A 66-year-old Caucasian male underwent curative tonsillectomy and ipsilateral radical neck dissection for right-sided tonsillar cancer (T2, N2b, cM0, G2; stage IVa). Four weeks after surgery, he was started on combined radiation therapy at a total dose of 60 Gy to the neck and chemotherapy with cisplatin (with standard schedule of 6 cycles á 40 mg/m2 = 73 mg, weekly).
During the following three weeks, the patient’s wife increasingly observed changes in her husband’s personality involving irritability, volatile emotions and impulsive aggression leading to verbal abuse and threats towards family members and neighbors (e.g., he delivered a letter to his neighbor including strong abusive language). The patient started to argue with his neighbor about proprietary rights of a water pump that has been shared for a long time. Ultimately he revealed physical aggression while cutting through the pipes of the water pump and chopping the house’s windowsills using an axe. After the fourth cycle of chemotherapy was completed, the situation escalated at home as his wife wanted to restrain him from driving his car after he had expressed suicidal thoughts in a state of agitation. He threatened to push her down the stairs unless she was willing to hand over the car keys. Finally their daughter called the police and emergency medical services and the patient was presented to the emergency department.
On initial mental state examination, the patient articulated himself clearly and was oriented to person, place and time. Initial testing of global cognitive functions did not reveal any gross impairment. The patient was calm and placid throughout the interview. When questioned about the preceding events, he trivialized them and revealed lack of any understanding that his behavior was wrong. Instead, he blamed his wife being responsible for his current situation and assured the admitting psychiatrist that he would avenge himself by giving his wife a sound beating once at home. His affect was euthymic with normal emotional reactivity while being inappropriate to the situation. The patient’s thought process and content were unremarkable. He denied any current suicidal ideation. Eventually he accepted admission to the acute psychiatric ward; however, he stated that his motivation was primarily the fact that this would spare him the daily drive to the hospital to receive ambulatory radiotherapy.
The patient did not have any other past medical or psychiatric history. He reported a history of chronic alcohol consumption (about two large beer per day), which he had ended after the diagnosis of tonsillar cancer 3 months ago with no occurrence of alcohol withdrawal symptoms. Drug history was insignificant. His wife assured that he had never been a violent or aggressive person in 42 years of marriage and that the current behavior was radically different. Brain contrast-enhanced computed tomography on admission revealed no significant findings. No abnormal findings were apparent on routine blood test (including blood alcohol level).
At first, the patient behaved cooperatively on the ward. The next day, however, he felt harassed by the volume of a fellow patient’s radio, so he angrily walked into the fellow patient’s room, intentionally destroyed the radio and assaulted her with his shoes and fists. He also attacked an attending nurse who came to intervene with his fists. Subsequently, the patient was restrained and, with obtained consent of the patient, intravenously treated with lorazepam. Further hospitalization commitment was ordered by court due to endangerment of others. Like the previous day, the patient appeared unrepentant and lacked any awareness of wrongdoing. Rather, he tried to rationalize his violent behavior by stressing that everyone feeling disturbed would have acted this way. The patient was started on neuroleptic treatment with risperidone 0.5 mg twice daily and lorazepam temporarily. The remaining two cycles of chemotherapy were not completed due to the unpredictability of the patient’s behavior; radiation therapy was continued as scheduled.
In the following, magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed a minor degree of general brain atrophy and slight chronic microvascular white matter changes. Cerebrospinal fluid examination including tests for infectious diseases (e.g., neurosyphilis) and biomarkers for Alzheimer’s Disease was unremarkable. No abnormal values were found on comprehensive blood tests including thyroid hormones and B vitamins. Although the patient scored within the normal range on both mini-mental state examination (MMSE, 28 points) and DemTect (16 points), the three-item clock-drawing test (CDT, 3 points) and Nuremberg Age Inventory (NAI) revealed a slight impairment in executive cognition. Specifically, he scored slightly below average in the NAI Labyrinth-, Number- and Word- Connection items (78, 83 and 84 points, respectively).
Over the course of the patient’s stay, the psychopathological condition improved constantly. Although still convinced that his conduct was justified, he was on good terms with the hospital staff and his fellow patients and increasingly behaved cooperatively and adequately. Therefore, the patient was put on home visit for stress vacation without any incidents and three weeks following cessation of cisplatin therapy, the patient’s wife confirmed that he had recovered to his original mental state. By that time, the patient was aware of his wrongdoing and regretted his recent social misconduct. He further emphasized that such conduct was not consistent with his personality. Of note, the patient did not experience any amnesia over the reported course. The patient was discharged four weeks after admission with continuation of risperidone and further treated by an ambulatory psychiatrist.