An 8-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat was presented owing to acute-onset lethargy. Physical examination revealed marked dehydration, a grade III/VI left parasternal heart murmur and pain elicited during abdominal palpation. Complete blood count revealed a normal hematocrit (0.44 l/l; reference interval [RI] 0.28–0.49 l/l). Abnormal laboratory findings included a mild leukocytosis (15.6 × 103/μl; RI 4.2–13.0 × 103/μl) and a severe azotemia (urea 202 mg/dl; RI 17–34 mg/dl, creatinine 14.9 mg/dl; RI: 0.7–2.5 mg/dl), hyperphosphatemia (11.8 mg/dl; RI 2.5–7.1 mg/dl) and hypermagnesemia (4.6 mEq/l; RI 1.6–2.2 mEq/l). Urinalysis from a cystocentesis sample revealed a urine specific gravity of 1.015, a pH of 5.5, 1+ Multistix protein, 2+ blood, 3–5 red blood cells/high-power field, and occasional leukocytes and epithelial squamous cells. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a small misshapen left kidney with a large volume of echogenic fluid within the capsule, mild right renomegaly with a mild-to-moderate amount of intracapsular fluid, hyperechoic tissues surrounding the right kidney and a mild volume of peritoneal effusion.
Prior to performing renal aspirates, coagulation times were measured and prothrombin time (PT) was 16 s (RI 15–22 s) but partial thromboplastin time (PTT) was >500 s (RI 65–119 s). Additional citrated blood was collected from a jugular venepuncture directly into a syringe and transferred to a 3.2% citrate tube to measure FXII activity and perform a kaolin- and TF-activated TEG. FXII levels were measured using a coagulometric assay with human FXII deficient plasma and a standard curve generated with lyophilized pooled cat plasma. FXII activity was 15% (RI 60–140%), consistent with a FXII deficiency. Kaolin-activated TEG exhibited delayed clot formation characterized by markedly prolonged reaction (R) and kappa (κ) times, and a decreased angle compared with normal (; and ), whereas the TF-activated TEG revealed a normal to mildly hypercoagulable tracing characterized by a mildly increased maximum amplitude .
Fluid was drained percutaneously from beneath both renal capsules, and aspirates of the right kidney were performed without evidence of hemorrhage. The next day, an ultrasound examination confirmed re-accumulation of the subcapsular fluid bilaterally and the cat was humanely euthanized. A post-mortem examination revealed bilateral perinephric pseudocysts, pyelectasia with concretions, renal fibrosis with cortical hemorrhage, and partial obstruction of the ureters with proximal ureteral dilation, as well as bilateral parathyroid enlargement.
A 7-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was presented for inclusion in the study as a healthy control. The cat was apparently healthy at home and physical examination was unremarkable. Complete blood count revealed normal parameters, including hematocrit (0.35 l/l). Serum biochemistry profile and PT results were within the RIs; however, the PTT was markedly prolonged (173 s; RI 24.2–34.9 s). FXII deficiency was suspected; further hemostatic testing was performed. Blood was collected from a jugular venepuncture directly into a syringe and transferred to a 3.2% citrate tube The kaolin-activated TEG exhibited delayed clot formation and decreased clot strength, characterized by markedly prolonged R and κ times, and decreased angle and maximum amplitude (MA) , whereas the TF-activated TEG was normal . FXII activity was 7%, consistent with a FXII deficiency.