A 55-year-old woman suspected to have CS was referred to the Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, Prague, for PTEN gene analysis to confirm the diagnosis.
Her medical history was unremarkable until she developed a goiter at 34 years of age. At 45 years of age, she underwent a strumectomy. A histopathological examination confirmed a macrofollicular adenoma in the left thyroid lobe and an encapsulated thyroid tumor in the right thyroid lobe. At 54 years of age she underwent a total thyroidectomy due to a follicular carcinoma .
At 43 years of age she underwent a hysterectomy for myomatosis and adnexectomy due to an adenopapilocarcinoma of the left ovary.
At the age of 49 years, the patient was admitted to hospital with epileptic paroxysms. A CT scan of the brain showed a left frontal lesion, which was the cause of the paroxysms. The lesion was surgically removed and histopathologically classified as a benign meningioma . At 53 and 57 years of age, she was again surgically treated for meningioma recurrence and a steadily deteriorating condition. Despite those surgical interventions, there was a progressive decline in cognitive functions and memory.
The initial brain tumor finding together with the observed cachexia led to the suspicion of metastasis from an unknown primary cancer. Careful endoscopic examination revealed hundreds of polyps in the stomach, duodenum and colon. There were numerous mostly hyperplastic and hamartomatous polyps up to 10 mm in diameter in the stomach. Smaller and multiple sessile polyps were found in the duodenum. The esophagus was free of any polyps. Along the entire length of the colon were multiple histopathologically confirmed hyperplastic and inflammatory polyps as well as tubulovillous or villous adenomas of 4-10 mm in diameter, with low-grade dysplasia.
At the age of 55 years, the patient was examined by a clinical geneticist (MS) who observed macrocephaly, a fissured tongue and a polyp of 0.5 cm in diameter in the dorsal part of the oral cavity. A few wart-like papules on the forearms and chest were classified as senile verrucoid lesions. No other mucocutaneous lesions were found on the face or oral mucosa. The patient's mother, whose medical history was unknown to us, died of colon cancer at the age of 56 years. No other members of the family have had signs of CS or any cancer. The patient had one child who was negatively tested for mutations in the PTEN gene.
Several biopsies were performed throughout the gastrointestinal (GI) tract over a 9-year period, and none showed evidence of malignant lesions. Then at 57 years of age, histopathological examination of biopsy material from a hyperplastic polyp in the stomach revealed a well-differentiated intramucosal adenocarcinoma of 8 mm in diameter . One year after the gastric cancer had been detected, the patient developed an aggressively growing synchronous adenocarcinoma of the anorectum (T3N0M0) and the sigmoid colon (T3N0M0) . Abdominoperineal surgery (i.e., the Miles' operation) was performed. However, the patient died at post-operative 1 month due to unmanageable complications.