A 41-year-old man was brought to our ED complaining of confusion. One week earlier he had started to experience severe nausea and vomiting. These symptoms were followed by diplopia, dysarthria and also dysphasia. One day later he had experienced gait disturbances and progressive ataxia accompanied with confusion, apathy and disorientation. He had no history of alcoholism, drug abuse or previous surgery but had a history of untreated Crohn disease. Just before the arrival in our ED, he was hospitalized in another center for about one week but all investigations had failed to reveal the diagnosis. When he was admitted to our ED, he was confused and disoriented to time and place. He was dysarthric and replied with inappropriate answers. Cranial nerve examination showed bilateral horizontal nystagmus in lateral gaze, left abducens nerve palsy and upward gaze palsy. Pupils had normal size and normal light reaction. Gag reflex was absent. In motor examination, tone and force of muscles were normal, DTRs were +2 in all limbs. Plantar reflexes were upwards bilaterally. Sensory examination was normal. Bilaterally, finger to nose exam was abnormal and dysmetria was seen. After reviewing all previously performed investigations, MRI was performed which was consistent with the diagnosis of WE ( and ). Treatment with thiamine led to partial resolution of his upward gaze palsy and nystagmus on the first day. At the end of the third day of treatment, except for gate ataxia, all other symptoms were fully corrected and he was totally conscious. After the fifth day his gait became normal and after one week he was discharged in good general condition.
It should be mentioned that after recovery he denied any alcohol consumption but mentioned occasional use of Clonazepam. All other clinical settings related to WE described in previous reports were thoroughly ruled out, including malnutrition, history of gastrointestinal surgical procedures, unbalanced nutrition including staple diet of polished rice, chronic diarrhea, cancer, systemic diseases such as renal disease, hyperthyroidism, and chronic infectious febrile diseases, magnesium depletion, and use of drugs known for causing WE.