A 76-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with weakness in his right upper extremity. He had a history of right frontal lobe infarction in the previous month, as well as diabetes, hypertension, and abnormal lipid metabolism. On admission, he was conscious. His body temperature was 36.3 °C, blood pressure was 155/74 mmHg, pulse rate was 60 beats/minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% (ambient air). Cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examinations were unremarkable, while detailed neurologic assessment revealed weakness in his right hand and a positive Barré test of his right upper extremity. Laboratory findings were within accepted reference ranges. His inflammatory markers, such as white blood cell and C-reactive protein, were also in the normal range. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed a normal sinus rhythm without ST-T segment change. Chest radiography revealed a cardiothoracic ratio of 48%. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed an area of hyperintensity in the left precentral gyrus, indicating acute cerebral infarction, consistent with his weakness in the right upper extremity . Magnetic resonance angiography of his left cervical internal carotid artery showed no abnormal findings. Transthoracic electrocardiography (TTE) revealed normal left ventricular function and no abnormalities except for LA dilation . Altogether, the ECG had a normal sinus rhythm, our patient had no history of atrial fibrillation, and the TTE indicated no mass in his heart; however, cerebral infarction was recurrent and occurred in the cortex (left precentral gyrus) without cervical arterial stenosis. Therefore, we suspected cardiac embolism as the cause of cerebral infarction and performed TEE. TEE showed a small LA tumor attached to the ostium secundum of the atrial septum .
He was diagnosed as having cerebral infarction, and was initially treated with edaravone and argatroban. Because the cardiac tumor detected by TEE was considered to be the cause of cerebral infarction, on hospital day 36, complete tumor resection, followed by atrial septal defect repair using an equine pericardial patch, was performed . The surgery was performed via median sternotomy under cardiopulmonary bypass with biatrial cannulation. On macroscopic examination, the excised tumor was 0.6 × 0.6 × 0.5 cm, reddish brown, and smooth . Histologic examination showed the presence of myxoid stroma containing polygonal or stellate cells arranged in groups and strings; these findings were consistent with cardiac myxoma. Our patient had an uncomplicated postoperative recovery, and his neurologic symptoms improved with conservative treatment. He was discharged on hospital day 58.