We describe a case of a 36-year-old black African woman with two previous live births by cesarean section and two previous miscarriages who was referred in her fifth pregnancy after 6 weeks of amenorrhea. Her serum quantitative β-human chorionic gonadotropin (bHCG) was 16,124 mIU/ml. However, an intrauterine or extrauterine pregnancy could not be located on a transabdominal ultrasound scan.
A copper intrauterine contraceptive device had been removed 2 months prior to her last menstrual period. She reported using one cycle of clomiphene 50 mg with the hope of achieving a twin pregnancy.
She had delivered twice by cesarean section for failure to progress. Her last two pregnancies had been first-trimester miscarriages; one was managed expectantly, and the other was surgically evacuated, though the actual procedure was unknown to the patient. She did not have any chronic medical illness and was not receiving any medication prior to this presentation. She stayed in a city suburb that was well serviced. She was a school principal in her second marriage with no children in the current relationship. She did not smoke or drink alcohol.
On examination, she had a normal blood pressure of 113/70 mmHg and a pulse rate of 98 beats/min. Her body temperature was 37.5 °C. On examination, her cardiorespiratory and neurological systems were normal. Her abdomen was soft and not tender. The result of her pelvic examination was normal. TVUS showed a gestational sac of 13 mm with irregular margins and a visible yolk sac located on the anterior isthmic portion of the uterus, raising suspicion of a cesarean section scar ectopic pregnancy. She declined a Doppler ultrasound evaluation scheduled for the next day. She was scheduled to have serial bHCG evaluations every 48 h.
A repeat serum quantitative bHCG done 48 h after the initial test revealed a level of 21,521 mIU/ml, a 33% rise. She defaulted follow-up until 1 week later, when she presented with pelvic pain of increasing intensity for 5 days. An urgent transvaginal scan was performed. A fetal pole with active cardiac activity (crown-rump length 0.9 cm) in a gestational sac was located in the anterior low myometrium. The sac traversed the full width of the anterior myometrium, with the posterior margin of the sac abutting the anterior margin of endometrium and the anterior margin of the sac extending to a subserosal location in a fairly exophytic fashion. There was evidence of trophoblastic circulation on Doppler examination. There was no endometrial fluid or free pelvic fluid .
She was immediately admitted for a diagnostic laparoscopy/hysteroscopy and possible excision of the scar pregnancy if confirmed. A preoperative complete blood count showed hemoglobin 13.4 g/dl, white blood cells 7.2 × 103/μl, and platelet count 243 × 103/μl. The patient’s kidney function was normal with sodium 135 mmol/L, potassium 4.9 mmol/L, urea 3.5 mmol/L, and creatinine 65 μmol/L. The patient’s liver function test results were also normal. She had a negative result in a blood test for human immunodeficiency virus. Urinalysis did not show abnormalities. The patient’s random blood sugar was 5.6 mmol at admission. At laparoscopy, the bladder was adherent high on the anterior uterine wall, and the ectopic pregnancy was not visualized . At hysteroscopy, there were extensive adhesions within the lower endometrial cavity, which obscured visibility. There was no active intracavitary bleeding ruling out a threatened or inevitable miscarriage. We could not visualize any obvious bulge in the cervical canal suggestive of a cervical ectopic pregnancy. Because of the uncertainty of the location of the pregnancy due to adhesions, excision was postponed. Postoperatively, the patient became unstable with low blood pressure, systolic pressure range of 82 to 95 mmHg and diastolic pressure range of 40 to 55 mmHg, and a pulse rate range of 64 to 73 beats/min, but without active vaginal bleeding or use of medications inducing persistent hypotension. Anesthesia had been induced with etomidate 16 mg and suxamethonium 100 mg, and maintenance was initiated with isoflurane 0.8–1.5%. Intra- and perioperative analgesia was induced with fentanyl 200 mg intravenously (IV), indomethacin 100 mg rectally, and paracetamol 1 g IV. Antibiotic prophylaxis was with ceftriaxone 1 g IV and metronidazole 500 mg IV. This prompted us to order an urgent MRI scan to map the location of the pregnancy in the immediate postoperative period. MRI confirmed the TVUS findings of a cesarean section ectopic scar extending to the serosa .
An emergency laparotomy was then performed on the same day. The abdomen was entered through a Pfannenstiel incision along the old skin scar. A transverse incision was made in the upper uterine segment just above the adherent bladder. The products of conception were removed with forceps, and the gap in the anterior myometrium at the old scar was seen and felt. There was massive bleeding from the implantation site. Twenty milliliters of vasopressin (20 U diluted in 100 ml) in normal saline was administered into the bleeding myometrium edges. The edges were apposed in layers with VICRYL suture (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) to repair the defect. Estimated blood loss was 2000 ml. The patient was transfused with 1 U of packed cells intraoperatively. She was continued on the same intravenous antibiotics and analgesia that had been commenced after the laparoscopy. Her hemoglobin count on day 1 postoperatively was 8 g/dl, and she declined any further transfusion. Oral iron and folic acid supplementation was commenced.
The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful, and she was discharged on day 4 after surgery. Histology confirmed the presence of decidua and chorionic villi. The patient wanted a child because she was in a new relationship, but she was no longer sure of her future fertility plans after the ectopic pregnancy. A levonorgestrel implant was inserted 2 weeks postoperatively. The patient last attended physical review at 6 weeks, and she was well with no problems related to the surgery at a telephone review at 3 months postoperatively.