This 64-year-old man was admitted to our department with a 14-month history of complete right-sided HFS. He was bothered by progressive intermittent twitching of the muscles on the right side of his face, which initially involved the right eyelid and gradually spread to the inferior part of the face ipsilaterally. At the early stage of the onset, the symptoms partially relieved after he received treatments of carbamazepine. However, spasm of the face muscles still relapsed after 3 months despite markedly increased drug doses. In addition, he also received intramuscular injections with botulinum toxin type A (BtA) once without obvious efficacy. On admission, we observed intermittent contractions of the muscles on the right side of the face and further neurological examination revealed no aberrant neurological signs. The typical symptoms, complemented with a definite abnormal muscle response (AMR) wave through preoperative electrophysiological monitoring, suggested that this patient should be diagnosed with typical HFS. Preoperative MRTA showed that a cerebellar artery passed through the REZ of the facial nerve and no obvious space-occupying lesions were found .
A standardized right retrosigmoid approach was adopted, and the REZ of the facial nerve was routinely exposed using a microneurosurgical technique. Intraoperatively, we did not find blood vessel compression at the REZ of the facial nerve (a). This is not in accordance with preoperative images. Upon further exposure, an unexpected small lesion was discovered with an ash grey mass, which was located between the facial-vestibulocochlear nerve complex and was close to the internal auditory canal (IAC). The facial nerve was compressed and displaced to the ventral side by this small lesion (b). Considering that this lesion may be the cause of HFS, we decided to intraoperatively resect it after negotiation with the patients’ relatives. The lesion was then totally excised and the facial-vestibulocochlear nerves were well-preserved (c). The intraoperative electrophysiological monitoring showed that the AMR waveform suddenly disappeared. No other compression sites were found after careful checking and closure was routinely performed.
The postoperative process was uneventful and the right HFS absolutely disappeared without any neurological deficits. Histopathologically, the lesion was verified to be a VS, which expressed verocay bodies and SOX10 proteins . Six months after operation, this patient presented no recurrence of HFS.