A 65-year-old Caucasian man with a history of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis status post-right single lung transplant 14 months prior and sick sinus syndrome with a permanent dual-chamber pacemaker 6 years prior presented at a cardiology clinic with several months of dizziness and persistent resting tachycardia around 120 beats per minute (b.p.m.) with a home pulse oximeter. He denied fever, chest pain, dyspnoea, or prior episodes of palpitations. Beyond his immunosuppression (cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, prednisone) and prophylaxis (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, valganciclovir), his medications included atorvastatin 40 mg daily, tiotropium 2.5 mcg-olodaterol 2.5 mcg inhaled daily, furosemide 60 mg daily. Upon detailed medication reconciliation, he also reported taking an over-the-counter herbal supplement, marketed for ‘natural stress relief’, for several months, which had not been disclosed to prior clinicians.
Pacemaker interrogation (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) demonstrated supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) at 120 b.p.m. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a narrow complex, long R-P tachycardia (NCT) with upright P-waves in leads V1 and I and biphasic (+/−) P-waves in inferior leads . Based on P-wave morphology and vector, differential diagnosis of this long R-P NCT included atrial tachycardia (AT) originating from the native high crista terminalis or donor tissue right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV) vs. sinus tachycardia with the abnormal P-wave morphology from post-lung transplant cardiac rotation. Potential underlying precipitants included transplant rejection, medication toxicity, and toxic-metabolic triggers like infection or hyperthyroidism.
The patient was admitted for evaluation and telemetry monitoring. Vital signs on admission included: heart rate 117 b.p.m., blood pressure 138/83 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18, and oxygen saturation 95% on room air. Physical examination was notable for tachycardia, normal heart sounds without murmurs, and lung sounds clear to auscultation bilaterally. Routine labs for toxic-metabolic disturbances did not show acute findings. Chest X-ray was negative for acute pulmonary processes such as transplant rejection, although rotation of his heart post-lung transplant was noted . Upon further history-taking, the patient revealed that starting the herbal supplement coincided with his timeline of symptoms. Further investigation of the herbal supplement revealed a combination of over 130 ingredients, including whole plant heart-leaf sida in unlisted dose . Heart-leaf sida, or Sida cordifolia, is a botanical source of ephedrine alkaloids, which was banned by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2004. The herbal supplement, specifically heart-leaf sida, was the suspected cause of tachycardia, and it was discontinued.
Within 24-h of stopping the herbal supplement, the patient’s heart rate abruptly decreased without atrioventricular nodal blocking agents or other interventions , suggesting an SVT related to herbal supplement ingestion. Subsequent ECG in normal sinus rhythm (NSR) at 87 b.p.m. demonstrated a biphasic (+/−) P-wave in leads V1 and V2 with continued abnormal P-wave morphology in the limb and precordial leads attributed to post-lung transplant cardiac rotation or transplant atrial anastomosis . Given the abrupt resolution of the NCT and change in P-wave morphology in lead V1 from upright to biphasic (+/−) after conversion to NSR, a diagnosis of AT originating at or near the donor RSPV was favoured. Since the AT resolved with herbal supplement discontinuation, electrophysiology study (EPS) was deferred.
One week later, the patient was seen for follow-up and denied recurrence of symptoms. A 14-day ECG patch (Zio, iRhythm Technologies, San Francisco, CA, USA) at 1 month follow-up subsequently showed sinus rhythm at an average 94 b.p.m. with first-degree atrioventricular block and <1% atrial premature contractions.