A 46-year-old woman initially presented with a 4-month history of a right anterior cervical mass without voice hoarse, dyspnea, pain, or bucking in June 2019. Physical examinations revealed a palpable 1.5 cm right thyroid nodule moving with deglutition, and without obviously enlarged lymph nodes. Ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic nodule in the right thyroid (TI-RADS 4A), and papillary thyroid carcinoma was diagnosed based on a needle aspiration cytology examination.
The patient then underwent a resection of the right thyroid and isthmus on June 15, 2019. The thyroid adenocarcinoma was shown by a histological analysis of the specimen . Positive CDX2 and cytokeratin 20, and negative thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) and thyroglobulin (TG) were revealed by immunohistochemistry examinations, which indicated that the primary tumor originated was from the gastrointestinal tract. Then, colonoscopy revealed a tumor 10 cm from the anal margin. Histological analysis of the specimen confirmed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . Positron Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography (PET-CT) showed colorectal carcinoma accompanied by multiple lymph nodes metastases . And the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 7ng/mL. Chemotherapy, which included 2 cycles of intravenous raltitrexed combined with oxaliplatin and oral capecitabine, showed an excellent response, resulting in a decrease of CEA to 2.71ng/mL.
An anterior resection of the rectal cancer was performed on August 23, 2019, after a treatment with diabetes in the endocrinology department. A moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with penetration of the intestinal wall into the submucosal adipose tissue was reported by the histological analysis of the specimen. Two of 16 dissected lymph nodes showed carcinoma metastasis. The postoperative TNM stage was pT3N1M1. Four courses of intravenous oxaliplatin combined with oral capecitabine were given after surgery. Until August 2020, a progressive increase in CEA was detected. Oral capecitabine was not satisfactory and CEA levels fluctuated repeatedly. From March 2021 to September 2021, four courses of targeted therapy (bevacizumab 400 mg) combined with chemotherapies (intravenous irinotecan combined with oral capecitabine) were given, with good tolerance. Then, on October 18, 2021, a second PET-CT examination suggested multiple metastases of the abdominal omentum and pelvic cavity . Sequentially, the patient received another targeted therapy with a combination of chemotherapies (pembrolizumab, cetuximab, irinotecan, and raltitrexed) for 6 months. The patient died on June 2, 2022, with an overall survival of 35 months following diagnosis of colorectal cancer thyroid metastases.