A 38-year-old Asian man was referred to our hospital with complaints of severe abdominal distension and pancytopenia. His past or family medical history was unremarkable. Although his abdominal bloating was impairing his daily life, he had not visited a healthcare facility or undergone treatment for abdominal distension.
A routine blood count revealed pancytopenia, with a white blood cell count of 2600/μL, a red blood cell count of 3.42 × 106/μL, a hemoglobin level of 10.3 g/dL, and a platelet count of 9.2 × 104/μL. The results of liver function tests were normal, including a total bilirubin level of 1.3 mg/dL, an albumin level of 4.3 mg/dL, and an indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min of 8.7%. "Asymptomatic" Kasabach-Merritt syndrome was apparent, however, based on a high international normalized ratio of prothrombin time of 1.46, a decreased fibrinogen level of 82 mg/dL, elevated fibrin degradation products (FDP) of 80 μg/mL, and D-dimer levels of 32 μg/mL.
Multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) on admission revealed a huge hemangioma located on the right liver, and replacing the parenchyma of the right liver and the left para-median sector. The hemangioma occupied almost the entire abdominal cavity, protruding into the right diaphragm up to the right thoracic cavity and extending down to the pelvic cavity, with a maximum diameter of 43 cm . Angiography and portography [reconstructed by MDCT images ] revealed that the right hepatic artery and its branches were extremely stretched, and the right portal vein was compressed and occluded by the tumor. The middle and right hepatic veins were completely occluded, and the hepatic vena cava was markedly compressed, while the left hepatic vein remained patent . Volumetric analysis revealed a tumor volume of 16,880 mL and a left lateral sector volume of 1250 mL.
Based on the liver function tests, remnant liver volume, and anatomic considerations, urgent primary tumor resection seemed possible, but because of the benign nature of the disease and our patient's stable condition, we decided to perform TAE to reduce the tumor volume before performing the resection to ensure the safety of the future radical resection of the tumor.
First, TAE was performed for the right hepatic artery with coils and gelfoam. Thereafter, the tumor volume, anatomical positions, and recanalizations were calculated and investigated by dynamic MDCT once a month, not to misjudge the operation timing. Three months after the first TAE, the tumor volume had decreased to 10,290 mL. Angiography performed at that time revealed a collateral feeding artery from the right subphrenic artery, which was then embolized by TAE. Two months after the second TAE, the tumor volume had further decreased to 8260 mL based on MDCT volumetry . No complication was observed after two successive TAEs.
The remarkable volume reduction in the right upper portion of the tumor allowed for a safe approach to the hepatic veins and vena cava, and a radical resection of the tumor was performed by an anatomical right trisectorectomy. The operation was performed through a J-shaped skin incision using a ninth inter-costal thoracoabdominal approach , and after the conventional right liver mobilization, the tumor was successfully resected by anatomical division of the hepatic hilum preserving biliary continuity with the intermittent inflow occlusion. The operating time and the intra-operative blood loss were 540 min and 2150 mL, respectively.
Pathologic investigation of the specimen revealed a cavernous hemangioma, 30 × 25 × 15 cm, weighing 8100 g, comprising a spongy zone and a fibrotic scar zone with massive necrosis. Our patient's post-operative course was uneventful and he was discharged from the hospital 16 days after surgery. At 24 months following surgery, he enjoys an improved quality of life with normal liver function.
Changes in the laboratory data and tumor volume are summarized in Figure . Despite the blood counts becoming normal after TAE, fibrin degradation products (FDP) and D-dimer decreased after the surgical removal of the tumor.