A 53-year-old woman had complained of intermittent left back pain since she was 18 years old. She was diagnosed as having UPJO when she was 38 years old. However, she did not want to be treated and stopped attending a hospital. When she presented again, the left backache was getting worse, and CT showed severe hydronephrosis without crossing vessels, the thickened wall of the UPJ, an increase in the density of surrounding fat, and enlargement of the lymph nodes . A DJ stent was inserted. Laboratory examination showed a normal estimated glomerular filtration rate (64 mL/min/1.73 m2). On (99m)Tc-MAG3 evaluation, there was normal radioisotope uptake and prolonged time from peak to 50% activity (T (1/2)) in the left kidney (87.27 min). She visited our outpatient clinic 6 months after DJ stenting, and laparoscopic Anderson-Hynes dismembered pyeloplasty was performed 3 months later. The renal pelvis was tough, with adhesion to the perirenal fat. At 2 months postoperatively, anatomic stenosis occurred, and the length of the stricture was about 2.0 cm . Endoscopic techniques, holmium laser endoureterotomy and balloon dilation, were performed; however, after stent removal, left back pain and fever developed, and the anatomic stenosis again recurred. Laparoscopic redo pyeloplasty with a BMG was performed. For the procedure, the endotracheal tube was secured to the dependent side of the mouth, and the BMG was first harvested from the inner cheek by the oral surgeon based on the stenosis length. The graft was shaped off the muscle and placed in saline for later use . The patient was then placed in a right lateral decubitus position. A camera port was placed in the umbilicus, along with two 5-mm ports. After medializing colon and visualizing the ureter and renal pelvis, a sufficient longitudinal incision in the anterior wall of the ureter was made until healthy-appearing pelvis and ureter were seen proximally and distally guiding 6fr straight catheter placed retrograde initial part of surgery . The 5-mm port on the left was changed to a 12-mm port to insert the BMG. The mucosal layer of the graft was oriented toward the lumen and placed on the incised part of the ureter . The BMG was anastomosed using 5-0 absorbable monofilament interrupted suture on the anterior wall , and the omentum was sutured over the graft for a blood supply . Finally, a 6-French DJ ureteral stent was placed. Three months after surgery, absence of obstruction was confirmed by ureteroscopy, and the stent was removed . Then, 5 months after surgery, (99m)Tc-MAG3 evaluation showed significant improvement of (T(1/2)) in the left kidney from 87.27 to 4.75 min, and the patient's main complaint, backache, disappeared.