A four-year-old Caucasian boy was admitted to the hospital for fever, vomiting and abdominal pain. On physical examination, an inflammatory and suppurating eschar was seen on the scalp without other specific findings. A scalp lesion that appeared 10 days later was initially diagnosed as folliculitis and treated with pristinamycin. Two days later, the scalp lesions and fever still remained, and with multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes on both sides. There was tumefaction of the right occiput and stiffness of the right side of the neck. Results of blood cell count and liver enzymes were normal. C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and alphaglobulin were moderately elevated.
Upon subsequent questioning, the child reported that he lived near a forest and was frequently bitten by ticks, approximately once or twice a week, particularly on the scalp. Although no tick was found in this scalp lesion, a diagnosis of TIBOLA was suggested and explored by serology and PCR of the eschar biopsy.
DNA was extracted from tissue samples (QIAamp Tissue Kit; Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The eschar biopsy was screened by real-time PCR for F. tularensis using primers and probes targeting the yqaB gene with PCR carried out in a thermal cycler (LightCycler; Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Germany). The real-time PCR screen was positive for Francisella tularensis DNA in the skin biopsy, and negative for Rickettsia, Bartonella and Borrelia. spp., and for Coxiella burnetii. This result was confirmed by PCR of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, which was found to be 99.8% identical to the GenBank sequence for F. tularensis . The initial serology test, an indirect immunofluorescence assay, was negative. Three weeks later, further serology tests showed titres consistent with tularemia, including titres for IgG of 1: 400 and IgM of 1:100. To confirm the serological result, western blotting was performed on our patient's serum, which showed that F. tularensis was the causative agent. Concomitant indirect immunofluorescence assays for Rickettsia and Bartonella spp., C. burnetii and Borrelia burgdorferi were negative.
We treated our patient with doxycycline. The eschar and lymphadenopathy decreased after two weeks of treatment.