A 39-year-old man suffering from recurrent headache and paroxysmal visual symptoms for three years was admitted to our hospital. In 2018, the patient developed a persistent pulsatile and pinprick headache in the right temporal region. The visual analog scale (VAS) score was 7/10. The headache was aggravated while coughing and was accompanied by photophobia. The patient claimed that the objects in the central area of the left visual field were blurred and deformed, followed by bilateral temporal visual field defects. The visual symptoms occurred minutes before the headache and sometimes in the postdromal phase 1–2 h after the headache commenced. The above symptoms lasted for 10 h and were relieved after taking a painkiller. The recurrence of headache with aura occurred once every two months. In 2019, the headache aggravated, with a VAS score of 10/10, and expanded to the right occipital region. Visual symptoms and headaches occurred simultaneously; the visual symptoms could be relieved after one night of sleep, and the headache could last for up to three days. These symptoms might have been triggered by staring under bright light. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable, and no history of migraine or family history of migraine was noted. Neurological examination showed no positive findings except for a score of 29 in the MMSE test and a score of 26 in the MoCA test. Initial brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed in 2020 revealed multiple focal high-intensity signals in the corpus callosum on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . Since the patient had recurrent headache and DWI lesions and CSF showed a mild inflammatory reaction, vasculitis was considered, and the patient was treated with antiplatelet and steroid medications in a local hospital; however, the treatment did not prevent the attacks. After admission, the patient underwent further examinations, including routine blood tests, liver and kidney function, and coagulation tests. All indicators were found to be normal. Autoantibody spectrum tests, including antiphospholipid antibody, antinuclear antibody, and systemic vasculitis antibody, showed negative results. Fundus examination did not reveal any abnormalities. Results of carotid artery ultrasound, transcranial Doppler (TCD) ultrasound, and brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) examinations were all normal. Brain MRI showed that the lesions in the corpus callosum remained the same as in the previous year . Furthermore, hyperintense signals in the corticomedullary junction and mild brain atrophy were found . The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) profile was negative. Given the persistent DWI hyperintensity in the corticomedullary junction and corpus callosum, brain atrophy, and paroxysmal symptoms in this young patient, NIID was suspected. Genetic analysis revealed an abnormal expansion of 101 GGC repeats in the NOTCH2NLC gene [, ]. Genetic counseling was referred but was declined by patient and his family. Eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions in the nuclei of sweat gland epithelial cells and fibroblasts were detected through skin biopsy , which confirmed the diagnosis of NIID. After the patient was discharged from the hospital, episodic symptoms appeared again after a cold, manifesting as a headache lasting for about 3 days after a visual aura. After oral administration of sibelium, the symptoms did not recur.