A 54-year-old woman was diagnosed with pancreatic head cancer for 8 mo and had liver metastasis ablation for 2 wk.
Eight months ago, the patient was hospitalized for sprained right wrist. It was unexpected to discover that she had pancreatic head cancer and diabetes. She subsequently underwent laparoscopic pancreaticoduodenectomy, and histopathologic results revealed pancreatic adenocarcinoma with mucinous adenomas (about 5%-10% of which were sig-ring cell carcinomas), G3/poorly differentiated, and invasion of nerves and lymphatic vessels. Following surgery, she completed 8 cycles of chemotherapy with albumin-bound paclitaxel and gemcitabine. One month after completing chemotherapy, contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed liver metastasis in the right lobe, with a maximum cross-section of approximately 2.0 cm × 1.9 cm. Two weeks ago, the patient underwent CT-guided ablation of liver metastasis and was discharged after receiving treatment for infection prevention and liver protection. The patient had no discomfort and was admitted to the hospital for chemotherapy.
The patient sprained her right wrist more than 8 mo ago, and she had no other known medical conditions.
Her father died of an unknown type of cancer at the age 49.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, and her skin and sclera showed no signs of yellowing. The abdomen was flat and soft, and the right lower abdomen was tender and percussive.
Blood routine, renal function, coagulation, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 results were all within the normal range. However, some laboratory results were abnormal, including C-reactive protein, 4.62 mg/L (normal range: < 4 mg/L); alanine aminotransferase, 50 IU/L (normal range: 7-40 IU/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 45 IU/L (normal range: 13-35 IU/L); CA125, 62.8 U/mL (normal range: ≤ 25 ng/mL) . Real-time polymerase linked reaction (RT-PCR) indicated positive nucleic acid of novel coronavirus, and pus culture revealed Candida albicans, which was sensitive to fluconazole.
Chest CT examination indicated viral pneumonia, and contrast-enhanced abdominal CT revealed a liver abscess with a maximum cross-section of 6.9 cm × 6.0 cm, accompanied by fluid and gas .