The patient was a 40-year-old premenopausal Asian woman with no known medical history. Her father had died of multiple sclerosis, and the patient had no other family history of malignant tumors. She had a preoperative thoracoabdominal Computed Tomography (CT) and abdominal echocardiography that revealed no lesions in other organs. The preoperative diagnosis was left upper lateral breast cancer T2N0M0 stage IIA, and left nipple-sparing mastectomy and sentinel node biopsy (0/5) were performed. The postoperative pathological diagnosis was invasive ductal carcinoma with a tumor diameter of 30 × 35 mm, no vascular invasion, histological grade II, hormone receptor (HR) + (estrogen receptor: 90% A-S: 3 + 5 = 8, progesterone receptor: 99% A-S: 3 + 5 = 8), Ki-67 80%, human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER)2 −, and BRCA: mutation-negative. The Oncotype Dx of the surgical specimen showed a high recurrence score of 38.
Her clinical course and treatments are summarized in Fig. . Postoperatively, after 3 months of docetaxel and cyclophosphamide therapy (4 courses) and 3 months of hormone therapy (tamoxifen), abdominal pain was observed. The cause of her abdominal pain is a 4-cm bone metastasis in the right iliac bone. The bone biopsy showed HR +, HER2 −, Ki-67 60%. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) was administered to the patient’s right iliac bone. Tamoxifen was discontinued, and a treatment using LH-RH agonist, fulvestrant, CDK4/6 inhibitor (Abemaciclib) and denosumab was initiated.
In the fifth month after bone metastases were known, metastasis was found in the lumbar spine and right 10th rib, and the treatment was deemed to be ineffective for progressive disease. Hormonal therapy was discontinued and replaced with the anticancer drug, Tegafur Gimeracil Oteracil Potassium (TS1) as it has no hair loss and is superior in quality of life.
One year after bone metastases were known, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed new metastases to the L2, L4 right, and left sacroiliac joints, right ilium, acetabulum, and nasal bone. The right iliac bone undergoing radiation therapy enlarged; the sacral tumor enlarged, and she developed metastatic para-aortic lymph nodes in Figs. a, a. Blood tests showed that tumor markers (CEA, CA15-3) were normal, but serum lactate dehydrogenase was abnormally high at 838 IU/L.
The MSI-IVD Kit (FALCO, Kyoto, Japan) specifically detects MSI-High in tumor tissue using five markers (BAT25, BAT26, NR21, NR24, MONO27) with single nucleotide repeat sequences that are less susceptible to genetic diversity. If more than two of the five MSI markers are MSI-positive, the patient is considered MSI-High, and PEM is indicated in such cases. The patient’s breast cancer tissue was positive for all five markers.
She used PEM as the 3rd treatment after recurrence. Her pelvic region was treated with IMRT for 2 weeks, and PEM (200 mg) was administered every 3 weeks with zoledronic acid. She was admitted to due to fever and malaise, but was recovered within a few days. Two months after PEM administration (after three courses of PEM), Diffusion-weighted Whole body Imaging with Background Suppression (DWIBS) revealed an overall increase in apparent diffusion coefficient values and shrinkage in tumor volume . The para-aortic lymph nodes also disappeared, opioid use was discontinued, and LDH levels trended downward. She was taken off OxyContin and returned to work.
Her treatment with PEM continued for one year with no exacerbation of metastases, the signal of the metastatic site on diffusion-weighted imaging remains low . She was able to keep her job, though, due to loss of appetite, treatment was stopped. We suspected we had missed some major lesion and decided to investigate its cause. This was two years after the bone metastasis was discovered. CT and colonoscopy showed no evidence of malignancy in the abdominal cavity. Gastroscopy revealed pyloric stenosis, she was put on prednisone, appetite returned, and so the diagnosis of irAE due to PEM was made. She was not diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, but a head MRI was performed to rule out brain tumors, which can be seen in Lynch syndrome . Head MRI showed 4 brain metastases up to 1 cm in size, and gamma knife was performed. Fortunately, she is symptom free and has returned to work while taking aromatase inhibitors after 8 months of withdrawal of PEM (One year and 8 months after the start of PEM).