A 75-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our hospital with a 10-month history of vaginal bleeding. In 1986, she underwent a hysterectomy because of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. The cause of the blood loss was initially interpreted as vaginal atrophy which was unsuccessfully treated with estriol cream. She had experienced several urinary tract infections, which she never had before. She did not have any other complaints.
On physical examination, it was found that there was no palpable abdominal mass. On vaginal examination, a crater-shaped lesion was found in the right upper part of the vagina, which indurated the surrounding tissue, with a fetid smell and necrosis. Rectal examination showed no abnormalities.
Transvaginal ultrasound showed a 30 × 22 mm tumor on the top of the vagina. No ascites were seen. A biopsy revealed an adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for cytokeratin 20 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and negative for cytokeratin 7 and carbohydrate antigen (CA)-125, suggesting the origin of the tumor was more likely to be gastrointestinal than urogenital.
Laboratory findings, including tumor markers, were all within normal values, except for CEA (Immulite 2500, Siemens Medical Solution Diagnostics, LA, USA), which was raised at 16 μg/L (normal 2-4 μg/L).
Pre-operative exams (chest X-ray, colonoscopy and cystoscopy) did not show any characteristic malignancy or metastasis. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a process in the right ovary bed reaching the vaginal vault and medial side of the urinary bladder . It did not exclude bladder infiltration. Biopsies taken during cystoscopy showed extensive inflammation, but no signs of malignancy. Biopsies taken from the cecum showed adenomatous tissue with low-grade non-malignant dysplasia. The radiologist suggested a diagnosis of ovarian carcinoma. After discussion in our multidisciplinary oncology team, a laparotomy was decided upon in order to determine staging and/or plan cytoreductive surgery.
During laparotomy, it was observed that the vaginal vault was infiltrated by an enlarged tumorous appendix, with two loops of the ileum attached to the process. No infiltration in the bladder was seen. A right hemicolectomy was performed on part of the upper vagina. Both ovaries had a normal atrophic aspect.
Microscopic examination of the tissue showed a primary adenocarcinoma of the appendix, 1 cm in diameter, arising in a colonic type villous adenoma . There was extensive infiltration in the mesoappendix and ileum. One out of 14 dissected lymph glands showed a metastasis. Both mucosal cutting edges were free of tumor, but it extended into the vaginal cutting edge: pT4N1 M0. It was decided to give our patient adjuvant radiotherapy: she received 50.4Gy in 28 fractions of 1.8Gy on the vaginal vault and the original tumor location. She also received brachytherapy of 14Gy high-dose rate (HDR) in two fractions of 7Gy, 5 mm from the surface and 5 mm from the top with a one-week interval.
Fourteen months after surgery, during a transvaginal ultrasound in a regular follow-up, the tumor was found to have recurred. Ascites were also seen. Abdominal and pelvic CT scans revealed extensive intra-abdominal tumor spread with deposits on the diaphragm, omentum, vaginal vault and the sigmoid colon.
The multidisciplinary oncology team advised palliative treatment with the combination oxaliplatin-capecitabine, as the tumor was colon-like. After three cycles of chemotherapy, CA-125 levels decreased from 162 to 86 kU/L (Immulite 2500) and a CT scan showed significant reduction of the tumor deposits.