A 35-year-old Hispanic man presented to our emergency department and reported 1 week of generalized malaise, abdominal pain, fatigue, subjective fever, sore throat, joint pain, watery diarrhea, intolerance to oral intake, and petechial skin rash . The skin rash was described as blisters, which progressed to erythematous macules that were non-confluent and were associated with burning and itching. The rash started on his palms and soles and then subsequently spread centripetally to his arms, chest, and trunk. Diarrhea occurred at a frequency of 2–3 episodes a day but had resolved by the time of evaluation. His past medical history was only significant for chronic back pain, for which he had been taking 100 mg of diclofenac potassium twice daily for 1 week before admission. Prior to admission, he was not taking any medications due to lack of a past medical history. The only medication taken was diclofenac potassium, as mentioned above. He denied the use of any other medication, tobacco smoking, alcohol intake, or drug use. His family history and psychosocial history were unremarkable. He denied any prior surgical intervention. He reported self-employment as an independent taxi driver.
At initial assessment on admission the physical examination was remarkable for a blood pressure of 132 systolic and 77 diastolic mmHg, a temperature of 39.6 °C (103.2 °F), pulse of 132, and respiratory rate of 18. He was well developed, well groomed, with skin remarkable for non-confluent, non-blanching erythematous macules. He had an atraumatic head and his eyes had reactive pupils that were symmetric with clear conjunctiva. He had a supple neck with no signs of jugular vein distention (JVD) or thyromegaly. His thorax was symmetric with non-labored respirations, lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, his heart rate was regular with regular rhythm, pulses were palpable and normal in his bilateral upper and lower extremities; no rub or murmur was noted. His abdomen was soft and non-tender with no distention and no palpable masses; bowel sounds were present. He was alert and oriented, and followed commands; cranial nerves 2–12 were preserved, deep tendon reflexes were intact, strength was 5/5 bilaterally in both his upper and lower extremities.
The laboratory results were remarkable for anemia, thrombocytopenia, elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) 21.9 mg/L (reference value ≤ 5 mg/L), and mild transaminitis, with no deranged bilirubin or alkaline phosphatases. No acute findings were reported from chest X-ray.
He was initially diagnosed as having acute viral gastroenteritis and was managed with supportive therapy. Due to a persistent fever, he was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and antiviral therapy, which included vancomycin, aztreonam, azithromycin, and oseltamivir. Because his blood cultures and urine culture were negative, vancomycin was discontinued.
His febrile episodes persisted and he had repeated negative blood and urine cultures, negative vasculitis, and unremarkable autoimmune work-ups. Subsequently, he developed acute encephalopathy and experienced a seizure. He was then intubated for airway protection and placed on mechanical ventilation. A lumbar puncture was deferred, given the presence of profound thrombocytopenia and the risk of bleeding. Computed tomography of his head reported no acute signs of intracranial hemorrhage or infarction. Other remarkable findings were a platelet count of 10 k/μl, hemoglobin of 6.2 g/dl, hematocrit of 18.2%, reticulocyte count of 10%, plasma prothrombin time (PT) > 11.3 seconds (reference range, 9–12 seconds), activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT) > 27.1 seconds (reference range, 26.1–33.8 seconds), serum creatinine 0.8 mg/dl (reference range, 0.5–1.5 mg/dl) alanine aminotransferase serum of 55 unit/L (reference range, 5–40 unit/L), aspartate transaminase serum of 35 unit/L (reference range, 9–48 unit/L), total bilirubin serum of 1.4 mg/dL (reference range, 0.2–1.2 mg/dL), direct serum bilirubin of 0.6 mg/dL (reference range, 0.0–0.3 mg/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) serum of 1172 unit/L (reference range, 100–190 unit/L), haptoglobin of 0 mg/dL (reference range, 30–200 mg/dL), a peripheral smear with schistocytes , total hemolytic complement assay less than 14 (reference range, 31–60 U/mL), and a positive direct Coombs test . All viral serologic tests were negative . Given these test results and a significantly worsening neurological status, high doses of intravenously administered steroids were initiated, along with intravenously administered gamma immunoglobulin. This was indicated for suspected immune-mediated hemolysis versus an acute vasculitis process. A skin biopsy was also performed, and a formalin-fixed skin biopsy showed patchy granular deposition of C5b-9 along superficial dermal vessels, dermal epidermal junction .
The findings of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neurological derangement were enough to suspect a diagnosis of TTP. Thus, serum ADAMTS13 activity and inhibitor assays were conducted. Serum ADAMTS13 activity was < 3% (reference range, 68–163%), and the serum inhibitor level was 1.5 (normal range, < 0.5). Specific identification of the inhibitor could not be obtained. He was then empirically treated by transfusing fresh frozen plasma and he underwent plasmapheresis sessions.
He received five sessions of plasmapheresis, which improved his clinical status and allowed for successful liberation from mechanical ventilation. Antibiotics were de-escalated based on culture reports, and intravenous steroid dosages were tapered down. Laboratory assessments showed increases in levels of platelets, haptoglobin, LDH, and hemoglobin. Levels of important compounds throughout the course of treatment are presented in Table . He was subsequently discharged from the ICU and hospital. The post-plasmapheresis level of serum ADAMTS13 activity was 126%, thus confirming the diagnosis of acquired TTP.
Further follow-ups were done in our hematology clinic at 3 months and 6 months following hospital discharge. As mentioned in this case report, he was found to be asymptomatic, including a lack of rash and no further neurological symptoms. In addition, all laboratory tests were reported to be within normal limits, including serum haptoglobin, LDH, hemoglobin, and platelets, as were renal function tests, liver function tests, and serum ADAMTS 13 activity. No further intervention was recommended from a hematology point of view and our patient returned to work without further complications.
Our patient gave us informed consent to publish this case, including images.