A 48-year-old female patient was admitted to our department of breast surgery at a tertiary hospital, presenting with "the right breast mass and pain for more than four months" on April 20, 2020. Body mass index (BMI) is 22.8.
The patient had no previous medical history.
No adverse health habits such as smoking and alcohol.
No family disease history. We did not palpate any other positive signs except for the right breast mass.
We performed an imaging evaluation, and breast ultrasound revealed a mass in the gland approximately 2.0 cm × 1.3 cm × 1.7 cm in size, positioned at 12 o'clock in the right breast, 1.8 cm away from the nipple. The mass had an unclear border and an angled edge and was classified into five categories according to the breast imaging reporting and data system . No abnormal enlargement of lymph nodes was observed in the axillary, supraclavicular, or infraclavicular regions. Both mammogram and breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated that the mass was malignant. In addition, no other abnormal changes were observed in the patient’s bilateral breasts. Immediate ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy confirmed the presence of invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast by pathology .
Therefore, we performed a further systemic evaluation to rule out metastatic disease and found thyroid- and kidney-occupying lesions. Thyroid ultrasound revealed solid nodules in the middle and upper of the thyroid right lobe, the inferior proximal isthmus, and the middle of the left lobe with sizes of approximately 0.7 cm × 0.6 cm, 0.8 cm × 0.5 cm, and 1.0 cm × 0.8 cm, respectively . With unclear boundaries, multiple-sized calcification foci were observed in the nodules and classified as category 4c according to the thyroid imaging reporting and data system. In the IV area of the left neck, an enlarged lymph node with a size of 1.8 cm × 0.6 cm and uneven cortical thickening can be seen.
In addition to this, an abdominal ultrasound revealed a 6.4 cm × 5.9 cm solid hypoechoic mass on the upper pole of the right kidney and an uneven internal echo. Furthermore, computed tomography (CT) of the urinary system displayed that the lesion was cystic low-density, with massive calcification and shadows of flocculent soft tissues, which appeared slightly thickened on an enhanced scan and was therefore considered to be cystic kidney cancer .