A 50-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital with complaints of swelling and pain in the neck. A multi-nodular goiter was discovered during a routine examination of the patient. She had a history of fullness of the neck for about 3 months. During palpation, a right thyroid lobe growth of slightly stiff consistency and moving nodules about 1.5cm in diameter were detected. Her systemic examination was normal. No anomalies were found her biochemical test results. Multiple hypoechoic bilateral nodules, the largest of which was on the right side (13 × 10mm diameter), were seen on the neck ultrasound. Insufficient tissue material was obtained by fine-needle aspiration biopsy due to the hard consistency of the right lobe nodule. Total thyroidectomy was performed on the basis of a pre-surgical diagnosis of multi-nodular goiter.
During macroscopic examination, we observed burgundy red elastic thyroidectomy material. This mass weighed 25g, and its size was 4cm × 3cm × 2cm in the right lobe and 5cm × 4cm × 2 cm in the left lobe. In the right lobe, which appeared moderately rich in colloid on the cross-sectional image, we observed a thickly encapsulated area 1cm in diameter that stained as a solid beige color with hematoxylin and eosin. We also observed nodular structures 0.5cm and 0.3cm in diameter, in the left lobe.In the light microscopy, thick capsulated tumoral areas which had cells with clear cytoplasm and nucleus usually located at the center , pushed the capsule in some points of view, and forms outside the capsule in two focuses were observed . Colloid in tumor tissue was too little . There was no lymphovascular invasion. Thyroid tissue except tumor was in accordance with nodular hyperplasia. In the differential diagnosis, tumor cells stained positive for thyroglobulin with immunohistochemical staining especially considering the areas of clear cell tumor . Vimentin, RCC, synaptophysin, and chromogranin staining were not observed. The case was reported as clear cell variant of follicular thyroid carcinoma.