A 78-year-old Caucasian woman presented with sub-acute shortness of breath. She had a history of pSS diagnosed 10 years previously by lip biopsy and positive antibody markers. She had been managed conservatively for symptoms of eye and mouth dryness with artificial saliva, frequent sips of water, sugarless lemon drops, cyclosporin eye drops, and biodyne mouthwash and toothpaste. Her past medical history is significant for hypothyroidism (on levothyroxine 100 mcg), iron deficiency and anemia of chronic disease, bronchiectasis, complete heart block status post pacemaker, and remote history of breast cancer treated with tamoxifen and bilateral mastectomy over 20 years ago.
She was noted to be tachypneic and hypoxemic, with 93% oxygen saturation on nasal cannula (5 L/minute) upon initial presentation. On examination she had dental caries and dry oral mucosal membranes. Moreover, there were diffuse ronchi and decreased breath sounds in her lower lobes bilaterally. Skin ulcers were noted on the shin of her lower extremity. High-resolution computed tomography of the chest showed large bilateral pleural effusions, severe bronchiectasis bilaterally with septal thickening, dilated medium-sized airways with eccentric pulmonary arteries, and thin walled cysts .
The results of pleural fluid analysis were consistent with an exudate and were negative for signs of malignancy or infection. A pleural biopsy was also negative for malignant cells and the results were consistent with benign mesothelial cells and histiocytes. Echocardiography showed elevated right heart pressures (pulmonary arterial systolic pressure [PASP] of 39 mmHg), normal ejection fraction, mild left ventricular hypertrophy, and mild diastolic dysfunction. Additional laboratory test results showed pancytopenia: hemoglobin = 8.9 g/dL, white count = 3300/mm3, and platelets = 113,000/mm3. The red blood cell indices included an mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 92.5 (reference range 78–100) fL and red cell distribution width (RDW) of 16% (reference range 11.5–14%). The results of the iron panel showed an iron level of 59 (reference range 60–170) mcg/dL, iron-binding capacity of 206 (reference range 240–450) mdg/dL, and ferritin of 29 (reference range 12–263) ng/mL. Vitamin B12 was 278 (reference range 160–950) pg/mL. The thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 4.770 (reference range 0.5–5.0) mIU/L, with normal free thyroxin (T4) at 1.66 (reference range 0.7–1.9) ng/dL. The vitamin D level was 45.1 (reference level 25–80) ng/mL. The rheumatology-targeted workup was significant for positive anti-Ro (SSA) antibody (> 8) (reference level: < 1), RF, elevated beta-2-microglobulin, cryoglobulinemia (level not quantitated), hypocomplementia (C3 < 83 [reference range 88–165] mg/dL; C4 < 8 [reference range 14–44] mg/dL), elevated inflammatory makers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate > 140 mm/hour; C-reactive protein = 44 mg/L), negative ANA, and monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (κ = 43.4 [reference range 0.33–1.94] mg/dL; λ = 31.1 [reference range 0.57–2.63] mg/dL; κ/λ = 1.4). Albumin level was normal.
The hypoxemia was likely multi-factorial, related to the large pleural effusions and parenchymal lung disease. Primary Sjogren’s syndrome explains her pleural effusions, bronchiectasis, and pulmonary hypertension as it causes inflammation and tissue injury in the pulmonary system. Additionally, the chest imaging results were consistent with radiographic features of lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (LIP), which is a well-described interstitial lung disease (ILD) in Sjogren’s syndrome [, ].
A diagnosis of pSS with extra-glandular complications was made. She was started on prednisone 40 mg per day. Two chest tubes were placed to drain the effusion. At discharge the patient was feeling significantly better. Her shortness of breath had resolved. Moreover, her xerostomia, xerophthlamia, chronic fatigue, and appetite had improved. The skin ulcers had also started to heal. Although a punch biopsy was not performed, the skin ulcers are likely to be vasculitic as they were unprovoked and resolved after the initiation of prednisone .
Prednisone was tapered after 6 weeks and the patient then switched to mycophenolate mofetil with continued improvement of her symptoms. Laboratory investigations demonstrated resolution of the hypocomplementia, cryoglobulins, and improvement in all cell lines. Inflammatory markers and beta-2-microglobulin trended downward. However, the anemia was persistent and she was started on darbepoetin alfa.
At 5 months of follow-up, the patient was noted to have a swollen submandibular lymph node, which was surgically excised. Pathology revealed a B-cell marginal zone lymphoma (CD19, CD45, and IgM-positive immunophenotype).