An 82-year-old woman presented to our institution for evaluation of her right TKA, which was performed in 2009 at an outside hospital. Her past medical history was significant only for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) for which she usually took adalimumab biweekly, methothrexate and celecoxib but reported this was well controlled.
Per her outside operative records, implants used at the initial surgery were a cemented Triathlon® CR femoral component, a 9 mm size 3 X3® CS insert, a size 3 Triathlon® universal tibial baseplate, and a 10 mm asymmetric Triathlon® X3® patella.
The patient was initially referred by the primary surgeon to our oncology clinic in February 2019 due to findings of a distal femur lesion in her right knee discovered on follow-up X-rays and better seen in a noncontrast MRI. At that time, the patient was pain-free but reported feelings of instability. The physical exam showed a well-healed midline surgical incision for TKA without complication. No obvious instability with varus/varus testing or drawer testing was found.
MRI with IV contrast was performed to further characterize this mass in the right distal femur and rule out a malignant lesion . The MRI report showed “postsurgical changes of right TKA with findings typical for osteolysis secondary to particle disease and knee joint effusion with synovitis.” The orthopedic oncologist then referred the patient to our adult reconstruction clinic with very low suspicion for a neoplastic process.
The patient was assessed again in April 2019 and mentions occasional knee buckling but without pain. Her X-rays showed a focal well-circumscribed lucent lesion with thin geographic mineralized margin along the distal diametaphysis and deep to the cemented femoral component. There was thinning and weakening of the cortices in several areas. At that time, we recommended surgery due to the fracture risk. The patient declined but was agreeable to close surveillance. She was assessed two months later and did not want to consider surgery, again and refused X-rays due to absence of pain. She returned back a month later with mild knee pain and opted to proceed with a revision TKA for the diagnosis of massive femoral osteolysis and impending femoral fracture. The patient was later seen preoperatively, and the pain and X-rays remained stable .
We utilized the prior incision and entered the join through a medial parapatellar arthrotomy. Clear synovial fluid was seen and sent for culture. The patella and tibia were mobilized and found to be well fixed, although the tibia had some osteolysis. The polyethylene was found to have minor oxidation, but no significant wear was found. We found no third bodies or other debris. We removed the insert and found no backside wear or any other explanation for this massive osteolysis. There was visual appearance of diffuse in vivo oxidation. Based on the extent of the osteolysis, we decided to revise the femur with a stem to bypass the defect. The femoral component was then removed with minimal bone loss. There were massive cystic changes with some debris that we sent for pathology . After refreshing the cuts, we proceeded with reconstruction. The femoral reconstruction was performed using a size A Tritanium® metaphyseal cone and Triathlon® femoral component with a 15 mm × 100 mm cemented stem extension and a 16 mm posterior stabilized X3® insert.
All the cultures resulted negative. Microscopic evaluation of the periprosthetic tissue revealed features typically observed when implant failure has taken place. Numerous multinucleated foreign body giant cells can be seen filled with debris from breakdown products. Some of the giant cells had empty spaces where engulfed methyl methacrylate cement was present but dissolved during tissue processing. Other foreign body giant cells contained shards of refractile debris and fragmented refractile particles. Macrophages also infiltrated the tissue and are filled with phagocytosed microparticles. Chronic inflammatory cells were present but there was no acute inflammation supporting that this was an aseptic process.
At one-year clinical follow-up, the patient was noted to be doing well with no changes in her radiographic examination . Her incision healed uneventfully. The patient was pain free and ambulating without walking aids. At the last follow-up, her right knee range of motion was 0-130°.