The patient was a 40-year-old, multiparous woman with no comorbidity, who referred to our center for prenatal counseling at 25 weeks of gestation due to abnormal cystic structure protruding from a large abdominal wall defect located below the umbilicus observed during a routine exam. The patient was in the low risk group in the first trimester screening test. The parents were consanguine and had one normal boy.
At the time, our scan revealed an elongated cystic lesion, measuring 85*45*65 mm which originated from the abdomen and extended to outside of the abdominal cavity with edematous umbilical cord and small deviated bladder to the left side. There was moderate hydronephrosis on the right side with renal cortical thinning. The left kidney looked normal. The bladder was small, and although the left umbilical artery was seen properly, the right one was very narrow. Evaluation of the fetal genitalia showed two penile-like protrusions with an empty scrotal sac. The fetus was otherwise normal . For better anatomical evaluation, fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was requested and showed a large cystic structure above the normal urinary bladder, compressing it inferiorly with a large anterior abdominal wall defect, and the mentioned cystic structure extended all the way to the cord; the possibility of uracal cyst with left side pyelectasis was present due to the pressure effect of the cyst. Amniocentesis was recommended, but the parents did not agree to submit to it.
The patient underwent serial monthly ultrasound examinations. The protruding cystic structure disappeared at the 32-week scan with an anterior abdominal wall defect. Although the fetal growth velocity and Doppler assessment were normal, there was mild polyhydramnios. It was supposed that the cystic structure had ruptured spontaneously and collapsed. The patient had planned to deliver at 38 weeks of gestation at a tertiary, fetal-maternal center with a fetal surgeon, neonatologist, perinatologist, and NICU; however, rupture of the membrane occurred at the 37th gestational week, and the patient underwent an emergency cesarean section. The boy was delivered with an APGAR score of 10 at 5 minutes and a birth weight of 3800 g. Initial examination after birth revealed a large abdominal wall defect and exomphalos measuring 80*50 mm with 2 separate phalluses in the coronal plane on the right and left sides .
The baby was transferred into emergency surgery with a pediatric surgeon for closure of the abdominal wall defect. During the surgery, a complete double bladder and urethra was noted. The right bladder was exstrophic and connected to the blind end of the right urethra; there was another intra-abdominal bladder, which was connected to the normal and functional urethra at the concordant phallus. Both testes were visualized in the pelvic cavity and undescended. The anus and rectum were normal. Therefore, abdominal wall reconstruction was done using mesh . Complete reconstructive surgery and orchiopexy was postponed so as to perform advanced imaging and a complete evaluation of the genitourinary system. Unfortunately, before reconstruction surgery could take place, the baby died from pneumonia and sepsis. Neonatal microarray study and karyotype were normal.