This case involved a 26-year-old man who was being treated for a psychiatric disorder. On the day of presentation, his relatives found him lying on the bedroom floor. There was a speargun rod in his mouth, and he was bleeding, including from his nose. On inquiring the history, we learned that the patient had shot himself with a rubber band speargun. At the scene, the patient was conscious and showed no weakness; hence, the relatives took him to the nearest community hospital.
According to the patient’s treatment history at that hospital, the spear was cut short, just approximately 10 cm off the edge of the patient’s lips. He was calm, breathed well, and had normal vital signs without any neurological deficits. The patient received oxygen through a nasal cannula and was administered tetanus toxoid and intravenous antibiotics. In addition, he underwent cranial X-ray and was later referred to a level I trauma center.
At our hospital, a multidisciplinary team of neurosurgeons, trauma surgeons, otolaryngologists, interventional neurologists, and anesthesiologists was established urgently to assess the patient. Initially, the patient’s vital signs and symptoms were normal. In addition, no bleeding was observed in the upper aerodigestive tract. On physical examination, an 8 mm diameter round iron spear was found to have penetrated through his soft palate and the posterior oropharyngeal wall.
Cranial computed tomography (CT) scan showed a metallic rod that had penetrated through the oropharynx, the left side of the clivus, and the left lateral part of the posterior fossa. The rod was positioned slightly above the foramen magnum and ended in the left cerebellar hemisphere. The spear’s tip was located at the inner cortex of the left side of the occipital bone [-]. Moreover, multiple pneumocephali and pneumoventricles were observed. However, no intracerebellar hemorrhage was observed .
Three-dimensional (3D) CT reconstruction images revealed the details of the spear; it had a harpoon (or flapper), with the most convex part of the metallic tip of the spear acting as a hinge. This section was located within the clivus bone, with the end of the flapper having partially penetrated the intracranial cavity [ and ]. CT angiography (CTA) was performed to evaluate vascular injuries because the spear appeared to be located near the vertebrobasilar junction. However, there were multiple metallic artifacts obscuring the surrounding vessels [ and ]. After discussion among the multidisciplinary medical team members, relatives, and the patient, it was decided that the patient should undergo surgery. The surgery was performed in a hybrid operating room, which had a combination of equipment for digital subtraction cerebral angiography (DSA) as well as endovascular treatment and surgery.
Treatment began with airway management. The patient could open his mouth only one finger wide. Therefore, the anesthesiologist performed nasotracheal intubation using the awake fiber-optic technique during which the patient cooperated well . Next, diagnostic cerebral angiography was performed to completely evaluate the vessels; it revealed that the left vertebral artery was located adjacent to the spear, with no signs of a false aneurysm or luminal narrowing. The other intracranial arteries, including the anterior and posterior circulations near the spear, were unobstructed [ and ]. Then, a guiding catheter with a continuous slow rate saline drip was placed into the left proximal vertebral artery so as to prepare for a repeated angiogram and embolization in case of an arterial extravasation or secondary tearing during or immediately after removal of the spear.
Otolaryngologists operated on the patient starting with a tracheostomy because the nasotracheal tube obstructed the surgical spear removal path. Then, the surgeon opened the patient’s mouth with a Dingman retractor and separated the soft palate as well as the posterior pharyngeal wall at the median. The neurosurgery team further exposed the soft tissue surrounding the spear until the end of the flapper could be located. Under a microscope, the team members then drilled the clivus bone that surrounded and covered the flapper. When the spear was gently pulled out, slight bleeding occurred from the clivus bone, which was successfully stopped using bone wax.
There was fortunately no continuous intracranial bleeding. A thorough rinsing was performed with a large amount of saline solution, and all visible bleedings were coagulated. Then, the dural defect was repaired with a dural substitute and tissue sealant. Finally, the posterior pharynx was closed tightly; the soft palate was repaired and reapproximated.
After removing the spear, angiographic findings concerning the intracranial arteries were found to be normal, both immediately [ and ] and 2 weeks postoperatively. In the postoperative period, the patient’s respiratory function was normal and the tracheostomy tube was subsequently removed. The patient started breathing naturally.
The patient also underwent psychiatric evaluation and was diagnosed with adjustment disorder, which was treated with medications and emotional support. He was finally discharged on postoperative day 19. His mental state was normal, and he no longer had any suicidal ideation.