A 41-year-old female patient with an 18-year history of schizophrenia was referred to the emergency department of the local general hospital. She was presented with mutism, staring gaze, rigidity, negativism, and stupor. The symptoms developed over a period of 3 days. The patient had no history of general medical illness or alcohol/substance abuse. She had been treated in a community mental health service for several years and was clinically stable during the last semester under treatment with haloperidol decanoate 150mg monthly. According to the information given by her family, she was drinking excessive amounts of water for several days prior to the development of the catatonic symptoms. The patient was admitted to the internal medicine ward for further evaluation and treatment. At admission, she was afebrile and awake, with no alteration of consciousness or other signs of confusion. A full clinical and laboratory investigation was employed. The computed tomography of the brain was normal, as well as the electroencephalogram. The blood sample analysis revealed moderate hyponatremia, with sodium levels 124mEq/L. The urine analysis did not reveal any significant findings. The patient received treatment with water restriction and isotonic saline and was discharged in 2 days, in good clinical condition, with sodium serum levels 138mEq/L. The physicians’ instructions at discharge were water restriction, laboratory re-examination, and psychiatric evaluation. She was examined by the treating psychiatrist the next day of discharge and did not present any signs of catatonia. Her clinical condition was stable over the following weeks, and sodium serum levels were 138mEq/L 4 weeks after discharge.
A search in the PubMed database revealed 10 previous reports of the hyponatremia-associated catatonic syndrome, involving 11 patients which are summarized in Table . Seven cases involved patients with a mental disorder. The first report was from India and involved a male patient with bipolar disorder. The patient presented catatonic symptoms (mutism, negativism, rigidity) in the context of severe hyponatremia of unknown cause. All symptoms abated with the restoration of sodium serum levels . Maxwell et al. reported two cases of young females who presented with catatonic stupor after the consumption of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (ecstasy) and the development of hyponatremia. Both recovered completely within several hours with conservative management. A subsequent report involved a 45-year-old male patient with schizophrenia, who developed catatonic symp- toms, such as grimacing, posturing, stereotypy, and negativism, which were associated with hyponatremia. The patient had symptoms of confusion as well. The administration of lorazepam was employed for the resolution of the catatonic symptoms . In another report of hyponatremia-associated catatonia, a young male patient with schizophrenia was presented with stupor, staring gaze, akinesia, negativism, mutism, and muscular rigidity. The patient had suffered a brain injury that had been accounted for the development of hyponatremia, although he had a normal brain image and no neurological sequelae. All symptoms resolved with the correction of hypo- natremia . There is also a reported case of hyponatremia-induced persistent and recurrent catatonic syndrome in a non-psychiatric patient due to adrenal insufficiency. The symptoms did not respond to serum sodium levels restoration or lorazepam, and a course of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) was required for symptom resolution . On other occasions, a middle-aged female patient developed catatonic symptoms (immobility, withdrawal, rigidity, negativism, mutism, and posturing) and delirium in the context of hyponatremia induced by venlafaxine. Treatment with lorazepam improved the symptoms, which were completely resolved with the correction of hyponatremia . Novac et al. reported the case of a young female patient with depression and papillary thyroid cancer, who was presented with confusion, psychosis, and catatonic symptoms due to hyponatremia in the context of iodine-131 therapy for metastatic cancer. Treatment with clonazepam and the restoration of sodium serum levels improved the catatonic symptoms. In another report, a female patient with schizoaffective disorder and medical multi-morbidity was presented with stupor, mutism, posturing, stereotypy, and staring due to hyponatremia secondary to psychogenic polydipsia. The catatonic symptoms resolved with lorazepam administration . A unique case of a 69-year-old male patient who developed two discrete episodes of catatonia associated with hyponatremia was reported by McGuire et al. Symptoms of confusion and psychosis were recorded as well. The two episodes had taken place over a 3-year interval. During the first presentation of the patient, treatment with diazepam resolved the catatonic symptoms, whereas on the second occasion, the correction of sodium serum levels sufficed for symptom resolution. Finally, there is a recent case of the development of catatonic symptoms in an elderly male patient in the context of hyponatremia induced by imiquimod treatment that the patient had received for actinic keratosis. The catatonic symptoms improved with lorazepam .