A 9-year-old boy was seen at our urology outpatients' clinic in September 2005 with a 3-year history of straining at micturition and fleshy non-healing wounds located on the dorsolateral aspects of his penile shaft associated with minimal purulent discharge. The amount of discharge was not related to the act of voiding. He lived with his grandmother, who had tried topical applications of native medications without much improvement. On clinical examination, he had a ring scar located at the midshaft of his penis. The scar did not appear to be constrictive. There was no change in skin coloration or texture and no alteration of sensation distal to the scar. He also had minimal exuberant granulation tissue on the dorsolateral aspects of the scar associated with very minimal purulent discharge . There was a palpable dense periurethral induration beneath the scar. The bladder was not distended. His blood urea nitrogen, electrolytes and serum creatinine were normal. His retrograde urethrogram revealed a tight ring stricture in the middle third of his urethra .
At surgery under general anesthesia, a hemostatic tourniquet was applied to the root of his penis. A degloving incision was made in his old circumcision scar and the penile skin was dissected off the corporeal bodies towards the base of the penis. At the site of the ring scar, an intact black hair thread tourniquet was seen encased in dense fibrous tissue and binding the penile skin to the corporeal bodies. The hair thread tourniquet was divided and removed , and the penile skin sharply dissected off the corporeal bodies circumferentially at that location. A 2 cm urethral stricture was identified and excised, but when the urethral ends were temporarily pulled together, the penile shaft was severely bowed into a ventral chordee. A pedicled penile flap was therefore taken from the distal aspect of his penile skin and used for reconstructing the urethra over an indwelling urethral catheter after the method described by Quartey . The procedure was completed by closing the circumcoronal wound, leaving a circumcision-like wound. A firm dressing was applied before the hemostatic tourniquet at the root of the penis was removed. His urethral catheter was removed 3 weeks postoperative. The patient's financial circumstances did not allow postoperative retrograde urethrography. He has since been voiding well and has been followed-up for 28 months.