A 64-year-old woman came to the Outpatient Department of Shenzhen Hospital of Southern Medical University with numbness and weakness in the limbs. Physical examination was negative except for slightly increased muscle tone in the right upper limb. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a thickening at the esophagogastric junction, extending over a length of 75 mm, with maximum thickness of ~ 16 mm. Abdominal CT showed enlarged lymph nodes at the bilateral posterior crura diaphragmatis, porta hepatis, and portal cavity interval, and also adjacent to the left gastric blood vessels, coeliac trunk, and abdominal aorta. Gastroscopy, revealed a friable mass bulging into the gastric cavity. The surface was markedly necrotic and bled easily on touch. The mucosa around the mass was congested and edematous, and the gastric angle was distorted. The gross appearance was suggestive of gastric cancer. Biopsy was obtained from three sites and sent for pathological examination. Microscopic examination showed necrosis and ulceration of the mucosa. The tumor was mainly composed of round cells of varying size, with the smaller ones resembling lymphocytes and the larger ones being 3–9 times the size of the smaller ones. Intervening fibrovascular septa created a patchy pattern . Tumor cells had low cytoplasmic content and eccentric nuclei with fine chromatin and small nucleoli; there was red staining on one side of the nuclei . About 10% of the tumor cells had strongly eosinophilic, large nucleoli, with clearly visible apoptotic bodies . In some areas, cell morphology was markedly different: the tumor cells were fusiform, banded, tadpole-shaped, or giant sized, and the cytoplasm was more eosinophilic . Furthermore, there was patchy necrosis, with strip-like red-stained bands in the necrotic area or between the tumor cells . There were 5–9 mitotic figures per high-powered field (HPF).
On immunohistochemical analysis the tumor cells were strongly positive for MyoD1 , myogenin , and the neuroendocrine cell marker PGP9.5, and weakly positive for desmin, actin, vimentin, CD56, and Syn. There was scattered positivity for epithelial cell markers CKpan and EMA. Staining was negative for CgA, S-100, HMB45, CD99, CD20, CD79a, CD30, ALK, CD117, DOG1, MUM1, FLI1, LCA, Bcl-2, TdT, and CD34. The ki-67 index was ≥90% .
Based on these findings the patient was diagnosed with ERMS of the esophagogastric junction and was advised surgery. At surgery, patchy necrosis was seen in the overlying mucosa. The tumor was 2.6 mm in size and confined to the mucosa and lamina propria.