A 20-year-old male with a history of heterotaxy syndrome, dextrocardia, systolic ventricular failure of the systemic ventricle due to DORV associated with an unbalanced common atrioventricular canal, severely hypoplastic left ventricle, and TAPVR presented to our ACHD centre with progressively worsening fatigue and worsening dyspnoea. Of note, he underwent pulmonary artery banding in the 1st month of life followed by left-sided bidirectional Glenn procedure and TAPVR repair at 8 months of age and ultimately right-sided pericardial extracardiac lateral tunnel Fontan completion at 5 years of age. Other relevant history include elevated Fontan pressures, Fontan-associated liver disease, chronic hypoxic respiratory failure, mild-to-moderate intellectual disability, cleft lip and palate status post repair, bilateral conductive hearing loss, asplenia, and obesity.
Vital signs were notable for blood pressure 90–100/60–70 mmHg and SpO2 80–90% on room air. Physical examination was notable for a 3/6 holosystolic murmur not only heard loudest at the right upper sternal border but also heard all over the precordium and the back. Home medications were notable for aspirin 81 mg, carvedilol 25 mg, chlorothiazide 500 mg, enalapril 10 mg, furosemide 40 mg, sildenafil 20 mg, and spironolactone 25 mg.
Initial evaluation, including transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and TEE, demonstrated a common AV valve with annular dilatation and severe regurgitation, a severely enlarged common atrium, and a systemic (right) ventricular ejection fraction of 20%. The AVV leaflets were thickened, with dominant anterior and posterior bridging leaflets and smaller dysplastic leaflets in the medial and lateral commissures ( and and , and ). These leaflets demonstrated excessive mobility and prolapsed into the atrium, resulting in a wide and torrential medioposterior-directed regurgitant jet involving most of the valve and reaching the pulmonary vein inflows. Of note, the Nyquist limit setting on the echocardiogram was 60 cm/s and there were large V-waves.
After a multidisciplinary discussion, surgical repair of the common AVV was deemed high risk due to underlying severely reduced single ventricular systolic function and associated cirrhosis. Similarly, heart transplantation was deemed very high risk in the setting of a poor social support system exacerbated by intellectual disability of the patient. A decision was therefore made to proceed with trans-catheter repair of the common AVV using the MitraClip system (Abbott Cardiovascular, Plymouth, MN, USA). Computed tomography angiography of the chest was obtained for preoperative evaluation .
Baseline haemodynamics during cardiac catheterization revealed moderately elevated Fontan pressures of 18 mmHg, mildly elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 13 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance of 1.5 Wood units. Baseline systemic oxygen saturation was 87% in the setting of multiple veno-venous collaterals.
After successfully accessing the right and left femoral veins with 8 Fr sheaths and right femoral artery with a 5 Fr sheath and induction of general anaesthesia using a combination of propofol and midazolam, trans-baffle puncture of the Fontan tunnel was performed with fluoroscopy and TEE guidance. Considering underlying dextrocardia and the orientation of the AVV, the puncture was directed counterclockwise and positioned just above the mid-point of the valve on fluoroscopy. Under TEE guidance, the tenting was positioned such that the guide sheath entered the common atrium horizontally and levelled with the centre of the AV valve. A 0.035″ Confida wire was advanced across the baffle and used to facilitate the delivery of a 22 Fr steerable guide catheter and dilator into the atrium. Complicating considerations included the presence of an intra-atrial web, a remnant of the intra-atrial septum, and a left-sided Fontan baffle . Additionally, the delivery system needed to be mis-keyed at 180° and the sheath had to be inverted so that it flexed to the patient’s right due to the dextrocardia. As the atria and systemic ventricle were horizontal, the system did not require much flexing of the guide catheter. Once a puncture was successfully made, an XTW clip was prepared in the usual manner and introduced via the catheter on the clip delivery system. Once in position above the valve and using the en-face view, the orientation of the clip was rotated to intersect the largest of the regurgitation jets. After a couple of attempts and gauging the clip movement in this anatomy, the leaflets were successfully grasped and anchored. This reduced the regurgitation from torrential to severe. A second XTW clip was prepared and advanced close to and slightly lateral to the first clip to better address the valve regurgitation and anchor the first XTW clip given the high mobility of the leaflets ( and and and , and ). This further reduced the regurgitation from severe to moderate. After successful delivery of the clips, Fontan baffle puncture–site closure was considered. However, evaluation with angiography and TEE revealed minimal right-to-left shunting by colour flow, and the patient maintained stable systemic oxygen saturations at 87%, so it was not performed. Of note, the systemic ventricular ejection fraction remained unchanged at 20%. The patient was discharged home in stable condition.
Six days later, the patient was readmitted for worsening dyspnoea and systemic oxygen desaturations. Chest radiography was negative. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed worsening right-to-left shunting through the Fontan baffle puncture site by colour flow and saline contrast study. This was postulated to be due to a decrease in common atrium pressure post successful MitraClip placement, while the Fontan pressure remained constant and elevated. Imaging showed the common atrium had shrunk in size since the MitraClip procedure. A decision was made to close the Fontan baffle puncture site. Unfortunately, induction of anaesthesia was complicated by worsening hypoxemia and cardiac arrest with unsuccessful cardiopulmonary resuscitation.