A 62-year-old woman with a history of stage IIIa chronic kidney disease (CKD) was referred to our hospital for rapidly worsening renal function with hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis. Her baseline creatinine level was 1.5 mg/dL but had increased to 5.62 mg/dL over a period of 4 mo.
She has noticed bilateral lower-extremity edema and dyspnea on exertion 2 wk prior to the presentation. She denied any hemoptysis, chest pain, nausea, or vomiting. She had two episodes of epistaxis about a month prior to admission. She had two admissions over the prior 6 mo for hypertensive encephalopathy and influenza pneumonia with hypoxemic respiratory failure. There was no history of any invasive vascular procedures, use of radio-contrast agents, or treatment with anticoagulants or thrombolytic agents.
Her relevant medical history included poorly controlled hypertension, hyperli-pidemia, transient ischemic attack (TIA), diastolic heart failure, reactive airway disease, nephrolithiasis status post-lithotripsy, and osteoarthritis with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug usage.
She reported no family history of renal disease or thrombosis. She was a non-smoker and not a current alcohol user.
Her vitals were within normal limits and physical exam was normal except for bilateral lower-extremity edema and diminished breath sounds at the lung bases.
Laboratory examination revealed normocytic normochromic anemia, serum eosino-philia (10%), hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, elevated creatinine (5.2 mg/dL), and elevated blood urea nitrogen (69 mg/dL). Urinalysis showed few red blood cells (RBCs), granular casts, and microalbuminuria and was negative for eosinophil and red cell casts. Serology was positive for antineutrophil antibody, anti-cardiolipin IgM antibody, and c-ANCA; 1:320.
Liver function tests, troponins, creatinine kinase, serum magnesium, calcium, HbA1c, complement levels (C3, C4), serum immunoglobulin levels, coagulation studies including prothrombin time, protein C, S levels/activity, antithrombin III activity, and lupus anticoagulant were within normal limits. Additionally, D-dimer was positive, and factor V Leiden mutation was negative.
Her perinuclear ANCA, atypical pANCA, anti-histone antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibodies, myeloma panel (serum and urine protein electrophoresis and immunofluorescence), viral panel (hepatitis B, C; HIV serology), and urine toxicology tests were negative.
A retroperitoneal ultrasound showed diffuse cortical thinning suggestive of medical renal disease but negative for obstructive uropathy. Non-contrast-enhanced com-puted tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was unremarkable except for diffuse atherosclerotic changes in the aortic arch. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, without any significant ischemic changes. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a normal ejection fraction and was negative for atrial myxoma, vegetation, or intracardiac thrombi.
She was clinically volume overloaded and had no oliguria. She responded well with good urine output to intravenous diuretics. Hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis were improved upon initial medical management. In the background of rapidly worsening renal function with a positive titer of ANCA and history of epistaxis, ANCA-associated vasculitis was suspected; thus, she was started on pulse therapy of IV methylprednisolone 1 g/d. A renal biopsy was postponed to day 4 after admission due to relative contraindications such as aspirin usage, poorly controlled hyperten-sion, and the patient’s inability to assume a prone position due to body habitus. Once she was medically optimized, an interventional radiologist performed the renal biopsy under anesthesia. She was discharged with prednisone 60 mg because the biopsy report was not yet available at the time of discharge.