An 80-year-old man with epigastric pain visited our hospital in January 2019. A magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed several stones in the common bile duct (CBD), and he was diagnosed with choledocholithiasis. Endoscopic lithotripsy was performed, and cholangiography showed narrowing and wall-irregularity of the lower CBD . Brushing cytology detected class V malignant cells, and laboratory findings showed elevation of carcinoembryonic antigen, 8.2 ng/mL (0.0–4.9 ng/mL). Abdominal MDCT showed wall thickness and contrast enhancement of the lower CBD. Invasion to the surrounding organs or vessels was not detected, and there was no significant lymph node swelling or remote metastasis . He was diagnosed with distal bile duct cancer of T1bN0M0 Stage IA according to the Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery classification , and PD was scheduled. On the preoperative MDCT images, complete occlusion of the CA was incidentally detected . There was considerable calcification around the occlusion of the CA; therefore, the cause of the occlusion was suspected to be arteriosclerosis. MDCT images identified complicated peri-pancreatic arterial anastomoses from the SMA to the CA system . A 3D image of the arterial system was reconstructed from MDCT images, and the arterial anastomoses were clearly visualized and easily detected . Although most of the anastomoses were developed through the GDA, we identified one well-developed anastomosis between the SMA and the splenic artery (SPA) through the dorsal pancreatic artery (DPA) . Preoperative abdominal angiography was also considered to evaluate collateral arteries and perform preoperative TAE of the GDA because of the complete obstruction of the CA. However, it was assumed that the arterial blood flow to the spleen, stomach, and liver could be supplied via the anastomosis from the SMA to the SPA through the DPA, even if we divided the GDA . In order to confirm this hypothesis, we planned to perform a GDA clamping test during the surgery and check the blood flow of the hepatic artery with intraoperative ultrasonography to determine whether it was possible to divide the GDA. In the case of deficient blood flow of the hepatic artery after the GDA clamping test, we scheduled reconstruction of the GDA using the middle colic artery by plastic surgeons, or the preservation of arterial anastomosis between the SMA and the GDA around the pancreatic head when possible.
PD was performed in April 2019. After taping of the GDA , CHA, and proper hepatic artery (PHA), we clamped the GDA, and checked the arterial flow in the PHA using Doppler ultrasonography . Although the acceleration time decreased from 143 to 60 ms and the resistive index decreased from 0.531 to 0.428 after the clamping test , a tardus-parvus pattern was not detected with the clamping test , suggesting the arterial anastomosis from the SMA to the PHA through the DPA and the SPA worked well. We divided the GDA and performed a typical PD without any additional complicated procedures , including arterial reconstruction and the preservation of arterial anastomoses between the SMA and the CHA around the pancreatic head. At the end of the operation, we checked the blood flow in the PHA once again. The acceleration time was 144 ms and the resistive index was 0.537, suggesting absence of a tardus-parvus pattern. There were well-developed arterial anastomoses around the pancreatic head. Especially, arteries in the mesopancreas (pancreatic nerve plexus) were quite developed and thus, resection of the mesopancreas was excessively hemorrhagic. The operative time was 6 h and 40 min, and the estimated blood loss was 1377 ml. Pathological diagnosis was distal bile duct tubular adenocarcinoma of T3(SS), N1, Stage IIB .
Postoperative laboratory data showed slight elevation of hepatic enzyme immediately after the surgery , but we did not observe jaundice or increase of ascites after the surgery, suggesting no signs of ischemia of the liver. There was also no delayed gastric emptying, which is sometimes caused by ischemia of the stomach after PD [, , ]. Pancreatic fistula of Grade B developed, and it was resolved without any invasive intervention. The patient was discharged from the hospital 41 days after surgery. The postoperative MDCT 3 months after surgery detected arterial perfusion to the CHA from the SMA via the DPA and SPA .