A 74-year-old female patient presented with the feeling of an abdominal growing mass and weight loss (approximatively 10 kg within the last 12 months) without rectal bleeding or abdominal pain. After a computed tomography (CT) scan the patient was referred to our hospital with the suspicion of a rectal tumor. Complex medical history included a subtotal colectomy with an end ileostomy and a mucous fistula at the descending colon due to Crohn disease at the age of 16 years. In the following years, the patient suffered from repeated ileus episodes and a laparotomy with adhesiolysis was performed in 2007. She never took any medication for her Crohn disease and no further manifestations of activity were observed. Clinical examination showed the patient in reduced general condition; the abdomen was soft and there was no pain during the palpation of the abdominal wall. Laboratory values were in the standard range.
The imaging in the CT scan was not conclusive, and therefore we performed magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to confirm the suspicion of tumor and to allow staging. The MRI showed a massive dilatation of the remaining colon and the rectum without detection of a tumor at the anal level . Lower endoscopy failed due to complete anal stenosis and obliteration of the descending colon at the stoma site.
The possible therapeutic options were discussed with the patient. She refused a restoration of the intestinal continuity so we decided to perform an abdominoperineal rectum resection. After laparotomy and adhesiolysis the whole sigma and rectum appeared massively dilated . The rectosigmoid was resected until reaching the muscular pelvic floor. The ileostomy was newly created after resecting the approximatively last 5 cm of the ileum because of a prolapse. The anus was dissected carefully intersphincterically and the specimen was removed completely . The perineum was closed tension free.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged to rehabilitation on the 13th postoperative day. The pathology report showed a dilated rectum and sigma with large amounts of partly calcified mucus. There was no evidence of dysplasia, malignancy, or Crohn manifestation in the completely obliterated proximal colon and the anus.