A 12-year-old girl was admitted to our Nephrology Department due to pain in her right lower leg that began 3 days ago. Her past medical history consisted of nephrosis, which was diagnosed and treated in her town 6 years ago, and is still on a maintenance dose of prednisone 5 mg/d. Also, urine tests (24 h urine protein and a random protein to creatinine ratio) during the treatment period correspond with SRN.
On physical examination: temperature 37C, blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, pulse rate 74 /min, and respiratory rate 14 /min. She had swelling in her right calf and movement restriction with no redness or local warmth and no history of trauma. Ultrasonography showed a hematoma in the right calf .
The first decision to reevaluate NS was a kidney biopsy, but a calf hematoma obligated hematologic evaluation , which showed partial thromboplastin time prolongation. A mixing test was done and compatible with coagulation factors antibodies . Anti-factor VIII inhibitors (Anti-FVIII) were positive with high titers (156 BU) and lupus anticoagulant was negative. As mentioned before, additional tests to rule out secondary causes were performed and all came back negative . A full-body computed tomography was negative for lymphadenopathy and malignancy. Due to NS, additional tests were performed; protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III, and all within normal limits.
Since calcineurin inhibitors (CNI) such as cyclosporine is considered the initial second-line therapy for children with SRN, we started cyclosporine with prednisone. Initial prednisone dose was 40 mg/d and the tapered and discontinued after 6 months. Cyclosporine was started at 100 mg/ twice daily with the previous dose for the first 2 months and then tapered slowly to a maintenance dose of 100 mg/d after the first year. Activated partial thromboplastin time prolongation and proteinuria returned to normal limits after a month. The hematoma was resolved after 2 months with no recurrence of nephrosis or bleeding events. Monitoring tests are shown in Table and the patient is currently on a tapering regimen to complete the 2-year course of the treatment.