A 16-year-old Iranian girl was referred to the neurology department because of having bilateral horizontal gaze palsy. The gaze palsy was sudden in onset, developing overnight. The patient also reported a history of paresthesia in both of her feet since 2 months ago, which had progressed in the course duration of 2 weeks reaching her trunk at the level of the umbilicus. She experienced similar symptoms in both of her hands approximately 1 year ago. Regarding, her past medical history was otherwise normal. She used no medications and denied using illicit drugs, tobacco and alcohol.
Considering physical examination, the patient had complete bilateral horizontal gaze palsy in the horizontal plane while vertical gaze was normal, aside from slightly decreased velocity of saccadic movements. Pupils were midsize and reactive, and nystagmus, diplopia or blurry vision were not found. Mild bilateral peripheral facial nerve palsy was also presented in the physical exam. Hyperreflexia in all four limbs was detectable without clonus, plantar reflexes were down going, and muscle forces were not reduced. There were no apparent signs of spasticity and ataxia. All other physical exam findings were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging indicated multiple hyperintense subcortical, and periventricular lesions visible on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted images, in addition to bilaterally involving PPRF at the level of the pons, anterior to the cerebral aqueduct . Two hyperintense lesions were also presented in the sagittal sections of the spinal MRI, one at the level of C7 and the other adjacent to T4. The lesions visible on the MRI were consistent with demyelination. After gadolinium injection, the PPRF lesions were not enhanced, however, T4 thoracic spine lesion was enhanced. Lumbar puncture was not performed because of patient’s dissent. Visual evoked potential (VEP) undertaken indicated no abnormality. Anti-aquaporin 4 (AQP4) and anti-myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies were accomplished in order to rule out neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and both tests were negative. All other diagnostic tests and routine lab works were normal.
With respect to the clinical findings and the history of a previous attack, the patient has had two clinical attacks at two different sites in the CNS, which were confirmed using MRI, and an enhancing lesion at the level of T4, diagnosis of MS was made in terms of the 2017 revised McDonald’s criteria .
The patient was treated with 1000 mg of intravenous methylprednisolone for three consecutive days, along with other supportive measures. Eye motion indicated significant improvement by passing 1 week from therapy and complete ocular movements were retrieved on the one-month follow up visit of the patient.