A 17-year-old male applied to the Oral and Maxillofacial Department of School of Dentistry at Shahed Universit for routine oral and dental checkups. Intraoral clinical examination revealed multiple erythematous areas surrounded by a thin white border with a slightly elevated appearance on the labial mucosa (A), the floor of the mouth (B and C), buccal mucosa (D), ventral surface of the tongue (E), lateral borders of the tongue (F), and dorsum of the tongue (G). In addition to these lesions, the fissured tongue was another abnormal appearance of oral mucosa in this patient. All of the lesions were asymptomatic, and the patient was not aware of their presence.
The extraoral examination (e.g., skin, eyes, joints) was completely normal. Also, the medical and familial history was not relevant. Often these clinical features of the tongue are characteristic and enough to diagnose. However, due to the rarity of involvement of other sites of the oral mucosa, (such as labial and buccal mucosa, floor of the mouth, and ventral surface of the tongue), in this case, a histopathologic examination was necessary to confirm the diagnosis. Therefore, the biopsy was considered. After explaining the condition to the patient, he filled a consent form to perform biopsies and published the results in the article. Then two biopsy samples were kept from the ventral surface of the tongue and labial mucosa, respectively. Histopathologic findings confirmed the diagnosis of geographic stomatitis .
Microscopic description of these two samples revealed stratified squamous mucosa with moderate acanthosis and regular elongation of rete pegs, thinning of suprapapillary plates, and prominent exocytosis of neutrophilic inflammatory cells producing intraepithelial superficial spongiform pustules .
There is also prominent infiltration of neutrophilic inflammatory cells in surface parakeratotic layers. The underlying subepithelial corium with moderate dense infiltrates of mixed inflammatory cells. The special Periodic acid–Schiff staining– staining method to detect polysaccharides such as glycogen, and mucosubstances such as glycoproteins, glycolipids, and mucins in tissues–failed to reveal fungal elements.
Due to the clinical examination and histopathologic description, the diagnosis of geographic stomatitis was confirmed as the etiology of this condition is unknown; there is no etiological strategy for treatment. Thus, we informed the patient about the disorder’s benign character and asked him to refer us when he feels symptoms, e.g., burning sensation. The patient followed up for six months.
As expected, at three and six months of follow-up, the displacement of the lesions due to the nature of the geographic stomatitis was quite evident , and the patient had no symptoms during this time, including burning or pain.