A 28 year old female housewife from Kumbo, a rural area in the North West region of Cameroon, Sub Saharan Africa, who presented to our facility in October 2015 with a 3 months history of non-painful rash. The rash was of gradual onset, progressive non itchy and occurred on areas of her face and thighs. It later evolved to crusty ulcerative lesions prompting consultation in our unit.
She was diagnosed positive for HIV 6 months prior to consultation with a CD4 count of 10 cells/µl and was initiated on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Efavirenz. There was no history of intravenous drug use (IVDU).
On physical examination, she was cachectic and ill looking with a BMI of 15.6 kg/m2, with non-tender crusty ulcerated lesions around the nasal area (with destruction of nasal tissue and nasal septum), non-tender ulcerations around the mental regions with a few papular lesions around the cheeks . No mucosal lesions were found in the mouth, there were neither lymphadenopathy, nor hepatomegaly and splenomegaly on abdominal palpation. She had spaced non ulcerative papular lesions on her thighs. There was neither hypoesthesia nor any nerve involvement around the ulcerations. The rest of physical exams was unremarkable. A working diagnosis of cutaneous leishmaniasis was made with a differential of tertiary syphilis, cutaneous mycosis and cutaneous tuberculosis. The TPHA/VDRL done was non-reactive while a biopsy of ulcerations was negative for acid fast bacilli (AFB). A skin scrape of the lesions was negative for KOH while absence of hypoesthesia and a negative biopsy for AFB helped to exclude lepromatous leprosy. Venous blood was collected in an ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tube, spinned at 3000 rpm for 5 min. A sample from the Buffy coat was obtained and a thin film made. The slide was stained with Giemsa and examined with oil objective immersion to identify the amastigote .
She was treated with amphotericine B given intravenously at 1 mg/kg for 2 weeks with mild improvement in lesions. Renal function test was normal before and 1 week after initiation of amphotericine B. She developed hypokalemia due to amphotericine B which was corrected with intravenous potassium. She was discharged but died 1 month later.