A nine-month-old girl was admitted to Dr. Sami Ulus maternity and children’s health and diseases training and research hospital, Ankara, Turkey, in September 2013, after having suffered weakness and swelling of the legs for two days. She had diarrhea four times, and was vomiting three times daily, for two months. Her stool was non-bloody and watery; however, these complaints were resolved one week before hospital admission. She had only been breastfed for a week before admission. Milk formula and complementary feeding was started at six months of age, but the patient usually avoided this combination and ultimately vomited. The interval between intake of cow’s milk and onset of symptoms could not be determined by her mother, whose prenatal, natal, and postnatal history was not significant; neither was her family history.
The patient was agitated and pale, with bilateral pretibial pitting (+2) edema. Vital functions were in normal ranges. Her weight was 7 kg (3% - 10% percentile) and her height was 66 cm (3% percentile). Her weight gain had been < 10 gr/day for the previous month. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. Laboratory data revealed a white blood cell count of 10.000/mm3, hemoglobin at 7.5 g/dL, MCV at 102 fL, platelets at 405 × 103/mm3, and albumin at 1.7 g/dL. Serum Na, K, urea, creatinin, and alanine-aspartate aminotransferase levels were normal. Her urinary analysis did not reveal proteinuria, and the reticulocyte count was normal. Her serum vitamin B12 level was < 45 pg/mL (200 - 1510 pg/mL), indicating severe vitamin B12 deficiency. The maternal hemoglobin level was 11 g/dL, MCV was 100 fL, and the maternal serum vitamin B12 level was 167 pg/mL. The patient’s serum folic acid and ferritin levels were normal; anti-gliadin, anti-endomysium, and anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies were negative. Serum IgA, IgM, and IgG were normal, but IgE concentration was 250 IU/mL (normal level is 0 - 15 IU/mL). There was no peripheral eosinophilia. Stool samples were normal, and stool steatocrite was negative. Cow’s milk-specific IgE was 7.98 ku/L (normal level: < 0.35 ku/L) and caseine-specific IgE level was 0.35 ku/L (normal: < 0.35 ku/L). The skin prick test for cow’s milk protein was 4 × 5 mm (negative control 0 mm, positive control 6 × 7 mm) and positive . The patient was diagnosed with CMA.
Albumin was administered as an infusion twice and stopped when her serum albumin level reached 2.4 g/dL. Treatment with intramuscular vitamin B12 was commenced, and normalization of her vitamin B12 (1320 pg/mL) was seen. She had difficulty in oral feeding, so a nasogastric tube was inserted for feeding and an amino-acid-based infant formula was started. Cow milk products were eliminated from the diet of both mother and patient. The latter showed significant clinical improvement as her appetite and activity improved; she gained 1500 grams of body weight over the following 20 days. Diarrhea was not seen during hospitalization. After one month, the serum albumin reached a normal level (3.6 g/dL) spontaneously. An oral cow’s milk challenge test was planned, but the patient did not attend the follow-up.