A 53-year-old male patient underwent a total gastrectomy for an adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction with an esophagojejunal reconstruction in Roux-en-Y configuration. Histology of the surgical specimen showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the esophagogastric junction, with a maximal diameter 5 cm, microscopically positive proximal margins and 21 negative lymph nodes (T3, N0, M0). The patient developed postoperatively a leakage from the esophagojejunal anastomosis, which was treated endoscopically with placement of a covered stent. Post-discharge, the patient received adjuvant radio- and chemo-therapy.
Several months after surgery the patient was re-admitted due to progressive dyspnea, retrosternal pain and hypotension. Physical examination revealed a dyspneic patient with dilated jugular veins and a remarkable diminution of respiratory sounds on the left side, diminished heart sounds and a two-component friction rub during thorax auscultation. Vital signs included a low systolic blood pressure (75 mmHg), tachycardia (120 bpm), tachypnea (35 breaths per minute) and normal body temperature, without significant changes in the electrocardiograph. Laboratory studies revealed a normal hemoglobin (12 g/dl) and elevated white blood cells (26.000/mm3), creatinine kinase (720 U/L) and LDH (530 U/L), with negative troponine-I. Chest radiograph demonstrated a moderate left pleural effusion and subsequent pleurocentesis was performed with aspiration of about 2,4L of serosanguineous fluid. Biochemical analysis of the fluid revealed glucose 246 mg/dl, proteins 2,7 g/dl, albumin 1,7 g/dl and LDH 125 U/l, while cytological examination was suspicious for malignant cells. The patient exhibited a moderate amelioration of his symptoms just after the pleurocentesis, but remained hemodynamically unstable and was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) for further monitoring.
A new chest radiograph two hours later demonstrated pneumopericardium along the left heart border . Echocardiography revealed air and small pericardial fluid collection, not adequate for pericardiocentesis. The patient eventually stabilized hemodynamically six hours after his admission to the SICU. Upper GI series using water-soluble contrast (Gastrografin®) were performed the next day and demonstrated leakage of the contrast from the esophagus and entrance in the pericardium , while thoracic computed tomography (CT) showed hydropneumopericardium , findings suggestive of an esophagopericardial fistula. However, rapid re-accumulation of fluid in the left hemithorax necessitated the placement of a thoracic tube, with a daily output of about 1,5 L serosanguineous fluid. Cytology was positive for malignancy and a pleurodesis was performed. Unfortunately, the patient deteriorated clinically during the following 5 weeks and finally died. Permission for postmortem examination was denied.