Our patient is a 23-year-old Chinese woman with UCD who presented with seizures 2 years after the latest episode of metabolic decompensation. She was the second child of a non-consanguineous union. Her elder sister and parents were well and there was no history of early deaths in the family, especially male family members. She was delivered at full term via an emergency caesarean section for failure to progress and breech position. Her Apgar was 7 at 1 minute and 8 at 5 minutes, probably due to prolonged maternal anesthesia.
She presented at 14 months of age with gross motor delay and intermittent vomiting after meals. She was alert and interactive. However, she was ataxic and her lower limbs were hypotonic with decreased power and brisk reflexes. The tone, power, and reflexes were normal in her upper limbs. She had intention tremors of the upper limbs. Computed tomography (CT) of her brain did not show any intracranial abnormalities. Her plasma ammonia level was markedly elevated at 327 umol/L (normal range 16 to 53 umol/L). She was treated with intravenously administered sodium benzoate with improvement in the hyperammonemia. She was diagnosed as having OTC deficiency in view of hyperammonemia, elevated glutamine at 1237 umol/L (normal range 400 to 700 umol/L), and elevated urinary orotic acid at 110 mmol/mol creatinine (normal range 0.5 to 3.3 mmol/mol creatinine). Her citrulline level was normal at 17 umol/L (normal range 5 to 60 umol/L). Sequencing of the OTC gene did not detect any pathological variant. The inability to identify a pathological variant by sequencing is not unusual. Pathological point mutation variants are found in approximately 80% of patients with enzymatically confirmed OTC deficiency. The remaining patients either have variants in the regulatory regions, variants within the introns, or have large deletions, all of which would not be detected by the sequencing that was done in this patient.
Our patient had multiple hospital admissions from diagnosis to 19 years of age, due to episodes of metabolic decompensation with plasma ammonia levels ranging between 157 and 278 umol/L . These episodes occasionally occurred due to suboptimal compliance to protein-restricted diet, but most of the episodes occurred without any obvious trigger. She responded each time to intravenously administered sodium benzoate or sodium phenylbutyrate, L-arginine and 10% dextrose infusion with normalization of the ammonia levels. She would then resume her protein-restricted diet, with orally administered sodium benzoate and citrulline. Functionally, she was independent in the activities of daily living. However, she was intellectually impaired with an IQ score of 40 and received special education.
She presented with the first episode of seizure at 21 years of age. She did not have previous febrile seizures in childhood. There was no family history of epilepsy. She had altered mental state and incoherent speech on presentation. The plasma ammonia levels remained normal, ranging from 16 to 45 umol/L.
An electroencephalogram (EEG) recorded non-convulsive seizures with the onset of rhythmic fast activity , occasionally starting at the left frontotemporal region before becoming generalized . These were associated with clinical manifestations of oral automatisms, impaired consciousness, and right-sided head turn.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which was performed 2 days after the first seizure presentation, showed T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal hyperintensity in bilateral parahippocampal gyri with loss of gray-white matter differentiation and dilatation of bilateral temporal horns suggestive of hippocampal atrophy, due to mesial temporal sclerosis . There was also restricted diffusion noted in the parahippocampal regions on both sides . There was no prior MRI imaging performed. She was started on levetiracetam and pregabalin as these anti-epileptic drugs had minimal drug–drug interaction. Pregabalin was added on as she continued to have breakthrough seizures with levetiracetam. The use of sodium valproate is contraindicated in UCDs as it predisposes to hyperammonemia. Her seizures remained well controlled with the use of the two anti-epileptic medications.