MECM, a 49-years-old previously healthy woman, married and childless, was admitted at a private hospital in Natal City, Rio Grande do Norte State, Brazil, in June, 2014 for a microsurgery of neuroma. She used to live in a flat with a parrot who had an unknown disease that caused loss of feathers. The microsurgery was performed via the cranial middle fossa to remove a left sided acoustic neuroma. After 40 days of the procedure, she presented a predominantly and intensive occipital holocranial headache, followed by vomiting. She was managed with analgesia and prednisone 20 mg/day for 5 days. The patient also had hyporexia that was accentuated with the worsening of headache, 12 kg of weight loss, asthenia, irritability, difficulty to concentrate and rotator vertigo. She did not have a fever. On physical examination, the patient presented classic signs of irritability of meningeal inflammation.
On the 50th postoperative day, she was diagnosed with a cerebrospinal fistula in the occipital region and submitted to a surgical correction. The CSF analysis revealed 126 cells/mm3, composed by 63% of lymphomonocytes, 13 mg/dl of glucose levels (89 mg/dl of glycemia) and 189 mg/dL of proteins. Direct examination and CSF microbiological culturing (including common bacterial, mycobacterial and fungal procedures) did not detect any pathogen. Hemogram and biochemical examination of blood were normal. Vancomycin and ceftriaxone were prescribed for 14 days, dexamethasone, 16 mg/day, for 10 days, followed by 15 days of prednisone weaning. She was discharged with partial improvement of headache, without vomiting and presenting normal CSF. After 3 weeks, the headache intensified and vomiting returned. Prednisone 80 mg/day, for 7 days, followed by 30 days of weaning was prescribed, resulting in mild improvement of headache, but with persistent vomiting and return of rotational vertigo. Therefore, cinnarizine, esomeprazole, bromopride and paracetamol/codeine were prescribed. As no relief was obtained after 30 days, the patient was re-hospitalized and CSF analysis revealed: 245 cells/mm3, 88% of lymphomonocytes, 23 mg/dL of glucose levels and proteins of 324 mg/dL. Microbiological cultures for bacteria and fungi were negative. Hemogram and biochemical examination of blood were still normal. She was diagnosed again with occipital liquoric fistula and submitted to clinical treatment. She was under the same antimicrobial and corticoid regimen of the last hospitalization and was discharged with mild headache. Dexamethasone 16 mg/day, for 10 days, followed by 30 days of weaning with prednisone was prescribed. At that moment, the CSF still had 68 cells/mm3, with 100% of lymphomonocytes, 56 mg/dL of glucose levels and 78 mg/dL of proteins. Prednisone was prescribed for 30 days.
When the corticoid was discontinued, headache worsened and vomiting returned. After 5 months of the onset of the disease, a new computed tomography (CT) scan of the skull showed a CSF fistula on the same topography. She was hospitalized and submitted to a surgery to correct the fistula. She had leukocytosis on admission (16,000 leukocytes/mm3, with 88% segmented cells) and CSF analysis showed 280 cells/mm3, being 88% of lymphomonocytes cells, 12 mg/dL of glucose levels and 312 mg/dL of proteins. Bacterial and fungal cultures were negative. Empirical treatment with vancomycin and cefepime was introduced for 21 days and dexamethasone 16 mg/day for 10 days, followed by 20 days of weaning with prednisone. As the headache worsened, she was again hospitalized and submitted to surgical correction of the fistula. New CSF showed 184 cells, 63% of lymphomonocytes, 41 mg/dL of glucose levels and 285 mg/dL of proteins. Vancomycin, meropenem and dexamethasone, 10 mg/day were initiated. On the 5th day of treatment, headache remained intense and frequent vomiting. A new CT suggested hydrocephalus and the patient was submitted to a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt. After 3 days of VP, the patient continued to present with vomiting and leukocytosis and the CSF pressure was above 300 mmH2O. She was admitted to the intensive care unit. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the skull suggested meningeal thickening, spinal cord compression at the level of C5-C6 and the alteration of the CSF signal was compatible with viral or fungal disease . The initial suspicion was cryptococcosis. Liposomal amphotericin B (300 mg/day) and acyclovir therapy were empirically initiated. After several invasive procedures, broad spectrum antibiotics and corticosteroids, CSF culture showed growth of Trichosporon spp. After 2 weeks, another Trichosporon CSF positive culture was obtained. As there was progressive worsening of the clinical condition, voriconazole (200 mg/every 12 h) was added to the previous prescription. On the 20th day of hospitalization, the patient died .
The CSF was centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 10 min and the sediment was used for direct examination and culture. Direct examination was performed with India ink which revealed no encapsulated blastoconidia. The sediment of 2 CSF samples collected at different days (14th and 28th of April, 2015) were plated on Sabouraud Dextrose Agar at room temperature (28 + 2 °C) and yielded positive yeast cultures after 72 h of incubation. The two cultures were send to the Medical and Molecular Mycology Laboratory, Clinical and Toxicological Analyses Department, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte State for further molecular identification. Of note, both colonies had a mucoid aspect. Besides, because Cryptococcus spp. are the main etiological fungal agents obtained from meningitis, that was the first suspicion. Yeast isolates from original cultures were plated onto CHROMagar Candida (CHROMagar Microbiology, Paris, France) and corn meal-Tween 80 (to induce sporulation). Surprisingly, both isolates had a macroscopic wrinkled appearance, were able to produce arthroconidia, as revealed by their micromorphology, and to hydrolyze urea . Therefore, they were considered to belong to the genus Trichosporon and named HGT198 and HGT914, respectively. Both strains were further identified by molecular techniques.
A single colony of each strain was used for DNA extraction with PrepMan Ultra sample preparation reagent (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Genomic DNA concentration and purity were checked with a NanoDrop instrument (Thermo Scientific; Amersham Pharmacia Biotech, Wilmington, DE, USA). Both strains were further identified by a molecular method as detailed elsewhere . DNA amplification was obtained by using the primer pair TRF (5′-AGAGGCCTACCATGGTATCA-3′) and TRR (5′-TAAGACCCAATAGAGCCCTA-3′) . Nucleotide sequences were submitted for BLAST analysis at the NCBI site for species identification. Only sequences deposited in GenBank showing high similarities with our query sequences and an E-value of lower than 10− 5 were used in this study. BLAST searches showed the best match with T. inkin (FJ153608.1), 100% identity (619 of 619 bp without gap sites) for both strains (HGT198 and HGT914). IGS1 rDNA sequences of these strains have been deposited in GenBank under accession numbers KY807052 and KY807053, respectively. Of note, both strains were considered of 100% identity, after blastn analysis (all the 641 bp compared among them), with an E-value of 0 and no gaps found between the two IGS1 rDNA sequences.
Strains HGT198 and HGT914 were evaluated according to their ability to adhere to human buccal epithelial cells, biofilm formation, hemolysins and phospholipase production by using the methods described by Zuza-Alves . DNAse production was determined according to Montoya . Both strains did not produce phospholipase or DNAse. However, they showed high biofilm formation capability as compared to C. albicans ATCC90028 and T. asahii CBS2630 and similar levels of hemolysin production of the two reference strains. In addition, they were able to adhere to epithelial cells to the same extension of T. asahii reference strain .
Both strains were tested against fluconazole, itraconazole and amphotericin Bby using the CLSI protocol [–]. As illustrated on Table , they exhibited very low MIC values against all antifungal drugs tested.