An otherwise healthy 54-year-old Caucasian male presented to our clinic with a six week-long history of paranasal sinus swelling, fatigue and dyspnea on exertion. Fever and weight loss were denied. Additional relevant findings on physical examination included tachycardia of 110/min and muffled heart sounds. On room air, oxygen saturation was normal (97%) and respiratory rate was not elevated. No spleno- or hepatomegaly was palpable. Left-sided submandibular lymph node enlargement was present, other lymph nodes were not enlarged. Discrete congestion of cervical veins was seen, with the right side being more prominent. Slight bilateral ankle edema was noted. Neurological examination showed no abnormalities. Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was estimated at 2 .
Relevant laboratory findings included an elevated lactate dehydrogenase level (LDH) of 620 U/l (reference < 250 U/l) and EBV copies of 395,000/ml. Testing for HIV was negative. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed low QRS voltages and sinus tachycardia.
Computed tomography (CT) scans of the head and neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis showed cervical, mediastinal, paraaortic and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy as well as an infiltration of the frontal, maxillary and sphenoidal sinuses by a suspected lymphoma. Notably, the mediastinal adenopathy showed encasement of the aortic root, the coronary arteries and an infiltration of the pericardium, the right ventricle and the right atrium .
An initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a hemodynamically relevant, circumferential pericardial effusion of about 2 cm with consecutive diastolic collapse of the right atrium. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was normal at 60%. The assessment of the right ventricular (RV) function was compromised by pericardial effusion; longitudinal function was normal (tricuspid lateral annular peak systolic velocity 0.23 m/s, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion 23 mm) and the proximal wall of the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) showed a thickening of > 1 cm with diminished local contractility. In addition, a solid right atrial mass of 13 × 22 mm was seen, and possible differential diagnoses of intra-cardiac lymphoma, thrombus or myxoma were discussed .
Pericardiocentesis allowed the drainage of 1200 ml of effusion over the course of three days. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging was performed to analyze the extent of cardiac involvement in more detail. Here, pericardial and myocardial infiltration of the right atrium and ventricle and infiltration of the aortic root and was confirmed . The etiology of the right atrial mass remained unclear. As the risk of severe bleeding under chemotherapy and extensive vascular infiltration was assessed as relevant, only low-dose anticoagulation with low-molecular-weight heparin was initiated.
Biopsies were obtained from the paranasal sinuses, a submandibular lymph node and the bone marrow. A spinal tap was also performed, which showed no pathological findings. The patient was started on a prephase treatment with prednisone (100 mg/day for 5 days) and cyclophosphamide (200 mg/m2 for 3 days).
Morphologic and flow cytometric analysis of the pericardial effusion described a mature B-cell neoplasia with an immunophenotype of CD79b+, CD19+, CD20+, CD22+, CD10+, CD23+ indicative for an aggressive B-cell lymphoma. Based on this preliminary diagnosis, prephase treatment was escalated to R-CHOP due to the extent of disease and to treat the EBV reactivation (rituximab 375 mg/m2 administered twice at an interval of one week, cyclophosphamide 150 mg/m2 in order to reach a complete dose of 750 mg/m2, doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 and vincristine 1.4 mg/m2).
Therapy was well tolerated. However, a follow-up TTE three days after administration revealed a sudden drop in LVEF to 35–40% with LV dilatation, akinesia of the apical and medial septal zones and hypokinesia of the medial segments. The right atrial mass was still present, and the RV showed normal contractility. The patient reported dyspnea on exertion, but no chest pain. Troponin T concentration was mildly elevated at 34 ng/l (reference < 14 ng/l). Invasive cardiac catheterization was not performed in light of the atypical constellation of findings for acute myocardial infarction and a high likelihood of a lymphoma and/or lymphoma therapy associated cause of the symptoms. Nevertheless, a coronary computed tomography angiography was performed, which showed no evidence for coronary artery stenosis. Subsequently, therapy with a ß-blocker and an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor was initiated.
In the following days, immunohistochemical examination and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) of the biopsy material from the submandibular lymph node/paranasal sinuses led to the diagnosis of BL with cells displaying a proliferation rate of virtually 100%, an immunophenotype of CD20+, CD10+, BCL6+, MYC+, TdT−, BCL2, a strong positivity for a EBV and a rearrangement of c-MYC (Chr 8q24) on FISH analysis. There was no BL manifestation in the bone marrow. On day 10 following start of therapy, the patient was discharged with the diagnosis of a BL stage IV disease in a clinically much improved state (ECOG 1).
Chemotherapy was then continued analogous to block A1 of the German Multicenter Study Group on Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (GMALL) B-ALL/NHL protocol as recommended by the local tumor board . Interestingly, prior to treatment start the LVEF had normalized to 60% and the right atrial mass was no longer detectable on TTE, suggesting that the transient cardiac deterioration was indeed most likely attributable to the BL manifestation, which had regressed after R-CHOP therapy. We therefore decided to continue with the full dose of the A1 therapy block (rituximab 375 mg/m2, vincristine 2 mg, cytarabine 150 mg/m2 twice daily for two days, etoposide 100 mg/m2 for two days, methotrexate (MTX) 1500 mg/m2, ifosfamide 800 mg/m2 for five days and dexamethasone 10 mg/m2 for five days; intrathecal prophylaxis with cytarabine 40 mg, dexamethasone 4 mg and MTX 15 mg was administered twice) while continuing to closely monitor cardiac function. After the second chemotherapy block, TTE again revealed a slight decrease in LVEF (45–50%) with reduced longitudinal strain.
A follow-up TTE during the third cycle of chemotherapy showed a normal LVEF with borderline longitudinal strain and normal RV function. Notably, the thickening of the RV wall had vanished in comparison to the baseline exam.
Overall, the patient was treated with accumulating doses of chemotherapy according to protocol in a total of 7 cycles, and the LVEF remained normal after the initial recovery from acute dysfunction. CT staging revealed a complete remission after completion of chemotherapy. Subsequently, the patient underwent consolidating radiation of the mediastinum at a cumulative dose of 36 Gy in 13 fractions.
With a follow-up of 16 months after diagnosis, the patient is in continuous complete remission as of now.