The patient is a 48-year-old Persian male with repeated episodes of redness of eyes in the last nine years, without pain or irritation, which was diagnosed as scleritis by an ophthalmologist, and was administered prednisolone and azathioprine. After 1.5 years, follow-up was discontinued due to resolution of symptoms.
The patient had a 1-year history of pain in small joints of hands and foot, accompanied by morning stiffness (15 min). Joint pain was more prevalent in the wrists, finger interphalangeal (IP), shoulder, and elbow. He also reported positive history of malaise, with no history of photosensitivity, oral aphthae, ulcer, intestinal diseases, hair loss, Raynaud phenomenon, dryness of eyes or mouth, and skin lesions, upper limb claudication, weight loss, smoking, or any addiction. He also did not have hypertension, diabetes, and any history of thrombosis.
A preliminary diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis was assumed for the patient by the rheumatologist, and the patient was administered a regimen of prednisolone (7.5 mg/day), methotrexate (10 mg/week), and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/day), which resulted in a relative improvement of arthralgia symptoms.
After eight months of following the mentioned treatment regimen, the patient arbitrarily discontinued his drugs due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Consequently, he developed pain and paresthesia in his fingertips with cyanosis of the left index finger from 1 week before visiting us at the rheumatology clinic. On evaluation, there was evidence of cyanosis of the left index finder at its radial side, along with mottling signs and coldness at the distal part of the remaining fingers. Splinter hemorrhage was also observed under the fingernails .
There was no evidence of arthritis, swelling, or tenderness in his wrist, interphalangeal, and metacarpophalangeal joints. Radial and ulnar pulses were present and symmetric in both hands. Heart and lung auscultation were normal with no signs of heart souffle. No evidence of bruit was detected in carotid, subclavian, abdominal, and renal artery examination. Abdominal and genitalia examinations were normal and without tenderness. Central and peripheral nervous system examinations were unremarkable.
Rheumatological laboratory evaluation demonstrated elevated rheumatoid factor levels with high titers, and cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (C-ANCA or anti-PR3) was ten times the normal value. Kidney and liver function tests were unremarkable, and the SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was negative. Urine analysis was also unremarkable with no presence of cellular cast or protein (WBC: 2–3 and RBC: 0–3). Table demonstrates the laboratory data of our patient.
Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. With suspicion of vascular obstruction, color Doppler sonography of the left upper limb artery and vein was performed, being normal with no signs of arterial stenosis or deep venous thrombosis. Cardiac echography was performed and revealed an ejection fraction of 55% and pulmonary artery pressure of 22, with no evidence of vegetation, mass, or thrombosis. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the lung and paranasal sinuses was normal with no evidence of alveolar hemorrhage, nodules, or cavitation . Peripheral neurological evaluation through electromyography and nerve conduction velocity (EMG-NCV) test was unremarkable. The patient was also visited by an ophthalmologist, with no signs of uveitis and vasculitis detected, and sclera normal.
Based on a diagnosis of ANCA-associated vasculitis and obstruction of distal arteries of the small terminal artery of the extremities, infusion of methylprednisolone pulse (1 g/day) was started for 3 days, followed by venous pulses of cyclophosphamide (1 g/monthly) along with oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day).
During the course of treatment, he was still in pain, and the gangrene process continued. A positive value for aPL was detected, including a two-fold elevation of anticardiolipin (aCL) IgG levels. Therefore, anticoagulants were started for the patient through venous infusion of heparin (5000 unit/stat then 1000 U/h) along with oral administration of warfarin (5 mg/day). Furthermore, ASA (80 mg/day), diltiazem (30 mg, thrice a day), and atorvastatin (40 mg/day) were administered to the patient. Heparin infusion was halted after 3 days, while anticoagulant treatment was continued with warfarin (5 mg/day). The methylprednisolone 3 day course was followed with oral administration of 1 mg/kg prednisolone (30 mg, thrice a day).
Laboratory data were repeated two weeks after finishing treatment. Anti-PR3 levels were still elevated (184 IU/mL). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (2 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (2 mg/L) levels were within the normal range. Urine analysis demonstrated proteinuria, while 24-h urine showed 210 mg protein/day (creatinine 1170 mg, volume 3000 cc). Complete blood count and liver function test results were unremarkable. The patient was discharged 5 days of admission with improved symptoms during follow-up. We repeated the aCL tests during the patients third month of follow-up, which again demonstrated positive ACL antibodies (aCL Ab (IgG) = 51.5; NL < 30), confirming our previous diagnosis of APS. During follow-up and examination, gangrene stopped and limited to the area at early points of diagnosis. There was also sufficient blood flow around the mentioned area .