A 1.5-year-old male neutered Persian cat was referred with a 3-month history of
waxing and waning left head tilt and ataxia with acute deterioration over
the past 3 days. Improvement was noted following corticosteroid therapy
(prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg q12h PO). The cat had been rehomed 1 year
previously, had no history of neurological signs initially and was up to
date on vaccinations. There was no history of trauma or exposure to toxins.
Physical examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination revealed
moderate decreased mentation, left vestibular ataxia and head tilt, and
delayed postural reactions (hopping responses and tactile placing reactions)
on the left side with normal spinal reflexes. These signs were consistent
with a left vestibular syndrome. A central origin was considered, given the
left-sided proprioceptive deficit and altered mentation. A left brainstem
lesion (including vestibular nuclei) or, less likely, a thalamic lesion
(including medial geniculate nuclei), were suspected based on the
neurological signs. Differentials included an inflammatory or infectious
process or, less likely, a neoplasm or a progressive congenital disease.
MRI of the brain was performed using a high-field scanner (1.5-T magnet; Signa
HD23 optima 1.5T [General Electric Healthcare]). The protocol included
T2-weighted (T2W), T1-weighted (T1W), fast-spin echo (FSE) sequences, T2W
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), susceptibility-weighted
magnetic resonance sequence (SWAN sequence), diffusion-weighted imaging, and
pre- and post-contrast three-dimensional FSE (cube) T1 sequences. Gadoteric
acid contrast medium intravenous injection was performed (0.1 mmol/kg). All
intensities were compared with normal grey matter. A large, well-demarcated
lesion was observed within the lateral ventricles, closely associated with
the left choroid plexus. Measured dimensions were 27.7 × 29.1 × 24.3 mm
(length × width × height) . The intralesional signal intensity was uniformly
hyperintense on T2W and hypointense on T2-FLAIR and T1W images, similar to
CSF. This lesion was asymmetric, delimited by a thin wall and extended
caudally, causing secondary non-communicating hypertensive hydrocephalus
with dilation of the lateral ventricles, causing left thalamic, brainstem
and cerebellar compressions. Minimal wall cyst contrast enhancement was
noted on the T1W post-contrast images. Magnetic resonance signs of increased
intracranial pressure were present, with caudotentorial brain herniation and
severe cerebellar foraminal herniation. Generalised thinning of the cerebral
cortex and effacement of the cerebral sulci and subarachnoid space were also
observed. Differential diagnoses based on the magnetic resonance
characteristics of the lesion included choroid plexus cyst, arachnoid
diverticula or ependymal cyst.
Following MRI study, left rostrotentorial trepanation and transparenchymal
endoscopic-assisted fenestration and aspiration of the lesion were
performed, to temporally relieve the neurological signs associated with high
intracranial pressure, prior to cystoperitoneal shunting. The intralesional
fluid collected was similar to normal CSF; biopsy of the lesion wall was
attempted but was not successful. Corticosteroid therapy was initiated
(prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg body weight PO q12h). Progressive clinical
improvement was noted over the 3 days following the drainage of the lesion.
On the 2 days post-decompression MRI, marked decreased size of the lesion,
apparent subarachnoid CSF and absence of brain herniation were observed
.
Three weeks post-decompression, relapse of the initial clinical signs was
observed and lesion recurrence was noted on the pre-cystoperitoneal shunting
MRI. General anaesthesia was complicated by cardiac arrest. Successful
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and a CT-guided aspiration of the cyst,
through the trepanation hole, were performed. Cystoperitoneal shunting
surgery was postponed. Major forebrain clinical signs were observed. MRI was
repeated 10 days post-CPR, demonstrating recurrence of the cystic lesion,
diffuse cortical and thalamic T2W and T2-FLAIR hyperintensity of the grey
matter and heterogeneous contrast enhancement . Based on these
abnormalities and the clinical signs, global brain ischaemia was
suspected.
The cat slowly improved over the next 6 months. During this period, three
fine-needle CT-guided aspirations of the lesion were performed through the
initial craniectomy defect, because of the recurrence of clinical signs
associated with increased cyst size, while waiting for the cat to recover
and be able to withstand surgical cystoperitoneal shunting. The cat remained
bilaterally blind but regained good levels of consciousness, urinary and
faecal continence, and motility. Quality of life was judged to be acceptable
for the owners and the medical team in charge.
Successful surgical placement of a cystoperitoneal shunt in the cystic
intraventricular lesion was eventually performed. Repeat MRI, 4 days after
surgery, revealed a marked reduction of the cyst and adequate placement of
the cystoperitoneal shunting device . The cat’s neurological
status improved shortly after surgery and had been stable overtime, 7 months
post-shunting. The size and appearance of the cystic lesion were unchanged
on follow-up MRIs, 2 and 7 months postoperatively.