A 35-year-old female with discomfort and fullness in the upper abdomen was admitted to our hospital. The patient was admitted due to fatigue in the lower limbs 14 years ago. She was diagnosed with pernicious anemia and subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord in an outside hospital (laboratory results unavailable). Vitamin B12 and folic acid supplements were taken discontinuously but without symptomatic improvement. The patient has no family history of gastric disease. On admission, the patient was conscious and afebrile with normal vital signs. She has pale palpebral conjunctivas and fingernails with no other remarkable findings. Routine gastroscopy revealed autoimmune gastritis, multiple gastric submucosal bulges, and no endoscopic features related to H. pylori status according to the Kyoto classification . Both the 13C-Urea breath test (UBT) and rapid urease test showed negative results. Laboratory tests showed moderate anemia with decreased hemoglobin (80 g/L), serum iron (4 μmol/L) and serum ferritin of 6.17 ng/ml; normal vitamin B12 (1,271.70 pg/ml) and folic acid (> 30 ng/ml) level and elevated gastrin 17 (> 60 pmol/L), decreased pepsinogen I (PG I) (12.01 μg/L), normal pepsinogen II (PG II) (4.11 μg/L), lower PG I/II ratio (2.92), negative PCA (anti-parietal cell antibody), and negative IFA (anti-intrinsic factor antibody). Liver and kidney tests, urinalysis, stool routine tests, and tumor markers tests (CEA, AFP, CA19-9, and CA125) were unremarkable. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and frequent premature ventricular contractions. Thyroid ultrasound revealed no abnormalities. Cranial CT scan (plain scan) and chest and abdominal CT scan (plain and contrast-enhanced scan) revealed no abnormalities, except mild splenomegaly. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed multiple submucosal bulges , which were confirmed as G2 NETs in the gastric fundus, gastric body junction, and gastric body by histopathological examination of endoscopic biopsies . We recommended endoscopic surveillance, endoscopic submucosal dissection, or somatostatin analogs for the treatment of the patient. The patient and the family chose endoscopic surveillance for further treatment. Therefore, we gave the symptomatic treatment of vitamin B12, iron, and folic acid supplement and arranged a follow-up of gastroscopic surveillance every 6 months.