A 70yr old woman (E.N) presented to our accident and emergency unit as a referral from a cottage (peripheral) hospital with a complaint of sudden exacerbation of her chronic abdominal pain, associated now with abdominal distension, vomiting, absolute constipation and fever of four days duration. 12 months prior to presentation she had laparotomy with splenectomy for large spleen suspected to be due to Tropical splenomegaly syndrome (TSS). The surgery was performed by a surgical specialist in a peripheral hospital. Few weeks following the splenectomy, she started complaining of intermittent abdominal pains of worsening severity which culminated in her present complaint. She had paid severe visits to the surgeon who did her splenectomy and had analgesis and antispasmodics prescribed and was always reassured that the abdominal pain will abate with time. No investigations were ordered.
Examination revealed an acutely ill looking, toxic, pale and dehydrated elderly lady in respiratory distress, blood pressure of 80/50mmHg, pulse rate of 120/min and low volume, respiratory rate 40/min and a temperature of 38.4°C. Abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen with a midline scar from the epigastrum to the symphysis pubis. No visible peristalsis but generalized tenderness, guarding and rebound. Bowel sounds were infrequent and rectum was empty but warm on digital rectal examination. Chest examination revealed severe dyspnoea and bilateral basal rales. A clinical diagnosis of generalized peritonitis complicating intestinal obstruction, septic shock and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) were made. Resuscitation was started with IV saline infusions, IV ceftriazone (third generation cephalosporins), IV metronidazole, nasogastric tube suction, and urethral catheterization (for urinary output monitoring). She had two pints of blood transfused pre-operatively. Intermittent oxygen therapy was also administered for low Pao2. Investigation showed packed cell volume of 22%, urea of 11.5 mmol/L, normal electrolytes and urinalysis. Plain chest and abdominal (erect and supine) X-ray were ordered but were not done because the poor state of patient prevented her movement to the X-ray suit. However, she had abdominal pelvic ultrasound, which showed dilated bowel loops and large volume of intraperitoneal fluid. The need for adequate resuscitation delayed surgery for about 12 hours. At laparotomy 3 liters of flaeculent smelling hemorrhage peritoneal fluid was found. The jaws of a large size artery forceps was seen tightly trapping the small bowel mesentery from its distal extremity to half way up towards the duodeno-jejunal flexure with the tips of forceps pointing toward the duodeno-jejunal junction and the handle located in the right iliac fossa. This led to ischemic gangrene of about 65cm of the small bowel involving the distal third of jejunum and upper two thirds of the ileum. There were no pulsations on the ileal and jejunal arteries distal to the trapping artery forceps .
The gangrenous loops of bowel were resected and primary enteroanastomosis fashioned. Liberal peritoneal lavage with normal saline was carried out. Abdominal wound was closed with drainage tube in situ. The patient had a turbulent post- operative phase and was managed in our Critical Care Unit (CCU). However, 12-hours post-operatively she died most probably from continuing sepsis. The relatives declined post-mortem examinations.