A 48-year-old Asian woman with dysmenorrhea and taking oral contraceptives (Edulen, ethinylestradiol 50 μg, ethynodiol acetate 1000 μg) for 6 months suddenly developed difficulty in speech at 7 p.m. on 25 September 2003. Her symptoms resolved in a few minutes. A re-attack of the difficulty in speech and unsteadiness in walking occurred on October 1, and she was admitted to our hospital. Her mother and grandfather had a medical history of cerebral infarction; however, the details were unclear. The patient had been a cigarette smoker (20/day) since 1999.
A physical examination revealed no disturbance of consciousness or cognitive dysfunction, but mild weakness in her right leg was demonstrated. The patient was assessed and was graded with a score of 2 on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS). An immediate brain computed tomography (CT) demonstrated no early ischemic changes; however, diffusion-weighted images (DWI) on magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed a slightly high intensity lesion along the left insular cortex. No laterality was detected in the perfusion-weighted MR images (PWI). MR angiography displayed poor visualization of the branches of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA).
Cerebral angiograms disclosed a floating thrombus at the left carotid bifurcation . A carotid duplex sonography with a GE LOGIQ 700 showed a 3 mm isoechoic floating thrombus originating from the antero-lateral carotid wall . The floating thrombus appeared to move slightly with the cardiac cycle. Significant atherosclerotic change of underlying intima-media could not be seen at the left carotid artery. Both transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms appeared normal. There was no arrhythmia detected by ambulatory electrocardiography. Routine biochemical and hematologic tests, including prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, platelet count, anti-thrombin III, protein C, protein S, anti-nucleotide antibody and anti-cardiolipin antibody, were within normal limits. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed no abnormality.
In spite of the hyper-acute stage of ischemic stroke, we determined to treat her not by thrombolysis, but conservatively, due to the slight neurological deficit, no diffusion-perfusion mismatch, no arteriographic carotid stenosis and the peripheral branch occlusion of the MCA. We administered intravenous heparin (10,000 U/day), oral aspirin (100 mg) and ticlopidine (100 mg). Fortunately, her neurological deficits gradually improved and completely diminished in a few days. However, she suddenly exhibited total aphasia and severe right-sided hemiparesis 5 days after admission. MRI performed just after the ictal event documented a large diffusion-perfusion mismatch in the left MCA territory, and MR angiography revealed a total occlusion of the left MCA trunk. An emergent cerebral arteriogram demonstrated the disappearance of the carotid floating thrombus , no carotid stenosis and a total occlusion of the horizontal portion of the ipsilateral MCA .
Local intra-arterial thrombolysis followed by percutaneous transluminal cerebral balloon angioplasty was performed. Although partial recanalization of the left MCA was achieved, the large territorial infarct in the upper division of the left MCA was complete, causing severe neurological deficit (NIHSS score 21 on day 30). Follow-up carotid duplex sonography showed the disappearance of the floating thrombus and no plaques. Aspirin (100 mg) was continued as a drug of secondary prevention, and cigarette smoking and oral contraceptives were terminated. CEA was considered to be not indicated because there was no carotid residual stenosis.