A 68-year-old man with no remarkable medical history underwent rectal low anterior resection in November 2008 for Stage T3N0M0 rectal cancer. In December 2009, pulmonary metastasis was found and capecitabine, oxaliplatin, and bevacizumab treatment (400 mg every 3 weeks) initiated. At chemotherapy initiation, his serum creatinine was 0.66 mg/dl. Urinalysis was done every month after the initiation of chemotherapy, but neither proteinuria nor hematuria was evident. In March 2011 (15 months after chemotherapy initiation), dipstick urine evaluation first demonstrated hematuria of 1–2+. Proteinuria was evident for 2 months afterward. Subsequently, chemotherapy was stopped at the end of May 2011. However, heavy proteinuria persisted, and the patient was referred to us in July 2011. He had gained 6 kg of body weight and had developed edema of the lower extremities over the preceding month. His blood pressure was 135/80 mm Hg. Laboratory investigations are listed in Table . Urinalysis showed proteinuria of 3.5 g/day and >100 red blood cells/high-power field (HPF), with granular and fatty casts. Marked hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia were observed, but serum creatinine was normal. Serum IgA was elevated to 487 mg/dl (normal: 110–410 mg/dl). Serum complement component (C) 3 and C4, total serum hemolytic activity, and hepatobiliary function were normal. Tests for hepatitis B and C, antinuclear antibody, anti–double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibody, and cryoglobulins were all negative. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was elevated to 11.5 ng/ml (normal: <5 ng/ml), but carbohydrate antigen 19–9 was within normal range. No red blood cell fragmentation was observed. Computed tomography showed normal-sized kidneys, massive ascites, and bilateral pleural effusion, and a small, isolated pulmonary metastatic lesion was observed in the right inferior lobe.
Percutaneous renal biopsy was performed. Three out of forty-three glomeruli were globally sclerotic. Other glomeruli exhibited mild-to-moderate mesangial proliferation, with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive paramesangial hemispherical deposits. Capillary lumens were dilated and occupied by PAS-positive material. Mesangiolysis was also observed in some glomeruli . Tubular atrophic and interstitial fibrotic changes were observed focally. Arterial vessels showed mild sclerosis, with no intra-arterial or intra-arteriolar thrombi. Immunofluorescence (IF) study revealed marked intensity (+++) for IgA and C3, and slight intensity (+) for IgG, IgM, C1q, and fibrinogen, which were found mainly in the mesangium and along capillary walls. Electron microscopy revealed numerous EDDs in paramesangial areas, which were fine granular, spherical, or hemispherical in shape and varying in size . Similar EDDs were observed in some subendothelial areas. In addition, subendothelial electron-lucent widening with loose granular materials was observed focally and segmentally. Some glomerular capillary lumens were occupied with globular and loose materials, which were thought to be serum components. These materials gathered in subendothelial areas, compressing endothelial cells to the opposite side .
The patient underwent follow-up for nephrotic syndrome with unremarkable therapy. Heavy proteinuria with hematuria continued after bevacizumab cessation, but began to decrease gradually after 6 months. Eight months later, proteinuria had decreased to 0.3 g/g · creatinine, and serum total protein and albumin were 7 g/dl and 4 g/dl, respectively. However, hematuria persisted.
In June 2012, a second renal biopsy was performed to reevaluate renal histology. At the second biopsy, serum creatinine was 1.09 mg/dl with negative urinary protein and urinary red blood cells of 20–29/HPF . Total protein and serum albumin were normalized, and serum IgA had decreased from 487 mg/dl at the first biopsy to 297 mg/dl. Four out of twenty-nine glomeruli were globally sclerotic. Other glomeruli exhibited mild mesangial proliferation only . Tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were present in approximately 30% of the tubulointerstitial area . IF revealed mild intensity (+) for IgA and C3, decreased compared with the first biopsy. On electron microscopy, EDDs in the mesangium were decreased in number and size compared with the first biopsy . Widening of subendothelial spaces and subendothelial EDDs were still observed segmentally (data not shown).
The pulmonary metastatic lesion showed only slight enlargement, and no new metastatic lesions were identified. However, capecitabine treatment (1800 mg/day) was initiated at the end of October 2012 because CEA gradually increased to 11.4 ng/ml. In December 2012, laboratory data showed no proteinuria, urinary blood cells of 10–15/HPF, serum creatinine of 0.82 mg/dl, and serum IgA of 280 mg/dl. At the final follow-up in July 2013, hematuria first disappeared, and serum creatinine and serum IgA were 0.84 mg/dl and 270 mg/dl, respectively.