A 70-year-old male was referred to our hospital for a blunt trauma in his right eye that occurred the day before. The patient told his 4-year-old nephew hit him with a rolled-up newspaper. Visual acuity was light perception, and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 45 mm Hg with moderate pain. Slit-lamp examination showed no corneal or conjunctival lesions. A complete hyphema with some undefined iris structures were visible in the inferior sector of the anterior chamber. It was not possible to see any other structures, the lens, or the posterior segment . At light stimuli in the right eye, there was a pupillary response in the left eye.
Subsequently we performed, using our ultrasound platform (Aviso S- Quantel Medical), a B-scan examination showing some vitreous hemorrhage but no signs of retinal detachment. We performed also an ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) with a 50-MHz ultrasound probe revealing a large iridodialysis with the iris entirely dislocated in the inferior sector of the anterior chamber . The patient was hospitalized and a systemic (mannitol i.v. and oral acetazolamide) and topical (timolol 0.05%) ocular hypotensive therapy was started. Topical therapy consisted also of cortisone and heparin drops. Therapy was able to control the ocular pressure and the pain and, after 5 days, the hyphema disappeared revealing a 270° iridodialysis with the iris root attached only in the inferior-temporal sector and a traumatic cataract. It was possible to see the fundus with no evidence of serious retinal damages and mild vitreous hemorrhage. Preoperatively, we obtained an ultrasound biometry for intraocular lens power selection, because the position of the iris did not allow measurements with optical devices.
At this time, the surgical procedure consisted in a phacoemulsification of traumatic subluxated cataract with removal of the residual capsular bag and a scleral fixation of intraocular lens followed by iridoplasty .
In particular, we started with a capsule-conjunctival peritomy from 9 to 6, 2.2-mm corneal incision at 12 o'clock, and two paracenteses at 3 and 9. Iris was entirely captured by two prolene hooks in the inferior-temporal sector. During phacoemulsification, due to the large subluxation of the lens, we were able to remove the nucleus in two pieces but residual capsular bag and cortical remnants were removed by anterior 23-G vitrectomy together with the prolapsed vitreous.
After creation of two scleral pockets at 3 and 9, we proceeded with scleral fixation of an intraocular lens. Then we removed the iris hooks and started a complexed iridoplasty using a 10-0 prolene double-armed straight needle and a 23-G vitreous forceps to fix the iris root with three mattress stitches at 11, 1, and 3 o'clock at 1.5 mm from the limbus. In this way, we obtained a circular pupil, even though large . We concluded the surgical intervention with a careful removal of viscoelastic sutures of the scleral, conjunctival, and corneal wounds. In the postoperative period, we controlled a moderate increase of IOP (29 mm Hg) with oral acetazolamide and topical drugs, other than a moderate flare with chloramphenicol-betamethasone drops. After 1 week, with IOP of 18 mm Hg, we stopped oral acetazolamide and continued with dorzolamide-timolol fixed combination drops twice daily. After 2 weeks, with IOP of 16 mm Hg, we stopped dorzolamide-timolol fixed combination and followed with only timolol drops twice daily. After another 2 weeks, we stopped timolol and chloramphenicol-betamethasone drops and the patient had only therapy with topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drops 2 times a day for 1 month. At postoperative 3 months, there was no evidence of residual flare and IOP was normal.
During follow-up, vitreous hemorrhage spontaneously partially resolved within 1 month and, completely, at 2 months after surgery and it did not need any other surgical procedures.