This is a case of a 13-year-old boy who presented to the emergency department with pain in the right groin and inability to bear weight for 2 days following a trivial fall while playing a contact sport (Kabaddi). He gave a history of dull aching pain in the right groin for 2 months, exacerbated on movements but was able to ambulate till his fall. He had no other constitutional symptoms; his family and medical history were otherwise unremarkable. On physical examination, the right lower limb was externally rotated with diffuse swelling and tenderness on deep palpation over the right proximal thigh. Plain radiography on anteroposterior and lateral views revealed a subtrochanteric fracture with an elliptical eccentric lytic lesion with “soap bubble appearance” with septae and sclerotic margins in the proximal metaphyseal region of the right femur ( and ).
Pre-operative radiograph anteroposterior view of pelvis with bilateral hip and lateral view of affected right hip with open physis showing a subtrochanteric fracture and an elliptical eccentric lytic lesion with “soap bubble appearance” with septae and sclerotic margins in the proximal metaphyseal region.
Under spinal anesthesia, the patient was taken in supine position under all aseptic precautions. A lateral approach to the tumor was taken. A biopsy was taken, after which a through curettage was done and hemostasis was achieved. The resultant cavity was filled with implantation of 5 units (one unit containing 10 cc of granules) of hydroxyapatite granules. The fracture was fixed with pediatric DHS and four hole DHS plate. Immediate post-operative radiograph showed stable fixation. Histopathological examination showed irregular dilated spaces lined by fibroblasts surrounding septae, also showing many osteoclasts, histiocytes, and fibroblasts surrounded by bony trabeculae.
Follow-up after 5 years shows radiologic and clinical signs of fracture healing, consolidation, and complete incorporation of granules with no signs of recurrences . The patient had good range of motion of hip with pain free ambulation with some residual discomfort in squatting .
Plain radiographs show anteroposterior view and lateral view of 5-year follow-up showing well-consolidated and healed fracture with complete incorporation of the granules.