A 76-year-old male patient of Asian descent who had experienced unstable angina for nearly 10 months was admitted to our hospital and was scheduled to undergo elective coronary angiography (CAG) a few days later. He had a history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes and transient ischaemic attacks (TIAs); he was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes 10 months previously but did not receive any treatment. He had smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for approximately50 years. There was no history of epilepsy in his family.
Physical examination revealed no pathologies; furthermore, no pathological results were obtained based on laboratory findings, and his cardiac enzyme levels (CK-MB, 1.17 ng/ml; troponin-I < 0.1 ng/ml) were normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST segment depression in leads II, III and aVF . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.58.According to brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), mild stenosis of the cerebral arteries and anterior communicating artery aneurysms were present, with no recent cerebral ischaemia.
Four days after admission, cardiac catheterization was performed via the transradial approach. CAG revealed diffuse calcification from the proximal to the middle portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD), resulting in approximately 90 and 60% stenosis in the left main coronary artery. The left circumflex artery (LCX) was very small. The right coronary artery (RCA) exhibited approximately 80% stenosis. However, because the coronary artery was severely calcified, the lesion could not be completely expanded. We suggested that rotational atherectomy (RA) should be performed by experts. For this procedure, a total of 80 ml of iodixanol (osmolality, 290 mOsm/kg H2O, which is the same as blood) was administered. At approximately 20 h after CAG, the patient’s upper limbs began to tremble slightly. The patient was conscious and could not control these movements. He did not call a physician, and no detailed examination was performed. A total of 6 episodes occurred during the 4 days before the second cardiac catheterization was performed. Each episode lasted approximately 2 s, and the episodes often occurred at night. As these symptoms were ignored, no treatment was administered.
Eight days after admission, RA was performed by an expert, and a 1.25-mm burr was gradually advanced into the lesion at 150,000 rpm until the burr finally passed through the lesion in the LAD. Following this procedure, two drug-eluting stents (DESs) were implanted in the distal (Firebird 2.75 × 33 mm, Microport) and middle (Firebird 3.0 × 33 mm, Microport) portions of the LAD. Another DES (Firebird 3.5 × 29 mm, Microport) was implanted in the proximal portion of the LAD and crossed over into the left main artery. Finally, another DES (Firebird 3.5 × 13 mm, Microport) was implanted in the middle portion of the RCA. The patient was manually administered 150 ml of iodixanol. At approximately 2 h after cardiac catheterization, his upper limbs again began to tremble slightly, and although he was still conscious, he could not control these movements. His symptoms subsequently became more serious, and the frequency of the episodes increased significantly. The patient’s neurological examination, vital signs, ECG, and serum glucose levels were normal; parameters related to liver and kidney function, electrolyte levels and thyroid function were also normal. His symptoms began to gradually attenuate 3 h later and had fully subsided at 6 h after the second operation. Neurologists recommended an electroencephalogram (EEG) examination, which was performed over two hours on the second day. The results showed diffuse slowing with epileptiform abnormalities; paroxysmal spike-wave and slow wave discharges were observed in the bilateral areas , and the abnormalities were marked in the frontal areas . The patient refused to undergo computed tomography (CT) or MRI. During 6 months of monthly clinical follow-up after discharge, no abnormalities of the nervous system were found by cardiologists and neurologists, and his EEG results were normal . Throughout this process, no antiepileptic drugs were given.