A 20-year-old woman from Honduras presented on 3/20/2018 with her adoptive mother for a normal gynecological annual exam with a chief complaint of never having a menstrual period. She had lacked access to gynecological care in Honduras and had thus never been previously evaluated by a gynecologist. Her first sexual encounter was at age 17 and she reported having penetrative vaginal intercourse on a few occasions, although she was not currently sexually active at the time of evaluation. Previous sexual history included one male partner, condom use for protection against sexually transmitted infections, and good sexual function. Importantly, she had never experienced poor sexual satisfaction or dyspareunia. Her known family history was limited but was significant for a cousin who had also never had a menstrual period and a maternal grandmother who had had a brain tumor of unspecified type. She took no medications, and her only allergy was penicillin, with no reaction documented. She denied tobacco or illicit drug use and used alcohol occasionally. She denied any breast lumps, masses, nipple discharge, breast pain, excessive facial/body hair, abdominal/pelvic pain, genital lesions, rashes, or pruritus.
On physical exam, her vital signs were within normal limits and her body mass index (BMI) was 25.51. She was alert and oriented and in no acute distress. Neck was without lymphadenopathy or thyromegaly. Breasts were well-developed with no masses, tenderness, or discharge, Tanner stage V. Abdomen was soft and nontender. Gynecological exam showed no lesions and normal adult female pubic hair pattern, Tanner stage V. The cervix was unable to be palpated or visualized. The uterus was notpalpable and no adnexal masses were appreciated. The vagina was normal in appearance, measured 8 cm, was two fingerbreadths in diameter, and was without bleeding or discharge. The urethra was normal in appearance. The patient was cooperative, with appropriate mood and affect.
In light of the patient's presentation, transabdominal/transvaginal ultrasound was performed on 3/22/2018, which revealed bilateral remnant uteri with no endometrium appreciated . The right remnant of the uterus was more prominent compared to the left. The cervix was not imaged. Follicle-containing ovaries were imaged transvaginally and transabdominally and were normal in size and appearance bilaterally, definitively excluding the presence of testes and effectively ruling out congenital androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS). There were no ovarian cysts or masses imaged. No fluid was appreciated in the cul de sac.
A follow-up MRI of the pelvis without and with contrast performed on 4/4/2018 demonstrated absence of the cervix, bilateral homogeneous enhancing uterine buds within the pelvis measuring 3.0 × 1.7 × 2.3 cm on right, 2.9 × 1.7 × 2.6 cm left. The upper one-third of the vagina was absent, while the lower two-thirds were present. The right ovary was of normal size, measuring 2.8 × 1.4 × 1.6 cm, and with multiple normal ovarian follicles. The left ovary was also of normal size measuring 2.1 × 1.5 × 1.9 cm, with multiple normal ovarian follicles and 1 cm left corpus luteum. Trace physiological free fluid was identified. No enlarged lymph nodes were noted. The bladder was unremarkable. The urethra was notable for 2 adjacent tiny cystic structures abutting the right posterior aspect of the external urethral meatus measuring 0.6 cm and 0.3 cm, respectively, most compatible with tiny Skene gland cysts. Together, the findings of primary amenorrhea, normal ovaries and female secondary sexual characteristics, and aplasia of the uterus with absence of the cervix and upper one-third of the vagina, were consistent with a diagnosis of MRKHS.
A subsequent biochemical analysis was performed to further support the diagnosis of MRKHS. Levels of estriol, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), total testosterone, and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) were all within normal limits, again consistent with the diagnosis of MRKHS . The patient declined karyotype analysis due to financial limitations.
Because of the well-known association between MRKHS and anatomical abnormalities of the urological system , a renal ultrasound was performed on 4/20/2018, which demonstrated normal bilateral kidneys, no evidence of hydronephrosis, and no evidence of contour deforming mass or shadowing renal calculus. Bilateral ureteral jets were demonstrated on color Doppler, and no distal hydroureter was seen. Thus, our patient displayed characteristics of MRKHS type I.
Upon hearing the diagnosis, our patient was anxious, especially with regard to future reproductive prospects; however she was counseled for 45 minutes with her stepmother/guardian present regarding the implications of the diagnosis and reproductive options such as use of a surrogate to carry a pregnancy for her. She expressed gratitude at the end of the encounter for the information and services provided and was offered follow-up as needed.
Upon last follow-up (August, 2018), the patient was doing well at age 21, living with her supportive stepmother, and not sexually active.