We report the case of a 32-year-old North Indian multiparous female who presented to our gynecological outpatient department in April 2020 with complaints of recurrent vulvovaginal symptoms in the form of vaginal discharge, vaginal ulceration and burning vulvar pain for the last 5 years. She had been previously treated with multiple course of antibiotics, antifungals, and topical steroids, but did not get any relief. After 3 years of unhelpful treatment, she was offered laparoscopic-assisted vaginal hysterectomy (LAVH) in February 2018, with the assurance of relief of symptoms by a private practitioner. However, the procedure did not relieve her agony, and the symptoms persisted. Histopathology of the uterus was unremarkable. After 3 months of LAVH, she presented with dyspareunia. Intercourse became increasingly difficult and finally impossible. Her previous menstrual cycles had been regular with normal amounts of bleeding. She had two living children, both delivered vaginally without any complications. She was a homemaker, non-alcoholic, and non-smoker. There was no history of intake of any indigenous medicine before the onset of the disease. Her past medical and family history was also unremarkable. Further review of the medical history disclosed that she also had complained of oral symptoms in the form of a burning sensation after eating spicy food, but did not seek any treatment for this.
On examination, she was a female of average build with excellent general health. Her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg, pulse rate was 82/min, and she was afebrile to the touch. Systemic examination was unremarkable. On local examination, we observed that ulcers were present on the vulvovaginal mucosa involving the posterior fourchette along with white plaques on the labia minor, vaginal introitus, and surrounding vulvar skin. A vaginal speculum could not be inserted. Per vaginum examination only allowed entry of the tip of the little finger, and the area was extremely tender. Detailed examination showed that there was a significant decrease in the diameter and length of the vagina. The anterior and posterior vaginal walls were severely adherent to each other and could not be separated . Oral examination revealed the presence of white plaques and erosions on the left buccal mucosa with no lesions on other parts of the oral cavity, in other words, the gingiva and throat . Dermatological consultation was taken, and a provisional diagnosis of OVVLP was made. The patient was advised about the possible diagnosis, and after receiving informed written consent, vulvar and oral biopsy was taken. Preliminary blood investigations were normal. Her hepatitis B and C, antinuclear antibody tests and antithyroid antibody tests were also negative. The histopathology of vulvar biopsy revealed a hyperkeratotic, acanthotic stratified squamous epithelial lining with prominence of the granular layer. The superficial dermis mainly showed a band-like lymphocytic infiltrate (lichenoid pattern). However, acanthosis was absent in the older lesions with thinned out epithelium and loss of rete ridges . Oral biopsy revealed a hyperkeratotic, acanthotic stratified squamous epithelial lining with hydropic degeneration of the basal layer. The subepithelium showed a mainly lymphocytic cell infiltrate (image not available). These findings suggested an inflammatory lesion. After multidisciplinary discussion of the case, based on the clinical picture and biopsy report, the patient was diagnosed with OVVLP ruling out lichen sclerosis and other immune bullous conditions. Since the patient had previously used topical steroids with no improvement, she was put on oral prednisolone with a starting dose of 40 mg once daily. After 4 weeks of treatment, the patient reported marked symptomatic relief of the vulvovaginal symptoms. Vaginal examination allowed one finger entry without any difficulty with improved vaginal elasticity. Her oral symptoms had also improved remarkably although mild lesions were still visible. Steroids were gradually tapered to a maintenance dose of 10 mg over 3–4 weeks. She was also advised to do vaginal dilatation at home and instructed in perineal care. On a further follow-up visit at 3 months, the patient reported normal sexual activity with only occasional mild pain. The vulvar burning sensation and oral lesions had also totally disappeared. The patient was then advised to return for follow-up every 6 months; however, she was lost to follow-up after that.