A 45-year-old Chinese woman presented with sudden onset of progressive asthenia and numbness in both lower extremities, accompanied by difficulty in micturition; she was first sent to a local hospital. Five hours later, she was unable to walk. She reported no fever, back pain, or trauma history. She had no past medical history of note and was on no medication. A general physical examination performed on admission revealed increased heart rate (94 beats per minute) and blood pressure (193/104mmHg). A neurological examination revealed a normal mental state, but grade 0 myodynamia and paresthesia in both lower limbs. An initial non-contrast MRI scan of her spine performed at the local hospital showed a well-demarcated, oval-shaped extramedullary lesion located at the T9 level, ventral to her spinal cord. The lesion appeared isointensive on T1-weighted images and hyperintensive on T2-weighted images, but gadolinium was not administrated in this scan . She was then diagnosed with acute tumoral SSDH and received conservative treatments. However, because of no sign of alleviation, she was referred to our hospital 20 hours after the onset of initial symptoms.
On admission to our department, a neurological examination revealed that her muscle strength was grade 0 in both lower limbs, and grade 5 in both upper limbs. There was a significant loss of coordination in all fine and gross motor movements in both lower limbs, together with a complete absence of proprioception. Sensations like fine touch, pain, temperature and vibration were completely diminished below the umbilical level. Deep tendon reflexes, for example knee and ankle jerk, were negative, while biceps and triceps reflexes were normal. Bilateral Babinski’s signs were positive and muscle tone was normal. In view of progressive deterioration in her neurologic conditions, we performed an emergency laminectomy from T8 to T10 to decompress her spinal cord 22 hours after onset of the initial symptoms. Only a hematoma was found during the operation and postoperative MRI confirmed the complete removal of the hematoma . Several days after the operation, her tactile anesthesia and proprioception improved to the level that she could correctly identify which toe was moved by others. She had partial return of voluntary movement in her ankles 2 weeks later. Postoperative angiography showed no vascular lesions. She then went to a local hospital for rehabilitation therapy.