M.L.B.V, female, 37 years old, living in the countryside of the state of Pernambuco-Brazil, home-worker, self-related white ethnicity was referred to the dental clinic for patients with special needs of the University of Pernambuco.
The anamnesis showed she did not smoke or drinks alcohol, had normal somatic and mental development, excellent interaction and socialization degree. She also demonstrated cognitive capacity and oral language according to her age and socioeconomic level. She did not have any pregnancy. Her mother said her daughter had been diagnosed with ectodermal hypohidrotic dysplasia in childhood. No other cases of the disease in the family were acknowledged, though.
In the general physical exam, the patient presented height around 1,55 meters, low discreet weight, hypoplasia of mammas, locomotion difficulty due to malformation of the right lower limb , pigmentation alteration all over the body, mainly in the upper and lower members, characterizing the pigmented nevus , sindactilia of the left hand and hypohidrosis (decrease of sweating).
The craniomaxillofacial paraclinical approach showed a prominent forehead and an old-looking face, low-implanted ears with malformation of the left ear, nose in saddle, hypotrichosis (decrease in the amount of hair). In relation to the morfofunctional aspects, the patient presented mixed breathing (nasal and oral), atypical deglutition, facial asymmetry and deviation of nasal septum.
The intraoral examination showed poor oral hygiene, evaluated through the Simplified Index of Oral Hygiene (IOH-S = 4,0). Diffuse gingivitis, local periodontal disease, oligodontia, enamel hypoplasia and alteration in the form and size of the teeth were also observed .
Therapeutics consisted in measures to restore the balance of oral microbiota such as antiseptic mouthwash for its chemical control, tooth brushing orientation, extraction of dental elements associated to periodontal disease, atraumatic restorative treatment, all with a view to prosthodontics rehabilitation. Now, at two-year follow-up, the patient's periodontal and dental health is under control.