Our patient, a 6-year-old girl with a one-year medical history of sJIA diagnosed by the International League of Associations for Rheumatology classification criteria was rehospitalized due to the first relapse of sJIA that developed at 13 months of disease onset. Laboratory evaluation revealed a significant increase in acute phase reactants (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 94 mm/h, C-reactive protein 234 ng/L, procalcitonin 22.96 ng/ml, ferritin 3,272 μg/L), increased D-dimers (4.11 mg/L) and fibrinogen (8.1 g/L), and normal levels of aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase and lactate dehydrogenase, accompanied by white blood cell and platelet counts, and no anemia. Due to immunosuppressive therapy and systemic inflammatory response, our first aim was to exclude infection; following sampling for blood cultures, polymerase chain reaction for Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus, empirical treatment was first started with ceftriaxone i.v., later switched first to tazocine, and then to meropenem and vancomycin following consultation with an infectious disease specialist. Early evaluation of antibacterial treatment showed no effect on clinical presentation and inflammatory markers; thus pulse corticosteroid therapy was administered again (30 mg/kg for three days) with only partial effect on the disease presentation and inflammatory markers. Therefore, treatment with an interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (anakinra) was sought from the Committee for Drug Approval, as this drug was not at the time registered for sJIA treatment in our country. Following the Committee approval and signed informed consent by the parents, anakinra was administered at a dose of 100 mg s.c. once daily. This treatment led to normalization of fever and inflammatory markers within 3 days.
Three weeks after the introduction of anakinra, the patient became febrile again with chills, mild hepatosplenomegaly, and significantly increased inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 493.7 ng/L, procalcitonin 50.32 ng/ml). Additional laboratory evaluation confirmed MAS in our patient during the first relapse of sJIA (, column “Flare 1”) and she was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit for further treatment under intensive monitoring. Heart ultrasound revealed pericarditis and hypertrophic myocardiopathy accompanied by significant increase in N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide of >35,000 ng/L and normal troponin. On the first day at the intensive care unit, she received fresh frozen plasma for correction of hypofibrinogenemia, and on days 2 and 3 whole blood derived filtered and irradiated platelets stored in a single donor plasma from a male donor due to rapid drop in platelet count (from 178 to 36 × 109 /L within 12 h). Approximately one hour post-infusion of platelets on day 3, she started coughing and rapidly became progressively dyspneic. Physical examination of the patient revealed tachycardia, tachypnea, and diffuse bilateral crepitations throughout her lungs. Hypoxemia was evident with peripheral oxygen saturation persistently below 90% and increasing oxygen requirements. The administration of intravenous furosemide and hydrocortisone had no effect on her symptoms. Urgent chest radiograph showed bilateral inhomogeneous opacities but no cardiomegaly, and she was promptly intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation for a total of 30 h . There was no evidence for acute heart failure secondary to ischemic event or circulatory overload, so the diagnosis of transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO) was unlikely. Microbial analysis for possible sepsis was negative. Laboratory evaluation revealed transitory leukopenia . The patient's pulmonary condition rapidly improved and a radiograph taken 40-h post-event showed marked resolution of the airspace shadowing . She was extubated and transferred to the Immunology and Rheumatology Department one day later, with no further pulmonary sequels. Based on the relevant criteria for TRALI at the time of presumed transfusion complication, blood immunology was performed to detect Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) class I, class II, and human neutrophil antigen (HNA) antibodies in the donor's and patient's plasma by using the following tests: granulocyte immunofluorescence test, granulocyte agglutination test, monoclonal immobilization of granulocyte antigen, and enzyme immunoassay kit (Lifecodes Quick-screen and B-screen, Immucor GTI Diagnostics, Wisconsin, USA) . Anti-HLA class I, class II and/or HNA antibodies were not detectable either in donor's or patient's plasma, suggesting that in our patient, TRALI may have resulted from a non-immune mechanism in which the recipient had previous and/or existing inflammatory pathological condition favoring the development of type II TRALI .
Following clinical suspicion of TRALI in our patient, the Croatian Hemovigilance Network (CHN) members immediately contacted all medical centers in our country to see if any other patient having received blood components from the same male donor had TRALI, but no such complication was reported. Treatment of MAS was continued with repeated pulse dose of steroids for three days, followed by prednisolone p.o. and cyclosporine A, and this approach led to successful control of sJIA and MAS as its complication within 10 days. According to the recommendation obtained from Transfusion Service, physicians were instructed to pay due attention to the patient's risk factors for acute lung injury and implement evidence-based national transfusion practices avoiding transfusions when they were not vitally indicated .
During 12-year follow-up, our patient had a total of four relapses of sJIA . Following the first relapse complicated with MAS and suspected type II TRALI, additional two flares of sJIA with MAS were promptly recognized and treated. The patient's parents refused therapy with anakinra, so treatment with steroids and cyclosporine A was administered during these flares. Our patient had no need of transfusion of blood derivatives during the follow-up. Based on the severe and relapsing presentation of the disease complicated by MAS, which could be considered as refractory sJIA , additional evaluation for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis was performed at Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden, but the NK cell count, NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity, degranulation of NK- and T cells, perforin and SLAM-associated protein were all normal. The patient has been symptom-free and without any therapy for the last eight years.