A 78-year-old man with a history of hypertension and mCRPC on Abiraterone for 6
months presented to the emergency department (ED) with progressive generalized
weakness and shortness of breath for 1 month, since his initial diagnosis of
coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19). He presented to his primary care office 3 weeks
prior to his presentation to the ED with shortness of breath and tested positive for
COVID-19 reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction. He was managed in
the outpatient setting with supportive symptomatic measures and self-quarantine. He
had gradual improvement in his symptoms and repeat testing was negative for COVID-19
during this hospitalization. He was seen by his oncologist 2 months prior to his
presentation to the ED and was found to have mild hypokalaemia on routine laboratory
results for which he was prescribed oral potassium supplements. The patient’s
home medications included losartan 50 mg, abiraterone 1 g, omeprazole 20 mg,
potassium chloride (KCl) 10 mEq orally daily.
Physical examination was remarkable for a tachycardic rate and irregular rhythm
consistent with atrial fibrillation. He had a normal S1 and S2 and no murmurs.
Laboratory results revealed a potassium level of 2.2 mmol/L (3.5–5.0),
magnesium level of 2.4 mg/dL (1.6–2.5), and normal renal and hepatic
functions. Pro B-type natriuretic peptide was elevated at 3934 pg/mL and
high-sensitivity troponin of 51 ng/L (upper limit of normal: 20). Initial
electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular rate
of 106 b.p.m., frequent premature ventricular contractions, and a QTc of 634 ms.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (Video
1) demonstrated minimally reduced left ventricular ejection
fraction of 45–50%. The right ventricle had normal cavity size and
systolic function. Diastolic function could not be assessed due to the
patient’s atrial fibrillation rhythm. He developed multiple episodes of TdP
with loss of consciousness while in the ED and he was subsequently intubated for
airway protection.
The patient was admitted to the cardiac floor and he received a total of 160 mEq of
intravenous KCl via peripheral intravenous access over 16 h, and 4 g of magnesium
sulfate. Overnight, he developed recurrent episodes of TdP, which became more
frequent and prolonged. He subsequently became pulseless and underwent advanced
cardiac life support (ACLS), including defibrillation. He underwent one cycle of
chest compressions and a single defibrillation with subsequent return of spontaneous
circulation (ROSC). Post-ROSC vital signs: blood pressure 104/75 mmHg, heart rate 56
b.p.m., temperature 36.6°C, and respiratory rate 18 br/min and ECG was
significant for bradycardia with a QTc of 670 ms . He was started on an
intravenous lidocaine infusion in addition to a dopamine infusion to augment his
heart rate and assist in shortening the QTc.
Despite a total of 220 mEq of intravenous KCl over 24 h, his potassium level only
improved to 2.8 mmol/L. On the second day of his hospitalization, nephrology was
consulted to assist in further management of his refractory hypokalemia. He was
started on spironolactone and amiloride to promote urinary potassium reabsorption in
addition to hydrocortisone, in an effort to reduce abiraterone’s effect on
increasing mineralocorticoid synthesis.
His potassium level normalized on the third day of his hospital admission, was
extubated on the fourth day, and was transferred out of the cardiac care unit on the
5th day without any further arrhythmias or QTc prolongation . His hospital stay was
complicated by an aspiration pneumonia, from which he eventually recovered. He was
discharged to a skilled nursing facility for subacute rehabilitation. The patient
was instructed to discontinue abiraterone indefinitely and follow-up with his
oncologist regarding further evaluation and management of his cancer. He was also
started on dabigatran for full anticoagulation given his presentation with atrial
fibrillation and high risk for stroke with CHA2DS2VASc score
of 3. He was instructed to follow-up with cardiology clinic. The patient was
contacted by telephone for follow-up 3 months after discharge. He was
symptomatically doing well, had normal electrolyte levels off of abiraterone, and
was in the process of establishing care with a cardiologist in his hometown.