A 64-year-old man was diagnosed with a systolic murmur during a routine medical check-up 5 years ago. However, he had not undergone further detailed investigations or been hospitalized for heart failure. His medical history included well-controlled hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The patient presented to the hospital with progressive dyspnoea on exertion, ongoing since several months, and was admitted with congestive heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20%, severe AS, and left ventricular thrombus (LVT) . The patient became haemodynamically unstable because of cardiogenic shock during his pre-operative work-up. He was intubated and treated with a high dose of inotropes, with no haemodynamic improvement. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was inserted through the right femoral artery and vein, and IABP was inserted through the left femoral artery. Thereafter, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further therapeutic planning. On admission, a transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated impaired LVEF of 20%; mild-to-moderate aortic regurgitation (AR); and severe AS with a peak velocity of 4.9 m/s, mean pressure gradient of 59 mmHg, and aortic valve area of 0.54 cm2 (see , ). Echocardiograms confirmed anticoagulation-induced LVT disappearance (see , ). Laboratory data revealed elevated levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP, 3586.4 pg/mL, reference 0.0–18.4 pg/mL), ischaemic hepatitis (aspartate aminotransferase [AST], 3670 U/L, reference 8–38 U/L; alanine aminotransferase [ALT], 2196 U/L, reference 4–44 U/L), and renal failure (serum creatinine, 1.81 mg/dL, reference 0.61–1.04 mg/dL). Cardiac computed tomography (CCT) confirmed a calcified type 1 bicuspid valve (; , ). The aortic annular area and perimeter measured 530 mm2 and 85.3 mm, respectively . The ascending aorta was dilated, with a diameter of 41 mm. Due to the patient’s worsened clinical condition and high surgical risk (EuroSCORE II: 46.8%, STS score: 17.1%), TAVI was deemed as a feasible alternative to surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR). The CCT-assessed virtual aortic annular perimeter was 74.7 mm ( and ). Hence, a 29 mm Evolut self-expandable prosthetic aortic valve (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was implanted. The TAVI procedure was carried out on Day 2 under general anaesthesia and with transoesophageal echocardiography. Left femoral venous (6F) and left radial artery (6F) accesses were obtained for the temporary pacemaker wire and the pigtail catheter, respectively. Considering the access routes, the IABP from the left femoral artery was replaced with an 18-Fr sheath. Pre-dilatation was performed using a 20 mm balloon (Z-MED 20 mm, NuMED, Hopkinton, NY, USA) . Based on aortic angiography, a self-expandable prosthetic 29 mm valve was deployed with a pigtail catheter in the non-coronary sinus . However, its expansion was hampered due to extensive calcification. The nose cone was then gently pulled back into the ascending aorta using rotational fluoroscopy (; , and ). Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) and aortography demonstrated mild-to-moderate paravalvular AR after post-dilatation of a 20 mm balloon . The aortic peak-to-peak pressure gradient improved from 71 to 12 mmHg after the procedure .
The patient was successfully weaned off VA-ECMO after TAVI. He demonstrated significant haemodynamic recovery following the procedure. After the resolution of pulmonary congestion, VA-ECMO was discontinued on Day 5. The post-procedural transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated improvement of LVEF to 38% from the initial 20%, mild AR, and a peak velocity of 2.3 m/s (see , and ). Cardiac computed tomography 4 months after TAVI revealed a self-expandable prosthesis with flattened spreading ( and ; , ). The patient was prescribed medications including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, β-blockers, and diuretics. He was discharged on Day 29 without neurological sequelae. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed LVEF of 50%, peak aortic velocity of 2.95 m/s, and mild-to-moderate AR at 8 months after the procedure. One year later, the patient remained in good clinical condition, with no readmission for heart failure.