A 77-year-old woman visited our hospital with a chief complaint of anal bleeding and a palpable rectal mass.
Anal bleeding and a palpable rectal mass were observed one month before presen-tation.
The patient had no notable previous medical history.
Digital rectal examination revealed a nodular mass just above the dentate line.
Blood analysis revealed that tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, were within the normal range (CEA level of 1.7 ng/mL and CA19-9 level of 13.9 U/mL). Complete blood count and results from blood biochemical analysis were normal.
Total colonoscopy revealed no abnormality in the colon. However, it revealed a 20-mm protruded lesion in the lower rectum just above the dentate line, which was thought to be the cause of the patient’s chief complaint . Narrow-band imaging with magnifying endoscopy (NBI-ME) revealed non-structural areas and some thick, unevenly sized vessels with branching and curtailed irregularity . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed the tumor invading the submucosal layer but not the muscular layer . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomo-graphy (FDG PET/CT) showed no lymph nodes or distant metastases.
Biopsy specimens of the lesion showed diffuse infiltration of round atypical cells with irregular nuclei. On the basis of the endoscopic findings and histopathological examination of the biopsy specimens, a malignant rectal tumor, including adenocar-cinoma, neuroendocrine tumor, and malignant lymphoma, was suspected. However, we could not make a definite diagnosis regardless of several sufficiently sized biopsy specimens. In addition, since this lesion was expected to have invaded the submuco-sal layer on the basis of EUS findings, endoscopic therapy alone was considered insufficient. However, considering that this lesion was located in the lower rectum, we believed that ESD would be a better first choice as an excisional biopsy than other surgical procedures that would be highly invasive. Therefore, we performed an excisional biopsy via ESD instead of re-performing biopsy using forceps. Histopatho-logical examination of the ESD-resected specimen revealed diffuse infiltration of round tumor cells with irregular nuclei . Additionally, immunohisto-chemical examination revealed tumor cells positive for Human Melanin Black-45, Melan-A, and S-100 . In addition, the tumor cells lacked melanin pigment; thus, a diagnosis of amelanotic AMM was made. Although all margins of the ESD-resected specimen were free from melanoma cells, the AMM had invaded the submucosal layer up to 7000 µm, and both lymphatic and venous invasion were noted.