A 47-year-old gentleman presented with a productive cough, pleuritic chest pain, and fever for 2 days. Physical examination revealed a febrile gentleman of Thai ethnicity. He had a regular pulse, S1/S2 as normal without murmurs or rub. Lung examinations revealed left basal crepitations. Vital signs were blood pressure (BP) 130/83 mmHg, heart rate 104 beats/min, oxygen saturation 97% on room air, respiratory rate 16/min, and temperature 38°C. Chest radiograph showed left lower zone retrocardiac opacities , and he was transferred to the isolation ward. SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) came back positive from his nasopharyngeal swab. The patient did not have any significant medical history. He denied travel, but he was in close contact with a colleague with COVID-19. He came from a TB endemic area.
On Day 3 of hospitalization, he deteriorated requiring 4 L nasal cannula to achieve SpO2 94%. His BP was 125/80 mmHg, his rate 110 beats/min, and he had tachypnoea 20/min. There was no evidence of heart failure or tamponade. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with normal QRS complexes . High sensitive troponin I was 4 ng/mL (normal values: <14 ng/mL). There was absolute monocytosis (0.92 × 109/L, normal range 0.2–0.7 × 109/L) and elevated C-reactive protein at 134.7 mg/L (normal values < 5 mg/L). A repeat chest radiograph showed a marked increase in heart size . He was started on active drug remdesivir (300 mg in total for 2 days) as a part of an ongoing trial.
Subsequent ECG revealed persistent sinus tachycardia and no evolution of ST-T wave changes. Labs were remarkable for monocytosis (1.02 × 109/L). Liver function tests and coagulation panel were normal. Arterial blood gas showed acute respiratory alkalosis with pH 7.48, pCO2 39, pO2 68, bicarbonate of 29 on 3 L nasal cannula. Lactate was raised at 2.7 mmol/L (normal value < 2 mmol/L). Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a hyperdynamic left ventricle with left ventricular ejection fraction of 65%. There was the right atrial collapse, diastolic collapse of the right ventricle, 3.5 cm of pericardial effusion, and plethoric inferior vena cava of 2.2 cm with < 50% variation (Videos 1 and 2). The effusion was noted to be complex with fibrin deposits adhering to the myocardium (Video 3). The transmitral flow variation was 30%, and the transtricuspid variation was 50%.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. The patient developed sinus tachycardia (range up to 130 beats/min) with concomitant febrile episodes of 39°C. Pericardiocentesis was performed in view of persistent tachycardia and rapid accumulation of pericardial effusion. The procedure was done under echocardiographic guidance. Pericardiocentesis yielded 900 mL of haemoserous fluid [fluid lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 2253 IU/L, fluid/serum LDH > 0.6; normal value 270–550 IU/L]. Cytology was negative for malignancy. Adenovirus PCR, enterovirus PCR, and SARS-CoV-2 PCR were negative. Acid-fast bacilli were detected and TB PCR was positive. Fluid microscopy revealed predominantly nucleated cells (8513 cells/µL) with 91% lymphocytes. Adenosine deaminase for pericardial fluid was significantly elevated at 44 U/L (normal value < 20 U/L). The retroviral screen and autoimmune panel were negative. The immediate resolution of tachycardia (heart rate reduced to 80–90 beats/min) signifies the haemodynamic improvement gained from relieving the tamponade. The pericardial effusion was highly diagnostic of TB pericarditis in the absence of coagulopathy, malignancy, and autoimmune aetiologies. He was commenced on rifampicin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide. Subsequent echocardiogram showed resolution of effusion with marked improvement of symptoms. A follow-up CT thorax revealed left lung lower lobe collapse-consolidation, small pleural effusion with a marked reduction in pericardial effusion .
He was discharged after 2 weeks into anti-TB therapy. Subsequently, he was reviewed during follow-up (4 weeks post-discharge) with resolution of pericardial effusion and residual left retrocardiac consolidation on chest X-ray.