A 32-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with altered mental status secondary to drug overdose as reported by emergency medical services (EMS). EMS gave the patient one round of naloxone with reported improvement of the patient’s respiratory status. Patient chart review was notable for a history of opiate dependence and enrollment in suboxone and methadone centers. History of presenting illness was limited due to the patient’s presenting mental status.
Presenting vital signs were notable for a respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute and oxygen saturation of 75% on room air, with improvement to 95% on a non-rebreather mask. The patient was lethargic but arousable and was able to move all four extremities spontaneously. Initial lab work was notable for a glucose of 87 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (70–130 mg/dL) and a urine drug screen that was positive for opiates and cocaine. The official CXR read was as normal; however, the treating clinicians were concerned about the subtle appearance of bilateral interstitial opacities.
After a period of observation, the patient had multiple episodes of emesis. Additionally, he was noted to have no improvement in mental status or ability to oxygenate; therefore, crystalloid fluids, naloxone, ondansetron, and clonidine were given in an attempt to reverse the reported opiate overdose and prevent withdrawal symptoms. On re-assessment, physical exam revealed sonorous respiration and inspiratory stridor; thus, it became more apparent that an underlying pulmonary and metabolic pathology was contributing to the patient’s hypoxemia and lethargy, rather than just opiate use.
Once the patient’s family arrived at the hospital, they noted that he had recently traveled to Israel for drug rehabilitation approximately one week prior to his hospital visit. However, they believed that he continued to use intravenous drugs upon arrival home. At that time, Israel already had confirmed COVID-19 positive cases.
The patient was moved into a negative pressure isolation after travel history correlated with the known abnormal CXR and hypoxemia because of a high degree of suspicion of COVID-19. Arterial blood gas on room air showed a pH of 7.26 (7.35–7.45), partial pressure carbon dioxide of 60 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) (35–45 mmHg), partial pressure oxygen of 47mmHg (80–100 mmHg), and bicarbonate of 27 milliequivalents per liter (mEq/L) (22–28 mEq/L), demonstrating hypercarbic hypoxemic respiratory failure, and the patient’s oxygen saturation began to drop to 85% on a non-rebreather.
The decision was made to intubate the patient for hypoxemia and airway protection. A post-intubation CXR demonstrated progression of bibasilar opacities from initial CXR , with later lung CT demonstrating extensive ground-glass opacities in bilateral lungs .
During the patient’s intensive care unit (ICU) course, the SARS-associated coronavirus ribonucleic acid assay sent from the ED came back positive, indicating COVID-19 pulmonary infection. Repeat lab work also showed characteristic COVID-19 findings of lymphopenia and elevated AST and ALT. After six days on a ventilator, the patient was successfully extubated. He was treated with hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 and antibiotics for aspiration pneumonia. After a stable course on the general medical floor, he was discharged home with self-quarantining instructions to prevent the spread of COVID-19.