A 67-year-old Han Chinese male smoker present with nonproductive cough and increasing shortness of breathless. The chest CT imaging showed central lung cancer located in left lobe, accompanied with pulmonary artery invasion, obstructive atelectasis and pleural effusion. The biopsied pathology from bronchoscopy indicated squamous cell carcinoma. The cytology from pleural effusion showed positive tumor cells. The patient was finally diagnosed as metastatic lung cancer squamous cell carcinoma. He was injected with 10 cycles of sintilimab, concurrent with chemotherapy containing gemcitabine and carboplatin in the first 4 cycles. The immunotherapy was replaced by paclitaxel for one cycle when CT evaluation suggested progressed disease. The dyspnea appeared on the 15th day of close contact with his son, who returned from Wuhan but not accompanied with fever. The relevant physical examinations included rales of lung and low breath sound of the left thorax. The chest CT indicated peripherally subpleural lattice opacities at the inferior right lung lobe and bilateral thoracic infusion. The complete blood count showed increased white blood cell (WBC) and neutrophilic granulocyte with concurrently decreased lymphocyte. The C reaction protein (CRP) level was 97.68 mg/L, but procalcitonin was normal. As suspect of COVID-19 infection, the patient was treated in an isolation ward, and the double RT-PCR results from swab samples within 72 hours remained negative. No pathogen was cultured from sputum samples. The patient was treated the daily dose of 80 mg prednisolone and meropenem for 7 days. On the 3rd-day post treatment, the chest CT showed an attenuated inflammatory lesion. The daily dose of prednisolone was stepwise reduced to 40 mg for 7 days and then minimally 20 mg. Secondary to 7 days of piperacillin tazobactam injection, the chest CT demonstrated the former lesion almost absorbed, in line with prominently falling CRP level to 22.17 mg/L. The anti-PD-1 related pneumonitis with bacterial infection was finally diagnosed based on the clinical evidence and good response to the prednisolone and antibiotics. Due to continued hemoptysis, the patient started with afatinib and stable disease was evaluated by CT imaging. He died post one month of oral treatment.