An 84-year-old previously well Greek man presented to our facility with a one-month history of an erythematous, scaly and pruritic rash that progressed from his left medial malleolus to involve his lower legs and hands . There were associated superficial erosions and hemorrhagic bullae of the hands, which were painful and interfering with his daily function. His only significant medical history included hypertension and allergic rhinitis for which he was not on medication. There was no history of smoking, asbestos exposure or recent infections.
Investigations indicated mild lymphopenia of 0.7 × 109 cells/L (normal range: 1.0×109 cells/L to 4.0 × 109 cells/L), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 85mm/hour (normal range: 5 to 12mm/hour) and a non-specific rise in anti-nuclear antibody of 160U (normal range: <40U). Serum and urine protein electrophoresis, and a chest radiograph were unremarkable. A punch biopsy of a rash on his hand confirmed IgA-positive LCV involving vessels of the superficial and mid dermis, with prominent peri-vascular fibrin, neutrophils and leukocytoclasia (nuclear dust) . Immunofluorescence studies demonstrated IgA and C3 deposition in the walls of superficial vessels. He was treated with oral prednisolone and topical corticosteroids with resolution of the rash.
Six months later, he presented again with a right-sided pleural effusion that contained atypical mesothelial cells on drainage, raising the suspicion of MPM. A subsequent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery biopsy confirmed biphasic MPM involving the parietal pleura. Laboratory tests demonstrated thrombocytosis of 628 × 109 cells/L (normal range: 150×109 cells/L to 400 × 109 cells/L), elevated C-reactive protein of 293.3mg/L (normal range: <8mg/L) and ESR of 58mm/hour (normal range: 5 to 12mm/hour). A computed tomography scan of the chest revealed right lower lobe collapse and difficulty assessing for a mass lesion.
As he was otherwise asymptomatic, he declined systemic chemotherapy. Two months after being diagnosed as having MPM, he had a recurrence of biopsy-confirmed LCV that again responded to oral prednisolone and topical corticosteroids. The MPM and LCV have not required further treatment, such as chemotherapy, as our patient remains asymptomatic.