The case described is of a 16-year-old Japanese girl who had no relevant family history. She had a medical history of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and had been on atomoxetine since she was 12 years. She had developed stomatitis at the age of 12, alopecia at the age of 14, and butterfly erythema vulgaris at the age of 15. At the age of 16, she was referred to our hospital for suspected cSLE.
On physical examination at first presentation, the patient’s height and weight were 169.1 cm (+ 2.2 standard deviations above age average) and 44.2 kg, respectively; the tall stature was suggestive of trisomy X, but the associated facial features, such as epicanthal folds or hypertelorism, were not observed. She had a persistent headache, fever for six days, diffuse hair loss, mucosal ulcers, butterfly eruptions, and palmar erythema. Blood tests revealed pancytopenia (total white blood cell count: 3,400/µL; lymphocyte count: 958/µL; hemoglobin level: 7.9 g/dL; platelet count: 149,000/µL), In addition to thrombocytopenia and anemia, erythrocyte fragmentation (7.0 ‰; normal value: <1.2 ‰ ), elevated lactate dehydrogenase (355 IU/L), serum creatinine levels (0.91 mg/dL), low haptoglobin (< 10 mg/dL), and negative Coombs tests were observed, which were suggestive of secondary thrombotic microangiopathy(TMA); ADAMTS13 activity was normal. Concerning other SLE findings, low complement levels (C3: 25 mg/dL; C4: 2 mg/dL; CH50: 10 U/mL), and normal C-reactive protein levels (0.3 mg/dL) were revealed. The patient tested positive for the following autoantibodies: anti-nuclear antibody titer > 1:1280, homogeneous and speckled pattern; anti-DNA antibody 520 IU/mL; anti-double-stranded DNA antibody 1,010 IU/mL; anti-Smith antibody > 1:32; anti-U1 ribonucleoprotein antibody > 1:256. Tests for anti-SS-A antibody, anti-Scl-70 antibody, PR3-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), myeloperoxidase-ANCA, anti-cardiolipin antibody (IgG), lupus anticoagulant, and anticardiolipin/beta2-glycoprotein I complex antibodies were negative. Urine analysis showed proteinuria (2.4 g/day), mixed cellular casts, and red blood cells; kidney biopsy was not performed, since urinary analysis results improved soon after treatment. Underlying infectious disease was ruled out by blood culture and whole-body computed tomography scan. To exclude malignancy due to pancytopenia, a bone marrow examination was performed. The result showed normocellular marrow and denied leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome, but a chromosomal abnormality (47, XXX) was incidentally identified. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with cSLE with trisomy X based on the American College of Rheumatology revised criteria , and was classified as having high disease activity, as the SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI) score was 27 . There were two unusual findings for SLE. One was palladium calcification detected by the cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , and another was low bone mineral density detected by the dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) (lumbar spine: 0.972 g/cm2; Z-score − 1.7), which are commonly observed in the elderly.
Due to high disease activity and suspected TMA complications, the patient chose a strong treatment method. The course of treatment is shown in Fig. . She was initially treated with two courses of intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy (1 g/day for 3 days and maintenance therapy with prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day for 4 days) with heparinization (150 IU/kg/day). Thereafter, monthly cyclophosphamide treatment was added (0.5 g/m2), and prednisolone was tapered. Alfacalcidol (0.5 µg/day) was administered from onset to prevent osteoporosis due to steroids’ side effects. Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) (1500 mg/day) and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/day) were added for the maintenance of remission, but were discontinued secondary to their adverse effects of leukopenia and alopecia, respectively; these symptoms abated after the withdrawal of these medications. Subsequently, belimumab was added as a remission maintenance drug, but no obvious effect was observed, and prednisolone dosage was increased up to 15 mg/day to control headache and elevated anti-dsDNA antibody. Generalized extremity pain developed early and worsened throughout the disease. Her visual analog scale of extremity pain score was always 9–10/10 even under administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, but differed from the doctor’s impression; because she could walk and bend knees naturally. Extremity MRI performed 6 months after the treatment onset was normal. However, a second MRI performed 6 months later revealed multifocal avascular necrosis (AVN) and the increased volume of adipose tissue in the bone marrow of the spine, similar to what is observed in the elderly . Since the location of pain spread beyond the AVN position and unnaturally high visual analog scale score was persistent, it was determined that the causes of pain were attributable to a mixture of AVN and complex regional pain syndrome. Hence, pregabalin was added, but no effect was observed, and the pain persisted.
Additional tests for coagulation defects were performed because one of the proposed mechanisms for vascular interruption in AVN is coagulation/ thrombus formation [, ]. Prothrombin time, activated partial prothrombin time, D-dimer levels, protein C and protein S activation, and antithrombin III activity were normal. However, the plasma levels of factor VIII (FVIII) and VWF antigen (VWF: Ag) were elevated (FVIII: 192.4 %, normal range 78–165 %; VWF: Ag > 201 %, normal range 50–150 %). These findings ruled out congenital thrombotic disorders such as protein C/S deficiency but revealed that the potential thrombotic condition might be caused by high levels of FVIII and VWF: Ag . Additionally, further deterioration and a mildly decreased bone mineral density were observed on the second DEXA (lumbar spine: 0.956 g/cm2; Z-score − 1.8). MMF was restarted for the concerns of ongoing deterioration, and rituximab was added to reduce steroid-related adverse effects, such as bone complications.
Currently, she is being treated with prednisolone and MMF for SLE. However, her extremity pain has not been managed effectively.