A 58-year-old diabetic female was transferred to our intensive care unit after undergoing an emergency coronary angiogram, which revealed normal coronaries. She was being treated for urinary tract infection and diabetic ketoacidosis for the past 2 days at a private hospital. During this period, she sustained an episode of pulseless ventricular tachycardia which was treated as per advanced cardiac life support protocol after which she got transferred for a coronary angiogram at our hospital. Troponin levels were raised and 2D echocardiography was showing left ventricular hypokinesia.
At the time of intensive cardiac unit admission, she was mechanically ventilated and receiving vasopressors (norepinephrine 0.18 μg/kg/minute). She was easily arousable to call and did not have any neurological deficit. She continued to get episodes of ill-sustained ventricular tachycardia. Her arterial blood gas revealed an optimal oxygenation and a high anion gap acidosis. Blood biochemistry showed a neutrophilic leukocytosis.
She was given intravenous amiodarone infusion along with correction of the existing electrolyte disturbances—hypokalemia (2.9 mEq/dL) and hypomagnesemia (1.2 mEq/dL). Intravenous meropenem was given in view of urosepsis. Human insulin infusion was administered for controlling blood sugar levels between 140 mg/dL and 180 mg/dL. Her general condition improved over the next 12 hours with resolution of shock, correction of acidosis, and restoration of a normal sinus rhythm. She was hence extubated. She was subjected to computed tomography urography which confirmed pyelonephritis.
Bedside 2D echocardiography was suggestive of “Takotsubo cardiomyopathy” with typical apical ballooning of the left ventricle. Speckle tracking on echocardiography suggested apical hypokinesia .
Electrophysiologist opinion was sought and oral bisoprolol was added along with oral amiodarone. As she improved, she was shifted to the step-down unit for further management. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging done to rule out structural abnormality revealed Takotsubo cardiomyopathy appearance in mid and apical cavity .
Within 12 hours, she was shifted back to the intensive care unit for episodes of ill-sustained ventricular tachycardia with pulse. She was managed as per advanced cardiac life support guidelines with synchronized cardioversion. Intravenous antiarrhythmic bolus doses of amiodarone and lignocaine were also tried. In spite of conventional management, episodes of ill-sustained ventricular tachycardia continued. Hence, it was decided to insert thoracic epidural catheter and administer sympathetic blockade to control the ventricular tachycardia storm and correct the metabolic derangements simultaneously. Hypokalemia (3.2 mEq/dL) found was the most likely cause of inciting the tachyarrhythmia.
After sympathetic blockade with ropivacaine 0.20% over the next 48 hours, no further episodes of ventricular tachycardia were recorded on Holter monitoring. She stabilized and epidural catheter was removed after 72 hours. The patient was discharged from the hospital at day 9 of admission on oral propefenone, amiodarone, and bisoprolol. Two dimensional echocardiography at discharge was suggestive of mild apical and distal interventricular septal hypokinesia, ejection fraction 45%.