A healthy 47-year-old Japanese woman presented at our hospital complaining of sudden visual deterioration in her left eye. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was hand motion in her left eye and 0.5 in her right eye. She had a history of ROP (body weight at birth: 800g), but other details were unclear. Our patient was born in 1965, when there was no consideration of treatment for her ROP.
The fundus in her left eye was invisible due to massive VH, but B-scan ultrasound ruled out retinal detachment. Regressed ROP, straightening vessels, pigmentation in the midperipheral retina, and ectopia of a hypoplastic macula were found in her right eye.In her left eye, the VH decreased three weeks later and the BCVA improved to 0.4. The fundus photograph taken after the disappearance of the VH is shown in Figure a. Regressed ROP similar to her right eye was found in her left eye. The membranous tissue connecting the temporal peripheral retina and posterior lens capsule, as well as a retinal cystic change, were shown by ultrasound biomicroscopy . Membranous tissue of adhesion was found at the posterior lens capsule and retinal exudate, corresponding to the retinal cystic lesion on ultrasound biomicroscopy . Fluorescein angiography in her left eye did not reveal neovascularization, but increased vascular permeability was observed at the midperipheral and peripheral retina . In her right eye, no neovascularization or increased vascular permeability was detected.
For the next two months, VH recurred twice in her left eye. The left BCVA deteriorated to hand motion after the third episode of VH, and the fundus became invisible. As the VH was refractory, we performed pars plana vitrectomy combined with lens extraction by phacoemulsification and artificial intraocular lens (IOL) implantation four months after her first visit.After lens extraction by phacoemulsification and IOL implantation, core and peripheral vitrectomy were performed. We could have performed posterior vitreous detachment at the posterior pole to the midperipheral area, but the vitreoretinal adhesion was very tough from the midperipheral to the peripheral area. Because posterior vitreous detachment from the midperipheral to the peripheral area could not be completed , we shaved the vitreous body as much as possible. The area was concurrent with the increased vascular permeability shown by fluorescein angiography . Via indentation of the sclera, the membranous tissue and exudative retinal cyst were observed . We excised peripheral vitreous and membranous tissue using a vitreous cutter, and we performed cryocoagulation and laser photocoagulation in the area of increased vascular permeability shown by fluorescein angiography. Neither retinal break nor retinal detachment was found.Six months after the surgery, VH and other complications had not occurred, and the left fundus was stable . The final BCVA in her left eye was 0.6.