A 40-year-old, right-handed, lady, with no prior comorbidities, presented to us in the clinic with complaints of headache and imbalance for the past 20 days. She described her headache as being most severe in the morning, with no associated nausea, vomiting, or visual complaints. Her vertigo was also most prominent on waking up. The patient reported pain in her neck which radiated down her whole spine. On examination, she was awake, alert, and oriented. Her pupils were 3 mm bilaterally equal and reactive to light. There was mild papilledema noted bilaterally. However, there were no other focal neurological deficits. She did not exhibit any cerebellar signs or gait disturbance at the time of examination. There was no neck stiffness. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan depicted a well-circumscribed lesion along the anterior prepontine region measuring 24.8 × 14.7 × 31.5 mm, compressing the lower pons. On T1-weighted sequence, this showed hypointense signals with a hyperintense area, creating a fluid-fluid level within the cyst. There was no contrast enhancement in the wall or within the lesion. On T2-weighted images, it appeared predominantly hyperintense showing a fluid-fluid level with a relatively iso to hypointense area. There was craniocaudal extension of the lesion through the foramen magnum.
Since the neurological symptoms were not severe, she was advised to get a repeat MRI scan and come for an early follow-up. Depending on the progression of the symptoms, and increase in size of the cyst, the need for surgery would be determined. On her next follow-up visit 3 months later, her symptoms had significantly improved, with the vertigo controlled on use of prochlorperazine and headaches settled with over the counter analgesics. The repeat MRI scans showed the content of this lesion to be of the same intensity as the CSF on T1 and T2 images. The previously noted hyperintense signals showed regression in size and there was no fluid-fluid level in the current study. Given the symptom resolution and reduced size of the cyst on imaging, she was advised a follow-up with MRI scans in 6 months.
On her most recent follow-up, her MRI scan showed complete resolution of the previously visualized prepontine cyst. She was clinically asymptomatic and was advised a follow-up MRI scan after 1 year or earlier for possible recurrence.