A 52-year-old male patient of Zhuang ethnicity had a cough for 1 mo. The patient had previously taken antibiotic treatment for cough and otitis media, which presented as pain and impaired hearing in the outer court for 1.5 mo.
The patient’s symptoms started 1 mo prior with recurrent attacks of paroxysmal cough. At 10 d prior to admission, the patient had a fever and reported 3 kg weight loss in the past month.
The patient had no previous medical history, and no history of smoking or drinking.
The patient has no personal genetic history or family history.
Physical examination on admission revealed a temperature of 36.5 °C and heart rate of 106 bpm; and no lymphadenopathy was detected. The cardiovascular, and neurological examinations were unremarkable. The right eye had mild conjunctival hyperemia. Harsh breath sounds were heard in both lungs, and moist rales and voice tremor enhancement were heard in the left upper lobe.
Routine blood examination showed that white blood cell (WBC) count was 10.55 × 109/L, hemoglobin was 108.30 × 1012/L, neutrophil percentage was 0.828, procalcitonin was 0.428, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 91 mm, and C-reactive protein (CRP) level was > 200 mg/L. Liver function test showed that total bilirubin was 29.1 μmol/L, direct bilirubin was 23.3 μmol/L, and alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were within normal range. Coagulation function examination showed that prothrombin time was 16.7 s, activated partial thromboplastin time was 33.4 s, fibrinogen was 6.68 g/L, antithrombin was 74%, and D-dimer was 807 ng/mL. Electrolytes and renal function were within normal limits. Urine showed a pH of 5, specific gravity of 1.030, urine bilirubin + 1, urobilinogen + 2, urine protein ±, and no red blood cells or WBCs in the high-power field. Stool was positive for liver fluke, and blood culture was negative.
Bronchoscopy revealed remarkable tracheal and endobronchial mucosal erosion, congestion, and inflammation. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple pulmonary nodules, enlarged hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes, and pleural effusion in bilateral lungs. The lesions were not enhanced in the CT images . No enhancement was found in the susceptible sites of tuberculosis, so the possibility of lung cancer was temporarily ruled out.
No acid-fast bacteria were observed on smear, and all blood cultures were negative. Chest CT scan reexamination showed enlarged pulmonary nodules (the anti-tuberculosis drugs were discontinued). Pure tone audiometry revealed moderately high-frequency mixed hearing loss in the right ear, and normal hearing in the left ear. Ear examination showed intact tympanic membrane with congestion and invagination in the right ear, and normal tympanic membrane in the left ear. Biopsies revealed local granulomatous structure; peripheral fibrous hyperplasia; lymphocyte, plasma cell, and neutrophil infiltration around the structure; and no heterotypic cells . Bronchoscopy reexamination showed diffuse mucosal hemorrhage ending in the glottis. Therefore, the operation was discontinued. During this period, hemoglobin decreased progressively from 108.30 g/L to 53.10 g/L, antithrombin decreased from 74% to 20%, and fever persisted at > 39.0 °C (multiple blood transfusions and fresh frozen plasma transfusions were given). Rheumatoid factor was negative. Autoantibody examination showed positive antinuclear antibody (ANA), c-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA), and proteinase-3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (PR3-ANCA).