A 43-year-old Colombian female, with a history of pterygium surgery OU and recurrent
corneal ulcers treated with topical drops for 4 years, consulted to the
ophthalmology service elsewhere for presenting several episodes of foreign body
sensation, trichiasis, and distichiasis. Due to this symptomatology, eyelash
electrofulguration and blepharoplasty OU were performed without improvement. Two
years later, the patient was referred to our service, for a second opinion for
presenting corneal ulceration and trichiasis persistence.
At her first ophthalmological examination, positive findings OD were: best-corrected
visual acuity (BCVA) of counting fingers (CF), trichiasis and distichiasis, corneal
pannus, superficial punctate keratitis, 50% forniceal shortening and symblepharon
formation of 10% in the lower temporal lid, graded as IIc and IIIa stages according
to Tauber and Foster et al classification .
Positive findings OS were: BCVA 20/20, trichiasis and distichiasis at the lower lid,
associated subepithelial fibrosis in the nasal region, superficial punctate
keratitis, and 25% forniceal shortening classified as a IIa stage.
Based on clinical manifestations and medical history, OCP was suspected. To confirm
the diagnosis, OD direct immunofluorescence in conjunctival biopsy was performed.
The results showed the presence of linear deposition of IgG and IgA antibodies along
the basement membrane zone of the conjunctival tissue, confirming the diagnosis of
OCP. Treatment with azathioprine and prednisolone was started. During the follow-up,
ophthalmological examination OD revealed BCVA 20/400, and detention in forniceal
shortening. Thus, prednisolone tapering was indicated.
However, the patient presented a new symblepharon at the nasal lower lid region OD,
classified as IIc IIIb. For this reason, cyclophosphamide and closer medical controls were indicated.
Three months later, the patient was stable with no new pathological findings. So,
prednisolone tapering until suspension and 3-month controls were indicated.
A year later, the patient referred suspension of immunosuppressive treatment by a
general practice physician, due to the appearance of anemia with iron sulfate
supplements requirement. Besides, clinical examination showed an important loss of
visual acuity OD, from 20/400 to CF. The patient presented a corneal leukoma
secondary to recurrent corneal ulcers OD.
One year later she presented increased foreign body sensation, xerostomia, asthenia,
adynamia, skin dryness, and arthralgias. The patient was referred to the
rheumatologist, and laboratory tests and a salivary gland biopsy were
ordered. She presented positive Anti-TG, Anti-TPO, Anti-Ro and Anti-La antibodies
and salivary gland biopsy was consistent with SS. Thus, SS and HT were diagnosed at
the same time.
Based on these findings, MAS diagnosis was confirmed. Treatment with
hydroxychloroquine, pilocarpine, and levothyroxine was started.
Despite the treatment, 1 year later, although the patient persisted with the same
BCVA OU, forniceal shortening progressed to 80% OD and 75% OS. In the next 2 years,
the patient suspended the immunosuppressive treatment by her own, presenting OCP
reactivation, demonstrated by a progression of the forniceal shortening OD (90%),
associated to inferior corneal pannus and corneal opacification OD . For this reason,
rheumatology and ocular immunology specialists indicated methotrexate (Mtx) and,
according to evolution, cyclophosphamide. With the MTX treatment, the patient has
shown VA and clinical stability OU and the absence of progression of OCP has been
evident during the last 5 years with no requirement of cyclophosphamide treatment so
far.