A 74-year-old man with a 4-year history of bradykinesia was diagnosed with PD and reported a poor response to levodopa. His medication was increased from a levodopa equivalent dose of 300 mg to 948 mg per day, with little improvement. One year before his admission, he developed incomplete palpebral ptosis of both eyes and gradually deteriorated in terms of ambulation. Three months before his admission, he also developed dysphagia, dysphonia, and head drop.
On neurological examination, the patient had normal cognition (the Mini-Mental State Examination score was 27/30, with 16 years of education). He presented with slight facial masking, incomplete palpebral ptosis, slurring of speech, dropped head, and bradykinesia. Other cranial nerves were normal. His muscle strength and tone of limbs were almost normal, but the strength of his neck extensor muscles was 2/5 and there was slight rigidity in his neck. He presented with no apparent tremor but took very small steps, as in freezing of gait. He had normal cerebellar examination, sensory faculties and reflexes. The Hoffmann signs and Babinski signs were negative bilaterally.
As the patient had responded poorly to levodopa (with <30% improvement) and there was no prominent tremor or rigidity, we gradually adjusted his anti-parkinsonism medication from levodopa-benserazide 250 mg (200 mg levodopa plus 50 mg benserazide) t.i.d., entacapone 0.2 g t.i.d., piribedil 50 mg t.i.d. to levodopa-benserazide 125 mg t.i.d. within 10 days. There was no visible deterioration in any of his symptoms after this reduction in drug dosage.
To determine why the patient had palpebral ptosis, we carried out several tests to exclude MG. Interestingly, administration of neostigmine significantly improved his head drop and palpebral ptosis as well as his gait . Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) showed significant decremental responses at 3 and 5 Hz in the orbicularis oculi. His anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody (anti-AchR antibody) serum level was >20 nmol/L (normal value: <0.45 nmol/L) and he was negative for anti-muscle specific tyrosine kinase (anti-MuSK) antibody.
The patient was then treated with pyridostigmine 60 mg t.i.d. together with tacrolimus 3 mg q.d. One month later, his palpebral ptosis and head drop had improved greatly, but his parkinsonism symptoms had worsened and he experienced distinct “wearing off.” He presented with prominent rigidity in the neck and limbs when in the off state. We gradually increased levodopa-benserazide to 250 mg t.i.d., but his parkinsonism symptoms were still worse than the first time he visited our hospital. To verify the diagnosis of parkinsonism, we performed a 9-[18F]fluoropropyl-(+)-dihydrotetrabenazine positron emission tomography–computed tomography (18F-AV133 PET-CT) scan. The mean standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) for the left posterior putamen, right posterior putamen, left anterior putamen, and right anterior putamen were 2.14, 2.18, 2.15, and 2.45, respectively [the mean SUVRs for a healthy person are 5.12, 6.05, 5.36, and 5.36, respectively, and the reference diagnostic value distinguishing PD patients from healthy controls in the posterior dorsal putamen is 3.43 ], revealing a significant decrease in uptake in the bilateral putamen .
One and a half years after discharge from our hospital, the patient's palpebral ptosis and head drop had completely resolved, but he was experiencing bradykinesia, rigidity, postural instability, and freezing of gait. He received a levodopa equivalent dose of 1,066 mg, and the effect of each levodopa dosage could be maintained for 3 h. His bradykinesia, rigidity, and freezing of gait were improved, with a 32.2% change in the Movement Disorder Society-Sponsored Revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) III in a levodopa challenge test.