A 40-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with deteriorating mental status. One day before, she suffered from a severe headache unresponsive to analgesics followed by right hemiparesis 4 h later. The patient’s family reported that they could not reach proper medical care until the next morning when the patient’s mental status was deteriorating. She also had a 4-day history of profuse greasy diarrhea. Her medication history is notable for combined oral contraceptives for 9 years and short-acting beta agonists for asthma. Collateral history from family revealed few episodes of loose stools along with a poor appetite and weight loss of 15 kg over the last 5 years. They denied a prior history of abnormal bleeding episodes or any thrombotic incidents in the form of deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism or cerebrovascular event. The family also confirmed that the patient did not experience any previous neurological manifestations. The patient does not use tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drugs.
Her family history is unremarkable and concerning manifestations of atherosclerotic vascular disease was noncontributory.
Her initial Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was nine. On physical examination, she appeared cachectic (BMI 17 kg/m2) and dehydrated. Marked weakness in the right upper and lower limbs was observed. The pupils were equal in size and response. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain showed parenchymal hypodensity in the left parietal lobe. Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiogram MRA showed a large hyperintense area in the left cerebral hemisphere corresponding with left middle cerebral artery infarction. The magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) revealed left transverse and sigmoid sinuses thrombosis in addition to a thrombotic left jugular vein . Duplex scanning of the neck vessels showed total occlusion of the left internal carotid artery and atherosclerotic right internal carotid artery with noncritical stenosis.
Laboratory evaluation revealed iron deficiency anemia with hyperhomocysteinemia and folate deficiency; Hemoglobin 80 g/L, Mean Corpuscular Volume 66 fL (80–95 fL), Ferritin < 1 μg/L (11–307 μg/L), Transferrin saturation 8% (20–50%), serum folate 2 nmol/L (4.5–45.3 nmol/L), homocysteine 15 μmol/L (5–12 μmol/L).
Serum potassium (K) and phosphorus (P) levels were low; K 3.2 mmol/L (3.5–5 mmol/L) and P 12 mg/L (26–45 mg/L).
Coagulation profile showed: INR 2, aPTT 28 s (30 s–40 s) and thrombocytosis with platelet count of 641 × 109/L. Serum levels of protein S and C were low. Lupus anticoagulant screening was negative and anti-cardiolipin antibody test was also negative.
To investigate the etiology of the patient’s iron deficiency anemia, anti-tissue transglutaminase (tTG) IgA and IgG antibodies were assessed and found to be strongly positive: anti-tTG IgA 215 U/mL (positive: > 10.0 U/mL) and anti-tTG IgG 20 U/mL (positive: > 10.0 U/mL) and the total serum IgA level was within the reference range. Consequently, a duodenal biopsy was performed and showed marked villous atrophy, crypt hyperplasia, and lymphocytic infiltration within the lamina propria consistent with celiac sprue (Marsh III b). The above findings were compatible with the diagnosis of celiac disease complicated with secondary folic acid and iron deficiency, hyperhomocysteinemia, and proteins C and S deficiency.
The patient was promptly started on a high-caloric gluten-free diet via nasogastric tube and the diarrhea ceased within 2 days. Additionally, low molecular weight heparin for cerebral venous thrombosis was administered along with aspirin and a lipid-lowering agent for further arterial stroke prevention. Nutritional deficiencies were corrected timely.
The patient gradually regained consciousness during the first 2 weeks, she was able to follow commands and open her eyes spontaneously but she had expressive aphasia and right hemiplegia.
She was discharged 20 days after admission, her GCS score was 11. She received nursing care at home in addition to physical and speech therapy.
On follow-up 2 months later, the patient had no diarrheal episodes. She was able to walk with assistance and follow commands but still had expressive aphasia. The laboratory panel revealed an INR of 1 and electrolytes serum levels within normal limits. An improvement of hemoglobin level and thrombocytosis (Hemoglobin 150 g/L, platelet count of 360 × 109/L) was also noted.