A 41-year-old woman with a history of hypertension visited our hospital due to sudden onset of painless vision loss in the right eye for 1 week. Her height is 5′; body weight is 49 Kg with a body mass index is 22 kg/m2. She doesn’t have sleep apnea, and the vision loss occurred while she woke up. Visual acuity was 20/200 OD and 20/40 OS. Fundus and OCT (Optical Coherence Tomography) examinations showed marked disc swelling, flame-shaped hemorrhaging over the superior and temporal nerve fiber area , and well-demarcated retinal ischemia superior to the fovea in the right eye , with an absent optic cup appearance of the left eye. In addition, we found a relative afferent pupillary defect in the right eye. Visual field examination showed peripheral constriction and inferior arcuate defect of the right eye and normal of the left eye. Fluorescein angiography disclosed a filling defect of retinal arterial circulation superior to the fovea correlated with retinal ischemia and blocked fluorescence due to profound retinal hemorrhaging over the disc in the right eye . Examination revealed blood pressure was 158/105 mmHg. Cardiac and carotid doppler sonography were normal. Laboratory examinations for the complete blood count, antinuclear antibody, protein C/S, and homocysteine were within normal ranges; the erythrocyte sediment rate (ESR) was 6 mm/hour; total cholesterol was 234 mg/dL. Under the impression of NAION with branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO), the patient was admitted for intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy for 3 days (total dose: 3000 mg) followed by gradual tapering oral prednisolone and one intravitreal injection of triamcinolone. Two months later, as the disc swelling and retinal ischemia resolved, we found that the occluded artery was the cilioretinal artery and not the ordinary branch retinal artery . Visual acuity improved to 20/25 in the right eye 6 months after the treatment. Disc revealed a pale change in the superior and temporal part with an absent optic cup.