A 29-year-old female was incidentally diagnosed with hepatic CH in liver segment IVb on abdominal CT and ultrasonography at the age of 25. She had a history of endometriosis treated with oral contraceptives starting at age 25. Follow-up imaging revealed that the lesion was growing and new, smaller lesions were distributed around the initial lesion. The oral contraceptives were immediately discontinued. The patient reported minimal alcohol consumption and no smoking history. The patient was 165.5 cm tall, weighed 87.5 kg (BMI = 31.9), and had no abnormalities of the skin, or laboratory values of blood counts, biochemistry, or coagulation tests. Hepatitis B and C virus markers were negative.
An abdominal ultrasound revealed a 78-mm marginal hyperechoic mass in liver segment IVb with a mixture of high and low echoes inside, and a contrast effect of a linear structure in liver segment IVa. CT imaging confirmed a 70-mm tumor in liver segment IVa with peripheral enhancement that disappeared toward the center of the lesion. Dot-like nodules surrounded this lesion . The nodule in liver segment IVa had high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and diffusion-weighted images, with surrounding, smaller lesions. The lesions showed heterogeneous low signal intensity in the hepatobiliary phase of gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA) enhanced images . The well-defined tumor in segment IVb had high signal intensity on T2-weighted and diffusion-weighted images and in the hepatobiliary phase of Gd-EOB-DTPA enhanced images .
Due to the suspicion for malignancy and the risk of tumor rupture, a left liver lobectomy and cholecystectomy were performed. Macroscopic findings included the lesion in liver segment IVa with a small, surrounding area of small, red patches and a well-defined lesion containing a 6.5-cm blood clot in liver segment IVb . Histopathologically, the irregularly scattered red spots were identified as aggregated blood vessels lined by endothelium without atypia. The distribution was disseminated, and the lesions were diagnosed as hemangiomatosis . The vascular spaces of the well-defined tumor in liver segment IVb were filled with blood and lined by flat endothelial cells. These are common findings for hepatic CH .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and she was discharged on postoperative day 12. No recurrent liver lesions occurred as of 1 year after the operation.