A 37-year-old woman (Gravida 4 Para 3 Abortus 1, and the most recent pregnancy was a normal pregnancy) presented with vaginal bleeding and a high level of β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) at 199,060 (mIU/mL). Transvaginal ultrasound showed uneven echogenicity of the endometrium. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed patchy nodular shadow in bilateral lungs, of which cancer metastasis was suspected, and there was no sign of intracardiac lesion. As a result, the patient was clinically diagnosed with gestational choriocarcinoma (stage III with FIGO score of 12). She initially received standard chemotherapy (etoposide, methotrexate, and dactinomycin with cyclophosphamide and oncovin, EMA-CO*3) but unsatisfactory response was observed, then five cycles of other regimens (5-Fu with Dactinomycin*1; 5-Fu, Dactinomycin and Vincristine, FAV*3; cisplatin and paclitaxel, TP*1) were tried while the level of β-hCG still ranged between 5000 to 10,000 .
At the time of reexamination after eight courses of chemotherapy, the patient was found intracardiac masses in the right atrium (2.6*1.7 cm), chordae tendineae anterior of the tricuspid valve (1.4*0.7 cm) and the right ventricle (4.1*2.9 cm) by ultrasonic cardiogram (UCG). Then two courses of EMA-CO chemotherapy and one course of EMA-EP (etoposide, methotrexate, and dactinomycin with etoposide and cisplatin) chemotherapy were followed. However, the patient developed a fever with a temperature of 37.5–38.2 ℃, sore throat, chills, chest tightness, dyspnea, and decreased activity tolerance. Moreover, a mid-diastolic grade three murmur can be heard in the tricuspid region on auscultation of the heart. The level of β-hCG climbed to 95,219 (mIU/mL), and UCG revealed a 6.1*5.4 cm heterogeneous echogenic mass in the right atrium and ventricle, connected with the right atrium and ventricle wall . Furthermore, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed increased irregular metabolic abnormalities in the lower part of the right atrium-right ventricle junction and no other lesion was observed .
Based on the patient's history of pulmonary metastasis from choriocarcinoma, poor control of β-hCG after multiple courses of chemotherapy, the progressive enlargement of the right heart occupancy (from 2.5*1.4 cm to 6.1*5.4 cm in 2 months), and the occupancy hypermetabolism suggested in PET-CT, the diagnosis of choriocarcinoma with pulmonary and cardiac metastasis was made. After consultation with cardiac surgery, complete intracardiac mass resection was performed, and three intracardiac masses were observed: they were located at the right atrium (3*4 cm), the anterior chordae tendineae of the tricuspid valve (1*2 cm), and the right ventricle (5*7 cm). The pathology confirmed the intracardiac metastasis of gestational choriocarcinoma and the immunohistochemistry showed β-hCG ( +) . After a week of operation, the UCG found a 5.4*4.2 cm mass in the right atrium again . Considering the poor prognosis, the patient received palliative care and eventually died of disease progression.