A 63-year-old African-American male with type 2 diabetes on metformin, rheumatoid arthritis not on oral corticosteroid therapy, chronic low back pain alleviated with intermittent epidural steroid injections, hepatitis C, and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) who was on decitabine for chemotherapy presented to the hospital on 6/25/16 for hematemesis and poor oral intake. Prior to arrival, he had been feeling weak and his weakness acutely worsened in the two to three weeks before admission. His other symptoms included nausea and poor appetite. He had vomited at least twice. Two days prior to his admission, he was seen in his outpatient oncologist's office. He told his oncologist that he had not been feeling well and had been experiencing dehydration and fatigue. He said his symptoms started around the time the posaconazole 300 mg daily was started in April of 2016 for fungal prophylaxis. His oncologist held his posaconazole at that visit on 6/23/16. The only relevant steroid exposure was intermittent steroid injections into his spine for low back pain. His last injection had been in March of 2016. It was estimated that he had received a total of five steroid injections into his back prior to admission. The time interval between and the time course of injections are not specified. His full medication list included potassium supplementation, hydroxychloroquine, indomethacin, tramadol, docusate, acyclovir, levofloxacin, decitabine, allopurinol, gabapentin, aspirin, lisinopril, and metformin.
Blood pressure on admission was within normal limits at 125/60 mmHg. Labs on admission showed hypokalemia (3.1 mmol/L) and hypocalcemia (8.5 mg/dL) but normal sodium and glucose. To evaluate his adrenal function, the primary team sent a morning cortisol on 6/26/16 which resulted as 1.9 mcg/dL at 5:39 AM. To further evaluate his adrenal function, he underwent a cosyntropin stimulation test. On the morning of 6/27/16, his cortisol at 5:28 AM was 2.2 mcg/dL. He was then given one dose of cosyntropin 250 mcg IV at 8:00 AM with repeat cortisol measurements resulting in 3.7 mcg/dL at 30 minutes and 4.1 mcg/dL at 60 minutes. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis without contrast was done on 6/26/16 and showed bilateral thickened adrenal glands consistent with hyperplasia. During that admission, he was started on hydrocortisone 15 mg by mouth in the morning and 10 mg by mouth in the evening. ACTH measured on 6/27/16 was 154.6 pg/mL. After the ACTH results returned, he was started on fludrocortisone 0.1 mg by mouth daily as the providers concluded that the patient had primary adrenal insufficiency given his elevated ACTH and failed cosyntropin test. There was no renin value measured at the time of initial diagnosis.
He was followed up in the endocrine clinic one month later. During the office visit, it was documented that he had hyperpigmentation of the skin but the patient stated that this had been present for years. After starting hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone, his symptoms improved including increased appetite and resolution of headache and nausea. He was rehospitalized in September 2016 for a stem cell transplant for his CMML. 21-OH antibodies were tested during that admission and were negative (<0.1). On discharge, he was prescribed hydrocortisone 10 mg by mouth in the morning and 5 mg by mouth in the afternoon. He tolerated this regimen well. He re-presented to the endocrine clinic in July of 2017 (one year after discontinuation of posaconazole) for repeat cosyntropin testing. Cosyntropin 250 mcg IV was given after measurement of a baseline cortisol of 5 mcg/dL. One hour after the cosyntropin was given, it rose to 18.5 mcg/dL. Pretesting ACTH was 34.1 pg/mL (7–69 pg/mL) and renin was 0.176 ng/mL/hr (0.167–5.380 ng/mL/hr). Based on his improved cosyntropin testing , he discontinued the hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone.