Six years prior, a 27-year-old female presented to our department with a large mass (diameter: approximately 70 mm) in her left breast and was diagnosed with locally advanced cancer of the left breast (T4bN1M0, stage IIIB, Union for International Cancer Control [UICC] classification, 7th edition). First, we administered an anthracycline-based therapy, followed by a taxane-based drug and an anti-human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) antibody. The size of the tumor was markedly reduced, and a radical operation involving mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection was then performed. Microscopic examination revealed scirrhous cancer in the left breast. The tumor [T4bN0(0/9), stage IIIB, estrogen receptor status: positive, progesterone receptor status: positive, HER2 receptor status: strongly positive, and Ki-67 index: 30%] measured approximately 10 mm in diameter. The patient underwent radiotherapy after the mastectomy, followed by trastuzumab (HER2-targeted) therapy; she continued to receive endocrine therapy thereafter.
She underwent computed tomography (CT) once a year after undergoing surgery, and a mediastinal nodule measuring 23 mm in diameter was detected at 4 years , which was the only positive site detected on 18F-FDG-PET/CT (maximum standardized uptake value [SUVmax]: 4.71) . A retrospective review of previous CT scans revealed that the nodule had been gradually growing for 3 years . The patient had no symptoms or abnormal laboratory data, including abnormal tumor marker levels. The anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody level was within normal limits. As we speculated that the nodule was a solitary mediastinal lymph node metastasis from her breast cancer, we performed thoracoscopic resection of the tumor approaching the right thoracic cavity ; the tumor had a capsule but had not invaded and was not attached to adjacent structures, and complete extirpation of the tumor was achieved.
On microscopic examination, the nodule displayed a lobulated shape and contained many T lymphocytes and some thymic epithelial cells covered by a fibrous capsule. Local invasion of the tumor cells into the capsule was seen, and thymic gland tissue was found in the surrounding fat tissue. We diagnosed the tumor as a thymoma (World Health Organization [WHO] classification 2015 type B1 ; Masaoka stage II ; and T1aN0M0, stage I, according to the UICC-TNM 8th classification ) .
We did not perform a supplemental total thymectomy, but decided to carry out CT frequently. Currently, the patient comes to our hospital to receive continuous hormone therapy for her breast cancer, and the latest CT scan (at one year after the tumorectomy) showed no metastases from or recurrence of her breast cancer or thymoma.