A 38-year-old Iranian man, residing in a rural area, was admitted to our surgery unit with a history of back pain, chest pain, paraplegia and urinary incontinence within the last 45 days. The patient had a history of hydatid cyst(s) in the liver, lungs, and chest wall. The first surgery occurred 26 years previously when he was 12 years old and underwent thoracotomy for two hydatid cysts in the left lung. Subsequently, in April 1999, the patient was diagnosed with a hydatid cyst in his left lung and underwent surgery again. Nine years later, after confirmation of a hydatid cyst in his left lung, he underwent thoracotomy. In May 2011, computerized tomography (CT) revealed multiple cysts located behind the left lung and the fourth rib (R4), leading to the diagnosis of paraspinal hydatidosis and a second thoracotomy. In May 2014, his imaging results demonstrated the presence of four hydatid cysts in the left hemithorax. Total cystectomy was performed for one cyst under the latissimus dorsi, and two cysts behind the third rib (R3) and one cyst behind his left clavicle were drained. In the same year, one hydatid cyst was detected in his liver, and hepatic resection was performed. In March 2018, imaging results demonstrated the presence of multiple cystic lesions under R3, R3 and the fifth rib (R5). Thoracotomy was once again performed, and the cystic lesions and the necks of R3, R4, and R5 were removed. After surgery, albendazole therapy (400 mg/kg) was initiated and continued.
In December 2019 the patient was referred to our surgery unit with progressive weakness. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple spinal epidural cystic lesions at the level of the third to fourth thoracic vertebrae (T3–T4) and that the pedicles on both sides of T4, some parts of the lamina, and the vertebral body were destroyed. The patient underwent surgical resection with the costotransverse approach, and multiple epidural cystic lesions at the T3–T4 level were completely removed. Multiple extradural cystic lesions were carefully excised to avoid intraoperative rupture of the cysts. Intraoperatively, irrigation with hypertonic saline (as scolicidal agents) and cotton pads soaked with hypertonic saline were used. Since the T3 and T4 pedicles had been destroyed, posterior fusion with pedicular screw was performed. The diagnosis of hydatid cyst was confirmed by pathological examination, following which treatment with 400 mg/kg albendazole was started, with the recommendation that the treatment continue for 6 months. Within 2 weeks after surgery, his lower extremity forces dramatically returned and he was full force after 4 weeks.