An 80-year-old female presenting with hematochezia and hemorrhagic shock was transferred from another hospital to our institution because of a 6-day history of melena. She had previously undergone gastrointestinal endoscopy, colonoscopy, and capsule endoscopy, none of which could identify the bleeding source. She had several medical comorbidities, including rheumatoid arthritis that required oral steroids for 10 years, steroid-induced diabetes, and colon diverticulitis, as well as surgical history of hip replacement, knee replacement, cholecystectomy, and appendectomy. No relevant family and social history had been noted. No palpable mass was found on clinical examination. Her blood pressure, body temperature, heart rate, and respiratory rate were 90/63 mmHg, 36.4 °C, 117 beats per min, and 24 breaths per min, respectively.
Clinical laboratory examination showed the following data: white blood cell count of 11,300/μL, red blood cell count of 190 × 104/μL, hemoglobin level of 5.6 g/dL, hematocrit of 15.6%, platelets count of 5.1 × 104/μL, total protein level of 2.7 g/dL, albumin level of 1.9 g/dL, prothrombin international normalized ratio of 1.78, and activated partial thromboplastin time of 95.9 s.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed extravasation in the small bowel around the upper jejunum . Massive transfusion was then performed to maintain tissue perfusion, while several treatments, including TAE or surgical repair, were performed to stop the bleeding. We planned to perform TAE to control bleeding followed by surgical laparotomy to evaluate the ischemic intestine immediately.
First, the second jejunal artery was selectively embolized with a 1:3 mixture of N-butyl cyanoacrylate (NBCA) and iodized oil. Hemostasis was confirmed via angiography, after which the patient’s vital signs stabilized .
Subsequent laparotomy revealed multiple jejunal diverticulum near Treitz’ ligament, and an induration of NBCA was palpable in the nearby mesentery. A mobile fluoroscopic X-ray system was also used to identify the NBCA location. An intraoperative diagnosis of massive bleeding from acquired jejunal diverticula was established, for which jejunectomy including the nearby diverticulum was performed to prevent future bleeding. The operative time was 164 min and the estimated intraoperative blood loss was 10 ml. Her postoperative course was stable.
Histological examination of the specimen revealed several diverticula devoid of muscularis propria (false diverticula). The organized vein opened into the diverticula, which seemed responsible for the bleeding. Glass-like acidophilic unstructured deposits were found around the vein wall, which suggested intestinal amyloidosis .