A 3-year-old Arab Saudi boy was referred to our hospital with a history of recurrent fever which had persisted for ~ 3 months despite receiving antibiotics. The patient had abdominal distension of moderate severity, accompanied by hepatosplenomegaly and silvery hair. Past medical history was insignificant. The patient was born as a full term baby through a normal vaginal delivery without any complications in the neonatal period. Family history was significant for parental consanguinity as the parents are first cousins. Patient has one sibling who is alive and well, with no history of any inherited disorders from the family. There is no history of any allergy and vaccination history is appropriate for patient’s age. Developmentally, all age-appropriate milestones were achieved. Father earns a good income and socioeconomic status is fair.
On arrival to the hospital, the patient had a temperature of 36.2 °C. Other vital signs were normal with a peripheral pulse rate of 109 beats per minute, blood pressure of 107/73 mmHg, respiratory rate of 28 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 100% at room air.
On examination, the patient had an average build with fair skin and silvery hair. Anthropometric measurements were normal with a height of 88 cm, weight of 12 kg, and a body mass index of 16.5 kg/m2. Respiratory system examination was normal with bilateral air entry and equal breath sounds. In the cardiovascular system, patient was found to have normal peripheral perfusion and S1 and S2, with no murmur or other abnormality. Patient was neurologically intact with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15/15, with normal sensory and motor function. No focal defects were detected. In the gastrointestinal examination, abdomen was distended but nontender. There was a massive hepatosplenomegaly with liver 10 cm below the right costal margin and spleen 15 cm below the left costal margin when palpated. Bowel sounds were normal.
His initial laboratory tests at presentation revealed: white blood cells (WBC) 4.39 × 109/L, platelets 23 × 109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) 96 g/L, total bilirubin 21.9 µmol/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 84 U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) 277 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 459 U/L, prothrombin time (PT) 13.8 seconds, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) 56.3 seconds, triglyceride 6.48 mmol/L, ferritin 894 µg/L, and soluble CD25 5000 pg/mL (for full laboratory results, see Table ).
Hair microscopy revealed hypopigmented hair shafts with pigment clumps, and magnetic resonance imaging findings showed diffuse brain parenchymal volume loss with cerebral white matter disease . Peripheral blood smear showed giant granules in the cytoplasm neutrophils . Bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular marrow with 100% cellularity, adequate megakaryocytes, and erythropoiesis. Granulopoieses was adequate with increased lymphocytes and histiocytes. Central nervous system (CNS) involvement, and silvery hair results, were also suggestive of CHS with HLH. Molecular study revealed bi-allelic mutation of the LYST gene consistent with CHS.
Treatment history is presented in Table . The patient was initially treated on 6 June 2019 with dexamethasone (10 mg/m2/day) and intravenous Ig only due to parent refusal of chemotherapy with good initial response resulting in tapering the dose of dexamethasone. However, the patient experienced a disease reactivation that necessitated starting the HLH-2004 on 1 November 2019. Thereafter, the patient experienced multiple disease reactivations associated with febrile neutropenia and infections, requiring several hospital admissions in less than 1 year. On 25 February 2020, the patient was treated with reinduction of HLH-2004 protocol. On 18 April 2020, the patient was admitted for disease reactivation and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection. The patient was treated again with reinduction of the HLH-2004 chemotherapy protocol and ganciclovir. After achieving the initial remission, patient’s disease reactivated and did not respond to the reinduction with HLH-2004 protocol, with increasing risks of drug toxicities. As a result, the patient received emapalumab from 27 July until 13 August 2020 (six doses, one dose every 3 days) and achieved remission without any significant adverse effects. Reported side effects included erythematous rash over the right forearm, anterior, and posterior thigh after the first dose of emapalumab. There was no further history of rashes, fever, or diarrhea. Treatment with emapalumab was followed by a successful HSCT on 7 September 2020 from a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) identical male sibling. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis was given with methotrexate and tacrolimus. Patient received myeloablative conditioning in the form of fludarabine and treosulfan. Pentamidine was used for pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) prophylaxis. Follow-up at day 100 after transplant showed that the patient recovered the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) on 28 September 2020 (21st day), and platelets were recovered on 1 October 2020 (24th day). Patient developed, hypertension and cytomegalovirus infection, bacterial infection, as well as the fungal infection, which were treated successfully. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF) was used to maintain the ANC > 1000. There was no GVHD, mucositis, veno-occlusive disease, hemorrhagic cystitis, or thrombotic microangiopathic anemia reported during the first 100 days, post-transplant. The patient got engrafted with a picture of mixed chimerism. The patient continued to be in remission and engrafted at 6 months follow-up. GCSF was continued due to persistent neutropenia. Adrenal insufficiency and renal impairment were treated successfully. CMV viremia resolved.
The patient continued to have a mixed chimerism at 6 months. Evolution of lymphoid and myeloid donor cells chimerism was as follows (respectively): 82% and 76% on 2 November 2020, 82% and 47% on 30 November 2020, 88% and 40% on 4 January 2021, 86% and 27% on 1 February 2021.