A 58-year-old postmenopausal woman presented vaginal bleeding for more than 4 months, never received hormonal treatment and had no family history of malignant diseases. A 12 × 10 × 10 cm right ovarian mass was found by ultrasound. Laboratory tests showed CEA 64 ng/ml, and HPV 16(+). A ThinPrep cytologic test (TCT) showed atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance (ASCUS). Then, cervical biopsy and endocervical curettage presented a high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion (HSIL)/cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade III (CIN III). The surgical operation of a large right ovarian mass followed, and an intraoperative pathological consultation was conducted. The limited frozen tissues revealed a borderline Brenner tumour and locally suspected invasive carcinoma. Finally, a total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy were performed.
The gross size of the tumour in the right ovary was approximately 12 × 10 × 10 cm, with a grey-white, smooth external surface appearance. The cut surface showed multiloculated cysts with smooth walls and contained thick yellow liquid . In the right fallopian tube, there were many grey nodes on the mucosa while the mucosa of the left tube was smooth. The uterine cervix and endometrium seemed thicker and rougher .
Under a microscope, the right ovarian tumour was characterized by round to irregularly shaped and variably sized nests, and the cysts were filled with necrotic tissues . The tumour cells were round or polygonal with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent nucleoli; and individual cell keratinization was observed. The mitoses were not uneasily observed . The morphology was similar to that of the frozen sections . Surprisingly, similar tumour cells could also be found in the bilateral fallopian mucosa and fimbrial end of the right fallopian tube or the endometrium and uterine cervix . Furthermore, the left ovary was normal.
Because there was an HSIL in the cervical biopsy, to comprehensively evaluate the lesion, we divided the entire cervix tissue into 12 pieces and embedded it in a clockwise direction. The 10/12 pieces of cervix appeared HSIL (CIN III). However, at 1,2,7 and 12 o’clock, we found some superficial invasive lesions with a maximum invasive depth of 1 mm at 12 o’clock . Furthermore, tumour cells that had invaded the cervical stromal lymph-vascular space were identified . Thus, the diagnosis of uterine cervix was HSIL with superficial invasion (with a depth of 1 mm), accompanied by lymph-vascular space invasion.
Since there were similar tumour cells in the right ovary, the fallopian tube on the same side, and the endometrium and there was a superficial squamous carcinoma in the uterine cervix, we considered the possibility that the carcinoma in other sites of the female reproductive tract originated from the cervix, although this condition was not found in references and reports. Therefore, we performed immunohistochemical staining and an HPV RNA scope on the slides of every site. The results revealed that carcinoma cells, whether in the ovaries, fallopian tubes or endometrium, were diffusely positive for CK5/6, P40 and p16 but negative for PAX-8, GATA-3, CK20, ER, PR, CgA, and Syn. The Ki-67 proliferation index was approximately 60% . Moreover, the HR-HPV RNA scope staining showed HPV-positive expression in CSCC nuclei . CD31 and D2–40 staining verified carcinoma invasion in the cervical stromal lymph-vascular space. In addition, the peritoneal washings were negative.
In conclusion, ovarian carcinoma was directly spread from HPV-associated superficial uterine cervical squamous carcinoma through the endometrium and the fallopian tube on the same side, possibly following lymphovascular invasion. To date, the patient has been given 6 cycles of chemotherapy with paclitaxel and cisplatin and two cycles of radiotherapy. There has been no recurrence or metastasis to date.