A 30-year-old G3P2 woman was admitted at 38+6 weeks of gestation for elective induction of labor due to concerns regarding intrapartum anticoagulation. The current pregnancy was complicated by an episode of idiopathic lower extremity deep venous thrombosis (DVT) at 10 weeks estimated gestation at which time an inferior vena caval (IVC) filter was placed. Following placement of the IVC filter, therapeutic anticoagulation was initiated with subcutaneous unfractionated heparin for the duration of the pregnancy. The remainder of her antecedent medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
Although the last injection of subcutaneous heparin was administered 12 h before hospital arrival, the patient’s activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was significantly elevated at 70 s (normal range: 21-33 s) at the time of admission. The patient was subsequently counseled that neuraxial analgesia was contraindicated in the setting of an elevated aPTT due to an increased risk of neuraxial bleeding. The decision was made to ripen the cervix with misoprostol and administer intermittent intravenous (i.v.) fentanyl as needed for labor analgesia. The fetal heart rate pattern remained reassuring throughout this period of time. A repeat aPTT obtained 6 h later remained elevated at 80 s. After discussing potential options with the patient, it was decided to proceed with i.v. remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) based on our institutional protocol (basal infusion: 0.03-0.05 μg/kg/min; bolus dose 0.2-0.8 μg/kg every 5 min). A basal infusion rate of 0.04 μg/kg/min (2 μg/min) with a bolus dose of 0.8 μg/kg (40 μg) every 5 min was ordered based on her ideal body weight of 50 kg. The medication was prepared by the hospital pharmacy and placed in a barcode syringe for administration in a Hospira LifeCare® Infusion System which was connected to an 18-gauge cannula sited in the woman’s left hand.
The remifentanil PCA was initiated after appropriate medication review by anesthesia and nursing personnel, confirming the drug, concentration, dose, and route of administration and initiation of pulse oximetry. The mother was supine, with left uterine displacement. Within seconds of administering the first PCA dose, the patient stated that she could not open her eyes and rapidly became rigid and apneic. Her oxygen saturation (SpO2) decreased to approximately 80%, her pulse declined from 97 to 57 beats/min, and her blood pressure fell from 126/74 to 92/57 mmHg. Anesthesia personnel immediately performed a jaw-thrust maneuver to open the patient’s airway and initiated bag-mask ventilation with 100% oxygen at 15 L/min using a flow inflating resuscitation bag. Simultaneous to these events, the hospital code team was summoned by nursing personnel. The remifentanil infusion was immediately disconnected and an i.v. bolus of normal saline 500 mL administered. Two-handed bag-mask ventilation was difficult due to maternal rigidity, but the patient’s SpO2 improved to >90% within three minutes. Despite appropriate resuscitative efforts and maintenance of left uterine displacement, fetal bradycardia occurred. Subsequently, the maternal pulse (radial and femoral) was undetectable and fetal cardiac activity was simultaneously lost. Immediately before initiating cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), the maternal pulse returned, precluding the need for maternal chest compressions. A fetal scalp electrode did not detect the fetal heart rate. Faculty members from the Departments of Anesthesiology and Obstetrics rapidly conferred and decided to proceed with an emergent bedside cesarean delivery given the ongoing difficulty with two-handed bag-mask ventilation, non-reassuring fetal status, and concern for further delay if the patient was transported to an operating room. The differential diagnosis included massive pulmonary embolus, amniotic fluid embolus, intracranial hemorrhage, a primary cardiac event, or adverse medication reaction.
An emergent bedside classical cesarean delivery was performed through a low midline vertical incision 4 min after the loss of fetal cardiac activity and 5 min after loss of maternal cardiac output. Delivery of a term female infant with Apgar scores of 1 and 8 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, followed. Umbilical cord arterial gas analysis showed a respiratory acidosis with pH 7.07, CO2 89 mmHg, O2 13 mmHg, HCO3 25 mmol/L, and base deficit of -4 mmol/L. Intravenous etomidate 20 mg and succinylcholine 120 mg were administered at the time of surgical incision to facilitate maternal tracheal intubation. There was no patient movement with surgical incision. Following delivery, the patient’s blood pressure was 136/74 mmHg, her pulse was 135 beats/min, and her SpO2 was 98%. Initial maternal arterial blood gas results obtained 6 min after delivery of the infant were: pH 7.17, CO2 57 mmHg, O2 192 mmHg, HCO3 21 mmol/L, and base deficit -7 mmol/L. Additional i.v. medications included midazolam 4 mg, ketamine 20 mg, fentanyl 150 μg, and propofol 40 mg. Maternal pulse decreased to 71 beats/min and her SpO2 remained >90% for the remainder of her operation.
The hysterotomy and abdominal wall were temporarily closed in the labor room and the patient transferred to the operating room where the abdominal cavity was inspected. Sevoflurane and oxygen were administered, as were intravenous oxymorphone 1.4 mg, meropenem 500 mg, and ondansetron 4 mg. After extensive irrigation, the hysterotomy and abdominal incision were closed using a standard technique. Following closure of the skin incision, the patient was considered sufficiently stable for extubation and was taken to the postoperative recovery room for extended monitoring. The infant was transferred to the intermediate care nursery for observation. The patient’s postpartum recovery was complicated by wound separation with healing by secondary intention. The patient had no explicit recall of the intraoperative surgical events and she had complete neurologic recovery with no deficit.
Pharmacy personnel immediately began investigating the possibility of an adverse medication event. The remifentanil infusion bag and PCA apparatus were collected and secured as per protocol. Within 3 h of the event, a medication error was confirmed; the compounded remifentanil solution had a concentration ten-fold higher than was labeled on the medication syringe. As a result, the patient had received an i.v. bolus dose of remifentanil 400 μg rather than the 40 μg bolus dose ordered. Following an extensive root cause analysis and patient event review, Pharmacy Services instituted several safeguards and modifications to its compounding protocols to significantly reduce the risk of future compounding errors. Specifically, only one concentration of remifentanil is now prepared, and the instructions for preparation are available on the pharmacy computer without any mathematical computation required.