A 72-year-old man with underlying dilated cardiomyopathy had an MR conditional cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D), Boston Scientific D179 device with lead models 7736 (right atrial), 0692 (RV), 4677 (left ventricular, LV). The system was implanted in 2015 for primary prevention following unexplained syncope with LV ejection fraction of 24% (normal range > 55%), left bundle branch block and New York Heart Association class II.
The patient attended for a routine device interrogation in March 2019, which demonstrated satisfactory battery, lead and device settings, consistent with previous follow-up . On review of the events, there was a single stored atrial tachycardia response (ATR) episode which correlated temporally with him undergoing brain MRI at another centre for investigation of trigeminal neuralgia. Though the device logged this as an atrial arrhythmia episode it shows features on the EGM of the potential effects of MRI on CIED’s.
Oversensing EMI—atrial fibrillation and ventricular fibrillation shows intermittent oversensing of EMI on the atrial and RV channels from the RF gradients during the MRI scan. There are periods of inhibited pacing and intervals in the ventricular arrhythmia detection zones. No tachycardia therapy is delivered as there are not enough intervals to meet the detection criteria. The device inappropriately detects an ATR episode, mode switches and stores an EGM of the event. There was no evidence of oversensing at any time point remote from the MRI scan (before or after).
Loss of RV capture ( and )
EGM demonstrates temporary loss of capture on the endocardial RV lead, however, there is capture on the epicardial (coronary sinus) LV lead. This is proved in , where the loss of evoked response on the RV channel is shown compared to the capture seen in clinic (*). The implications for our patient were minimal due to his continuing pacing from his LV lead and underlying AV conduction.
Provocation manoeuvres were performed in the clinic with no changes in impedance values and no oversensing seen proving satisfactory lead integrity and performance.
In discussion with the local hospital, it was determined that device re-programming was not performed prior to the patient being scanned, although the patient was asymptomatic throughout and the scan was completed without clinical complication.
After a satisfactory device interrogation, the patient was followed-up via remote monitoring, with no subsequent events, battery or lead abnormalities.