A five-year-old Hispanic (non-indigenous) boy was admitted to our hospital with a history of intermittent fever, and was found to have elevated muscle enzymes.
His mother reported that he had been taken to a doctor five days earlier and the apparent diagnosis was an intestinal infection, for which he was started on trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole and acetaminophen. The fever was associated with productive cough. After no apparent improvement, she decided to bring her child to our emergency department.
The child had been healthy four months before. He had been admitted to our hospital two months prior due to dyspnea and hypoxia, and was diagnosed with a pericardial effusion that caused a tamponade on an echocardiogram, causing right atrial and ventricular collapse . Emergency percutaneous pericardial catheter drainage was placed, draining 200 mL of serous clear fluid. A culture from the pericardial effusion was reported sterile; cytology reported no microorganisms or leukocytes, but an increased level of proteins (3400 mg/dL). Acid-fast stain results were negative, as were the results of adenosine deaminase testing. Rheumatoid tests were also performed: anti-double-stranded DNA results were negative and serum complement (C3 and C4) levels were within normal limits. HIV rapid test and serum antibody (IgM) tests for cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus were negative as well. Coxsackie serology was not available. Hypoalbuminemia was also noted at 2 g/dL (reference range 3.4 to 4.8 g/dL) at admission, associated with proteinuria. Tests were inconclusive and the pericardial effusion was considered to be viral. Because of his overall health improvement, he was discharged from hospital one month later, with follow-up planned.
Our patient did not have any important family, traumatic, or surgical history. He had had viral hepatitis three years previously. No allergies or medication taking were reported. He had normal psychomotor development, and vaccinations had been given on schedule.
On physical examination, his vital signs were within normal limits and he was not febrile. His weight was 13.6 kg and his height 98 cm, considered low stature for his age (Z = -3.9). A thyroid palpation revealed no goiter, nodules or pain. Heart sounds were rhythmic and no pericardial rub was heard. An anterior mid-thoracic scar was noted where the percutaneous pericardial catheter had been placed. He had hepatomegaly that was later confirmed on an ultrasound. Results of an anterior chest X-ray were normal.
Hematology tests on admission revealed a total leukocyte count of 6.83 K/UL, hemoglobin level of 12.5 g/dL and a platelet count of 310 K/μL. His blood chemistry results revealed elevated muscles enzymes: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 1117 (reference range 240 to 480 IU/L), a creatine phosphokinase (CPK) of 2874 U/L (reference range 38 to 170 U/L) and creatine kinase MB (CK-MB) of 60 U/L (reference range 0 to 24 U/L). His renal function tests were within normal limits. Hypertrigliceridemia was also noted at 408 mg/dL (reference range 30 to 200 mg/dL). Urine test results showed 500 mg/dL proteinuria and microscopic analysis showed five to eight erythrocytes per field. During the time our patient was hospitalized, his CPK levels were moderately increased (2435 to 4615 U/L). Our patient did not report muscle pain or weakness, and results of a neurological examination were normal. A repeat echocardiogram was performed due to his history, showing normal systolic and diastolic ventricular function with no pericardial effusion.
Considering his recent history of cardiac tamponade, thyroid tests were ordered. The results were diagnostic of primary clinical hypothyroidism: free T3: < 1.1 pg/mL (reference range 1.1 to 3 pg/mL), total T3: 34.9 ng/dL (reference range 100 to 200 ng/dL), free T4: 0.2 ng/dL (reference range 0.7 to 1.85 ng/dL), total T4: 1.04 μg/dL (reference range 4.5 to 12 μg/dL) and thyrotropin 299.380 μIU/mL (reference range 0.490 to 4.670 μIU/mL). A thyroid scan with technetium and a thyroid ultrasound were performed showing a normally located and absorbing thyroid gland without nodules . Anti-peroxidase (APO) and anti-thyroglobulin antibody test results were negative. Levothyroxine was started at a dose of 9 μg/kg per day. Bone age was also calculated with a radiograph of the left hand and was reported delayed by two years.
An electromyogram reported a myophatic inflammatory process involving mainly proximal muscles compatible with myositis. A muscle biopsy was performed that revealed colliquative necrosis without inflammatory cell infiltration . An anti-Jo-1 antibody test result was negative. Rhabdomyolisis was, however, considered to be autoimmune and steroids were given. Three weeks after the thyroid hormones and one week after steroids had been started, muscle enzyme levels (CPK, CK-MB, and LDH) had returned to normal levels.