A 19 years old boy was diagnosed with Fabry disease through a family-based molecular screening, demonstrating the presence of the R112H mutation in the GLA gene. The diagnosis was further confirmed by the assessment of enzymatic α-gal activity in leucocytes, which resulted undetectable. Subsequently, he was admitted for a global screening of disease clinical manifestations although, at the time of diagnosis, he appeared completely asymptomatic. His neurological and general examination, including cardiac auscultation, were unremarkable. Biochemical tests (including 24 h microalbuminuria, proteinuria and creatinine clearance), ophthalmologic assessment, audiometry, pulmonary function tests, brain and kidney magnetic resonance imaging did not show any abnormality.For the cardiac assessment he underwent first transthoracic echocardiography, 12-lead electrocardiogram, 24-hour Holter recording, and bicycle stress test, all resulting normal. Finally CMR with LGE imaging was performed; cine images (steady-state free precession) confirmed normal biventricular size and systolic function and normal LV wall thickness . No signal alterations were detected on black-blood T1-weighted fast spin-echo imaging and T2-weighted short TI inversion recovery imaging . Conversely, delayed enhancement imaging performed 10 minutes after injection of Gadolium chelate contrast agent showed LGE of the LV inferolateral wall with intramyocardial distribution . Of note, despite the absence of LV wall motion abnormalities, feature-tracking analysis of cine LV mid short-axis slice demonstrated reduced circumferential strain of the mid inferolateral wall .Considering the male gender and the evidence of a cardiac involvement, ERT treatment with recombinant agalsidase alfa was started and administered intravenously at the standard dosage of 0.2 mg/kg every other week, without side effects. After 12 months of ERT cardiological assessment including ECG, echocardiography and CMR was repeated, showing no changes compared to baseline ; in particular LGE of the LV inferolateral wall was still observed and unchanged .