A 45-year-old Chinese woman presented to the Medical Acupuncture Department of Sanming Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine Hospital on April 11, 2022. Thirty-five years ago, she had episodic migraines. The frequency increased over time, however, and for the past 10 years she has had daily headaches. Her headaches were characterized by daily persistent throbbing pain on the left side of her head, accompanied by photophobia, phonophobia, neck stiffness, dizziness, and fatigue, and that severe migraine typically endure for a duration of 7 days or more. They also caused poor sleep quality, anxiety and depression, and a poor quality of life. Medications that she had taken for this condition included painkillers (acetaminophen, acetylsalicylic acid, diclofenac sodium, ibuprofen, celecoxib, indomethacin, dihydroergotamine, zolmitriptan, and compound aminopyrine phenacetin tablets), preventive agents (topiramate and valproic acid), and anti-anxiety and depression medications (trazodone hydrochloride and mirtazapine). The compound aminopyrine phenacetin tablets slightly reduced the severity of the patient's pain; she had required 1–3.5 tablets daily for more than 5 years. Without painkillers, she rated her headache intensity as 9 of 10 on a visual analog scale (0 = no pain, 10 = intolerable pain). With painkillers, the headaches were reduced to an intensity of 5, but persisted. At the time of the presentation, the patient's diary confirmed that she had experienced headaches and engaged in short-term medication use on all days of the previous 30-day period, with a total monthly headache intensity score (sum of 30 daily scores; 0 = no pain, 1 = mild pain, 2 = moderate pain, 3 = severe pain) of 90. Her Migraine-Specific Quality of Life Questionnaire (MSQ) score was 33 points, her Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD) score was 24 points, and her Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) score was 20 points . This patient had undergone cranial computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetic resonance angiography at several hospitals, and no obvious abnormality had been found. Following these procedures, she was diagnosed with chronic migraine with MOH . Prior to her presentation, the patient was advised to discontinue the use of painkillers and instead prescribed oral anxiolytic and antidepressant medications, including trazodone hydrochloride, mirtazapine, and deanxit. Despite a year-long period of painkiller withdrawal, the intensity of the patient's headaches did not improve, with the frequency of pain increasing to most days of the month (≥20 days). Headache attacks were alleviated by bed rest and the prescribed medications, but were still accompanied by symptoms such as dizziness, tinnitus, and fatigue. After one year, the patient experienced intolerable pain accompanied by dizziness and other discomforts, leading her to discontinue the anti-anxiety and depression medication independently, opting instead to intermittently use oral painkillers. The patient had a history of “chronic gastritis” due to long-term oral analgesic use, which had not been treated. She had no history of any other chronic disorder, such as diabetes or neurological or cardiovascular disease. Her aunts and cousins had histories of migraine, and her mother had a history of MOH.