A right-handed, 64-year-old Caucasian woman presented for reimplantation left TEA. She had had a left total elbow resection arthroplasty in April 2014 due to a fungal PJI. Her past medical history was significant for a 41-year history of severe refractory rheumatoid arthritis involving multiple joints and cervical spine. She had failed multiple medical therapies including disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and biologics, and was treated intermittently with prednisone for flares.
The original DePuy Pritchard TEA (DePuy, Warsaw, IN, United States) was implanted in 1995. It had performed well until June 2007 when she developed left elbow pain and fevers and received a liner exchange in well-fixed implants . The TEA was retained until she required resection arthroplasty in July 2011 after repeat debridement and antimicrobial regimens failed to resolve a draining sinus due to a coagulase-negative staphylococcus (CONS) infection. The implant was replaced with a vancomycin-impregnated cement spacer. Intraoperative cultures grew CONS for which she was treated with cefazolin for 8 weeks. Two months postoperatively the spacer was removed but tissue cultures remained positive for polymicrobial infection including CONS and Enterobacter cloacae. Extended antimicrobials consisted of 6 weeks of ciprofloxacin and vancomycin. In December of 2011 reimplantation was attempted but abandoned when intraoperative frozen sections showed >30 white blood cells per high-powered field (WBC/hpf). Definitive tissue cultures grew new Aspergillus terreus only, which was thought to be a contaminant after growing on only one of six fungal cultures.
In February 2012, she was off of all immunosuppressives and systemically well. The elbow was healed and free of any drainage. Her C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 8.7 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 29. Reimplantation surgery was undertaken using a similar method reported by LeBlanc et al. 2012 ; an allograft-prosthetic composite was used consisting of a long-stemmed cemented Coonrad-Morrey TEA (Zimmer) and tibial allograft on the humeral side . Intraoperatively there was no concern for infection, but final cultures grew scant CONS and Aspergillus terreus and histologic samples were nonspecific. She was treated as a mixed fungal and bacterial PJI and treated with 8 weeks of intravenous voriconazole and vancomycin. The implant was retained.
In the following 6 months she healed and was doing well until a rheumatoid flare. She was put on a trial of abatacept and shortly after developed a fluctuant mass around the lateral distal humerus. An aspiration of the collection grew Aspergillus terreus and the abatacept was stopped. Blood work showed a CRP level of 10.4 and an ESR of 50. Over the course of the next 7 months, she would undergo eight more serial aspirates of the recurrent collection with only the first specimen growing Aspergillus terreus. A bone scan showed no increased uptake, but repeat radiographs showed the presence of an insufficiency fracture on the ulnar side . During this time she remained off of antimicrobial treatment in an attempt to identify the offending organism.
With failure to control Aspergillosis of the left TEA with combined serial (two) operative debridements and medical management, a second resection arthroplasty was performed in April 2014. Aspergillus terreus grew on one of three cultures but no bacterial growth was identified. Postoperative antimicrobial therapy consisted of caspofungin and cefazolin for 8 weeks, followed by cephalexin and a short trial of oral voriconazole, which was stopped due to gastrointestinal intolerance and transaminitis.
Eleven months post left TEA resection arthroplasty for chronic Aspergillosis, she was systemically well and had been off of antimicrobials for 5 months. A physical examination revealed a left flail elbow, she was neurologically intact with good function of the hand and a well-healed posteriorly based scar. There were no signs of infection or inflammation. Her most recent laboratory test results showed a WBC count of 6.2 × 10E9/L, a CRP level of 2.2 mg/L and an ESR of 25, all within normal limits. The last positive tissue culture was from the resection arthroplasty in April 2014 and no further specimens had been collected. Plain radiographs showed a significant osseous defect of the proximal ulna and distal humerus . A bone scan and white blood cell scan showed no definitive evidence of ongoing infection.
In March 2015, after consultation with infectious diseases and local orthopedic colleagues, our patient and surgeons elected to proceed with a second attempt at reimplantation arthroplasty. Due to extensive bone loss, the reimplantation was performed using a cemented distal humerus endoprosthesis and long-stemmed ulna component (Biomet SRS/Discovery TEA; Zimmer Biomet) . Multiple tissue specimens collected intraoperatively were negative for fungal and bacterial growth.
Unfortunately, after a brief symptom-free period she developed a recurrent sinus over the tip of the olecranon and recurrent CONS was confirmed. Our patient has since undergone definitive resection arthroplasty. No further fungal infection was identified and no further surgery is planned.