This 3.5 year old girl is the first child of non-consanguineous parents of Moroccan origin.
During infancy she suffered from recurrent episodes of vomiting and regurgitation which later ceased without treatment. In addition, she was affected by frequent respiratory tract infections. She was referred to our clinic because of recurrent hypoglycaemic myoclonic events. The first episode occurred at the age of 2.5 years, while she was suffering from febrile gastroenteritis. After a fasting period of about 12 h the mother noted sudden generalized myoclonic jerks, which occurred about once a minute over a period of 30 min. The girl was fully responsive during that time. At the age of 3 years similar convulsions occurred during a fasting period related to a febrile respiratory infection. Oral application of a glucose solution given by her mother led to rapid cessation of the myoclonic jerks. Within the next months this observation recurred. An interictal EEG was found to be normal. Although not considered relevant by the mother she reported alacrima since early infancy. The child had been under ophthalmological supervision for keratoconjunctivits sicca since the age of 6 months.
Clinical examination revealed a dysplastic left auricle. No other dysmorphic features were found. Height and weight were within normal limits. Neurological examination was notable for symmetrically reduced deep tendon reflexes, spontaneous Babinski reflexes, and an increased muscle tone of the lower limbs. The gait was clumsy without other major signs of ataxia.
ACTH-resistant adrenal insufficiency was diagnosed by laboratory testing. Achalasia was excluded using a barium swallow test.
Mutation analysis showed a homozygous G > A transition at nucleotide position 1331 + 1 in intron 14 (c.1331 + 1G > A) resulting in a splice mutation at splice donor site of intron 14 . This mutation results in a loss of an exon or inclusion of an intron and subsequently in aberrant splicing and a frameshift with a premature stop codon. The resulting truncated protein was most likely not functional.