A 32-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 2, suffering from abnormal vaginal bleeding for approximately 20 days 2 months after her gestational 4-month induced abortion, was admitted for emergency treatment due to syncope on exertion. She had undergone a vaginal delivery 9 years prior to admission and Caesarean section 9 months earlier. No history of excessive bleeding during or after the vaginal delivery or Caesarean section was noted. Her menstrual cycles were regular after menarche, at an interval of 30 days, and the bleeding lasted for about 5 days.
No dysmenorrhea was reported. Upon admission to the hospital, the patient received blood transfusion and fluid infusion. General examination of the woman was normal except for a severely anemic appearance. Pelvic examination showed the uterus to be slightly enlarged and feebly tender, and no adnexal abnormality on palpation was observed. The vulva and cervix were also normal. At this point, the patient’s hemoglobin level was 5.5 g/dL and her serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) was 1.13 mIU/mL. On a gray-scale image, a 33 mm×27 mm ill-defined hypoechoic lesion was observed on the anterior wall of the uterus, which was prominent towards the uterine cavity.
Color Doppler sonography demonstrated hypervascularity throughout the described lesion, and a color mosaic pattern represented a turbulent flow . Spectral analysis of the arterial vessels showed a high-velocity (peak systolic velocity (psv) of 45 cm/s), low-resistance (resistance index (RI) of 0.34) flow.
These findings were most suggestive of uterine AVM. In addition, the color sonographic findings of the ovaries were normal. The patient was referred to interventional radiology for pelvic angiography and uterine artery embolization of uterine AVM. After informed consent was obtained, a regional anesthetic technique was performed. The right common femoral artery was accessed, and a 5F glide catheter was placed through a 5F sheath. Contrast injection through a catheter in the left internal iliac artery demonstrated a tangle of vascular structure fed primarily via the left uterine artery . A 5F selective catheter was placed into the left uterine artery. Contrast injection demonstrated a serpiginous and dilated arterial structure. Gelfoam pledgets were injected into the left uterine artery until near stasis of flow was encountered.
The 5F catheter was then withdrawn and placed in the right internal iliac artery. Contrast injection through a catheter in the right internal iliac artery revealed a tangle of vascular structures fed by the right uterine artery. These indicated that the AVM was fed by bilateral uterine arteries. As performed above, the 5F selective catheter was then withdrawn and placed into the right uterine artery. Contrast injection showed a tortuous vascular mass. Gelfoam pledgets were injected into the right uterine artery until near stasis of flow. After bilateral uterine artery embolization, angiograms revealed the obliteration of uterine AVM .
The patient experienced a mild lower abdominal discomfort for several days after the procedures but made an uneventful recovery. A repeat gray-scale imaging performed two weeks later suggested a 12 mm × 9 mm hypoechoic lesion in the anterior wall of the uterus that had a significant change in the appearance of the vascular malformation. In addition, a markedly reduced blood flow pattern was observed on the color Doppler ultrasound . The menstrual cycle of the patient returned to normal one month after follow-up. An ongoing follow-up was conducted.