A 48 year old male presented to our emergency department with pain and restriction of movements involving both shoulders following a fall. A thorough history into the mechanism of fall revealed that the patient was a known diabetic on oral hypoglycaemic drugs and following a syncopal attack, he fell on his outstretched right hand with the body weight falling on it, causing it to dislocate posteriorly. And a bystander in trying to prevent the patient from falling held on to his left upper limb, which was pulled into abduction, extension and external rotation producing an anterior dislocation on the left side. A detailed clinical examination showed flattening of deltoid contours on both sides. Humeral head was palpable posteriorly on the right side and anteriorly on the left side. Surprisingly, there were no characteristic deformities with the arms hanging by the side of the body. Attempted range of motion was painful on both sides. Plain radiograph anteroposterior view of both shoulders showed posterior dislocation of right shoulder with a fracture of greater tuberosity and anterior dislocation of left shoulder with a greater tuberosity fracture. Special radiographs including axillary lateral and scapular Y view were taken which confirmed the findings. He was not a known epileptic and did not give any history of a seizure episode in the past. He did not have any history of dislocation in the past. There were no features suggestive of generalized ligamentous laxity.
A closed reduction was achieved for both shoulders under general anaesthesia, anterior dislocation was reduced easily by Kochers method, and posterior was reduced by giving gentle traction on the arm in flexion and adduction, with a direct pressure to the humeral head from behind, but as the posterior dislocation was unstable, after reduction, it was immobilised by spica in slight flexion and abduction with 20 degrees external rotation, whereas a chest arm bandage was applied for the other side. Post reduction check X-ray showed concentric reduction of both shoulders with minimal displacement of fracture fragments. The spica and bandage were removed after 3 weeks and shoulder pendulum exercises were initiated. After a couple of weeks, complete range of motion exercises were started. X-ray of bilateral shoulders, at 3 months, showed complete union of the fracture. Both the shoulders have satisfactory painless range of motion with no instability.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of his details in this report.