An 18-year-old Sri Lankan male was referred for evaluation of short stature, multiple bone deformities and fragility fractures for six years.
He had been well until the age of 12 years with uncomplicated birth and childhood. At the age of 12 years, left and subsequently, right genu valgus and short stature were noted. He did not have any other problems during the initial presentation. The documented examination has not revealed any other abnormalities. Standing X-rays of bilateral tibia/ femora and pelvic bones (AP view) have shown bilateral asymmetric genu valgus, but no reduction of bone density or abnormalities suggestive of rickets in epiphyseal plates .
Blood investigations at the initial presentation revealed an ionized calcium of 1.4 mmol/L (1.2–1.4 mmol/L) and the inorganic phosphate level was 1.1 mmol/L (0.95–1.75 mmol/L, age-based for 12–15 years). Serum creatinine, haemoglobin, alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase were within the normal range. Serum vitamin D or parathyroid hormone levels had not been performed.
He underwent left femoral plating, but valgus deformity progressed over time. X-ray of the same projection done one year later demonstrated corrective left distal femoral osteotomy with internal fixation screws on the medial aspect of the distal femoral epiphysis and metaphysis. However, the deformity was more pronounced compared to the prior X-ray causing a mild pelvic tilt in the standing position .
Three years later, at the age of 15 years, he sought advice from another unit for the persistent genu valgus, where he underwent left distal femoral medial closed wedge osteotomy. Post-operative x-ray of the bilateral knee joints revealed evidence of the second osteotomy with internal fixation screws in situ. Local osteopaenia was noted around the internal fixation screws. Some callus formation is seen laterally around the distal femoral metaphysis/epiphysis . He was prescribed vitamin D 1000 IU daily which was continued until the current presentation.
Two years later, at the age of 17 years, he developed a left femoral shaft fracture while standing up. Subsequent evaluation revealed multiple femoral fractures and he was unable to weight-bear since then. He was mobilised in a wheelchair since then. He has had normal puberty and intellectual development. He had been on a balanced non-vegetarian diet and there were no features of any other chronic illnesses. He was a product of non-consanguineous parents. Family history did not reveal any skeletal diseases or tumour syndromes.
His height was 147.5 cm. There was kyphosis and genu valgus. The examination was otherwise unremarkable.
Generalised osteopenia and bilateral femoral neck fractures were noted in the x-ray of bilateral hip joints . Left femur x-ray showed marked osteopaenia, diffuse ground glass density in the medullary cavity of the femur and pathological fractures with marked deformities . X-rays of the hands showed fully fused epiphyses, terminal tufting more marked in bilateral 2nd and 3rd fingers and osteopenia in the middle and distal phalanges of all the fingers as well as the distal aspect of the proximal phalanges bilaterally. There was no definite subperiosteal resorption. Early Madelung deformity was seen but, the length of the metacarpals was normal. There was no evidence of rickets . Laboratory investigations during this presentation are summarised in Table .
Laboratory investigations were in favour of primary hyperparathyroidism. The ultrasound scan of the neck showed a large well-defined heterogeneous hyperechoic lesion in the lower and mid portion of L/thyroid measuring 51 × 30 × 16 mm. Contrast-enhanced CT of the neck confirmed a well-defined rounded soft tissue density with moderate heterogeneous enhancement along the posterior aspect of the L/lobe of the thyroid. This was suggestive of a parathyroid adenoma. Additionally, diffusely scattered lytic bone lesions with associated bone expansion were noted in the imaged axial skeleton and upper humeri suggestive of brown tumours of hyperparathyroid bone disease . The PTH level from the aspirate of guided FNAC was > 3000 pg/mL further confirming localisation.
DXA scan of the lumbar spine suggested very low bone density with a BMD of 0.122 g/cm2 and a Z-score of -5.8. There were no calculi or nephrocalcinosis in the ultrasound scan kidney-ureter-bladder.
He underwent left parathyroidectomy and left thyroid lobectomy since there was a concern about possible parathyroid malignancy peri-operatively. A nodular, capsulated and brownish parathyroid measuring 60 × 30 × 24 mm was removed. Histology confirmed a well-circumscribed parathyroid adenoma with a thin fibrous capsule. There were no bizarre cells or increased mitoses. One week after the surgery, the PTH level dropped to 4.03 pg/mL. He was discharged home on calcium carbonate containing elemental calcium of 1000 mg three times daily and alfacalcidol one microgram twice daily. Two months after the surgery, his alkaline phosphatase was 1811 IU/L and calcium and phosphate were within the normal range. His replacement doses were gradually decreased to calcium carbonate containing elemental calcium of 500 mg twice daily and alfacalcidol 0.5 µg twice daily six months after surgery. Currently, he is feeling well and has been followed up with a plan for future orthopaedic interventions. To date, he is mobilised with the help of a wheelchair.
The timeline of events is summarised in Table .