A 36-year-old Caucasian man, life-long non-smoker, with no past medical history and no regular medication self-presented to a general practitioner complaining of sudden episodes of shortness of breath at rest together with unexplainable malaise in the previous 6 months. He reported no history of fever, chills, cough, diarrhoea, or vomiting. He denied any episodes of chest pain under any circumstances. On physical examination, he had a regular pulse (188 b.p.m.), with a blood pressure of 150/70 mmHg. The oxygen saturation was 100%. He had a normal jugular vein pressure and the heart sounds were normal. His chest was clear on auscultation. There was no peripheral oedema present.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm at a rate of 75 b.p.m., with a normal QRS axis and normal conduction intervals. There was concave ST segment elevation in leads V1 and V2. ST segment depression was present in leads I, II, aVF, aVL, and V3–V6. The T wave was biphasic in lead III. The precordial leads suggested left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) according to the Sokolow-Lyon criteria. This ECG prompted a decision to transfer him immediately to a hospital under the suspicion of acute coronary syndrome without ST elevation. Whilst awaiting transport, he experienced acute onset of dyspnoea together with non-specific chest heaviness. A repeat ECG showed ventricular tachycardia transforming to ventricular fibrillation. The patient was successfully defibrillated with one external 200 J biphasic discharge. Coronary angiography was performed upon arrival at the hospital and demonstrated unobstructed coronary arteries. Laboratory tests showed normal renal function and electrolyte levels (sodium, potassium, and chloride). The Troponin T level was 46.0 ng/L (cut-off 14.0 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed concentric LVH without valvular disease or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction and normal left ventricular ejection fraction. Echocardiographic findings were notable for severe diastolic dysfunction. The patient stayed on the coronary care unit for 72 h, and then transferred to a monitored bed on the standard cardiology ward. He had no further episodes of ventricular tachycardia during the hospital stay. He was administered bisoprolol 2.5 mg per day and ramipril 2.5 mg per day. The indication for an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) therapy was discussed and unequivocal consent was reached at the electrophysiology indication seminar. On the 8th day, the patient had an ICD fitted and he was discharged home after 24 h.
A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study confirmed the LVH, and did not demonstrate any late gadolinium enhancement. Within the differential diagnoses, we considered Fabry disease as a possible cause of concentric ventricular hypertrophy although the patient had no classical pain symptoms (acroparaesthesia and abdominal pain) or specific signs such as skin changes (angiokeratomas in lower abdomen, groin, gluteal regions, and anhidrosis). The screening dried blood spot test was positive for Fabry disease, confirmed by low plasma activity of alpha-galactosidase A. Genetic testing discovered the pathogenic mutation c.902G>A (p.R301Q); both the sister and daughter of the patient carried the pathogenic mutation. He was diagnosed with a cardiac manifestation of Fabry disease, and was referred to the National Centre of Fabry Disease Programme for enzyme replacement therapy. The enzyme replacement therapy has been started and the patient has been receiving it for almost 4 years (Fabrazyme 1 mg/kg i.v. every 14 days). He has had no ventricular tachycardia recorded or treated with ICD since its implantation.