We report on a 55 year old male patient with a history of severe aortic valve stenosis, ectasia of the aorta ascendens (48 mm) and reduced left ventricular function. He underwent prosthetic valve replacement with a mechanical valved conduit (St. Jude Medical Conduit CAVG 29 mm) in 2003. Anticoagulation was started with phenprocoumon. Implantation of a cardiac pacemaker (Medtronic Kappa KDR 503) due to atrioventricular block III° was necessary five days after initial heart surgery.
The patient presented to the emergency department in 03/2013 with a new sleep-onset weakness of the left arm and difficulties to speak. Emergency cranial computed-tomography (CCT) revealed ischemic brain lesions in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery. Neither atrial fibrillation nor valvular lesions or carotid artery stenoses were detected, when the patient was evaluated for causative mechanisms. Rehabilitation was finally completed with minimal residual neurological symptoms. Five months later, the patient was readmitted with fatigue, febrile temperatures, headache, nausea and progressive left-sided weakness and dysarthria. CCT scans after readmission showed signs of the preceding ischemic stroke in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery and new signs of progressive embolisation in the territory of the left middle cerebral artery with haemorrhage. C-reactive protein (CRP) was now 59 mg/l (ref. <5 mg/l) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 45 mm/h (ref. 0–30 mm/h). Sequentially obtained blood culture samples (5 of 5 sets) were positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis resistant to oxacillin (MRSE) (see Table ). In line with additional minor DUKE criteria, predisposition, febrile temperatures and septic emboli, the definitive diagnosis of infective prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) was made. Antiinfective treatment with vancomycin plus rifampicin was started and the patient was transferred to a tertiary university medical center providing immediate facilities for cardiosurgical and neurosurgical interventions. The initial bedside transthoracic echocardiography on admission revealed no signs of valvular masses suggestive for vegetations, a moderate mitral regurgitation was noted. Evaluation via transesophageal echocardiography 48 h later showed a filiforme (7x4mm) mass at the prosthetic aortic valve and a perivalvular dehiscence of the mechanical valved conduit. Fortunately, at this time no surgical intervention was required.
In 11/2013 the patient developed progressive clinical signs of heart failure on the basis of severe mitral regurgitation, on transesophageal echocardiography destruction of the aortic-mitral continuity was noted, which made a mitral-valve repair intervention impossible. Urgent prosthetic valve replacement was successfully performed (St. Jude Medical MJ-501 33 mm). Histopathological samples showed signs of low grade chronic inflammation. Tissue samples from the surgical site and swab specimen from the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) were culturepositive for S. epidermidis (MRSE). In conclusion, new prosthetic valve material had to be inserted into a non-sterile situs despite antiinfective pretreatment and sterile bloodcultures. A curative approach seemed from that particular time on all but impossible and the patient was discharged with cotrimoxazol plus rifampicin as a timely indefinite oral suppressive treatment. Seven months after mitral valve replacement, in the context of a rising CRP and progressive fatigue, breakthrough bacteremia was detected. The MRSE strain isolated from sequential bloodcultures displayed now resistance against rifampicin (see Table ). Bloodstream negativity was achieved after prolonged treatment with daptomycin plus clindamycin. From the infectious disease perspective, the presence of this now isolated “difficult to treat” MRSE strain, together with lacking surgical options to remove or revise prosthetic material resembled a palliative situation, since there were no substances for effective oral suppression therapy left. The main concern however, was that in the near future the progressive destruction of the periprosthetic tissue between the aortic and mitral valve might result in a fatal valve complication or progressive embolization to the brain. Regarding the lack of curative options, salvage OHT was discussed as a measure of last resort. During the pretransplant workup, prostate cancer (pT3a, pN0 (0/27), R1, L0, V0, M0; Gleason Score 3 + 4 = 7a) was diagnosed and the patient was delisted for OHT due to apparent malignancy. Radical prostatevesiculectomy was performed with adjuvant radiotherapy, after an interdisciplinary tumorboard decision. Twelve months later, under oral antiinfective suppressive therapy with moxifloxacin and clindamycin, the patient developed febrile temperatures with MRSE bacteremia – now displaying resistance against clindamycin and all fluoroquinolones. Fortunately, bloodstream negativity could be induced again with a prolonged course of daptomycin on an outpatient basis (OPAT). Finally, the patient was reassessed for OHT under stable conditions, bloodculture negativity and in line with oncological transplant requirements – 28 months after the first diagnosis of infective PVE, the patient was successfully transplanted. In the peri-transplantion period and for four weeks post-transplantion the patient received daptomycin plus fosfomycin. Bloodcultures remained sterile at any time and in particular after ending antiinfective treatment. He is now under close follow-up doing well (6 months post-OHT). Histopathological examination of the explanted organ and prosthetic material showed clear evidence of chronic active IE. Tissue specimen from aortic tissue were conclusive positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis on broadspectrum 16 s-PCR. From the isolated tissue samples the mecA gene encoding for oxacillin resistance was amplified.