The author, a 40-year-old Caucasian man and a qualified physician, developed a ‘barbed-wire-like’ painful left lateral thigh vesicular eruption in a dermatomal pattern. The rash had been preceded by two days of ‘electric, aching’ pain without skin changes at the same site, and occurred during a period of significantly reduced sleep due to an unexpected death of a sibling. The suspected diagnosis of herpes zoster was confirmed within four hours of the vesicle eruption, at an urgent care centre, and a seven-day course of oral valacyclovir 1000mg, administered orally three times a day (GlaxoSmithKline, Mississauga, Canada), was started immediately, along with naproxen (Bayer Inc., Mississauga, Canada) and oral codeine (Ratiopharm, Toronto, Canada) for analgesia.
The codeine and naproxen had minimal impact on the severity of his pain, which was constantly present. His pain was further aggravated by any contact with the affected skin, including contact by clothing. Altogether, this pain constellation led to poor sleep, difficulty in concentrating, and increased stress during an already stressful period.
In an effort to avoid increased narcotic use or additional medications (and their possible side effects), he elected to apply a series of plain occlusive dressings (Tegaderm™; 3M, London, Canada) directly over the vesicular eruption, as depicted in Figure . This decision was based upon a spontaneous hypothesis that an additional layer of skin (albeit artificial) might reduce the severity of his constant pain and skin hypersensitivity.
His pain reduced immediately to a tolerable (and ignorable) level, from approximately eight out of 10 (with codeine and naproxen) to four out of 10 on a numerical pain scale (with 0 being no pain and 10 being severe pain). More importantly, incidental contact by clothes and water in the shower no longer resulted in additional severe lancing pain. Subsequent to the occlusive dressing application, no more analgesics were taken, and his pain level never increased above four out of 10 on the numerical pain scale. The occlusive dressings were applied for the duration of the vesicles, being finally removed after eight days. Peeling dressings were removed and replaced during this period. The removal of partially peeling dressings resulted in mild worsened pain at the time of removal, akin to removing a regular adhesive bandage. If replacement was delayed for longer than five minutes, his previous severe level of pain would begin to return, and promptly returned to four out of 10 or lower with subsequent reapplication. Full resolution of his symptoms occurred over approximately two and a half weeks, with no post-herpetic neuralgia.