A 10-year-old female patient presented with a complaints of painless swelling around both the knees, right ankle, and left wrist which was first noticed at the age of 6 years and was gradually progressive. The patient started developing pain and deformity at the right ankle for 2 years, which was gradually progressive and had a difficulty in walking since then. There was no history of trauma, fever, weight loss, loss of appetite, and no other constitutional symptoms. Family history of multiple hereditary exostosis was present in father and younger male sibling. On examination, swellings were present over the medial and posterolateral aspect of the distal femur region, in posterolateral aspect of the right proximal tibia and posterolateral aspect of the right distal tibia, which were bony hard in consistency and immobile. The patient had varus deformity in the distal third of the right leg with no distal neurovascular deficit. X-rays of both knees, both ankles, both wrists, and full length both tibia taken in two planes which confirmed the bony exostosis and showed flattening/distortion of the right fibula by large exostosis of the distal tibia and ankle mortise appeared to be preserved (, ).
Two-dimensional and three-dimensional computed tomography scan of the right lower limb was taken to know the extent of the exostosis and pre-operative planning, which suggested multiple osseous outgrowths in the lower end of femur, upper tibial metaphysis, distal tibia and proximal fibular metaphysis (, ). All the swellings showed the continuation with medullary cavity of long bones. The largest lesion was measuring 4.8 × 3.4 × 3.1 cm in size in the posterolateral aspect of the right distal tibial metaphysis, which was indenting the fibula with bowing deformity, the knee and ankle joint movements appeared normal.
As the patient had symptoms in the right ankle, we planned for excision of the right distal tibia exostosis through posterolateral approach. All routine blood investigations done and were within normal limits and pre-anesthetic checkup was taken for fitness for surgery.
The patient was operated in the left lateral position using posterolateral incision, dissection was done between peroneal tendons and flexor hallucis longus, the bony exostosis mass was exposed and excised from the underlying bone using osteotome. Exostosis mass of distal tibia was adherent to the medial aspect of the right distal fibula, a segment of fibula measuring about 2.5 cm was excised above the syndesmosis Level to complete the excision of the bony mass . Ankle was stable on examination after the segmental fibular excision, so nothing was required to maintain the ankle stability. Excised bony mass was sent for histopathological examination, wound was closed in layers and below knee slab was given for 3 weeks.
Post-operative period was uneventful and post-operative X-ray of the right ankle (, ) showed complete removal of exostosis mass. The histopathology report was suggestive of osteochondroma (exostosis) with no malignant transformation and the patient was started on full weight-bearing after 3 weeks of surgery. At present (1 year follow-up), the patient has no pain and deformity (, ) at the ankle and having good ankle range of motion. We are following up the patient regularly (till skeletal maturity) to check for ankle stability and deformity.