A 16-year-old Sinhalese male with severe haemophilia A (factor level < 1%), was admitted to a teaching hospital in Sri Lanka on Day 1 of an acute febrile illness. He had been diagnosed with haemophilia in early childhood, but was not on prophylactic factor VIII therapy. Four days before admission, he had undergone a dental extraction, with 30% factor correction with intravenous factor VIII prior to the procedure. One day before admission he had developed bleeding from the extraction site, which had been treated with 750 IU of factor VIII to achieve a 30% factor correction. On the day of admission he had developed fever with chills and rigors, associated with arthralgia, myalgia, nausea, vomiting and severe frontal headache.
On admission, he was febrile and flushed, with a heart rate of 120 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 110/70 millimetres of mercury. The respiratory rate was 20 per minute, with clear lungs on auscultation. The abdomen was soft, with mild epigastric tenderness. Neurological examination including the fundus examination was unremarkable. There was no evidence of bleeding on clinical evaluation at the time of admission.
Baseline investigations revealed a white blood cell count of 4400 per cubic milimetre (/mm3) (Neutrophils 47%; Lymphocytes 41%), while the platelet count and haematocrit were 241,000/mm3 and 34.5% (haemoglobin 11.3 g/dl) respectively. The erthyrocyte sedimentation rate, urine full report, serum creatinine, hepatic tranasaminases, prothrombrin time and Chest X-ray were all within normal limits and remained normal during the entire hospital stay. A clinical diagnosis of a possible undifferentiated viral fever or dengue fever (DF) was made based on the history, examination and investigations. Subsequently DF was confirmed by sero-conversion with the dengue IgM antibody test (MAC-ELISA, M Antibody capture- Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay) on the tenth day. Earlier confirmation by antigen detection was not possible due to limited availability of test. He was managed as dengue, according to the national dengue management guidelines, with hourly monitoring of fluid balance, pulse rate and blood pressure . The haematocrit and platelet counts were checked thrice per day. The patient was frequently clinically evaluated to detect the presence of any bleeding.
On day 2 of the illness he complained of severe throbbing headache associated with vomiting. Neurological examination, including fundoscopy, was normal. An urgent non-contrast computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain excluded the presence of any intracranial bleeding. On day 3 of the fever he developed recurrence of bleeding from the tooth extraction site, together with vomiting of dark red blood. His platelet level at that point was 124,000/mm3 with a haematocrit of 32%. Intravenous factor VIII was given to achieve a 100% factor correction over twenty four hours. Omeprazole was administered intravenously for management of possible co-existing gastric erosions or peptic ulcers. Factor correction was discontinued after 24 hours (on day 4) as bleeding had settled and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was in the normal range. Fever resolved by day 5. His platelet count dropped progressively from day 1 to a nadir of 50,000/mm3 on day 6. During the course of the illness he did not develop any clinical evidence of fluid leakage or become haemodynamically unstable. On day 7 he was discharged since he was afebrile and clinically well, with a rising platelet count of 69,000/mm3.