A 55-year-old woman presented with a headache that had worsened over the past few months in June 2019. MRI of the brain revealed a large heterogeneous mass of 6.5 × 5.5 × 4.2 cm in the left frontal lobe and mild perilesional edema. The mass was compressing the left lateral ventricle and there was hyperintense signal on T1W and T2W images consistent with hemorrhage in its part in this region. No contrast enhancement was observed in the mass on post-contrast MR images . Total re-section of the tumor was performed and histopathological diagnosis was oligodendroglioma, WHO grade 3, IDH-mutant, and 1p/19q-codeleted. The patient was asymptomatic in the postoperative period. Adjuvant treatment (cranial radiotherapy combined with temozolomide) was recommended by oncologists, but she refused. No tumor recurrence was observed in follow-up MRI examinations.
However, in July 2022 (36 months after initial diagnosis), the patient was admitted to our institution with a 3-week history of severe low back pain. Neurological examination demonstrated mild paraparesis. No sensory deficit was found and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Gadolinium enhanced MRI of the spine revealed an intradural extramedullary lesion compressing the spinal cord between T11–L1 levels and multiple enhancing tumor deposits attached to cauda equina roots between L4–S1 levels (–). There was no evidence of metastases outside the central nervous system. T11–T12 midline laminectomy was performed to decompress the spinal cord and obtain histological samples. A gray-hemorrhagic, soft tumoral extra medullary lesion was observed following the opening of the dura. Also, tumoral nodules surrounding the cauda equina roots were observed. Subtotal resection of all visible tumor was achieved. Early postoperative course was uneventful. Spinal radiotherapy was planned for residual tumor between T11–L1 levels and tumor deposits between L4–S1 levels.
Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor consisted of small-medium cells with small, rounded nuclei, perinuclear clearing, and the presence of increased cellularity, pleomorphism, brisk mitosis and focal necrosis. Vascular endothelial proliferation was absent . Immunohistochemical staining showed positive results for GFAP, EMA, Olig2 and mutant IDH-1 (,). Immunohistochemistry for ATRX showed retained wild-type expression . Ki-67 proliferation index was 30%. Fluorescence in situ hybridization studies revealed 1p/19q co-deletion (1p/1q ratio 85%, 19q/19p ratio 65%) in tumor cells (,). Final histological diagnosis was WHO Grade 3 Oligodendroglioma, IDH-mutant, 1p/19q-codeleted.