A 4-year-old female patient presented with a history of fever, abdominal pain, loss of appetite and cough for a few days. She was examined by her pediatrician and oral amoxicillin-clavulanate was prescribed due to suspected bronchitis. The morning after the examination, she experienced 3 episodes of bilateral loss of vision with difficulty in walking. The symptoms were transient and lasted a few seconds. Therefore, she was admitted to the hospital emergency department.
Her family history was unremarkable, with the exception of a grandmother affected by syringomyelia and Chiari malformation.
Before her hospitalization, the child had always been in good general health, except for frequent episodes of otitis, with the last episode occurring in the previous month. After the last episode, a prophylaxis for otitis with azithromycin was prescribed by her pediatrician.
On physical examination, the patient was in good general condition. The girl was collaborative during the medical evaluation, although her responsiveness was slightly impaired. Neither focal neurological signs nor meningeal irritation signs were observed.
Laboratory tests showed mild hypoglycemia (glucose serum level = 59 mg/dl) and mild hyponatremia (134 mmol/L). An ultrasound of the abdomen was performed because of the abdominal pain. No pathological signs were found. The episodes of amaurosis prompted an ophthalmologic evaluation, including a fundus oculi examination that was negative.
On the following day, a maculopapular rash appeared on the patient’s face and chest. Nevertheless, it was transient and quickly disappeared without specific treatment.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed slow activity on the temporo-occipital regions, more evident in the right hemisphere. The child neurologist observed a mild generalized hypotonia without significant neurological deficits.
The child was then admitted to perform a brain and spine MRI and a lumbar puncture, in order to exclude the presence of viral encephalitis, cerebral abscesses or other cerebral inflammatory lesions, such as acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM).
MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) of the brain and spine showed a signal alteration in the SCC, without contrast enhancement and with low apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values, thus suggesting an abnormal diffusion restriction and a reversible cytotoxic lesion .
Antiviral treatment with intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/Kg every 8 h) and dexamethasone (0.2 mg/Kg every 8 h) was initiated, while waiting for the results of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) search for neurotropic viruses, bacteria and fungi in the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) and peripheral blood (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis, Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus agalactiae, Listeria monocytogenes, Escherichia coli K1, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex 1, herpes simplex 2, human herpesvirus-6 (HHV-6), enterovirus, human parechovirus, varicella-zoster, Cryptococcus neoformans, and adenovirus). Antiviral therapy was suspended because the polymerase chain reaction search for neurotropic viral nucleic acid sequences in the cerebrospinal fluid and peripheral blood was negative. A nasal swab for influenza virus was also negative. A low number of HHV-6 DNA copies was detected in the blood, but this data did not change patient’s management.
Collateral findings detected by MRI were pansinusitis and bilateral otomastoiditis, but no specific otolaryngologic treatment was considered.
EEGs were repeated in the following days, showing a progressive normalization of the pattern.
The child has always been in good general condition and apyretic. As a consequence, she was discharged after 10 days of admission and treatment with oral corticosteroids, with a progressive reduction of the steroid dose.
After 40 days, a follow-up brain MRI was repeated, showing a complete normalization of the signal alteration in the SCC . The EEG was also repeated, showing a complete normalization of the pattern.
After 2 years of follow-up, the child was in good general condition, without neurological deficits.