A 13-year-old boy was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Ningbo University in February 2023 with complaints of cough and chest pain. He had no history of disease or poultry contact. Physical examination showed that he was 173 cm tall and weighed 80 kg, with clear consciousness, a scar of Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccination, and slightly moist rales in the right lung. There were no abnormalities in routine blood test or blood chemistry. Immunoglobulin and complement tests showed normal IgE levels and lymphocyte subsets. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 2 mm/h, and the tuberculosis-SPOT test was negative. The results of the rheumatoid test, as well as the tests for syphilis, hepatitis B, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies, were all negative. In addition, the 13 respiratory pathogen tests also yielded negative results. The aspergillus IgG antibody and galactomannan tests were both negative. However, the serum cryptococcal antigen (CrAg) test, performed by gold immunochromatography assay (Trade name: CrAg Lateral Flow Assay; Product code: CR2003; Manufacturer: Immuno-Mycologics, Inc) was positive 2 days after admission. Both routine and biochemical test of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed normal results, and india ink staining for Cryptococcus was negative. Blood culture, CSF culture, and sputum culture were all negative. Cardiac ultrasound, electrocardiogram, cerebral magnetic resonance imaging, and fiber bronchoscopy revealed no significant abnormalities. A chest ultrasound revealed heterogeneous echoes in the right thoracic cavity with possible inflammatory wrapping. The chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a lesion and cavities in the right lower lobe of the lung . Bronchoscopy showed that the cavity was unobstructed. In light of the unexplained pulmonary cavitation, absence of abnormalities in the appearance of the tracheal structure, and a positive blood CrAg test, alveolar lavage fluid was subjected to next-generation sequencing (NGS) for a definitive diagnosis. This was done to exclude false positives and determine the underlying cause of the disease. BALF samples with a total cell concentration of ≥1 × 106 cells/mL underwent pre-processing for host removal using sample release reagent (Genskey Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). Subsequently, DNA was extracted from 0.3 mL BALF samples following the instructions of the DNA Extraction and Purification Kit (Genskey Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The DNA library was generated after cDNA synthesis, and its quality was assessed through Qubit detection. Finally, the qualified library was sequenced on an MGISEQ200 platform (MGI Tech Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China). Adapters and low-quality reads (Q, 20) were removed from raw data with 50-bp single-end reads using fastp software. Human sequence data were excluded by mapping onto the human reference database (hg38, YH genome, T2T-CHM13 genome) through Burrows Wheeler Aligner (BWA) software. The remaining sequence reads, aligned to the Dian Diagnostics Pathogenic Microorganism Genome Database by BWA, underwent annotation and statistical analysis. Negative controls (Genskey Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) underwent the same sequencing and bioinformatics analysis procedures as the clinical samples. Synthesized sequences were used as a positive control, serving as indicators for the detection process in each batch. For homogenized species-specific sequences, the prevalence of microbiota was determined according to the mNGS criteria. For clinical core pathogens and bacteria difficult to detect, including firmicutes and intracellular bacteria, reads ≥1 were considered positive. For other clinically relevant bacteria, fungi, and viruses, reads ≥3, exceeding those in the negative controls of the same batch, were considered positive. For bacteria, fungi, and viruses not clinically reported or isolated, reads ≥20, surpassing those in the negative controls of the same batch, were considered positive. The NGS test detected Cryptococcus species in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid at 3 days after admission . As the cryptococcal infection was confined to the lungs, PC was the definitive diagnosis. He was treated with intravenous injection of fluconazole at 400 mg once a day for 8 days, followed by continuous oral administration of fluconazole capsules at 400 mg once a day for 6 months. The child’s symptoms, including chest pain, were significantly relieved. He was discharged 10 days after admission without coughing or chest pain. Chest CT revealed that the lesion in the lower lobe of the right lung reduced after taking fluconazole for 1 month . The lesion in lung diminished and reexamination of serum CrAg turned positive after taking fluconazole for 4 months .