A 17-year-old single Turkish woman presented to our emergency clinic with complaints of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain localized in the right lower quadrant. She stated that the localized pain had started three days prior to admission. The patient and her family had no history of TB infection or contact with patients with TB. Direct abdominal and chest radiography revealed no abnormality, and an abdominal ultrasound was also normal. Her pelvic examination, including pelvic ultrasonography, could not be performed because her bladder was empty. Her laboratory investigations produced the following results: blood urea nitrogen 35 mg/dL (5-23), creatinine 1.02 mg/dL (0,6-1,2), and C-reactive protein 12 mg/L(0-0,5). Her blood cell counts were leukocytes 12,200/μL (4-11000), hemoglobin 12.6 g/dL (12-16), and platelets 408,900/μL (150-450,000). Her other serum parameters were within normal limits. The results of an enzyme-linked immunoassay for HIV were negative. Urine analysis showed no pyuria or hematuria, and the results of a urine human chorionic gonadotropin assay were negative. The patient was placed under observation because her physical examination revealed no abnormality except right lower abdominal tenderness. A second abdominopelvic ultrasonogram was acquired during the observation period, and the results led to the suspicion of retrocecal appendicitis. Therefore, we performed surgery.
A McBurney's incision revealed a cystic mass approximately 15 cm × 6 cm in size with regular margins. The mass originated from the right tubo-ovarian complex. The patient's appendix was clinically normal . The cystic mass was excised, and we preserved the tubo-ovarian complex and avoided the need for an appendectomy. When the cyst wall was cut, purulent liquid leaked through it. Microbiological evaluation of bacterial, fungal, and mycobacterial cultures and stains was not performed because the operation was performed over the weekend. The patient recovered fully and was discharged on the third post-operative day. Histopathological examination of the cystic mass revealed a granuloma with central caseating necrosis surrounded by epithelioid histiocytes . During the post-operative examination, we found a blood β-human chorionic gonadotropin level of 0.5 IU/mL, tuberculin skin test (the purified protein derivative test) 31 mm, and negative acid-fast bacillus (AFB) results of the urine and sputum tests. After the diagnosis was histopathologically confirmed, the patient was started on two months of anti-TB therapy consisting of daily doses of isoniazid (400 mg), rifampicin (600 mg), pyrazinamide (2 g), and ethambutol (1000 mg), followed by four months of isoniazid and rifampicin therapy. The total treatment duration was six months, and the patient recovered completely and without complications.