A 58-year-old male who has received peritoneal dialysis for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated nephritis for 6 years presented to our hospital on day 1 with a complaint of low-grade fever that started 2 weeks ago. No significant physical abnormalities, including heart murmurs or skin rashes, were observed, and there were no clear signs of local infection besides a fever of 37.5°C. Blood tests revealed a slightly elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (8200/μL; normal range: 3300–9000/μL) with neutrophilia and a slight increase in C-reactive protein (CRP; 1.32 mg/dL; normal range: 0.00–0.30 mg/dL). Two sets of blood cultures and the culture from the peritoneal dialysis exit site were collected. When he revisited the hospital on day 4, his body temperature had risen to 38.6°C, with no significant physical abnormalities. WBC and CRP levels had increased further to 21 700/μL and 5.51 mg/dL, respectively. Procalcitonin had slightly increased to 0.32 ng/mL (normal value: ≤0.05 ng/mL). β-D-Glucan did not increase. A plain CT scan performed on the same day did not reveal any focus of fever, and a COVID-19 antigen test using a nasopharyngeal swab was negative. Furthermore, two sets of blood cultures were collected, and oral levofloxacin therapy commenced every other day for 3 days. At hospital visitation on day 11, his fever and inflammatory response had improved. However, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a relatively high echogenic 15 × 6 mm mobile mass in the left ventricular outflow tract (, Video 1), which was not seen on the TTE conducted a month earlier as part of routine tests (see , ). No significant valvular diseases were observed. Four sets of blood cultures were collected before administering the antimicrobial agents, and cultures from the peritoneal dialysis exit site were negative. There were no physical findings characteristic of infective endocarditis, elevation of rheumatoid factor, or embolic findings on contrast-enhanced chest and abdominal CT. The patient was admitted with suspected blood culture-negative infective endocarditis (BCNIE) based on the TTE findings and fever. No abnormalities were noted in vital signs, chest radiography, and electrocardiography (ECG) on admission. Empirical intravenous infusions of ampicillin/sulbactam and ceftriaxone were initiated. Two sets of blood cultures collected on day 12 were also negative. There was no fever or re-elevation of the inflammatory response after admission; however, transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) performed on day 14 showed that the mass had increased to 22 × 5 mm, and its stem was attached to the vicinity of the anterior mitral annulus (, Video 2). A CAT was strongly suspected because of the appearance of the mass. Owing to the rapid enlargement over a short period, the mass was also considered a possible thrombus, and heparin infusion was started; however, a TTE performed on day 20 showed that the structure had enlarged further to 25 × 5 mm (, Video 3). This calcified mass was also clearly recognized using ECG-gated cardiac CT on day 20, but mitral annular calcification (MAC) was mild, confirmed using CT . On day 22, a mass resection was performed for embolization prevention and diagnosis at another hospital. An aortic incision revealed a highly mobile, milky white tissue (25 × 5 mm) attached to the mitral–aortic intervalvular fibrosa , which was resected at the base of the stem. The aortic and mitral valves were normal, with no need for reconstruction after mass resection, and the MAC was not prominently visible within the surgical field. Pathologically, the tissue was diffusely calcified, and there was no evidence of neoplasia . However, unlike a typical CAT, chronic inflammation and fibrin were not prominent. The presence of bacteria was not clear from Giemsa staining or tissue culture. The postoperative course was uneventful, and TTE performed approximately 12 months after surgery showed no recurrence.