The proband was a 13-years old female athlete who was evaluated due to a syncopal event. Her ECG showed T-wave inversion in V1-V4 leads and low QRS voltages in the limb leads. The echocardiogram was within normal limits and no further evaluation was requested at the time. She was re-evaluated at the age of 15, after the sudden cardiac death (SCD) of her brother. She reported no further symptoms. Her resting ECG showed extensive repolarization abnormalities with T-wave inversion in leads V1-V6, flattened T waves and low QRS voltages in the limb leads, as well as ventricular premature beats (VPBs) . Her echocardiogram revealed mild biventricular dilatation with borderline biventricular function (LV ejection fraction of 50%). There were no RV dyskinetic areas or aneurysms. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) showed extensive circumferential subepicardial LV late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) compatible with a ring-like myocardial fibrosis that affected 35% of the LV myocardial mass . There was LGE in the inferior RV wall. There was no evidence of inflammation. She displayed a highly arrhythmic profile with 7000 polymorphic VPBs with both a left bundle branch block (LBBB) and right bundle branch block (RBBB) morphology in a 12-lead 24-hours Holter monitoring. In the exercise test, she developed a symptomatic sustained ventricular tachycardia with an LBBB morphology, inferior axis and late precordial transition suggesting an RV outflow tract origin . Based on these findings she was diagnosed with ALVC according to the Padua Criteria [, ] . She was classified at high risk of SCD and an ICD was implanted. One week after the implantation, the ICD was appropriate discharged.
Her brother was an athlete without any symptoms who died suddenly during exercise at the age of 18-years. In the athletic pre-participation cardiovascular screening he had a pathological resting ECG with an isolated negative T wave in lead V3 and polymorphic VPBs originating from both ventricles . His echocardiogram was within normal range and no further cardiac evaluation was requested. The post-mortem examination revealed areas of LV fibrosis.
The mother was 51 years old and complained of palpitations. Her ECG showed an isolated T negative T wave in lead aVL and RVOT originated VPBs. Upon cardiovascular imaging there was mild RV dilatation without any regional wall motion abnormalities or evidence of myocardial fibrosis. She exhibited more than 20,000 VPBs per 24 h without evidence of complex ventricular arrhythmias. The father, 52 years old, was asymptomatic with a normal ECG and echocardiogram and with no evidence of arrhythmias.
The molecular basis of the disease was identified for the proband with next generation sequencing technology, using Illumina’s Trusight Cardio sequencing panel, covering 174 genes clinically relevant to cardiac diseases. Alignment, quality filtering, variant calling and variant annotation were performed using in parallel the standard MiSeq Reporter (Illumina) and the Sophia Genetics pipeline. The variant calling files were filtered using the Sophia Genetics DDM platform and the detected variants were characterized according to the recommendations of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) . All benign or likely benign variants were filtered out and the retained variants were then evaluated according to the relevance of the gene to the observed phenotype resulting in one plausible candidate variant which was located in the DSP gene: NM_004415.4:c.8586delC,p.(Ser2863Hisfs*20). The proband was homozygous for the variant , which was novel and characterized as VUS (variant of unknown significance) (according to ACMG criteria). It was a frameshift variant located in the last exon of the gene producing a transcript that was not predicted to undergo nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Specifically, the variant resulted in the substitution of the last 9 amino acids of the protein and the prolongation of the C-terminal tail by 10 additional amino acids (PVS1 criterion reduced to moderate; ). Furthermore, it was absent from the population databases of Exome Sequencing Project and Genome Aggregation Database (PM2 criterion). The parents of the proband underwent DSP genetic testing by targeted Sanger sequencing for the detection of the variant and were found both heterozygous for the same variant. Material from the autopsy subjected to genetic testing revealed that the proband’s brother was also homozygous for the same variant. Following these genetic results and during the course of a second and more detailed interview, the parents revealed a common origin from the same geographic region of Greece, but they were not aware of any common ancestor .