A thirty four years-old G2P1 woman was admitted in the high risk pregnancy unit of our The First Dpt of Obstetrics and Gynecology at 23+ 4 weeks of twin gestation due to premature prelabor rupture of the membranes (PPROM). The twins were dichorionic according to the first trimester ultrasound scan. The patient reported the presence of increased “vaginal discharge” during the last week. Nitrazine tape test was positive showing amniotic fluid leakage. She had an uncomplicated previous singleton term vaginal delivery 3 years ago. Her personal medical history revealed the presence of hypothyroidism that was treated with thyroxine 175 mcg twice a day, an appendicectomy 12 years ago and cervical cryotherapy for Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) 1 year ago.
During physical examination, she was normotensive, afebrile and the cervix was not dilated or effaced. Laboratory examinations at admission were obtained and revealed the presence of mild leucocytosis (12,300/μl) and an elevated C- Reactive Protein (CRP) (40.98 mg/L with upper normal laboratory limit of 1.0 mg/L), while both dipstick urine examination and urinary cultures were normal. The patient received amoxicillin and metronidazole regimen eight hourly for 10 days and betamethasone 12 mg intramuscularly with a repeated dose at 24 h. Ultrasound examination revealed the presence of two embryos with positive cardiac function that weighted 535 and 606 g. The first of them had an amniotic fluid index (AFI) of 5 cm and the second an AFI of 14 cm. The patient’s cervical length was 28 mm and funneling was not noted. Ultrasonographic and laboratory assessment was performed every 3 days. Three days later WBCs were raised (14,200/μl) whereas CRP value declined at 2.90 mg/L.
One week following admission (24+ 4) the patient experienced blood stained brownish vaginal secretions and the vaginal examination revealed a Bishop score of 8. She was transferred to the labor ward where she delivered a female that weighted 550 g. Manual extraction of the placenta failed and the umbilical cord was ligated just above the level of the external cervical os. The vagina was rinsed with antiseptic solution (povidone iodine, Betadine®) and she remained in the labor ward under close surveillance of vital signs and fetal heart rate for the next 4 h. No signs of active labor were noticed. After informed consent and detailed counselling about the possible benefits and complications, the woman opted for delayed delivery of the second twin.
The next day the delivered twin died from respiratory distress syndrome. Blood samples were obtained from the patient that once again revealed raised white blood cells (WBCs) (12,400/μl) and increased CRP (13.14 mg/L). The patient remained in the high-risk pregnancy department and 5 days later she had a new blood and urine examination along with urine cultures that revealed elevated WBCs (13.900/μl), an a steep rise in CRP (31.78 mg/L) along with the presence of enterobacteriae spp. An expert in infectious diseases was advised and the patient received cefuroxime 750 mg eight hourly for 7 days. The surveillance protocol involved close laboratory assessment (WBC and CRP levels three times a week), ultrasonographic evaluation twice a week, vital signs clinical assessment (arterial pressure, heart rate, temperature) and electronic fetal monitoring (non stress test, NST) twice a day . The fluctuations of CRP and WBC values during the patient’s hospitalization are shown in the Fig. . She remained afebrile with no clinical evidence of chorioamnionitis. A repeated dose of steroids was administered to the patient during her 26th and 27th day of hospitalization (28th week of gestation).
The second female fetus was finally delivered 34 days after the first fetus (29+ 2) with cesarean section due to an abnormal NST. The neonate weighed 1150 g and had an Apgar score of 7 at the first minute and 9 at 5 minutes. It remained in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) for about 4 weeks.