A 67-year-old male patient was transferred from the emergency department to ICU because of cough and wheezing for 5 days which worsened with dyspnea over the past day. The patient had a medical history of DCM, coronary atherosclerotic heart disease (CAHD), hypertension, and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM), for over 10 years, but had not received standard and regular treatment. On admission, the patient was found to be unconscious, along with shortness of breath. Main abnormal physical examination findings included, blood pressure (BP), 68/56mmHg, heart rate (HR), 120–160 beats per minute, with an atrial fibrillation rhythm with frequent ventricular arrhythmias (as seen in Fig. ), respiratory rate (RR), 30–40 breaths per minute, pulse oxygen saturation (SPO2), 88% (on the high-flow nasal cannula oxygen therapy [HFNO], with the FiO2 100% and the flow rate 50 L/min), body temperature, 36.3℃. Extensive wheezing and crackles could be heard upon auscultation of both lungs.
The arterial blood gas analysis (ABG) on admission indicated, pH 7.076, PaCO2 65.1mmHg, PaO2 45.5mmHg, lactate 6.8mmol/L, and HCO3- 13.3mmol/L. The laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count (WBC) 8.5*109/L, procalcitonin (PCT) level of 0.46ng/mL, interleukin-6 (IL-6) level of 267pg/ml, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (HSTNI) level of 117.7pg/ml, and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 381.2pg/ml. Echocardiography showed the enlargement of the left atrium and left ventricular, the diameters were 5.7 and 7.0 cm, respectively, and the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) decreased to 19%. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated there were multiple infiltration and consolidation lesions in both lungs , and no abnormalities in the head . The APACHEII and SOFA scores on admission was 37 and 11, respectively. Upon admission the patient was diagnosed with severe community-acquired pneumonia, sepsis, acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, DCM, acute decompensated heart failure (ADHF), CS, atrial fibrillation with frequent ventricular arrhythmias, personal history of hypertension (classified as an extremely high-risk group), and NIDDM.
After ICU admission, the patient received HFNO and intermittent non-invasive mechanical ventilation (MV). Norepinephrine (NE) was administered to maintain blood pressure, furosemide, amiodarone, esmolol and levosimendan were administered to reduce cardiac load, control arrhythmia, and enhance myocardial contractility, respectively. After initial treatment, the patient’s clinical condition was still rapidly deteriorating, the dosage of vasopressors had been increased to NE 2.5ug/kg/min, terlipressin 0.03 IU/ kg/min, epinephrine 0.2ug/ kg/min, and the repeated ABG demonstrated, pH 7.066, PaCO2 71.3mmHg, PaO2 47.5mmHg, HCO3− 14.1mmol/L, and lactate 7.0mmol/L.
As the conventional measures could not alleviate the clinical condition, treatments were upgraded to invasive MV, and VA-ECMO was quickly established through femoral artery-femoral vein catheterization to provide circulatory support. The rotational speed of ECMO was set at 7200 RPM with a flow rate of 3.7 L/min (Xenios Console, Medo Medizintechnik AG, Germany). Additionally, prone position was performed after the establishment of MV and VA-ECMO. Furthermore, fiber optic bronchoscopy examination was performed and BALF was obtained for culture and metagenomics next generation sequencing (mNGS) test.
With the assistance of MV and VA-ECMO, the patient’s oxygenation and circulation achieved significant improvement. However, high MV (PEEP 12cmH2O, FiO2 60%) and VA-ECMO settings (flow rate 3.0-3.5 L/min), with a moderate dose of NE (0.5-1.0ug/kg/min) were persistently required. Additionally, the patient had a persistent fever, with body temperature fluctuating within 38.5–39℃, while empirical antibiotics was administered (piperacillin tazobactam). On the 3rd day of ICU stay, the mNGS test revealed the presence of CP gene fragments, but both of the BALF and blood cultures did not find any pathogens. To further confirm the etiology, another BALF sample was collected, BALF mNGS test, BALF and blood cultures were repeated. Meanwhile, antibiotics were adjusted to oral doxycycline and intravenous moxifloxacin.
After the adjustment, the patient’s body temperature, vasopressor dosage, ventilator and VA-ECMO settings gradually decreased. On the 5th day of ICU stay, the second mNGS test still reported the presence of CP gene fragments, yet the culture of blood and BALF were negative. Doxycycline and moxifloxacin continued to be used as targeted antibiotic therapy.
On the 7th day of ICU stay, the flow rate of VA-ECMO and the dose of NE were decreased to 1.7 L/min and 0.1ug/kg/min, respectively, thereafter, VA-ECMO was successfully withdrawn. On the 14th day of ICU stay, the patient’s consciousness was clear, and passed the spontaneous breathing test, MV and endotracheal tube were successfully discontinued and removed, respectively. Furthermore, the patient’s infection biomarkers gradually decreased and the lung CT scan demonstrated a gradual absorption of the infiltrative lesions . All antibiotics were stopped on the 16th day. Echocardiography demonstrated an improvement of cardiac function on the 22th day , the diameters of left atrial and ventricular were decreased to 5.3 and 6.3 cm, respectively, and the LVEF was increased to 32%.
On the 24th day of ICU stay, the patient’s vital signs were stable and the organ function were recovered to the baseline. The patient was transferred to the ward for further rehabilitation. Finally, the patient was recovered and discharged alive.