A 31-year-old man with no previous medical history was transported to the Emergency Department (ED) by ambulance on a spine board and with a cervical collar in place after a car accident. The patient was the restrained vehicle driver and the Emergency Medicine Services found him at the scene soon after a collision with a bus. His initial vital signs were notable for a blood pressure of 122/72 mm Hg, a heart rate of 122 beats/ min and a respiratory rate of 22 breaths/ min.
On arrival to the ED, the patient had a blood pressure of 115/65 mm Hg and a pulse of 128 beats/ min. Airway was patent with an oxygen saturation of 99 % through an oxygen mask. On primary survey, equal breath sounds were auscultated with no signs of associate underlying lung injury. Heart sounds were tachycardic but otherwise normal along with intact distal pulses in all extremities. Fluid resuscitation with normal saline was initiated in the field and continued through two large bore intravenous lines at both antecubital fossae. The patient’s GCS was calculated to be 15/15. Full body exposure revealed ‘seatbelt’ sign in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen and no other signs of traumatic injuries.
On secondary survey, abrasions were noted on both upper extremities and there was abdominal discomfort with diffuse tenderness, guarding over the lower part of the abdomen with no signs of distension. The focused assessment with sonography for trauma examination (FAST) revealed a mixed-echogenicity subhepatic mass, suspicious for intraperitoneal hematoma. Chest, cervical spine and pelvic radiographs showed no abnormalities. Given his relative hemodynamic stability head to pelvis CT scanning was performed, which showed a hematoma of the mesocolon of the ascending colon with active extravasation of intravenous contrast material, originating from a branch of the right colic artery. A pseudoaneurysm of this arterial branch was also noted along with displacement of the ascending colon, resulted from the hematoma of the mesocolon .
Diagnostic laparoscopy was a consideration as a management option but due to the deterioration of patient’s condition with increasing abdominal pain and overt peritoneal signs along with hemodynamic instability, the surgeon’s choice was to take the patient to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy with the fear that the induction of pneumoperitoneum would compromise venous flow return and could be easily fatal in this particular case. A median laparotomy was performed and an estimated 300 cc hemoperitoneum was evacuated. Intraoperative findings included a subserosal hematoma along the cecum and the adjacent segment of the ascending colon with areas of totally disrupted serosal wall . There was also a v-shaped hematoma of mesocolon adjacent to injured bowel, expanding to the origin of the mesenteric vessels . Intraoperative findings revealed no other traumatic injuries in abdominal structures. A standard right hemicolectomy along with primary ileotransverse colonic anastomosis was performed.
The patient was taken to the recovery room post-surgery in a stable condition and admitted to surgical intensive care unit. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on post-operative day seven without any problems.