The patient was a 42-year-old man with no contributory medical or family histories. He had become aware of a neck mass 2 months earlier and visited a local hospital. Ultrasonography (US) and computed tomography (CT) showed a mass lesion in the left lobe of the thyroid gland. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) suggested medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), so the patient was referred to our department. Physical examination revealed a 3.5-cm elastic hard, mobile mass in the left thyroid lobe. No other significant findings were observed. Laboratory data demonstrated: thyrotropin (TSH), 1.78 µIU/mL (normal 0.50–5.00 µIU/mL); free thyroxine (FT4), 1.38 ng/dL (normal 0.90–1.70 ng/dL), free triiodothyronine (FT3), 3.50 pg/mL (normal 2.3–4.0 pg/dL); thyroglobulin (Tg), 10.60 ng/mL (normal, < 33.7 ng/mL); anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies (TPOAb), < 9.0 IU/mL (normal < 16.0 IU/mL); anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (TgAb), < 10.0 IU/mL (normal < 28.0 IU/mL); alkaline phosphatase, 197 U/L (normal 106–322 U/L); serum calcium, 9.7 mg/dL (normal 8.8–10.1 mg/dL); intact parathyroid hormone (PTH), 63.0 pg/mL (normal 10–65 pg/mL); carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 1.7 ng/mL (normal ≤ 5 ng/mL); and calcitonin, 2.54 pg/mL (normal ≤ 5.15 pg/mL). US showed a 46-mm irregularly shaped hypoechoic mass without clear halo in the left lobe of the thyroid gland . Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a mass lesion with poor contrast on the posterior side of the thyroid, with no extraglandular infiltration or cervical lymphadenopathy . Positron emission tomography (PET)–CT indicated abnormal accumulation in the left thyroid lobe and no other abnormalities . We reviewed the FNAC specimen in the Department of Pathology of our hospital, and follicular thyroid tumor was suspected based on the granular, short spindle-shaped and atypical cells with clear nucleoli . We then performed left lobectomy. Adhesions were identified between the tumor and surrounding connective tissues. An irregularly marginated, lobulated mass measuring 40 mm in diameter was found occupying the whole left lobe, and the cut surface was reddish-brown and solid . Pathological findings revealed a thick, fibrous capsule around the tumor, and a thick fibrous band was observed inside the tumor. Both capsular invasions and vascular invasions were observed. Tumor cells were eosinophilic and exhibited solid growth, with anisocytotic, round nuclei of different sizes and increased chromatin. Mitotic figures were not clear. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), negative for thyroglobulin, negative for chromogranin A (positive for normal parathyroid tissue within the nodule), positive for PTH, and positive for parafibromin. Ki-67 labeling index was 10% . Based on the above findings, non-functional oxyphilic PC was diagnosed. No complications such as postoperative bleeding, recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy, or hypoparathyroidism were seen, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 4. As of one and a half years postoperatively, serum Ca and PTH levels were within normal ranges, and imaging studies showed no evidence of recurrence or metastasis.