A 25-year-old previously healthy woman presented to an emergency department (ED) in Atlanta, Georgia in June 2020 with a chief complaint of fatigue. She reported 1 week of weakness, dyspnea, and low-grade fevers, followed by mild cough, sore throat, vomiting, diarrhea, and lymph node swelling. She lived at home with family and had no recent travel or known sick contacts. She was a nonsmoker, drank alcohol socially, and did not use recreational drugs. She was not on any chronic medications and had no known allergies. She endorsed taking ibuprofen and acetaminophen over the prior week for symptomatic relief.
On presentation, she was afebrile, with mild hypotension (blood pressure 98/56 mmHg) and normal oxygen saturation on room air. She appeared ill, with tender cervical lymphadenopathy; significant conjunctival injection without perilimbal sparing; injected, erythematous, and cracked lips; and tenderness to palpation in the left lower abdominal quadrant. She had no rash, splenomegaly, or swelling of the extremities.
Laboratory work-up was notable for profound acute kidney injury and leukocytosis . SARS-CoV-2 PCR from nasopharyngeal swab and SARS-CoV-2 IgG from serum were both positive. Blood cultures and legionella urine antigen was negative. The patient’s urine culture grew Escherichia coli, which was treated with ceftriaxone switched to piperacillin-tazobactam due to AmpC-type resistance of the isolate. Chest X-ray and CT without contrast were unremarkable. Point of care echocardiogram revealed a dilated inferior vena cava. CT abdomen/pelvis demonstrated mild peripancreatic fat stranding, felt to possibly represent acute uncomplicated pancreatitis, as well as nonspecific bilateral perinephric fat stranding. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for hypotension, with diagnosis of COVID-19 and concern for possible MIS-C due to mucocutaneous, renal, GI and cardiac system involvement.
The patient’s blood pressure initially normalized and her creatinine improved to 2.5 mg/dL with aggressive fluid resuscitation. She was transferred to the floor on hospital day 2, however, within 7 h she experienced recurrent hypotension requiring transfer to the ICU for the initiation of vasopressors. Workup for the new shock revealed evidence of worsening cardiac dysfunction. An electrocardiogram demonstration right axis deviation, troponin-I was newly detectable at 0.06 ng/mL and B-natriuretic peptide (BNP) increased to 1617 pg/mL. She again improved with aggressive fluid resuscitation, and quickly weaned off vasopressors while experiencing renal improvement with brisk auto-diuresis. A transthoracic echocardiogram obtained on hospital day 3 was notable for isolated right-sided ventricular dysfunction with moderate to severely reduced right ventricular systolic function, estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 46.3 mmHg, and a flattened interventricular septum in systole consistent with right ventricular pressure overload. Left ventricular function was normal (EF 60%). CT angiogram of the chest showed mild enlargement of the main pulmonary artery up to 3.5 cm without acute pulmonary embolus, as well as interval development of scattered, peripherally localized ground-glass opacities since prior chest CT 3 days earlier. Doppler ultrasounds of all four extremities were negative for thrombi. The patient maintained normal oxygenation on room air and remained afebrile, but had persistent leukocytosis and elevated inflammatory markers.
Due to concern for inflammatory multi-system organ involvement similar to that seen in MIS-C, and risk of progression to more florid cardiac involvement, a risk-benefit discussion was held with the patient regarding treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), including potential risk of hypercoagulability . She was treated with IVIG 2 g/kg split equally between hospital days 2 and 3 to reduce risk for thromboembolic and renal toxicities, along with aspirin 325 mg daily for 7 days, based on treatment courses suggested for pediatric patients with MIS-C or Kawasaki disease [–]. Additionally, the patient was offered remdesivir under an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) basis, but declined. Her leukocytosis began to downtrend on hospital day 4, and clinical symptoms improved including conjunctivitis. She was discharged on hospital day 5 with pulmonary clinic follow-up for pulmonary hypertension, and she was treated with a 7-day course of apixaban for COVID-19-associated coagulopathy per Emory University Hospital COVID-19 treatment guidelines.