A 65-year-old male known to have chronic viral hepatitis C presented to accident and emergency department with 1-year history of shortness of breath and blue discoloration of his fingers.
His shortness of breath worsened with the time; it was exertional initially, but recently it was noticed even at rest. It was aggravated by walking and setting, but relieved by lying flat and oxygen therapy. It limited his activities of daily living, sexual intercourse, and self-care (modified medical research council MMRC grade = 4). In addition, he reported that his shortness of breath was associated with generalized fatigue, blue discoloration of his hands, feet, mouth, and nose, and bilateral hand tremor that occurred mainly during exercises. He also had intermittent generalized nonradiating, moderately severe pressure like headache but no sensory or motor symptoms were noticed. Furthermore, this shortness of breath was not associated with chest pain, cough, sputum production, palpitation, or loss of consciousness. There was no leg swelling, abdominal distension, abdominal pain, vomiting, jaundice, or change in bowel or urine habits.
Our patient was known to have chronic hepatitis C infection, which was not treated because of nonadherence issues. His social history revealed that he smoked cigarettes and consumed alcohol for more than forty years but quitted one year back. He also stopped using illicit drugs and shared needles after more than thirty years of consumption.
On physical examination he had peripheral and central cyanosis , grade 4 clubbing , muscle wasting, needle marks, palmar erythema, and bilateral resting tremor but no asterixis. The patient had scattered telangiectasia over his body. The abdominal, cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurological examinations were normal.
Initial laboratory investigations demonstrated a low platelet count 104 × 109 per L (reference range (RR) 150 –400 × 109/L), normal white and red cell counts, and normal haemoglobin level. In addition, his coagulation profile, renal function, and electrolytes were almost within normal limits. Liver function test revealed elevated total bilirubin 34 μmol/L (RR 5-21 μmol/L) and direct bilirubin 17 μmol/L (RR 0-5 μmol/L). Total protein 82 g/L including albumin (39 g/L), globulin 39 g/L (RR 15-30 g/L), G-Glutamyl transferase, and alkaline phosphatase was within normal ranges. Alanine transaminase level was 108 U/L (RR < 41 U/L) and his alpha fetoprotein was 13.3 μg/L (RR < 9 μg /L). Electrocardiogram was normal, but chest X-ray showed bibasal nodular opacities. Hepatitis profile revealed a positive anti-HCV Antibodies, HCV genotype 3, and HCV viral load of 251188.640 IU/mL.
At this point, pneumonia and hepatic hydrothorax were extremely less likely based on the mentioned clinical and basic laboratory investigations.
Arterial blood gases (ABG) showed severe hypoxemia with improvement on lying down as follows: While setting, ABG readings were PH= 7.43, SO2= 57%, PO2=33.5 mmHg, PCO2= 31.9 mmHg, and HCO3=21 mmol/L. However, while lying down, his ABG results were PH= 7.438, SO2= 71.6%, PO2= 37.6 mmHg, PCO2= 29.3 mmHg, and HCO3= 21 mmol/L). A-a gradient increased in supine position from 76 mmHg to 78 mmHg. Abdominal Ultrasound showed liver surface nodularity and an incidental renal cyst. Gastroscopy confirmed the prescience of oesophageal varices hepatic gastropathy. As a result, his Child-Pugh score was 5 points (Class A) and MELD score (9 points)
His pulmonary function test showed normal forced expiratory volume to forced vital capacity ratio (FEV1/FVC) but reduced FEV1 and FVC. Chest computed tomography scan showed bibasal prominent pulmonary arterial dilatation and irregular borders of the liver, but no emphysematous or fibrotic changes. Contrast-enhanced transthoracic echocardiography was performed. Within 5 heart cycles from appearing in the right atrium, contrasts' microbubbles appeared in the left atrium and left ventricle .
Based on the history, physical examination, and laboratory investigations, our patient was diagnosed with hepatopulmonary syndrome We treated him for his underling liver disease with Sofosbuvir and Daclatasvir, and for HPS he was managed symptomatically with long term oxygen therapy (LTOT). Subsequently, he was closely followed up in the outpatient department by hepatologists and pulmonologists every 3 months, advised to receive vaccination for hepatitis A and hepatitis B, and assessed for liver transplant. After the completion of his medical therapy, the laboratory results confirmed the resolution of hepatitis C infection.