Our patient is a 57-year-old male, with a four-month history of HIV infection (CD4 count = 10/µL, HIV viral load > 3,000,000 copies/ml) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis, who complained of worsening fatigue and nausea for two months. He also complained of progressive unintentional weight loss (over 30 kg in this period) and a productive cough. No vision or sensory symptoms was reported. Additionally, there was no evidence of fever, loss of consciousness, or cognitive-behavioral demonstration; however, he had given a history of disrupted gait. Although, the neurological (i.e., finger-to-nose, heel-to-shin, and limb forces) and meningitis tests (i.e., neck stiffness, Brudzinski’s and Kernig’s signs) were normal. This could be related to the severe generalized weakness, as no neurological deficit was identified. He was on a drug regimen consisting of Truvada® (emtricitabine 200 mg– tenofovir disoproxil 300 mg) q24h, dolutegravir 50 mg q24h, and valganciclovir 450 mg q12h and was compliant with treatment. Laboratory results showed a pancytopenia (WBC = 1,500/µL, Hb = 6 g/dL, and platelets = 125,000/µL) and elevated CRP level of 92 mg/L. Lung CT-scan showed a 9 mm×6 mm nodule in the right middle lobe and a tree-in-bud pattern at the lower levels of the left lung . Abdominal ultrasound investigation revealed an enlarged spleen (15.5 cm), multiple enlarged paraaortic lymph nodes, and a 7 mm lymph node in the porta hepatis.
A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis indicated a decreased glucose level (24 mg/dL) as well as a normal protein level of 28 mg/dL and a WBC count of 0–1/L. Acid fast bacilli (AFB) staining in both sputum and CSF was positive. Viral, namely CMV and varicella zoster virus, and fungal diagnostic tests on the CSF specimen for probable agents were negative. No pathological finding in brain MRI was observed at this stage. Considering Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) infection, we started an anti-MTB empirical treatment, consisting of isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol, and rifampin (liver function tests were normal). Due to the pharmacokinetic interactions of rifampin and dolutegravir , we increased the dose of dolutegravir to 50 mg q12 h. No MTB growth was observed in the culture and GeneXpert® molecular tests of sputum and CSF were negative for MTB, raising the probability of NTM infection. Due to low blood cell counts, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly, we performed a simultaneous bone marrow biopsy and observed foamy histiocytes and NTM presence (AFB staining positive and GeneXpert® negative) . Clarithromycin was added to the previous regimen, for NTM infection coverage. At this stage, the results of previously-requested NTM polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis from the CSF specimen detected M. genavense presence (complete match to hsp65 gene) . Considering the NTM infection in the respiratory system and bone marrow, and M. genavense meningitis, we made a disseminated M. genavense infection diagnosis. The patient was discharged with NTM combinational drug treatment (five-drug) accompanied by ART and valganciclovir as his medical condition was stable.
Four months later he presented with generalized fatigue and anorexia, while claiming he had not consumed the NTM prescription appropriately; however, he was compliant with ART and valganciclovir. There were no abnormal findings in the examinations. CD4 count was 13/µL and lung CT scan prevailed that the tree-in-bud pattern vanished but the nodule was present with no significant size change. According to his previous history, we requested a brain MRI, which showed a right hemispherical mass in the corpus callosum with mass effects on the ventricle, accompanied by edema and two lesions in both hemispheres of the cerebellum . The patient did not consent for a cerebral biopsy to investigate potential diagnoses, such as toxoplasmosis and malignancies. However, considering the previously confirmed presence of M. genavense in CNS and poor Anti-NTM regimen compliance, the intracranial masses were most likely formed in the background of disseminated M. genavense infection. Anti-NTM drug combinations (ethambutol 1,200 mg q24h, rifampin 600 mg q24h, clarithromycin 500 mg q12h, levofloxacin 750 mg q24h, and amikacin 1,000 mg q24h) were initiated in conjunction with ART, valganciclovir, and prophylactic trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. We started dexamethasone eight mg q12h for perilesional edema. The next MRI within one week showed that the edema had regressed and reduced cerebral mass size, favoring the diagnosis. After the treatment, his clinical progression was desirable and he was discharged with the same prescriptions as of admission (except for amikacin, which was discontinued due to a rise in serum creatinine up to 1.8 mg/dL, and then improved before discharge to baseline by discontinuing the drug and hydrating). Dexamethasone was replaced by prednisolone, which was tapered gradually over the following weeks. Three months later, his symptoms were relieved, his drug compliance was complete, and he was clinically stable .