A 44-year-old woman was identified as having positive fecal occult blood and a halo within the left side of the liver upon ultrasonography at a regular medical check-up and was referred to our hospital in November 2017. A colonoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor in the rectum , and an adenocarcinoma was detected by biopsy from the tumor. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a well-defined solid mass in the lower rectum and bilateral and multiple (12 in total) low-attenuation lesions in the liver . The patient was diagnosed with rectal cancer with synchronous advanced liver metastases. Additional remote metastases were not detected, and therefore, surgical resection of the primary rectal cancer and liver metastasis was indicated. Due to the fact that the primary tumor in the rectum was small and the rectum was unobstructed, treatment for the CRLM was considered to be the key prognostic factor, and therefore, the liver-first strategy was adopted. At that stage, the indocyanine green retention rate after 15 min (ICG-R15) was 11.4%, and the estimated remnant liver volume was 61.1%; therefore, a liver surgery was considerable. However, because the CRLM lesions were highly progressive, we planned a neoadjuvant systemic chemotherapy first to provide an observational period to identify potential new metastatic lesions, which were refractory to systemic chemotherapy or contraindicative for surgical resection. Two courses of S-1 + oxaliplatin (SOX) + bevacizumab (BV) were administered (21-day cycle; day 1: oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2) + BV (7.5 mg/kg); day 1–14: S-1 (70 mg/m2/day)), and an additional course of SOX without BV was performed in preparation for surgery. At this point, the patient presented low white blood cell count (grade 2), generalized weakness (grade 2), loss of appetite (grade 1), and constipation (grade 1). The enforcement of chemotherapy resulted in a considerable reduction in the size of the tumor in both the rectum and the liver . The primary tumor wall thickening was reduced from 20 mm to 13 mm on CT, and upon colonoscopy, the tumor was seen as a 20 mm size type 2 lesion before chemotherapy , whereas the tumor was prominently reduced to nothing but a flat granulation scar after chemotherapy . In addition, the pathology upon colonoscopic biopsy detected nothing but inflammatory cells, and therefore we have concluded that both the primary and CRLM lesions responded well to chemotherapy. On the course of chemotherapy, there was no great change in the serum albumin, total bilirubin, or prothrombin time, and no ascites was observed. ICG-R15 was 12.0% even after chemotherapy. The estimated remnant liver volume was 73.4% at this point . Considering the fact that the CRLMs were multiple and bilobular, the liver-first strategy was estimated to be suitable for the case. Eleven weeks after the introduction of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and 3 weeks after the final chemotherapy (8 weeks after the final administration of the final BV), a total of 10 partial hepatectomies were performed to extirpate 12 lesions. The clamp crushing method and the Pringle maneuver was adopted within the procedure . Because all tumors were located close to the liver surface, all lesions were accessed easily without division of main branches of the portal vein or hepatic vein. We used a contrast-enhanced ultrasonography by Sonazoid to detect the CRLM lesions, which were reduced after chemotherapy . The operative time was 7 h 12 min, and the total blood loss was 1334 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 9. The pathology of the surgical specimen revealed nothing but scars replacing what supposedly were lesions of liver metastasis. No residue of cancerous cells was observed within the scar; therefore, it was concluded that complete remission was achieved through chemotherapy . Pathology revealed no findings of edema, fibrosis, or thrombosis around the central hepatic vein and the sinusoids in the background liver, indicating the fact that there were no signs of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome. Two months after the hepatectomy, a laparoscopic intersphincteric resection of the primary rectal tumor was performed. The operative time was 6 h 7 min, and the blood loss was 86 ml. The pathology showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma penetrating into the muscularis propria. Most cancerous cells were viable . There was no lymph node metastasis. After further analysis, although the primary lesion seemed exceedingly diminished after neoadjuvant chemotherapy upon colonoscopy, the preoperative chemotherapy was defined as grade 1a, and we concluded that its effect on the primary focus remained limited. The patient had a recurrence in two different sites in the lung (a single node in the lower-right lobe and another in the lower-left lobe) 10 months after the resection of the primary CRC lesion. A 2-stage surgery was performed to resect the metastatic lesions in the lungs. Three years after the diagnosis of colorectal cancer with synchronous liver metastases, there have been no signs of recurrence and the patient is still alive. The clinical time course of the patient and the change in the levels of tumor markers are summarized in Fig. .