Herein we report the case of a 50-year-old man, without past medical history, presented to our department of gastroenterology with abdominal pain and constipation for 3 months. The abdominal pain was not colicky but progressive and radiated to the epigastric region and relieved spontaneously without analgesics. No similar cases were mentioned in the family, neither any genetic syndrome nor malignancies. No drug history, nor professional exposure were noticed. There was no reported history of vomiting, diarrhea or passage of dark-colored stool and neither weight loss. At physical examination, there were no palpable masses and no collateral findings on the abdominal wall. Biological tests and blood tumor markers were normal. Endoscopy revealed a sessile polyp in the right colonic angle. Biopsy concluded to a tubular adenoma with low-grade dysplasia. The CT scan showed that the mass was measuring 4 cm in greatest diameter, polypoid with a large base . No other polyp were identified. The patient was transferred to the general surgery department and underwent right hemi colectomy under general anesthesia, by a well-experienced surgeon specialized in operative management of colorectal carcinomas. The surgical procedure turned good without complications, such as hemorrhage, occlusion or peritonitis. On gross examination, the mass was polypoid with a white lobulated surface and large implantation base . Microscopically, an invasive adenocarcinoma was identified occupying the colonic mucosal with an invasion of the submucosa . The tumor showed a tubule-villous pattern on the surface and was made mostly of jagged crowded glands in the depth. Some region exhibiting Paneth cell differentiation characterized by an abundant cytoplasm (low nuclear: cytoplasm ratio) containing bright eosinophilic coarse granules and centrally located nuclei . The transition between the two patterns was gradual with few glands featuring both Paneth cells and mucin secreting cells.There were no specific distribution of Paneth cells, which were observed both on the surface, and in the depth of the tumor. Masson’s trichrome stain highlighted the dense granules within the Paneth cells. At immunochemistry, the tumor show positive nuclear staining with b-catenin antibody and a stable microsatellite profile (MSS). Surgical margins were free and no metastatic lymph nodes were found, thus the tumor was staged T1N0. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient remained free of symptoms at the 6-month follow-up and had no evidence of recurrence. No adjuvant therapy was indicated. However, a close follow-up is planned based on endoscopy and radiologic examinations, to avoid any recurrence and to check new polyps raising. The patient was well informed about his pathology, outcomes and potential risks of recurrence for instance.