The main complaint was left-sided limb weakness and slurred speech.
A 49-year-old middle-aged man was admitted to a local hospital with a sudden onset of left-sided limb weakness and slurred speech for 1 h. The patient was conscious upon admission and had no discomforts, such as headaches or chest pain.
He had a previous history of hypertension and was not on any oral medications to control blood pressure.
He denied any family history of brain diseases.
Clinical examination upon admission revealed consciousness, incomplete mixed aphasia, grade 2 muscle strength in the left upper extremity, grade 0 muscle strength in the left lower extremity, and normal muscle strength in the right limb.
Blood tests were performed. Routine blood tests: leukocyte counts, 15.8 × 109/L; platelet counts, 119 × 109/L; erythrocytes, 4.95 × 1012/L; and calcitoninogen, 4.49 ng/mL. Cardiac enzyme profiling revealed: lactate dehydrogenase, 768 U/L; creatine kinase, 1743 U/L; creatine kinase isoenzyme, 74 U/L. Blood gas analysis revealed: lactate, 2.5 mmol/L With regards to coagulation function, prothrombin time was 15.2 s, with an international standardized ratio of 1.27, prothrombin time was 18.4 s, fibrinogen was 1.07 g/L, and D-dimer was 7.190 mg/L.
Cranial computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral basal ganglia and lateral ventricular paraventricular infarct lesions . This patient had a National Institute of Health Stroke Scale score of 9. In this patient, recombinant tissue fibrinogen activator was used to perform intravenous thrombolysis (IVT). The patient became less conscious and had grade 0 muscle strength in the left limb. On the next day, he was transferred from the local hospital to our hospital for further treatment. He was examined at our hospital and found to have a D-dimer greater than 100000 mg/L. Cranial CT was performed, which revealed multiple cerebral infarctions in the right basal ganglia and right frontotemporoparietal . CT perfusion showed multiple ischemic cores in the right frontotemporoparietal lobe as well as relatively extensive hypoperfusion areas . Emergency head and neck CT angiography (CTA) revealed aortic dissection in the ascending aorta, innominate artery, and right common carotid artery. Then, CTA of thoracoabdominal aorta was performed, which revealed aortic dissection in the ascending aorta, innominate artery, right common carotid artery, abdominal trunk, common hepatic artery, splenic artery, superior mesenteric artery, left common iliac artery, and left external iliac aorta . CTA revealed a Stanford type A aortic dissection that extended from aortic root to the left external iliac artery.