A 42-year-old male patient was seen at consultation with pulsatile, lateral neck pain for three weeks prior to presentation associated with a mild headache. This pain, described as heaviness, was sometimes located in the mid-thoracic region, exacerbated by a slight dry cough and associated with a low-grade fever and sometimes with an exertional dyspnea. There was no associated hemoptysis, vomiting, chills, sweating or dizziness. His past medical history was unremarkable apart from recurrence of oral and genital ulcers as well as inflammatory arthralgia.
On admission, clinical examination revealed a hyperthermia at 38.3°C but was hemodynamically stable. There was a warm, slightly painful, right latero-cervical swelling extending to the supraclavicular fossa. There was evident collateral venous circulation . The lung fields were clear, and there were no palpable lymph nodes and no signs of phlebitis. Further examination revealed healing scrotal ulcers and oral ulcerations as well as erythematous skin lesions.
Ophthalmologic examination was unremarkable. Laboratory tests showed a microcytic anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 9.6 g/dl, with a normal white blood cell count of 9,100/mm3. Admission electrocardiogram noted a regular sinus tachycardia. Doppler transthoracic echocardiography noted a slight circumferential pericardial effusion with no sign of pulmonary hypertension or intracavitary thrombus.
Chest computed tomo-angiography showed cruoric internal jugular vein thrombosis extending to the superior vena cava with significant venous collateral circulation. There was no hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy, neither was there any lung parenchymal abnormality . The abdominopelvic ultrasound was normal.
The patient was treated with prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) and colchicine (2 mg per day), as well as anticoagulation with heparin and a vitamin K antagonist (Acenocoumarol), with regular INR monitoring. Clinical evolution was favorable during hospitalization, with residual discrete right supraclavicular swelling. There was no accident associated with anticoagulants.