A fifty-seven-year-old Caucasian male presented with progressive exertional dyspnoea and occasional sharp left sided chest pain over a two-week period. He is otherwise a fit and active with no significant past medical history.
Clinical examination and routine investigations were unremarkable. Chest-x ray revealed a left hilar soft tissue density which was suggestive for lymphadenopathy. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a lobulated anterior mediastinal mass measuring 5.8 × 4.9 cm, abutting the pericardium with no visible fat plane and bulging into the medial aspect of the left lung without signs of infiltration . Differential diagnoses included a thymic tumour and lymphoma. The latter was radiologically and clinically less favourable after discussion with haematologists and normal investigations and blood tumour marker profile. However, the CT guided biopsy showed cores of an adenoid cystic carcinoma-like tumour presenting either a primary thymic adenocarcinoma with adenoid cystic pattern or metastasis from salivary gland origin. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed a highly avid anterior mediastinal mass with an SUV max of 10.4 and no tracer uptake in the salivary glands or elsewhere ruling out metastasis from salivary glands. There was no medical history of salivary gland neoplasms in this patient and a CT of the head/neck region showed no evidence of malignancy.
The patient was thence referred for discussion in the thymoma multi-disciplinary meeting (MDT) which recommended surgical resection. Pericardial and chest wall invasion was excluded with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The mass was approached through median sternotomy. An encapsulated lesion lying towards the left side was seen involving the left upper lobe of the lung and pericardium with doubtful invasion of the pleura. The tumour was completely resected including an 85 X 20 mm left upper wedge and 40 mm pericardial edge . The adjacent parietal pleura was sent for frozen section which showed no atypia or malignancy but rather an inflamed pleura.
Macroscopically, the mass measured 50 × 25 × 58 mm without evidence of capsular breach. Microscopically, a predominant cribriform architecture with both solid and cystic degenerated areas were seen. Mitotic figures were infrequent with frequent foci of tumour necrosis. A panel of immunohistochemistry markers was conducted. The tumour cells were strongly positive for CD117, CK7, with patchy positivity for CK19. The immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of epithelial and myoepithelial components (p63, p40 and CK5/6 positive). Figures and show histological slices of the specimen.
Taking into consideration the morphology, the positive expression of CD117 and the presence of epithelial and myoepithelial components, metastasis from adenoid cystic carcinoma was favoured over primary thymic carcinoma with adenoid cystic-like features. A true primary adenoid cystic carcinoma is very unusual and careful assessment was performed to definitively exclude the possibility of metastasis. Further testing was done on the tumour for an MYB gene rearrangement. Results showed no clear evidence of rearrangement at 6q23.2-q23.3 .
Grading of the tumour was rather challenging. The proportion of solid areas present was less than 30% and therefore it was considered as a low-grade lesion, which is the same classification as for primary salivary tumours. There was however patchy necrosis with lymphatic and venous invasion which could indicate a high degree of aggression. The tumour was staged based on the TNM 8th edition as a pT1bN0Mx, R0 with lymphatic and venous invasion.
The morphology between ACC and TCACC is different and the IHC is different both in terms of markers expressed and pattern of expression. Periodic Acid Schiff was helpful (material positive in ACC but not TCACC). This tumour was unusual in that the amount of necrosis and the vascular invasion was patchy hence the need to exclude a primary elsewhere.