A 50-year-old man admitted to a nearby hospital for long-lasting back pain that had been worsening over the previous two months. His medical history was significant for deep vein thrombosis in the left lower extremity and a prior pseudoaneurysm repair in the right superficial femoral artery with a prosthetic graft, which later became occluded. He had also undergone an ileectomy for a small bowel obstruction caused by multiple ulcers in the terminal ileum. He had no remarkable family history of cerebrovascular or cardiovascular disease. He was a current smoker with a 60 pack-year smoking history.
Laboratory tests were significant for inflammation, mild renal dysfunction, and coagulopathy (fibrinogen level, 655 mg/dL; D-dimer level, 1.6 μg/mL). Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 23 mm pseudoaneurysm in the right RA and a solitary 23 mm aneurysm in the left internal iliac artery . He was transferred to and hospitalized at our institution on the day of the initial diagnosis.
Antihypertensive therapy and analgesics were administered immediately. Radiologists attempted coil embolization of the right RA on the third day after admission; however, the EVT was unsuccessful because the right RA was torn at the orifice, and the guide wire rapidly migrated into the extravascular space.
We performed EVT on the 10th day after admission. Direct puncture was performed to access the left common femoral artery, and the left axillary artery was accessed by surgical cutdown. Blood flow to the entire right RA was sacrificed to effectively isolate the pseudoaneurysm. The left RA was cannulated from the axillary access, and a 23 × 33 mm Excluder Aortic Extender (W.L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA) was deployed in the abdominal aorta to thoroughly cover the right RA . The left RA was also partially covered. The left internal iliac aneurysm was situated at the bifurcation of the superior and inferior gluteal arteries, and the superior gluteal artery flow was spared to prevent postoperative gluteal claudication. The left inferior gluteal artery was cannulated and embolized through the axillary access, followed by cannulation of the left superior gluteal artery and advancement of a 7-Fr guiding sheath. A 6 × 59 mm Gore Viabahn VBX balloon-expandable endoprosthesis (W.L. Gore & Associates) was deployed to cover from the left internal iliac artery to the left superior gluteal artery . The final angiography revealed no endoleak from either aneurysm. The operative time was 187 min. Of note, no vascular fragility was observed during exposure and handling of the arteries.
Although the patient was intubated for five days after surgery because of hypertensive heart failure secondary to renal hypertension, renal function gradually improved to baseline and the preoperative back pain resolved. Contrast-enhanced CT on the 12th day after surgery revealed no enhancement of either pseudoaneurysm . The patient was discharged 16 days after surgery without gluteal claudication or other adverse events.
The patient was tested for HLA-A26/B51 and COL3A1 genetic abnormalities, and the results were unremarkable. Other than pseudoaneurysms, the patient exhibited no symptoms of Behçet disease, including uveitis and genital ulcers. Therefore, vascular Behçet disease and vEDS were excluded from the diagnosis. Specialists were consulted to analyze the possibility of collagen diseases, but no characteristic features in his face or habitus typical of other Marfan-like syndromes, such as Loeys-Dietz syndrome, were identified.
Consequently, no extravasation from the right RA and no increase in the size of left iliac artery aneurysm has been noted in the last 12 months to date .