An 80-year-old woman presented to our hospital with severe right hip pain that had been worsening for 7 days. Her initial temperature, white blood cell (WBC) count, and C-reactive protein (CRP) were 35.8 °C, 6700/mm3, and 34.3 mg/dl, respectively. The initial blood culture revealed the presence of Micromonas micros. Radiography revealed osteoarthritis of the right hip joint (-a). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed destruction of the right femoral head and increased joint fluid in the right hip . She was diagnosed as having septic shock associated with acute septic arthritis of the right hip joint. Her medical history included bilateral osteoarthritis of the hip joints, and she underwent left cementless THA (-a). The patient had no relevant drug history, family history (including any relevant genetic information), or psychosocial history. The findings and management plan were discussed with the patient. After obtaining her informed consent, the patient was prepared and shifted for surgery.
The duration from the initial symptom presentation to the 1st-stage operation was 20 days to allow for treatment of septic shock. The duration of antibiotic administration before operation was 20 days (intravenous penicillin and clindamycin). Preformed antibiotic-loaded cement spacers were implanted in the 1st-stage operation. Synovial fluid of the hip joint was obtained for culture. All potentially infected, necrotic, and ischemic tissues were removed. Thereafter, a high-pressure pulsatile lavage with 21 L of lactated Ringer solution was performed. After reaming of the femoral canal, a preformed antibiotic-loaded cement spacer (HIP CEMENT SPACER MOLD, Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, US) with reinforcement of a 2.4-mm Kirschner wire was implanted (-b). Two grams of vancomycin (Sawai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) were added per 40 g Cemex RX (Tecres S.p.A., Italy). The 1st stage operative time required 79 min. The total blood loss in the 1st-stage operation was 340 mL (intraoperative blood loss, 100 mL; postoperative blood loss, 240 mL). In the 1st-stage operation, the culture of the hip joint fluid was negative. The suction drain was removed when there was less than 50 mL clear fluid/24 h. The period of drain insertion was 5 days after the 1st-stage operation. In accordance with the sensitivity profile of the causative organism in the initial blood culture, antibiotics were administered after the 1st-stage operation (intravenous penicillin and clindamycin for 15 days). Oral antibiotics (amoxicillin and clindamycin for 16 days followed by clindamycin for 73 days) were continued until the day before the 2nd-stage operation. The interval to the 2nd-stage operation was 104 days. Weight bearing on the operated extremity was toe-touch weight bearing with crutches. Complications between the 1st- and 2nd-stage operations were caused by drug eruptions attributed to amoxicillin. The WBC count and CRP before the 2nd-stage operation was 4400/mm3 and 0.22 mg/dl, respectively.
In the 2nd-stage operation, a preformed antibiotic-loaded cement spacer was removed, and debridement of the necrotic and ischemic tissue was performed. Synovial fluid was obtained for culture. After a high-pressure pulsatile lavage with 9 L of lactated Ringer solution, the hips were reconstructed using the cementless implants. The acetabular component was AG-PROTEX cup (Kyocera, Tokyo, Japan). The femoral component was AG-PROTEX stem (Kyocera, Tokyo, Japan) . The operative time for the 2nd stage was 65 min. The total blood loss during the 2nd-stage operation was 550 mL (intraoperative blood loss, 440 mL; postoperative blood loss, 110 mL). In the 2nd-stage operation, cultures of the hip joint fluid were negative. The suction drain was removed 2 days after the 2nd-stage operation as per routine. Antibiotic administration duration after the 2nd-stage operation was 85 days (intravenous cefazolin for 1 day followed by oral clindamycin or 84 days). Walking training was started without limitation of weight-bearing within the allowable pain range beginning 2 days after surgery.
The follow-up duration after the 2nd-stage operation was 28 months. There was no complication or recurrence after 2nd-stage operation. WBC count and CRP at final follow-up were 2600/mm3 and 0.03 mg/dl, respectively. Plain radiograph at final follow-up showed no loosening around acetabular and femoral component (-c). The patient was well and showed agreement with the positive results.
The study protocol adhered to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki, and the study was approved by the institutional review board. The patient was informed that this case study would be submitted for publication, and she provided consent.