A male aged 52 years was admitted to our outpatient department with a headache. His headache first appeared one month prior to admission to our hospital, and worsened severely at six hours prior to admission. He had a history of good physical health (without organ transplants, leukemia, diabetes, underlying malignancy, human immunodeficiency virus, long-term use of steroid and autoimmune disease) and did not report any foci of infection, sinusitis, or head trauma. The patient was hospitalized with severe headache as an inpatient in our department. Physical examination showed that the patient was conscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15, had sensitivity to light reflex, and a soft neck. He reported no vomiting or blurred vision. The patient reported muscle weakness in the left lower limb (4/5). His body temperature was 36.7 °C. His complete blood count indicated a white blood cell count of 11.4 × 109/L, 7.5% lymphocytes, 88.3% neutrophils and a C-reactive protein level of 1.1 mg/L. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a sharply defined lesion (3.1 cm × 2.4 cm × 2.9 cm) in the right temporal lobe with long T1-weighted and T2-weighted signals shadows and a circular equisignal . Enhanced diffusion-weighted imaging signals were observed in the center of lesion . The signal intensity of the ring wall was increased after enhancement, and the thickness of the ring wall was uniform . The lesion was surrounded by large patches of edema . The adjacent lateral ventricles and parenchyma displayed compression deformation and the midline structures were slightly shifted toward the left . Magnetic resonance spectrum (MRS) showed an elevated lactic acid peak, and low N-acetyl aspartate (NAA), choline, and creatine peaks .
After diagnosis of brain abscess based on the imaging results, puncture aspiration of the space-occupying lesion in the right temporal lobe was performed. Dark yellow pus was extracted during the operation, but the capsule (abscess wall) was left untreated. The patient’s headache was alleviated, but he had a low-grade fever that fluctuated around 37.3 °C after the operation. The patient was initially treated with meropenem (1 g intravenous (i.v.) every 8 h) according to standard practice. Pus culture showed Gram positive, partially acid-fast, and strictly aerobic filamentous bacilli and was further identified as N. brasiliensis by 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing after 3 days cultured. 16S rRNA gene sequencing revealed 99% homology with that of strain N. brasiliensis at the GenBank database. A drug sensitivity test (E-test method) showed that the bacterium was sensitive to amikacin, ceftriaxone, trimethoprim, gentamycin, doxycycline, linezolid, piperacillin–tazobactum, meropenem. The patient was then treated with amikacin (2 g i.v. every 12 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g i.v. every 12 h). After 10 days, the patient’s temperature returned to normal and his headache completely disappeared. The complete blood count results were also normal. The head MRI showed that the space-occupying lesion in the right temporal lobe had disappeared and the patches of low-density shadows were substantially reduced . The midline structures were no longer shifted, but the wall of the abscess was still apparent . Physical examination showed that the patient was conscious, and had normal limb muscle strength and normal body temperature. As such, we agreed to the discharge the patient in accordance with his request.
However, the patient was readmitted to our hospital three months after discharge with severe headache. The headache had progressively worsened over the previous 10 days, and was associated with vomiting. Physical examination showed that the patient was conscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15, exhibited sensitivity to light reflex, a soft neck, and normal limb muscle strength. Body temperature was 36.8 °C, and he had a white blood cell count of 10.4 × 109/L, 10.5% lymphocytes, 83.5% neutrophils, and a C-reactive protein level of 0.5 mg/L. Head MRI showed multiple irregular lesions (the maximum lesion measured 2.1 cm × 1.4 cm × 0.8 cm) in the right temporal lobe and occipital lobe with slightly long T1-weighted and T2-weighted signals shadows and equi- or low- intensity fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signals were observed . The signal intensity of the ring wall was slightly increased after enhancement and the lesion was surrounded by large patches of edema . The adjacent lateral ventricles and parenchyma displayed compression deformation and the midline structures were slightly shifted toward the left .
To excise the lesion, we performed craniotomy; yellow pus was extracted during the operation and the capsule (abscess wall) was not visible. The patient’s headache was alleviated; however, he again had a low-grade fever that fluctuated around 37.5 °C after operation. The patient was treated with amikacin (2 g i.v. every 12 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g i.v. every 12 h) according to his previous postoperative therapy. Pus culture results again indicated the presence of N. brasiliensis, and it was also sensitive to amikacin, ceftriaxone, trimethoprim, gentamycin, doxycycline, linezolid, piperacillin–tazobactum, meropenem. Patient continued to be treated with amikacin (2 g i.v. every 12 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g i.v. every 12 h). After seven days, his temperature returned to normal and the headache completely disappeared. The complete blood count results were also normal. The head MRI showed that the space-occupying lesions in the right temporal lobe and occipital lobe had disappeared and the patches of low-density shadows were substantially reduced . The midline structures were no longer shifted . Physical examination showed that the patient was conscious, and had normal limb muscle strength. The patient continued to receive treatment with amikacin (2 g i.v. every 12 h) and ceftriaxone (2 g i.v. every 12 h) for three weeks before discharge. Additionally, the patient continued to take oral trimethoprim (1.9 g three times a day; the dose was calculated by weight) for three months after discharge. There was no recurrence at the time of the one-year postoperative follow up .