A 40-year-old Japanese female with gravidity 2 and parity 2 presented with prolonged menorrhagia and severe anemia. The patient had a history of cervical carcinoma in situ and underwent cervical conization 10 years ago. During postoperative follow-up, carcinoma did not recur, but menorrhagia and anemia persisted. Six years before admission, a uterine leiomyoma 3.5 cm in diameter was confirmed by transvaginal ultrasound examination; the tumor increased in size to 5 cm in diameter during evaluation 2 years before admission. During the last year, an extrauterine mass 5 cm in diameter protruding from the posterior uterine wall was discovered. For further assessment and treatment, the patient was admitted to the gynecology department at our hospital. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a large pelvic mass measuring 10 × 9 × 7 cm containing hemorrhagic cysts. The mass was located in the left posterolateral myometrial wall with an extrauterine extension. Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingectomy was performed for suspicion of uterine sarcoma or degenerated leiomyoma.
Macroscopically, the placenta-like extrauterine mass measuring 10 × 9 × 9 cm was protruding from the posterior uterine wall . This mass consisted of multiple nodules with a deep red color giving it a placenta-like appearance and contained numerous hemorrhagic cysts measuring up to 2 cm in diameter . The exophytic mass showed continuity as a white dissecting multinodular mass measuring 4 × 3 × 3 cm in the left lateral myometrial wall . The rest of the myometrium was diffusely thickened but did not contain any nodular lesions.
Histologically, both extra–and intrauterine components of the mass consisted of numerous ill–defined nodules, with nodules of the intrauterine component dissecting the myometrium . All nodules exhibited sparsely distributed swirls of benign smooth muscle cells, with marked hyalinized degeneration and hydropic change . The myocytes were uniform with slightly enlarged and bland spindle–shaped nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm . Mitotic figures, significant nuclear atypia, and coagulative tumor necrosis suggesting malignancy were not identified. Abundant collagen fibers were found among myocyte fascicles . Numerous congested and dilated vessels and edematous connective tissue between nodules were also found prominently in the extrauterine component of the mass. These macroscopic and histologic features of the tumor were similar to those of previously reported cases of cotyledonoid dissecting leiomyoma of the uterus [–]. In addition, numerous glands composed of columnar epithelium resembling endometrial gland epithelium were surrounded by stromal cells with features of endometrial stroma in both the extra-and intrauterine tumor components. These glands were markedly dilated in the extrauterine component and were concordant with gross hemorrhagic cysts . The endometrial gland-like columnar epithelial cells were nonciliated without cellular atypia , whereas the stromal cells were diffusely positive for CD10 (monoclonal, #56C6; Leica Biosystems, Newcastle, UK), an endometrial stromal marker, by immunohistochemistry ; these findings were similar to the endometrial component of adenomyosis. Interestingly, some of the glands were enclosed by several layers of smooth muscle cells with myometrial features . These smooth muscle cells were negative to slightly positive for Bcl-2 (monoclonal, #124; DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) by immunohistochemistry, similar to that observed in tumor-free myometrium, whereas Bcl-2 expression was abundant in leiomyoma cells . In addition, ordinary adenomyosis was found in the thickened and tumor-free myometrium . All together, these findings suggested that the glands found in the tumor mass were part of the adenomyosis that were invaded by tumor growth. Endometriosis was not found in any other parts of the resected uterus or the fallopian tubes. The patient showed no recurrence at 3 months of postoperative follow-up.