In 2009, a 30-year-old woman, native of Karachi (Sindhi ethnicity), presented at our clinic with a 3-year history of discharging sinus of her right hip and inability to ambulate. She had a history of right proximal femur fracture secondary to a trivial trauma 11 years earlier . She initially remained under treatment of bone setters for 3 months and then she underwent fixation (in 1998) with dynamic hip screw in a tertiary hospital without a biopsy being done although history and X-rays were suggestive of pathologic fracture. She remained symptomatic postoperatively and gradually the implant cut through the femoral head . In 2007 the implant was removed in another tertiary hospital and tissue was sent for histopathology which showed hydatid disease. Postoperatively she developed discharging sinus for which she underwent multiple debridements along with prolonged courses of albendazole but her condition did not improve.
In 2009, she was offered a hemipelvectomy after which she visited our hospital. On examination she was unable to bear weight on her right leg. Her right leg was shortened by 4cm; the girth of her right thigh was increased by 8cm. There were multiple discharging sinuses over her right thigh and right hip with seropurulent discharge. There were multiple scars over the lateral aspect of her right proximal thigh with limited, painful range of motion of her right hip. Distal neurovascular status was intact. X-rays were performed that showed grossly extensive involvement of her proximal femur and acetabulum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her pelvis was done which showed erosions and altered signals in right proximal femur, acetabuli, ischium pubic rami and right ilium . There was atrophy of her hip muscles, scarring and lymphatics obstruction. Her uterus, ovaries and opposite hip were unremarkable. An ultrasound of her abdomen was unremarkable. Options of hemipelvectomy versus a limb salvage form of modified internal hemipelvectomy and wide margin resection were explained to her. The second option had a risk of recurrence and infection but she opted for the same.
In March 2009, an internal hemipelvectomy with wide margin resection of soft tissue and proximal femur was done . Perioperatively frozen sections were sent from resected margins that were reported as disease free (no cyst wall, no scolices). Postoperatively she remained on skeletal traction and received albendazole therapy for more than 3 months. As her wound and infection parameters gradually improved she underwent reconstruction with free vascularized fibular graft along with locking compression plate (LCP) in August 2009 . Postoperatively a hip spica was applied. Follow-up imaging was done to assess union . Gradually her ambulation progressed and she was able to ambulate without support after a long time.
She remained ambulant ‘as tolerated’ until February 2013 when she had a fall at home and sustained right patella fracture for which tension band wiring was done . Her postoperative recovery remains smooth and now, in August 2014, 60 months (5 years) postoperative from her reconstructive surgery she is ambulant without any support. At present she is infection and disease free.