A 25-year-old man had low back pain with right lower limb pain for 15 d.
The patient presented with low back pain with right lower limb pain 15 d ago.
Past health denied any other medical history.
The patient denied any history of genetic disease or infection.
Vital signs for the patient upon admittance were: body temperature, 36.5 °C; blood pressure, 112/70 mmHg; heart rate, 84 beats per min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. The patient presented in a forced position, was limping, and exhibited slight straightening of lumbar curvature. Obvious limited mobility of the lumbar region was noted, with marked tenderness present between the L4 and S1 spinous process and the right side of the spine. Radiating numbness in the right lower limb and negative knocking pain were further reported. A neurological examination revealed no abnormalities. Various physical tests were performed. Positive results were obtained for the right straight leg raising test (Lasegue) to 30°, strengthening test, right piriformis muscle tension test, cervical flexion test (Linder), and lying on the back with a straight stomach test. In contrast, the cross leg lifts test, right femoral nerve stretching test, and Patrick test were negative. Patellar tendon reflex, Achilles tendon reflex, and double lower limb muscle strength and tension were normal. There were no obvious abnormalities in depth sensation. Grade five bilateral hallux dorsalis extension muscle strength was observed and the bilateral Babinski sign was negative.
Routine blood work was performed: Neutrophilic granulocyte percentage, 75.54%; percentage of eosinophils, 0.24%; lymphocyte percentage, 17.92%; hypersensitive C-reactive protein, 11.89 mg/L. Routine examination of urine and stool showed no abnormalities. Liver function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and biochemical examinations were also within normal ranges.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the lumbar region was conducted in October 2017 and revealed a L5/S1 disc prolapse, nucleus pulposus detachment into the spinal canal, and compression of the right nerve root . The scan indicated a serious condition where protrusion could potentially cause damage to the spinal cord. To determine the extent of bone marrow compression, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also performed of the lumbar region. Stenosis of the right lateral recess and compression of the right nerve root were found to be caused by a L5/S1 intervertebral disc prolapse . The disc was 1.0 cm beyond the vertebral edge and hung along the posterior vertebral edge. The effective sagittal diameter of the spinal canal was 0.7–0.8 cm . The patient was diagnosed with LIDH and surgical resection was recommended. However, the patient elected to undergo conservative treatment involving TCM.