The patient is a 100-year-old man who entered the emergency department (ER) of the IRCCS Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy for abdominal distension and pain with constipation in the last four days. His abdomen was swollen with a palpable mass in his lower right quadrant.
The medical history included insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, glaucoma, osteoporosis, osteoarthritis and a laparotomy for cholecystectomy in 2008, and a subsequent open surgical procedure for biliary peritonitis.
The patient’s medical regimen included insulin glargine (6 U/die), ursodeoxycholic acid (300 mg/day), pantoprazole (20 mg/day) and Travoprost drops for glaucoma.
At ER admission the patient’ clinical parameters included a mild temperature of 37.0 °C, a blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg and a pulse rate of 100 beats/min. Blood test results showed an increased white blood cells count of 12.000/mm3 (neutrophils 10.500/mm3), moderate to severe anemia (hemoglobin concentration of 7,8 g/dL; MCV 79,2 fL), platelets 399.000/mm3, C-reactive protein 87,0 mg/dL and low albumin 2.7 g/dL. Renal and liver function, total and direct bilirubin were all within normal levels.
Abdominal X-ray showed dilated small bowel segments in the left and middle area of the abdomen with air-fluid levels. An CT scan showed a 6-cm-long, circumferential and stenosing mass in the ascending colon (immediately below hepatic Sg6), hydro-air levels of the small intestine, especially in the ileal area, and the pelvis, the distension of the cecum and of the distal segment of the ascending colon, with a maximum diameter of 9.5 cm, containing fecaloid material . There was no radiological sign of metastases in the liver or lungs.
The patient was diagnosed with an ileus caused by stenosing ascending colon cancer with abnormal distension of the right colon at higher visceral risk of perforation. The patient was asked for consent for the emergency surgery consisting of right colectomy and primary anastomosis, as recommended in the current guidelines . However, the patient refused to give his informed consent for surgery and, as an alternative surgical procedure, a lateral decompressive cecostomy without one-stage primary tumor resection during emergency operation was performed in local anesthesia (operating time about 25 min), minimizing the risk for colon perforation with preoperative blood transfusion and intravenous fluid replacement.
Thereafter, the patient was shifted to the surgical ward for post-operative clinical management based on a multidisciplinary team-based approach including a geriatrician who was in charge of the patients’ clinical conditions on a daily basis by virtue of a comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA). On the basis of the CGA assessment, a series of specific clinical conditions were identified such as malnutrition, hypomobility and the potential drug related iatrogenic syndrome and the appropriate therapeutic interventions were performed, including nutritional oral supplementation, rehabilitation and drug deprescribing .
The pre morbid patient’s clinical condition showed that he lived independently at home, received appropriate social support, (Gijon scale 7/25), had an initial impairment in both the instrumental and basal activities of daily living (Barthel Index 90/100) in (Instrumental Activities of Daily Living – IADL 3/8) with a faster functional decline experienced in the last two weeks. During the in-hospital stay, the patient had preserved consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15/15). The Mini-Mental State Examination was used to screen the cognitive status (MMSE 21/30), while the presence of delirium was assessed daily for 5 consecutive days with the 4AT test (4AT score: 2/12; 3/12; 2/12 at first, third and fifth post-operative day respectively). Non-pharmacological based strategies and interventions were adopted to minimize the risk of incident postoperative delirium targeting sleep disrupted circadian rhythm, visual or hearing deprivation, immobility and dehydration .
A mild multimorbidity burden (Cumulative Illness Rate Scale for Geriatrics , CIRS comorbidity 2/13 and severity 1.6/5) was assessed. During the in-hospital stay drug deprescribing has led the reduction in the two drugs regimens, minimizing the risk for iatrogenic syndrome Clinical examination was performed on a daily basis with maintained satisfactory cardiopulmonary function and clinical parameters.
A reduced gait speed (0.3 m/sec) with the need of a walker and an increased risk of fall (Tinetti Scale 12/28) were observed during the in hospital stay and a rehabilitation training program was started to recover motor and functional abilities.
During the postoperative in hospital stay, the patient had favorable post-operative outcomes with a prompt canalization of the ostomy that allowed the successful administration of a solid diet the day after surgery.
In particular, the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA 17/30) showed mild malnutrition that along with unintentional weight loss, poor appetite and substantial decreased food intake, motivated the request for a nutritional advice with the introduction of a parenteral nutrition, including glucose, lipids and amino acids (Olimel® N4E, 1000 ml, 700 Kcal), associated with the standard diet. Furthermore, in order to prehabilitate the patient for the second surgical step, an oral immunonutrition (Impact® Oral, 237 mL; Nestle) was also administered three times daily in the 5 day before surgery.
After all these clinical interventions, the clinical case was discussed in the disease management team (Surgeon, Oncologist, Geriatrician, Anesthesiologist) and the safety and tolerability of the second surgical step, that included the radical colon surgery with curative intent and bowel recanalization was shared and approved. The patient gave his informed consent to this second step surgical procedure.
The patient underwent midline vertical laparotomy incision extended supra-and-sub-umbilical for 20 cm, under general anesthesia. A right hemicolectomy with ileocolic latero-lateral stapled anastomosis were performed. Intraoperatively, the patient was monitored with bi-spectral index (BIS) and train of four (TOF), in order to adequately modulate the administration of anesthetic drugs. The surgical and anesthesia procedure lasted 35 min and the BIS range underwent a change between 82 (awaked patient) and 30 (asleep), with the BIS value that was never lower than 30, as strongly recommended by recent guidelines dedicated to elders’ anaesthesia and peri-operative care [–].
Furthermore, the systolic pressure was maintained stable, with a Mean Arterial Pressure (MAP) > 60 mmHg, and an invasive hemodynamic monitoring (radial catheter) was performed. In order to maintain an adequate body temperature, the patient was heated by infusing liquids through hot-lines and a convective hot air system.
A balanced general anesthesia was used with closed circuit mechanical ventilation and PEEP support. Isoflorane was used as a halogenated gas. Curalization was obtained with Rocuronium and analgesia with Remifentanyl.
Ten minutes before the end of surgery, the patient was given paracetamol 1 g intravenously. This therapy was repeated every eight hours for twenty-four hours, delivering appropriate pain control through an opioid-free analgesia.
During surgery, a nasogastric tube was placed and removed before extubating the patient.
At the end of surgery, the patient was awakened in the operating room and kept in the recovery room for about an hour. Given the stable hemodynamic profile and the adequate consciousness, he was transferred back to the surgical ward.
The patient successfully recovered from this second step surgery without immediate postoperative delirium. A dehiscence of the surgical wound was observed, needing daily medications. From the 4th day after surgery, the patient was administered oral re-feeding and started rehabilitation training program after six days from surgery. Ten days after surgery, the patient was transferred to the Geriatric Clinical ward for clinical continuity of care and extensive rehabilitation.
The histopathological findings of the surgical specimen showed a mucinous (G2) adenocarcinoma with moderate differentiation, with a superficial ulcer, infiltrating the wall up to the sub serosal adipose tissue (pT3), no venous invasion (pV0) and no perineural invasion (pPn0). The surgical margins were all cancer free. A total of 27 lymph nodes were removed, and a single metastasis (1/27 - pN1a- Lymph node ratio: 0.04) was observed. The colon cancer was diagnosed as stage IIIB (pT3, N1a, M0) according to the 7th edition of the International Union Against Cancer TNM classification. Immunostaining for mismatch repair proteins found an immunophenotype with microsatellite instability (MMRd - MSI) and BRAF V600E mutation. Indeed, the molecular analysis for BRAF gene mutations showed the mutation of the exon 15 (V600E; c.1799 T > A, p. - Val600Glu).
The centenarian was discharged home with in-home geriatric and rehabilitative care and geriatric simultaneous care on a monthly regular basis. Taking into consideration the advanced age and the biological vulnerability, the patient was not considered eligible for adjuvant chemotherapy. Furthermore, the family members were sent to genetic counseling based on the results of the analysis of mismatch repair genes.
After nine months from surgery, the patient lives independently at home with a progressive improvement of functional decline (Barthel Index 70/100, IADL 1/8) and a satisfactory quality of life (EuroQoL 5D 0,71/1).