We report the case of a 90-year old female who was admitted to our traumatology department to fix an extracapsular hip fracture of the left femur which occurred during a low-energy trauma. The history of the patient revealed that she suffered from osteoporosis. In her eighties, she had been conservatively treated with a cast for a right wrist fracture. Previously the patient had been treated for four vertebral compression fractures with thoraco-lumbar orthosis. Spine and femur DEXA scan measurements at the time of the vertebral fractures showed T-Score of -4.9 and -3.7, respectively, confirming a severe osteoporosis.
After routine clinical tests, the surgeon chose DHS to treat the pertrochanteric fracture. The operation was performed under general anesthesia, with the patient positioned on a fracture table. The fracture was manually reduced under image intensifier control. Thereafter the surgeon began placing two k-wires into the femoral head through the femoral neck with a lateral skin incision. A complication occurred in this step, as the surgeon found out that the first k-wire had been broken. A second K-wire was positioned. Next the cephalic screw was positioned in the middle of the femoral neck using K-wire to guide the insertion of the dynamic screw. Due to the severe osteoporosis, the surgeon decided to ream only the lateral cortex of the femur to boost the grip strength. The ensuing step was to slide the lateral plate to the cephalic screw until the internal side of the plate was seated on the lateral cortex of the femur. Owing to difficulties in placing the plate, the surgeon decided to use the mallet. During X-ray control of this surgical step, the cephalic screw appeared to have unexpectedly migrated into the pelvis . Several attempts with different surgical forceps were made to remove it through the screw hole, but the screw had penetrated deeply into the pelvis making it impossible to retrieve it. The general surgeon was called to perform an abdominal approach to remove the screw, which was finally retrieved in a few minutes without any further complications. Meanwhile, the procedure of osteosynthesis was completed using a condylar plate . The patient started postoperative physical reconditioning three days after, with only one day’s delay compared to standard procedure.