A 52-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a submucosal tumor of the ascending colon. The patient voiced no complaints, and no abnormalities were found upon physical examination. She had a past history of pulmonary tuberculosis at 22 years of age. Laboratory findings showed a slight elevation of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 3.6 mg/mL; reference value, <3.4 mg/mL) and other values were normal. Colonoscopy confirmed a submucosal tumor extending from the hepatic flexure to the ascending colon , with edges continuous with muscular layer as determined by ultrasound colonoscopy. Biopsy was attempted, but the tissue could not be collected because of bleeding. Computed tomography (CT) revealed irregular tumor edges and highly dense areas indicative of calcification . The primary tumor standardized uptake value (SUVmax) for F-18 deoxyglucose was 2.4–3.4 as determined by positron emission tomography . Gastrointestinal stromal or neuroendocrine tumors were considered as a differential diagnosis.
We performed a radical resection with lymph node dissection. General anesthesia was induced with full muscle relaxation, and a skin incision was made in the abdomen. A firm tumor was confirmed in the ascending colon, but the abdominal cavity was devoid of metastatic or disseminated lesions. The ileocolic vein and artery, as well as an accessory right colic vein, were identified, ligated, and cut, and the main lymph nodes on the anterior surface of the inferior mesenteric vein from gastrocolic trunk to ileocolic vein were dissected. We resected along the fusion fascia between the mesocolon and retroperitoneum; the resultant surgical specimen completely encompassed a firm tumor.
The resected specimen was approximately 6.5 × 4.0 × 3.2 cm , the center of the solid tumor being located in the middle of the resected specimen. Pathologic examination revealed proliferating spindle cells from the submucosa to subserosa , as well as partial ossification. The mitotic rate was eight mitoses/10 high-power fields. No necrotic areas were detected, and the tumor was not encapsulated. Well-differentiated adipose tissue surrounded the tumor, but contained atypical nuclei with condensed chromosomes . Immunohistochemistry was positive for p16, CDK4, and MDM2 expression . Based on these clinicopathological findings, the tumor was classified as well-differentiated/dedifferentiated liposarcoma.
A firm mass of dedifferentiated sarcoma was completely resected. However, there were some atypical cells in the adipose tissue around the firm tumor and these were diagnosed as well differentiated liposarcoma. The well-differentiated liposarcoma component extended to the surgical margin in places; however, only normal adipose tissue was detected at most of the surgical margin. A positive surgical margin was detected only for the parts of the well differentiated sarcoma near the firm mass. No lymph node metastasis was detected. Microscopic remnant of well-differentiated liposarcoma was confirmed according to pathological findings, but post-surgical FDG-PET CT and enhanced CT could not detect the remnant tumor around the resected lesion. The patient received no postoperative therapy. We performed follow-up evaluation with enhanced computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging every 3 months. No recurrences have been observed 12 months after surgery.