A previously healthy 65-year-old woman who had been experiencing left buttock pain radiating to the dorsum of the foot for 2 years visited my spine clinic.
She had sudden onset of left buttock pain 2 years ago; the pain slowly radiated to the dorsum of the foot and worsened over time. Prior to visiting the clinic, she underwent lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and abdominal computed tomography scan for the evaluation of left buttock pain. She was managed conservatively. However, the condition did not improve. She received physiotherapy, pain killers, and epidural injections based on a presumptive diagnosis of spinal stenosis and varicose vein for 2 years in other hospitals.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
Upon presentation at the clinic, her pain was aggravated by sitting and walking for a long time. When walking 500 m or sitting on the chair, she experienced sensory loss in the dorsum of the left foot. However, she had no significant previous medical history or surgeries. Physical examination revealed no atrophy and dilated veins in both lower extremities. According to the motor examination, there was no definite weakness on both lower limbs. Hypoesthesia to light touch and pin prick was observed on the dorsum of the right foot and lateral side of the right calf. Deep tendon reflex revealed a mild decrease in ankle reflex at the left side. The results of the straight-leg-raise test, femoral nerve stretching test, Patrick test, and flexion, adduction, and internal rotation test were negative. Moreover, the range of motion of the hip joint and lumbar spine and pedal pulses were normal.
The results of the electrodiagnostic evaluations, including motor and sensory nerve conduction studies, H-reflex test, and electromyography, were normal.
A retrospective review of previous lumbar spine MRI findings revealed no significant evidence of spinal stenosis. However, a cystic mass was observed in the left L5-S1 extraforaminal space . The lesion was indicative of an INGC because of its location along the path of the L5 spinal nerve. The patient was not aware of the cystic lesion. Thus, to confirm the nature and extent of the cystic mass, hip MRI, including high-resolution magnetic resonance neurography (MRN), was recommended. High-resolution MRN revealed an INGC arising from the articular branch of the hip joint, which extended to the lumbosacral plexus and L5 spinal nerve . Moreover, a degenerative change in the posterior labrum was observed . The cystic lesion had a tubular-like feature from the termination of the articular branch to the level of the sciatic notch, where crossover at the level of the sciatic nerve and/or lumbosacral plexus occurs . However, the balloon-like feature above the crossover expanded to the far-lateral extraforaminal space at the L5-S1 level along the left L5 spinal nerve .