A pair of European 9-year-old identical male twins (patients 1 and 2) with PJS presented with bilateral progressive prepubertal gynecomastia over the course of 1 year. The family history showed that their father had PJS but no history of gynecomastia or testicular calcification. Neither mutations nor deletions where found in the tumor suppressor gene LKB1/STK11, which is responsible for approximately 60% of PJS cases.
The twins arrived at our Department in 2008. A physical examination showed two boys with pigmented lesions of the lips and bilateral gynecomastia with a diameter of 9cm in patient 1 and 7cm in patient 2, corresponding to a female Tanner stage B3. Their testicular volume was 4mL bilaterally. The boys’ penises were infantile, and they had no pubic or axillary hair (pubic hair, PH1; genitalia development, G1).
The height of patient 1 was 129.2cm (25th percentile), with a growth velocity of 7cm/year (90th percentile for age) and normal weight for height. The height of patient 2 was 125.5cm (10 to 25th percentile), with a growth velocity of 6cm/year (75 to 90th percentile) and normal weight for height. The target height was 173cm (−0.7 Standard Deviation Score, SDS).
Hematic levels of sexual hormones were constantly verified with specific reference to luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin, testosterone, estrone and estradiol.
Baseline endocrine investigations in patients 1 and 2 showed normal prepubertal serum concentrations of testosterone, FSH, LH and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, as well as slightly elevated levels of estradiol, with normal levels of estrone.
Both boys were treated with the third-generation aromatase inhibitor, anastrozole, starting dose of 1mg orally once daily. The decision to treat the boys with the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole had been implemented to reduce gynecomastia and to prevent the accelerating effect of estrogen excess on skeletal maturation.
Samples were obtained before the beginning of the anastrozole treatment, then after 1 and 2 years of treatment, during 2-years follow-up evaluation, before and after 3 months subcutaneous mastectomy surgery.
During the period of anastrozole treatment, a reduction of gynecomastia was observed more in one twin than in the other. In particular, during the first year of treatment, growth velocity decreased from 7 to 3cm and gynecomastia decreased from 9 to 4cm in diameter in patient 1, whereas growth velocity decreased from 6.6 to 3cm/year and gynecomastia decreased from 7 to 3cm in diameter in patient 2.
During the second year of treatment, no changes in gynecomastia occurred, and growth velocity reverted to normal values for age in patient 1 (5cm/year), whereas it remained below the normal value for age in patient 2 (3.5cm/year).
After 2 years, a sharp reduction in growth velocity occurred for both patients (although it was more pronounced in patient 2, with a growth velocity of 1.6cm/year, 3rd percentile), which prompted a reduction in the anastrozole dose and then its withdrawal at the age of 11.5 years.
After a washout period of 6 months, clinical reevaluation of both twins showed regrowth of gynecomastia, corresponding to a female Tanner stage B3, with resumed tenderness of the breast to palpation .
To determine bone age, X-rays of each patient’s nondominant hand and wrist were analyzed by the TW2 method before anastrozole treatment was started, and after 1 year of treatment and 2 years of treatment.
Bone age was 11.2 years in patient 1 and 10.9 years in patient 2, with an advance of approximately 2.5 years and an adult height prognosis of 157cm (−3 SDS) for patient 1 and 158.7cm (−2.8 SDS) for patient 2 (both below the target height).
Ultrasound was performed using a Logiq S6 scanner (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) with a multifrequency matrix-array linear transducer (7 to 14MHz) and a multifrequency convex transducer (3.5 to 5Mhz).
A breast ultrasound to assess palpable masses was performed during and after pharmacological treatment, before and after 1 month and 1 year from subcutaneous mastectomy surgery. The examinations showed bilateral gynecomastia with typical hyperechoic fibroglandular tissue. No solid nodular or cystic formations were present on either side.
An abdominal ultrasound scan of their adrenal glands and a testicular ultrasound scan were performed to analyze the presence of estrogen-producing adrenal tumor; a testicular ultrasound scan showed bilateral multifocal calcifications.
At the age of 13 years, the twins underwent gynecomastia surgical treatment, using the Webster technique. A skin incision was made below the areola edge and the adipose and glandular tissues were significantly removed under direct vision from the skin at the top and from the pectoral muscle at the bottom; the removed breast tissue was sent to a pathologist.
The result was radical surgery (thus avoiding recurrence) and a good aesthetic result.
In both boys, an advancement flap of adipose tissue below the nipple–areola complex was placed, in consideration of the underlying disorder, to avoid leaving a residual subareolar glandular parenchyma .
Although the glandular tissue had been completely removed, this technique allowed a good aesthetic result, thus avoiding depression of the nipple–areola complex, which would remain responsive to the circulating estrogen.
Both patients were satisfied with the result and had no functional impairment of their arms or reduction in nipple–areola complex sensitivity. Wound healing was completed in 10 days, and scars were almost undetectable in both cases. The excessive removal of parenchyma did not result in skin irregularities, avoiding any unnecessary subsequent treatment. Both patients received postoperative pain management with painkillers according to their weight. The clinical course had no irregularities. No surgical infections or hematomas were reported. Although the breast gland had been totally removed, both patients had good cutaneous retraction and no nipple or areola necrosis or deformity, as confirmed by ultrasound picture control.
Histologic findings confirmed their condition to be benign. After surgical glandular removal, a breast examination showed a significant reduction in breast volume; 1 year after surgery, a breast ultrasound scan of both patients showed a total absence of glandular parenchyma, with muscle planes well represented.
A compressive medication was applied after surgery with a chest bandage for 4 weeks.
Analgesics were prescribed only in case of pain. Both boys were observed by surgeons 1 and 4 weeks after surgery for removal of the bandage and to exclude the onset of hematomas, seromas, skin infections, keloids and pain.
After surgery, the twins were followed for an additional year for evaluation of sex hormone levels, growth curve and breast size.