A 67-year-old female presented with a history of shortness of breath for the preceding 4 days, associated with intermittent chest discomfort, palpitations, and dizziness. She recorded her heart rate of 30 beats per minute, upon which she was conveyed to the emergency department. She described her palpitations primarily as ‘skipped beats’ and became unsteady on her feet, requiring family assistance to mobilize. There was no history of falls, collapse, or loss of consciousness. Past medical history included treated Takayasu’s arteritis, bullous pemphigoid (on long-term prednisolone 5 mg once daily), hypertension, dyslipidaemia, chronic kidney disease, inflammatory arthritis, and type II diabetes mellitus. At functional baseline, she was able to mobilize around the house with a walking frame and cook independently with minimal assistance. Her relevant medication with regards to presentation included bisoprolol 5 mg once daily.
Weight was recorded as 133 kg, with a height of 168 cm, and a calculated body mass index of 47.3. Physical examination revealed no significant abnormality. Investigations revealed a mild anaemia (haemoglobin—112 g/dL), chronic kidney disease (creatinine—147 μmol/L and creatinine clearance 69 ml/minute by using Cockcroft-Gault calculation), and negative troponin levels. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm with intermittent Mobitz type I second degree AV block with a sinus rate of 100–110 beats per minute . Cardiac monitoring revealed frequent episodes of Wenckebach phenomenon (Mobitz type I second degree AV block) throughout the day with no heart rate variability on postural change. Echocardiogram showed normal bi-ventricular size and function, dilated bi-atrial size, moderate mitral regurgitation, and mild tricuspid regurgitation. A previous 24-h ambulatory ECG in 2021 showed normal sinus rhythm with no significant tachybrady arrhythmia.
It was at first theorized that her symptoms were the result of beta-blockade; therefore, her bisoprolol was ceased. Following a washout period of 48 h, there was no appreciable effect on ECG complex morphology/rhythm or heart rate, and multiple episodes of Mobitz type I were documented throughout the day. On telemetry, a rhythm pattern with intermittent sinus tachycardia at rest at a rate of 130 beats per minutes and intermittent Mobitz type I second degree AV block was demonstrated over a period of 20 min .
The following day, the patient was noted to be hypertensive; therefore, candesartan was increased to 4 mg once at night, and amlodipine 2.5 mg once daily was initiated. These interventions had the desired effect of lowering blood pressure; however, there was no demonstrable effect on the incidence of Mobitz type I episodes on telemetry. At this stage, we deduced a provisional diagnosis of IST-induced Wenckebach phenomenon, relating possibly to autonomic dysfunction with a differential diagnosis of multi-factorial pathology, possibly related to diabetes or long-term steroid use. Thereafter, ivabradine was initiated at a dose of 2.5 mg 12-h with close monitoring. Twenty-four hours following first administration of ivabradine, the heart rate was noted to be at a persistent physiological rate of 70–80 beats per minute at rest, in normal sinus rhythm with no documented episodes of Wenckebach phenomenon on the cardiac monitor or on 12-lead ECG , with no detectable nocturnal episodes. There were no pauses or evidence of high-grade AV block on telemetry. Since ivabradine makes symptoms and rhythm better, decided to continue ivabradine alone at this stage. The patient noted an improvement in her condition, with no further symptoms. She was thereafter deemed medically fit and discharged on 16 May 2022.
An outpatient 24-h ambulatory ECG monitor obtained a week following discharge demonstrated sinus rhythm with regular diurnal variation and a mean heart rate of 77 beats per minute with no further symptoms recorded during either the follow-up or 24-h recording period. Additionally, there was no evidence of Wenckebach phenomenon or high-grade AV block during the 24-h recording period. No adverse effects attributable to ivabradine were noted during the follow-up period. The patient was reviewed in outpatient clinic a few months post-discharge; the patient had remained symptom-free from a cardiac perspective and ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm.