A 62-year old woman presented at the psychiatry clinic with dizziness, back pain, gastrointestinal discomfort and anxiety. She was diagnosed with somatoform disorder and treated with duloxetine, 60 mg per day, for 7 months. Although the somatic symptoms and related mood disorders improved, she also complained about frequent awakening during night and was unsatisfied with her sleep quality. For this reason, she sought help from our sleep medicine center and an overnight polysomnography (PSG) study was arranged. The examination showed that she had a total sleep time (TST) of 7.2 h with apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) of 6.7 /h (AHI is a parameter used to classify the severity of sleep apnea, the cut-off point for mild, moderate and severe sleep apnea is 5 /h, 15 /h and 30 /h). Tonic and phasic electromyography (EMG) activity were scored manually according to the criteria of the 2007 American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) manual . During the 264 30-s epochs (132 min) of REM, we found that 29.5% of REM sleep had increased chin EMG activity with a 6.8% increase for tonic activity and a 22.7% for phasic activity . However, the patient did not complain of any abnormal behaviors during nocturnal sleep except for more vivid dreams. Moreover, we did not notice significant movements during REM sleep from the video of the evaluation night. As the symptoms of somatoform disorder had significantly improved, the treatment of duloxetine was continued for about 2 years.
During the following 2 years, the patient’s daughter noticed that she had occasional speaking and yelling during the night (a few times per month). The symptoms gradually worsened over time (two or three times per week), with not only frequent vocalization during sleep but also some enactment behaviors with violent dreams. For example, she once fell from bed during sleep when she had a vivid dream of running and chasing someone. In another instance, she dreamed of biting something, but she was actually biting the hand of her grandson. She did not have any co-medication or alcohol/substance use. Similarly, she had no medical histories of sleepwalking, daytime sleepiness, neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson’s disease (PD) or any clinical symptoms of cognitive dysfunction. In addition, she had no family histories of RBD and neurodegenerative diseases. Neurological examinations were unremarkable. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no clinically significant abnormalities. The scores of the Epworth Sleep Scale (ESS) and the RBD questionnaire (RBDQ-HK) were 0 and 60 (cut-off point of total score is 18), respectively. The score of the Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD) was 7 but the score of Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) was increased mildly to 10. We then arranged an overnight PSG examination for her. We found that most of epochs of REM sleep had increased tonic chin EMG activity (39.3%) and phasic chin EMG activity (30.3%) . Moreover, the video monitoring revealed abnormal behavior episodes (waving hands or moving legs) during REM sleep.
The clinical manifestation and video PSG suggested that the patients met the diagnostic criteria of RBD with dream-enactment behaviors during REM sleep and RSWA. In view of the temporal association between medication and RBD and a lack of evidence suggesting RBD secondary to other comorbidity, we recommended that the patient to discontinue the use of duloxetine. Two overnight video PSG sessions were conducted after discontinuing duloxetine for 9 days and 37 days. As shown in Fig. , the total percentage of tonic and phasic chin EMG activity decreased to 12.5% and 6.8%, respectively. The most important change was that RBD symptoms gradually reduced with the discontinuation of duxoletine and completely disappeared after 37 days. The timeline of clinical history and medication history are summarized in Fig. .