A 39-year-old man without history of medical disease and risk factors suffered out-of-hospital cardiac arrest. He was successfully resuscitated first by members of the public and then by paramedics with initial rhythm of ventricular fibrillation. After return of spontaneous circulation (total of 20 min of resuscitation, one successful shock, and GCS 3 after return of spontaneous circulation), the surface electrocardiogram (ECG) showed slight ST-elevation (1 mm) in precordial leads V2 and V3, therefore the patient was transferred sedated and ventilated to the cathlab for primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI).
Angiography revealed critical stenosis of ∼9 mm in the proximal left circumflex coronary artery (LCx) (left dominant), however without any typical angiographic sign of a culprit lesion. Intracoronary nitrate was administered, leading to complete disappearance of the stenosis and proving that severe focal spasm was the pathomechanism. Accordingly, no coronary intervention was performed (, Videos S1 and S2; Figure ).
In the intensive care unit therapeutic systematic hypothermia was introduced, requiring moderate vasopressor support (norepinephrine 0.025 µg/kg/min), as well. The patient received adequate sedation (remifentanil 0.08 µg/kg/min and midazolam 1.6 µg/kg/min). After 2 h at core temperature of 35°C, the patient developed one episode of non-sustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and became haemodynamically unstable, requiring increasing dosage of vasopressor support. ECG showed pronounced ST-elevation in leads I, II, III, aVF, V6, and massive ST-depression in leads V1–V4 . Urgent coronary angiography was performed, revealing subtotal occlusion of the entire proximal middle left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) and LCx with Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 1 flow. . After intracoronary administration of nitrate the vasospasm fully disappeared, followed by reperfusion arrhythmia (ventricular fibrillation) (, Video S4). After successful defibrillation the patient haemodynamically stabilized, ST-elevation resolved and semi-selective angiography proved the resolution of spasm, as well. No indication was for any coronary intervention. Patient was transferred back to the intensive care unit.
Back at the intensive care unit urine toxicology test was performed, being positive for cocaine and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). The patient’s wife confirmed recreational cocaine use (at most once a month) by her husband.
The patient was stabilized by progressively reduced dosage vasopressor and continuous intravenous administration of nitrate (0.4 µg/kg/min). Hypothermia was kept at low-normal level (36°C). Patient was successfully extubated on Day 3. Repeated echocardiograms revealed mild left ventricular concentric hypertrophy, normal left ventricular ejection fraction without wall motion abnormalities. The patient was discharged into stationary rehabilitation with antihypertensive medication (Carvedilol 25 mg b.i.d. and Lisinopril 5 mg b.i.d.), aspirin 100 mg as well as vasodilating agents (Amlodipine 5 mg b.i.d. and Nicorandil 10 mg b.i.d.). Two months after presentation, the patient was discharged from stationary rehabilitation without any neurological deficit.