34-year-old female Gravida 5, Para 4 in her 39th week of gestation with spontaneous labor was transferred to our hospital. Her pregnancy was uncomplicated. She denied smoking and had a BMI of 24 kg/m2. Her past medical history was unremarkable.
The first stage of labor was uneventful and lasted for 4 h. At the end of the second stage of labor which had lasted for 30 min, the patient complained of breathlessness and right-sided chest pain. Physical examination revealed the blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg, pulse was 102/min, and the oxygen saturation was 95 % on room air oxygen. The patient was found to be moderately tachypnoeic with breath rate of 22 cycles per minute. She received oxygen supplementation by facial mask and after pushing for 10 min, the labor ended with a vaginal delivery. A healthy, live female infant (4400 g) with Apgar score of 8/9 in the first and fifth minute was delivered.
Ten minutes later she felt worse. Palpation revealed mild subcutaneous crepitus in the neck and subclavian regions corresponds to subcutaneous emphysema. In a few minutes there was marked emphysema extending from the upper anterior chest wall up to the face. The deterioration of respiratory status was observed, still the patient's condition remained stable.
Chest X-ray was performed which showed pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax. Computed tomography confirmed right-sided tension pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema. A team of thoracic surgeons were required urgently. A pigtail catheter was placed in the 5th intercostal space. The pneumothorax was resolved during few hours. The chest radiograph was repeated 5 h later which showed resolution of pneumothorax. As the clinical condition had stabilized, the chest tube was removed. The patient was observed closely for 7 days in hospital, without a specific medication with proper analgesia during the first 48 h. The symptoms regressed and repeat chest X-ray confirmed disappearance of pneumomediastinum. She was discharged home with no other postpartum problems. No complications were seen afterwards. At 2 years follow-up she is healthy and asymptomatic.