A 72-year-old man with a history of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) was treated with latanoprost (Somerset Pharma, New Jersey, United States of America) bilaterally for 4 years. At the time of evaluation, he complained of blurred vision with a best-corrected vision (BCVA) of 20/50 bilaterally, while his IOP was 17 mm Hg in the right eye and 21 mm Hg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed bilateral dense senile nuclear cataracts. Fundus examination revealed symmetric glaucomatous optic nerve head cupping of 0.65 of both eyes. Gonioscopy revealed open angles in all four quadrants and no peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) in both eyes. Visual field examination demonstrated nonspecific changes and nasal-step field defects with a mean deviation (MD) of −2.22 and −5.95 dB in the right and left eyes, respectively. Therapeutic options were discussed with the patient, who gave written informed consent after being informed about the nature, risks, and possible adverse consequences of the combined procedures.
The patient underwent femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery in the left eye first. A standard Phaco surgical technique with topical anesthesia and a main temporal clear corneal incision was performed. After placement of the intraocular lens in the bag, Provisc (Alcon, Ft Worth, TX) was injected to inflate the ciliary sulcus 360° to enhance visualization of ciliary processes. ECP is then performed with 0.2 W energy for 270° while avoiding 3 and 9 o'clock to blanch and shrink the ciliary processes. The surgery on the left eye was uneventful. Standard topical therapy with moxifloxacin, 1% prednisolone acetate, and prolensa 0.07% was applied 4 times daily in the early postoperative period. On postoperative day 1, BCVA was 20/40, and IOP was 36 mm Hg, which reduced to 12 mm Hg following wound burp. Around 1 week later, the VA was 20/25, and the IOP was 15 mm Hg. One month after the procedures, he was presented with a satisfactory IOP of 12 mm Hg and a BCVA of 20/25.
The same methodology was used to perform ECP/Phaco in the right eye 2 months later by the same experienced surgeon (G.V.). There were no immediate intraoperative complications. His BCVA was 20/400 on postoperative day 1, and IOP was elevated to 36 mm Hg, which reduced to 12 mm Hg immediately following the wound burp. The anterior chamber had a minimal postoperative reaction. One week later, the VA was 20/25, and IOP was 18 mm Hg, slit lamp exam revealed minimal intraocular inflammation and no hyphema. However, the right pupil remained dilated at 8 mm despite topical pilocarpine at 4% at the office visit. Topical pilocarpine 1% four times a day was started. The patient was followed every 2–3 weeks, then monthly, and thereafter. Approximately 6 months after the procedure, the patient was not on glaucoma medications, IOP was 10 mm Hg in the right eye and 12 mm Hg in the left eye, and BCVA was 20/30 bilaterally. No new PAS or iris atrophy was seen in our follow-up. A persistently dilated pupil without reaction to light or near objects was present only in the right eye .