A 40-year-old previously healthy Afro-European male smoker was brought to emergency department (ED) for acute sustained chest pain preceded by an episode of palpitation and triggered by cannabis consumption. His physical exam was normal without relevant findings. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed transient anterior ST elevation and negative T waves in inferior leads . Laboratory studies showed normal biological parameters except for positive troponin level which rises from 23 to 400 ng/L (normal value <14 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a mild hypokinesia in the septo-apical wall, normal ejection fraction, and no valvular heart disease (Video 1).
The patient was diagnosed with NSTEMI and he was quickly referred for an emergent coronary angiography. The right coronary angiogram shows a patent right coronary artery (Video 2 and ) while the left coronary angiogram reveals the presence of highly mobile thrombus in the left main artery without evidence of coronary atherosclerosis and coronary blood flow compromise (Video 3 and ). After performing a manual aspiration, a residual thrombus fragment embolized to the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery and septal branch bifurcation (Supplementary material online, Video S1 and ).
The absence of underlying atheromatous disease, the normal coronary blood flow, and the young age of the patient were the reason to avoid stent implantation and to continue with medical treatment. Also, the episode of palpitation described anteriorly to chest pain on top of the acute thrombotic event and the arrhythmogenic effect of cannabis guide towards a paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Subsequently, we started a medical treatment including intravenous UFH and dual anti-platelets therapy (ticagrelor and aspirin initiated in ED). As the performed thrombo-aspiration led to a dramatic decrease in thrombotic charge with a Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 3 blood flow, the administration of GpIIbIIIa inhibitors was avoided. Furthermore, Anti-Xa activity was controlled constantly according to a specific UFH protocol used in Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) with a target value between 0.3 and 0.6 UI/mL. No bleeding occurred.
All performed investigations like 24-h Holter EKG, lower limb venous Doppler, hypercoagulability workup, enhanced thoraco-abdomino-pelvis computed tomography scan, and transoesophageal echocardiography were normal (Supplementary material online, Video S2).
Repeat coronary angiogram performed after 5 days with the above cited medical treatment shows complete resolution of the residual fragment (Supplementary material online, Video S3 and ).
The patient was discharged on apixaban 2.5 mg twice daily, aspirin 75 mg, and clopidogrel 75 mg for 3 months, then shifting to apixaban 5 mg twice daily and clopidogrel 75 mg once daily up to 1 year. He was referred to a substance withdrawal programme. A good outcome in completely asymptomatic patient was noted at 3-month follow-up with normal TTE, coagulation testing, and 72-h Holter ECG findings. In order to detect a potential uncovered paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, a Reveal LINQ™ Insertable Cardiac Monitor that may help to guide long-term anti-thrombotic strategy was implanted.