Patient S1 was a 48-year-old Caucasian German man with post-lingual UHL and NH on his contralateral ear. The etiology of his hearing loss was unknown, and his middle ear status was normal. He had a duration of deafness of 11 months before unilateral implantation with a CI. Patient S2 was a 51-year-old Caucasian German man also with post-lingual UHL and NH on his contralateral ear. His hearing loss was caused by acoustic trauma; his middle ear status was reported to be normal. Patient S2 had a duration of deafness of 45 months before unilateral CI implantation. Patient S3 was a 48-year-old Caucasian German man with post-lingual UHL and NH on his contralateral ear. He had lost his hearing due to a stapedectomy; he showed a normal middle ear status. Patient S3 was implanted unilaterally with a CI after a duration of deafness of 96 months. Patient S4 was a 57-year-old Caucasian German man with post-lingual UHL and NH on his contralateral ear. His hearing loss was due to a Borrelia infection. Patient S4 also showed a normal middle ear status and was implanted with a CI after a duration of hearing loss of 33 months.
Our patients did not wear hearing aids (HAs) before implantation as their hearing loss (HL) was too profound for HAs to provide sufficient acoustic amplification. Since all our patients were members of the German Army, which is obliged by law to provide the best possible compensation for any kind of disability, treatment costs were no issue. Our patients, who all had leading positions within the army, consistently reported a high level of distress often related to feelings that their job was at risk because of their HL and were thus highly motivated for CI treatment. All our patients were thoroughly counseled and signed informed consent before implantation. Authorization was provided by the Germany Army, as our patients were treated in an army hospital in Germany.
All our patients were implanted with the PULSARCI100 implant and a standard electrode of 31.5 mm in length (MED-EL, Innsbruck, Austria). Our patients also received the OPUS 2 speech processor including the FineStructure coding strategy. In all patients, first fitting of the CI was performed approximately four weeks after implantation and included the adjustment of electrical hearing thresholds, the most comfortable stimulation levels as well as frequency allocation and compression characteristics. Our patients received aural rehabilitation therapy for patients with CI in their hearing centers. Bilateral testing was performed once a monosyllable understanding in quiet conditions of 50% correctness was achieved.
Pure tone audiometry testing was performed in the NH ear, in the hearing impaired ear before CI implantation and, post-operatively, in the CI-only condition six months after first fitting. During testing in the CI-only condition, the contralateral ear was plugged and masked with 80 dB wideband noise. All our patients had NH on the contralateral side with mean hearing thresholds of 5 dB to 30 dB HL across tested frequencies (250 kHz to 8 kHz). Pre-operatively, our patients showed pure tone thresholds averaging between 80 dB and 100 dB in the hearing impaired side . Pure tone audiometry after six months of implant use showed that hearing thresholds were stable in the implanted side and ranged from 25 dB to 45 dB HL .
In the speech tests, our patients were tested with their normal everyday processor settings, which were obtained during clinical device fitting when the implant was first fitted, and our patients subsequently adjusted the loudness to a comfortable level. Tests were performed in an audiometric room with a semicircular loudspeaker set-up. A total of 11 WESTRA audiometry loudspeakers were mounted on a steel ring of 2 m diameter at a height of 1.2 m above the mesh in the frontal horizontal plane from 90° (right) to -90° (left) and with a separation of 18°. Our patients were positioned on an adjustable chair in the center of the semicircle of loudspeakers. All tests, the tested conditions and the time of testing are displayed in Table . Test conditions included the acoustic-only (CI side with speech processor turned off and NH side unplugged and unmasked), binaural (NH and CI side) and CI-only (CI side only with contralateral ear plugged and masked with 80 dB wideband noise) conditions.
The Freiburg monosyllable test (20 lists, 20 monosyllable words per list) was presented at a sound pressure level (SPL) of 65 dB SPL. Stimuli were presented from the front in quiet conditions and at a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 15 dB, 5 dB and 0 dB, and speech simulating CCITT (Comite Consultatif International Telegraphique et Telephonique) noise was presented from the front (same loudspeaker). The test was performed in acoustic-only, binaural and CI-only conditions. Monosyllable scores in the CI-only condition are shown in Figure . After six months, our patients scored between 70% and 80% (mean: 75%). The individual monosyllable scores for binaural and acoustic-only conditions are shown in Figure . Consistent ceiling effects were observed in quiet conditions for both the acoustic-only and binaural conditions. A consistent increase in speech understanding in the binaural condition compared to the acoustic-only condition was found at all three SNR levels: the mean benefit at 15 dB SNR was 3.8 percentage points (pp), at 5 dB SNR 7.5 pp and at 0 dB SNR 11.9 pp .
The dichotic listening test included 10 number groups of which each contained 10 two-digit number pairs that were presented simultaneously at 80 dB SPL via loudspeakers. The use of loudspeakers deviated from the original test design suggested by Feldmann and was selected to emphasize the impact of the head shadow effect and binaural hearing. This test was performed in acoustic-only, binaural and CI-only conditions. Dichotic speech test results are depicted in Figure . Scores ranged from 60% to 80% (mean: 71.3%) acoustic-only, 20% to 30% (mean: 23.8%) with CI-only (with contralateral ear plugged and masked) and 80% to 100% (mean: 90%) in the binaural condition. The mean benefit in the binaural condition compared to the acoustic-only condition was 18.8 pp.
The Hochmair-Schulz-Moser (HSM) sentence test (30 lists of 20 sentences three to eight words long, each list consisting of 106 words) was presented at 65 dB SPL with a SNR of 10 dB, 0 dB and -5 dB. The test was performed in acoustic-only and binaural conditions. Individual HSM scores in the binaural and acoustic-only conditions are shown in Figure . Ceiling effects were observed at 10 dB SNR. At 0 dB SNR and -5 dB SNR, the HSM scores of all our patients were higher in the binaural condition compared to the acoustic-only condition with a mean increase in speech understanding of 4.6 pp at 0 dB SNR and of 6.3 pp at -5 dB SNR.
The Oldenburg Sentence Test (OLSA) (30 sentences, five words per sentence) was modified by presenting speech from various azimuth conditions, that is, speech was presented either from the front, contralateral CI or ipsilateral CI. The noise was presented from the front and its level was constant (60 dB SPL), whereas the speech level was varied adaptively. For each test run, individual speech reception thresholds (SRTs) were calculated by averaging the signal levels of the last 20 sentences in each list and subtracting the noise level of 60 dB SPL. The test was performed in acoustic-only and binaural conditions. Each condition (listening and azimuth conditions) was tested twice in a randomized order. Individual SRTs measured with the OLSA are shown in Figure . Our patients performed best when the noise signal was presented on the CI side (-9.3 dB binaural, -9.2 dB acoustic-only) and worst when the noise was presented on the contralateral side (-4.7 dB binaural, -4.3 dB acoustic-only). With noise presented from the front, our patients performed slightly better than in the contralateral presentation (-5.0 dB with CI, -4.8 dB acoustic-only). Mean differences between listening conditions were less than 0.4 dB for all noise source placements.