A 36-year-old patient, gravida 11 para 6, with an ultrasound diagnosis of “missed miscarriage”, presented to our hospital with lower abdominal pain. She was 18+ gestational weeks by the last menstrual period (LMP) and 15+ gestational weeks by the ultrasound. Her previous obstetric history was significant for five lower segment cesarean sections (LSCS), four miscarriages, and one uterine rupture.
In her fifth pregnancy, she had a fetal demise at ~24 weeks of gestation, which was medically terminated. The patient was induced once; however, details of the medical induction were not available to review. The pregnancy termination was complicated by uterine rupture, which was managed by laparotomy, hysterotomy, and uterine rupture repair. Two of the five LSCS were done electively following the uterine rupture repair. The patient was healthy otherwise.
On physical examination, the patient was vitally stable, and the abdomen was soft with no tenderness on palpation. Pelvic transabdominal ultrasound was requested to rule out scar rupture. The myometrium–bladder interface was preserved, and scar thickness was 5 mm, which was normal for a previous cesarean section., All laboratory findings were within the normal ranges.
Conservative, medical, and surgical management options and the associated risks and benefits were discussed with the patient. She opted for medical management. Accordingly, a low-dose misoprostol of 100 µg was inserted vaginally in the posterior fornix, and 6 hours later, a repeat dose was given. Two hours after the second dose, the patient started to have pain and contractions. She was vitally stable. Her vaginal examination revealed an opened cervical os, and tissues were felt in the vagina; hence, the patient was shifted to labor and delivery suite for monitoring. After receiving adequate analgesia, a pelvic transabdominal ultrasound was done for scar thickness, which showed a thinning out of the myometrium at a scar site measuring 2 mm. Two hours later, the fetus was aborted that weighed 60 g, and 20 units of oxytocin infusion was started. One hour later, the placenta was delivered completely. The estimated blood loss was 180 mL. The patient was vitally stable all through with no extra bleeding.
The following day, the patient was stable with minimal vaginal bleeding and the repeated complete blood count (CBC) was normal; a prophylactic antibiotic amoxicillin–clavulanate 625 mg every 8 hours orally for 7 days was started. On Day 2 post miscarriage, the patient was discharged home with a follow-up appointment.