A 51-year-old Caucasian male, a keen cyclist with no previous medical history, presented to the emergency department with a 2-week history of persistent fever, malaise, chills, and night sweats despite taking a 10-day course of doxycycline. An urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis was performed prior to referral though this showed no evidence of any pathology. The patient was a non-smoker with no history of drug abuse, previous heart surgery, recent invasive procedures, or dental intervention.
Physical examination at presentation was unremarkable with no signs of infection and normal vital signs. Laboratory tests revealed elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 82 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 60 mm/h), but otherwise normal complete blood count, renal, liver, and thyroid function. The electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm at 82 b.p.m. with no evidence of atrioventricular block. Urinalysis showed microscopic haematuria. Three sets of blood cultures revealed the growth of coagulase-negative gram-positive cocci. The patient was subsequently started on intravenous teicoplanin at a loading dose of 1 g every 12 h for three doses.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a bicuspid, calcified aortic valve, and a dilated aortic root with a dilated and asymmetric sinus of Valsalva and sinotubular junction (, Videos S and S). Moderate, eccentric aortic regurgitation was also present (, Video S). The aortic root diameter measured 4.8 cm with an aortic root area of 10.8 cm2, and the mean gradient across the aortic valve was 10.7 mmHg with a peak gradient of 19.2 mmHg.
At this point, the blood culture and sensitivity report confirmed the growth of Staphylococcus lugdunensis sensitive to flucloxacillin. Hence antibiotics were switched to intravenous flucloxacillin 2 g every 6 h.
A transoesophageal echocardiography was performed, which revealed an aortic root abscess surrounding a dilated aortic root and a bicuspid aortic valve with severe regurgitation through both the leaflet coaptation site and the abscess cavity (, Videos S and S). No vegetations were seen on the valve. Left ventricular systolic function was normal.
A cardiac CT was then performed for further evaluation, which showed a dilated ascending aorta with a maximum diameter of 45 mm, an aortic root abscess in the left ventricular outflow tract below the level of the aortic valve annulus dissecting caudally into the anterior mitral valve leaflet and cranially up the wall of the ascending aorta along its posterior aspect (about 1 cm in depth), and a bicuspid aortic valve with severe calcification of the leaflets . Mild stenosis at the mid-left anterior descending artery due to a calcified plaque was also present (, ).
The patient was then referred for urgent debridement of the abscess and replacement of the valve with tissue prosthesis using 29 mm Magna Ease valve. The abscess cavity was patched with bovine pericardial tissue. Histopathologic evaluation of the excised valvular tissue confirmed the diagnosis of infective endocarditis.
Post-operatively, the patient made an excellent recovery with a well-healed sternotomy and a good exercise tolerance. A repeat transoesophageal echocardiogram was satisfactory showing no complications with the patch, and antibiotics were switched to intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g once daily to reduce the frequency of administration and facilitate mobilization. The patient received a total of 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics.
A repeat transthoracic echocardiogram performed 3 weeks post-aortic valve replacement showed a well-seated prosthetic tissue valve with a peak gradient of 18 mmHg, and good global left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction estimated at 60% (, Video S).