A 63-year-old man developed a gradual onset of rest tremor in his right arm and experienced a reduction in facial movements 12 years ago. The patient gradually noticed a static tremor in his right limb and a reduction in his facial movement range. Nine years ago, as his symptoms gradually progressed, he consulted a local neurologist and was diagnosed with PD. The patient was then started on Madopar (levodopa and benserazide hydrochloride tablets, 187.5 mg/day) and pramipexole (0.375 mg/day). The patient’s symptoms slowed, and he continued to visit his doctor, who made regular medication adjustments as needed. In the last half year preceding his visit to our hospital, the patient felt that the effects of the medication were shortening in duration, and he had increasing difficulties in walking and getting up. The patient was then referred to our hospital for DBS. When the patient was admitted, his medication regimen included Madopar (625 mg/day), pramipexole (0.75 mg/day), and entacapone (0.4 mg/day) (levodopa-equivalent dose (LEDD), 800 mg).
Neurological examination revealed facial hypomimia, bradykinesia, high muscle tone in the neck and extremities, and severe peak-dose dyskinesia. We also examined the visual symptoms of the patient using optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus photography, and the Visual Impairment in Parkinson’s Disease Questionnaire (VIPD-Q) . Results showed that the patient’s eye-blink rates were 13 times/min (OD) and 14 times/min (OS); the thicknesses of his retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) were 77 μm (OD) and 88 μm (OS) (normal range from 80 to 200 μm); his vessel percentage areas were 20.22 (OD) and 18.87 (OS); and his VIPD-Q score was nine . After no contraindications for surgery were found, we performed STN-DBS, and postoperative CT/MRI imaging confirmed that the DBS leads were correctly placed in the STN (A).
One month after surgery, the DBS parameters were selected as follows: right, C+1-, 60 μs, 130 Hz, and 1.8 V, and left, C+9-, 60 μs, 130 Hz, and 2.0 V, to which the patient’s motor symptoms appeared to respond well (UPDRS III: off stimulation, 47; on stimulation, 21). The patients’ eye-blink rates were 13 times/min (OD) and 14 times/min (OS), and his VIPD-Q score was seven at this time.
Six months after the commencement of the DBS treatment, the patient was bothered by the gradual worsening of his blurred vision and decreased strength when blinking. We conducted ophthalmologic examinations, and the results (B) indicated that the thicknesses of the patient’s RNFL and vessel percentage area (VPA; normal range from 20 to 35) were dramatically decreased despite the improvement in eye-blink rate (, C). The patient’s eye-blink rates were 15 times/min (OD) and 17 times/min (OS) (on stimulation) at this time. The RNFL thickness was 82 μm (OD) and 74 μm (OS), the vessel percentage areas were 19.25 (OD) and 14.37 (OS), and his VIPD-Q score was 16. One month after the operation, the patient’s medication was gradually reduced to Madopar (375 mg/day), pramipexole (0.375 mg/day), and entacapone (0.2 mg/day) (LEDD, 422.5 mg) within a three-week time period. DBS is seldom related to retinal morphology, and this patient did not benefit from having DBS turned off. We suspected that the occurrence of visual symptoms was related to the sharp reduction in levodopa, as previous studies have shown levodopa to have a protective effect on the retinal nerves [,]. Thus, we first restored the patient’s original levodopa dosage and reduced it gradually over time. The patient reported that his symptoms were alleviated with these treatment adjustments.
One year following surgery, the patient returned to our hospital for a further consultation, at which point his medication was restored to Madopar (600 mg/day) and pramipexole (0.75 mg/day) (LEDD, 675 mg). His ophthalmic symptoms had improved (, C). His eye-blink rates were 18 times/min (OD) and 20 times/min (OS) (on stimulation) (A); his RNFL thicknesses were 87 μm (OD) and 77 μm (OS) (B); his vessel percentage areas were 24.82 (OD) and 22.51 (OS) (C); and his VIPD-Q score was seven (D). No obvious uncomfortable sensations had been experienced by the patient during the preceding year.