An 8-year-old male child of Sub-Saharan African ethnicity presented to the Paediatric Dentistry Unit of Lagos University Teaching Hospital, Lagos, with a history of trauma sustained in an accident. The accident occurred while playing at school a day prior to his presentation at the dental clinic. It resulted in avulsion of both maxillary central incisors at the time of the accident. There was minimal bleeding.
The maxillary left central incisor found at the site of the accident, was kept in a cup of milk and brought along to the clinic the next day at the time of presentation. However, the maxillary right central incisor could not be found.
His medical history was contributory as the patient was diagnosed with SCA prior to presentation. The estimated haemoglobin percent was 4.5 g/dl, with several sickled red blood cells in the peripheral blood smear. Haemoglobin electrophoresis revealed “haemoglobin S” which was diagnostic of HbSS.
After gently irrigating the socket for foreign bodies, an attempt was made at replantation of the maxillary left central incisor. Splinting was done with 0.018 inches stainless steel orthodontic wire bonded to the teeth with orthodontic adhesive. The patient was started on medications-Amoxicillin (50 mg/kg 8 hourly daily for 5 days) and given tetanus toxoid, after a stat dose for sub acute bacteria endocarditis (SBE) and tetanus prophylaxis respectively. Paracetamol tablets (500 mg 8 hourly for 3 days) were given for analgesia and a chlorhexidine mouth wash used for 1 minute twice a day.
Patient was reviewed three days after and was reported to have bled moderately from the socket of the replanted tooth. The patient and parents were reassured and the patient was asked to be reviewed after one week.
At ten days post splinting, a radiographic examination of the maxillary anterior region was taken . The patient and parent were given instructions as to the importance of good oral hygiene for preserving oral health and the patient was instructed not to tear off food with the anterior region.
However, at about two weeks after the splinting, he was involved in another domestic accident at home and sustained another injury to the replanted tooth, resulting in gross third degree mobility of the tooth. Replantation of the tooth was deemed to have failed and the tooth was eventually extracted and denture fabrication suggested because of the effect on aesthetics. However, the patient was lost to follow up and was not seen again until 4 years after the accident by which time there was total loss of space for the maxillary central incisors. The mandibular incisors had supraerupted and were mildly crowded. A referral was made for an orthodontic assessment.
Extra-oral assessment showed the patient had a mild maxillary protrusion associated with increased medullary activity. There was no circumoral musculature strain on lip closure. He had a high lip line with 2 mm gingival display on smiling.
Intra-orally, he was in the permanent dentition stage with the exception of the third molars. He had an unrestored dentition and was caries free. His oral hygiene was fair.
There was total loss of space for maxillary central incisors.
In the mandibular arch there was mild crowding of the lower labial segment with exaggeration of the curve of Spee. The mandibular incisors were supraerupted into the space in the maxillary arch due to loss of the central incisors. The buccal segments were reasonably well aligned. In the maxillary arch there was total loss of central incisors space, however the buccal segments were reasonably well aligned.
In occlusion, he had a Class II division 1 incisor relationship with minimal overjet and a 5 mm complete overbite. The molar and canine relationships were in Angle’s Class I bilaterally.
Aims of treatment included:
Creation of space for maxillary central incisors.
Relief of crowding, alignment and leveling of the lower anterior segment.
Replacement of maxillary central incisors with removable prosthesis.
Achieve good functional, as well as stable occlusion
Pre-adjusted Edgewise brackets (0.022 × 0.028 inch slot, Roth prescription) were bonded to the maxillary and mandibular teeth. Extraction of the lower left lateral incisor was done to relieve crowding in the lower arch and for leveling the lower anterior segment. Space was regained in the maxillary anterior segment progressively using stainless steel open coil springs. The space measured approximately 12 mm, four months into treatment, and about 20 mm, 10 months into treatment. A passive coil spring was placed subsequently to maintain the space gained. By 12 months into the treatment, there was adequate space gained to accommodate the maxillary central incisors. After a review by a paediatric dentist (FAO), a partial acrylic denture was planned to replace the lost teeth. Lower arch leveling and alignment continued until the lower arch was well aligned. After 18 months into treatment he was finally debonded and a Hawley retainer with stock teeth incorporated was fitted. Patient and parents were satisfied with the outcome of the treatment and the subsequently improved aesthetic .
Throughout the period of orthodontic treatment, the patient did not present any vaso-occlusive crisis.