A 41-year-old Indian woman presented with a history of intermittent palpitations of 10 days’ duration to our hospital. She denied any history of fever, cough, chest pain, dyspnea or syncope or relevant past history of these. She had a past history of pulmonary tuberculosis in 1992 with 6 months of antitubercular treatment. She denied any past history of hypertension, coronary artery disease, diabetes mellitus, thyroid or connective tissue diseases. On examination she was afebrile with a regular pulse of 142 beats/minute, and a blood pressure of 120/70mmHg. She had brownish, waxy papules in the skin of her bilateral lower limbs above her medial malleolus but the rest of the general physical examination did not reveal any abnormal findings. Her systemic examination was within normal limits. She was transferred from our emergency department to the cardiac coronary unit and a synchronized electrical cardioversion successfully terminated her VT.
On investigation, her hemogram, blood biochemistry, liver, renal function and thyroid function were within normal limits. Her angiotensin-converting enzyme level was 147μL (normal range: 0 to 20). Her serum calcium was normal. Her immunological markers were negative with normal erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) chest scan showed findings suggestive of stage-III sarcoidosis . A slit lamp examination of her eyes did not reveal any abnormal findings. An electrocardiogram showed monomorphic VT and right bundle branch block with right axis deviation .
To evaluate the extent of the disease an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET)-CT scan was performed. The study showed evidence of active disease involving her bilateral lungs, mediastinal, right supraclavicular, peripancreatic and retrocrural lymph nodes with focal lesions in segments VII and VIII of her liver . As the supraclavicular node was not palpable, a biopsy was attempted from the superficial lesion in the right lobe of her liver. This biopsy showed interstitial fibrosis but no evidence of epithelioid granulomas. A skin biopsy from a waxy papule of her lower limb showed non-caseating epithelioid cell granuloma suspicious for sarcoidosis . A Ziehl–Neelsen stain showed an absence of acid-fast bacilli. A diagnosis of systemic sarcoidosis with suspected cardiac involvement was made. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy was not attempted because systemic sarcoidosis had already been confirmed with skin biopsies and further intervention in an unstable patient was considered unnecessary.
Holter monitoring showed recurrent episodes of sustained monomorphic VT. Her coronary angiogram was normal. Her echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 48% with hypokinesia of the mid-basal interventricular septum (IVS). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium contrast showed evidence of late enhancement in both the apical and anteroseptal left ventricular regions suspicious for fibrosis . To further confirm the diagnosis of cardiac involvement, endomyocardial biopsies were performed. However, her endomyocardial biopsies did not reveal granulomas, but showed focal interstitial fibrosis .
On the basis of the above clinical and investigational findings, diagnosis of systemic sarcoidosis with cardiac involvement was made. She satisfied the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare guidelines for diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis (see section Guidelines for the diagnosis of cardiac sarcoidosis) . She was started on prednisolone at a dose of 1mg/kg/day in addition to supportive care. She received multiple antiarrhythmic drugs including oral amiodarone at a maintenance dose of 300mg daily and metoprolol at a dose of 100mg twice daily without any satisfactory response. Radiofrequency ablation was attempted twice but failed to suppress the ventricular arrhythmia. She was then planned for automatic implantable cardiac defibrillator (AICD) implantation which could not be done due to financial constraints. In the following week, the patient died following an episode of VT that was unresponsive to defibrillation. The patient’s family refused autopsy studies.
Cardiac sarcoidosis is confirmed when endomyocardial biopsy specimens demonstrate non-caseating epithelioid cell granulomas with histological or clinical diagnosis of extracardiac sarcoidosis.
If endomyocardial biopsy specimens do not demonstrate non-caseating epithelioid granulomas, then extracardiac sarcoidosis is diagnosed histologically or clinically when the following combination of major or minor diagnostic criteria are satisfied:
1. Two or more of the four major criteria are satisfied
2. One in four of the major criteria and two or more of the five minor criteria are satisfied
1. Advanced atrioventricular block
2. Basal thinning of the interventricular septum
3. Positive gallium-67 uptake in the heart
4. Depressed ejection fraction of the left ventricle (<50%)
1. Abnormal electrocardiogram findings: ventricular arrhythmias (ventricular tachycardia, multifocal or frequent premature ventricular contractions ), complete right bundle branch block, axis deviation or abnormal Q wave
2. Abnormal echocardiography: regional abnormal wall motion or morphological abnormality (ventricular aneurysm, wall thickening)
3. Nuclear medicine: perfusion defect detected by thallium-201 or technetium-99m myocardial scintigraphy
4. Gadolinium-enhanced contrast magnetic resonance imaging: delayed enhancement of myocardium
5. Endomyocardial biopsy: interstitial fibrosis or monocyte infiltration of moderate grade