A 24-year-old male presented with a 6-month evolution of his disease with abdominal pain, constipation, fever and a 20-kg weight loss. He received treatment for typhoid fever without improvement. For this reason, abdominal tomography was performed, demonstrating a heterogeneous lesion with zones of fat and solid density that entirely occupied the abdominal cavity, displacing retroperitoneal structures dorsally. CT-guided biopsy was performed at a different hospital and pathological report demonstrated liposarcoma. Colonoscopy was performed, demonstrating extrinsic compression at the level of the descending colon. The patient was sent to our Institution for further evaluation. Upon admission, the patient had a Karnofsky score of 90 and was classified as grade zero according to the status of the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG). He also presented with respiratory difficulty and distended abdomen due to solid, multilobulated tumor that extended from the epigastrium to the pelvic region without delineated borders. CT scan confirmed previous findings . Histopathological review from the referring hospital demonstrated minute fragments of mature adipose tissue without atypia. This material was considered to be inadequate for diagnosis. For this reason, a new CT-guided biopsy was performed and a well-differentiated sclerosing-type liposarcoma was reported . Because the patient's tumor had previously been considered nonresectable, he was referred to medical oncology where chemotherapy with ifosfamide and adriamycin was offered. Clinical and radiological responses were evaluated and reported stable disease. The patient completed six cycles of adriamycin and ifosfamide and was re-evaluated upon treatment completion. The patient continued with stable disease (no change in tumor size was documented either clinically or radiologically) without change in functional status according to Karnofsky index upon admission. At the conclusion of chemotherapy, supportive therapy vs. chemotherapy with etoposide and ifosfamide was proposed and the patient elected supportive therapy. An interdepartmental meeting was held and, in a joint decision with the patient, surgical exploration was decided upon. Surgery was performed with the patient in dorsal decubitus and a midline incision was made from the xyphoid to the pubis, revealing an 80 × 60-cm tumor that encompassed the entire retroperitoneal cavity, with lax adhesions to the descending colon and ureters, neovascularization and adherence to the bladder without multiorgan resection and with macroscopic free margins . Complete resection of the tumor was performed. The patient had a satisfactory evolution and was discharged 48 h postsurgery without adjuvant treatment. The final histopathological report showed undifferentiated liposarcoma of the retroperitoneum (80 × 50 × 35 cm) weighing 18 kg.
The patient is being followed-up every 3 months. At 6 months post-surgery, a new CT scan was done and there was no evidence of disease . Currently, at 14 months of follow-up, the patient is asymptomatic and disease free.