An 81-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with a 2-week history of productive cough, exertional dyspnea, general malaise, altered mental status, and subjective fevers and chills. He had no recent sick contact exposures or travel history. He had no (farm) animal exposures and no history of the handling of, or heavy consumption of fish, dairy or meat products. His past medical history included castrate-resistant prostate cancer with liver and bone metastases on enzalutamide, leuprolide, and oral prednisone (10 mg daily) for at least 1 year. He also had triple-bypass cardiac surgery for a previous myocardial infarction. He had a previous history of smoking but no alcohol or recreational drug use.
On examination, his body temperature was 37.5 °C, with sinus tachycardia at 135 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 95/62 mmHg which improved to 121/79 mmHg with intravenous fluid resuscitation. He had a resting pulse oximeter saturation (SpO2) nadir of 93% on room air, but continued to require supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula due to intermittent episodes of desaturations. Lung auscultation demonstrated decreased air entry to the bases with diffuse crackles bilaterally. No murmurs on cardiac auscultation or other stigmata of endocarditis.
Sepsis workup showed peripheral white blood cell count of 10.7 × 109/L with neutrophil count of 9.49 × 109/L and elevated inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate 90 mm/hr., C-reactive protein 195.9 mg/L). Blood cultures were obtained prior to antibiotic administration on admission. Chest radiograph followed by a full-body computerized tomography revealed multifocal pneumonia without other foci of infection. Transthoracic echocardiography did not show any vegetations or hemodynamically significant valvular dysfunctions. A bone scintigraphy revealed prior known bony metastases without other foci of infection.
Given concerns for clinical deterioration and sepsis, he was admitted to hospital and started on empiric antibiotics of ceftriaxone and vancomycin for pneumonia, potentially secondary to aspiration. Two of 4 blood culture bottles (i.e., both aerobic and anaerobic bottles) flagged positive at 18 h with a Gram-positive bacillus that failed to identify by the VITEK-MS MALDI-TOF (Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry, bioMérieux Clinical Diagnostics, Canada). The isolate was forwarded to the provincial reference laboratory (Public Health Ontario Laboratory, PHOL) for further testing and identification. The isolate was identified by PHOL to be C. inhibens with homology of 99% using 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis , though this information was only available after the patient was discharged home.
The patient clinically improved with the empiric antibiotic regimen and was stepped down to oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid for a total 7-day course of antibiotics. He achieved complete clinical recovery upon finishing antibiotics and did not require any supplemental oxygen at the time of discharge. Repeat blood cultures obtained both while on antibiotics and after discharge from hospital were negative.