A 25-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department with a three-day history of abdominal pain, distension and absolute constipation with vomiting. There was no significant medical or surgical history. She took no regular medications, and was a non-smoker and non-drinker. Bedside observations were normal. A physical examination revealed a distended tympanic abdomen with tenderness across the lower abdomen but no signs of peritonism. A urine dipstick test was unremarkable and blood tests showed a raised white blood cell count (14.4 ×109 cells/L) and C-reactive protein (35mg/L). Urea and electrolytes, hemoglobin and liver function tests were all normal.
Radiographs of the abdomen and chest showed gross dilatation of the right side of the colon with Chilaiditi’s sign. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed massive dilatation of the caecum, which measured greater than 14 cm in diameter . The distal colon was collapsed with a transition point in the mid abdomen suggestive of a volvulus or band.
A nasogastric tube was inserted, intravenous fluid resuscitation commenced and our patient underwent an emergency exploratory laparotomy. Intra-operatively, the bowel was found to be significantly dilated from the caecum to the distal transverse colon and the distal small bowel was mildly dilated, giving the impression of decompression through an incompetent ileocaecal valve. There was a volvulus of the transverse colon in the right upper quadrant. The transverse mesocolon appeared to take origin from the right upper quadrant as opposed to the usual location as an extension of the peritoneum from the posterior abdominal wall centrally. There was no evidence of colonic ischemia or serosal injury.
The large bowel was decompressed with a 14 gauge needle allowing the tightly held bowel to be manipulated more easily. The large bowel was fully unraveled and the volvulus corrected then decompressed distally into the descending colon. The greater omentum on the transverse colon was then fixed at both the hepatic and splenic flexures by creating pouches in the lateral anterior abdominal walls, and fixing the omentum within this with polydioxanone sutures (PDS). The central portion of the omentum was purposefully caught in the mass closure of the wound to ensure additional central fixation.
Post-operatively our patient made a good recovery. By day five she was tolerating a full diet and was discharged six days post-operatively. Despite a superficial wound infection at two weeks, she made a full recovery with no complications noted at her three month and six month follow-up.