A 28-year-old African American female with a 3-year history of rheumatoid arthritis presented to the emergency department (ED) in September 2019 with fever of 101.5 °F, chills, and right ear pain. This ED visit was preceded by multiple hospital admissions for similar symptoms of fever, chills, and productive cough. In July 2019, 2 months prior to the ED visit, the patient had an admitting diagnosis of sepsis secondary to bilateral community acquired pneumonia treated with doxycycline and cefuroxime, but the course was complicated by neutropenia.
One week prior to her September 2019 hospital admission, the patient went to the urgent care for persistent fever for 3 days and right ear pain. She was diagnosed with otitis media and started on amoxicillin. The patient also presented with multiple lip ulcers and was given lidocaine. The mother, her health proxy, noted the symptoms did not improve after 2 days, so she brought her to the ED. Patient was admitted for sepsis secondary to right middle lobe community acquired pneumonia and urinary tract infection. In addition to RA, the patient’s medical history includes asthma, pneumonia, mild intellectual disability, and anemia. Due to the patient’s mental disability, her mother, who is her primary caregiver and health proxy, provided the review of system. According to the mother, associated symptoms included fever, chills, fatigue, ear pain, sore throat, productive cough, abdominal pain, and myalgia. The mother denied any recent travel or any sick contacts. No nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or dizziness were noted. There is no family history of rheumatoid arthritis, felty syndrome, or recurrent infections. There is no history of previous or current alcohol, smoking, or recreational drug use. The patient was not sexually active. Physical examination revealed the patient was febrile at 101.5 °F, tachycardic at 117 beats per minute with normal rhythm, intact distal pulses, normal breath sounds bilaterally with no wheezing, bilateral tympanic membrane injection without effusion, pharyngeal erythema, lower lip ulcers, abdominal tenderness, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and no active synovitis but decreased range of motion of right wrist. Pertinent laboratory tests showed white blood cell count of 3.50 × 103/μL with absolute neutrophil of 25 cells/mm3, and platelet count of 286 × 103/μL. Hemoglobin was 7.6 g/dL, hematocrit of 32.4%, and mean corpuscular volume of 71.1 fL. Peripheral blood smear showed no significant abnormalities with normal reticulocytes. Blood and urine cultures showed growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Tests for Streptococcus pneumoniae, epstein–barr, herpes simplex, and influenza A and B showed negative findings. C-reactive protein was found elevated at 19.8 mg/L, and lactic acid was 2.5 mmol/L. Chest radiography in anterior posterior view showed infiltrates in the middle portion of the base of the right lung. Chest computed tomography showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatosplenomegaly with spleen measuring in the upper limits of normal. Hematology consult recommended bone marrow biopsy. The pathological evaluation of bone marrow revealed findings of normocellular focal spicules and maturing trilineage hematopoiesis, no evidence of overt dysplasia, increased immature mononuclear cells, and left shift with very rare mature neutrophils.
The provisional diagnosis was Felty syndrome. Treatment was initiated with systemic acyclovir and Abreva ointment for lip ulcers and adalimumab, hydroxychloroquine, and azathioprine for RA. She was also supplemented with vitamin B1, B6, and B12. During the hospital stay, the patient was started on intravenous azithromycin for pneumonia and urinary tract infection (UTI). She developed shivering, elevated temperature, shortness of breath, oxygen saturation in low 70%, tachycardia, and appeared to be grunting. The patient did not lose consciousness but began shaking uncontrollably without any swelling or rash. She was diagnosed with azithromycin allergy and was given benadryl and solu-medrol intravenously. Her antibiotics were changed to intravenous ceftriaxone and doxycycline, which were changed to intravenous cefepime after positive growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. During her stay, azathioprine and hydroxychloroquine were held because bone marrow biopsy did not show any evidence of large granular lymphocytic (LGL) or lymphoproliferation. Overall the treatment was tolerated well, and the absolute neutrophil count improved. On the day of discharge, the patient was afebrile with stable vital signs and oral mucosa/lip ulcerations resolved. She currently remains on adalimumab with controlled rheumatoid arthritis.