A 59-year-old female was admitted to our department with the incidental finding of an orbital lesion. The lesion was discovered performing a craniofacial CT scan for nocturnal snoring. Interestingly, the patient had presented some episodes of left orbital pain associated with conjunctival chemosis but had never looked for medical attention regarding these symptoms.
The neurological examination was negative; the visual field examination and the test of Lancaster were normal.
A contrasted MRI scan showed a lesion with the involvement of the inferior and medial wall of the left orbit . The lesion presented a hyperintense signal in T2 and FATSAT sequences and homogenously enhanced after gadolinium injection on delayed sequences. Notably, the foramen rotundum appeared to be slightly enlarged; thus, the radiological hypothesis was a schwannoma of the second trigeminal branch. A cerebral angiogram showed that the left ophthalmic artery originated directly from the middle meningeal artery by an anastomosis with the lacrimal artery but no pathological blushes were evident.
The patient was operated by a pure endoscopic endonasal transphenoidal, transmaxillary, transethmoidal approach . A 0° optic with an 18 cm rigid endoscope (Karl Storz Endoskope®, Tuttlingen, Germany) and neuronavigation system (BrainLab®, Munich, Germany) with CT/MR fused imaging were used. The patient was supine with the head in a neutral position. A nasal septoplasty was performed by the ENT surgeon for a deviation of the nasal septum and to increase the surgical maneuverability of the instruments. Then, uncinectomy, exeresis of the ethmoidal bulla, and antrostomy were performed in sequence obtaining a wide exposure of the posterior part of the maxillary sinus. A standard bimanual binostril technique was then adopted with the endoscope held by one of the surgeons and the surgical instruments by the other.
The tumor became visible after the partial removal of the lamina papyracea and exposure of the periorbit by drilling with a high-speed electric drill (Microspeed, Aesculap®, Center Valley, PA) the infero-medial and posterior wall of the left maxillary sinus and the pterygoid process. Neuronavigation confirmed the anatomical landmarks.
The tumor capsule was initially cut from the maxillary to the sphenoid sinus and then dissected from the Tenone's capsule. A well-defined plane between the tumor and next anatomical structures was not always recognizable. Intraoperative pathological examination was positive for the cavernous hemangioma. The tumor was removed using bipolar coagulation and by piecemeal technique. During the removal of a large fragment, profuse bleeding from a drainage vein and probably the cavernous sinus was controlled with hemostatic agents (Spongostan, Ethicon®, Somerville, NJ; Floseal, Baxter® Deerfield, IL). The remaining part of the lesion was finally removed obtaining a total removal.
The cavity previously occupied by the hemangioma was partially filled up with fibrin glue.
Finally, a pedicled flap of the septal mucosa was rotated to the surgical field and two nasal splints were positioned on the septum.
After surgery, the patient presented mild and transient diplopia due to partial paralysis of the VI cranial nerve on the left side. A postoperative CT scan did not show surgical complications. The cavernous hemangioma was the definitive pathological diagnosis.
At 2-month follow-up, the patient neurologic examination was negative and a MRI of the orbit showed the complete removal of the tumor; in particular, no lesions of the left optic nerve and ocular muscles could be demonstrated .