A 54-year-old man underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) for PDAC in our hospital in April 2004. Histopathological examination confirmed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with UICC staging T3 (CH+, DU+, S+, RP+, PV−, A−, PL−, OO−) N1M0 stage IIB (UICC 7th edition). The diameter of the main pancreatic tumor was 40 mm in size. Number 13a lymph node was positive for metastasis. Resection margins of surgical specimen was all negative for caner (R0 resection). After surgical resection, adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine (GEM) was performed until January 2006. Follow-up computed tomography (CT) and blood examination were performed every 6 months after primary resection. During the follow-up, serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 level were within normal range [1.9–4.1 ng/mL (normal range, > 5.0) and 8.0–24.2 U/mL (normal range, > 37), respectively]. In April 2007, follow-up CT showed two tiny nodules at the lower lobe of the left lung and the lower lobe of the right lung . The serum CEA level and CA19-9 level were within normal range. However, there were no symptoms and evidence of inflammatory changes in the laboratory data during the follow-up [WBC 6500–7700/μL (normal 3300–8600) and CRP 0.1–1.7 mg/dL (normal 0–0.14)], it was difficult to differentiate these tiny nodules from inflammatory change to metastatic nodules. During the follow-up, the nodule in the lower lobe of the left lung gradually enlarged to a 2-cm nodule with spiculation in September 2008 . There was no change in the tiny nodule of the lower lobe of the right lung.
Percutaneous lung biopsy showed atypical cells in granulation tissue. Differentiation between a primary and metastatic tumor was difficult on preoperative imaging studies and the percutaneous lung biopsy specimen. Furthermore, no other tumors were found on imaging examinations. Therefore, wedge resection of the left lower lobe of the lung was performed in October 2008.
Histopathological examination showed that the tumor was composed of columnar cancer cells with papillotubular proliferation. These findings were similar to those of the primary pancreatic cancer and indicated a pulmonary metastasis (PM) from PDAC. After surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy with GEM was completed for 6 months. Follow-up CT and blood examination were performed every 3 months after pulmonary metastasectomy. However, the nodule in the lower lobe of the right lung, which was detected in April 2007, gradually enlarged from March 2010, about 1 year and 10 months later from the completion of adjuvant chemotherapy . During follow-up, no other tumors appeared, and wedge resection of the lower lobe of the right lung was performed in September 2010. Histopathological examination also confirmed PM from PDAC. In November 2011, a new, enlarging, solitary nodule was found in the left upper lobe of the left lung . No other metastatic tumors were observed on imaging studies including fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET). Thus, pulmonary metastasectomy was performed for the third time in September 2012. Histopathological examination also confirmed PM from PDAC. Eventually, adjuvant chemotherapy with GEM was performed from December 2008 (after the initial pulmonary metastasectomy) to May 2013 (8 months after the last pulmonary metastasectomy). Adjuvant chemotherapy with GEM was completed for 6 months again. The patient has been asymptomatic without tumor recurrence or elevated tumor markers for 4 years since the last pulmonary metastasectomy.