A 65-year-old male (height 165 cm, weight 49 kg) was scheduled for a laparoscopy-assisted total proctocolectomy for type 2 colon cancer. His medical history included CS for 2 years and ulcerative colitis for 20 years. The former condition was treated with 5 mg of prednisolone, 2.5 mg of enalapril, 12.5 mg of spironolactone, 5 mg of bisoprolol fumarate, and 50 mg of amiodarone, and the latter with 2400 mg of mesalazine. A CRT-D device was implanted due to symptomatic non-sustained ventricular tachycardia occurring shortly after his CS diagnosis. Before the implantation, the QRS duration was 136 ms and his left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 30.0% using the modified Simpson method, and 35.2% 4 months after the implantation. Although he experienced no firing of the defibrillator after device introduction, his cardiac function gradually declined to a New York Heart Association (NYHA) class III on admission. The CRT-D device was programmed in the dual-chamber pacing (DDD) modality at a lower rate of 60 beats/min, with the checkup record revealing that 94% of the cardiac rhythm was dependent on the device. The electrocardiogram (ECG) presented a ventricular-paced rhythm with a heart rate of 75 beats/min. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography showed overall left ventricular wall motion abnormalities with a LVEF of 32.0%. Abnormal ventricular septal thinning, one of the main criteria for CS , was also detected . In addition to CS, a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy and several nodules in the lungs indicative of pulmonary sarcoidosis, despite a lack of clinical pulmonary manifestations. Additional examinations, including laboratory testing, a spirogram, and a chest X-ray, were within the normal range.
We selected general anesthesia combined with epidural anesthesia (Th11-12) for perioperative management of this patient. We maintained the usual prednisolone medication on the operation day and administered 100 mg of hydrocortisone pre-operatively. The induction of anesthesia and the tracheal tube intubation were uneventful, using 100 μg of fentanyl, 3 mg of midazolam, and 30 mg of rocuronium. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (1.0–1.5%) and remifentanil (0.1–0.3 μg/kg/min). In addition to standard monitoring, invasive arterial pressure via the left radial artery, central venous pressure via the right internal jugular vein, stroke volume index, cardiac index, stroke volume variation, systemic vascular resistance, and central venous oxygen saturation were monitored with the use of the FloTrac/PreSep/EV1000TM system (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA). The modality of the CRT-D was unchanged except for its defibrillation function, which was deactivated before induction of anesthesia to avoid malfunctioning during surgery. Instead, defibrillation pads were placed on the patient and connected to another defibrillator in case of fatal arrhythmias.
As shown in Fig. , some hemodynamic fluctuations occurred during the course of the surgery, especially when the patient was intubated, the surgical procedure was started, the pneumoperitoneum was started, and the posture of the patient was changed. However, those changes were successfully managed with bolus administration of phenylephrine, continuous infusion of dopamine, bolus infusion of colloid, and/or titration of anesthetics, in accordance with the abovementioned monitoring. The total operation time was 8 h and 52 min, and the total anesthesia time was 10 h and 47 min. The total infusion volume was 2710 ml, and the total amount of bleeding and urine output were 108 and 1208 ml, respectively. After the surgery, the defibrillation function was reactivated, and the patient was uneventfully extubated. His postoperative pain was successfully controlled with a continuous epidural infusion of 0.125% levobupivacaine (5 ml/h) that was started before the end of the surgery. The intensive cardiac monitoring was continued just before he was transferred from the intensive care unit to the ward, while continuous ECG and SpO2 monitoring were performed until postoperative day (POD) 3. He was discharged on POD 24 without any deterioration of his cardiac condition.