A 6-year-old boy presented to the outpatient department of our institution with complaint of a painless mass over the medial aspect of the left eye near the nasal bridge since birth. There was no history of pain, nasal bleeding or nasal obstruction. On examination, the best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/1200 in the left eye. There was a firm, regular, mobile, non-pulsatile and non- tender large mass involving the lateral part of nose and medial aspect of left orbit using lateral displacement of the left eye ball . The overlying conjunctival mucosal surface was keratinized. Corneal diameter as measured with vernier caliper was 11 mm each in horizontal and vertical meridian in right eye and 10 mm horizontally and 12 mm vertically in left eye. Anterior corneal radius of curvature of right eye was 7.22 mm (46.75D) vertically and 7.25 mm (46.5D) horizontally whereas in left eye it was 7.7 mm (43.75D) and 6.04 mm (56.0D) in vertical and horizontal meridian respectively. There were no other remarkable findings in the anterior segment. Axial length was 22.63 mm and 23.52 mm respectively in right and left eye. High compound myopic astigmatism (-0.50/-12.00X 090) was present in left eye whereas the right eye was emmetropic. There was no improvement in visual acuity of the affected eye even with best possible refractive correction. The posterior segment examination of both eyes was normal. Extraocular motility was full except restriction in adduction of left eye. Computed tomography scan showed a large (3.8 cm × 2.8 cm × 3.3 cm) hypodense globular lesion medial to left eyeball in the extraconal space with no direct connection to the brain . The mass had a thin enhancing wall with scalloping of the medial orbital wall without bony erosion. Sinonasal evaluation did not reveal the presence of significant sinus pathology except for the flat nasal bridge with medial displacement of lateral nasal wall. The patient underwent left transcaruncular medial orbitotomy under general anaesthesia and the mass was excised in total and was sent for biopsy. The histopathological examination revealed well-differentiated mature glial tissue composed of gemistocytic astrocytes and oligodendrocytes surrounded by fibrous tissue and focal inflammatory infiltrates . The wall fibrous tissue morphology predominates in long-standing cases and was present in our case. No meningeal or dural tissue was identified. Postoperatively there was no change in visual acuity but improvement in ocular motility including adduction. The postoperative cosmetic result was satisfactory . The child was followed 6 months after the initial presentation. There was significant improvement in ocular motility and regression in the corneal astigmatic power (-9.00X090) however the visual acuity remained the same. There was no sign of recurrence till that time.