A 72-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to the Department of Haematology, General Hospital G. Papanikolaou, with a painful left parotid enlargement but without any other physical findings. Seven years prior to this presentation, she was diagnosed with MCL in her left submandibular gland, which was treated with surgical removal, radiotherapy, and a chemotherapy regimen of cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (vincristine) and prednisone/prednisolone (CHOP). Her white blood cell (WBC) count of 5100/μL was represented by a normal differential of 69% neutrophils, 25% lymphocytes (with normal morphology), 5% monocytes and 1% eosinophils. Her hemoglobin, hematocrit and platelet levels were normal at 12.7 g/dL, 38.4% and 219/μL, respectively. Her bone marrow smears and biopsy were both normal without evidence of any infiltration by lymphoma cells.
An ultrasound examination of our patient revealed multiple cystic lesions in the parenchyma of her left parotid gland. Her MRI showed an enlargement of her left parotid gland and the total replacement of her normal parenchyma with mixed-type solid and cystic lesions . The solid components were mildly enhanced after an intravenous administration of contrast medium . A whole body computed tomography (CT) scan showed the absence of pathologically enlarged lymph nodes. All the other organs of her chest and abdomen were also found to be normal.
A biopsy of her left parotid gland and subsequent histological examination showed the presence of MCL (common variant). The MCL was composed of monomorphous small to medium-sized lymphoid cells which most closely resembled centrocytes with a vaguely nodular growth pattern. The prominent neoplastic nodules were adjacent to the cystic area .
Immunostaining results for CD20, CD79a, CD43, CD5, sIgM(λ+) and cyclin D1 were positive and negative for CD23 and CD3.
Our patient was treated with partial parotidectomy and chemotherapy. Her post-operative course was uncomplicated. Eighteen months after surgery she was asymptomatic and disease-free.