A 61-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of a two-month history of persistent dry cough and dyspnea. He had a myocardial infarction three years earlier. He worked as a programmer. His vital signs, physical examination, and serum laboratory examinations were normal. Non-enhanced thoracic CT on admission (day 1) showed the tumor in the intrathoracic central airway , which showed a severe narrowing of the trachea, to a diameter of approximately 4 mm. Interestingly, further evaluation by three-dimensional (3D) CT taken both on deep expiratory and inspiratory phases revealed marked air trapping on the deep expiratory phase in the right lung compared with that in the left lung, accompanied by protrusion of the intrathoracic tumor into the right main bronchus . Bronchoscopy performed on Day 2 confirmed the stenosis of the right main bronchus with mucosal edema by the tumor , but no definite evidence of an obstructive cause was noted in the extrathoracic area.
Thereafter, based on the pathological findings of the specimens obtained by transbronchial biopsy, he was diagnosed with lung squamous cell carcinoma (clinical stage of T4N3M0, stage IIIb). Then, 60 days after commencing treatment with cisplatin (80 mg/m2) and irinotecan (60 mg/m2) followed by radiation therapy (60 Gy/20 fractions/4 weeks), he was found to have a partial response, with improvement in the limitation of expiratory flow, based on the forced expiratory volume in 1 second . The tracheal and bronchial dimensions measured on thoracic CT showed improvement both in the central airway (CA) and in the right main bronchus (RMB) from Day 1 to Day 60 , respectively. Interestingly, after completion of 4 cycles of chemotherapy, thoracic CT taken on Day 207 showed re-growth of the tumor in the central airway but not in the right main bronchus, together with reproduction of the saw-tooth sign . On Day 224, insertion of a stent was performed for progressive central airway stenosis, which resulted in the disappearance of the saw-tooth sign and amelioration of stenosis, especially in the CA . After inserting the stent, his AHI (apnea hypopnea index) score on polysomnography showed a slightly increased value of 7, but the mean SaO2 was above 92% throughout. In addition, there were no clinical findings of OSAS.