A 58 year-old male presented to our emergency department (ED) with massive hemoptysis and epistaxis. His history included ethanol use, treated tuberculosis and atrial fibrillation. He was intubated and underwent emergent right bronchial artery Embosphere particle (Merit Medical Systems, South Jordan, UT, USA) embolization (ten vials). Bleeding was halted. He recovered and was discharged home.
Ten months later, he returned to ED because of continual episodes (previous two days) of non-massive bright red hemoptysis. He denied recent trauma, fever or chills. He did describe mild midsternal chest discomfort and exertional dyspnea. He had visited Panama three months earlier. His initial blood pressure was 149/109. Heart rate and lab values were normal. Electrocardiogram demonstrated no change from his previous hospital visit. No clots were detected by transthoracic echocardiography. Cardiology recommended not to start anticoagulants, and to continue his remaining medication regimen.
Chest CTA revealed ill-defined hypodense areas predominantly in the right upper lobe pulmonary artery while main and left pulmonary arterial segments enhanced uniformly. Relative hypodensities were also seen in the right lower lobe and upper lobe arterial branches .
Pulmonary embolism was therefore initially suspected. No DVT was discovered on follow up ultrasound examination.
Arteriography using 50 ml contrast at 3 mL/s was undertaken several hours following patient presentation to the ED. Omni Flush catheter (AngioDynamics, Latham, NY, USA) was advanced to the right pulmonary artery through a 5F sheath following right femoral vein puncture. Arteriography demonstrated filling defects due to reversal of flow .
No clot was detected and no local resistances were encountered during routine coaxial maneuvers. The catheter was advanced to the right upper lobe branch. Local and rapid retrograde flow was again identified both during fluoroscopic contrast injections and in formal arteriography.
The interventional radiologist thereby recognized bronchopulmonary artery fistula while ruling out pulmonary embolism. The right bronchial artery origin was selected with a Mik catheter (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) through a 5F vascular sheath following right femoral artery puncture. Angiography demonstrated several prominent first, second and third order arterial branches bridging and shunting to the right upper lobe pulmonary artery (, ), and innumerable higher order tortuous communicators.
A Progreat (Terumo Medical Corporation, Somerset, NJ, USA) microcatheter was advanced through and several centimeters beyond tip of the Mik catheter. 900–1200 μm Embosphere particles were delivered through this microcatheter (total four vials), followed by Ultrafoam (Becton, Dickenson and Company, Franklin Lanes, NJ, USA) slurry. 3 through 6 mm Tornado and/or Nestor (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) microcoils were then deployed during sequential partial retractions of microcatheter. Satisfactory stasis was demonstrated following embolizations of two right bronchial arteries (congenital variant from more typical solitary right bronchial artery). High flow communicators remained patent and served as feeders of multi channeled fistula. These arose predominantly from right upper lobe bronchial artery branches. Each of these was selected with the microcatheter. Microcoil embolizations were performed prior to additional gelatin foam slurry boluses. Largest deployed microcoil expanded to 8 mm max .
Two right bronchial arteries originated from descending thoracic aorta. Branches of both selected, stasis achieved. Follow up right pulmonary arteriography demonstrated reduced reversal of flow in the upper lobe branch.
The microcatheter was removed. Intercostal branches arising from descending thoracic aorta were subsequently selected with 5F catheter and examined by angiography but none of these warranted intervention. Hemoptysis ceased and the patient was discharged home following additional cardiac workup.