A 66-year-old, non-smoking Caucasian woman was transferred to our emergency department after she had presented to a community health clinic with nausea, vomiting, and worsening malaise that had been present for less than a day. An electrocardiogram (EKG) performed at the clinic showed bradycardia, and periods of asystole. Our patient denied any other symptoms, including chest pain, shortness of breath, and syncope. The only recent change that she could recount was that she had consumed approximately 200 g of dulse the previous day .
Our patient's medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, gout, anxiety, and chronic renal disease. Her medications on presentation included omeprazole, allopurinol, lorazepam, rosuvastatin, ezetimibe, losartan, metformin, pioglitazone, amlodipine, acebutolol, famciclovir, nortriptyline, hydroxyzine, and hydrocortisone acetate cream. None of the medications were new to the patient.
On physical examination, we found our patient to be an alert, and oriented, obese woman of stated age, with a Glasgow coma scale score of 15. Her heart rate was irregularly irregular, and bradycardic at 30 beats per minute, blood pressure was 124/82 mmHg, and respirations were tachypnic at 28 breaths per minute, with an oxygen saturation of 98% on 100% oxygen administered by facemask. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory investigation revealed an elevated white blood cell count, normal hemoglobin, normal platelets, and a random glucose level of 10.2 mmol/L (reference range 3.0 to 6.0 mmol/L). Testing for cardiac enzymes was negative. Arterial blood gas revealed a compensated respiratory alkalosis, with a pH of 7.40, PaCO2 of 33 mmHg, PaO2 of 80 mmHg, and a HCO3 of 21 mEq/L. Renal function was impaired, with elevated serum urea (11.9 mmol/L; normal range 2.5 to 7.5 mmol/L), and creatinine (168 μmol/L; 60 to 110 μmol/L). Estimation of the patient's glomerular filtration rate revealed a creatinine clearance (CrCl) rate of 37 ml/min (normal range 88 to 128 ml/min), which placed her chronic kidney disease at stage 3b by the National Kidney Foundation criteria . Our patient was also found to be severely hyperkalemic, with a serum potassium concentration of 8.6 mmol/L (normal range 3.5 to 4.9 mmol/L). Her EKG rhythm on presentation to the emergency department showed an irregularly irregular bradycardic rhythm with periods of asystole, absent P waves, widened QRS complex, and peaked t waves .
We diagnosed our patient with hyperkalemia secondary to acute on chronic renal failure, precipitated by the consumption of a large amount of potassium-rich dulse. She was admitted to the intensive care unit, and started on a treatment regimen that included insulin, bicarbonate, calcium gluconate, and sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate - Sanofi-Aventis, Laval, Quebec, Canada). Our patient's usual doses of allopurinol, metformin, and losartan were withdrawn, and ultimately discontinued.
Our patient showed marked improvement overnight, and was discharged to the ward. Within a few hours of treatment initiation, her serum potassium had almost completely normalized (5.5 mmol/L), as did the EKG changes . By the next morning, she was eukalemic (4.1 mmol/L), with a normal sinus rhythm . Her serum creatinine level also improved, and at discharge was close to the patient's pre-admission baseline (93 μmol/L), with an estimated CrCl of 66 ml/min, indicating stage 2 chronic kidney disease . She remained stable with a normal potassium, and cardiac rhythm, and was discharged on hospital day seven .