A 10-year-old Japanese boy with a 2-year history of sleep attacks or syncope was referred to our orthopedic department because his mother noted that he had been experiencing frequent falls. He had been followed up by a pediatric orthopedist for asymptomatic congenital kyphoscoliosis with vertebral malformations in the thoracolumbar spine. He was treated for narcolepsy by a psychiatrist, but no clear diagnostic evidence was apparent, such as abnormalities on electroencephalography. On first presentation to this department, he suddenly lost consciousness. The attack seemed more like syncope than a narcoleptic episode. The mother said he experienced such attacks three to five times a day, with each episode lasting from 30 seconds to a few minutes. After each attack, he usually fell asleep. He showed neither motor weakness nor sensory loss in his upper or lower extremities, and no bladder dysfunction was evident, but generalized hyperreflexia was identified. Electrocardiography showed normal results, and we did not observe any bradycardia at the time of syncope. Breathing likewise remained normal during syncope.
Plain lateral radiography of his CVJ showed abnormal alignment with a clivo-axial angle (the angle formed by lines drawn along the clivus and the posterior aspect of the odontoid process) of 112° (normal, 150 to 180°; Figure A)
. Lateral radiographies in flexion and extension positions showed significant instability between C1 and C2. Computed tomography (CT) and three-dimensional (3D)-CT of his CVJ showed an anteriorly tilted odontoid process of C2 and a hypoplastic C1 posterior arch with rachischisis (spina bifida) that was migrating into his foramen magnum (Figures B and
C). His bilateral lateral atlantoaxial joints were dislocated anteriorly and his C1 anterior arch was hypertrophied. Magnetic resonance imaging showed basilar invagination and compression of his spinal cord at the C1 level (Figure D). Subsequent 3D-CT angiography showed abnormal courses of bilateral vertebral arteries (VAs; Figure E). Both VAs showed a “first persistent intersegmental artery” that entered his spinal canal at the caudal portion of the C1 posterior arch after emerging from the C2 transverse foramen, without passing through the C1 transverse foramen. These arteries appeared to be nearly pinched between the C1 posterior arch and the pars interarticularis of C2. The VAs at the subaxial spine were not hypoplastic. Based on these findings, we suspected that the cause of syncope was this arterial anomaly at his CVJ, and transient brain ischemia could be caused by these anomalous courses of the VAs being pinched between the C1 posterior arch and the pars interarticularis of C2 during cervical motions, especially in flexion. Posterior decompression and occiput-cervical fusion was therefore planned for decompression of the spinal cord and to prevent compression of the first persistent intersegmental arteries during motion.
C1 laminectomy and posterior occiput-cervical fusion (O-C2) were performed using an instrumentation system (VERTEX® MAX; Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA). Intraoperatively, the migrated C1 posterior arch was repositioned after skull traction and we were able to reach the upper surface of C1. Decompression of his foramen magnum was therefore not required for C1 laminectomy. A portion of the C1 posterior arch rachischisis consisted of tendon-like tissue that adhered severely to the dura. During C1 laminectomy, the locations of VAs were detected using Doppler ultrasonography. C2 pedicle screws were inserted with the assistance of a navigation system (Stealth Station®; Medtronic Sofamor Danek). After C1 laminectomy and screwing, monocortical autologous bone was harvested from the right posterior iliac crest and grafted between the decorticated posterior surfaces of the occipital bone and C2.The postoperative course was uneventful. Occiput-cervical alignment appeared improved after surgery, with a clivo-axial angle of 130° (Figure A). Since the surgery, he has not experienced any episodes of syncope. Cervical orthosis was applied for 6 weeks. Bone union was confirmed on CT at 4 months postoperatively (Figure B). As of the latest follow-up at 3.5 years postoperatively, he still showed no syncope, and was able to walk and run without falls.