A 45-year-old African-American man presented to our Emergency Department in a delirious state with loss of memory for one day. He had a past medical history of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), compliant, since 1999), hepatitis C virus (+cirrhosis, -Epstein-Barr virus, -Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis, since 2002) and hypertension for 10 years. Two weeks prior to presentation, he had an episode of hepatic encephalopathy for which he was treated with rifaximin and lactulose and was subsequently discharged on these medications clinically improved. Upon arrival, our patient was confused and his mental status was waxing and waning. He was able to tell us his name, date of birth and address but was unable to reveal how he was feeling. Our patient was drowsy and had to be woken up several times to answer questions. His blood pressure was 130/70mmHg, pulse 56 beats/min, and oxygen saturation 99 percent.
Our patient could not recall what drugs he was taking. He used to smoke four cigarettes per day and there was no history of alcoholism.
On examination, he looked lethargic, his face and extremities were cold, his neck was supple and spider nevi were seen on the left side of his neck and right shoulder. A chest examination was clear to auscultation and percussion. His heart sounds were normal. He was alert and oriented but his mental status was variable. Sensation was intact bilaterally, and there was no asterixis. There was sloughing of the skin over the left leg due to chronic venous changes; scaling was present on the plantar surfaces of both feet, and the dorsalis pedis pulses were intact bilaterally.
Laboratory investigation results showed hemoglobin 10.4g/dL, hematocrit 31.4 percent, white blood cells 7700 cells/mm3, platelets 135,000 cells/mm3; Na+ 130mEq/L, K+ 4.9mEq/L, Cl- 103mEq/L, CO2 24.0mmHg, albumin 1.9g/dL, bilirubin 2.6mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 179IU/mL, alanine transaminase 221IU/mL, aspartate transaminase 87IU/mL, corrected anion gap, 8.7, international normalized ratio 1.96, activated partial thromboplastin time 41.1. The ammonia level was noted to be approximately 50. Results of a chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly.
Our patient’s condition and laboratory test results suggested that his altered mental state was secondary to hepatic encephalopathy in the setting of cirrhosis secondary to chronic hepatitis C. He was given tablet rifaximin 400mg every eight hours and lactulose 30mg every six hours titrated to three to four bowel movements daily. A chest X-ray revealed only cardiomegaly, blood and urine culture results were negative, and the results of a metabolic profile were unremarkable. Our patient was initially started on empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment with vancomycin 1g every 12 hours and piperacillin/tazobactam 3.375g every six hours, both of which were discontinued on day two of therapy when culture results were reported as negative. However, our patient’s mental status did not improve. On day six of hospitalization, a neurology opinion was sought. As part of the investigation, an EEG was performed which revealed ongoing seizure activity from the right parietal lobe .
A diagnosis of non-convulsive status epilepticus was made and our patient was started on oral levetiracetam 500mg every 12 hours. Within one day of initiation of this treatment, our patient became alert and oriented. According to our patient, he never had seizures in the past. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his head revealed an old left basal ganglia hemorrhage but no structural lesions in the right parietal lobe (from where the seizures seemed to originate). Our patient was subsequently discharged and continues to do well on follow-up one year after the discharge.