An 11-year-old male patient was referred to our clinic due to testicular enlargement and rapid growth in height.
The patient presented with testicular enlargement without obvious cause, no pubic hair, no spermatorrhea, and a small amount of beard hair for 6 mo. Peripheral blood DNA samples obtained from the patient and his parents were sequenced using high-throughput whole-exosome sequencing, which was verified by Sanger sequencing.
The patient was the 2.1 kg (< -3sd), 46 cm (< -1sd), and the product of a 36 wk pregnancy born by cesarean section to a gravida 1, para 0-1 mother without a history of asphyxiation and resuscitation. The patient exhibited catch-up growth after birth and no history of feeding difficulties. The physical and mental development of the child at 2-years-old was similar to that of children the same age.
His non-consanguineous parents were clinically normal. His father and mother were 170 and 151 cm in height, respectively. There was no family history of genetic or infectious diseases.
On physical examination at his visit at 11 years of age, his weight was 52.5 kg and length was 146.1 cm. The patient had a clear mind, good spirit, normal hair, and no yellow coloring or bleeding spots on the skin. He had arched eyebrows, protruding bridge of the nose, forward leaning nostrils, a thin upper lip, a small amount of beard, normal jaw, and an inconspicuous laryngeal knot. Both pupils were equal in size and were sensitive to light. Breath sounds in both lungs were clear, and dry and moist rales were not heard. Heart sounds were strong and regular, the heart rate was 90 bpm, and no pathological murmur was found in each valve area. The abdomen was soft, no tenderness and rebound pain was observed, the liver and spleen were unpalpable. The big toes on both feet were widened and the limbs were normal. Limb muscle tension was normal. Physiological reflexes were present, and pathological reflexes were not found. Bilateral testes were symmetrical, about 8-10 mL in size, without pubic hair.
The patient’s liver function, kidney function, electrolytes, blood glucose and blood lipids were normal. Insulin-like growth factor was normal. Karyotype analysis of cultured cells revealed a karyotype of 46XY. Sex hormone levels were as follows: estradiol 25 pg/mL, (adult male reference value: < 20-47 pg/mL), follicle-stimulating hormone 6.62 mIU/mL (adult male reference value: 1.27-19.26 mIU/mL), luteinizing hormone 3.20 mIU/mL (adult male reference value: 1.24-8.62 mIU/mL), and testosterone 1.75 ng/mL (adult male reference value: 1.75-7.81 ng/mL). Total 25 hydroxy vitamin D was 13.79 ng/mL (reference value < 20 ng/mL vitamin D deficiency). Fasting insulin was 23.1 mU/L (reference value: 2.3-11.8 mU/L). Thyroid function was evaluated as follows: Triiodothyronine 6.84 pmol/L (reference value: 2.63-5.71 pmol/L), thyroxine 12.10 pmol/L (reference value: 9.01-19.05 pmol/L), and thyroid-stimulating hormone 1.9145 μIU/mL (reference value: 0.30-4.80 μIU/mL).
The patient underwent a skeletal examination, and the results showed that the bone age was 13 years. Magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary gland was normal. Slight lateral curvature of the thoracic spine was observed.
Informed consent was obtained from the parents on behalf of the proband for whole-exome sequencing, mitochondrial sequencing, and the publication of photographs. DNA was obtained from peripheral blood samples from the patient and his parents. Sequencing and analyses were performed by the Beijing Mygenostics (Beijing, China), which is a high-tech biotechnology company providing life science instruments, reagents and technical services. The second generation sequencer Illumina NextSeqTM 500 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States) was used to sequence the captured region at two ends, with a reading length of 150 bp. After sequencing the target region, the splices and low-quality data in the sequencing data were removed. Using Burrows-Wheeler Aligner software to compare with the reference genome (hg19 version), the data on sequencing depth, homogeneity, and probe specificity were analyzed. Genome Analysis Toolkit software was used to detect the polymorphic sites in the comparison data of each sample, and statistical analyses of the data on single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertion deletion mutations (indels) were conducted. The SNPs and indels were screened using the database of SNPs, , 1000 human genome ( and the Exome Aggregation Consortium database . Application of the human gene mutation database (HGMD, ) and the human Online Mendelian genetic database (OMIM, ) confirmed the reported pathogenic gene locus. The effects of variation on protein structure and pathogenicity were predicted by Rev, Polyphen-2, and Sift. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) sequence variation interpretation standards and guidelines were used for a comprehensive evaluation of the pathogenicity of mutation sites.
Whole-exome sequencing showed that there was complex heterozygous variation of the TAF6 gene in this patient, one of which was an unreported frameshift mutation c.1052delT (p.I351Tfs*40), which may lead to the loss of gene function; the frequency of the variation in the normal population database is unknown, and is a low-frequency variation; the results of protein function prediction are unknown, and are not reported in the HGMD database. According to Sanger sequencing, the variation originated from the child’s mother, and the paternal gene was wild-type . According to ACMG guidelines, the mutation was suspected to be pathogenic.
The other was a missense mutation c.76A>T(p.M26L), which has not been reported. This missense mutation showed 76 nucleotide deficiency changes from adenine to thymine, resulting in the 26 amino acids changing from methionine to leucine. The frequency of the mutation in the normal population database is 0.0014, and is a low-frequency mutation; the results of protein function prediction are unknown, and are not reported in the HGMD database. According to Sanger sequencing, the variation originated from the child’s father, and the maternal gene was wild-type . According to ACMG guidelines, the clinical significance of the variation is unknown.