A 73-year-old man, with a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension, was referred to our clinic in November 2010 with a 3-year history of epigastric pain that was increasing in severity. The pain was non-colicky and was not associated with jaundice or weight loss. The patient did not have any significant personal or family history with no previous admissions and had not been previously admitted for investigation of these symptoms. General and systemic examinations were normal and his serum biochemistry, including liver function tests, amylase and lipase tests were within normal limits, except for his carbohydrate antigen (CA 19–9), which was 60 U/mL (normal range 0–10 U/ml). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple, variably sized cystic lesions with multiple calcific foci involving the whole pancreas . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed numerous pancreatic cysts involving the entire pancreas, obscuring the pancreatic duct . A diagnosis of diffuse SCA was made and he was offered surgical intervention; he declined and sought a second opinion.
Approximately 1 year later, he presented with obstructive jaundice and abnormal serum biochemistry results: alkaline phosphatase, 218 U/L (normal range, 30–120 U/L); total bilirubin, 82.2 μmol/L (normal range, 0–20 μmol/L); direct bilirubin, 51.2 μmol/L (normal range 0–15 μmol/L) ; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 177 U/L (normal range, 0–45 U/L); alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 260 U/L (normal range, 0–45 U/L); serum amylase, 37 U/L (normal range, 30–110 U/L); serum lipase, 11 U/L (normal range, 5–208 U/L), and CA 19–9, 60 U/mL (normal range, 0–37 U/mL). Abdominal ultrasonography showed multiple pancreatic cysts and a dilated biliary system with common bile duct (CBD) stones . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) also showed severe distal CBD narrowing, and the stones were extracted. Another abdominal CT was done because of the elapsed time of one year with no follow up. It showed the absence of any malignant changes and an increase in the size of some cysts. VHL disease was excluded, based on a normal neurological examination, normal visual acuity, and the absence of other organ involvement, including a normal CT brain. Again, the patient was offered surgical treatment, but he asked for additional time to consider this option and was discharged without jaundice and in a normal condition.
Two months later, he presented again with obstructive jaundice. MRI and MRCP were repeated to evaluate the CBD and demonstrated dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary systems, but no stones. The patient agreed to surgery and underwent total pancreatectomy. Intraoperatively, the entire pancreas (including the uncinate process) was distorted and replaced by variably sized cysts, up to 3 cm . Remarkably, the operation was uneventful without evidence of other organ or lymph node involvement. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged 10 days later. The patient is currently taking pancreatic enzyme replacements, and is alive and well 20 months after surgery.
A microscopic examination of the pancreatic specimen showed microcysts and macrocysts lined by cuboidal epithelium, with optically clear cytoplasm and the absence of evident mitosis or necrosis.