This case reviews a 35-year-old G4P4 female with no significant past medical history who initially became symptomatic during her first trimester of pregnancy with progressive vision loss in the right eye with associated intermittent frontal headaches, which persisted throughout pregnancy. After delivery, the patient had scheduled an ophthalmology appointment, but her visual deficits continued to worsen. Seven weeks postpartum, she then presented to our emergency department and was hospitalized for complete vision loss in the right eye and worsening vision in the left eye. Notably, the patient did not have any symptoms of adrenal insufficiency (no hyperpigmentation, salt cravings, nausea, or weight loss) or symptoms of diabetes insipidus (no polyuria or polydipsia). Physical examination revealed pupils equally round, reactive to light, and accommodation, extraocular movements intact, complete vision loss in the right eye with mild proptosis, and only having light perception in the left eye. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Vital signs were within normal limits except for mildly elevated blood pressure at 130/75. Initial lab results were notably within the normal range, except for elevated prolactin possibly due to the patient breastfeeding . MRI of the head with and without contrast revealed enlargement of the pituitary gland exerting mild mass effect beneath the surface of the optic chiasm . Dedicated pituitary MRI revealed a suprasellar hypoenhancing 12.7 mm x 21 mm x 8 mm mass suspicious for pituitary macroadenoma and effacement of the right cavernous sinus. The patient had a normal pituitary hormonal axis including morning cortisol levels on initial evaluation when she was admitted to the hospital. The patient underwent image guided frameless stereotactic right pterional craniotomy with biopsy, decompression of both optic nerves by bone/dura opening of optic canals, and partial resection of the suprasellar mass. Pathology of the biopsy showed dense reactive fibrosis with associated mixed lymphoplasmacytic inflammation and negative IgG4 immunohistochemical staining . Flow cytometry showed mostly CD45 negative events/debris (85%) due to reduced sample viability, CD45 + lymphocytes (14%) and CD11b + granulocytes (1%).Of the lymphocyte population, CD3 + T-cells had a CD4:CD8 ratio of 1.3 while CD20 + B cells were predominately polytypic/polyclonal. Over the next three days, the patient’s vision improved in both eyes but was blurry, and the right eye was worse than the left eye.
Endocrinology was consulted at the end of the patient’s hospitalization after the patient’s surgery and biopsy result suggesting lymphocytic hypophysitis. We initiated high dose pulse steroid therapy for continued symptoms of vision loss. We also checked T3 and T4 levels which were both within normal limits, since they had not been measured before the surgery. Upon discharge she was initiated on prednisone 50 mg daily for one week and instructed to taper to 40 mg daily for the following week.
At the outpatient endocrinology follow up 2 weeks after discharge, the patient’s only active symptom was persistent blurry vision in the right eye. The patient was tapered off of prednisone over 2 months, and at 6-month follow-up the patient reported her vision was stable with no other symptoms that would indicate Addison’s disease or diabetes insipidus (e.g. no nausea, hypotension, polyuria, or polydipsia). The patient’s 8 AM cortisol and sodium were also both within normal limits . At 6-month follow-up with ophthalmology, the patient’s Snellen exam showed L eye was 20/500 and R eye was able to count fingers. The 6-month post-op pituitary MRI revealed redemonstration of a sellar mass, similar in size compared to the pre-op MRI, indicating a surgical outcome of incomplete resection. .
The expected outcome of the treatment plan is to continue monitoring vision and to monitor for any subsequent endocrine disorders caused by the surgical resection or recurrence of lymphocytic hypophysitis.