A 54-year-old Caucasian female presented to the neurosurgery service with a 1-day history of progressive right sided hemiparesis with 4/5 strength in both right upper and lower extremities. Past medical history was significant only for hypertension. The social history revealed that the patient resided on a farm during her childhood. There was no evidence of immunocompromise or systemic disease involving lung or other organs. Laboratory investigations were unremarkable. Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was inconclusive and follow-up imaging was performed at a 1-month interval after a dexamethasone wean with short-term clinical improvement in strength. At one month, and correlating with the steroid wean, there was progression in deficit with increasing weakness similar in degree to that found at presentation. Due to the uncertain diagnosis and worsening clinical symptoms, open surgical biopsy with possible resection was performed.
MRI performed shortly after presentation demonstrates a 2 × 4 cm heterogeneous intracranial mass lesion involving the left motor cortex and extending into the ipsilateral parietal lobe. The lesion was hypointense on T1 sequences and had a speckled appearance upon gadolinium administration, hyperintense on T2 sequences with minimal diffusion restriction on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). Specifically, on T2 imaging there was lack of a defined focal cavity and absence of intracavitary projections with a crenated appearance. Single and multi-voxel MRS was also performed over the area of enhancement as well as the contralateral normal brain. Single-voxel MRS over the enhancing area demonstrated diminished N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) to creatine ratio (1.10), normal choline to NAA ratio (0.82), normal choline to creatine ratio (0.9), and a diminished myoinositol to creatine ratio (0.39). There appeared to be peaks between 3.6 and 3.8 ppm over the enhancing area that were not present in the contralateral normal brain . Repeat MRI at one month demonstrated worsening edema consistent with worsening of the pathologic process .
Approximately one month after presentation, the patient underwent a left fronto-parietal craniotomy for open surgical biopsy with possible resection of the lesion using frameless stereotactic guidance, intraoperative 3D-ultrasound, and neurophysiological monitoring with cortical/subcortical mapping. The neuropathologist's intraoperative impression of the frozen section was that of high-grade glioma. Therefore, resection was thus continued until subcortical stimulation of motor regions was achieved at three milliamps. Postoperatively no additional deficits were noted. The MRI performed on postoperative day one showed some residual enhancement along the splenium of the corpus callosum . The patient improved in strength by the time of discharge on postoperative day three. Following pathological confirmation, intravenous liposomal amphotericin B was initiated for 4 weeks, followed by oral itraconazole for 12 months. At last follow-up 1 year postoperation, cerebritis had resolved on MRI and her neurologic status was normal.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed chronic granulomatous inflammation with caseating necrosis, multinucleated giant cells, and epithelioid histiocytic cells Periodic acid-Schiff staining showed broad based budding yeast, compatible with Blastomycosis . The specimen was sent to the Centers for Disease Control and they confirmed the diagnosis of Blastomycosis.