A 54-year-old obese Sri Lankan woman (BMI of 32) presented with fever, headache, vomiting and generalized malaise for 3 days. She has a background medical history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and right-sided ischemic stroke. On admission she was febrile (38.7 °C), with stable hemodynamics. Rest of the systemic examination was unremarkable including abdominal examination. Initial investigations revealed white cell count (WBC) of 5.9 (× 10 3/ μL), Platelet count of 179 (× 10 3/ μL), Hemoglobin of 12.8 g/dl, AST 47 (U/L), ALT 37 (U/L) and bilirubin levels within normal range. Next day (on day 5 of the illness) there was a drastic drop in platelet and WBC counts from initial values to 55 (× 10 3/ μL) and 3.69 (× 10 3/ μL) respectively, with dengue IgM antibodies being positive, which was confirmative of acute dengue infection. The patient was managed according to the national dengue guidelines with meticulous monitoring of vital parameters and urine output while carefully balancing the fluid intake. Over the next few hours her clinical condition deteriorated with tachycardia (heart rate 100 bpm) and low urine output of < 0.5 ml/kg/hour though she was maintaining a stable blood pressure at 140/90 mmHg and capillary refilling time less than 2 s. Bed side ultrasound scan showed free fluid in peritoneal cavity which was suggestive of DHF. Clinical picture was further complicated by acute per-vaginal bleeding with a drop in haematocrit by 20%. She was transfused with 1 unit of red cell concentrate in addition to crystalloids. Despite all these measures, her condition further deteriorated and she became drowsy.
Blood gas analysis revealed a metabolic acidosis, with a pH of 7.27, HCO3– 17.7 mmol/l and lactate of 2.7 mmol/l. Subsequent clinical course was complicated by acute renal injury, acute disseminated coagulopathy (DIC) and acute liver failure. ALF was diagnosed due to altered liver biochemistry , coagulopathy and encephalopathy. She was started on intravenous N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) infusion and transferred to Medical Intensive Care Unit (ICU) at this point.
On arrival in the ICU, she was encephalopathic with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of 12–14 and was having oliguric AKI. Blood gases revealed worsening metabolic acidosis with rising lactates (2.7–4.1 mmol/l). Inflammatory markers like CRP were normal. Blood and urine cultures were sterile, excluding sepsis.
During next few days hepatic encephalopathy worsened and she was electively intubated due to low GCS. At this point, her non-contrast CT (NCCT) brain was normal and EEG (Electroencephalogram) showed acute encephalopathy changes.
Even though her transaminitis was settling, she had persistently rising direct bilirubinemia with high levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) with development of deep jaundice. On retrospective review, she had no exposure to drugs which can cause cholestasis or hepatotoxicity. CECT abdomen did not reveal extra-hepatic biliary obstructions. Hepatitis A, B, C, cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein Barr virus (EBV) and leptospira serology were negative as well as anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA). Liver biopsy was performed after correction of coagulopathy and the histology revealed intra hepatic cholestasis .
She was initiated on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) to stabilize metabolic parameters and to mitigate the worsening lactic acidosis. However, despite escalating dose of CRRT lactic acidosis got worsened (7.3–8.2 mmol/l). At this point CytoSorb® hemo-adsorption therapy was introduced coupled with CRRT after which metabolic parameters returned to normal with gradual drop in lactate with correction of acidosis . She was transfused with fresh frozen plasma, platelet and cryoprecipitate guided by the ROTEM (rotational thromboelastometry) studies, following which her pervaginal bleeding settled and INR normalized.
She was started on therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) due to persistently rising serum bilirubin levels and severe encephalopathy, after which the GCS started to improve and patient was safely extubated. 4 cycles of TPE was done with recovery of GCS to 15/15. Hyperbilirubinemia was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid as well. Patient was discharged home after good recovery.
On review 1 month later, she was asymptomatic, her bilirubin levels were reaching the baseline and repeat USS of liver was normal other than grade 2 fatty liver.