A 60 year old caucasian female underwent cosmetic fibroblast skin tightening treatment around both her eyelids at her local salon. She recalls some of the EMLA cream (used as a topical anaesthetic) inadvertently seeping into both her eyes during preparation for the treatment. She experienced some initial discomfort, but recalls it subsided and proceeded to have the fibroblast treatment.
She presented approximately four hours later to the emergency department with acute, bilateral, red, painful, photophobic eyes with reduced vision and periorbital swelling. She was referred as an emergency to ophthalmology with bilateral corneal injuries.
Her visual acuity on initial examination was 6/12 right and 6/24 left. Examination was very difficult as she was extremely photophobic and rated the pain as 10/10 on the pain scale. pH was 7–8 in both eyes measured with litmus paper.
On examination she was found to have bilateral diffuse corneal epithelial loss affecting approximately 80% of both corneas. These findings were consistent with a bilateral corneal chemical alkaline injury. She also displayed marked periorbital oedema with multiple dot burn lesions on her skin secondary to the plasma fibroblast treatment itself .
The patient was treated with topical chloramphenicol 1% ointment every 2 h for both eyes, topical cyclopentolate 1% and wore soft eye pads over her eyes overnight for comfort. After day 1 of treatment, she was switched to preservative free chloramphenicol 0.5% eye drops 4 times a day to both eyes and chloramphenicol ointment once at night.
On day 5, the patient was prescribed preservative-free sodium hyaluronate 0.2% lubricating eye drops for use during the day and a paraffin-based ointment for use at night.
The patient had a visual acuity was 6/18 in both eyes on review the following day. The patient was less photophobic and fluorescein examination showed bilateral resolving epithelial defects. After day 1 of treatment the right eye still had a large epithelial defect . Figure shows a large 4.3 mm by 6 mm epithelial defect in the right eye with 1% fluorescein illuminated with a cobalt blue filter.
On day 5 follow up, the corneal epithelial defects were mostly resolved with only a few diffuse punctate epithelial erosions seen with fluorescein in both eyes. The patient reported symptoms of dry eye and mild photophobia. Visual acuity returned to 6/6 in both eyes.
On day 25 of follow up the patient reported only very mild dry eye symptoms and the ocular surface had returned to normal in both eyes . The patient was advised that she is at risk of developing bilateral corneal recurrent erosion syndrome.