A 14-year-old female spayed Chinchilla Persian cat was referred for evaluation of otitis externa and unusual proliferative lesions in both ear canals. There was a history of mild recurrent otitis since adoption as a kitten. Prior to referral, relapse of otitis externa had occurred, but an underlying cause was not found. A food elimination trial attempt failed because of limited food preferences. Injections of methylprednisolone acetate and cefovecin were given about 1 month before referral, but no response was noted. Proliferative lesions developed on both ears 2–3 weeks before referral.
On examination at referral, the cat seemed slightly depressed and mild inappetence was reported. Both ear canals were obstructed and covered with reddish-to-dark-brown verrucous and necrotic tissue . The lesions were friable and bled easily. It could not be determined how deeply the lesions spread into the ear canals. The ears appeared to be moderately pruritic but were not tender on palpation.
The results of haematology and biochemical tests were within normal limits. Total thyroxine was normal. Ear cytology revealed a mild, mixed yeast (Malassezia species) and bacterial infection. Aerobic cultures yielded Pasteurella multocida, while dermatophyte culture was negative. Clinically, lesions appeared to be restricted to the external ear canals – skull radiography showed no evidence of otitis media and there were no neurological signs relating to middle- or inner-ear disease. A sample for pathological examination was obtained from the friable proliferating tissue, which broke off easily during gentle manipulation. Histopathological examination showed various degenerative changes, but severe parakeratotic hyperkeratosis with neutrophilic crusts occupied most of the specimen. The epidermis and the outer root sheaths of the hair follicles showed marked papillomatous hyperplasia . A number of pyknotic and hypereosinophilic keratinocytes (apoptotic cells) were observed in the non-degenerated areas . These findings were compatible with a diagnosis of PNOE and a presumptive diagnosis was made based on both the clinical and histopathological features.
Treatment was initiated with once-daily application of a potent topical glucocorticoid (mometasone furoate) to the lesions of both ears, using an otic lotion that also contained gentamicin and clotrimazole furoate along with mometasone furoate (Mometaotic Otic Suspension; Intervet). Oral itraconazole (5 mg/kg q24h for 3 weeks) was added to enhance fungal treatment of the Malassezia species. On re-examination after 9 weeks, the proliferative tissue had resolved from both pinnae and vertical ear canals, and the frequency of head shaking had markedly decreased. However, erythema and erosions could still be detected by hand-held otoscope examination in the ear canals, and severe proliferative lesions were still evident in both horizontal ear canals, with neither tympanic membrane being visualised. Microscopic examination of smears from both ears were negative for bacteria and yeasts. Repeat skin biopsy was performed as before, with pathological findings the same as described previously, further supporting a diagnosis of PNOE . Oral triamcinolone (Ledercort tablets; Alfresa Pharma) was administered for 1 week at 0.9 mg/kg q24h, and was then tapered to alternate-day administration at the same dose for a further 3 weeks. Previous topical therapy (Mometaotic Otic Suspension) was continued. After 4 weeks there was marked improvement of both ears, with the tympanic membrane being clearly visualised and only a small residual lesion apparent in the right ear canal. Treatment was changed to prednisolone (2 mg/kg on alternate days) for 2 weeks along with a weaker steroid otic lotion (triamcinolone acetonide), after which no lesions were observed. Prednisolone was gradually tapered and stopped after 2 weeks. During the treatment, repeat haematology and biochemical tests were within normal limits except for a slightly elevated triglyceride concentration at 82 mg/dl (reference interval 7–77 mg/dl). Treatment was stopped, and there has been no recurrence of lesions during a follow-up period of 2 years.