A 50-year-old, right-handed woman who presented with transient blindness and headache from 2 years ago was admitted to the hospital. These symptoms worsened in the previous 2 months. A lumbar puncture showed that her intracranial pressure was more than 400 mmH2O. Magnetic resonance venography suggested stenosis at the border of the transverse sinus and sigmoid sinus on the right side . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed stenosis at the border of the transverse sinus and sigmoid sinus on the right side and no sign of thrombus . The intravenous pressures were as follows: superior sagittal sinus, 48.9 cm H2O; torcular, 48.9 cm H2O; transverse sinus, 47.5 cmH2O; before stenosis, 47.5 cmH2O; and after stenosis, 12.2 cmH2O, the pressure gradient across the stenosis was 35.3 cmH2O. It can be concluded that the venous stenosis seriously hindered venous outflow. To relieve the VSS and reduce intracranial hypertension, treatment with venous sinus stent was recommended. The patient accepted intracranial stenting. The stenting was put at the border of the transverse sinus and sigmoid sinus on the right side , and venous sinus pressure was measured after the stenting: superior sagittal sinus, 31.2 cmH2O; torcular, 29.9 cmH2O; before stent, 29.9 cmH2O; at stent, 28.5 cmH2O; after stent, 25.8 cmH2O, the pressure gradient across the stenosis was 4.1 cmH2O; and near the sigmoid sinus, 23.1 cmH2O. Lumbar puncture after the operation showed the patient’s intracranial pressure to be 240 mmH2O. This indicates that, compared with the pressure before stenting, the stent directly solved the VSS.
In this case, transcranial Doppler ultrasound was used to measure high temporal resolution blood flow velocity. The relative low cost, ease of use, non-invasiveness, and excellent temporal resolution of transcranial Doppler ultrasound make it an ideal tool for examination of cerebrovascular function in both research and clinical settings. However, it cannot be used in patients with insufficient bilateral temporal bone windows for insonation of the middle cerebral artery. Measurements of dCA were performed at 3 time points: before stenting, after stenting, and 3 months later. The patient need to avoid alcohol and exercise 12 h before the measurement. And the measurements were made in a quiet, specialized laboratory with a constant temperature between 22 and 24 °C. Transcranial Doppler (EMS-9 PB, Delica, China) was used to evaluate cerebral blood flow velocity. The 2 MHz probe was fixed to a special head frame and detect blood flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery non-invasively at a depth of 45 to 60 mm. A servo-controlled plethysmograph (Finometer PRO, Netherlands) was used to record the natural arterial blood pressure of the right middle finger placed at the heart level. And a capnograph attached to a mask on a nasal tube was used to monitor end-tidal CO2. The 10-min monitoring data were processed by MATLAB software (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). The raw waveforms were sampled at 100 Hz for both arterial blood pressure and cerebral blood flow velocity. A cross-correlation function was used to achieve beat-to-beat alignment of data. To down sample the data to 1 Hz, a third-order Butterworth low-pass filter (cut-off at 0.5 Hz) was applied as an anti-alias filter. Dynamic cerebral autoregulation was evaluated using transfer function analysis [, ]. We used a transfer function to calculate the quotient of the cross-spectrum of arterial blood pressure and blood flow velocity in the middle cerebral artery signals and the autospectrum of arterial blood pressure in the frequency domain. In the frequency domain, we estimated the phase difference and gain within a low frequency range (0.06–0.12 Hz). Before venous sinus stenting, the dCA of the patient was as follows: gain (right side), 0.68 cm/s/mmHg; gain (left side), 0.68 cm/s/mmHg; phase difference (right side): 30.62 degrees; phase difference (left side), 40.74 degrees. End-tidal CO2: 37.1 mmHg. One day after the venous sinus stenting, the dCA of the patient was as follows: gain (right side), 0.74 cm/s/mmHg; gain (left side), 0.84 cm/s/mmHg; phase difference (right side), 43.77 degrees; phase difference (left side), 51.62 degrees. End-tidal CO2: 37.8 mmHg. The patient’s symptoms were significantly relieved. Three months after intracranial stenting, the dCA of the patient was as follows: gain (right side), 0.91 cm/s/mmHg; gain (left side), 0.76 cm/s/mmHg; phase difference (right side), 82.73 degrees; phase difference (left side), 71.20 degrees. End-tidal CO2 was 37.6 mmHg. Figure shows the changes in the right- and left-brain phase difference. The patient reported no headache or blindness at the 3-month follow-up.