A 38-year-old Japanese man with seronegative RA, diagnosed in the year 2004 by using the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 1987 criteria, had received sulphasalazine and methotrexate (MTX) therapies before he visited our institute and was started on regular low-dose prednisolone therapy. Despite these therapies, his RA disease activity remained high (tender and swollen joints at the knees and ankles; patient global assessment score, 48/100 mm; C-reactive protein (CRP), 3.37 mg/dL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 48 mm/hour; matrix metalloproteinase-3, 1531 ng/mL; Disease Activity Score 28-ESR, 4.57). The patient was obese (175 cm, 95 kg, BMI (body mass index): 31.0); however, he neither had a history of other medical problems (no viral infection and a non-carrier) nor had he ever received surgical intervention. He did not require intra-articular steroid injection. IFX at a dose of 3 mg/kg (total dose, 285 mg) was introduced in addition to MTX (10 mg weekly), prednisolone (5 mg daily), and folic acid (5 mg weekly). He suffered no immediate adverse effects and experienced excellent pain relief in his knees and ankles the day after his first infusion of IFX, but six days after infusion he presented with a fever of 40°C, chills, and polyarthralgia including the knees and ankles that persisted for two days, and he was admitted to hospital.
At admission (day 0, eight days after his first infusion), his body temperature was 40.6°C and he was tachycardic (107 beats/minute) with 104/68 mmHg blood pressure. His heart sounds were normal and he had no visible rash. The affected joints (knees, ankles, and right wrist) were swollen, painful, and warm. There was no evidence of a primary source of infection. Laboratory data showed marked acute inflammation (CRP, 31.0 mg/dL; white blood cells, 19,200/mm3) and pre-disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and shock (prothrombin time (PT), 62.2%; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 45.1%; fibrinogen, 804 mg/dL; serum fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP), 14.7 μg/mL). Findings from chest computed tomography (CT) , urine smears, and cultures were all normal, and he had no symptoms involving the abdomen or pelvis. Fluid drawn from the knees was purulent and its smear revealed numerous gram-positive cocci arranged in chains, which were subsequently identified as S. pneumoniae at day five. He was clinically diagnosed with bacterial septic polyarthritis. Emergency surgical joint lavage and drainage was then performed at the knees, along with needle aspiration and lavage of the ankles and right wrist just after admission (day 0). He was treated with intravenous antibiotic therapy with cefazolin (2 g twice daily at days 0 and one) and vancomycin (1 g once daily at days one and two). At day two, a whole body CT showed auxocardia and hydrothorax, but no pneumonia or other abnormal findings . Two blood cultures taken at day 0 revealed penicillin-sensitive S. pneumoniae (minimal inhibitory concentration of penicillin G ≤ 0.03 μg/mL) with no penicillin-resistant strains at day two. He was switched to ceftriaxone (2 g twice daily at day two and thereafter for a total of 29 days). He made a rapid and sustained recovery with intensive rehabilitation. He was discharged on day 37 with 10 mg weekly of MTX, when he returned to his preadmission state .