A 59-year-old Chinese male presented with a 6-month history of intermittent dizziness. The dizziness occurred exclusively at meal times and was worst when swallowing large quantities of solid food, such as rice or bread. He initially was symptom free when consuming smaller quantities of solids or fluids, but his condition worsened progressively with presyncopal events occurring even while eating smaller quantities of solid food. The patient described a sensation of increasing difficulty in swallowing despite reducing the size of his meals. He denied any associated syncope or seizures. His past medical history and physical examination were unremarkable and blood investigations were within normal limits. Echocardiography revealed a structurally normal heart with normal systolic and diastolic function. 24-h electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring recorded a sinus pause of 4.5 s at the time the patient had his meal . A provisional diagnosis of swallow syncope was made and a permanent pacemaker (PPM) implantation was scheduled.
Tilt table testing prior to pacemaker insertion resulted in a hypotensive response 5 min after provocation with 400 micrograms of sublingual glycerin trinitrate administered sublingually, with reproduction of symptoms of syncope. The minimal blood pressure was 32.9/29.2 mmHg and the heart rate 75.3 bpm. No asystole was observed during tilt table testing .
The patient’s symptoms resolved completely after implantation of a dual chamber PPM. A diagnostic workup to exclude gastrointestinal disease was performed. A barium swallow test was normal and effectively ruled out achalasia. The oesophagus appeared healthy with no structural disease on oesophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD). The pacemaker was continuously interrogated during the OGD. Increased pacing requirements were noted when the endoscope was advanced into the esophagus . Subsequently, a 20 mm diameter TTS (through-the-scope), CRE™ (controlled radial expansion) balloon (Boston scientific) was sequentially inflated in the proximal, mid and distal esophagus while the pacemaker was programmed “OFF” to assess the physiologic response. Inflation in both distal and mid oesophagus resulted in significant sinus pauses of up to 5.6 s confirming the cardio-inhibitory response to oesophageal distension as the underlying pathophysiological mechanism of this patient’s syncopal events.