This previously healthy 15-year-old Japanese girl developed fever and was diagnosed with influenza A virus infection based on a positive result with a rapid detection kit in 2009, during the pandemic influenza (H1N1) period. She had not previously taken oseltamivir, and had not developed neuropsychiatric symptoms in her previous influenza infection; this was her first admission to a neurological ward. The day after oseltamivir was started, her fever subsided, but the family noticed unusual behavior, such as doing her makeup at midnight and littering her room. She took 5 doses of 2 mg/kg (150 mg/day, b.i.d., 36 kg in weight) of oseltamivir every twelve hours and concomitantly took dihydrocodeine, ambroxol, benproperine, azithromycin and clarithromycin. There is no report of neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with these concomitant medications, except clarithromycin (clarithromycin occasionally induces altered mental status accompanied with electroencephalogram (EEG) abnormality, mostly in adults with psychiatric illness ). The symptoms did not fluctuate according to oseltamivir dosing times. After 3 days, she suddenly left her home and was found standing in front of an unknown apartment. Her family discontinued oseltamivir at that point. Because her bizarre behaviors continued after cessation of oseltamivir (for example, she complained of hearing voices of strange men), she was admitted to our hospital with suspected influenza encephalopathy. She developed delirium-like symptoms, such as insomnia, disorientation, visual hallucinations, a long-term memory deficit, abnormal behaviors (e.g., persistent ritual sneezing) and delusion (e.g., insisting that she was pregnant), but showed normal responses intermittently, especially during benzodiazepine infusion (diazepam or midazolam). Midazolam infusion (1 mg) enabled her to give correct verbal responses to questions about her name, her friends’ names, her age, and her address, as well as to perform mental calculations (additions and subtractions). Seizures were not observed and abnormal slowing in the EEG, which is characteristic of influenza-associated encephalopathy, was not observed in repeated recordings. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study and repeated brain MRIs showed no abnormality. SPECT with 99mTc-ethyl cysteinate dimer showed no abnormal cerebral perfusion, while SPECT with 123I-iomazenil (performed 3 days after discontinuation of benzodiazepine) showed decreased benzodiazepine receptor binding in the right medial temporal area .
Glutamate receptor autoantibodies (GluRAbs), including GluRε2-NT2, GluRε2-CT1, GluRδ2-NT and GluRδ2-CT, were within normal limits in serum, but were increased in CSF (Additional file : Table S1).
Finally, she completely recovered within 2 weeks after cessation of oseltamivir and administration of benzodiazepine (oral nitrazepam or lorazepam, with continuous midazolam infusion for 5 days in the middle). Naranjo’s adverse drug reaction probability scale gave a score of 6.
At 154 h after final dosing of oseltamivir, blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were taken for drug level determination and genetic assessment. The serum level of oseltamivir was under the detection limit (0.5 ng/mL) and that of its active metabolite Ro 64-0802 was 1.30 ng/mL. CSF levels of oseltamivir and Ro 64-0802 were both under the detection limit (0.5 ng/mL). The observed serum level of Ro 64-0802 in this patient was higher than the expected level of Ro 64-0802 based on the pharmacokinetic parameters of age-matched healthy subjects, suggesting delayed excretion of Ro 64-0802 . The pharmacokinetics of oseltamivir in patients with influenza is qualitatively similar to that in healthy subjects .
Oseltamivir is exclusively converted by hepatic carboxylesterase CES1 to Ro 64-0802, which is excreted into urine by glomerular filtration and tubular secretion via organic anion transporter OAT1 and/or OAT3 [, ]. Delayed excretion of Ro 64-0802 could be due either to decreased conversion of oseltamivir to Ro 64-0802 or to decreased elimination of Ro 64-0802 itself. Simulation studies indicated that the observed serum concentration of Ro 64-0802 at 154 h after final dosing was consistent with a decrease to one-tenth of normal in the conversion rate of oseltamivir to Ro 64-0802 or with a decrease to one-half in the elimination rate of Ro 64-0802 . The former case, but not the latter, would also result in increased concentrations of oseltamivir, though in both cases, the oseltamivir concentration would have been at an undetectable level by 154 h after the final dose. The patient’s renal function was normal. The patient was not receiving any drugs known to inhibit OAT1, OAT3 or CES1.
Gene sequencing of OAT1 and OAT3 and diplotype analysis of CES1 failed to explain her abnormal exposure to Ro 64-0802. Examination of the single nucleotide polymorphism of c.122G > A(R41Q) in the human sialidase Neu2 gene showed that the patient was a heterozygous carrier of this variation .