An 80-year-old indigenous Australian man presented to his general practitioner complaining of a headache, persistent cough with minimal hemoptysis, weight loss and night sweats over a period of two months. He was an ex-smoker of cigarettes with an 80-pack per year history of tobacco use. His past medical history was unremarkable. A physical examination revealed a palpable swelling of the scalp overlying the parietal bone. He had no history of trauma to the head. His general practitioner requested a chest X-ray that demonstrated a large mass in the left parahilar region extending into the anterior segment of the left upper lobe . It was reported as highly suspicious for a primary neoplasm and thought to be a bronchogenic carcinoma. The man was referred to our institution for a medical oncology opinion. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of his chest and a non-contrast CT of his head were requested . The chest CT demonstrated the presence of a mass in the anterior left upper lobe measuring 8.78×7.40×7.79cm extending to and invading the anterior and lateral pleura . The mass extended to the left hilum and invaded the anterior mediastinum and contacted the aortic arch. There was evidence of left upper lobe bronchial obstruction and compression of second order bronchi. No lymphadenopathy was noted. The head CT demonstrated a destructive lesion along the vertex of the parietal bone measuring 14mm transverse and 44mm anteroposterior. There were soft tissue components extending intracranially and extracranially. The intracranial component had a maximum thickness of nine mm and had a mass effect on the superior sagittal sinus . An area of possible long-standing gliosis with calcification was noted in the left temporoparietal lobe. The CT findings were consistent with a metastatic lesion originating from the meninges intracranially, with some involvement of the brain parenchyma and extending through the parietal bone to the extracranial soft tissues. A bronchoscopy was performed with bronchial washings, bronchial brushings and a biopsy for histopathology was taken. The biopsy contained scanty mucous-like tissue which did not withstand processing. The bronchial washings and bronchial brushings contained a moderate number of abnormal cells arranged singly and in clusters with pleomorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei, coarse chromatin and a small volume of dense cytoplasm consistent with SqCC. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) testing was not performed. The patient declined palliative radiotherapy and was managed medically with 8mg of dexamethasone daily and opioid analgesia.