A 66 year old Caucasian, post-menopausal woman was admitted to hospital under the care of the general physicians. She had a three months history of cough and productive green sputum, weight loss, poor appetite and frequent night sweats. Interestingly there was no history of vaginal bleeding.
Clinical examination revealed she was febrile. On auscultation of the chest, crepitations were audible. The abdomen was soft but tender on palpation of the lower abdomen.
Initial investigations included an elevated CRP (279.8) and white cell count (25.4). She was anaemic with a haemoglobin of 8.2 g/dL. Chest X-Ray showed basal atelectasis but nil else.
The patient was transfused with two units of blood and broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics were commenced. A few days later the patient developed vomiting, abdominal pain and was noted to have a brown vaginal discharge. In view of her continuing poor general condition, the lower abdominal tenderness and discharge, imaging of the abdomen and pelvis was arranged.
A CT scan revealed a huge pyometra extending up to the umbilicus and an intrauterine contraceptive device was noted to be in situ . No lymphadenopathy was evident and the remainder of the abdomen was normal. The patient's care was then transferred to the gynaecology team.
After taking a thorough gynaecological history, it emerged that the patient had a Lippes loop inserted 25 years previously. She was not counselled regarding the importance of re-attending to have the coil checked or told that she would need to have it removed at some point. In addition to this, the patient was not aware that she needed to have regular cervical smear tests and was then unfortunately lost to follow up. Closer examination revealed a tender 24 weeks size uterus.
She was taken to theatre, where 1600 ml of pus was drained from the uterus and the coil removed. However, at operation the cervix was noted to be suspicious. Biopsies were taken and further examination under anaesthesia clinically confirmed cervical cancer.
After drainage of the pyometra and administration of appropriate antibiotics, the patient made a good recovery from her septic state. Histology later confirmed a stage 1b poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix. She was referred to the oncologists and is due to have a radical hysterectomy.