We present a nine-year-old girl complaining of dyspnea, easy fatigability and skin lesions. She had a history of an occasional epistaxis and weakness since 20 days before her admission, accompanied by the symptoms and signs of common cold, specially cough, during the last two days.
In the past medical history, the skin disease had started when she was around 4 months old with eruption of some desquamative, crusted and non-pruritic lesions on the plantar surfaces of both lower limbs. After being visited by a dermatologist, since there were similar lesions diagnosed in her two cousins, she was told of the genetic transmission of the rash and that nothing needed to be done. Up to the age of 8 years of age, she also complained of occasional episodes of fatigue for which correction of anemia was suggested.
On physical examination, she had respiratory distress and widely spread skin lesions. Vital signs showed tachypnea, tachycardia, normal blood pressure and temperature. The lesions were on the trunk, fingers, toes, and specially on palmoplantar areas. They were crusted with yellowish color, peeling and not bleeding when scratched on . Also the lips seemed dry, brittle and bleeding easily on gentle palpation.
A holosystolic murmur was heard at the apex radiating to the axillary region, and a gallop rhythm was detected. She had no organomegaly except for palpating the liver about 3 to 4 centimeters below the rib edge. No clubbing or more important findings were found. The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly . On echocardiography, the left ventricle was dilated and had a non-compaction pattern with its ratio to the compacted compartment more than 1.4/1. The M-mode displayed a decreased ejection fraction and an increased E point septal separation (EPSS). Also the color doppler mode showed mild to moderate mitral regurgitation . The patient was admitted to PICU and the monitoring was started. She was put on humidified oxygen and 2/3 maintenance fluid. The lab tests were sent and parenteral medications including dopamine, dobutamine and furosemide begun. Complete blood count showed mild anemia and biochemistry was normal except for the slightly increased liver enzymes, most probably due to hepatic congestion. The dermatological consultation confirmed the diagnosis of Carvajal Syndrome. The patient had a smooth course in the PICU and was discharged a few days afterwards with a good general condition receiving digoxin, furosemide, captopril, sprinolactone and coenzyme Q.