An 89-year-old female patient requiring surgery for colorectal cancer also suffered from severe calcified aortic valve stenosis (aortic mean gradient = 59 mmHg, aortic area = 0.4 cm2) and significant stenosis of the left main trunk, which contraindicated her cancer surgery. Discussions among the local heart team led to suggest that percutaneous coronary intervention followed by TAVR would be performed before colorectal surgery. Considering future concern of coronary intervention, easy access to the coronary ostia is expected for selection of the THV. Aortic root dimensions and the access site were precisely measured using computed tomography (CT) angiography, with the aortic annulus having a perimeter of 67 mm and an area of 320 mm2. While iliac and femoral severely calcified stenosis contraindicate a conventional femoral route, the Doppler and CT studies of supra-aortic vessels did not show any abnormalities. The right common carotid artery was free from calcifications, and its internal diameter was 7 mm at puncture level. The implantation of an S-size ACURATE neo™ aortic valve (Boston Scientific, MA, USA) via the right carotid artery was collegially retained by the local heart team. The choice of this valve was mainly driven by an easy access to the coronary ostia if repeated percutaneous revascularization were requested in the future in this coronary diseased patient. After obtaining the patient’s consent, the TAVR procedure was performed according to local standard protocol in a hybrid operating room. Intravenous heparin was administrated to maintain an activated clotting time of ≥250 s. As in our usual practice for transcarotid TAVR, continuous cerebral perfusion was monitored by cerebral tissue oxygen saturation measurement with the near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) cerebral oximeter (O3™, Masimo, Irvine, CA). The patient was under double anti-platelet therapy for a recent previous coronary stent implantation. Surgical access for TAVR was performed under general anesthesia with a fast-track approach. A 5 Fr pigtail was advanced into the aortic root using a left radial approach. Through a 4 cm right cervical incision , the right common artery was exposed. The stenotic aortic valve was then crossed using a straight-tip guide wire and an Amplats left 1.0 diagnostic catheter (Terumo Medical, Somerset, NJ). The straight-tip guidewire was then replaced with a pre-shaped extra-stiff Safari XS (Boston Scientific, MA, USA) in the left ventricle. An iSLEEVE™ (Boston Scientific, MA, USA) expandable sheet was cautiously advanced into the ascending aorta . Given the heavy annular calcification, we performed a 22 mm valvuloplasty using a noncompliant balloon (Cristal balloon, BALT, Montmorency, France). Prothesis placement was performed in the standard fashion, and the up-to-down deployment was satisfactory with enhanced stability because of the short distance between the arterial carotid access and the aortic annulus . After a satisfactory angiogram , the iSLEEVE™ introducer was removed, and the common carotid artery was surgically purged and repaired using a 6–0 polypropylene running suture. Echocardiography confirmed the absence of paravalvular leak, and the mean prosthetic gradient was 7 mmHg. After continuous ECG monitoring, the patient was discharged home on the third postoperative day, per our local practice. Based on the Valve Academic Research Consortium (VARC 2) criteria, we recorded no complications.