The 48-year-old Caucasian female patient (height 165 cm, weight 59 kg) had migraine without aura and migraine with aura according to ICHD-3 criteria on an average of 6–7 days per month since puberty. Since 2015, headache intensity, attack duration, and frequency of headaches per month increased, which is why she presented to our center. She now experienced 11 days with migraine per month. Attacks showed a very severe intensity, attack duration averaged 19 h in 2019, according to her reporting in the migraine app . Acute medications were used an average of 10 days per month (naratriptan 2.5 mg, eletriptan 40 mg, or sumatriptan 6 mg subcutaneously). The patient did not report any other pre-existing conditions or medication use. The MIDAS score was grade IV, corresponding to a very severe impairment.
In December 2019, the patient was first prescribed erenumab 140 mg (Aimovig) subcutaneously after extensive patient information as other approved prophylactic migraine medication (amitriptyline, metoprolol, flunarizine, topiramate) had not been effective. This resulted in a reduction of migraine days per month to an average of 3 days. The attack duration shortened to an average of 10 h. The patient usually took acute medication (naratriptan 2.5 mg or sumatriptan 6 mg subcutaneously) on 2 days per month. Initially, the patient experienced no side effects. In February, a masseuse noticed a reddish, circular rash in the buttock area during back massage. The patient herself did not experience any subjective symptoms. In particular, there were no local skin changes at the injection site on the thigh. The patient therefore paid no further attention to the skin redness. She applied a cooling gel, and the redness resolved spontaneously after approximately 1 week. Treatment with erenumab 140 mg was continued in monthly intervals. Therapeutic efficacy remained continuously stable to the patient's satisfaction, with only about 1–2 mild migraine attacks per month. These responded very well to the acute medication.
On February 3, 2022, the patient experienced a migraine attack. She treated it with sumatriptan 6 mg subcutaneously. On February 4, a recurrent headache occurred. The patient treated this with naratriptan 2.5 mg with good effect. On February 5, 2022, the patient repeated the monthly injection of erenumab for the 27th time. On February 6, migraine headaches recurred. The patient initially treated these again with naratriptan 2.5 mg, and after 4 h with sumatriptan 6 mg subcutaneously because of lack of efficacy. The headache then subsided. To prevent recurrent headache, the patient used an additional 100 mg of prednisolone. She tapered off prednisolone because of continued headache with a gradual dose reduction of 20 mg every 2 days. On February 10, the migraine headache resolved. Approximately 40 h after the application of erenumab, the patient experienced very severe pain in the buttock area centered over the anal crease on February . The area of pain extended in a circular pattern over an area of approximately 20 cm . The pain started abruptly and reached very severe intensity within about 30 min. Sitting on the buttocks was no longer possible for the patient. There was pronounced allodynia in the entire gluteal area. The patient was therefore no longer able to wear clothes in this body part and had to leave her buttocks undressed for 7 days and could not leave the house. A broad blister-like skin swelling formed in the area of pain. The blisters opened up on the fourth day after the onset of the skin reaction . In addition to the pain in this area, a pronounced redness appeared in the entire buttock area. Here, the patient experienced a burning pain similar to a severe sunburn or scald. The symptoms lasted for a period of 10 days. From this point on, they slowly subsided. In this time period, pain intensity fluctuated with intermittent intensifications of pain.
On February 12, i.e., 7 days after the use of erenumab, the patient noticed a painless circular redness on the inside of the right elbow . Another area of redness appeared proximally on the flexor side of the right forearm. These areas did not cause any discomfort except for mild sensitivity to touch. The areas did not expand and resolved spontaneously after 3 weeks.
After 14 days, the redness in the buttock area was still present, but the marked allodynia had remitted . After a period of 21 days, the symptoms resolved completely. The patient did not report any other sequelae.
The patient discontinued the use of erenumab thereafter. On March 7, 2022, she switched to fremanezumab 225 mg (Ajovy) subcutaneously, which also had a good effect on migraine. No skin reactions or other side effects occurred under regimen this so far. The prior acute medication was continued.