Our patient is a 59-year-old gentleman who presented to the Emergency Department of the Cancer Institute of Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil on 10th May 2020 with worsening dyspnea and chest pain for the last 3 days. Five months prior to presentation he had been diagnosed with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and previously, on April 29th during a routine follow-up hospital admission for his lymphoma, he had a routine PET CT and chest CT scan performed for lymphoma follow-up showing bilateral ground-glass lung lesions with less than 25% of lung involvement suggestive of COVID-19 infection. Subsequent COVID-19 PCR revealed that the patient was COVID-19 positive, however as he was asymptomatic, he was discharged.
Comorbidities presented were systemic arterial hypertension treated with losartan 50 mg bid and non-insulin-dependent diabetes treated with 60 mg of gliclazide per day and metformin 850 mg q8h.
The past medical history of our patient includes the diagnosis of lymphoma on December 1st, 2019, after an exploratory laparotomy due to perforating acute abdomen resulting in enterectomy of the perforated segment (15 cm resection) plus manual end-to-end anastomosis + Barker peritoniostomy (due to hemodynamic instability). On December 5th—a second look abdominal surgery was performed with wall closure and mesh placement. The lymphoma was classified as diffuse large cells non-Hodgkin lymphoma—CD20 negative. The patient started CHOP chemotherapy [cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone] with cycles every 21 days last on April 16th and three cycles of intrathecal methotrexate (MTX) chemotherapy last on March 16th.
Eleven days following discharge from the patient's first admission, the patient’s condition worsened. Subsequently on 10th of May 2020, the patient presented with worsening cough, dyspnea and chest pain to the Emergency Department of the Cancer Institute of Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil. Due to the patients deteriorating condition the patient was admitted to hospital.
During his latest hospital stay, he was prescribed ceftriaxone 2 g QD for seven days, azithromycin 500 mg QD for five days, enoxaparin 40 mg QD, oseltamivir 75 mg bid for two days (until the result of SARS-CoV-2 RT PCR positive). He received pneumocystis prophylaxis with sulfamethoxazole 400 mg + trimethoprim 80 mg and acyclovir 200 mg QD for herpes simplex prophylaxis. A second chest CT scan was performed which demonstrated an increase in the extension and attenuation of pulmonary opacities compared with the patient’s previous chest CT scan . The patient’s clinical condition was stable without any worsening of clinical condition and biochemical markers during his hospital stay and maximum oxygen intake of 3L/min by nasal cannula. The oxygen supplementation was titrated and interrupted on May 13th. On May 19th, the patient was discharged. At that time, a second nasal SARS-CoV-2 RT PCR was performed and resulted in a negative result.