A 60-year-old woman with no smoking history was diagnosed with allergic rhinitis and asthma; thus, treatment with antihistamines and inhaled corticosteroids/long-acting beta-agonists was started. At the age of 61, she had a prolonged cough, and a chest X-ray at another hospital showed consolidations in the bilateral lung, and she was referred to our hospital. A blood test showed eosinophilia (11.0%, 770/µL), elevated total IgE level (893 IU/mL), and positive myeloperoxidase (MPO) ANCA (10.3 IU/mL). Chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple consolidations in bilateral lungs . Therefore, eosinophilic pneumoniae and EGPA were suspected; however, bronchoalveolar lavage and lung biopsy could not be conducted due to the absence of patient consent. Symptoms of other organ damage, such as neuropathy, presumably linked to vasculitis, were not evident. After 1 month, a negative inversion of MPO-ANCA and lung lesion disappearance without any additional systemic treatment, including SCS, immunosuppressive drugs, and biologics, were confirmed .
At 63 years, nasal obstruction, hyposmia, and ear fullness developed. Endoscopic findings showed NPs in the bilateral middle nasal meatus and MEE in the bilateral middle ear. Pathological findings showed an enriched eosinophil infiltration in NPs (147 eosinophils/high power field) and a highly viscous MEE. A sinus CT scan predominantly revealed soft tissue shadows in bilateral ethmoidal sinuses. Therefore, she was diagnosed with ECRS and EOM complicated by asthma. Endoscopic sinus surgery was done, and short-term oral corticosteroid (OCS) treatment was performed postoperatively, tapered prednisolone (PSL) from 20 mg/day for 4 weeks. After the operation, her nasal, ear, and asthma control improved temporarily; however, they gradually worsened with the discontinuation of OCS treatment despite her regular use of high-dose inhaled fluticasone furoate/vilanterol tridentate (200 µg/day), montelukast sodium, and intranasal corticosteroids . When her asthma worsened three months after surgery, she had elevated blood eosinophils (7.0%, 490 /µL), total IgE (693 IU/mL), and fractional exhaled nitric oxide (74 ppb), indicating a predominance of type 2 inflammation .
Six months after the operation, 300 mg dupilumab administration was initiated subcutaneously every 2 weeks for refractory ECRS and asthma associated with EOM. Two weeks after dupilumab initiation, no adverse symptoms were noted other than an echo in the ear, although elevated blood eosinophil levels were confirmed. However, after the second administration of dupilumab, right-hand numbness, otalgia, hearing loss, anosmia, cough, facial edema, and headache developed. Four weeks after dupilumab initiation, increased blood eosinophil, C-reactive protein (CRP), and MPO-ANCA levels were noted. Endoscopic findings showed a swollen nasal mucosa and otoscopic findings showed an increase in MEE , while audiometry showed the deterioration of mixed hearing loss . CT scan showed a relapse of multiple peribronchial consolidations and exacerbation of rhinosinusitis and otitis .
Therefore, dupilumab therapy was discontinued and OCS treatment was initiated, with PSL tapering from 20 mg/day for 14 days. Blood eosinophils (1%, 70/µL) were reduced with OCS burst, and asthma, rhinosinusitis, facial edema, and ear symptoms were controlled. However, numbness in the right hand, positive MPO-ANCA (25.4 IU/mL), and elevated CRP (2.43 mg/dL) were still present, and the patient was referred to the rheumatology department. Although we were unable to gather histological evidence of vasculitis, she was diagnosed with EGPA by a rheumatologist based on adult-onset eosinophilic airway inflammation, nasal polyps, neuropathy, MPO-ANCA positivity, eosinophilia and clinical history. We have also confirmed that this case meets the classification criteria for EGPA as established by 2022 American College of Rheumatology/European Alliance of Associations for Rheumatology . 48 mg/day PSL and 25 mg/day azathioprine (AZP) were started as a remission induction therapy. 3 months later, PSL (19 mg/day) controlled MPO-ANCA levels (2.1 IU/mL) and blood eosinophils (1.0%, 150/µL), but asthma, rhinosinusitis, and right ear otitis worsened. For relapse of EGPA, an increased dose of PSL (55 mg/day) was administered as remission induction therapy again. 6 courses of intravenous cyclophosphamide (750 mg) therapy were used as immunosuppressive agent. Subsequently, she was treated with mepolizumab 300 mg and carefully tapered doses of PSL with monitoring of symptoms and biomarkers including blood eosinophils, MPO-ANCA, and CRP.