A 74-year-old female patient with osteoporosis, who had been taking alendronate and alfacalcidol for approximately 6 years, suffered femur fractures following a fall in March 2012. Radiography revealed a subtrochanteric right femur fracture . In addition, her contralateral thigh showed thickening of the lateral cortex and a transverse radiolucent fracture line in the subtrochanter . The patient was diagnosed with AFFs. The patient had normal levels of bone resorption markers, but low levels of a bone formation marker .
Four days after admission, the authors performed minimally invasive osteosynthesis using intramedullary nails . Alfacalcidol was continued but alendronate was ceased. Two weeks later, low-intensity pulsed ultrasonography (LIPUS) therapy was started for both thigh regions to promote bone healing. In June 2012, radiography and computed tomography imaging revealed signs of delayed union at the right fracture site .
The patient could not walk without a crutch owing to contralateral thigh pain. After obtaining informed consent, prophylactic osteosynthesis was performed on the left subtrochanteric lesion in June 2012. Bone biopsy samples collected at the intramedullary nail insertion site revealed an absence of osteoblasts and osteoclasts on trabecular surfaces , as well as low bone volume .
LIPUS treatment was restarted after surgery. In August 2012, once-weekly TPTD (56.5 μg) was added, and the patient’s tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase type 5b (TRACP-5b) and procollagen type 1N-terminal propeptide (P1NP) levels increased transiently, as did their lumbar bone mineral density . After 3 months of TPTD treatment, the patient’s fractures had improved . Administration of TPTD was terminated in February 2013 and the patient can now walk independently without crutch.
All procedures followed were in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation (institutional and national) and with the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 2000 and 2008. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being included in the case report.