A 24 year old previously healthy lady was admitted to a local hospital on third day of fever with arthralgia and myalgia without any bleeding manifestations. On examination she was hemodynamically stable with a pulse rate of 80 beats per minute and blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg. There was no postural drop in blood pressure, pleural effusions or ascites to suggest vascular leakage. She did not have symptoms or signs of neurological involvement on admission. Full blood count revealed white blood count (WBC) 3.26 × 109/L with differentials of Neutrophils 2.0 × 109/L, Lymphocytes 1.1 × 109/L and Monocytes 0.1 × 109/L. Hemoglobin (Hb) 13.2 g/dL, platelet count 80 × 109/L and hematocrit (Hct) 38 %.
Tentative diagnosis of dengue fever without fluid leakage was diagnosed as clinical features and investigations are characteristic of the infection. Fluid management and monitoring of vital parameters was started according to National Dengue management guidelines .
On fifth day of fever patient developed signs of fluid leakage. Hematocrit was 46 % which is a >20 % rise from baseline value. Other signs of leakage were right sided pleural effusion and ascites which were confirmed radiologically and low albumin levels (2.4 g/dl). Critical phase monitoring and fluid management was instituted according to the guideline. Patient did not have bleeding manifestations. Thirty one hours into critical phase she complained of severe headache and difficulty in breathing. Examination revealed a drowsy patient with increased rigidity of all four limbs and sinus tachycardia. Reflexes were exaggerated in all four limbs without focal neurological signs or papilledema. No tonic–clonic movements were noted. Blood pressure remained normal. Peripheral oxygen saturation was 92 % on air. Bilateral pupil sizes were 3 mm with slow reaction to light. Possibility of intracranial hemorrhage with brainstem involvement was suspected. Endotracheal intubation and ambu ventilation was initiated as she rapidly developed respiratory depression and deterioration of Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) to 6/15. Hemodynamic parameters were stable with a satisfactory urine output. She was transferred to a tertiary care level for urgent brain imaging and neurosurgical opinion.
Urgent non contrast computer tomography (CT) of brain showed multiple sub arachnoid hemorrhages in right frontal, left parietal and occipital lobes. It also showed right sided sub dural hematoma and gross cerebral edema compressing bilateral lateral ventricles, third ventricle and brainstem. (As reported by consultant radiologist) .
Urgent neurosurgical opinion was taken regarding further management and was decided to manage conservatively considering the critical phase of dengue fever with low platelet counts. Patient was immediately transferred to the intensive care unit for further management. As advised by the neurosurgical team patient was started on intravenous Dexamethasone 8 mg three times daily, Intravenous Vitamin K 10 mg daily, intravenous Tranexamic acid 500 mg three times daily, Phenytoin Sodium 100 mg two times daily and Folic acid 5 mg daily. Intravenous fluids were given according to the critical phase managing guidelines. Ventilatory support was continued.
At the time of developing cerebral hemorrhages platelet count was 40 × 109/L and coagulation profile was normal. Patient did not have signs of bleeding from other sites. Alanine Transaminase level (ALT) was 312 IU/L, Aspartate transaminase (AST) was 666 IU, Serum albumin level 2.4 g/dl, serum creatinine was 49 µmol/L. Blood picture did not show any evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation or thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Due to multiple cerebral hemorrhages it was decided to transfuse six units of platelets when the platelet count was 15 × 109 on seventh day of illness. ABCS (Acidosis, Bleeding, Calcium and Sugar) were monitored and corrected. Hematocrit dropped to 29 from 46 % despite adequate fluid replacement and there was unexplained tachycardia. 5 ml/kg of packed cells were transfused following which the hematocrit normalized. Venous blood gas analysis did not show evidence of metabolic acidosis. Serum ionized calcium was 1.12 mmol/L and it was corrected with intravenous calcium gluconate. Capillary blood sugar level was within the normal range throughout the illness.
On sixth day of the illness patient developed polyuria with >500 ml of urine per hour (>12 L per day) with hypernatremia. Serum sodium level was 150 mmol/L, Serum Potassium was 3.0 mmol/L. Urine specific gravity was 1.005 and urine osmolality was 153 mOsm/kg. A diagnosis of cranial diabetes insipidus was made and treated with intra nasal Desmopressin sprays following which polyuria and hyper osmolality settled. Platelet count continued to drop even after completion of critical phase reaching a lowest value of 15 × 109 on 7th day of illness.
Despite intensive medical therapy patient’s clinical condition deteriorated with appearance of signs of brainstem herniation. Pupils were fixed dilated with no reaction to light. Patient developed per vaginal bleeding and punctures site bleeding. Blood pressure gradually dropped needing ionotropic support. Patient succumbed to illness on day eighth.