A 69-year-old woman presented with palpitations and symmetrical and progressive numbness in her hands and feet; at the same time, the patient had a sense of stepping on cotton. When the patient visited the hospital, she could not write or walk without help.
The neurological examination showed a decrease of symmetrical short-glove, long-stocking-like acupuncture sensation. Her upper limb tendon reflex was reduced while her lower limb tendon reflex was active. Romberg’s test and bilateral Babinski tests were positive. The pathological reflex in cranial nerves was negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed nonspecific cerebral white matter lesions. Cervical spinal cord MRI showed abnormal longitudinally extensive T2 weighted hyperintensities involving the posterior columns , with inverted V or “rabbit ears” sign . Electromyography (EMG) showed that sensory nerve conduction velocity of bilateral sural nerves was slowed down, suggesting peripheral neurogenic damage. Skin sympathetic response measurements showed a decrease in amplitude of the right median nerve.
Routine blood tests demonstrated macrocytic anemia: reduced red blood cell (RBC) count, increased mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin, normal mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, and elevated RBC volume distribution width, platelet and thrombocytocrit . Other significant laboratory results revealed a reduced level of vitamin B12, elevated folic acid, normal ferritin, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), elevated homocysteine (Hcy), elevated gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), decreased pepsinogen 1, nearly normal pepsinogen 2 and reduced pepsinogen 1/pepsinogen 2 ratio. Her gastrin level was elevated. Her parietal cell antibody, intrinsic factor antibody, antinuclear antibody, anti CENP B antibody and anti SSA60 were positive. The tumor marker CA72-4 was elevated. Her doctor administered symptomatic treatment and advised her to undergo gastroscopy and colonoscopy to rule out the possibility of digestive tract tumor, and the patient came to our hospital.
The patient had no digestive symptoms and has not taken any gastric medication (including proton pump inhibitors). Gastroscopy showed thin mucosa in the fundus and corpus, with a marked visible vascular pattern and fold atrophy. A red, 0.4×0.8 cm and Yamada type 2 polyp was found in the corpus . The polyp proved to be hyperplastic by histological examination. Biopsies of the fundus and corpus revealed atrophy, intestinal metaplasia and pseudopyloric adenylation, while pathological examination of the antrum indicated chronic inflammation. Immunostaining of gastric corpus with gastrin and anti-chromogranin antibodies revealed that pseudopyloric metaplasia had replaced oxyntic mucosa, and endocrine cells presented with a micronodular hyperplasia pattern . The characteristics under gastroscopy and pathological presentation were consistent with AIG. C 13 urea breath test for the diagnosis of Helicobacter pylori infection was negative. In view of the positive antinuclear antibody, we further reviewed her past medical history and found that she had dry eyes and dry mouth for more than 20 years. We performed ophthalmic examination and lip biopsy. Eye test showed ocular staining scores on two eyes were >5 Labial salivary gland histopathology indicated no obvious atrophy in the acinus, but small and numerous foci of lymphocytic aggregation were observed (50–80 lymphocytes/HPF; ), and focus score was 10.8. Based on her clinical manifestations of dry eyes and dry mouth, eyes test results, pathological results, and positive anti SSA60, the patient was finally diagnosed with pSS.
The patient was treated with 500 μg mecobalamin intramuscular injection three times a week, supplemented with vitamin B12, vitamin B2, folic acid and some traditional Chinese medicine as adjuvant therapy. After the diagnosis of pSS, the initial immunotherapy regimen with oral hydroxychloroquine and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) was prescribed. However, the patient complained of sore eyes when taking hydroxychloroquine (0.2g bid). According to clinical experience and drug experiments (–), we finally adjusted the treatment regimen with total glucosides of paeony (0.6 g bid) and MMF (0.5g bid).
After 6 months of follow-up, her neurological symptoms were significantly relieved and the patient was able to return to a normal life. RBC count, vitamin B12 and Hcy were completely normal . After 1 year of follow-up, her spinal cord imaging results were completely normal except for age-related degenerative changes .