A 60-year-old man with a 30-year history of granuloma-tosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis) was referred with uncontrolled intraocular pressure (IOP) in his left eye. Multiple episodes of severe necrotizing scleritis had occurred in both eyes and resulted in phthisis bulbi with no perception of light of the right eye. Long-term systemic immunosuppression including methotrexate, prednisolone, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab only partially controlled the inflammation in his remaining left eye.
Visual acuity was 6/24 (improving to 6/12 with pinhole) with normal optic nerve appearance and a full visual field. Significant cataract was present. Despite a patent peripheral iridotomy, the peripheral anterior chamber was shallow and gonioscopy documented extensive peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS). This was thought to be a secondary angle closure with the PAS due to chronic inflammation, especially given the axial length was 25.06 mm.
Intraocular pressure was consistently greater than 30 mm Hg despite four IOP lowering agents and oral acetazolamide. Therefore, surgical intervention was considered necessary to control raised IOP of mixed etiology (secondary synechial angle closure, chronic anterior uveitis, and possible steroid induced).
The multiple episodes of scleritis had resulted in extensive severe scleromalacia of the left eye with excessive cicatrization of the lower lid causing over 5 mm of inferior scleral show .
Choice of glaucoma surgery was very limited with all scleral or trans-scleral modalities and angle-dependent minimally invasive glaucoma surgery (MIGS) contra-indicated due to scleromalacia and extensive synechial closure respectively. Phacoemulsification with endo-scopic cyclophotocoagulation (ECP) was performed (by Goyal) under general anesthesia . Inflammatory provocation was minimal and the angle, sclera, and conjunctiva were avoided. Pulsed immunosuppressive cover, intracameral dexamethasone, intravitreal triamcinolone acetate (Kenalog), and intensive postoperative preservative free topical steroids were employed to reduce the risk of postoperative inflammation on a background of chronic uveitis.
One year following surgery, IOP remains well-controlled at 12 mm Hg on timolol/dorzolamide combination therapy and vision improved from 6/24 to 6/6.