A 30-year-old Caucasian female patient presented with the complaint of a newly developed mass in the neck. The patient’s marital status was single and parity was 0. The patient’s family history was unremarkable. Her past medical history revealed that she was operated due to osteosarcoma of the left tibia distal end in 2003 and given 6 cycles of chemotherapy (ifosfamide + mesna + adriamycin). Borderline phyllodes tumor was detected in tru-cut biopsy performed due to the detection of a mass in the right breast in 2016 and it was totally excised. At the same period, pancytopenia was seen in complete blood count, and on further evaluation, target cells, acanthocytosis, and thrombocytosis were detected in the peripheral blood smear. In the bone marrow aspiration smear and biopsy, megaloblastic changes, severe erythroid dysplasia, and blastic infiltration (18%) were detected. In the genetic examination performed with real-time polymerase chain reaction, t(8,21) and inv(16) were found to be negative. Cytogenetic analysis performed by fluorescent in situ hybridization revealed 21% amplification of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene at chromosome 11q23 and 10% trisomy 17. The patient was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome-refractory anemia with excess blasts 2 (MDS-RAEB2) and anthracycline-based induction chemotherapy was given, and allogeneic HSCT was then carried out. The patient remained in remission on follow-up in terms of both osteosarcoma and MDS-RAEB2; however, there was no follow-up for possible recurrence of the tumor in the breast.
After admission to our clinic, a firm, fixed thyroid nodule approximately 4–5 cm in length extending to the supraclavicular area was detected on the left thyroid lobe. Bilateral breast examination revealed an approximately 1–2-cm moveable lesion in the left breast at 7 o’clock position and a 3-cm moveable lesion in the right breast at 8 o’clock position. Other physical examination findings were normal. In the laboratory evaluation, the patient was euthyroid. Thyroid ultrasonography (USG) revealed a 26.5 × 24 × 43 mm nodule containing cystic areas with a thin hypoechoic halo in the left lobe. Malignant features (Bethesda VI) were observed in fine needle aspiration biopsy performed from that nodule. On the breast USG, a heterogeneous mass with a size of 25 × 14 mm with uncertain borders was observed in the right lower outer quadrant. In addition, few bilateral subcentimetric hypoechoic lesions were observed. 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) imaging was performed due to the history of multiple malignancies. In FDG-PET imaging, a 2 × 1.5 cm lesion showing increased FDG uptake (SUV max 3.9) in the lower outer quadrant of the right breast and a lesion showing increased FDG uptake (SUV max 5.7) in the left thyroid lobe were observed .
The patient underwent total thyroidectomy, and pathological macroscopic examination revealed a solid, off-white colored nodule with a size of 5 × 3.5 cm completely filling the left lobe. In hematoxylin–eosin staining, the nodule had an encapsulated appearance, infiltrated as nodular tumor masses outside the capsule, and it was consisted of follicular epithelial cells with prominent PTC nuclear features, which formed mostly follicular structures. In approximately 15–20% of the nodule, anaplastic cells were seen, which were generally distributed one by one among the thyrocytes, and separated from the PTC areas with a sharp border in places. Since these anaplastic cells did not constitute the dominant tumor component in the nodule, they were evaluated in favor of focal areas of dedifferentiation. In addition, blastic cells that did not form a mass in the nodule were also observed. Immunohistochemically, diffuse staining with CD34, as well as less frequent staining with myeloperoxidase (MPO) and HLA-DR, was observed in these blastic cells. Considering all these findings, the nodule in the left lobe was defined as a stage II (T3aN0M0) follicular variant of PTC (FVPTC) with focal anaplastic differentiation areas and blastic cell infiltration . There were no blastic cells in the peripheral blood smear and bone marrow aspiration smear. FDG-PET revealed that the size and metabolism of the previously existing right breast mass were increased . In addition, new FDG-positive lesions were detected in the left breast and both axillae . The tru-cut biopsy performed from bilateral breast and axillary lesions showed diffuse blastic cell infiltration. Immunohistochemically, diffuse staining with CD34, CD117, MPO, and HLA-DR was observed in these blastic cells. These results were evaluated in favor of myeloid sarcoma . p53 gene analysis that was performed for possible Li-Fraumeni syndrome due to soft tissue sarcoma and MDS-RAEB2 was negative.
The patient was evaluated in the multidisciplinary council, and 150 mci radioactive iodine (RAI) treatment was given for thyroid papillary cancer. Stimulated thyroglobulin during RAI treatment was found to be 1.76 ng/mL. 1.6 mcg/kg/day levothyroxine was started 2 days after RAI treatment. After this treatment, FLAG-IDA (fludarabine, cytarabine, idarubicin, G-CSF) chemotherapy treatment was planned in the hematology department for the treatment of myeloid sarcoma. Cranial imaging performed upon the development of confusion and somnolence after two cycles of FLAG-IDA treatment revealed a lesion consistent with an abscess in the right frontal region. The culture of the abscess drainage material was positive for fungal infection, and intravenous amphotericin B treatment was therefore initiated during the follow-up in the intensive care unit (ICU). In the follow-up of the patient in ICU, who responded to the current treatment and suddenly developed bilateral vision loss and brain MRI showed multiple septic embolism foci and acute infarct foci in the right cerebral hemisphere and occlusion in the right internal carotid artery, the patient died in ICU due to multiple organ failure.