A 58-year-old white woman with a history of emphysema and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) secondary to A1AD, who received lung transplantation 4 years prior, presented to dermatology with a 1-year history of painful nodules on the extensor surfaces of her upper extremities and back. She reported a 14-year one pack/day smoking history as well as fatigue, shortness of breath, cough, allergies, arthritis, leg swelling, muscle weakness, colitis, decreased appetite, nausea, light sensitivity, eye pain, and eye redness. She also reported depression and anxiety. She denied alcohol or drug use. She had completed high school and was now supported on disability. She also received emotional support from her husband who accompanied her to appointments and was involved in her healthcare. She had a family history of a cousin with cancer (type not reported). Following lung transplantation, she had been maintained on an immunosuppressive regimen of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), tacrolimus, intermittent steroids, and a human alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor. Her post-transplant course was complicated by multiple respiratory viral and fungal infections, recurrent acute cellular rejection and lymphocytic bronchiolitis, chronic allograft dysfunction, recurrent lower extremity deep venous thrombosis, and an intermittent requirement for increases in her immunosuppressive therapy.
Five months later, she developed multiple tender, indurated erythematous plaques on her anterior tibial surfaces bilaterally, clinically suggestive of erythema nodosum. Excisional biopsies taken from both legs showed necrotizing granulomatous dermatitis and an inflammatory infiltrate involving the panniculus . An infectious workup with Gram, periodic acid–Schiff (PAS), and Fite stains did not reveal any microorganisms; there was no growth on short-term or long-term tissue cultures. A complete rheumatologic and hematologic workup, including serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP), was unrevealing. IHC staining of the inflammatory infiltrate was positive for myeloperoxidase (neutrophilic marker), and CD68 and CD163 (histiocytic markers). A multifocal histiocytic malignancy was considered, but there were no markedly atypical cells with aberrant IHC staining to support that possibility. A repeat biopsy 1 month later showed similar findings, including presence of neutrophil-rich mixed (septal and lobular) panniculitis without vasculitis, and a diagnosis of presumptive A1AD panniculitis was made. The decision was made to increase the dose of human alpha-1 proteinase inhibitor therapy and prednisone with close follow-up.
For the following 6 months, she was seen regularly in our dermatology clinic and noted at each visit to have significant improvement in her symptoms and lesions. However, over the course of several weeks, she developed multiple painful, exophytic, firm nodules with ulceration in the areas of panniculitis . An excisional biopsy taken at that time revealed a dermal-based proliferation of large pleomorphic atypical spindle and rounded cells with marked cytological atypia, and a subset of bizarre giant cells with hyperchromatic nuclei, abundant cytoplasm, and frequent atypical mitotic figures. Focal necrosis and myxoid features were present . A repeat infectious workup was negative.
IHC was negative for melanocytic (S-100, Melan-A, HMB45), epithelial (low molecular weight cytokeratin, cytokeratin MNF116, p40, p63), follicular dendritic cell (CD21), interdigitating dendritic cell (S-100), Langerhans cell (CD1a), histiocytic (CD68, lysozyme), muscle (SMA and desmin), and endothelial cell markers (CD31 and CD34). Both CD10 (positive in mesenchymal tumors, non-specific) and p16 strongly stained the pleomorphic spindle and giant cells. Together, the lack of tissue-specific markers, the histopathology findings, and strong CD10 staining indicated a diagnosis of cutaneous undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS)/PDS, a diagnosis of exclusion. A full body positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan was notable for multifocal increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in our patient’s bilateral lower extremities without the presence of distant metastatic disease.
Several therapeutic options were considered, including: cytotoxic chemotherapies commonly used in sarcoma such as doxorubicin and ifosfamide or gemcitabine and docetaxel; kinase inhibitors (such as imatinib or pazopanib); and programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) and PD-1 ligand (PD-L1) inhibitors. Although PD-1 inhibitors have generally been disappointing in sarcoma treatment, preliminary results from a phase II study suggested possible efficacy particularly in the UPS subtype . In the study, of the 76 patients treated with the PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab, an objective response rate of 22% was noted in the UPS subgroup, while no responses were seen in any of the other sarcoma subtypes studied. However, the use of such agents in organ transplant recipients is contraindicated due to a high risk of organ rejection.
Because of the presumed relationship between immunosuppression and sarcoma, the decision was made to discontinue MMF. Considering our patient’s poor overall baseline performance status and due to concerns of myelosuppression in combination with her immunosuppressive regimen , she was not considered a candidate for combination therapy with doxorubicin and ifosfamide. Liposomal doxorubicin, however, has shown comparable efficacy and less toxicity compared to traditional doxorubicin and is often used for the treatment of advanced sarcoma in patients with poor performance status . Given the safety profile of this combination therapy, the decision was made to proceed with liposomal doxorubicin 40 mg/m2 every 3 weeks.
After two cycles of doxorubicin and discontinuation of MMF, our patient experienced a reduction in the size of her lesions and improved pain at her 2-month follow-up visit . However, 2 weeks later, she was hospitalized with worsening fatigue, increasing dyspnea on exertion, and increasing oxygen requirements. A workup was positive for methicillin-susceptible staphylococcal aureus (MSSA) pneumonia. Acute cellular rejection or antibody-mediated rejection was also considered, although not definitively proven. Despite prompt initiation of appropriate therapy with antibiotics and steroids, her condition worsened, and she developed multi-organ failure in the setting of septic shock. She ultimately elected for comfort measures and died shortly after (timeline, Fig. ).