A 68-year-old female patient was admitted to the Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University in Guiyang, China, March 21, 2021, with complaints of “right upper quadrant pain for the past year” and “nausea when consuming greasy food for the past week”.
The patient’s symptoms began a year before her presentation, characterized by right upper quadrant pain. In the week leading up to the visit, she also experienced fatigue, a decreased appetite, and accompanying nausea.
The patient has no history of alcohol consumption. She had well-controlled hypertension for the past 3 years, managed with irbesartan. In 2020, she reported experiencing upper right abdominal pain and mild scleral yellowing, although there were no systemic jaundice or itching symptoms.
The patient's daughter has been diagnosed with PBC.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.3 ℃; blood pressure, 128/78 mmHg; heart rate, 72 beats per min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. Mild jaundice and scleral icterus were noted, and there was tenderness to percussion in the right upper abdominal quadrant.
Laboratory examination revealed an alanine aminotransferase level of 1073.5 U/L , an aspartate aminotransferase level of 1172.10 U/L , an alkaline phosphatase level of 165.00 U/L, a gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase level of 210.42 U/L , a total bilirubin level of 55.70 μmol/L with a direct bilirubin level of 39.6 μmol/L and an indirect bilirubin level of 17.65 μmol/L, a total bile acid level of 86.0 μmol/L, an albumin level of 37.00 g/L, and an albumin to globulin ratio of 0.940.
Liver disease-related autoantibodies were investigated. The patient tested positive for antinuclear antibodies (titers of 1:1000) using indirect immunofluorescence (FC 1510-1010-1, EUROIMMUN reagent, Germany), positive for anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA), and strongly positive for anti-mitochondrial M2 antibodies using indirect immunofluorescence. IgG levels were 27.4 g/L , IgA levels were 3.44 g/L, IgM levels were 0.95 g/L , and IgG4 Levels were 1620.9 mg/L. Thyroid function tests were normal, with an anti-thyroglobulin antibody level of 222 U/mL and an antithyroid peroxidase autoantibody level of 45.2 U/mL. The patient tested negative for hepatitis A, B, C, D, and E, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus, and ceruloplasmin was normal. Whole-exome sequencing was negative.
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was sought and demonstrated multiple enlarged lymph nodes surrounding the hepatic hilum and pancreatic head, slightly dilated pancreatic ducts, and nodules in the pancreatic duct and pancreatic head . Thyroid ultrasonography revealed diffuse thyroid enlargement with non-uniform echogenicity. Enhanced computerized tomography imaging of the upper abdomen showed multiple enlarged hilar and pancreatic head lymph nodes, and dilated pancreatic ducts. Bone densitometry demonstrated severe osteoporosis.
The patient underwent liver and pancreatic needle biopsies. An abundance of lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed in a lymph node of the porta hepatis . HE staining of the liver revealed scattered liver necrosis and a large number of inflammatory cell infiltration . Masson staining of the liver tissue revealed fibrosis in the portal area and the formation of fibrous septa . The infiltration of inflammatory cells in the portal area of the liver tissue was negative for IgG4 staining but positive for IgG staining . HE staining of the pancreatic tissue revealed a small amount of inflammatory cell infiltration that could be seen in the pancreatic glands . IHC staining of the pancreatic tissue was negative for IgG4 and was considered to be the result of insufficient sampling. Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a dilated main pancreatic duct and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the hepatic hilum, pancreatic head, and pancreatic lymph nodes ; Figure shows the uncinate process of the pancreas.