A 53-year-old man presented to a secondary medical institution with non-reperfused inferior MI 36 h after the beginning of chest pain. His systemic blood pressure was 75/35 mmHg. On physical examination, he presented with a 5/6 holosystolic murmur at the fourth intercostal space along the left sternal border. The patient was known to have poorly controlled diabetes and hypertension. He was then transferred to our tertiary-care institution for further management. The electrocardiogram showed Q waves in the inferior leads. His laboratory profile demonstrated elevated concentrations of high-sensitivity troponin I of 2566 ng/dL (normal value < 0.250 ng/mL), lactate 3.1 mmol/L (normal value < 1 mml/L), creatinine 2.4 mg/dL (normal value < 1.0 mg/dL), and N-terminal pro-hormone brain natriuretic peptide 8618 pg/mL (normal value < 125 pg/mL). A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a complex posterobasal VSD involving a torrential shunt from the LV to the right ventricle (RV) with a maximum diameter of 29 mm . A computed tomography (CT) scan further characterized the lesion .
Coronary angiography was performed, showing no significant stenosis in the left coronary system and a total thrombotic occlusion in the mid-segment of the right coronary artery , with an LV end-diastolic pressure of 25 mmHg. Right heart catheterization was also performed and revealed elevated right heart filling pressure [right atrial (RA) pressure of 18 mmHg], pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 28 mmHg, and a Qp/Qs ratio of 3.91. An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted to support the LV.
The patient was given norepinephrine (0.2 μg/kg/min), and the IABP was maintained at a ratio of 1:1 for 36 h with no respiratory compromise. Afterwards, the patient started to exhibit obnubilation, increased lactate concentration to 4.1 mmol/L, and a Qp/Qs ratio of 9.81. In an emergency Heart Team meeting, it was decided to escalate treatment to VA-ECMO to maintain the best theoretical haemodynamic profile for at least 14 days, after which surgical correction of the VSD would be performed.
Given the risk of an increased shunt because of VA-ECMO and the increase in LV afterload, several measures were taken to plan the best ECMO configuration. The procedure was performed with superficial sedation without general anaesthesia to avoid the risk of further haemodynamic compromise and the need for respiratory support. A left arterial 17 Fr femoral ECMO cannula was inserted in a standard fashion. Right femoral venous access was obtained. A TTE was used to measure the haemodynamic profile for multiple configurations (Summary figure). A 25 Fr multifenestrated ECMO cannula was placed in the cavoatrial junction, and invasive haemodynamics 20 min later showed a Qp/Qs ratio of 3.83, PCWP of 26 mmHg, and RA pressure of 12 mmHg.
Given the absence of any real improvement in the LV and an elevated residual Qp/Qs ratio, the final decision was to switch to LAVA-ECMO. With intracardiac echocardiogram guidance (AcuNav 8 Fr, Siemens), a transseptal puncture was performed, and a hydrophilic 0.35 mm Terumo Guide Wire passed through a patent foramen ovale (PFO). A multipurpose 6 Fr catheter and a 0.35 mm Amplatz Extra Stiff wire were advanced to the left upper pulmonary vein. A 25 Fr multifenestrated cannula was then sent across the interatrial septum via the PFO without any impediment into the left atrium (LA) . Biatrial and biventricular unloading was possible and involved side holes in both the LA and right cavities. Invasive haemodynamics showed a Qp/Qs ratio of 2.15, PCWP of 18 mmHg, and RA pressure of 10 mmHg; 4 h after the procedure, the patient was weaned from all vasopressor support, giving only furosemide, dexmedetomidine, and anticoagulation with heparin, and maintained without intubation.
The patient showed haemodynamic and renal improvement over the next 48 h and a normalization of creatinine levels (2.4–0.71 mg/dL) and did not require further vasopressor support. A new TTE demonstrated an improvement in LV and RV functions.
Unfortunately, on Day 4 of LAVA-ECMO, the patient developed an ischaemic stroke identified in the hyperacute phase while physical examination was made; this was characterized by motor aphasia and hemiparesis. Local thrombus aspiration was performed, and local alteplase (5 mg) was administered 90 min after the stroke onset. Nevertheless, the neurological damage resulted in permanent motor aphasia. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed, showing no evidence of thrombus formation in the LAVA-ECMO cannula and the left atrial appendage. On Day 6, the patient experienced haemorrhagic transformation of the stroke with catastrophic consequences. At this point, it was decided to stop the circulatory support given the impossibility of stopping the anticoagulation and the severity of the haemorrhage. The patient passed away on Day 6 of the hospitalization.