A 50-year-old man was referred to our department with the chief complaint of discomfort on the right side of his neck. He had no medical history. He had initially become aware of pain on the right side of his neck three years before visiting our department. He first consulted with the oral and maxillofacial department of a local hospital. Computed tomography (CT) at that hospital showed styloid process prolongation; however, the patient reported mild discomfort upon follow-up. The discomfort on the right side of his neck worsened, and he was referred to our hospital for the treatment of his neck symptoms.
The patient had no systemic disease at the initial visit. He was aware of the discomfort of the right side of his neck when he turned his head . A rigid bone-like structure was palpable in the right submandibular region. In addition, panoramic radiography revealed an elongated right styloid process beyond the mandibular plane . CT showed styloid process prolongation on both sides . The length of the styloid process was 60 mm on the right side. Calcification of the minor horn of the hyoid bone and the styloid process' tip was also observed. Moreover, prolongation of the right superior cornu of the thyroid cartilage was observed, with a length of 23.2 mm. The cervical symptoms might have been due to the extension of the superior thyroid cartilage angle. Still, the discomfort that occurred during the neck rotation coincided with the tip of the styloid process. The patient was diagnosed with symptoms of styloid prolongation .
Surgical trimming of the elongated styloid process with an extraoral approach was performed under general anesthesia. A skin incision was made in the submandibular region, and detachment was performed to reveal the intermediate tendon of the digastric muscle. A styloid process was observed near the hyoid bone. After the detached surrounding area, the styloid process was resected using an ultrasonic bone scalpel . The stylohyoid ligament was attached to the tip of the styloid process and, consequently, resected . The postoperative course was eventful, and the patient's neck discomfort dissipated. Eight years after the operation, the cervical symptoms did not recur.