A 14 years old girl was admitted in our hospital complaining with severe lower abdominal pain accompanied with nausea and vomit, which occurred during dinner. Menarche is 11 years old and the menstrual cycle is irregular. Gynecological examination was not performed because the girl was not sexually active. Physical examination showed mild tenderness and rebound tenderness. General hematological parameters such as blood routine and electrolyte check were normal. Ultrasonography showed the bilateral ovaries and fallopian tubes was normal, but an uneven slightly higher echo photophore was found at the back of the uterus, the size was about 72 mm × 64 mm × 50 mm, the boundary was unclear, the morphology was irregular. But the boundary of the ovaries was very clear. Meanwhile, we found a lot of fluid in liver and kidney fossa and bilateral iliac fossa .
Considering relief of the pain and the possibility of intra-abdominal bleeding, we performed laparoscopy. During the operation, we found liquid blood about 500 ml in the abdominal cavity . After sucking those blood, we saw a solid mass about 8 cm in size with irregular morphology, uneven surface, dark red clot and ruptured capsular . Bilateral fallopian tubes and ovaries were normal. At last, we found the lesion was next to the left sacral ligament .
When removing the mass, we detected some rotten fish fleshy tissue . Rapid pathological examination suggested germ cell tumors with the possibility of endodermal sinus tumor. We retrospectively detected the value of AFP, which was 1162.3 ng/ml. Postoperative paraffin pathology verified the diagnosis with AFP (+), SALL4 (+), Glypican-3 (+), PLAP (-), CDX2 (partial +), CD117 (-), CK7 (-), Calretinin (-), ki67 about 80% (+) .
Twenty-two days after the laparoscopy, this girl experienced 4 courses of BEP chemotherapy. At the end of the third chemotherapy, we found AFP decreased to 6.5 ng/ml. Two months after the last chemotherapy, the patient underwent CT examination, which showed a lesion about 1 cm in the douglas sac and no remote metastasis. Considering the patient was a younger girl, and the possibility of existence of residual tumor, we performed exploratory laparotomy, and fortunately, the mass showed in the CT was inflammation hyperplasia. We followed the patient by examining the AFP and whole abdominal MRI for one year, and found no symptom of recurrence.