A 17-year-old man with a 1-mo history of left shoulder trauma was admitted to our hospital.
One month prior to admission, the patient’s left shoulder accidentally touched a staircase handrail and he experienced mild pain. Abduction of the left upper limb was slightly limited and there was no swelling. Radiographic examination of the left shoulder joint at the local hospital, showed no obvious bone and joint lesions and no treatment was carried out. Persistent swelling and pain in the left shoulder continued after 15 d of treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; the pain was not relieved and gradually worsened.
The patient was in good health prior to the present illness.
The patient had no previous or family history of similar illnesses.
Physical examination revealed a left shoulder joint in forced adduction. The lateral and anterior sides of the left shoulder were obviously swollen, tender, with no pulsation, and the local skin temperature was increased. The patient was conscious of spontaneous illness, had a poor mental state, and had experienced no weight loss.
A complete blood count revealed that the patient’s serum C-reactive protein level (70.92 mg/L, normal range 0-5 mg/L), lactate dehydrogenase (751 U/L, normal range 313-618 U/L), fibrinogen (6.29 g/L, normal range 2-4 g/L), D-dimer (5.997 mg/L, normal range 0-0.3 mg/L), alkaline phosphatase (453 U/L, normal range 35-105 U/L), and ferritin (790.80 μg/L, normal range 15-200 μg/L) were increased. Tumor-marker assays revealed that neuron-specific enolase was increased to 41.43 ng/L (normal range 0-25 ng/L).
Posteroanterior shoulder joint radiography showed a linear low-density shadow at the greater tuberosity of the left humerus and small low-density flakes in the upper medullary cavity of the left humerus . Computed tomography (CT) of the left shoulder joint revealed a soft tissue mass in the left shoulder . Strip-like calcifications in the mass , the cortical edge, and marrow cavity were seen to be invaded on axial and coronal CT images , and the adjacent bone showed an insect-like zone of destruction and needle-like periosteal reaction. Thoracic CT revealed multiple small, solid, rounded nodules with clear boundaries beneath the pleura of both lungs. These were more common in the lower lobe of the right lung, and the larger nodules were approximately 6 mm in size .
Upper arm magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was conducted to further assess the extent of the mass . A huge mass was observed surrounding the left humeral head and the proximal shaft of humerus. It had a clear outer boundary and a size of 10.3 cm × 10.5 cm × 13.6 cm (anterior-posterior × left-right × superior-inferior). The mass showed mixed moderate hypointensity and hyperintensity on T1-weighted images and mixed hyperintensity on coronal fat-saturated T2-weighted images . T1-weighted images with contrast demonstrated heterogeneous enhancement of the lesion . The humeral cortex was discontinuous, with worm-eaten-like bone destruction seen on the axial T1-weighted images. The inside of the cancellous bone showed irregular patches of hypointensity on coronal T1-weighted images and mixed hyperintensity on fat-saturated T2-weighted images. Based on the findings of multimodality imaging, a primary locally invasive soft tissue tumor with a pathological fracture was suspected. The patient underwent a whole-body 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate bone scan to check the condition of the other bones . The bone scan demonstrated clearly visible scoliosis, an abnormal distribution of radioactive label concentrations, and increased activity in the left shoulder joint and proximal humerus, corresponding to the mass seen on MRI.
Finally, histopathology after surgery showed that the tumor was composed of polygonal mononuclear cells and multinucleated osteoclast-like giant cells . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD163 and CD68 , and negative for cytokeratin and S-100, corresponding to the phenotypic profile of a giant cell tumor.