A 27-year-old woman presented to a local physician with an intermittent epistaxis and a facial pain around her nose. Her medical history was unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a heterogeneously enhanced mass lesion centered in the left nasal cavity .
She was referred to our institute for surgical treatment of a nasal cavity tumor. On admission, she suffered from anosmia and diplopia. CT scan, performed 3 months after the first scan, demonstrated that the enlarged mass lesion breaking through the medial wall of the left orbit and pushed the eye laterally . We considered this might be the reason for her diplopia. For tissue diagnosis, the patient underwent endoscopic exploration from the nasal cavity. Because of heavy nasal bleeding, we combined midfacial degloving approach. Although we could control the bleeding, we could not resect the complete tumor.
Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections showed neoplastic cells forming small intracellular lumina that included red cells. The endothelium covering blood vessels was hyperplastic. No mitosis and necrosis were observed . The Ki-67 labeling index was 28%. Immunohistochemical analysis was positive for factor VIII-related antigen, vimentin, CD34, and CD31 . EHE was diagnosed on the basis of the aforementioned findings.
Magnetic resonance images indicated that the tumor had invaded the anterior skull base dura matter . Digital subtraction angiography indicated bilateral ethmoidal arteries as major feeding arteries to the tumor. Because of the aggressive nature of EHE, the cancer board of Tohoku University Hospital agreed radical surgery of the tumor utilizing anterior skull base dissection and endonasal endoscopic exploration.
Before the operation, spinal drainage was introduced to reduce brain retraction. Neurosurgeons conducted bilateral frontal craniotomy and excised the anterior skull base dura where the tumor had invaded. The left anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries were coagulated and cut. Following skull base dissections, otolaryngologists achieved complete removal of the tumor through the canine fossa using an endoscope. We confirmed that the tumor was adhesive but had not invaded into the orbit. Intraorbital component was left intact as we had planned preoperatively. Following resection of the tumor and the dura matter, skull base reconstruction was performed using the pericranial flap, fascia lata, and titanium mesh plate.
The patient recovered uneventfully from the radical resection of the tumor. Her diplopia improved. She has been free from local recurrence or distant metastasis for 26 months after the surgery.