A 38-year-old woman emigrated from the Dominican Republic 1 year prior to presentation with complaints of 6 days of abdominal pain and blood-flecked emesis. Of note she had recently been diagnosed with SLE, and was undergoing treatment with oral prednisone (10 mg once daily), azathioprine (50 mg twice daily), and hydroxychloroquine (400 mg daily).
Physical examination revealed a thin woman with cushingoid features in no acute distress. Vital signs demonstrated a normothermic, normotensive patient with mild tachycardia. Abdominal examination was notable for epigastric tenderness and guaiac positive stool. Her skin was noted to have a diffuse erythematous reticular rash extending from her abdomen to her upper legs. Laboratory findings demonstrated mild thrombocytopenia (120,000 platelets/mm3), a white blood cell count of 13,000/mm3, with an automatic differential of 79.5% neutrophils and 1.1% eosinophils. Chest X-ray was within normal limits without pulmonary infiltrates. Her urine culture subsequently grew Klebsiella pneumoniae, and she was treated with ciprofloxacin. Both azathioprine and celecoxib were discontinued at time of admission.
The patient underwent upper endoscopy that revealed mild esophagitis and duodenitis. Esophageal brushings and a duodenal biopsy were collected which demonstrated S. stercoralis. Serial stool samples were collected and were subsequently noted to contain S. stercoralis. Serology testing by enzyme-linked immunoassay further confirmed the diagnosis.
Treatment with oral albendazole (400 mg twice daily) was initiated within 20 hours of presentation; however, the patient continued to experience abdominal discomfort. The truncal reticular rash also persisted despite therapy. Four days after admission, and 3 days after initiation of albendazole therapy, the patient developed respiratory distress, high fever, and hypotension. New pulmonary rales were audible over both lung fields and a chest radiograph demonstrated new diffuse opacities. Blood cultures and urine cultures were obtained. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit where she was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, and received stress dose steroids. Her antibiotic coverage was broadened to include ciprofloxacin, metronidazole, vancomycin, and gentamicin, and her antiparasitic medication was changed to ivermectin (200 mcg/kg once daily). Blood cultures were positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterococcus faecalis, and Escherichia coli.
After 10 days of ivermectin and consistently negative stool examination for ova and parasites, antiparasitic therapy was discontinued. The patient was continued on appropriate antibiotics for 14 days and discharged home after a total of 22 days of hospitalization. The patient's serology tests had returned to normal by her 4-month follow-up visit.