A 15 year old middle eastern female patient from Gaza strip with free past medical and allergic history who was admitted at our internal medicine department on July 20. 2016. At time of admission, she had intermittent high grade fever and sore throat for 1 week duration. Additionally, a non-itchy skin eruption was noticed for 2 weeks duration. As well as she started to have yellowish eye discoloration 5 days after the onset of fever. The patient was taking phenytoin 200 mg QD PO as a seizure prophylaxis since she had significant head trauma 4 weeks prior to her presentation.
She denied any history of red eye, digital swelling, seizures, photophobia or any weight changes. Family history was unremarkable. She was sexually inactive and started to have irregular menstruation 1 year before the time of admission. In addition to phenytoin, her only medication at the time of admission was acetaminophen 500 mg twice daily.
On physical examination, she was alert, oriented and conscious. Her hemodynamics were stable. Temperature 39.9 C and her tonsils were erythematous. Generally, she looked deeply jaundiced as well as fatigued. Systemic examination was normal except maculopapular rash on her limbs, abdomen, chest and back besides peeling on both palms . On abdominal examination, the spleen was palpable 2 cm below costal margin and her liver was palpable and tender as well. She also had left axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy around 1 × 1 cm in diameter each.
Abdominal ultrasound was done and showed moderate hepatosplenomegaly, in addition to that, there was enlarged retroperitoneal, portahepatis and mesenteric lymph nodes. She also underwent brain MRI which did not show any intracranial pathology. Liver Doppler and cardiac echocardiography were both normal. Chest x-ray and EKG were normal as well. Laboratory work up was summarized in Table .
Beside AHS, autoimmune hepatitis and infectious mononucleosis were suspected at that time. Phenytoin was stopped as well as acetaminophen due to elevated liver enzymes. The patient was given IV hydrocortisone. Over 10 days of admission, her condition significantly improved then she was sent home. The patient was seen 1 month after her discharge, at that time, the fever was gone, the rash was resolved and her liver enzymes were normalized.