A 31-year-old female patient was admitted to the Department of Nephrology at West China Hospital after experiencing edema and fatigue for approximately seven days. She did not have a fever, diarrhea, purpura, or dark urine. The patient had a ten-year history of ET and was prescribed hydroxyurea, aspirin, and INF-α. The patient received a dose of interferon of 3×106 IU/week for the past five years and received the latest interferon treatment four days before arriving at our unit. The patient’s blood pressure and blood tests were monitored every three months throughout her interferon treatment, including liver enzymes, complete blood count, and renal function, none of which were abnormal. Her personal, family, and psychosocial histories were unremarkable. Upon physical examination, her temperature was 36.5 ℃, heart rate was 75 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. The patient’s weight was 55 kg, and her height was 158 cm. No skin rash or bleeding spots were seen, but moderate edema was observed on the face and extremities. The muscle strength and muscle tone of the four limbs were normal, and no abnormalities were identified in the physical examination of the lung, heart, and abdomen. Laboratory test results revealed anemia with schistocytosis, elevated lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) and creatinine levels, and a negative Coomb's tests, raising concern for thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) . Thus, hydroxyurea and INF-α were discontinued, and prednisone at 1 mg/kg/day was started.
A central venous catheter was placed due to a further increase in creatinine (529 umol/L) and oliguria, and hemodialysis combined with single-volume plasma exchange (PE) was conducted after obtaining a blood sample for the ADAMTS 13 activity test. Given the patient’s history of ET, leukemic or fibrotic disease transformation was a leading consideration in this case. Autoimmune diseases and infections were also suspected as possible causes. However, the bone marrow biopsy showed proliferation mainly of megakaryocyte lineage cells, with increased numbers of enlarged, mature megakaryocytes with hyper-lobulated nuclei. Tests for tumor markers, antinuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigens, anticardiolipin antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody, complement C3, complement C4, complement factor B, human immunodeficiency virus antibody test, hepatitis B virus DNA, Epstein-Barr virus DNA, and septic work-up, including blood, urine, and stool, were negative. The coagulation assay and fibrinogen test results were also within the normal ranges. We did not observe any typical findings of malignant hypertension on her optic fundi. The patient’s ADAMTS 13 activity was 8.5%, and brain computed tomography scan and ultrasound examinations of the kidneys did not reveal any abnormalities. The renal biopsy showed a double contour of the basement membrane and arteriole with luminal narrowing. Immunofluorescence tests for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4, and C1q were all negative. The electron micrograph showed diffuse endothelial swelling with obliteration of the capillary lumina. A diagnosis of TMA was made based on the pathological examination .
Following five cycles of PE and hemodialysis, the patient exhibited improved clinical symptoms, including elevated hemoglobin level, normalized platelet count, and decreased LDH level . PE was then paused after 12 cycles. By day 66, the repeated ADAMTS 13 test showed that the activity had increased to 35.8%, and the platelet count had risen to 563×109/L. Then, hydroxyurea was added to the treatment regimen. On day 75, the patient was discharged in stable condition. Unfortunately, despite the stable results, renal function had not recovered, and she still required continuous hemodialysis during her one-year follow-up.