The patient is a 28-year-old male whose prior medical history includes only morbid obesity and smoking tobacco. He presented to the emergency department for right foot pain. He stated he was playing basketball the day before the presentation and was painless throughout the entirety of the day. He denied injuries to the foot or ankle. When he awoke the next morning, he felt severe spastic pain to the medial aspect of his foot with intermittent radiation to the knee. Physical examination revealed focal tenderness and moderate swelling over the medial arch of the foot, with soft, compressible, and painless compartments on the dorsum and plantar aspect of the foot. No other apparent swelling or pain was noted on the foot. The patient was able to actively flex and extend his great toe, and the passive range of motion of the toes did not increase pain unless the first metatarsal was flexed. Dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses were strong and palpable. The sensory examination was normal throughout the extremity.
Radiographic imaging of the foot and ankle demonstrated no osseous injuries; however, it was noted the patient had an os trigonum , and a Geist Type 1 os navicularum . Initial blood draws resulted in a creatine phosphokinase (CPK) of 9,500 international units (IU) without elevated creatinine or potassium. The patient was placed in an observation unit for pain control and monitoring due to the abnormal presentation, with high suspicion remaining for possible musculotendinous injury and lower suspicion for compartment syndrome. During this day of observation, the patient’s pain began to worsen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the foot and ankle demonstrated fusiform edema in the proximal portion of the abductor hallucis muscle belly and proximal tendon without evidence of tear. These findings are demonstrated in , , and .
Subsequent fasciotomy over the abductor hallucis muscle belly demonstrated obvious muscle expansion from the fasciotomy incision and grayish discoloration consistent with avascular injury. The incision was carried distally to the metatarsal head and proximally to the calcaneal insertion, measuring approximately 18 cm. The surgeon noted improvement in discoloration suggesting reperfusion of the muscle belly, as well as contractility of the muscle. Irrigation was performed and a negative pressure dressing at 125 mmHg of suction was placed with the intention to return within 48–72 h for re-evaluation of the tissue viability, irrigation, debridement, and potential wound closure. Following surgery, the patient reported significantly decreased pain. The patient returned to the operating room 48 h after the index procedure and 5 days from injury for irrigation, debridement, and wound closure. The proximal aspect of the muscle was necrotic, non-contractile, and without bleeding on excisional debridement. Much of the proximal muscle belly was excised. The distal muscle belly remained healthy and bleeding and was retained. The swelling had largely subsided, and primary wound closure was successful with the aid of an incisional negative pressure dressing.
On post-operative day 1, the patient tolerated the procedures well, without complication, and the pain was controlled with oral narcotics. The incisional negative pressure dressing was removed, and the patient was subsequently discharged in the evening. The patient’s CPK decreased to 1300 IU by discharge, and there was no elevation in creatinine or potassium throughout the duration of the hospital stay.
The patient had a delayed first post-operative follow-up at 4 weeks post-operative. At this time, the patient’s pain was appropriately controlled with intermittent paresthesias present over the medial aspect of the foot. The patient was prescribed 300mg gabapentin TID for neuropathic pain. A CAM boot was provided, and the patient was encouraged to weight bear as tolerated while in the boot. The surgical site demonstrated continued wound healing and staples were not removed. The patient was to return in 2 weeks for wound check and staple removal but was lost to follow-up and presumed to be doing well.