A 14-year-old Asian female patient presented with a heart murmur for more than 5 months. The patient was in good health and had no cardiac family history. A physical examination showed a respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, heart rate of 70 beats/min (regular), blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, body temperature of 36.5°C, and percutaneous oxygen saturation of 98% on ambient air. Grade 3 systolic murmur can be heard in the apical region during auscultation. Findings on other cardiovascular system examination were absence.
Electrocardiogram suggests incomplete right bundle branch block. Echocardiography in another hospital revealed that there was an elliptic and slightly hyperechoic mass with a size of 26 × 17 mm in the right inner wall , suggesting the possibility of a thrombus. Further examination was recommended. A contrast-enhanced gated cardiac computed tomography (CT) showed that the lesion was closely related to the interventricular septum with enhancement . On contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion was isointense on T1-weighted image (T1WI) and isointense to slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted image (T2WI). The delayed enhanced scan showed obvious homogeneous enhancement . Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) examination revealed a nodule in the right ventricle near the ventricular septum with no increase in glucose metabolism, which suggested a high possibility of a benign tumour . None of the imaging examinations found any invasion of the surrounding structures by the lesions, no thickening of the pericardium, and no effusion in the pericardial cavity.
To seek surgical treatment, the patient came to our hospital for reexamination by echocardiography and myocardial perfusion angiography. The angiography showed a solid isoechoic mass in the right ventricle, which was closely related to the right ventricle surface in the middle and lower segment of the anterior septum, without an obvious sign of swinging. The perfusion of an ultrasonic enhancement agent in the right ventricle was similar to that in the septal myocardium. After excluding surgical contraindications, a right ventricular mass resection was performed on 2021-04-01. During the operation, the tumour was located in the right ventricular septum. Its pedicle was located near the apex of the ventricular septum . Postoperative pathology confirmed a right ventricle fibroma. Timeline shows a simple procedure for diagnosis and treatment.
The patient was discharged 14 days after surgery and remains disease-free and asymptomatic 14 months after surgery.