A 50-year-old female patient presented with fever, malaise, severe pain, swelling, and redness in the left eye, accompanied by vesicular eruptions on the skin of the eyelid and forehead in the year 1993. Visual acuity (VA) was 6/6 and 6/18 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Corneal sensitivity was decreased on the affected side, and multiple fine micro-dendritic lesions were present on the inferior nasal, superonasal and mid-peripheral part of the cornea. Slit lamp examination revealed +2 cells in the anterior chamber and fine KPs distributed over the corneal endothelium. Fundus examination revealed an cup disc ratio of 0.3 in the right eye and 0.4 in the left eye with macular hyperpigmentation. She was diagnosed with an acute attack of severe HZO in her left eye, complicated by keratouveitis. Diseases such as HIV, immunosuppression, and malignancy were ruled out by history. Rheumatoid factor (Rh) was not present in this patient. It was evaluated to rule out rheumatoid arthritis which may have caused complicated cataract. The presence of Rh in serum could also have indicated the occurrence of suspected autoimmune activity unrelated to rheumatoid arthritis. Her random blood sugar level was normal.
The patient was treated with acyclovir (Acivir) 800 mg 5 times for 5 days and carbamazepine (Carbatrol) 200 mg for 1-week with topical steroids – G. Betensol – N 1 hourly.
One year later, she presented with severe agonizing pain in the left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed thinning of the sclera on the superotemporal part of the anterior sclera, but no ectasia was present. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 25.8 mmHg on the affected side. At this stage the patient was treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (Propin 17%) B.D, topical steroids - (G. Betnesol etne, and beta blocker - (Glucotim 5%) B.D.
Patient remained asymptomatic for one year. In 1995, she presented with decreased vision in the left eye down to 6/36. She was diagnosed by complicated cataract with posterior synechiae at the 8 o’clock position, pigment dispersion on the endothelium, and HZO induced scleritis. She was given treatment for recurrent herpetic infection with acyclovir (Acivir) 400 mg B.D. for 6 months. When the eye was silent after 6 months and no intraocular inflammation was present, cataract extraction with posterior chamber intraocular lens (P.C.I.O.L) implantation was performed by extra-capsular cataract extraction (ECCE) . Post-operatively, she was given topical steroids -G. Betamethasone 0.1% BD for 6 months, tablet Prednisolone 20 mg OD post cibal, G. Timolol 5% BD and tab Nimesulide 100 mg BD.
Best corrected visual acuity was 6/6 and IOP on follow-up visits was normal with the use of antiglaucoma medications. Her random blood sugar was done on follow-up visits, which have been normal to date. She frequently visits the eye OPD with pain, for which she is prescribed lubrication – G. Misty. Her IOP on follow-up visit on 19.5.2014 was 22.4 mmHg in both eyes, VA was 6/6, and fundus examination revealed temporal disc pallor and an inactive hypopigmented lesion superior to the inferior temporal arcade and on the macula, which were probably due to quiescent prior localized neuroretinitis .