A 49-year-old Chinese female was presented to a local hospital with complaints of occasional abdominal distension and acid reflux of 1-month duration. The patient had no weight loss, anemia, or fever and denied any family history of cancer. The medical history of the patient was negative. Ultrasonography (US) and computed tomography (CT) revealed splenomegaly. A tentative diagnosis of blood system diseases was made, and then the patient underwent a bone marrow biopsy, which suggested that granulocytes were normal in proportion, and no obvious atypical cells were found. Although repeated biopsy was suggested, the patient refused and was referred to our hospital. On admission, physical examination revealed that the abdomen of the patient was soft and the spleen can be touched under the left costal arch. Laboratory tests showed white blood cell count 3 × 109/L, hemoglobin (HB) 125 g/L, and platelet count 151 × 109/L. The liver function and coagulation function were within normal limits. US indicated that the spleen was 5.7 cm in thickness, with smooth contour, uniform, and meticulous echo of the spleen parenchyma. Enhanced CT was performed and suggested splenomegaly (maximum diameter 23 cm), without swollen lymph nodes in the abdomen.
In order to make a definite diagnosis, the patient underwent splenectomy. During the operation, we found that the spleen is obviously enlarged, and the specimen of the resected spleen was roughly dark reddish . The final pathological examination showed that both number and size of the splenic white pulp were increased, and small lymphocytes proliferate in the nodules . The involvement of the splenic hilar lymph nodes was also noted. Immunohistochemistry was positive for Ki67, Bcl-2, CD43, CD79a, and CD20 . Eventually, the patient was diagnosed with SMZL.
The postoperative courses were uneventful. The patient’s white blood cell count increased to 8.1 × 109/L, and the platelet count increased to 465 × 109/L. During 12 months of follow-ups, the patient showed no signs of recurrence or spread.