A 30-year-old man was referred to the cardiologist’s clinic with chief complaints of exertional dyspnoea and intermittent palpitations for approximately 2 months. He had underlying diseases of hypertension and end-stage renal disease receiving peritoneal dialysis since December 2013 after taking unauthentic Chinese herbs. The patient was a non-smoker who took 40 mg of olmesartan once daily, 30 mg of nifedipine three times per day, 25 mg of carvedilol twice daily, 60 mg of isosorbide-5-mononitrate once daily, and 75 mg of clonidine twice daily to control his blood pressure.
His blood pressure was 150/102 mmHg and his pulse rate was 74 b.p.m. Auscultation of the heart and bilateral lung fields revealed no significant abnormalities. There was no evidence of oedema in the lower limbs. A chest X-ray revealed a marked increase in the cardiac silhouette and lung markings on the bilateral hilum. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus rhythm and LVH with left ventricular (LV) strain . NT-proBNP levels were up to 399 110 pg/mL (reference range: <125 pg/mL if age <75 years old), while hs-troponin T levels were within normal limits. An echocardiogram revealed severe concentric LVH with a maximum wall thickness of 16 mm at the anteroseptal segment of LV , LV global hypokinesia with a reduced LV ejection fraction (36%), a severely dilated left atrium, and minimal pericardial effusion. The speckle-tracking analysis revealed a reduced longitudinal strain of the LV with a sparing pattern at its apex .
Under the suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis, this patient underwent serial workup. Serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE), as well as a serum-free light-chain (sFLC) assay, all showed negative results, and light-chain amyloidosis (AL) was excluded. For ATTR cardiomyopathy, the patient underwent a 99mTc-pyrophosphate (PYP) scan with single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), which revealed a grade 3 uptake of the radiotracer within the myocardium (, , and ). We conducted a TTR gene analysis due to the clinical suspicion of ATTR cardiomyopathy; however, no pathologic mutation was detected. In view of the fact that this patient is relatively too young for a tentative diagnosis of wild-type ATTR, a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed. Since he had end-stage renal disease, he underwent a non-contrast CMR. An analysis of the native T1 mapping revealed a mean T1 value of 1244 ± 74 ms, which fell within the normal range (1156–1355 ms; 3-Tesla Vida MR scanner, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) and did not support the diagnosis of ATTR cardiomyopathy (, G, and ). We further performed an EMB for histopathological confirmation. Four specimens of EMB were collected from different sites of the right ventricular septum for pathological evaluation. The histology, however, revealed no amyloid deposition, but only a hypertrophied myocardium . In polarized light, Congo red staining did not reveal apple green fluorescence , and immunohistochemistry analysis did not reveal the presence of transthyretin . Electron microscopy failed to identify amyloid fibril aggregates. Masson’s trichrome stain showed that there was no significant collagen deposition within the myocardium . The diagnosis of ATTR cardiomyopathy was finally excluded. For possible hypertensive cardiomyopathy, this patient was on more rigorous control of blood pressure during follow-up.