We discuss the case of L.P.R., a 80 years old man known to us for bilateral hip replacement. In fact, he had received two surgeries for hip osteoarthritis, in 2010 the left side and in 2012 the right one. Both the left and right hip arthroplasties were composed of a titanium modular stem with titanium neck, a ceramic head and a titanium acetabular cup with ceramic insert. The two postoperative courses elapsed regularly and without complications, from both a clinical and radiographic point of view, with the exception of the presence of some calcifications around the left implant manifested after a few months from the first surgery.
12 years after left hip replacement, the patient begins to have swelling and left thigh pain, which started gradually during the previous two weeks, in the absence of trauma and without functional limitation. The patient was suffering from hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillations and dyslipidemia; he was taking Ramipril 2.5 mg/die, Bisoprolol 5 mg/day, Flecainide 100 mg/day, Simvastatin 20 mg/day and Rivaroxaban 20 mg/day (which was substituted with Enoxaparin 4000 UI/day few days before surgery, according to cardiological advise). The patient was vaccinated with mRNA-based Covid-19 vaccine (3 doses).
Haematological examinations did not report active or chronic infections, inflammatory and tumor markers were off (WBC 5000/mm3, CRP 0.54 mg/dL, ESR 22 mm/h, CEA 2.35 ng/mL, CA 19-9 9 UI/mL, CA 15-3 22 UI/mL, CA 125 29 UL/ml). The patient underwent to an ultrasound examination that showed a voluminous hematoma being organized. X-rays evaluation of the left hip displayed bone resorption around the left femoral stem (Gruen zone 1) . Therefore, it was decided to refer the patient both pelvis CT scan and MRI, which confirmed the pathological findings in the Gruen zone 1, reporting also bone resorption at the wing of left ilium and the acetabulum; anteriorly, inside the proximal part of the quadriceps muscle, there was a coarse, protein/hemorrhagic, subsolid collection of 7 cm in diameter, which involved also the iliopsoas bursa and extended to the pelvis . White and red blood cell count, serum C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal, without clinical signs of sepsis; Cobalt and chromium levels were found to be normal, respectively at 0.3 and 0.35 ppb.
Consequently, the patient was hospitalized and an ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration of the periprosthetic collection was performed. The results ruled out malignant tumor, instead raising the suspicion of periprosthetic infection or metallosis, that not even the scintigraphy resolved. In addition,
Assuming it was an ALTR with possible formation of a pseudotumor, we planned for an implant substitution with pseudotumor removal . However, during the hospitalization the patient contracted Covid-19. In accordance with strict internal protocols on the subject of coronavirus disease, due to the non-emergency/urgency nature of the case, it was necessary to wait for the nasopharyngeal swab to be negativized before proceeding with surgery. The operation was performed 4 days after hospitalization [,].
During surgery, the patient was placed in lateral position. Through the Enneking approach and the detachment of the gluteal muscles from the ileum, we accessed the articular cavity. Raising the lateral vastus, the voluminous polylobulated formation could be appreciated together with the erosion of the anterior proximal metaphysis that it had caused. The anterior component of the pseudotumor was excised, also taking some samples, exposing the prosthetic implant . The components appeared osseointegrated, so the femoral stem was explanted through Wagner's trans-femoral access and the acetabular cup with the help of gauges . A broad osteolysis was highlighted in the supracetabular portion, which extended up to ileum and ischium. To reconstruct the acetabular side, a Burch Schneider cage with four screws and filler cement was used, in addition to a Muller II cemented cup (Smith & Nephew, London, UK). At the femoral side, a 225 mm monolithic Wagner SL Revision Hip Stem (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) was employed, with a 32 mm femoral head and a medium neck, closing the femoral canal with two cerclages .
Microscopical analysis of the intra-operative samples revealed the presence of fibrous tissue, fibrin hemorrhagic collections, histiocytes and chronic inflammation due to foreign body, with dark refractive material of an exogenous nature.
The day after he was transfused with 2 units of red blood cells due to anemia (8.2 g/dL). During the first month the load was not allowed on the left side and monopodalic walking with 2 crutches was allowed, in addition to active and passive kinesis therapy of the left limb. 6 weeks after surgery, the patient was walking with 2 crutches and a partial load; no complications was reported; he did not present pain or swelling on his left hip.
Microscopic analysis found out that the specimen consisted of fibrous, adipose, and striated muscle tissue with massive fibrin-hematous collections surrounded by a histiocyte wall; few granulomatous aggregates of foamy macrophages, scattered histiocytes containing hematin pigment, plurinucleated giant cells, and deposits of blackish material refracting on light microscopy, interpreted as exogenous, were observed nearby .