A right thyroid nodule that was detected and followed for 4 years.
A 26-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital because of a right thyroid nodule that was found by physical examination and had persisted for over 4 years. At the time the nodule was found, the patient had no discomfort, and she was reexamined regularly in the outpatient department. Recently her thyroid B-ultrasound examination revealed a nodule in the right lobe, approximately 2.1 cm × 0.9 cm × 0.9 cm in size, that was solid hypoechoic, showed horizontal growth, had irregular edges, and was lobulated ; a small amount of blood flow signal was seen inside the nodule. Some of the individual right lateral cervical lymph nodes appeared swollen. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the thyroid was conducted: Heterotypic cells were found in the bloody fluid, with abundant cytoplasm and nucleoli. Malignancy was initially suspected (Bethesda V). BRAFV600E gene mutation analysis revealed no mutations. Therefore, the patient was admitted to the hospital with an admission diagnosis of a suspected malignant thyroid tumour.
Previous findings included abnormal pituitary function, oestrogen replacement therapy (details unknown), and sublingual gland cyst resection over 4 years prior.
The patient had no relevant personal or family history.
Physical examination showed no obvious nodules of the bilateral thyroid glands, no obvious enlargement of the superficial lymph nodes, and no other special changes.
Routine blood examination and biochemical examination, as well as thyroid function, antibody evaluation, thyroglobulin, and tumour tests, did not reveal any abnormalities.
B-ultrasound of the upper abdomen showed diffuse echogenic changes in the liver.
Lung computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple, small nodular shadows in both lungs with the maximum diameter of 5 mm and patchy shadows in the left lower lobe of the lung with poorly defined boundaries (suggesting inflammation).
A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the neck revealed a right thyroid nodule, which was suspected to be a malignant lesion, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the right neck . Lumbar enhanced MRI showed a low-signal lesion with enhancement in the lumbar 3 vertebra, and metastasis was considered based on the patient’s medical history.
Whole-body PET-CT was performed and revealed the following: (1) The right thyroid nodule was irregular with mixed low-density shadows and increased glucose metabolism, consistent with malignant lesions; (2) Multiple lymph nodes in the left parotid gland, neck, and mediastinum showed increased glucose metabolism; thus, the possibility of metastasis was considered; (3) Minor bone resorption and destruction of the lumbar 3 vertebra was observed surrounded by a few soft tissue shadows, and increased glucose metabolism was present, further indicating the possibility of metastasis; (4) Multiple small nodules and quasi-nodules were seen in both lungs, with no significant increase in glucose metabolism, again indicating the possibility of metastasis; and (5) The liver was swollen with reduced density and vascular separation but did not show increased glucose metabolism, suggesting the possibility of fatty liver.