A 17-year-old female neutered domestic shorthair cat was presented with a 2 cm rectal prolapse. The owner reported that the cat had a normal appetite and had been passing smaller-than-usual amounts of faeces for several days. The cat was wormed monthly (Advocate; Bayer). Physical examination revealed a low body condition score (3/9) and hepatomegaly.
Haematology revealed a mild, non-regenerative anaemia (haematocrit 24.5%; reference interval [RI] 30.3–52.3%) and a mild, mature neutrophilia (16.21 × 109/l; RI 1.48–10.29 × 109/l). Multiple biochemical analyses revealed a mild increase in alanine aminotransferase activity (222 IU/l; RI 12–130 IU/l). All other parameters, including total thyroxine, were within the RIs. Urinalysis showed adequate renal-concentrating ability (urine specific gravity 1.050) and dipstick analysis was unremarkable.
Abdominal radiographs were unremarkable apart from the marked hepatomegaly. The rectal prolapse was manually reduced under general anaesthesia and an anal purse-string suture was placed. Supportive care included intravenous fluid therapy, metronidazole (10 mg/kg IV q12h), cefazolin (30 mg/kg IV q8h), buprenorphine (0.015 mg/kg IV q8h) and esomeprazole (1 mg/kg IV q24h).
The following day abdominal ultrasound confirmed marked hepatomegaly. The liver was lobulated with a complex heterogeneous echotexture and irregular margins . There were multifocal, well-defined, ovoid-to-circular regions within the hepatic parenchyma that contained echogenic fluid, which demonstrated an atypical echogenic swirling pattern. The intrahepatic bile ducts were enlarged. The gall bladder contained anechoic fluid with irregular wall thickening. The common bile duct was markedly distended with anechoic fluid from the level of the cystic duct to the duodenal papilla, with no evidence of intraluminal obstruction. There was a concentric ring pattern in the transverse plane at the level of the ICCJ with wall thickening suggestive of a caecocolic intussusception ( and ). There was a small volume of anechoic free peritoneal fluid. Abdominal ultrasound was otherwise unremarkable.
Coagulation times were within the RIs (prothrombin time 18 s [RI 15–22 s] and activated partial thromboplastin time 92 s [RI 65–119 s]). Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable. Hepatic mass fine-needle aspirate cytology identified well-differentiated hepatocytes.
The following day the purse-string suture was removed and colonoscopy under general anaesthesia revealed an abrupt end at the entrance to the caecum. Multiple endoscopic colonic biopsies were collected. Exploratory laparotomy was then performed via a ventral midline approach. There was a single 7 cm × 7 cm × 4 cm mass with an irregular nodular contour replacing the quadrate lobe of the liver . The remaining liver appeared enlarged with rounded margins and multiple scattered nodules. The common bile duct was markedly dilated. The quadrate lobe was resected using a 30 mm TA-stapler (TA autosuture; Covidien). The caecum was inverted into the colon and was unable to be reduced . An antimesenteric colotomy was performed adjacent to the caecal inversion and extended to include the circumference of the inverted section. The colotomy was closed and a typhlectomy was performed. The base of the caecum was oversewn with 4-0 absorbable monofilament suture in a Parker-Kerr suture pattern to invert the edges. Abdominal wall closure was routine. Examination of the inverted caecum following resection revealed a distinct 1 cm × 1 cm focal, pedunculated mass arising from the mucosa and of the same colour as the mucosa. Postoperative analgesia was provided by a fentanyl continuous rate infusion (6 µg/kg/h for 24 h) followed by buprenorphine (0.015 mg/kg IV q8h for 48 h). The cat also received cefazolin (30 mg/kg IV q8h for 48 h) and amoxicillin–clavulanate (20 mg/kg PO q12h for 7 days) postoperatively.
Histopathology of the excised liver mass showed a proliferation of well-differentiated hepatocytes forming irregular plates of variable width, and lacking a defined lobular architecture or portal structures. Anisokaryosis was moderate with individual karyomegalic cells (diameter 2–3 times normal) having 1–2 large eosinophilic or basophilic nucleoli. Mitoses were present in low number (four per 10 high-powered × 40 fields). There was moderate multifocal cytoplasmic vacuolation (consistent with lipid and glycogen accumulation), and stromal tissue was inconspicuous. There was scattered individual cell death, multiple small necrotic foci, and acute and chronic haemorrhage (10% of the specimen). Tumour growth was nodular, although the margin with normal liver was irregular and infiltrative. Variably sized, sometimes blood-filled, cystic spaces were prominent and were lined by flattened endothelial cells (dilated vasculature and sinusoids) or by proliferating hepatocytes (in areas of necrosis). The changes were consistent with a well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma with a trabecular growth pattern and cystic foci .
Histopathology of the excised caecum included a pedunculated intraluminal polypoid mucosal projection with a submucosal stalk. Overlying mucosal epithelial cells were mildly hypertrophied, but significant dysplasia was not a feature. The regional mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue was reactive (enlarged, coalescing follicles, enlarged germinal centres), and of increased density in the polyp. The mucosa of the polyp and adjacent caecum contained a moderate plasmacytic infiltrate, with fewer lymphocytes and occasional neutrophils. There was mild multifocal mucinous gland dilatation. A focus of caecal mucosal ulceration showed more intense inflammation and a neutrophilic serocellular crust. Adjacent tunica muscularis was attenuated, and overlying oedematous serosa expanded by a mild mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, lymphoid aggregates, ectatic lymphatics and early fibroplasia. The changes were consistent with a hyperplastic inflammatory polyp, moderate chronic typhlitis and regional caecal wall degenerative changes with early repair . Histopathology of the colonic mucosal biopsies showed comparatively minor mucosal inflammation only.
The cat recovered well after surgery and was discharged 3 days later. Reassessment 6 weeks later revealed a 0.5 kg weight gain, a body condition score of 5/9 and resolution of clinical signs. Revisits every 3 months were recommended but not kept by the cat’s owner. The cat died acutely 1 year later. The cause of death was not determined and necropsy was not performed. The owner reported that the cat had been well prior to its death.