A 44-year-old man was admitted to our clinic because of left knee pain. He had pulmonary tuberculosis at 6 years old. He presented pus-forming arthritis, which was presumably tuberculous arthritis, in the left knee after 2 years, with spontaneous remission after closure of the draining sinuses. Thereafter, no recurrent symptom of infection was observed. However, the deformity and growth disturbance progressed with the knee pain. He had limb lengthening and alignment correction for the leg length discrepancy and genu valgum. However, his left knee pain continued despite the deformity correction. Radiographs showed a fused knee with severe tricompartmental arthritis . Severe limitation in range of motion was observed on the left knee. We planned to perform one- or two-stage primary TKA depending on the presence of infection .
Intraoperatively, a large subchondral abscess was found in the lateral femoral condyle and lateral tibial plateau after takedown of the fusion . On the basis of the necrotizing inflammation with granuloma in the frozen-section biopsy, active tuberculosis was suspected. Aggressive debridement and curettage of the infected and necrotic bone and soft tissues were performed.. After bone cuts and soft tissue balancing to prepare for TKA, articulating cement spacers (vancomycin 4 g and streptomycin 2 g per 1 batch) were made intraoperatively and applied to the tibial and femoral sides in sequence using intraoperative cement molds with a previously described technique [, ] . Relative medial and lateral stabilities were confirmed intraoperatively after inserting the articulating cement spacers. The diagnosis of tuberculosis infection was confirmed by isolating Mycobacterium tuberculosis from cultures. We decided to delay the TKA for at least 6 to 9 months to allow the administration of antituberculous drugs . Evaluation at 1-year follow-up revealed no recurrent infection after sufficient antituberculous drug treatment. Therefore, we recommended TKA surgery as planned. However, the patient was comfortable with the articulating cement spacers. He refused a conversion to TKA for personal reasons. At every visit thereafter, he consistently wanted to delay the second-stage surgery.
Painless activities were possible, including gait, step ascent and descent, and rising from a chair with full load bearing. No evidence was found that suggested recurrent infection or systemic toxicity. Laboratory markers of infection, and renal and hepatic toxicities were followed up once in a year. No abnormal finding was identified. A slowly progressing small bone loss was observed at the bone-cement interface. However, no notable mechanical problem such as subluxation, dislocation, periprosthetic, or implant fracture were observed on the serial knee radiographs . At the 7-year follow-up, the patient complained of left knee pain for 2 months. Radiographic and computed tomographic evaluations revealed collapse of the medial femoral condyle with fracture of the femoral articulating spacer component .
At 7 years after the implantation of spacers, we converted the articulating spacers to TKA using the NexGen Legacy Constrained Condylar Knee system (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA). The appearance of the knee joint and the finding from the intraoperative frozen-section examination suggested no residual infection. The femoral component of the cement spacer, along with the imaging study, showed a bisecting vertical fracture . The tibial component was intact . After removing the cement spacers, the dense fibrotic granulation tissue surrounding the bone surface was exposed, especially in the medial femoral condyle . Excisional biopsy of the tissues was performed. Considerable bone loss with cortical bone breakage was observed in the medial femoral condyle after the debridement of the granulation tissue and necrotic bone . We conducted wiring for the cortical bone breakage, and an allogenous morselized bone graft was performed for the bone loss. Augmentation blocks were additionally used for the remnant bone defect. In the proximal tibia, the considerably contained bone defect was restored with an allogenous morselized bone graft . Histological examination of the specimens from the bone surface of the medial femoral condyle showed marked fibrosis with a significant foreign body reaction characterized by infiltration of giant cells and macrophages . Direct visualization of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) particles was impossible because PMMA in the bone cement was dissolved in the organic solvent used during the routine histological processing. However, a negative pattern of the surrounding foreign body giant cells was observed, with various sizes [, ]. Many tiny particles were assumed to be abraded zirconium dioxide, an X-ray contrast medium used as an ingredient in the Palacos R bone-cement . These particles were mainly located within the cytoplasm of mononuclear macrophages. No evidence of infection or malignant lesion was found.
At the 2-year follow-up, the patient had a passive range of motion from 0° to 90°, with stability. TKA was maintained without osteolysis . He was satisfied with the clinical outcome after TKA conversion.