A 26-year-old man with a 7-year history of ulcerative colitis (UC) and a 2-year history of atopic dermatitis (AD) presented to our hospital with fever and chest pain. He had been treated for UC with 5-aminosalicylic acid (mesalamine, 4000 mg/day), but this regimen was erroneously disregarded based on his self-judgement 6 months before admission. He had also refused topical steroid treatment and had only been using a moisturizer to treat AD skin lesions; hence, his AD was poorly controlled. On admission, he appeared visibly unwell and presented with an unstable haemodynamic status. Laboratory results suggested multiple organ failure (MOF), with aspartate aminotransferase level of 1299 U/I, alanine aminotransferase level of 1142 U/I, creatinine level of 1.44 mg/dL, creatine kinase level of 3029 IU/L, and creatine-MB isoenzyme level of 136 IU/L. Echocardiography revealed a severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 16% . After tracheal intubation, veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) were initiated. He was presumptively diagnosed with fulminant myocarditis with cardiogenic shock. On Day 2, VA-ECMO and IABP were switched to an extracorporeal biventricular assist device (BiVAD) system under median sternotomy. Histopathological examination of the endomyocardial biopsy on admission led to a diagnosis of GCM .
Steroid pulse therapy (intravenous methylprednisolone, with a dose of 1000 mg/day for 3 days) and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG, 5 g/day for 3 days) were administered. Following this, the patient was administered steroid therapy via oral prednisolone (60 mg daily), which was subsequently reduced (see ). The patient’s MOF gradually improved with the support of BiVAD; hence, on Day 5, right ventricular support was removed after extubation, and rehabilitation was started with the remaining left ventricular assist device (LVAD) support. The patient complained of fatigue and double vision during rehabilitation. Three months before the present hospital admission, he was aware of intermittent ptosis. Physical examination revealed weakness in all skeletal muscles and orbicularis oculi muscles. Acetylcholine receptor (AchR)-binding antibody titres were elevated at 6.3 nmol/L . Computed tomography of the chest did not reveal an apparent thymoma. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with myasthenia gravis (MG) without thymoma. Oral prednisolone was tapered to 20 mg, and subsequently, cyclosporine (CYA) was started with a target trough level of 100–150 ng/mL. These treatments led to an almost complete resolution of muscle weakness, intermittent ptosis, and improved cardiac function with no infiltration of eosinophils or giant multinucleated cells.
On Day 41, we performed LVAD explantation and concomitant extended thymectomy as a treatment for MG. In addition, high-dose IVIG (25 g/day) was administered to prevent postoperative myasthenic crisis on Days 1–2 after LVAD explantation. Thymus hyperplasia was not anatomically observed, and histopathological findings did not show a thymoma . Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully with normal neurologic and end-organ function, and follow-up biopsy on Day 80 showed improvement of the inflammatory component of his disease presentation, with no giant multinucleated cells or injury (i.e. findings of resolving myocarditis) . His LVEF improved to 56% on Day 36 after the LVAD explantation . Regarding MG, he achieved minimal manifestation status, and the AchR-binding antibody titres gradually decreased. The patient was discharged on Day 91. During his hospital stay, he achieved maintenance of remission in UC and improved control in AD. He remained at home without recurrence of GCM and did not have worsening symptoms of MG over the 6-month follow-up period following discharge.