A 72-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. He had a history of hypertension and was a current smoker. The electrocardiogram showed complete right bundle branch block (CRBBB) and ST-segment elevation in leads V1–V4 . Transthoracic echocardiography showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30% with akinetic motion of the anteroseptal-apex wall . Emergent coronary angiography (CAG) was performed 10 min after loading of DAPT with aspirin 200 mg and prasugrel 20 mg, revealing subtotal occlusion in the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) . Recanalization with coronary flow of Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) Grade 3 was successfully obtained without any complications by thrombectomy and implantation of an everolimus-eluting platinum chromium stent (Synergy, 4.0 × 24 mm; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) confirmed good stent apposition with slight tissue protrusion in the stent .
One hour later, the patient developed sudden-onset severe chest pain. The electrocardiogram revealed new ST-segment elevation in leads I, aVL, and V1–V6 . Emergent CAG revealed thrombotic re-occlusion of a stent in the proximal LAD, which was diagnosed as acute stent thrombosis . Platelet reactivities on aspirin and prasugrel were evaluated by the VerifyNow system (Accumetrics, San Diego, CA, USA) before PCI. This demonstrated 438 aspirin reaction units (ARU) (target range for sufficient platelet inhibition, <550 ARU) and 282 P2Y12 reaction units (PRU) (target range for sufficient platelet inhibition, <230 PRU), implying high platelet reactivity on prasugrel. Because prasugrel resistance was suspected, cilostazol 200 mg was added just before PCI. We used an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) because of cardiogenic shock (blood pressure, 83/56 mmHg) and low LVEF. After recanalization by thrombectomy, optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed . Optical coherence tomography revealed massive thrombi without stent malapposition or edge dissection . Since balloon dilatation resulted in TIMI flow Grade 3 with only a small amount of thrombus, we did not need additional stent implantation . Thereafter, platelet reactivity decreased to 266 PRU at 4 h after PCI and 49 PRU at 1 day after PCI, implying delayed expression of prasugrel effects. At 2 days after PCI, CAG showed little thrombus in the stent and the IABP was removed. After 24 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged without any cardiac events under aspirin (100 mg/day), prasugrel (3.75 mg/day), and cilostazol (200 mg/day). Electrocardiogram at discharge showed CRBBB and negative T in leads I, aVL, and V1–V6 . Transthoracic echocardiography at discharge showed LVEF had improved to 50% with mild hypokinetic motion of the anteroseptal-apex wall .
At 3 months after discharge, follow-up CAG showed no in-stent restenosis and OCT revealed almost full neointimal coverage of stent struts without thrombi. Since the antiplatelet effect of prasugrel was sufficient with platelet reactivity of 209 PRU, we stopped cilostazol and continued aspirin 100 mg/day and prasugrel 3.75 mg/day. At 2 weeks after stopping cilostazol, adequate inhibition of platelet reactivity on prasugrel was maintained with 179 PRU. As of the 2-year follow-up, no thrombotic events had recurred. Genotype analysis for CYP involved in the prasugrel metabolic pathway demonstrated CYP2B6*1/*2 polymorphism .