A 49-year-old male presented to the emergency department with exercise-induced dyspnea and atypical angina pectoris. He reported a history of reduced exercise capacity since 5 months. On physical examination, his blood pressure was 135/85 mmHg and his heart rate was 82 beats per min. A resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) displayed sinus rhythm without any ST-segment abnormalities and a complete right bundle branch block . Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal biventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction by biplane Simpson's was 60%) without regional wall motion abnormalities. Mitral valve insufficiency (grade I) and mild aortal and tricuspid regurgitation was noted without signs of increased pulmonary artery pressure. Laboratory testing revealed slightly increased C-reactive protein levels (14.7 mg/L). Cardiac enzymes (troponin T and creatinkinase) and other routine biochemistry test values were within the normal range. His cardiovascular risk-factor profile included untreated hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and a history of cigarette smoking (60 pack years). His family history was negative for heart disease.
The patient underwent coronary angiography (CAG) that revealed an SCA originating from the right sinus of Valsalva [Figure and ]. An aortic root angiography was performed to rule out the presence of any other coronary ostia . Contrast-enhanced 320-row multidetector cardiac computed tomography with subsequent three-dimensional reconstructions confirmed the diagnosis of a solitary vessel arising from the right sinus of Valsalva. The single vessel courses within the right atrioventricular groove and shows mild luminal irregularities. The left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery, which emerges as a proximal branch from the solitary vessel, shows significant atheroscerotic lesions and is occluded in the course . Adenosine stress and rest perfusion cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed stress-induced perfusion defect at the anterior wall. No significant delayed enhancement as evidence of myocardial fibrosis, scar, or necrosis was observed.
Treatment options such as coronary angioplasty with stenting or coronary artery bypass graft surgery were discussed within the Heart Team. The Heart Team considered the atheroscerotic lesions and occlusion in the branch supplying the anterior wall eligible for neither percutaneous intervention nor bypass graft surgery. Thus, the patient was scheduled for intensified medical therapy to which the patient consented. The patient was treated with acetylsalicylic acid (ASS), angiotensin II type 1 (AT1) receptor blocker, diuretic hydrochlorothiazide, statins, and nitrates and routine cardiac checkups were recommended once in a year.