A six-year old previously healthy Sri Lankan boy presented with high grade fever (> 101 °F) for 10 days duration. He also complained of headache, left eye pain and photophobia for the same duration and double vision for 2 days. He did not have nausea, vomiting, malaise or seizures. There was no ear pain or hearing loss. He had been taking oral cefuroxime prescribed by a general practitioner for the febrile illness during previous 5 days.
On examination he was ill looking, irritable and febrile. There was no neck stiffness and the Kernig sign was negative. There were no rashes. Examination of cranial nerves revealed left abducens nerve palsy . Examination of visual fields, pupillary light reflexes, optic fundi, other cranial nerves and rest of the neurological examination were normal. Cardiovascular system examination including pulse rate and blood pressure was normal. The tympanic membranes could not be visualized immediately due to the presence of ear wax which could not be removed on the day of presentation due to limitation of resources. There was no tenderness or erythema over the mastoid process. Initial investigations results revealed; C-reactive protein – 161 mg/dL, haemoglobin – 11 g/dL, white blood cell count – 11,000/μL (Neutrophils 75%) and platelet count – 456,000/μL.
A tentative differential diagnosis of acute bacterial meningitis complicated by cerebral oedema, acute hydrocephalus or cerebral abscess was made. The child was commenced on intravenous cefotaxime, intravenous aciclovir and 3% sodium chloride after obtaining blood for bacterial culture. Urgent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) brain was performed due to limited resources and was however reported as normal with no evidence of cerebral oedema, hydrocephalus or intracranial abscesses. Lumbar puncture and electroencephalogram which were done on the following day were normal with normal cerebrospinal (CSF) opening pressure. Both blood and CSF cultures showed no bacterial growth. To resolve the diagnostic dilemma Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) brain with contrast was ordered but could not be performed until 3 days after admission due to limitations in resources. MRI brain revealed left mastoiditis extending up to the petrous temporal bone confirming the diagnosis of Gradenigo syndrome . There were no cavernous sinus or other cerebral sinus thromboses. Tympanometry revealed type B pattern in left ear consistent with a middle ear effusion.
The antimicrobial therapy was changed to intravenous vancomycin and ceftazidime and continued for 14 days. Tympanostomy and Grommet insertion were done. Fever settled after starting appropriate antibiotics and the child made a gradual recovery with improvement in eye movements and inflammatory markers. The child was discharged on oral co-amoxiclav and ciprofloxacin for further period of 4 weeks.