A 77-year-old woman presented with hoarseness. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a tumor with a diameter of 5 cm in the left upper lobe suspected to involve the mediastinal lymph nodes and invade the pulmonary artery . An 18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose-positron emission tomography scan demonstrated that the maximum standardized uptake value at the center of the tumor was 22.0. Bronchoscopic biopsy results confirmed the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma (cT4N2M0, cStage IIIB). As the patient showed symptoms of bloody sputum and the tumor was considered to be completely resectable, she underwent a left upper lobectomy with angioplasty of the left pulmonary artery. The intraoperative volume of blood lost was 187 ml and the volume of infusion was 2650 ml. Oral intake was restarted the next morning. Pathological evaluation revealed that the tumor size was 6.6 cm in maximum diameter, and it invaded the pulmonary artery. The histological type was pleomorphic carcinoma containing a variable adenocarcinoma component . The final pathological stage was pT4N2M0, pStage IIIB.
On the second postoperative day, her electrocardiogram showed a high frequency of ventricular premature complexes and the echocardiograph indicated Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. She was treated with human atrial natriuretic peptide, and anticoagulant therapy with continuous intravenous heparin infusion was administered to prevent intracardiac thrombus formation. Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was under 50 s. During the treatment, echocardiography did not detect intracardiac thrombus formation, and anticoagulation therapy was withdrawn on the 7th postoperative day.
The patient developed paralysis of the right upper limb and dysarthria on the 8th postoperative day. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed multiple high-intensity signals in the area of the left middle cerebral artery, which were not detected on preoperative MRI . She was diagnosed with a cerebral infarction and started on acute-phase treatment including anticoagulation with continuous intravenous heparin infusion. APTT was maintained over 60 s. The neurological symptoms improved the following day. Contrast-enhanced chest CT scan revealed thrombus in the left superior pulmonary vein stump measuring 10 mm in diameter . She had no comorbidity related to the cerebral attack. To exclude other causes of thrombosis, we performed magnetic resonance angiography, which revealed no significant findings in the carotid artery.
After the treatment was initiated, her symptoms became stable. However, symptoms of altered consciousness, dysarthria, and hemiparesis re-occurred on the 19th postoperative day and improved within an hour. The thrombus in the left superior pulmonary vein stump disappeared on follow-up contrast-enhanced chest CT performed the same day . After the second cerebral event, long-term treatment with apixaban, a direct oral anticoagulant, was initiated. At 3 months after surgery, the patient had no more recurrent embolic events.