A previously healthy, 61-year-old right-handed woman without history of epilepsy was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment of hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, confusion, and a brief seizure. Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 3.5 × 3.3 × 2.8 cm right frontotemporal meningioma with an accompanying midline shift of 3 mm .
Upon arrival, her neurological exam was notable for confusion and otherwise was nonfocal. Two clinical seizures with semiology of lip smacking, left head and eye deviation, and altered awareness were also observed. Both seizures ceased following intravenous lorazepam 2 mg without any improvement in mental status. Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed two right temporoparietal seizures with frequent T8/P4 sharp waves. She was treated with intravenous fosphenytoin 15 mg/kg. Continuous video-EEG monitoring showed nonconvulsive SE (NCSE). The patient was intubated and admitted to the neuro-intensive care unit. Stepwise treatment with propofol, midazolam, and ketamine was started, with burst suppression achieved in less than 24 h. Her antiepileptic drug (AED) management consisted of levetiracetam, lacosamide, and phenobarbital. Unfortunately NCSE recurred each time with weaning of general anesthesia. Three days after admission, she underwent resection of the right frontotemporal mass which was consistent with a WHO grade I meningioma . During her hospital stay, she was also treated for hyperparathyroidism secondary to a parathyroid adenoma that was treated medically and then surgically. Postoperatively, she remained seizure free, but her mental status did not improve. Intermittent EEGs showed diffuse slowing with focal right hemispheric arrhythmic delta slowing and continued right T8/P4 sharp waves. She was discharged to a long-term care facility in a minimally responsive state with tracheostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. Her mental status improved after discharge, but she had persistent generalized weakness due to critical illness myopathy from her prolonged intensive care unit stay. At 2-month follow-up, she had normal memory, attention, and language functions.
Two weeks later, she presented with confusion and left face twitching. EEG showed continuous right hemispheric spike and wave activity consistent with focal NCSE. Her preadmission AEDs were continued with the addition of valproic acid without subsequent improvement. EEG burst suppression was achieved with propofol, ketamine, midazolam, and pentobarbital. Brain MRI showed right superior temporal encephalomalacia and gliosis . NCSE emerged each time anesthetic medication was lowered despite four antiepileptic medications. Due to her previous SRSE with prolonged recovery phase and current poor prognosis, the family agreed for recurrent surgical treatment. She underwent tailored right temporal lobectomy 8 days after admission with removal of the superior, middle, and inferior temporal gyri (6 cm from the tip). Hippocampectomy was guided by intraoperative electrocorticography with resultant cessation of epileptiform activity along the margin of the resections . Postoperative EEG continued to show frequent right posterior temporal periodic epileptiform discharges for another 15 days without clinical improvement. Topiramate was added to her AED regimen, and propofol and midazolam was again titrated to EEG burst suppression for 2 days. As general anesthesia was weaned, the EEG slowly improved to diffuse theta and delta range slowing. Surgical pathology showed nonspecific leptomeningeal necrotizing inflammation in medium-sized arteries, focal cortical neuronal loss, and gliosis. The patient received high-dose fosphenytoin steroids for 5 days for possible autoimmune encephalitis. Tests for autoimmune markers and paraneoplastic antibodies as well as imaging studies for neoplasia in any other part of the body were negative except for a nonspecific elevated antinuclear antibody. She was transferred to a long-term care facility on topiramate 400 mg/day, valproic acid 3,000 mg/day, phenobarbital 300 mg/day, lacosamide 400 mg/day, and levetiracetam 5,000 mg/day.
At 9-month follow-up, neuropsychological testing could not be performed due to somnolence and lack of cooperation. Over 3 years the patient gradually improved her interaction and alertness, with concomitant decrease in her AEDs. As her cognitive status improved, a clinical picture of sensory aphasia was revealed. This manifested as relatively fluent and articulate speech with notable paraphasic errors, verbal perseveration, word salad, and alexia. Neuropsychological testing 34 months postoperatively could not be completed due to her dense sensory aphasia. The Mississippi Aphasia Screening Test showed an improving Wernicke-type aphasia that was evolving into a transcortical sensory aphasia profile with relatively fluent and articulate speech, paraphasic errors, poor comprehension, inconsistent response to questions and command following, restricted repetition of single words only, agraphia, and inability to read complex sentences.