A 44-year-old man, in whom the only antecedent was lumbar disc herniation, had experienced various symptoms while on a visit to Senegal. The symptoms that appeared one week after his arrival- included high fever, chills, drowsiness and not-bloody diarrhea. Two weeks after his return in France, he experienced additional symptoms: intense drowsiness with cognitive complaint, leg weakness, asthenia, joint pain (elbows, wrists, knees) and diffuse myalgia. Severe psychomotor slowing and impaired concentration led him to consult a physician. The patient was referred to a local hospital but no diagnosis was made at that time. After one year without a diagnosis and progressive worsening, he was examined at our tertiary center. He complained of drowsiness, cognitive difficulties, but also mild diarrhea. Clinical examination revealed a deficit in all four extremities, deep sensory impairment in the lower limbs, proprioceptive ataxia, distal pain, diminished cognitive speed and attention deficit. He presented also with a vitiligo. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable: in particular, tendon reflexes were present and symmetrical and there were no abnormal eye movements. Neuropsychological evaluation found a diminished speed of information processing, short-term and working memory impairment and attention and executive functioning disorders: the patient had a “subcortical” cognitive impairment. Thus, we used the BCcogSEP battery to evaluate cognitive functions . BCcogSEP is the French modified version of the Brief Repeatable Battery of Neuropsychological tests for Multiple Sclerosis (BRB-N) proposed by Rao and comprises the 5 modified BRB-N tests: a Selective Reminding Test (BCcog-SRT), a visuospatial memory test (10/36), the Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT), a verbal fluency test, and the digit symbol substitution test of the WAIS-R (DSST) . Three tasks were added in order to provide additional information about working memory and executive functions: the crossed tapping test, a “Go-No-Go” test and the WAIS-R digit span subtest. Among these 14 subtests, 11 were impaired, including the three subtests of SRT, the immediate recall of 10/36, the forward and backward digit span, the DSST, the PASAT, the crossed tapping test and the semantic and phonemic fluency tests.
Moreover, Free and Cued Selective Recall Reminding Test (FCSRT) for verbal episodic memory showed a normal score of 16 out of 16 words for immediate recall and scores of 6-9-9/16 (<5th percentile) for free recall and 12-15-15/16 for total recall (i.e. within the normal range), showing an improvement after cueing. In the visual object recognition memory test (DMS 48) the patient was deficient, with only 71% correct answers a few minutes after presentation of the pictures, and 69% correct answers one hour after. The Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) score was normal: 28 (recall 1/3). The Rey-Osterrieth complex figure copy was normal .
Brain MRI and electroencephalogram were normal whereas SPECT showed bilateral temporal and frontal hypoperfusion . Somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) were abnormal in the left leg, with a discrete delayed cortical wave latency. The motor nerve conduction study revealed a right carpal tunnel syndrome but found no other abnormalities; in particular, there was no evidence to suggest demyelination or axonal degeneration.
The CSF study showed a high protein level (0.80 g/l) with a normal number of white and red cells, negative polymerase chain reaction results for herpes simplex virus, the absence of oligoclonal bands, and a negative Lyme serology. These findings indicated the presence of an albumino-cytological dissociation. Different infectious causes has been researched in the blood but were negative: HCV, HBV, HIV, anguillula, ascaris, trypanosoma, schistosoma, fasciola hepatica, malaria, tropheryma whipplei, blastocystis hominis. Stool parasitological examinations were negative. Bacteriological examination of stool samples (after the third taking) revealed the presence of Campylobacter jejuni. Anti-ganglioside antibodies were positive (immunodot; anti-GM1 IgM: 1/2000, anti-GD1a IgG: 1/2000, anti-GD1b IgM: 1/500, anti-GQ1b: negative).
BE was diagnosed and the patient was treated with IVIg for 5 days. This led to an improvement in symptoms (i.e. regression of limb weakness and pain, improvement in cognitive impairment, particularly in terms of language and memory).
Unfortunately, after 2 months, the patient relapsed with the same clinical presentation. This led us to consider his symptoms as chronic. Consequently, he received IVIG treatment every 2 months, with a systematic recurrence of symptoms after 6 weeks. An immunosuppressive drug, mycophenolate mofetil, was tested, but was poorly tolerated and the patient was switched to azathioprine 100/mg day that was also stopped because it did not permit to diminish the frequency of IVIG. For the past 4 years, the time between 2 courses of IVIG has been about 3 months. The patient is now stabilized with this treatment but it is impossible to stop IVIG permanently as a relapse occurs a few weeks after IVIG withdrawal. Nevertheless, the patient probably presented a chronic progressive form of BE because relapses are not totally stopped despite the treatment.