An 18-year-old female presented to the ophthalmic clinic with bilateral blurred vision in a short term. The decline of vision was mild but in a gradual progress. The patient denied past medical history but myopia. No systemic anomaly was found. The logMAR best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the right eye was 0.1 (-2.0 diopters), and that of the left was 0.4 (-3.0 diopters). The intra-ocular pressure (IOP) maintained in a normal range. With slit-lamp examination, there was no cell found in her anterior chamber, nor abnormality occurred in the anterior segments. A slight amount of cells in the vitreous cavity were observed with funduscope. Both of her optic papillae were protuberant with unclear margins, with a construction resembling the “C-shaped donut” hid under each of the discs . Though the other parts of her retinas were normal, the foveal reflection was also reduced in both eyes.
Further inspections were carried out. The protrusions were internally hyperreflective in homogeneity on enhanced depth imaging (EDI) - OCT, forming crateriforms around the asymmetric optic nerve heads . The lesions of ovoid structure were wedged between the RNFL and Bruch’s membrane, lifting the inner retinal layers. Bilaterally, CME and enhanced reflectivity of the posterior choroid were confirmed as well . Staining of the lesions were observed in the late stage of fluorescein angiography, while there were no anomalous signs found in the retinal circulation time and vascular fluorescence . The lesions were hypoautofluorescent in fundus imaging and hypoechogenic in B-mode ultrasound. No obvious visual field defect or abnormal visual evoked potential (VEP) were found. Systemic examinations showed low signals of the lesions in the bone window sections of computed tomography (CT) . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), normal images were observed in her central nervous system (CNS), while the optic papillary lesions remained indiscernible . The patient refused examinations on cerebrospinal fluid or intracranial pressure, while she reported no symptoms of CNS. Therefore, craniocerebral diseases were not consider. Further investigations excluded infectious diseases, nervous diseases, autoimmune diseases, neoplastic diseases, and other systemic diseases. It was firstly confusing for the lesions resembled to the expression of ODD in fundus examinations. Nevertheless, the lesions were identified as PHOMS according to the criteria [, ]. Accompanied bilateral CME was also diagnosed. In this case, compressive effects on the optic papilla caused by PHOMS was considered to be a possible cause of CME, but there was no direct evidence at the first visit. Though no definite predisposing factor was confirmed for the edema, the hyperreflectivity in the posterior choroid indicated inflammation. Therefore, short-term systemic glucocorticoids were prescribed: initiating with 240 mg/d and 120 mg/d of intravenous methylprednisolone (each dosage lasted for 3 days), the patient received tapering oral prednisone from 80 mg/d, 40 mg/d, 20 mg/d, 10 mg/d to 5 mg/d for 1 month in the subsequent treatment.
Four months later, the logMAR BCVA of her both eyes raised to 0.0. EDI-OCT showed restoration of the macula, while the PHOMS and RNFL thickness remained unchanged . This outcome also excluded the possibility of CME caused by PHOMS compression, for the remaining of PHOMS should have continuous impact on the optic construction in inducing CME. Moreover, the vitreous cells were dissipated. Neither evidence of worsening conditions nor systemic discomforts were reported.