A 9 months old male patient was treated in endocrine outpatient clinic primarily as a case of congenital hypothyroidism. His parents noticed at age of 1.5 month that he sleeps most of the time, has progressive weight gain, and has abdominal distension. Therefore, he was advised by a pediatrician to do Thyroid function test, and results showed hypothyroidism (TSH 45.62 u IU/ml (0.34-5.6), T4 7.7 ng/dl (6.8-18), free T4 9.8 ng/dl). Hence, Levothyroxine 25 mcg once daily was initiated. During following up clinically and biochemically, the patient required increasing the dose till reaching 75 mcg once daily.
At 5 months of age, patient developed cyanotic attack lasted 1 minute, he had been admitted to a local hospital for treatment. On biochemical evaluation, the cause for the cyanotic attack was discerned to be due to hypocalcaemia as a part of rickets results . He was treated with I.V calcium and discharged on oral calcium and vitamin D (cholecalciferol) 2000 IU/day for 2 months then vitamin D 600IU/day without calcium.
He was a product of non-consanguineous marriage with an uneventful antenatal and natal period birth. He is bottle feeding and start weaning food intake. Regarding his developmental milestones, there was mild delayed motor milestones (9 months sitting by support), but cognitive status was normal. The parents were healthy with normal stature.
On physical examination, the boy weighed 9 kg, measured 67 cm in height and head circumference was 44 cm. His weight was at the 50th percentile, and head circumference was in the 25th percentile. He had round face, depressed nasal bridge, short neck, looks chubby, (US/LS 1.3), small hands and feet, and short stubby fingers . His penile length was normal. Metabolic screen and newborn screen for congenital hypothyroidism were normal.
Investigations
His baseline endocrine and biochemical values at age 4 months are shown in . His baseline endocrine and biochemical values at age 9 months are shown in . X-rays of both hands were taken. Roentgenogram pictures of hands revealed bilateral short metacarpals. CT brain was done and it was normal. Thyroid and abdomen U/S were normal. His baseline endocrine and biochemical values are shown in .
Treatment
According to physical examination (characterize of AHO) and laboratory investigations which showed hypocalcaemia, hyperphosphatemia and raised PTH, the diagnosis of PTH 1a associated with resistance (TSH) was established. Calcitriol (1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol) drops were initiated with oral calcium carbonate and adjustment to levothyroxine dose was made.
DISCUSSION
Hypothyroidism was first recognized in patients with PHP Ia in 1971 by Marx and co-workers . Usually, patients of PHP present with mild hypothyroidism, elevated TSH, normal or slightly low thyroid hormone. Patients with PHP Ia do not have circulating anti-thyroid hormone and do not develop goiter . Other hormonal disorders can be associated with hypothyroidism such as high calcitonin levels , growth hormone deficiency, hypogonadism , and sensorial defects , and is attributed to multiple peripheral resistance (, ).
The prevalence of PHP type 1a and type 1b is 1 per 295,000 in Japan. PHP affects females about two times more often than males . Although cases of severe hypothyroidism at newborn screening have been described, the onset of endocrine symptoms occurs later childhood .
There are two main types of PHP. Type I is characterized by minimal or non-existing renal cAMP synthesis in response to PTH. However, Type II has an absence of or a subnormal phosphaturic reaction in response to PTH, and it shows a normal increase in urine cAMP . Type I is further subdivided into two subtypes, PTH 1a and PTH 1b. In PTH 1a, the affected individuals have a genetic deficiency in the a subunit of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide binding protein (GS), and the majority of them exhibit specific morphological defects referred to as AHO .
All newborns with PHP Ia typically have elevated TSH concentration at birth (-) and may then normalize for 9–20 months before elevating again. In patients with PHP Ia, this can indicate that, like PTH resistance , resistance to TSH develops during the first 2 years of life. Normally there is a transient surge in TSH concentration immediately after birth, which is believed to be a reaction to the drop in extracorporeal temperature . Patients with PHP Ia may have a subtle TSH resistance that is only detectable during periods of maximal stimulation, like childbirth, which is why their TSH levels during birth surge excessively. This may help in the diagnosis of the disease in neonates (-), or after the first 2 years of life.
In those with PHP Ia, the processes causing hypothyroidism have not been identified. As will be covered below, different thyrotropic axis components may be involved.
The most common reason is a peripheral mechanism, namely resistance to TSH. It is a manifestation of the signaling failure to polypeptide hormones found in PHP patients Ia . Many studies have shown biallelic expression of the GNAS in the thyroid (-), yet rather than full inhibition of paternal allelic transcription, this was associated to preferential maternal expression. Due to the inactivation of the dominant maternal GNAS, this relaxed paternal imprinting of GNAS in the human thyroid may be one mechanism causing TSH resistance in PHP Ia , which would lead to a considerable loss of hormonal resistance and the expression of GNAS. Thyroid membranes taken from one PHP Ia patient showed reduced TSH stimulation of adenyl cyclase . The mechanism causing this condition is distinct from that causing other types of genetic hypothyroidism with TSH resistance, which are caused by germline TSH receptor mutations. This abnormality is characterized by normal or very low serum levels of thyroid hormone and increased serum TSH levels in the presence of a hypoplastic or properly sized gland in the appropriate location in the neck. Patients may exhibit severe hypothyroidism at one end of the range or euthyroid hyperthyrotropinemia at the other, depending on the extent of TSH receptor function impairment. .
Our patient presented with hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and high PTH level along with the with the typical findings on physical examination, so the diagnosis of PHP type 1a was concluded. He was managed with Calcitriol (1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol), oral calcium carbonate, and levothyroxine. This study agrees with a similar previous case report with the exception that the diagnosis was confirmed by the identification of GNAS gene mutation. Another previous study of a thirty-fife-day old male presented with hypocalcemic convulsions. Investigations revealed hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, raised PTH, and Vitamin D level was not deficient. So he received the proper management and was discharged home .