A 34-month-old boy was referred to our hospital with a pre-diagnosis of acquired ACTH deficiency. The patient was a term baby, delivered by cesarean section. He was intubated as a result of respiratory distress and supported by mechanical ventilation for 21 days in the neonatal intensive care unit. He was hospitalized nine times because of recurrent lower respiratory tract infections until the age of 10 months. In each period of hospitalization, he needed systemic steroid, and he also had continuously inhaled steroid during this period. Acquired ACTH deficiency secondary to glucocorticoid therapy or his medical conditions was decreed when the cortisol and ACTH levels were low at the age of 10 months. Hydrocortisone treatment (9 mg/m2/day) was started to prevent life-threatening complications. On admission to our hospital at the age of 34 months, he was on maintenance physiologic dose of hydrocortisone, his weight was 17.2 kg (+1.3 SDS), and his height was 97.5 cm (+0.5 SDS). He was normotensive and had natural skin and hair color, with normal male genitalia. Radiographic and biochemical analyses were normal. The cortisol response to a low-dose (1 µg) ACTH test was impaired . The hydrocortisone treatment was continued with the same physiological replacement dose. Other causes of recurrent lung infection were ruled out by the Pediatric Allergy and Immunology Division. During follow-up, ACTH and cortisol levels were persistently low (ACTH < 5 pg/mL, cortisol < 1 ng/mL), and he had never demonstrated hypoglycemia or electrolyte imbalance. Growth hormone tests were not performed because of the normal stature. Levels of the other pituitary hormones (thyroid hormones, prolactin), 17-hydroxyprogesterone, androstenedione, and adrenal ultrasound and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging results were all normal . Based on the hormonal profile, CIAD was suspected. On final assessment at 7 years 2 months, the patient weighed 28.3 kg (+1.1 SDS), and his height was 123.7 cm (+0.3 SDS). He has experienced no further lung infections since the hydrocortisone treatment was started.
In addition, the triple screening test of the mother during her second pregnancy showed low estriol (E3) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) levels, which may be related to glucocorticoid deficiency. Genetic counseling was given to the pregnant woman. It was explained that early disease diagnosis allows for immediate commencement of glucocorticoid therapy, and proper instructions for stress management were provided. Although this can prevent unnecessary neonatal deaths from an easily treatable disease, in this case the family decided to terminate the pregnancy.