A 75-year-old Hispanic man, born and resident in Zipaquirá, Cundinamarca (which is a Colombian rural area), who works as an independent seller, presented to the emergency department of the Clinic of the Universidad de La Sabana with a complaint of 15 days of fatigue, weakness, decreased appetite, epigastric abdominal pain, jaundice, and 10 kg weight loss. He had a history of peptic disease and degenerative arthritis.
On examination in our emergency department his temperature was 36.5, his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, heart rate 103 beats per minute, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 92%. His skin was pale and he had mucocutaneous jaundice, icteric conjunctivae, and bleeding stigmata of mucosa in oral cavity. Abdomen palpation revealed tenderness at palpation in right and left upper quadrants and epigastric region. His liver edge was smooth and was palpated 2 cm below the right costal margin; his spleen edge was palpated 2 cm below left costal margin. His reflexes were 1 out of 4 and there was no clonus. The remainder of the physical examination was normal.
His hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet counts were normal. His white blood cells and liver function test were elevated and coagulation times were prolonged; other laboratory results are shown in Table .
An upper abdominal ultrasound showed normal-sized liver, normal liver shape, no focal or diffuse lesions observed in the parenchyma, distended gallbladder with wall thickening of 4 mm, no evidence of biliary stones inside, and significant splenomegaly of approximate 17.5 cm, without focal lesions . Computed tomography (CT) of his abdomen, with the administration of contrast material, showed diffuse heterogeneous attenuation in his liver, and splenomegaly with contrast .
He was seen by surgery and gastroenterology services who considered support for viral hepatitis or acute cholangitis with ALF and decided to start antibiotic treatment with ampicillin/sulbactam 3 gr every 6 hours. The next day there was an increase in our patient’s liver function test results and his kidney test results started to elevate. He was re-interrogated by medical attendants; he told them that he had been in contact during the last 2 months with a cow who died of brucellosis; the diagnosis of the cow had been made by a specialist vet. With this background, the physician suspended the antibiotic scheme and added doxycycline 200 mg every day plus trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) 80/400 mg every 6 hours.
A sero-agglutination test Rose Bengal was reported as positive and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) immunoglobulin (Ig) M for Brucella was negative.
The evolution after the onset of specific antibiotic treatment was favorable with evident clinical improvement of his symptoms and paraclinical tests. He could go home after 11 days of hospitalization. The discharge diagnosis was ALF secondary to brucellosis. A month later our patient was followed up with a hepatic scintigraphy, where only mild cirrhosis was reported; in addition, he was asymptomatic and without clinical signs of sequelae or reinfection.