A 37-year-old woman with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) secondary to systemic lupus nephritis was admitted to the emergency room due to general weakness, fever, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. She had been undergoing CAPD for 15 years. On physical examination, she was found to have abdominal and rebound tenderness, but no skin wound. On admission, her body temperature was 38.8 °C, pulse was 101 beats/min, and blood pressure was 80/40 mmHg. Redness or discharge at the exit site of the peritoneal catheter was not observed. The patient had the following laboratory findings (reference ranges are indicated within parentheses): white blood cell (WBC) count of 5.3 × 109/L (4.8–10.8 × 109/L), hemoglobin level of 8.6 g/dL (12–18 g/dL), impaired liver function as shown by aspartate and alanine transaminase levels of 48 U/L and 16 U/L, respectively (10–37 U/L), C-reactive protein level of 17.5 mg/dL (0–0.3 mg/dL), procalcitonin level of 4.23 ng/mL (0–0.5 ng/mL), iron level of 50 μg/dL (29–164 μg/dL), transferrin saturation of 43.4 % (25–50 %), and ferritin level of 3207 μg/L (4.6–274 μg/L). The peritoneal effluent fluid was cloudy with a WBC count of 560 × 106/L and 55 % polymorphonuclear leukocytes. After performing peritoneal fluid and blood cultures, the patient was treated empirically with intraperitoneal cefazolin (600 mg) and ceftazidime (1 g) once daily. Two days after initiating antibiotic therapy, the abdominal pain subsided and peritoneal effluent fluid was cleared. However, her body temperature remained at 39.1 °C. On hospital day 3, she had severe painful leg edema abruptly. Moreover, she had cellulitis with ecchymosis and progressive hemorrhagic bullae on both lower legs. Shortly after, her blood pressure decreased to 60/40 mmHg. We could conduct any radiological investigations due to cardiovascular instability. She was then admitted to the intensive care unit. We briefly evaluated her recent food history, and found that she consumed salted baby octopuses and undercooked cockles few days before admission. On the suspicion of necrotizing fasciitis by V. vulnificus infection, she underwent emergency bedside fasciotomy. Wound cultures were performed during the fasciotomy, but showed no bacteria growth. On hospital day 4, peritoneal effluent fluid and blood cultures performed at admission revealed V. vulnificus. Therefore, we decided to perform a more accurate identification using 16S rRNA gene sequencing.
Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid was extracted from the cultivated microorganism using proteinase K. The 16S rRNA gene was successfully amplified with universal primers (forward: 5′-AGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′; reverse: 5′-GTATTGCCGCGGCTGCTG-3′) using Biometra T3000 (Analytik Jena, Göttingen, Germany) and sequenced using Applied Biosystems 3130 lx (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The 16S rRNA gene sequences were 100 % homologous to V. vulnificus (GenBank accession number: KP223908.1), which was confirmed with nucleotide basic local alignment search tool analysis. V. vulnificus showed sensitivity to cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin, and ceftazidime, intermediate sensitivity to cefazolin, and resistance to cefoxitin using the broth microdilution methods. Therefore, intraperitoneal cefazolin was discontinued, but intravenous ciprofloxacin (200 mg twice a day) and cefotaxime (1 g every 24 h) were administered in addition to intraperitoneal ceftazidime (1 g once daily) after dose adjustment for renal insufficiency. After 7 days of treatment, the peritoneal effluent WBC count decreased to 3 × 106/L. Furthermore, the absence of bacterial growth was confirmed with follow-up blood and peritoneal fluid cultures. The intraperitoneal and intravenous antibiotics were continued for 4 weeks. The patient underwent additional debridement for granulation tissues in both lower legs after emergency fasciotomy, and her wound completely healed after 9 months. The patient had been advised to avoid consumption of raw and uncooked seafood, and use separate cutting boards and knives for seafood and non-seafood. Furthermore, she was instructed to wear gloves when handling raw oysters or shellfish.