A 69-year-old Japanese woman who had never smoked was initially diagnosed with clinical stage IV (T2aN2M1b in 7th edition) lung adenocarcinoma with pleural and bone metastasis. She had no history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, or any colonic diseases (such as constipation). At the initial diagnosis, no EGFR gene mutation was detected in malignant pleural effusion by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A combination regimen with carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab was started as the first-line treatment . Next, pemetrexed, erlotinib, and docetaxel were administered as second-, third-, and fourth-line treatments, respectively. Each regimen was changed because of disease progression. Lung cancer progressed with increased pleural effusion after one cycle with gemcitabine (fifth-line treatment). Therefore, EGFR gene mutation was studied in pleural effusion, using the PCR fragment analysis/PCR clamp method, because the progression-free survival (PFS) of erlotinib was 24.7 months. Two EGFR gene mutations were detected, namely a deletion in exon 19 and a T790 M point mutation in exon 20. Based on the genetic results, afatinib was started as the sixth-line treatment, as recommended in the LUX-Lung-4 study . Osimertinib was not an option because it was not yet approved at that time. The PFS of afatinib was 4.0 months. Treatment with afatinib was continued for 15.3 months (458 days) until osimertinib was approved.
Osimertinib (80 mg/day) was started as the seventh-line treatment at her age of 74, when the patient had a body mass index of 16.2 kg/cm2 and a performance status of 1. The adverse events, cutaneous pruritus and stomatitis, were graded with Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE, ver 4.0) as grade 1. However, there was gradual improvement in the shoulder pain that had resulted from bone metastasis, and oral administration of oxycodone was successfully stopped on the 87th day after osimertinib was started. The best response of osimertinib was stable disease. In follow-up computed tomography (CT) at day 97 after treatment with osimertinib, intra-mural air in the transverse colon and intra-hepatic portal vein gas were incidentally observed. Intra-mural air in the bowel intestine was considered to be pneumatosis intestinalis. However, no evidence of perforation was observed because free air was absent from the abdominal cavity . Progression of lung cancer was not recognized.
Because of the close association between pneumatosis intestinalis and EGFR-TKI usage , pneumatosis intestinalis was considered to have been induced by osimertinib, which had been most recently administered. There were no subjective symptoms, such as abdominal pain. Her white blood cell count was 3500/μL (normal range: 3400-9200/μL), serum C-reactive protein was 0.0 mg/dL (normal range: 0.0–0.3 mg/dL), and creatinine kinase (CK) was 48 IU/L (normal range: 62–287 IU/L). Therefore, there were no findings to indicate inflammatory response, such as infection or intestinal necrosis.
We put the patient on fasting conservatively and interrupted osimertinib on the first day of fasting, monitoring her condition carefully. She received neither antibiotics, nor an oxygen supply. After improvement of pneumatosis intestinalis and intra-hepatic portal vein gas on abdominal CT taken on day 7 , we resumed meals orally on day 7 and osimertinib (80 mg/day) on day 10.
It had been possible to continue osimertinib successfully. With a PFS of 12.2 months, osimertinib was continued with beyond-progressive disease status. Our patient was administered osimertinib until a few days before she died of lung cancer. The total duration of osimertinib administration was 19.4 months (581 days) (16.1 months [484 days] since complete recovery from pneumatosis intestinalis). Her overall survival was 79.3 months.