A 17-year-old girl weighing 40kg was admitted to our hospital in September 2017 with 1-month history of headache. Neuroimagings showed a occupying lesion located in bilateral and third ventricles . The patient underwent neuronavigation-assisted IVT tumor excision and external ventricular drainage (EVD, right side) on September 27, 2017. Perioperative i.v. antibiotic prophylaxis with cefazolin (2g) was administered. Later, the antibiotic was changed to vancomycin (1g twice daily, Sep 29, Day2 after surgery) and ceftriaxone (2g daily, Oct 3, Day6 after surgery) in view of the possible central nervous system (CNS) infection because she had marked leucocytosis (20.53*109/L), and the laboratory examination of CSF was abnormal (, white blood cell (WBC): 826 cells/mm3, glucose: 37mg/dL, protein: 715mg/dL). Ten days from the start of ceftriaxone (Oct 14, Day17 after surgery), she had a sudden-onset of fever and her body temperature was 38.4°C with symptoms of nausea, emesis and apathy. On the days that followed, CSF cultures showed carbapenem-resistant Enterobacter cloacae infection, and MIC to imipenem ≥16 mg/mL (, Oct 17, Day20 after surgery). Blood culture was positive too. So we immediately removed the drainage tube of external ventricular and the catheter was cultured as well. The patient was then switched to tigecycline i.v. (100mg loading dose, then 50mg twice daily) and amikacin i.v. (600mg daily). But on the night of the same day, the patient suffered cardiac and respiratory arrest due to herniation of the brain, and we were forced to place another EVD (right side) for her . Considering the poor BBB penetration of tigecycline, after one day therapy, we adjusted the antibiotics (Oct 19, Day22 after surgery) to meropenem i.v. (2g thrice daily, prolonged infusion ≥3 hrs) and amikacin i.v. (600mg daily), in addition to cotrimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole 0.4g and trimethoprim 0.08g per pill, 2 pills per day). However, cotrimoxazole was used only once as the patient was allergic to it. After antibiotic treatment, the patient still had fever and the highest temperature was 38.8°C. The state of consciousness gradually deteriorated into lethargy, while CSF cultures still showed carbapenem-resistant Enterobacter cloacae infection. Therefore, given the poor permeability of the BBB to antibiotics, off-label IVT amikacin was given as a feasible treatment option. After the patient signed the informed consent, amikacin was administered IVT at a dose of 30 mg/d (Oct 21, Day24 after surgery). The dosage and usage of amikacin were as follows: 5mL normal saline containing 30mg amikacin was slowly injected into the ventricle. After each injection, the CSF drainage tube was temporarily closed for 1 hr to prevent premature drug outflow. After 2 days of IVT amikacin therapy (Oct 23, Day26 after surgery), routine CSF results showed an elevated WBC count (2550 cells/mm3, with 57% neutrophils). CSF culture was persistently positive with the carbapenem-resistant Enterobacter cloacae in the following two results on the 26th and 28th day after surgery. In the meantime, we underwent EVD for her on the left (Oct 26, Day29 after surgery) and right side (Oct 29, Day32 after surgery) because of the drainage (right side) inadvertently slipping off and hydrocephalus, respectively ( and ). The CSF culture was negative (Nov 2, Day36 after surgery) after the above treatment. And IVT treatment was well tolerated by the patient. After the CSF culture was negative for 3 consecutive times, the ventricular drainages were removed successively (Left side: Nov 6, Day40 after surgery; Right side: Nov 14, Day48 after surgery, ) and the IVT amikacin was discontinued (Nov 12, Day46 after surgery). On Dec 6 (Day71 after surgery), the CSF culture of the patient had been continuously negative for 9 times, and the indicators of CSF were basically normal ; we stopped meropenem and amikacin.
During the follow-up period, the patient’s mental status improved, and her fever gradually subsided. The meningitis was effectively and safely treated without evidence of nephrotoxicity or seizures. Neurologically, she did not have any focal deficits. Additionally, the patient’s pathologic result confirmed central neurocytoma and she was transferred to receive radiotherapy and rehabilitation. And the patient received third ventriculostomy and septostomy of the septum pellucidum because of obstructive hydrocephalus after three months. So far, she has made a full recovery and is leading a normal life.