A 10 years old male presented to the pediatric emergency department at our tertiary hospital, complaining of high-grade Fever and limping. the fever was continuous for 3 weeks prior to presentation, reaching 40.3C, and it was not relieved by acetaminophen, but relieved by NSAIDs. The patient has no respiratory, neurological, hematological or urinary symptoms. No skin changes were noticed. The mother reported abdominal pain and vomiting and unintentional 20 % weight loss over these 3 weeks.
The patient was limping on his left lower limb for one-week duration, with an inability to bear weight. He had left hip pain that started gradually, and progressed to a persistent sharp pain radiating to the thigh, aggravated by movement. Which lead to limitation of his daily activity. The pain was initially controlled with acetaminophen, but later it progressed and became unresponsive to analgesia. The patient denied pain in any other joints, hotness, redness or limb swelling.
The patient has no other comorbidities, and no history of previous surgeries. His family history was insignificant. He was positive for SARS Covid- 19 infection 8 weeks prior to current presentation; it was mild and resolved within few days. He was not vaccinated for Covid-19.
On physical examination, the patient was ill-looking, pale, in pain, unable to walk and unable to bear weight. He was febrile 40 C , tachycardic and tachypnic, normotensive, and O2 saturation 100% on room air. He had no swelling, redness or hotness of all joints, but there was significant tenderness over the left hip with marked decreased range of motion. Abdominal examination revealed mild generalized tenderness with no masses or organomegaly. The rest of the exam was unremarkable.
Laboratory tests revealed high white blood cells (WBC) 18 × 109/L; normal range ( 4,8 to 10,8 109/L) and high inflammatory markers including D-dimer 2.5 μ/mL ( normal range < 0.4 μ/mL), C-reactive protein 67 mg/L (negative <6 mg/L), ESR 120 mm/hr ( normal <20 mm/hr) and ferritin 560 ng/mL (normal range 7 to140 ng/mL). Liver enzymes were elevated, kidney function tests and electrolytes were normal. Blood culture and urine culture were negative for any bacterial growth.
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) were negative.COVID19 IgG titer was high 2140 IU/mL (Strong positive > 200 IU/mL), and COVID 19 PCR was negative.
Ultrasound (US) of left hip and pelvis revealed a high suspicion of femoral Deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Doppler US showed a massive DVT at the common femoral vein, extending to external iliac vein, proximal part of internal iliac vein and passing to the visualized part of common iliac vein, causing significant venous dilatation and absence of flow, in addition to DVT at superior femoral vein. External iliac artery and common femoral artery showed marked increase in the thickness of intima-media with irregularity, which confirm the diagnosis of vasculitis. However, there was no evidence of hip arthritis
Computed tomography (CT) scan of pelvis and thighs ruled out osteomyelitis and arthritis, and showed concentric mural thickening and wall enhancement of the common iliac, external iliac and common femoral arteries, the findings were consistent with vasculitis. Echocardiogram, electrocardiogram (ECG) and cardiac enzymes were normal. The US of abdomen solid organs was unremarkable.
Thrombophilia workup (including Anti phospholipid, factor 5 leiden mutation (H1299r, Y1702C), MTHFR activity, Protein C, S, antithrombin III and homocysteine) showed no increased risk of thrombosis.
The patient was diagnosed as MIS-c and started on management with two IVIG doses, steroids and aspirin; he received broad-spectrum antibiotics, and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH)
One day one post management the fever subsided, the patient started bearing weight and the limping improved dramatically. Antibiotic were discontinued and the patient was discharged home after six days.