We report the case of a 17-year-old North African male with no particular medical or family history, studying at high school, who presented with a left scrotal mass that had been evolving for several months. The patient was not given any special medication prior to diagnosis. The patient has no history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
On physical examination, there was an 8 cm painless left scrotal tumor. The light transmittance test was negative. The patient did not show any sign of testosterone deficiency, that is, testosterone levels were not measured. No regional lymph node areas were clinically palpable. The neurological examination was normal and no significant clinical findings were detected on other physical examinations.
The tumor markers [alpha-fetoprotein, beta-hCG, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)] were within normal ranges.
The ultrasound (US) revealed the presence of a 6 cm heterogeneous hypoechogenic tissular mass with cystic areas adherent to the left scrotal wall, which was thickened in some places and vascularized by color Doppler. It exerted a mass effect on the homolateral testicle, which was of average volume with a loss of contours in areas more marked at the level of the inferior pole. The thoracic–abdominal–pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan showed some suspicious lateral–aortic enlarged lymph nodes. The largest of these was 16 × 23 mm.
One week later, the patient had a left inguinal orchidectomy after first and high ligature of the spermatic cord with full resection margins.
The final pathology report concluded with an 8 cm paratesticular rhabdomyosarcoma of embryonic type that displaced the testicle without invading it. Without going beyond it, it infiltrated the epididymis, the rete testis, and the albuginea. The surgical margin at the level of the spermatic cord was free.
The patient was staged as stage III and was planned for adjuvant polychemotherapy implemented in nine cycles, combining these molecules: ifosfamide, vincristine, and actinomycin D. Chemotherapy was started 1 month later. He only received six cycles and refused further chemotherapy.
A CT scan after six chemotherapy cycles showed a residual paraaortic 5 cm mass, with no other sign of metastatic disease.The patient had a positron emission tomography (PET) CT that showed a 4 cm hypermetabolic mass at the level of the renal pelvis; no other hypermetabolic location was present.
After discussion with the patient and his guardian, the multidisciplinary meeting decided to perform a paraaortic lymph node dissection. The patient expressed an apparent refusal of any systemic treatment and wanted to have the disease surgically removed. Radiation therapy was also discussed, but it was ruled out due to the absence of an immediately available appointment.
The surgery was performed 4 months after the second CT scan and 2 months after the PET CT. On admission, the examination was strictly normal. The patient was afebrile and had normal vital signs; pulse rate was 84 beats per minute and blood pressure was within normal measures of 120/60 mmHg. The patient did not receive any particular treatment, except for prophylactic anticoagulation one injection of enoxaparine 0, 6 UI per day.
All the laboratory findings were normal .
We started with laparoscopy, which found a 2 cm relapse at the level of the section of the left spermatic cord. The extraperitoneal approach was initially considered, but the mass was deemed unresectable with laparoscopy. We converted to midline laparotomy and first resected the spermatic cord relapse.
The residual mass was 8 × 4 cm and enlaced the left ureter and the left renal vessels at the level of the renal pelvis . Careful dissection helped free the ureter and the renal vessels without harming them, allowing for renal conservation .
The surgery was performed by a skilled professor and lasted 180 min. There was no significant blood loss. At the end of the surgery, there was no macroscopic disease left.
The histological examination found a cellular tumor composed of sheets of small, stellate, spindled, or round cells . The tumor contained hyper- and hypocellular areas with a loose myxoid stroma . Small, stellate, spindled, round cells with scant or deeply eosinophilic cytoplasm and eccentric, small oval nuclei with a light chromatin pattern and inconspicuous nucleoli. Figures of mitosis were numerous. On immunohistochemistry examination, the tumor showed cytoplasmic positivity for desmin and focal nuclear staining for myogenic . The final histology examination resulted in metastatic lymph node from RMS.
The multidisciplinary meeting decided to complete two cycles of chemotherapy and perform paraaortic external beam radiation. After 7 months of surveillance, the patient completed chemotherapy and radiation. He was last seen at our department 1 year after surgery and was still disease free. The planned follow-up for this patient will be as follows: physical examination every 3 months in the first 2 years with a thoracic–abdominal–pelvic CT scan every 6 months; carried out at the initial hospital.