A 36-year-old Taiwanese female patient, gravida 2, para 1, with a previous vaginal delivery history and without a medical or surgical history was initially admitted to a private hospital due to preterm uterine contractions at 25 weeks and 6 days. Continuous intravenous infusion of ritodrine hydrochloride at the dose of 6 mg/hour was given. After receiving tocolytics for one week, preterm uterine contractions with vaginal bleeding persisted, so the patient was transferred to the emergency department of Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital.
At triage, the patient’s vital signs were as follows: a body temperature of 37.2 °C, a pulse rate of 133 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg. Laboratory tests revealed the following: acute kidney injury (serum creatinine level of 3.94 mg/dL), hyponatremia (serum sodium level of 120 mEq/L), hyperuricemia (serum uric acid level of 13.2 mg/dL) and elevated levels of liver enzymes (serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 202 U/L and serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of 192 U/L). The urine analysis was normal. The patient did not initially present with dyspnea at our emergency department. Tocodynamometry revealed regular uterine contractions, and the fetal heart rate was reactive. The cervix, which was dilated to 3 cm, had bloody tissue. Thus, the patient was admitted to our tocolytic unit due to preterm labor, acute kidney injury and impaired liver function.
After admission, atosiban acetate, which is an antagonist of the oxytocin receptor, was given intravenously at a rate of 100 µg/min in combination with ritodrine to complete the course of intramuscular betamethasone and intravenous magnesium sulfate. Due to impaired renal function, we administered a standard loading dose of 4 g magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection without a maintenance dose. Ritodrine was maintained at a dose of 6 mg/hour through an intravenous line. However, the patient presented with dyspnea, symmetric bilateral pitting edema of the lower limbs (grade 2) and dark urine two days after admission. Chest radiography revealed bilateral pulmonary edema. Electrocardiography excluded acute myocardial infarction. The follow-up laboratory findings revealed progressive acute kidney injury (serum creatinine level of 4.13 mg/dL) and persistent impaired liver function (serum AST level of 126 U/L and serum ALT level of 82 U/L) with hypoalbuminemia, progressive hyponatremia (serum sodium level of 116 mEq/L), hypermagnesemia (serum magnesium level of 5.6 mEq/L), and hyperuricemia (serum uric acid level of 14.6 mg/dL). The arterial blood gas data showed high anion gap metabolic acidosis. The serum creatinine kinase (CK) level was elevated at 1202 U/L. Ritodrine was ceased before cesarean section. Transabdominal sonography showed polyhydramnios with an amniotic fluid index of 40 cm, placental thickening (88 mm on the posterior wall of the uterus, Fig. A), and hydrops fetalis . Because of the deteriorated maternal and fetal status, emergency cesarean section was performed at 27 weeks and 1 day of gestation. A 1000-g female infant was delivered and had an Apgar score of 1 at 1 min and 3 at 5 min. After cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation and intubation, the neonate was transferred to our neonatal intensive care unit for respiratory distress syndrome, bronchopulmonary dysplasia and necrotizing enterocolitis. A placental chorioangioma (8.5 × 6.5 × 4.2 cm in size) was found after delivery of the placenta . The histopathological analysis indicated that the tumor consisted of proliferative capillaries within a variably cellular and collagenous stroma, confirming the diagnosis of placental chorioangioma. At this time, we realized that hydrops fetalis, polyhydramnios, placental thickening and maternal mirror syndrome were induced by the placental chorioangioma.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit after cesarean section. She was treated with sodium bicarbonate, adequate fluid hydration, and albumin supplementation. Her clinical status and laboratory indicators improved gradually after management. The patient was extubated and transferred back to the ordinary ward three days later. The patient was discharged home on the seventh day after cesarean section. The newborn was discharged home three months later and later developed complications, including hyperactivity and obsessive-compulsive disorder at four years old.