The patient was a 70-year-old man with a medical history of Parkinson’s disease for 7 years and good disease control through regular treatment with the oral medications levodopa and pramipexole. The patient had undergone rectal polypectomy 1 year ago, but he did not have a remarkable medical history otherwise. He did not have a history of alcohol consumption or smoking. His chief complaint was a 3-month history of pain in the lower back after falling down that had been exacerbated for 2 months.
Three months back, the patient fell off the bed and experienced mild back pain. He was admitted to the local hospital, where he was diagnosed with vertebral compression fractures of L1 and L2 and osteoporosis . He then underwent percutaneous kyphoplasty, after which the pain was mildly relieved . Two months after the kyphoplasty procedure, his back pain gradually worsened and he also started experiencing radiating pain in the left inguinal and left lateral thigh. He was unable to sit, stand, and walk as a result of the increasing pain, and also experienced weakness while defecating. Physical examination revealed deformity of the thoracolumbar segment in the form of a posterior convexity, as well as localized pressure and percussion pain in the thoracolumbar segment, slight tension in the paravertebral muscles, and dullness of sensation in the left inguinal and lateral thigh. No pathologic signs were observed, but lumbar spine motion was limited. A full-length spine radiograph showed post-vertebroplasty of L1 and L2, compression fracture of T12, kyphosis with sagittal imbalance (Cobb’s angle: 45°, PI: 37°, PT: 26°, SS: 11°), and severe osteoporosis . MRI of the lumbar spine showed T12-L2 bone edema . Laboratory examination showed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) increased to 54.00 mm/h and hemoglobin (HGB) decreased to 113 g/L.
Based on the observations, imaging findings, and the patient’s needs, posterior osteotomy, canal decompression, and internal fixation of the T10-L3 intervertebral plate with bone graft fusion was selected as the treatment option. After the surgery, the patient got out of bed with the protection of a brace, and the pain in the lower back was reduced. Additionally, sensation in the lower limbs was normal, and bowel movement was normal too. The surgical incision healed well and met the criteria for first-stage healing. Postoperative lumbar spine radiography and CT showed that the kyphosis was corrected and the nail rod was not loosened . The patient was satisfied with the outcome of the surgery and was discharged from the hospital. He was asked to continue with oral Parkinson’s therapy with additional bisphosphonates, calcium, and vitamin D3 for anti-osteoporosis treatment. The patient was instructed to wear a brace during all daily activities.
Unfortunately, a follow-up radiograph taken 1 month after surgery showed a loosening of the L3 pedicle screw. The patient was advised to continue anti-osteoporosis treatment and Parkinson’s treatment and wear a brace and was counseled in preparation for possible secondary surgery.
Three months after surgery, the patient complained of lower back pain that worsened when walking upright and turning over. Physical examination revealed that in-surgical incision was well healed, there was localized pressure and percussion pain in the distal fixed vertebrae segment, and the muscle strength of the lower limbs was normal. No pathologic signs were observed. CT scan and radiograph of the spine showed that the L3 vertebral body was loosely fixed internally and the screws had resorbed the surrounding bone .
Two months after initial surgery, the patient underwent deep-brain electrode placement at West China Hospital. Based on the symptoms, imaging findings, and the patient’s needs, the revision surgery was chosen to be performed. As the original internal fixation had failed and the patient had severe osteoporosis, the original L3 screw used for internal fixation was removed. Additionally, the L3–5 vertebral body was lengthened and fixed, the L3–5 vertebral nail tract was reinforced with bone cement, and a Domino joint head device was installed. After revision surgery, physical examination showed that the local pressure pain and percussion pain had been alleviated. Imaging 3 days after revision surgery showed that kyphosis was corrected (Cobb’s angle: 22°, PI: 44°, PT: 23°, SS: 21°) and the nail rod was not loosened . At the time of discharge, the patient was instructed to continue wearing the brace and continue with active anti-osteoporosis treatment, with regular review of his condition.
One month after revision surgery, imaging showed that the kyphosis was corrected and the internal fixation was stable . Two months after revision surgery, the brace was successfully removed. At 3-month and 6-month follow-ups, the patient was in good condition and the internal fixation was stable . At the last follow-up conducted 1.5 years after the revision surgery , the patient was in good condition and did not complain of lower back discomfort. He had been actively exercising according to the rehabilitation regime and had resumed social life.