A previously healthy 15-year-old male presented to the emergency departmentwith
headache, nausea, dizziness, fever andblurred vision occurring 30 minutes after
taking a single dose of ibuprofen 400 mg. A week earlier, he also had headache,
nausea and fever during one day after ibuprofen-intake, prescribed due to a fracture
of the fifth right metatarsal bone.
There was a family history of autoimmune disease. His20-year-old sister had
autoimmune thyroiditis.
On examination, hewas febrile (auricular temperature of 38.4ºC), with blood pressure
130/71 mmHg and pulse rate 93/minute. His neurological exam was normal with no
altered mental status nor meningeal or focal signs. He presented conjunctival
hyperemia, without ocular discharge. Other organ systems’ examination was
unremarkable.
Laboratory tests revealed total white cell count 9,900/µL,with a differential of
76,9% neutrophils and 19,4% lymphocytes, C-reactive protein 1.2 mg/L and
negativeblood culture.
He was admitted for clinical surveillance. On day 1, the patient maintained fever,
and headache became more intense, with emesis. On examination, he had neck
stiffness. Lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) analysis
revealed a clear ﬂuid, with total white cell count 268/mm3 (0%
neutrophils and 100% lymphocytes), glucose 58 mg/dL and total protein 720 mg/dL. No
organisms were seen on gram stain and culture was negative. Screening for bacterial
antigens(Haemophilus influenzae type b, Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis A, B and C, and
Escherichia coli k1) andenterovirus polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) were also negative. Ibuprofen was discontinued, and the patient improved
without specific treatment. Symptoms resolved within 48 hours after admission, with
no neurologic sequelae.
The patient was discharged with a presumptivediagnosis of aseptic meningitis induced
by ibuprofen. He was advised not to takeNSAIDs. Screening for autoimmune diseases
was negative and included antinuclear, antiphospholipid and antithyroid
antibodies.
A report to the National Authority of Medicines and Health Products (Infarmed) was
made, that considered probable the link between ibuprofen intake and aseptic
meningitis.