The index patient was a 27-year-old Chinese Han female with non consanguineous parents. She was accidentally noted to have a low SUA level on two occasions (SUA = 0.52 mg/dl and 0.45 mg/dl) in her routine check-up in the local hospital. She was asymptomatic and had no other discomfort, such as joint pain, loin pain, hematuria, urine foam, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, or diarrhea. No special treatment was recommended. She was recently admitted into the metabolism division, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University due to the repeated detection of hypouricemia; thorough laboratory and imaging examinations were carried out. Biochemical tests confirmed the diagnosis of hypouricemia (SUA = 0.33 mg/dl) with hyperuricosuria (FEUA = 50%). The current reference ranges for SUA used in our laboratory department are 3.5–7.0 mg/dL in males and 2.5–6.0 mg/dL in females. Meanwhile, the reference range for FEUA is 4–10%, irrespective of gender. Other biomedical findings were within normal range or negative. No kidney stones were found by local ultrasound. Acquired hypouricemia resulting from Fanconi syndrome and other clinical disorders were excluded. Both parents of the patient are alive and healthy, with no evident medical history, such as urolithiasis and AKI. The SUA concentration in the father was 3.68 mg/dl, which was within the lower-normal range, and the mother was 4.35 mg/dl, which was within the fully normal range. A FEUA test was not performed in both parents because they refused to have it done. The patient does not have any siblings. There is no history of hereditary diseases and there are no specific physical abnormalities. In addition, the patient stated she was a vegetarian who did not favor meat. Based on the overall information, we concluded that the patient had idiopathic RHUC. Clinical data are shown in Table . Pharmacologic therapy was not administered due to the absence of significant clinical manifestations and the lack of guidelines for RHUC management. However, several medical orders were required in order to inhibit the urate overproduction and prevent the incidence of adverse events: the patient was instructed to drink plenty of water and consume a low purine diet, avoid engaging in strenuous exercise, alkalize urine with sodium bicarbonate continuously and moderately, and monitor renal function regularly via laboratory and imaging examinations during subsequent outpatient follow-up. The case reports (CARE) guidelines were followed.
The patient and both of her parents were recruited for this study. Peripheral blood samples were collected upon the patient signing the relevant informed consent. Genomic DNA was subsequently extracted using LifeFeng Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Lifefeng Biotech Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) and then quantified for concentration and purity evaluation by a NanoDrop 1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, USA). All of the samples were within the reference range (double-stranded DNA concentration: > 20 ng/ul, 260/280: > 1.8, 260/230: > 2.0) that satisfied the requirements of the genomic analysis.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University and the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, and it was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
An initiation of 0.2 μg genomic DNA was subjected to WES. Genomic DNA was sheared into fragments of ~ 150 bp in size by a Covaris™ S2 Ultrasonicator System (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA) and the product was ligated to paired-end adapters containing Illumina-specific indexes using a SureSelect XT Library Prep Kit ILM (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). The resulting product was amplified by ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction (LM-PCR). The adapter-ligated DNA library was enriched and captured with a SureSelect Target Enrichment Kit Box 1 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). Each well-constructed library was then sequenced as 150 bp paired-end reads on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA), at the coverage depth of 50×. Briefly, crude sequencing data were checked for quality control by FastQC v 0.11.2 and then trimmed by Trimmomatic v 0.30 to exclude unqualified reads. The resulting clean reads were aligned to NCBI build GRCh37/hg19 by Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) v 0.7.7. The aligned reads were processed to remove the duplications by Picard v 1.110. Then, local realignment and annotation with RefSeq genes, dbSNP 138, and 1000 Genomes Project were performed by Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) v 2.8–1 and Annovar software , respectively.
Candidate mutations of interest were further validated by PCR amplification and direct Sanger sequencing. PCR primers were designed using a primer designing tool and they were ordered from Shanghai Generay Biotech Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China. Primer sequences are listed in Table . PCR amplification was performed on a GeneAmp PCR System 9700 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) with 2X Taq PCR Master Mix (Lifefeng Biotech Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China), and the product was loaded on ABI 3100 instruments (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) at Shanghai Jieli Biotechnology Co., Ltd. for Sanger sequencing.
Annotations with SIFT, Polyphen-2, LRT, and MutationTaster by Annovar, were performed to evaluate the mutation pathogenicity. Since the crystal structure has not been available, TMpred online software and Pymol 2.0, a free and user-friendly molecular visualization tool, were used to predict the secondary functional domains of the URAT1 protein and its 3-D image, respectively.
To screen out the genetic mutations leading to RHUC, WES was applied in genomic DNA from the RHUC patient and both of her parents. On average, the total number of bases in the reads was 4520 Mb and the ratio of bases having a phred score of greater than 30 (Q30) reached up to 94%. The detailed outputs are shown in Table .
According to an assumed inheritance of the autosomal recessive mode for this disease, we first analyzed the putative genetic mutations homozygous in the patient and heterozygous in both of the parents. Seeking functional variants, we filtered out those referred to as either unknown or synonymous. Focusing on rare variants, we sought for those having frequencies < 0.01 or unknown in 6500 Exome Sequencing Project database. Then, we excluded those present in the in-house exome sequence data obtained from 16 normal unrelated individuals, and finally, 29 variants were retained (see Sheet 1 in Additional file ). Unfortunately, none of the variants in the genes were functionally candidates for purine/uric acid metabolism and excretion. Next, we analyzed the putative causal mutations present in the patient but not present in the parents based on the prioritization strategy mentioned above. A total of 521 suspicious mutations were screened out (see Sheet 2 in Additional file ). In terms of the known candidate genes related to purine/uric acid metabolism and excretion, we finally chose the mutations located in the SLC22A12 gene for further Sanger sequencing.
Sanger sequencing revealed that the patient possessed two heterozygous mutations (see Table and Fig. ). One was a G to A substitution at nucleotide 269 in exon 1 (c.269G > A) leading to an alteration of arginine by histidine at codon 90 (p.R90H), which had been confirmed many times [, , , –]. Another was an insertion of GG at nucleotide 1289_1290 in exon 8 (c.1289_1290insGG), resulting in a frameshift and a truncated protein of 466 amino acids with a premature stop codon (p.M430fsX466), which was first reported in our study. The heterozygous c.269G > A was verified in the patient’s mother and the heterozygous c.1289_1290insGG in her father, suggesting that each heterozygous mutation of the patient derived from her mother and father, respectively (see Table and Fig. ).
The c.269G > A mutation is considered to be “damaging” by Polyphen-2 (= 0.992), LRT (= 0) and MutationTaster prediction (= 1), while it is “tolerated” by SIFT (= 0.061). Protein domain analysis showed that URAT1 has 12 transmembrane (TM) helices, and we made a discovery that amino acid substitution p.R90H, which is located in the intracellular region close to the second TM (TM2) , is highly conserved among different species . Further, we conducted molecular modeling to predict the effect of this mutation on protein structure . In the wild model, Arg90 formed hydrogen bonds with Cys88 and Gln93 effectively, building the conformational stability of this intracellular domain. In the mutation model, the hydrogen bond between His90 and Gln93 were weakly formed, which may decrease the stability of this domain and further affect urate transport activity. The insertion mutation c.1289_1290insGG produced a truncated protein of 466 amino acids from the position 430, with the amino acids sequence altered compared to the wild mature protein of 553 amino acids. Protein domain analysis showed that this truncated protein lacks the last three transmembrane domains, including the tripeptide motif (S/T)XΦ (X = any amino acid and Φ = hydrophobic residue) at the C-terminal, which interacts with scaffolding protein PDZK1, and together they strengthen urate transport .