A 68-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital on 2019-10-02 with the symptoms of "chest tightness, shortness of breath, and weakness with panic for 4 months and reduced platelets for 2 months". He began experiencing chest tightness and shortness of breath with panic and weakness 4 months ago, however, he was tested only 2 months ago and was found to have a low platelet count of 30*109/L. He was treated with oral Amino-polypeptide only thereafter.
The patient was diagnosed with "laryngeal carcinoma" in 2016 and the pathology showed "highly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma T3N2M0, stage IVA", which was surgically removed after one cycle of chemotherapy with TPF regimen (Paclitaxel, Nedaplatin, Tegafur) in combination with Nimotuzumab. In 2017, a new primary "esophageal carcinoma" appeared and pathology showed "intermediate differentiated squamous carcinoma", and esophagectomy was performed. 2018, a metastatic tumor in the left cervical lymph node appeared which was diagnosed as "squamous cell carcinoma" and underwent lymph node dissection. After this, the patient had regular follow-up outpatient visits every 3–6 months, had several imaging examinations, and the echocardiography, electrocardiogram, and chest computed tomography reports of the last 1 year did not reveal any significant cardiopulmonary abnormalities, d-dimer was always < 0.5 mg/L, pulmonary function and oxygen saturation were always good, and the rest of the blood tests were normal, with stable vital signs and no evidence suggesting tumor recurrence. He was never found to have diabetes or cardiovascular disease, and had no specific family history of genetic disease. The patient had smoked 20 cigarettes per day for the past 45 years and had quit for 6 months, and had drunk 150 ml of alcohol per day for the past 30 years and had quit for 3 years.
The patient had bilateral lower extremity edema and was admitted with blood pressure of 135/90 mmHg. Blood tests revealed hemoglobin (HGB) of 126 g/L, platelets (PLT) of 34 × 109/L, d-dimer (D-D) of 20 mg/L, prothrombin time (PT) of 17.9 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 46.0 s, fibrinogen quantitation (Fib) of 1.72 g/L, N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 2448 pg/mL. The patient was seen in a state of persistent low platelets and disorders of coagulation factors during hospitalization. Tumor marker assay showed neuronspecific enolase (NSE) of 32 ng/ml, serum osteopontin (CYFRA21-1) of 29.83 ng/ml, serum CA125 of 120.4U/ml, and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC) of 2.85 ng/ml. The peripheral blood smear showed normal leukocytes, varying size of mature erythrocytes, the presence of poikilocyte and orthochromatic normoblast, and a significant decrease in platelets. Bone marrow aspiration (flow cytometric immunophenotyping) showed 6.28% lymphocytes, 45.6% CD5 + cells, 64.27% myeloid cells, normal percentage of CD10 + mature granulocytes; 1.59% monocytes, high percentage of CD56 + cells (39.81%), 15.26% nucleated red blood cells, diminished CD36 expression and abnormal phenotype; 0.13% CD34 + , CD117 + naive myeloid cells, the proportion was not high and the phenotype was not abnormal; CD19 + B progenitor cells within CD34 + cells accounted for 5.94%, the proportion was approximately normal; the phenotype of the red lineage was mildly abnormal. In addition, all antibodies associated with autoimmune diseases were negative.
No specific changes were seen on the electrocardiogram . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) (Additional file : Video 1) suggested the presence of an occupancy in the patient's right heart cavity with a range of approximately 73*34 mm. Echocardiography and contrast echocardiography (Additional file : Video 2, Additional file : Video 3) showed the presence of a 76*40 mm mass in the right atrium and right ventricle with abundant blood supply in the mass and a possible regional necrotic area near the right ventricular outflow tract. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) showed multiple mass filling defects in the right atrium, right ventricle, and right ventricular outflow tract, and multiple lobar segmental pulmonary emboli in both lungs. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) showed a suspected primary malignant tumor of the heart.
The patient had multiple previous tumors, elevated tumor markers, echocardiography revealed the presence of an occupancy with abundant internal blood flow, and PET-CT showed only high glucose metabolism within the right heart occupancy, and no hypermetabolic cancerous tissue was observed in the intrapulmonary vessels. In the more than 1 year since the last tumor, no further tumor was detected and the imaging after admission showed a single lesion. After a multidisciplinary discussion, we diagnosed the patient with a metachronous carcinoma in the right heart. Based on the progression of the disease, we also believe that the malignant cardiac tumor led to the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and thrombocytopenia, and that a new pulmonary embolism developed as the tumor progressed. The final treatment was resection of the mass. However, patients with low platelets and gradually decreasing oxygen saturation are extremely weak and cannot tolerate any surgical procedures or anti-tumor treatments, so he can only be treated mainly with supportive therapy, strengthening intravenous nutrition and receiving human albumin, propyloglobulin, platelets and plasma transfusions. The patient's pulmonary embolism complicated by thrombocytopenia limited the use of anticoagulant medications, and his condition continued to deteriorate over a 2-week period, culminating in his death from cardiogenic shock. Due to lack of consent, we did not perform an autopsy.