A previously healthy, 38-year-old Caucasian obese (body mass index (BMI) 32) man of Hellenic origin, presented with a three-week history of hyperpigmented urine, a two week history of malaise and weakness and a 10-day history of high-grade fever associated with a nonproductive cough and no obvious weight loss. During this period, he had been documenting daily temperatures of 37°C to 39°C. On admission, our patient was not receiving any medication and his medical history was irrelevant. He had not been in recent contact with animals or ill people, was only a social drinker and not a regular user of tobacco products or drugs. As a professional driver, he had travelled regularly in the preceding months.
A physical examination on admission showed an axillary temperature of 38°C, a pulse rate of 110 beats per minute (bpm) and a normal blood pressure. Cardiac auscultation revealed regular S1, S2 clearly perceived with no associated murmurs. Lung auscultation was unremarkable and an abdominal examination revealed hepatomegaly and splenomegaly palpable to an extension of 3cm beneath his left rib cage. There was no lymphadenopathy or signs of meningismus. There had been apparent lower limb edema and no associated tonsillar findings.
His laboratory test results demonstrated a white blood cell count of 13,660/μL with 63.8 percent lymphocytes. Activated lymphocytes were observed on blood smear. Alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase levels were mildly elevated (119 and 67U/L, respectively), while gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (γGT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were also high.
Our patient’s laboratory test results on admission, on discharge and at one month follow-up are described in Table .
An abdominal ultrasound scan revealed hepatosplenomegaly with a raised suspicion for a splenic infarct. A computed tomographic angiogram (CTA) was performed and confirmed the presence of the infarct as well as the hepatosplenomegaly without any other occlusive findings. Neither splenic artery nor vein thrombosis was identified (see Figure ).
His blood and urine cultures were sterile and transesophageal echocardiography did not show any vegetations or mural alterations. His serologic test results for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV were negative, while his serologic test results for CMV immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies were positive. A positive CMV phosphoprotein 65 (PP65) antigenemia assay confirmed the diagnosis of acute CMV infection, but a prior hypercoagulable state was still considered. Prothrombin time (PT) value (15.5 seconds reference time 13), international normalized ratio (INR) value (1.25 reference approximately 1), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) value (43.6 seconds range 24 to 36) and D-dimers (DD) levels (5.20μg/ml range 0 to 0.5) were elevated, fibrinogen (391mg/dl range 200 to 400) and homocysteine (8.47μmol/L range for men 30 to 59 years 6.3 to 11.2) were within normal range. His antiphospholipid antibodies (APA) panel and anticardiolipin antibodies (ACA) were negative. Finally, the rest of the exams were as follows: antithrombin 88 percent (range 80 to 120), protein C 74 percent (range 70 to 130) and protein S 52 percent (range 65 to 140). Factor V-Q506 (Leiden) and FII (G20210A) were negative.
At this point, anticoagulation treatment was considered, but it was ruled out since CMV was the probable trigger or cause of the thrombosis in our patient and as the majorly implicated vessels were minor ones. Ganciclovir treatment was also considered but not administrated since it is an agent primarily indicated for immune-compromised and occasionally in immune-competent patients with target-organ involvement.
An abdominal ultrasound scan four days after admission revealed no significant changes and our patient was subsequently discharged from hospital two days after without being given any medication, with the diagnosis of CMV infection with associated splenic infarct. Our patient was advised to follow a regular check on an outpatient basis in a months’ time with ultrasound control and monitoring of the relevant blood parameters. He was also encouraged to undergo a control blood sampling one month after and the examination revealed a substantial increase in protein S levels and a normalization of all other biochemical parameters. The ultrasound check performed the same day confirmed that the splenic echogenicity return to normal.