A 26-year-old woman with no significant past medical history presented after ingestion of up to 132 tablets of 800 mg sustained-release ibuprofen, equivalent to approximately 105 g. This estimate of the amount ingested was based on empty ibuprofen packets found near her. The patient was bought into the Emergency Department having been found collapsed and unconscious at home by her family, who had last seen her well approximately five hours previously. There was no history of vomiting, gastrointestinal haemorrhage or seizures prior to presentation at hospital. Her initial Glasgow Coma Scale was 3/15 and the patient was therefore intubated and ventilated to provide a protected airway. On presentation she was haemodynamically compromised with a systolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg. The patient's initial electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, normal QRS duration and normal QT duration, but widespread myocardial ischaemia was noted. Initial biochemistry blood test results were sodium 132 mmol/l, potassium 4.7 mmol/l, urea 4.8 mmol/l, creatinine 159 μmol/l and venous blood glucose 4.7 mmol/l. Paracetamol and salicylate concentrations were not detected on her admission blood samples. Arterial blood gases showed a severe metabolic acidosis with pH 6.99, base excess of -21 and lactate of 17 mmol/l. The patient was commenced on epinephrine and norepinephrine for inotropic support in view of the significant hypotension, and the Guy's and St Thomas' Poisons Unit was contacted for further advice on management.
Since this was potentially a life-threatening ingestion of a sustained-release preparation of ibuprofen, it was recommended that multidose activated charcoal (50 g activated charcoal every 3–4 hours) should be given via a nasogastric tube to try and reduce further absorption of ibuprofen from the gastrointestinal tract. The patient's severe metabolic acidosis should be corrected with repeated doses of intravenous boluses of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate, and haemofiltration with a bicarbonate buffer if the metabolic acidosis did not respond to intravenous sodium bicarbonate. Other potential common drug and toxicological causes of a high anion gap lactic acidosis are summarised in Table . It should be ensured that the patient is adequately filled with intravenous fluid to sustain blood pressure prior to the commencement of any additional inotropic support.
Despite fluid resuscitation and maximal infusion doses of epinephrine and norepinephrine, the patient remained hypotensive with a systolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg. Additionally her metabolic acidosis remained resistant to intravenous sodium bicarbonate and haemofiltration with a bicarbonate buffer, with only minor improvement to pH 7.00. Her clinical condition continued to deteriorate and approximately five hours post-presentation to the Emergency Department the patient suffered a ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation cardiac arrest, which did not respond to standard Advanced Life Support protocol cardiopulmonary resuscitation.