A 68-year-old man was referred to our oncology clinic with the pathologic diagnosis of duodenal malignant melanoma. This patient had a history of controlled diabetes mellitus, controlled hypertension and myocardial infraction before admission. He had suffered from fatigue, weakness, lethargy and weight lost (more than 10%) since one month prior to admission. Physical examination revealed no additional clinical data.
A complete blood count (CBC) test showed an iron deficiency anemia. Thyroid function tests were normal. Moreover, he underwent an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (GIE) and a colonoscopy that revealed some erosion around pylorus of stomach and a prominent papilla of duodenum along with an ulcerative lesion adjacent to D2. Several biopsies were taken from the antrum and D2 lesions.
Histopathologic evaluation showed a high-grade malignant neoplasm involving the bowel wall. Tumor was composed of sheets of loosely cohesive pleomorphic cells with prominent nucleoli and eosinophilic cytoplasm. There was no visible melanin pigment in tumoral cells. Necrosis was also noted. The tumor cells labeled for S100 protein and markers of melanocytic differentiation; Melan-A. As staining for CK, LCA, CD117, and CD34 were negative, the diagnoses of carcinoma, lymphoma and gastrointestinal stromal tumor were ruled out. Morphologic and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with malignant melanoma ( and ).
Subsequently, after confirming the diagnosis of malignant melanoma of duodenal mucosa, the patient underwent secondary full medical evaluation including detailed inspection of the eyes, skin and mucosal surface. These examinations did not show any clinically significant lesion. Moreover, he underwent anoscopy for any visible lesion that was negative. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast revealed multiple abnormalities. CT scan exhibited an ovaloid mass in the gallbladder with washout in delayed phase that was suggestive of a tumoral lesion. There were two small nodules in the right adrenal and a heterogeneous hypodense mass (diameter: 3.2 cm) in the left adrenal. In the proximal (and to a lesser extent in distal) loops of the small intestine, a heterogeneous increase in thickness was also observed. Moreover, there were several mesenteric lymphadenopathies along the superior mesenteric artery .
Considering the pathologic diagnosis of the duodenal lesion and its metastatic nature, we commenced treatment of patient with oral temozolomide (every 28 days) and scheduled further diagnostic interventions including CT guided fine needle aspiration biopsy of the abdominal mass and re-upper GIE, unfortunately he expired due to active disease.