A 65-year-old man was diagnosed with DLBCL, Ann Arbor Stage IV. He had a history of dilated cardiomyopathy with preserved ejection fraction, transient atrial fibrillation following a rituximab injection, type 2 diabetes, class III obesity, and localized melanoma with complete exeresis more than fifteen years before.
Echocardiography performed before DLBCL treatment showed signs of known dilated cardiomyopathy with good left and right ventricular function and no pericardial effusion.
He received first-line chemotherapy with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone, and methotrexate but exhibited no metabolic response on positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-scan). Therefore, second-line chemotherapy was initiated with rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine and cisplatin, which achieved a complete metabolic response. Then, the patient received an autologous stem cell transplant conditioned with carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine and melphalan. Less than one year later, the patient presented abdominal pain, leading to a transjugular hepatic biopsy showing a stage IV DLBCL relapse. It was then decided to perform CAR-T cell therapy. At this time a PET-scan found systemic multiple lymphoma localizations with hepato-splenic, bone, abdominal and thoracic lesions as well as pericardial hypermetabolism and a small aortic cross hematoma . Rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin and etoposide were administered as a bridge to CAR-T cell therapy with good metabolic response. Due to a transient, asymptomatic COVID-19 infection, CAR-T cell reinjection was delayed for one month. Thirteen days before reinjection of CAR-T cells, a PET-scan showed progressive DLCBL and persistent pericardial hypermetabolism.
The patient was referred to our hematology department to receive CAR-T cell therapy with axicabtagene ciloleucel. At admission, cardiac examination was normal, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with known right bundle branch block and no other abnormalities. The patient presented chemotherapy-induced myelosuppression and tumor lysis syndrome. Following lymphodepleting chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and fludarabine, CAR-T cells were administered (0.65 × 108 cells/kg). The patient developed fever (≥38°C) on the day of CAR-T cell infusion (day 0) associated with atrial fibrillation and was then diagnosed with grade 1 CRS according to the American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy grading of CRS . Empiric administration of antibiotics was initiated with piperacillin-tazobactam and teicoplanin. On day 1, considering atrial fibrillation, low urine output and clinical fluid overload, furosemide was initiated. On day 4, due to persistence of fever, tocilizumab (8 mg/kg/day) was initiated . Clinically, fluid overload increased, and atrial fibrillation was intermittent from day 1 to day 6. On day 7, the patient presented hypotension [grade 2 CRS ] and delirium causing suspicion of grade 1 ICANS . In this context, a volume expansion of 0.5 L of crystalloids was administered, dexamethasone was initiated, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
At admission to ICU, his blood pressure was 109/80 mmHg, heart rate was 118 beats/min, body temperature was 36.1°C, respiratory rate was 35 cycles/min and percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 95% in air. The time course of the vital signs and medications following ICU admission is shown in . Edema of the lower limbs was observed, but no other sign of right ventricular dysfunction was noted. Heart sounds were decreased but no pericardial friction was heard. Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was moderately elevated to 15 mg/L (normal range: ≤5 mg/L) as well as N-Terminal pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide (3171 ng/L; normal range: ≤376 ng/L) but serum troponin T was normal (13 ng/L; normal range: ≤14 ng/L). An ECG showed atrial fibrillation, right bundle branch block but no sign of pericarditis .
In a context of severe thrombocytopenia (26,000/µL), brain and chest CT-scans were performed to investigate the sudden delirium and to monitor the aortic cross hematoma. No intracranial or thoracic bleeding was detected, but an increase in pericardial effusion was noted .
Echocardiography revealed decreased right ventricular function (TAPSE = 15 mm) with marked pericardial effusion and compression on the right atrium collapsed in the early diastolic phase. Left ventricular function was moderately decreased (LVEF = 45%). A distended inferior vena cava with a reduced respiratory diameter was observed. Based on these findings, cardiac tamponade was diagnosed. After platelet transfusion and a volume expansion of 0.5 L of crystalloids, it was then decided to perform immediate pericardiocentesis, which removed 300 ml of hematic fluid.
After pericardiocentesis, the patient's hemodynamic status improved: atrial fibrillation stopped within the next hour, and arterial blood pressure remained stable. Delirium resolved the following day and no more fever was reported. Two days after (day 9), the patient was discharged from ICU and transferred back to hematology department. Control echocardiography before transfer showed no recurrence of pericardial effusion and good biventricular systolic function.
CAR-T cell expansion was monitored with regular measurement in blood. Analysis was performed in flow-cytometry. Evolution of CAR-T cell expansion was similar to that in most patients with a peak at around day 10 after reinjection . Detection of CAR-T cells was based on size, and CD45+ CD3+ CD19+ FCbiot+ cell expression . Pericardial fluid analysis, performed with the same method, showed 26,841 cells/µl, of which 98% were lymphoma cells (small size CD45- CD19+ CD3- CD56+ DR+) and 2% were lymphocytes (CD45+), of which 72.8% (310 cells/µL) were CAR-T cells with more than 80% of activated cells (DR+) . The concomitant analysis of blood showed no lymphoma cells and 880/µL of lymphocytes of which 88.7% were CAR-T cells with more than 90% of activated cells . In blood, detection of CAR-T cells decreased rapidly after day 15 .
In hematology ward, dexamethasone was discontinued on day 14 and the patient presented no new fever until day 33, concomitant with Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacteremia and cervico-facial cellulitis. A PET-scan on day 30 showed a complete metabolic response and total regression of the pericardial localization. There was no recurrence of CVAE. The cellulitis improved from day 40 but myelosuppression persisted. On day 49, the patient developed abdominal pain. A CT-scan revealed a major relapse of DLCBL lesions with hepato-splenic localizations. In this context, the patient received best supportive care and died fifty days after starting CAR-T cell therapy.