The patient was a 16-year-old woman with no significant medical history. She presented at the Nanjing Brain Hospital with a fever of 37.5 °C, new-onset visual hallucinations and indifference. On day 2, the first video EEG recording showed EDB in the right brain regions, and normal occipital alpha rhythms were not observed . The patient was diagnosed with anti-NMDAR encephalitis according to EDB and received immunotherapy (glucocorticoid and immunoglobulin) immediately.
The beta activity within the EDB weakened when the patient closed her eyes , and the occipital alpha rhythms occasionally reappeared . Conversely, the beta activity was enhanced when the patient opened her eyes . During sleep, EDB markedly weakened during stage II non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep and was enhanced during slow-wave sleep periods .
On day 3 in the hospital, the patient experienced two seizures. Fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery (FLAIR)-weighted and T2 images were normal . Arterial spin labeling showed high blood flow in the right frontal and temporal regions . On day 4, indirect immunofluorescence technique (IIFT) results revealed NMDAR antibody titers of 1:100 in the CSF and 1:1000 in the serum. Gynecological sonography was normal.
The patient’s MEG data were recorded using a whole-head CTF 275-channel MEG system. MEG data were analyzed by time-frequency analysis, which was performed in each 5-s time window. Delta wave activity and beta activity were localized using magnetic source imaging. Detailed method involved in time-frequency analysis and magnetic source imaging has been described in our previous study [–].
On day 7 the MEG results showed EDB evolving from the right brain regions to bilateral brain regions . Time-frequency analysis showed the beta activity varying from 25 to 35 Hz . The magnetic source location showed the beta activity originating from bilateral superior parietal lobes . However, the delta wave originated from the bilateral superior temporal gyri, the right middle temporal gyrus, the right inferior frontal gyrus, and the left inferior parietal lobe . On day 11, the background activity in the second EEG recording was worse than that on day 7 , and EDB was observed in bilateral brain regions .
After immunosuppression (immunoglobin, methylprednisolone and mycophenolate mofetil) and antiepileptic treatment (oxcarbazepine), the woman improved. On day 30, the background activity in the third EEG recording was better than that on day 11 . Compared to the first signs of EDB on day 2, the EDB indications in the right brain regions were obviously decreased . On day 38, the second serum antibody titer was 1:100. On day 40, the patient was discharged.