A 79-year-old male was referred to our institution for bilateral blurring of vision. He had multiple medical problems including diabetes mellitus, bronchiectasis, ischemic heart disease, bullous pemphigoid, carcinoma of prostate with bone metastases and end-stage renal failure. He was on long term oral steroid for the disease of bullous pemphigoid. His systemic medication included allopurinol 100 mg daily, calcium carbonate 1000 mg daily, aspirin 100 mg with glycine 45 mg daily, ferrous sulphate 300 mg daily, flutamide 250 mg three times daily, frusemide 80 mg twice daily, insulin 32 units in the morning and 10 units in the afternoon, pantoprazole 20 mg daily, potassium chloride 600 mg daily, senna 15 mg daily, simvastatin 10 mg daily and prednisolone 10 mg daily. On presentation, his visual acuity (VA) was 20/60 OD and 20/100 OS. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 11 mmHg OD and 10 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination showed mild anterior chamber cells and moderate cataract bilaterally. Fundus examination showed retinal infiltrates in right inferonasal and left superotemporal peripheral retinae . There was bilateral mild vitreous haze and vessels detail was still visible (binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy score of 1). Diagnostic aqueous tap was performed for both eyes, which showed presence of CMV DNA in both eyes by polymerase chain reaction. Varicella-zoster virus and herpes simplex virus DNA were absent. A diagnosis of bilateral CMV retinitis was made. His white blood cell count was elevated at 12.8 × 109/L (normal range 3.8–9.9 × 109/L). He was anemic with blood hemoglobin count at 3.5 g/dL (normal range 4.4–5.7 g/dL). Liver and renal functions were deranged.
In view of the problem of CMV retinitis, oral valganciclovir was initiated at 450 mg on alternate days. Intravitreal ganciclovir treatment of 2.5 mg in 0.05 ml sterile water was given to both eyes. The ganciclovir solution was prepared by our institution’s pharmacy in two separate syringes for separate eye injections. Fundus examination after injections showed formation of needle-shaped, golden-yellow crystals in vitreous of right eye but not in left eye. He did not report any ocular pain or visual change. The crystals dissolved spontaneously.
The patient was reviewed 4 days later, his VA was 20/600 OD and 20/100 OS. There were no signs of retinal vascular occlusion or optic neuropathy. Intravitreal ganciclovir injections of 2.5 mg in 0.05 ml sterile water were repeated. The ganciclovir solution was prepared by our institution’s pharmacy and had been checked to ensure it did not contain any crystals before injections. Crystallization of ganciclovir was noted again in right eye but not in left eye after injections. He did not report any visual change. VA remained unchanged and IOP was normal. The crystals dissolved spontaneously after 5 minutes . There were no signs of retinal vascular occlusion. No further intravitreal ganciclovir treatment was given because his general condition deteriorated with sepsis, pneumonia and peritonitis. He passed away 1 month later.