A 64-year-old man presented with a six month history of a recurrent diffuse and erythematous painless swelling (3 × 2 cm2) below the left eye to the Department of Dermatology, Regensburg University, Germany. Cervical lymphadenopathy was clinically not detectable. Routine laboratory results showed no abnormality. Presuming an allergic dermatitis, topical treatment with steroids was initiated. Because of the persistence of the lesion, an incisional biopsy was performed three weeks later . Histopathology of the specimen showed an invasively growing tumour of the dermis, composed of atypical vascular endothelia in a disordered manner, forming bizarre vascular lumina. The tumor cells were characterized by an elevated proliferated activity with a proliferation fraction (MIB-1) of 5%–10%. The vascular endothelial proliferation showed a papillary architecture accompanied by small lymphocytes. The majority of endothelial cells presented a hyperchromatic nucleus and a swollen cytoplasm. . Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated positivity for CD 31 and factor VIII-related antigen. Based on these findings the diagnosis of a cutaneous angiosarcoma was made.
After referral of the patient to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Regensburg University, Germany, the tumour was removed by wide local surgical excision and the defect was temporarily covered by Epigard. Despite negative intraoperative frozen section margins, positive margins were repeatedly detected later on permanent sections. Negative margins on permanent section were finally reached after three resections and infraorbital soft tissue was plastically reconstructed with a buccal rotation flap. After surgery, chemotherapy followed with six cycles of alpha-interferon.
Five months later a periorbital redness and swelling on both sides required another incisional biopsy, which was confirmed as recurrent angiosarcoma on histopathological examination. Imaging staging procedures (MRI and CT head-neck, CT chest, CT abdomen, PET and bone scan) found bone invasion to the nasal root . Metastases to the neck lymph nodes as well as distant metastases were clinically and radiologically excluded.
Neither radiochemotherapy with a cumulative radiation dose of 64.8 Gy and seven cycles Doxorubicin nor an additional antiangiogenetic therapy with Trofosfamide, Pioglitazone, Rofecoxibe and steroids could prevent the rapid tumour progression. The patient died 21 months after the first diagnosis.