A 66-year-old Hispanic female with a medical history of asthma and hypertension presented to the Emergency Department with complaints of abdominal pain of score 7/10 and associated nausea. The pain was sharp, constant, in the right upper quadrant, and radiated to the back. She reported no fever, night sweats, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation. The patient had experienced similar intermittent pain with the intake of fatty foods over the past one month. She was an ex-smoker and had quit smoking 14 years ago. She denied any alcohol intake. She underwent no previous surgeries other than tubal ligation.
Physical examination revealed a thin woman who was moaning and groaning in pain, with normal skin color and no generalized lymphadenopathy. Vital signs were normal. There was tenderness to deep palpation in the right upper quadrant on the abdominal examination, and there was no palpable abdominal mass. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory workup yielded a lipase level >3000 U/L and elevated liver function tests (LFTs) with aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 139 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 65 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 122 U/L. Abdominal ultrasound identified gallbladder wall thickening with pericholecystic fluid. A diagnosis of cholecystitis and pancreatitis was being considered.
The CT scan showed a large amount of soft tissue mass in the retroperitoneum measuring 9.3 x 4.8 cm. The mass wrapped around the aorta and pushed it off the spine . It forced the uncinate process of the pancreas and bowel anteriorly and displaced the inferior vena cava. A minimal amount of induration was seen around the pancreas related to the retroperitoneal mass or pancreatitis.
After conservative treatment, the patient’s pain resolved, and lipase levels normalized, and she was discharged to follow up for outpatient endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) with biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass. One day later, the patient presented to the ER with similar abdominal pain, and laboratory workup during admission showed elevated lipase levels and normal LFTs. After resolving the lipase level's pain and normalization, the patient later underwent EUS, which confirmed the previous CT scan findings. The fine-needle biopsy of the mass showed a CD-10 positive, CD-5 negative B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder on flow cytometry. The positron emission tomography (PET) scan performed four weeks after the initial CT scan showed the tumor's size slightly larger than the previous one, with a transverse diameter of 10.1 x 5.9 cm and a cephalocaudal length of 9.5 cm without any metastatic lesions .
While awaiting the core biopsy and chemotherapy workup, the patient presented to the ER for worsening abdominal pain for the third time. With lipase levels >3000 U/L and ultrasound showing cholelithiasis with cholecystitis, the patient underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy. To confirm and classify B cell lymphoma type, a core needle biopsy of the paraspinal lymph node was done. It was consistent with grade 1-2 follicular lymphoma.
The patient underwent six cycles of bendamustine and rituximab treatment without any side effects. After four cycles of chemotherapy, a CT scan was performed to determine the response to therapy. CT scan showed resolution of lymphadenopathy with minimal residual soft tissue attenuation in the retroperitoneum.