A 55-year-old female with a history of bipolar affective disorder and type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department with haematemesis and melaena secondary to variceal haemorrhage. The patient was hypotensive and tachycardic with a serum haemoglobin of 71 g/L. Abdominal ultrasound showed a cirrhotic liver, with a subsequent diagnosis of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis cirrhosis complicated by variceal haemorrhage. At initial presentation the patient was categorised as Child Pugh A with a model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) score of 10.
Gastroscopy demonstrated grade I oesophageal varices and a large clot in the gastric fundus. A Sengstaken-Blakemore tube was inserted but failed to achieve haemostasis. Following a multidisciplinary team discussion, the patient was referred for TIPS creation. The shunt was created from the proximal right hepatic vein to the left portal vein with a Viatorr stent (Gore, Flagstaff AR, USA) extending to the hepatocaval junction, dilated to 9 mm . A large coronary vein was also embolised.
The patient re-presented two months later with acute variceal bleeding due to TIPS thrombosis. After balloon angioplasty failed to restore flow, the TIPS was re-lined and extended further into the portal vein . Residual coronary veins were embolised via the TIPS and the patient was commenced on prophylactic direct oral anticoagulation (Apixaban).
In the months following, the patient experienced ongoing bleeding from severe portal hypertensive gastropathy despite a total of three TIPS revisions and two gastric variceal embolisations. During this period the PSG never exceeded 10 mmHg. Following MDT review, she was referred for parallel TIPS. The existing TIPS was noted to be patent with a PSG of 9 mmHg prior to creation of the parallel TIPS from the right hepatic vein to the right main portal vein. A Viatorr TIPS stent (8 cm PTFE-covered, 2 cm bare metal) (Gore, Flagstaff, USA) was inserted and dilated to 8 mm, reducing the PSG to 4 mmHg .
The patient had an uneventful recovery with no immediate or delayed hepatic encephalopathy. Ultrasonography at both seven days and 5 months as well as MRI ten months post-procedure demonstrated patent parallel and primary TIPS. At ten months post-intervention, she remains well with no further bleeding or hepatic encephalopathy.
This study, being a case report, did not require institutional review board approval at the participating institution. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.