A 32-year-old Iranian man was admitted for an anterior neck mass. He had no history of radiation to the head and neck and no known family history of endocrine disease. During a physical examination, his nodule was well demarcated, fixed, and measured about 2.5 cm in its largest diameter. An ultrasound examination of his neck showed a 3 cm solid hypoechoic nodule of the right thyroid lobe and an additional nodule in the lower pole of the same lobe. A suspicious neck mass that appeared to be metastatic lymph nodes was noticed. The left thyroid lobe and the isthmus appeared to be normal. Serum levels of free triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotrophin were within normal ranges, and anti-thyroperoxidase/anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (anti-Tg Ab) were negative. A preoperative calcitonin serum value was elevated (40 ng/L) (chemiluminescence immunometric assay kit with reference intervals in adults: less than 11.5 ng/L for men and less than 4.6 ng/L for women). Our patient was screened for multiple endocrine neoplasia with negative results. He had normal serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone. A chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound were unremarkable. Fine needle aspiration of one nodule revealed papillary clusters that had atypical nuclei and intranuclear inclusions and that appeared to be a papillary carcinoma. Our patient underwent a total thyroidectomy with neck exploration. An enlarged thyroid gland with a prominent right lobe as well as a mottled lymph node in the right side were detected during the operation. Surgical specimens were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. For immunohistochemical studies, sections were incubated with the following primary monoclonal antibodies: cytokeratin AE1/AE3, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, thyroglobulin, and calcitonin (Dako Corporation, Glostrup, Denmark). An EnVision Dual Link system-HRP (ready to use; Dako Corporation) was used as a secondary antibody. Incubation with DAB (3,3'-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride) was performed as a substrate chromogen solution to produce a brown color. All steps were carried out at room temperature. Appropriate positive and negative control sections were processed in parallel. An ill-defined, solid, tan-colored lesion measuring 3 cm in its greatest diameter was observed grossly in the right lobe. In the same lobe, an irregular, whitish lesion measuring 1 cm in its greatest diameter was also present and was completely separated from the former lesion. The remaining thyroid tissue was unremarkable. A neck dissection yielded eight regional lymph nodes.
In light microscopy, two lesions had strikingly different morphologies. The largest nodule consisted of a sheet-like growth of cells with round nuclei and clumped chromatin with scant amphophilic cytoplasm . Mitotic activity was low, and no area of necrosis or hemorrhage was observed. The stroma contained a homogeneous and pink ground substance. There was no evidence of C-cell hyperplasia in the rest of the normal thyroid. Tumor cells were immunoreactive for calcitonin , chromogranin A, and synaptophysin and were negative for thyroglobulin and cytokeratin.
The lesion located in the lower pole of the same lobe showed a papillary growth pattern with nuclear clearing, nuclear grooving, and occasional pseudoinclusions . These cells were immunoreactive for thyroglobulin and cytokeratin and were negative for calcitonin, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin. Four lymph nodes isolated from the neck dissection specimen showed metastasis of MTC, and one of them showed metastatic PTC. The stage of this tumor was T2N1M0. The result of a genetic analysis of RET oncogene was negative. For ablation of remnants of thyroid tissue, our patient received 150 mCi I131. Six months later, a whole-body scan with I131 was performed in order to find metastatic or active thyroid tissue, but the result was negative. Suppression therapy with thyroid hormone was performed; during follow-up, the serum levels of thyroglobulin (normal range is not more than 60 μg/L), anti-Tg Ab (normal range is less than 2 IU/mL), and calcitonin (normal range is less than 11.5 ng/L) were routinely checked. The serum level was undetectable after surgery, and no increase in these parameters was detected. Our patient is clinically well 12 months after surgery.