The patient was a 66-year-old man with a history of cholelithiasis and inflammatory pseudo-tumors of the abdomen and chest wall. The patient was followed up every 6 months with MRCP and CT for the pancreatic branch type of intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm. In 2015, computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a ~ 10 mm tumor in liver segment 4 with enhancement seen in the arterial phase . Based on the radiological findings, the tumor was highly suggestive of a hemangioma. As for additional testing, hepatitis B and C markers were negative, Child–Pugh grade was A, and liver damage was grade A. In addition, levels of tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and α-fetoprotein were within their respective normal ranges. The tumor gradually increased in size during the 5-year follow-up period . CT revealed that the tumor size had progressed to 20 mm by 2020. The tumor showed enhancement during the arterial phase and iso-density during the late phase, which was located close to the left first branch of the Glisson . There was no lymph node metastasis seen around the hepatoduodenal ligament nor any distant metastases. On ethoxybenzyl magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the tumor showed low signal intensity upon T1 weighted imaging, but high signal intensity upon T2 weighted and diffusion-weighted imaging . The tumor showed high intensity during the early phase and loss of primovist® uptake during the hepatocyte phase . No infiltration into surrounding vessels was observed. Positron emission tomography–CT identified an accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (standardized uptake value max 5.3) at the tumor site . Based on these findings, the pre-operative diagnoses were HCC, ICC, and CoCC. Thereafter, left hepatectomy was performed. Intraoperatively, the liver was normal, and peritoneal seeding or ascites were not observed in the abdomen. The operative time was 424 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 500 mL. On macroscopic examination, the tumor was well-defined, grayish-white, and solid. The tumor was 15 mm × 15 mm in diameter . Microscopically, the atypical cuboidal epithelium became multi-nodular, forming small tubular glands and cord-like structures. Nuclear atypia was mild, and no mucus production was observed. Atypical, poorly formed cuboidal epithelium at the margins formed large and small dilated tubular glands, showing a cholangioma-like morphology . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the cells tested positive for cytokeratin (CK)-7, CK-19, and CEA. Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) was strongly stained in the membrane of the cancer duct, exhibiting a membranous pattern. The cytoplasm of tumor cells was positive for neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1) . Based on these findings, the final pathology report revealed that the tumor was CoCC (T1N0M0, stage IA), according to the Japanese General Rules for the Clinical and Pathological Study of Primary Liver Cancer 6th edition. On the 18th post-operative day, the patient was discharged without any complications. The post-operative course of the patient was uneventful, without any recurrence happening 1 year after the surgery.