A 49-year-old Caucasian female with a history of HOCM was evaluated in the office for worsening New York Heart Association class III dyspnoea over the past 6 months. Initial history and examination were remarkable for prior Raynaud’s phenomenon, a crescendo systolic murmur that increased with the Valsalva manoeuvre and hand telangectasias without sclerodactyly. The patient had been diagnosed with obstructive HOCM 6 years earlier and was treated with metoprolol succinate 100 mg daily and an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) for primary prevention. She was recently referred to a rheumatologist for evaluation of possible scleroderma.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated asymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) with a maximal septal thickness of 2.2 cm , systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve (Video 1), and a dynamic left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient of 56 mmHg at rest and 125 mmHg with Valsalva . Right ventricular (RV) function was mildly reduced, and the pulmonary artery (PA) systolic pressure was estimated at 75 mmHg. Subsequently, left and right cardiac catheterization (RHC) revealed normal coronary arteries, provocable LVOT gradient of 150 mmHg, PA pressure of 88/32 (52) mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) 12 mmHg, transpulmonary gradient (TPG) 40, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) 14.8 Woods units (Wu), and a cardiac index (CI) of 1.6 L/min/m2. Anti-centromere antibodies were positive. Computed tomography of the lungs, pulmonary function tests, and a ventilation-perfusion scan were unremarkable.
The differential diagnosis included combined pre- and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension (PH) from her longstanding HOCM, with the scleroderma features being incidental. Alternatively, limited scleroderma involving the pulmonary vasculature and contributing to her PH was considered.
The patient was started on tadalafil but this was stopped because of increased dyspnoea and gastric reflux symptoms. Surgical myectomy was considered but given the increased risk in the presence of severe PH, the decision was made to proceed with alcohol septal ablation (ASA). Over the months following the ASA, the patient had a modest initial improvement in her symptoms, but then the dyspnoea worsened. Transthoracic echocardiogram performed 6 months after ASA showed significant improvement of the provocable and resting gradients across the LVOT. To further optimize her prior to starting PAH-specific medications, her ICD was reprogrammed to pace the RV apex to induce left ventricular (LV) dyssynchrony, which led to abolition of the resting LVOT gradient, and further reduction of the provocable gradient to 32 mmHg.
Given the resolution of gradients, it was felt that her dyspnoea was due to progression of scleroderma-associated World Health Organization (WHO) 1 PAH. Repeated RHC showed a PA pressure mean 61 mmHg, PVR 34.1 Wu, and CI 1 L/min/m2 in the setting of a PCWP of 4 mmHg. Vasodilatory testing with nitric oxide (NO) showed improvement in the PA mean pressure 56 mmHg, PVR 20.9 Wu, and CI 1.4 L/min/m2, and minimal increase of the PCWP (6 mmHg). However, the improvement in the patient’s haemodynamics did not meet the threshold for considering calcium channel blocker treatment (non-responder). She was subsequently started on intravenous treprostinil, a direct vasodilator acting through the prostacyclin pathway, and macitentan, an endothelin receptor antagonist. The combination therapy of treprostinil and macitentan was well tolerated by the patient. Three months after initiation of PAH-specific medication, she reports a significant improvement in dyspnoea and overall energy. Follow-up TTE demonstrated improved PA systolic pressure from 76 to 63 mmHg and improved RV function, with tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion increasing from 1.4 to 1.8 cm. Accordingly, the treprostinil dose was uptritrated from 25 to 45 ng/kg/min.