A 59-year-old Greek man was admitted to our hospital nine months prior to the submission of this case report. He was complaining of persistent cough and chest pain that had started one month prior to a medical appointment. A physical examination on admission revealed enlarged left supraclavicular lymph nodes (approximately 3cm) and an asymptomatic firm subcutaneous mass on the dorsum of his penis, close to the glans, just left of the midline. No pain on his penis was mentioned at that time. Laboratory findings showed elevated serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (37.3ng/ml), neuron specific enolase (35.2ng/ml), and lactate dehydrogenase (1.590IU/L) and slightly elevated levels of creatinine (1.8mg/dL).
A chest plain radiograph and chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a spiculated lung mass (with a maximum diameter of 4cm) on the apical segment of the lower right lobe and multiple metastatic pulmonary nodules, consistent with carcinoma of the lung, as well as enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes (with an aortopulmonary window of 1.5cm and bilateral hilar nodes with a maximum diameter of 2.1cm) and left supraclavicular nodes (of approximately 1cm) . A CT scan of the brain revealed no abnormalities, whereas a CT scan of the abdomen showed bilateral adrenal masses, which were larger on the left and were consistent with metastatic disease from lung carcinoma, and enlargements of para-aortic, peripancreatic, and liver portal lymph nodes. The bone scanning and the CT scans of the chest and abdomen revealed osteolytic lesions at the right side of the bodies of T5-T6 thoracic vertebrae and in the posterolateral arches of sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth ribs, a mass invading the spinal cord, and another mass (with a maximum diameter of 4cm) located next to the ninth right rib.
Magnetic resonance images of the pelvis demonstrated a high-intensity area on T2 and a marginal obscuration of the Buck’s fascia (with dimensions of 2.5×4.5mm), which appears thickened around the left corpus cavernosum. This finding was confirmed by ultrasound imaging of the penis. The patient subsequently underwent a CT-guided percutaneous puncture of the mass in the left adrenal and para-aortic lymph node. A cytological examination confirmed metastatic adenocarcinoma of the lung (strong immunoreactivity against thyroid transcription factor 1, or TTF-1).
A penile malignancy was suspected, and a biopsy of the corpus cavernosum penis was performed. The biopsy led to a histological diagnosis of adenocarcinoma . The histology of the specimen was consistent with that of previous lung cancer. Two longitudinal tissue samples from the corpus spongiosum – which measured 1 and 1.8cm, respectively – were obtained for examination. Histology revealed connective tissue with invasion by clusters of cells with marked cellular atypia. The cells showed strong and diffuse immunoreactivity against CK7, CK8, vimentin, and CK34βE12 and focal positivity against TTF-1 and no expression of CK5/6 and CK20 antibodies. The morphologic features and the immunophenotype of the neoplastic cells indicate a poorly differentiated pulmonary carcinoma metastatic to the penile corpus spongiosum . Therefore, the patient was considered to have penile metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma.
Radiotherapy was used to treat the metastatic bone lesions three months after the medical appointment. Three weeks later, the patient was referred to us for treatment of lung cancer. He was treated with chemotherapy consisting of carboplatin (area under the curve of 5) and pemetrexed (500mg/m2) given on day 1 in a cycle of three weeks (q21 days). After the third cycle of chemotherapy, restaging of the disease was performed as the clinical performance status was worsening; a chest CT scan confirmed progressive disease with several new lung lesions, but the lymph nodes of the mediastinum as well as the abdominal ones were minimized. Additionally, a CT scan of the brain showed metastatic lesions at the left frontal lobe and the corona radiata. After completion of the total brain irradiation, second-line chemotherapy was administered with paclitaxel (90mg/m2) given weekly on days 1, 8, and 15 (q28 days) for two more cycles. Restaging showed partial response (lung lesions, penile lesions, and left supraclavicular lymph nodes), but bone marrow depression followed.