A 69-year-old female patient was admitted to the Emergency Department after 5 days from onset of symptoms related to SARS-Cov-2 infection. She referred worsening dyspnoea, extreme fatigue, and palpitations. She was tachycardic (120 beats/min) and tachypnoeic (42 breaths/min) with no fever on physical examination. Her past medical history was negligible for cardiac or any other pathology The arterial blood gas analysis revealed severe hypoxaemia (paO2/fiO2 87) and respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.51, pCo2 27 mmHg) Her CT scan showed diffuse bilateral infiltrates. She was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit for severe COVID-19-related ARDS and treated with protective ventilation and cycles of prone positioning. Her laboratory tests revealed a state of hyperinflammation with increased C-reactive protein (peak value 300 mg/L, reference range <4 mg/L), D-dimer (peak 2000 mcg/mL, reference value <100 mcg/mL), fibrinogen (550 mg/dL, reference value 200–400 mg/dL), and lymphocytopaenia (85/µL, reference value >1000/µL). The course of the disease was complicated by left cardiac dysfunction with signs of hypoperfusion, increased lactate levels (3 mmol/L, reference value <1 mmol/L), hypotension (mean arterial pression <70 mmHg), central vein oxygen saturation of 58% (normal value >70%). Transthoracic echocardiography showed segmental left ventricular wall motion abnormalities mostly involving apex and distal septum, slight increase of high sensitive cardiac troponin 200 pg/nL (normal values <14 pg/nL), absence of ST segment elevation, estimated cardiac index of 1,8 l/min/m2. Coronarography was considered not urgent and postponed. Cardiac function, haemodynamic status, and peripheral perfusion improved with low dose of norepinephrine (0,2 µg/kg/mi) and Levosimendan (0,2 µ/kg/min for a period of 24 h). No pericardial effusion was present in the first echocardiography (Video 1).
Five days after admission to the intensive care unit the patient suddenly developed an episode of shock with tachycardia (114 bpm) and hypotension (systolic arterial pressure of 55 mmHg), unresponsive to fluid loading and vasoactive therapy. The peripheral saturation remained stable and the ultrasound assessment of the lung was positive for bilateral sliding. A transthoracic echocardiography showed the presence of a new onset large pericardial effusion (3,5 cm) with evident signs of cardiac tamponade (diastolic compression of right ventricle, inferior vena cava enlargement, mitral valve flow variations >25% and tricuspid inflow fluctuations) (Video 2).
The ward cardiologist was called but he could not be on the scene before 30 min.
The need of emergency pericardiocentesis was established due to deterioration of the haemodynamic condition in the context of a difficult setting and the absence of a dedicated kit. A modified off-axis parasternal echocardiographic view at 5th intercostal space with high-frequency linear probe was performed , evidencing the point of intersection between lung and pericardium, the pericardial fluid over the right ventricle and the intercostal vessels (Video 3). This view was obtained with a gently clockwise rotation of the high-frequency linear probe until the ribs were displayed on a trasversal plane, ensuring a solid support surface away from lung sliding. The depth of the image was adjusted to enhance needle’s visualization and the movement of the right ventricle wall. This approach let to insert a central venous catheter with an in-plane ultrasound-guided Seldinger technique (Video 4). Small horizontal movements under the probe were essential to monitor the tip of the needle, its pathway, and guidewire’s progression in the pericardial sac (Video 4). Colour doppler avoided accidental puncture of the intercostal vessels. The procedure was uneventful and the drainage of 700 mL of serous fluid resolved the critical condition . The patient needed tracheostomy and a slow ventilator weaning of another 15 days prior to discharge to rehabilitation centre. CT scan showed near complete resolution of infiltrates, and echocardiography was normal at discharge.