A 60-year-old male patient was admitted to our department due to incidental observation of a 10-mm partly solid nodule with spiculated sign and boundary unclear in RUL by annual physical CT scans . The tumour markers were elevated and malignant nodule was highly suspected, with squamous cell carcinoma antigen 1.70 ng/mL (reference 0–1.5 ng/mL), CYFRA21-1 3.99 ng/ml (reference 0–2.1 ng/mL). Pulmonary function tests were appropriate for lung resection; FVC 4.76L (Pred 131.4%), FEV1 3.89 L (Pred 97.4%) and the diffusion function (MVV) 164.97L/min (Pred 97.4%) without significant abnormalities of echocardiography. Contrast CT described abnormal courses of AV and separated the AL from RUL . Surprisingly, it is found that part of the pulmonary veins converged directly into the superior vena cava . Therefore, a preoperative 3D-reconstruction was performed which revealed AL combined a split type of PAPVR in RUV.
The RUV was divided into two branches with different diameters . The thicker branch drained most of the anterior and atypical veins as well as part of the posterior veins (V1 + V3ac + V2b), which was identified as PAPVR with AV into the superior vena cava, while the other small branch (V2ac + V3b, represented by the below sRUV) drained into the left atrium at the proximal end of RMV.
After the exclusion of distant metastasis, two-port thoracoscopic right upper lobectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection were performed. During the surgery, the abnormally dilated AV connected to the superior vena cava, and crossed the apex of the lung from the ventral to the dorsal side . When the RUL was pulled down to the caudal side, the AL could be slipped out from the cavity consist of AV and pleuras smoothly . In the hilar, the thicker RUV branch draining into the superior vena cava was confirmed . After sutured the PAPVR of RUV by stapler, the pulmonary artery and bronchi of RUL were exposed as normal. For the hypoplastic of the fissure between the middle and upper lobe, we carefully separated sRUV, the veins of middle and lower lobe on mediastinal side. Under the premise of the RMV safety confirmed, the sRUV was ligated with silk thread and the fissure was separated by stapler. Shaped like a clover, the resected RUL combined AL was consistent with the 3D- reconstruction .
The operation lasted 285 min with 50 ml blood loss. The postoperative course was uneventful. The drainage tube was removed on the Day 3 and the patient was discharged on the 10th postoperative day in good clinical condition. Pathological analysis showed lung adenocarcinoma without lymph nodes involved.