A 21-year-old woman presented for evaluation of exertional palpitation and fatigue for last 2 years of New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II. She also had experienced two episodes of syncope in past 2 months. She had a positive history of premature CAD in first-degree relatives which included her mother, maternal sister, and her sister.
On clinical examination, blood pressure was 112/84 mmHg in left arm in supine position. Pulse rate was 76/minute, regular, normal in volume, with bisferiens character, and no radio-radial or radio-femoral delay, and all pulses were equally palpable. On palpation, there was double apical impulse. On auscultation, S1 was normal, S2 was normal with delayed A2 component, and S4 was present. There was prolonged grade 3/6 ejection systolic murmur which was best heard in 2nd and 3rd left intercostal space which increased on standing and decreased on handgrip. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, left anterior hemiblock, left atrial enlargement (LAE), T↓ in lead aVL, V2-4, and Q waves in precordial leads V2-5. Bisferiens character of pulse, increased intensity of murmur on standing, absence of delayed carotid upstroke, and radiation of murmur to carotids ruled out valvular type of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) (aortic stenosis). Supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS) was ruled out by absence of any diastolic murmur, and any supra-aortic membrane on echocardiogram.
Chest X-ray [postero-anterior (PA) view] showed normal cardiac size. Her routine haemogram and biochemistry were within normal limits. Transrthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed asymmetric septal hypertrophy (interventricular septum: 2.3 cm, posterior wall: 1.1 cm) resulting in a peak instantaneous left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient of 64 mmHg and a mean gradient of 48 mmHg. Further, mild mitral regurgitation due to systolic anterior motion (SAM) of anterior mitral leaflet was noted. She had grade II diastolic dysfunction while her systolic function was normal [ejection fraction (EF): 58%]. Coronary angiography was performed after obtaining her informed consent through right transradial route, which revealed a single coronary artery (SCA) arising from left sinus of Valsalva .
The left main coronary trunk was trifurcating into left anterior descending (LAD) artery, left circumflex (LCX), and RCA. LCX was dominant as it was giving rise to posterior descending artery (PDA) and posterolateral branch (PLB) . The coronary arteries were otherwise normal. On cardiac catheterisation, left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) was 18 mmHg and pullback gradient between left ventricle (LV) and sub-aortic outflow tract was 44 mmHg. Furthermore, no significant septal perforator was seen as there were multiple septal feeders which ruled out any option of transcoronary ablation of septal hypertrophy (TASH).
To better delineate anomalous origin and course of RCA, multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) coronary angiography was performed which revealed its retro-aortic course (, ).
On holter monitoring, she had multiple runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT). Based on family history, clinical presentation, and findings of ambulatory ECG, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) (Boston Scientific, USA) was implanted. As she refused surgical myectomy, she was discharged in stable condition on metoprolol 100 mg twice daily with strict advice for restriction of strenuous physical activity. She was doing fine on follow-up.