A 45-year-old Caucasian woman came to our attention with a diagnosis of a right intraligamentary lesion found in the ultrasound and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging. She suffered from cyclic abdominopelvic pain and chronic constipation. The patient’s past medical history included hypothyroidism and breast cancer treated with quadrantectomy, axillary dissection, and radiotherapy, followed by tamoxifen therapy for five years.
The transvaginal ultrasound examination (Mindray DC-60 Exp, Shenzhen, China) presented a heterogeneous tumor that was 44 × 42 × 37 mm in size, localized on the right anterolateral uterine wall. The mass had a subserosal location, with well-delimited borders and a central hypoechoic portion that was 25 × 18 mm . According to the International Ovarian Tumor Analysis (IOTA) classification system , color Doppler showed a tumor with a rich, irregular, central vascular network with low impedance (color score 3). The preoperative diagnostic hypothesis was a smooth muscle tumor of uncertain malignant potential (STUMP). Additional exams, including tumor markers (CA-125, CEA, CA 19.9, CA 15-3), were regular.
After careful counseling with the patient, it was decided to perform a total laparoscopic hysterectomy (TLH) with a bilateral salpingectomy. In the endoscopic view, there was no evidence of other lesions in the abdominopelvic cavity. The uterus was removed without superficial damage to avoid any possible pelvic contamination. During the laparoscopy, the uterine mass was similar to a uterine fibroid. Macroscopically, it appeared as an exophytic neoformation of the right uterine wall with regular margins and surfaces .
Histologically, the tumor showed a nested architecture with thin-walled vascular spaces and was composed of large cells with a clear to granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, round to ovoid nucleus, and prominent nucleoli (a). According to previous studies , to better differentiate a PEComa from smooth muscle tumors, the immunohistochemical analysis was performed. It showed cytoplasmic positivity for cathepsin K (b) and HMB-45 (c), nuclear positivity for TFE3 (d), and focal positivity for SMA.
According to the prognostic systems of Folpe et al. and Schoolmeester et al. [,], the lesion showed microscopic characteristics of UMP, which made clinical follow-up mandatory. The monitoring was performed with a gynecological evaluation (clinical and ultrasound assessment) and chest/abdomen/pelvis CT every six months. Two years after surgery, the follow-up was negative.