A 27-year-old Indo-Aryan man, resident of North-India, an electrician by profession, without addictions or co-morbidities presented with abdominal pain of 20 d, abdominal distension of 10 d, and loose stools of 3 d.
Abdominal pain was a continuous dull ache around the umbilicus. The pain became intermittent associated with the non-passage of flatus and feeling of fullness in the abdomen that was relieved with passage of flatus after some time. In the previous 10 d he had abdominal distension, which started around the left flank, and progressed to involve the whole abdomen. He had no vomiting, fever, jaundice, significant weight loss, urinary problems, chest problems, or lower limb swelling. Reports from outside our hospital showed eosinophilia (absolute count, 11400/μL).
He had no allergic tendency, pruritus ani, any recent intake of drugs, or B symptoms.
No history of atopy in his family and no history suggestive of the same.
On examination, he was of average built (body mass index, 22 kg/m2) with stable vitals. His local examination revealed splinter hemorrhages in digital nails ; however, fundoscopy did not show any Roth spots. Abdominal examination showed a distended abdomen with shifting dullness and sluggish bowel sounds without organomegaly or any stigmata of chronic liver disease. His systemic examination was non-contributory.
His initial hemogram showed a leucocyte count of 33000/μL (absolute eosinophil count, 25000/μL) and normal hemoglobin and platelet count. Peripheral smear confirmed eosinophilic leukocytosis without any blasts or hemiparasites. Midnight diethyl carbamazine provocation test was negative (diethyl carbamazine single dose 300 mg at midnight to increase yield). His kidney and liver functions were essentially normal. Total IgE was 830 kUA/L (normal range, < 64 kUA/L). The ascitic fluid study revealed low SAAG ascites (ascitic albumin: 2.9 g/dL and SAAG: 0.7 g/dL) with raised leukocyte count (6000 cells/mm3) and numerous eosinophils (95% polymorphs and 5% monomorphs) and reactive mesothelial cells. Multiple stool microscopy samples were obtained, however no evidence of parasites was observed.
Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed ascites with multiple echogenic foci (septated) and few subcentimetric mesenteric lymph nodes. ECG and chest X-ray were normal. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed to rule out any occult abdominal pathology, which revealed diffuse bowel wall thickening and submucosal edema. Both upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy and colonoscopy were performed and showed erythematous mucosa . The biopsy from multiple sites (antrum, duodenum, ileum, cecum, rectum) revealed eosinophilic infiltration in the lamina propria with dense infiltration of muscularis mucosa at the terminal ileum . His esophageal biopsies were essentially normal.