A 69 year-old-man presented with abdominal distension and anal bleeding on defecation. For the last six months the patient was complaining of flatulence, periumbilical pain and sensation of incomplete evacuation. Apart from tenderness on deep palpation, blood on PR examination and increased bowel sounds, all other systems were found normal on clinical examination.
Colonoscopy revealed intraluminal stenosis of the colorectal junction and biopsy specimens were obtained. Biopsy confirmed a well differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma of the rectosigmoid colon. There was no evidence of metastasis, based on abdominal computed tomography (CT), chest X-ray and endorectal ultrasound (US) 3D. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, and cancer antigen (CA) 50 were normal. Low anterior resection for colorectal carcinoma (CRC) with an end to end primary anastomosis was performed, while on exploration a mass in Meckel's diverticulum, 80 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve, was encountered . The mass was 7.5 cm in maximal diameter , while the size of the Meckel's diverticulum was 3 cm. Thus, this case is classified as an "intermediate risk" GIST according to the risk assessment of aggressive behavior in GISTs proposed by Fletcher et al. (size: 7.5 cm, mitotic count: 0-1/50 HPF) . No evidence of liver metastasis or intra-abdominal metastatic spread was found. The patient underwent resection of the tumor together with partial resection of the small bowel in order to avoid rupture and intra-abdominal spillage. Tumor was excised, together with 3 cm of ileum on either side, and a lateral to lateral anastomosis was performed with the use of staplers.
The lesion in the colorectal junction was a stage C2 (Astler-Coller) tumour, 8 × 6 cm in size , located in the rectosigmoid colon. Microscopic examination showed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, penetrating the bowel wall, without nerve and vascular invasion. However, one of the 23 resected lymph nodes was positive for metastasis. According to the TNM (tumor, lymph nodes, metastasis) classification, the disease was stage IIIb. Histopathological examination of the resected Meckel's diverticulum tumor revealed a stromal cell neoplasm with a few necrotic and hemorrhagic areas and a low index of mitotic count (0–1 mitoses/50 HPF) . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed expression of C-kit (strongly positive), moderately positive stain for SMA, while markers for focal S-100 and CD 34 were negative .
Patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and he was commenced on adjuvant chemotherapy with FOLFOX regimen (oxaliplatin i.v., 85 mg/m2(on day 1), leukovorin i.v., 200 mg/m2 (on days 1,2), 5 FU (fluorouracil) i.v., bolus 400 mg/m2 (on days 1,2), 5 FU i.v., 22 hours-infusion, 600 mg/m2 (on days 1,2), every 2 weeks for 12 cycles.
One year later he has no signs of local recurrence or metastasis.