A 46-year-old woman experienced left red eye, proptosis, and diplopia for 2 weeks. She went to a local hospital and was found to have a left sixth cranial nerve paresis. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging revealed the dilatation of the left superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) and enlarged left CS . The diagnosis of CSDAVF was suspected and the patient was referred to our institute for further investigation and management. At that moment, she could not come to our institute due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Three months later, she noted that her left eye became redder and more protrusion for 1 week. Later, her ocular symptoms gradually resolved. Four months later after the easing of lockdown, the patient came to our institute. On ophthalmic examination, the left eye had no proptosis, mild lateral rectus paresis, and normal intraocular pressure. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. The remaining neurological examination was normal. One week later, cerebral angiography was performed and showed the left CSDAVF (Barrow type D, Borden II, and Cognard II a+b) supplied by multiple dural branches of both cavernous internal carotid arteries (i.e., meningohypophyseal trunk), left external carotid artery (i.e., the artery of the foramen rotundum and accessory meningeal artery), and left ascending pharyngeal artery with retrograde venous drainage primarily into multiple left frontal and parietal cortical veins including the vein of Trolard through the left sphenoparietal sinus and SMCV. In addition, the fistula drained into the left the basal vein of Rosenthal, the great vein of Galen, and the straight sinus. The SOV, IPS, and pterygoid plexus were not visualized on angiography, even in the late venous phase . To prevent intracranial hemorrhage from cortical venous reflux, the patient was advised to treat this fistula with endovascular treatment as a first choice.
Under general anesthesia, transvenous embolization through the occluded left IPS was attempted but failed to reach the CS. We decided to try to access the left vein of Trolard. With heparinization, distal access guiding catheter (Fargo MAX, Balt Extrusion, Montmorency, France) was introduced into the left sigmoid sinus. Under fluoroscopic road map, Prowler Plus (Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA) microcatheter, length 150 cm, was used over the Agility Steerable guidewire (0.016 soft, Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA) but this microcatheter was too short to navigate into the CS. Therefore, the microcatheter was changed to Prowler Select Plus (Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA), length 170 cm, over the same guidewire. This system was successfully navigated into the affected CS [ and ]. The first detachable fibered coils (Interlock-35, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) were used but infeasible to insert into the CS because the length of this fibered occlusion system was not enough to reach the target. Then, we used Axium Detachable coil (Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA) instead of a fibered coil. After packing of nine Axium coils, control angiography revealed significant reduction of the shunt flow and venous stasis [ and ]. Postembolization course of the patient was uneventful. Cerebral angiography, obtained 6 months after embolization, confirmed complete obliteration of the CSDAVF . Her ocular symptoms had completely resolved.