A 58-year-old, emaciated woman with a body mass index (BMI) of 17.1 kg/m2 (153.0 cm height/40.0 kg weight) presented with anorexia, nausea, and upper abdominal pain. In addition to a family history of colorectal cancer, the patient had a prior history of multiple gastrointestinal tumors, including rectal carcinoma (20 years old) and ascending colon carcinoma (39 years old), plus a right shoulder sebaceous carcinoma (48 years old). While a diagnosis of MTS was possible based on a history of a cutaneous tumor and visceral malignancies, she had yet to be diagnosed.
Even though tumors were not discovered during upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and computed tomography examinations suggested duodenal obstruction due to superior mesenteric artery syndrome, she was placed under long-term observation. Malnutrition developed 7 months after symptoms first appeared, with BMI decreasing to 12.0 kg/m2 (28.0 kg body weight). An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy redo revealed an ulcerative tumor in the third portion of the duodenum that pathology diagnosed as an adenocarcinoma . An upper gastrointestinal series then revealed that contrast medium was unable to pass the third portion of the duodenum and computed tomography revealed a stricture in that area . The stomach and duodenum were dilatated . She was diagnosed with clinical T3N0M0 Stage IIA duodenal carcinoma (UICC, 8th edition).
Considering her general condition, a partial duodenectomy was performed because the tumor location was amenable to preservation of the papilla of Vater. Only the para-duodenal lymph nodes were dissected. The operation lasted 305 min with a blood loss volume of 100 ml. The tumor was 60 × 35 mm in size and histopathological examination confirmed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma (T3N0M0 Stage IIA [UICC, 8th edition]) . Microsatellite instability of the tumor was high. Genetic testing revealed defects in the DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene MSH2 and confirmed the diagnosis of Muir–Torre syndrome. The pedigree tree showed that the patient had one first-degree relative, one second-degree relative, and three third-degree relatives with colorectal cancer .
The postoperative course was uneventful and good appetite was recovered with no upper abdominal symptoms after surgery. However, nutritional recovery was poor in the early postoperative period, probably due to prolonged abstinence from food. Considering her general condition and regimen of adjuvant chemotherapy for gastric cancer , tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil was selected as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. After 3 months, adjuvant chemotherapy was discontinued at her request. Three years later, her nutrition status remains fully recovered and she is free from both recurrence and metastasis.