A 65-year-old woman who underwent right upper lung adenocarcinoma resection for 4 months and was found to have an elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 2 days before admission. In order to determine whether the tumor had local recurrence, the bronchoscopy examination was scheduled. She had a history of hypertension for a year and did not take medication. No history of other chronic diseases such as diabetes, coronary artery disease (CAD) or stroke, and no history of cigarettes, alcohol or substance abuse were reported. Physical examination showed normal BMI of 22.73 kg/m2 without other significant findings.
During the procedure, she had a sudden onset of chest tightness, nausea and vomiting for half an hour. An elevated blood pressure of 166/94 mmHg without other novel abnormal signs was found in the examination. Immediate electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segments elevation in leads V2–6 compared with those at admission, then the further evolvement of leads V2–3 into pathological Q wave . Laboratory result revealed high-sensitive cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) levels of 20.12 ng/L and 674.6 ng/L at the peak (normal range 0-14 ng/L). Moreover, her total cholesterol level was 6.70 mmol/L (normal range 3.00–5.70 mmol/L), low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level was 4.18 mmol/L (normal range 2.60–4.10 mmol/L), and lipoprotein (LP a) level was 1223 mg/L (normal range 0-300 mg/L). While other laboratory tests including routine complete blood count, urine test, glucose levels, renal and liver function, coagulation factors, hemoglobin A1c, thyroid function and autoimmune indicators were within the normal ranges. Thoracic enhanced CT scanning indicated no obvious sign of pulmonary embolism. Her echocardiographic examination presented new significant abnormal wall motion (anterior ventricular wall) with an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 62.1%.
The patient had atypical angina symptoms, dynamic changes of ECGs and elevated cardiac biomarker. Her echocardiographic showed new significant abnormalities in the wall motion. Emergency CAG was performed and showed only approximate 30% stenosis in the left anterior descending (LAD) ostium and 40% stenosis in the first diagonal branch , functional quantitative flow ratio (QFR) value for LAD was 0.96 . Combined with the above history and test results, the diagnosis of MINOCA was ultimately made with the suspected causes of stress-induced coronary artery spasm and plaque disruption.
She received dual anti-platelet therapy with daily low-dose aspirin for life and clopidogrel for 1 year. Considering her hyperlipidemia, statin and cholesterol absorption inhibitors were given. In addition, calcium channel blocker (CCB) and nitrites were given to control coronary artery spasm. Angiotensin receptor antagonist (ARB) was also prescribed for her uncontrolled blood pressure.
During a regular outpatient follow up for 14 months, she did not suffer from angina pectoris again. In the latest visit, echocardiograph showed that a normal ventricular wall motion and the estimated LVEF had rose to 69.4%. No major adverse cardiac events (MACE) including re-infarction, heart failure, stroke and all causes of death occurred during the period of follow-up.