A 33-year-old, previously healthy Swiss male was admitted to our hospital with 10-day history of fever and chills, accompanied by epigastric discomfort, nausea, and malaise. The patient had first presented to a regional hospital, where symptomatic treatment was initiated without lasting effect. Persisting fever and new-onset emesis led to presentation at our tertiary hospital. He worked as a haulier.
Past medical history was not significant, and he neither smoked nor drank alcohol on a regular basis. The patient had just returned from a week-long holiday in Austria, where among other activities he had visited a children’s zoo. His wife and 2-year-old daughter did not experience any illness.
On clinical examination, the patient presented with a temperature of 36.8 °C, blood pressure 90/59 mmHg, heart rate 100/minute, and oxygen saturation 98%. A small inguinal lymph node was noted. The rest of the clinical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory examination at admission revealed a markedly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 404 mg/l. The complete blood count showed a normal leukocyte count with neutrophilia of 86% and a left shift (17% band forms, increasing to 37% the following day). There was slight anemia (hemoglobin 130 g/l) and normal thrombocyte count (245 G/l). The transaminases [aspartate transaminase (AST) 95 U/l, alanine transaminase (ALT) 104 U/l] and alkaline phosphatase (156 U/l) were elevated 2–3-fold the upper limit of normal. Bilirubin (27 µmol/l) and international normalized ratio (INR) were slightly elevated with low albumin (28.5 g/l), indicating incipient impairment of liver synthesis function. Creatinine (87µmol/l) and pancreas amylase (33 U/l) were within the normal range. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were unremarkable. Leukocyturia (46/µl) and microhematuria (479/µl) were noted and interpreted as likely para-infectious changes in the absence of clinical evidence of urinary tract infection.
Treatment with doxycycline p.o. 100 mg bid was initiated on the assumption of an intracellular pathogen, and the fever disappeared within 3 days.
Aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures and serological tests for Epstein–Barr virus and cytomegalovirus taken at the regional hospital 5 days after onset of symptoms were negative. Further serology testing was negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B, C, and A virus, cytomegalovirus, as well as influenza A and B virus. Due to the history of animal contact, serological tests for Coxiella burnetii, Brucella, Leptospira interrogans, Francisella tularensis, Bartonella henselae, and Rickettsia rickettsii/conorii and typhi were added, all of which came back negative.
A conventional abdominal ultrasound scan with contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) revealed disseminated small, hypoechoic liver lesions , partially with hyperechoic rim , measuring up to 1.8 cm in diameter. CEUS was performed for its superior sensitivity in the demarcation of liver abscesses, indicating stage IV pyogenic liver abscesses .
A computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed multiple, partially confluent hypodense lesions of the liver consistent with the diagnosis of abscesses . It also demonstrated bilateral small, nodular pulmonary lesions and slightly larger consolidations in the right apex (1.2 cm) and lingula (1.1 × 2.2 cm2), as well as hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Transthoracic echocardiography was normal.
Blood cultures taken on day 1 of admission remained without growth. On day 7, the patient underwent a percutaneous ultrasound-guided biopsy of one of the liver lesions, while under treatment with doxycycline. The histopathological examination revealed granulocytic inflammatory infiltrates and abscess formation. No microorganisms could be detected in Gram, periodic acid–Schiff (PAS), diastase-PAS, Grocott, and Ziehl–Neelsen stains.
Aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the liver abscess material obtained by biopsy remained without growth, including mycobacterial cultures. Accordingly, the Gram stain of the liver aspirate showed no microorganisms. Eubacterial PCR of the liver biopsy tissue with 16S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) sequencing finally revealed the presence of Aggregatibacter aphrophilus.
At an outpatient follow-up visit 1 month after hospital discharge, the patient was asymptomatic with normal inflammatory markers and liver function tests. The ultrasound scan found that the liver abscesses had completely resolved , with no residual splenomegaly. A repeat echocardiography showed no abnormalities, specifically no signs of endocarditis. Doxycycline was stopped after a total of 6 weeks of treatment.