In January 2012 a 63 year-old woman presented to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of “Tor Vergata” University of Rome because of a pruritic vulvar plaque with irregular margins appeared three months before in the vulvar paraclitoral commissure area. Her family history did not reveal malignancies in first-degree relatives and her past medical history was unremarkable. She was 2 gravida 2 para and referred no previous gynecological pathologies. At gynecological examination vagina, cervix and uterus appeared normal, on the contrary a vulvar indurated and ulcerated lesion was observed (maximum diameter = 4 cm). The mass involved the clitoris and both the right and left majus and minus labium. Two excisional biopsies were taken from the primary lesion that documented a VIN3. Extended second biopsy was needed for the quickly increase of the plaque. Histological evaluation revealed nodules of neoplastic cells with the features of severe anaplasia. Immunohistochemistry the tumor was positive for vimentin, focal positivity with AE1-AE3 CK, CK5 and high molecular weight cytokeratin and negative for EMA, CD34, desmin, myosin, CroA, synaptophysin and S100. It was defined a proximal-type ephitelioid sarcoma (PES), a very infrequent kind of sarcoma. The initial diagnosis was successively confirmed by another external pathologist. Surgical margins were positive. The patient was prior submitted to a total body CT scan that did not reveal distant metastasis and a week after the diagnosis she underwent radical vulvectomy and bilateral inguinal lymph node dissection by Micheletti’s classic surgical technique
. The pathologist diagnosis confirmed a proximal-type ephitelioid sarcoma of the vulva.
Histologically the tumor was composed of nodules of polygonal epithelioid and spindle cells circumscribe areas of central hyalinization and necrosis (Figure A). The nodular pattern was composed by large cells with amphophilic cytoplasm. The tumor nodules were surrounded and infiltrated by inflammatory cells. Nuclei were large and vescicolar and nucleoli were overshot (Figure B). Immunohistochemistry the tumor was positive for vimentin, smooth muscle actin and Ki-67; focal positivity with AE1-AE3 CK, CK5 and high molecular weight cytokeratin and negative for EMA, CD34, desmin, myosin, CroA, synaptophysin and S100 (Figure C).
The surgical margins were free of neoplasm. One of 35 inguinal lymph nodes was metastatic. Following surgical treatment, adjuvant radiotherapy was planned. Nowadays at a 14 months-follow-up the patients is free of disease.