A 48-year-old female was referred to our department complaining of intermittent abdominal pain for 2 years. The non-positional pain was colicky, with gradual onset limited to the epigastric area and the right upper quadrant, with no relevance to defecation, eating, and breathing. There were no associated symptoms. The patient had a history of hypertension herself and hepatic cancer in her father. She has been taking oral contraceptives for the past 10 years. A month before our visit, an endoscopy and rapid urease test were performed, and no abnormal findings were revealed. On physical examination, the patient was afebrile, with normal vital parameters. In the laboratory results, there was no abnormal finding. The ultrasonography (US), obtained right after the presentation, revealed a large, well-circumscribed multilocular cystic mass with dimensions of 10.6 × 9.2 × 12.4 cm, having multiple, thin septa and no solid component located in the gallbladder fossa . Suspecting a hydatid cyst, we measured an anti-hydatid antibody, and the result was negative. A week later, the computed tomography (CT) with contrast demonstrated a normal gallbladder. A large cystic lesion with scalloping borders measuring approximately 11.6 × 9 × 11 cm (550 cc) in the gallbladder fossa with left lateral extension up to the left subhepatic space and inferior expansion to level of the D2 segment of the duodenum was seen . No typical feature of hydatid cyst was detected, and the cyst had completely encased the gallbladder and a tiny branch of the proper hepatic artery. Based on the findings, the cyst was diagnosed as a gallbladder lymphangioma. Without further imaging, after a few days, the patient underwent an open cholecystectomy with a Chevron incision. Opening the abdomen, the large cyst filled with fluid was seen, lying beneath the liver adherent to the left liver lobe, stomach, and gastrohepatic and hepatoduodenal ligaments . The gallbladder and the CBD were encased by the cyst. The cyst and gallbladder were both successfully resected. Due to adhesion, the CBD was cut; an end-to-end anastomosis of the CBD was created without any complications, and a drain was inserted. No evidence of recurrence on the third month follow-up was noted. Microscopic sections of the received specimen demonstrated small to large caliber vascular spaces, lined by endothelial cells, which were filled with eosinophilic proteinaceous fluid and intraluminal clusters of lymphocytes . Cytological examination of cyst-like drained fluid revealed numerous lymphocytes, and the diagnosis of cystic lymphangioma was confirmed.