A 15-year-old boy complained of central vision loss in his right eye, which persisted for 2 weeks. The patient’s medical and family histories were unremarkable.
The patient’s best-corrected visual acuity was 1.2 OU with no refractive error. Slit-lamp examination revealed no abnormal findings OU. Funduscopic examination revealed a wedge-shaped dark reddish lesion at the macula OD and no abnormal findings OS . Scanning laser ophthalmoscope (SLO) infrared imaging showed a dark area corresponding to the dark reddish lesion . EDI-OCT showed loss or disruption of the interdigitation zone (IZ) at the macula OD and normal findings OS . The patient was diagnosed with AMN OD.
On the next day following the first visit, the patient complained of central vision loss OS. One week after the first visit, a wedge-shaped dark reddish lesion was observed at the macula OS . EDI-OCT showed the disruption of the IZ at the fovea OS . Fluorescein angiography revealed hypofluorescence from the initial to late phases corresponding to the lesion OU . On indocyanine green angiography, initial geographic hypofluorescence was observed corresponding to the AMN lesion OU , but the finding became obscure at the late phase. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) revealed faint hypo-autofluorescence, corresponding to the lesion OU. Humphrey threshold 10–2 perimetry showed decreased central sensitivity corresponding to the lesion. The patient was diagnosed with AMN OU and was monitored with no treatment. Three months after the first visit, the dark reddish lesions and a dark area on SLO improved OU. EDI-OCT showed recovery of the macular IZ . On FAF, hypo-autofluorescence resolved OU.
Using LSFG-NAVI (Softcare, Fukuoka, Japan) and EDI-OCT (RS-3000 Advance; NIDEK, Gamagori, Japan), central choroidal thickness (CCT) and mean blur rate (MBR) at the macula were sequentially measured.
EDI-OCT measurements were obtained from both eyes at the initial visit, 1 and 3 weeks, and 1 and 3 months after the first visit. CCT was determined by manually measuring the distance between the outer border of the hyper-reflective line corresponding to the retinal pigment epithelium and the outer border of the choroid , using a horizontal scan through the fovea (scan length, 12.0 mm). Two authors (Yuki. H., Yuka. H.), blinded to clinical information, independently evaluated EDI-OCT images and the average values of two authors were compared.
LSFG was conducted 5 consecutive times at 1 and 3 weeks and 1 and 3 months. The circles used in obtaining these images were set to the AMN lesion site . The positioning of the circles was decided manually by comparing fundus photography with LSFG color map. The average MBR values were calculated for each phase using the LSFG Analyzer software (v 3.0.47; Softcare, Fukuoka, Japan), which allowed automatic setting of each circle during the follow-up visit at the same site where a circle was previously set at baseline to ensure consistency. Sequential changes in average MBR were evaluated as the changing rates of average MBR against the first measurement values, because MBR is a quantitative index of the “relative” blood flow velocity.
Within a certain range, there is a linear relationship between choroidal blood flow and OPP in healthy subjects [, ]. To exclude the possibility of such physiological responses from the current results, OPP was calculated from the patient’s blood pressure and intraocular pressure, as described previously .
CCT changes in the present case are shown in Fig. a. In the right eye, CCT decreased from 288.0 μm at the first visit (at the acute stage of AMN) to 272.0, 222.0, 231.0, and 202.0 μm at 1 week, 3 weeks, 1 month, and 3 months later, respectively . In the left eye, CCT increased from 206.0 μm at the first visit (before the onset of AMN) to 222.0 μm after 1 week (at the acute stage of AMN, Fig. b, e) and decreased to 177.0, 177.0, and 165.0 μm at 3 weeks and 1 and 3 months after the first visit, respectively .
The LSFG color map obtained 3 months after baseline clearly demonstrated that the MBR values at the lesion sites were higher than baseline data in both eyes . The average MBR values were as follows: 6.9 ± 1.2, 8.3 ± 0.8, 10.7 ± 0.6, and 9.7 ± 0.6 OD; 6.0 ± 0.4, 9.1 ± 0.6, 10.3 ± 0.6, and 10.1 ± 1.0 OS at baseline, 3 weeks and 1 and 3 months, respectively. When the rate of change in MBR was evaluated using the MBR values at baseline, 20.4, 54.9, and 40.0% increments were noted OD at 3 weeks, 1 month, and 3 months, respectively. Similarly, 51.1, 70.6, and 68.3% increments were noted OS at 3 weeks, 1 month, and 3 months, respectively. OPP slightly decreased from 31.0 mmHg OD and 34.0 mmHg OS at baseline to 26.4 mmHg OD and 27.4 mmHg OS at 3 months.