A 58-year-old man previously underwent left axillary-bilateral femoral artery bypass grafting at another hospital for atypical coarctation due to Takayasu’s arteritis. He was re-hospitalized approximately 10 years later due to heart failure, and a progressive decrease in left ventricular contractility was observed, with the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) decreasing from 54 to 28%. Although multiple antihypertensive drugs were administered, he was referred to our hospital to investigate the cause of the progressive decrease in left ventricular contractility and repeated heart failure due to poor blood pressure control. He had comorbidities, including pemphigoid. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) performed at the previous hospital did not detect an accumulation of 18F-FDG in the aorta. His laboratory data were as follows: creatinine, 2.93 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 65.7 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate, 19 mL/min/1.73 m2; C-reactive protein (CRP), 0.54 mg/dL; N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP), 17,014 pg/mL; aldosterone, 119 (reference value 36–240) pg/ml; and plasma renin activity, 10.6 (reference value 0.2–2.3) ng/ml/h. His blood pressure values were as follows: right upper limb, 168/108 mmHg; upper left limb, 169/99 mmHg; right lower limb, 143/98 mmHg; and left lower limb, 131/101 mmHg. The ankle brachial index (ABI) values of the right and left were 0.85 and 0.78, respectively. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography showed a LVEF of 28%. There was no left ventricular asynergy, and the wall motion showed diffuse severe hypokinesis. Left ventricular wall thickness of the interventricular septum (IVS) and posterior wall (PW) were 13 mm and 12 mm, respectively. Left ventricular hypertrophy was also observed. The left ventricular end diastolic and systolic diameters (LVDd and LVDs) were 57.4 mm and 47.5 mm, respectively, and left ventricular enlargement was detected. No significant valvular dysfunction was observed. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a patent left axillary artery—both femoral artery bypass and collateral circulation to the lower extremity artery . Significant calcification was observed from the distal thoracic descending aorta to the abdominal aorta, and severe stenosis was suspected at the same site . Aortography showed severe stenosis of the aorta from below the celiac artery to the abdominal aorta below the renal artery. Blood flow in the superior mesenteric artery flowed from the well-developed collateral circulation from the celiac artery, and flow imaging of the bilateral renal arteries was delayed . Coronary angiography showed no abnormal findings, including at the entrance. Contrast-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no apparent delayed contrast on the left ventricular wall, and T1 mapping images of cardiac MRI presented no significant increase in the T1 value on the left ventricular wall (1,050 ms by 1.5 T modified Look-Locker inversion recovery method; the average value of normal control at our hospital was 1,000 ms), and fibrosis of the left ventricular wall was considered mild . Although CRP was weakly positive, CT showed only severe calcification of the aorta, and PET-CT performed at the previous hospital did not show active inflammation in the aorta due to Takayasu’s arteritis. Therefore, we decided to perform open surgery for uncontrolled renal hypertension and a progressive decrease in left ventricular contractility due to decreased bilateral renal blood flow. To reliably reduce afterload, we performed descending thoracic aorta-abdominal aorta bypass using a large-diameter graft and revascularization of the bilateral renal arteries via the great saphenous vein grafts.
Thoracotomy was performed under general anesthesia via the left lower 7th intercostal space. Approach to the retroperitoneal space was performed along the left rectus abdominis muscle. A skin incision was made across the left axillary artery-both femoral artery bypass. To secure blood flow to the lower limbs during aortic clamping, surgery was performed without transection of the left axillary artery-both femoral artery bypass grafts. The retroperitoneal space was peeled off without incising the diaphragm to expose the abdominal aorta. In the retroperitoneal space, the dorsal side of the kidney was dissected, and the diaphragm was incised on the left side of the aortic hiatus to create a tunnel from the left thoracic cavity to the retroperitoneal space. After systemic heparinization, the descending thoracic aorta was clamped at the Th9 level, and proximal anastomosis was performed using a 12-mm woven graft (Intergard®, Maquet, Sunderland, UK). The anastomosed woven graft was guided to the retroperitoneal space through the tunnel of the diaphragm and the dorsal side of the left renal artery, and distal anastomosis was performed just above the abdominal aortic bifurcation. During this period, lower limb blood flow was maintained by the patent left axillary-bilateral femoral artery bypass. The anterior side of the left kidney was peeled off to expose the anterior surface of the abdominal aorta and the left and right renal arteries. The great saphenous vein was collected and anastomosed to the left and right renal arteries, and the vein graft stump was anastomosed to the woven graft. The left leg of the exposed left axillary artery-bilateral femoral artery bypass graft was resected just below the wound, considering the risk of postoperative infection. The operative time was 388 min.
No postoperative complications were observed. Postoperative 3D-CT showed that the bypass graft from the descending thoracic aorta to the abdomen ran parallel to the aorta on the dorsal side of the left renal artery and was patent. The great saphenous vein graft to the bilateral renal arteries was also patent . Postoperative ABI improved to 1.12 on the right and 1.06 on the left; the upper-limb blood pressure was improved to 128/91 mmHg with good control, and the dose of antihypertensive drugs could be reduced. He was discharged from the hospital 16 days after surgery. Blood test findings after discharge showed a decrease in NT-pro BNP level (78 pg/dL), aldosterone level (58 pg/mL), and plasma renin activity (1.1 ng/ml/h). Transthoracic echocardiography 1.5 years after surgery showed a marked improvement in LVEF of 58% . Left ventricular wall thickness and left ventricular diameter decreased: IVS, 9.0 mm; PW, 8.7 mm; LVDd, 41.6 mm; and LVDs, 28.6 mm. Left ventricular reverse remodeling was performed.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient to publish this case report and accompanying images.