A 62-year-old Japanese female was found to have obstructive jaundice secondary to pancreatic head cancer. A stent was placed endoscopically to relieve the biliary obstruction. Although chemotherapy was performed, the tumor metastasized to the liver. Subsequently, obstruction by the head of the pancreas occurred, which caused gastrointestinal bleeding. Therefore, an implantable subcutaneous central venous (CV) port was inserted for administration of nutrition and chemotherapy. Intravenous hyperalimentation was given by CV port over 24 h. Thus, lock therapy was not pursued in this patient. On day 13 after the CV port insertion, a low-grade fever developed. High fever and dyspnea ensued on day 16, and blood cultures revealed Candida albicans (C. albicans). White blood cells were 7 × 103/μl at the onset of candidemia followed by the gradual increase up to 13.3 × 103/μl before death, indicating that the patient was not neutropenic during the hospitalization. Her attending physicians believed the Candida infection occurred via the biliary stent. Therefore, antemortem echocardiography was not performed and the indwelling CV port was used throughout the hospitalization period. The patient was treated with 300 mg/day of fosfluconazole and 1 g/day of doripenem via the CV port. The use of fosfluconazole was per the suggestion of the infection control team; this drug is the first-line antifungal treatment of C. albicans in Japan. In addition, the isolated pathogen was the fosfluconazole-sensitive strain. In spite of these efforts, the patient died on day 26 from respiratory failure. Written, informed consent was obtained from a family member of the deceased to perform both postmortem computed tomography (CT) and autopsy. These analyses were approved by the ethics review board of the University of Fukui Hospital.
To analyze the pathogenesis in this patient, postmortem investigations were performed at the Autopsy Imaging Center of the University of Fukui. A postmortem CT scan was performed using an 8-slice multidetector CT used exclusively for the body. A full-body scan from the vertex to the feet was performed in the supine position to obtain volumetric CT data. The scanning conditions were: 120 kV, 250 mA, collimation 8 × 2.5, pitch 1.125, rotation time 0.8 s, slice thickness 5 mm, and increment 5 mm. Postmortem CT revealed a diffuse infiltration shadow widely distributed in the lung fields bilaterally. Two certified radiologists independently interpreted the images as consistent with acute respiratory distress syndrome , suggesting that the patient’s course was complicated by catheter-related sepsis. Subsequently, a medical autopsy was performed by a certified pathologist and histological data were analyzed by two independent pathologists. No catheter-adherent thrombus, thrombosis of the great central veins, or endocardial vegetations were detected by gross section views. Histological analysis revealed scattered abscesses in several organs including lungs and kidneys. Infectious cholangitis was not detected. In addition, hyaline membrane formation and Candida colonies were found in the lungs. These histological findings confirmed the suspected ARDS due to Candida septicemia. A skin incision revealed a subcutaneous abscess around the CV port, from which C. albicans was cultured. The CV port tube, together with the part of the subclavian vein into which it had been inserted, were fixed with formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin-eosin. A cross-section of the catheter that had been inserted into the subclavian vein revealed a fibrin thrombus containing neutrophils and macrophages , indicating that the thrombus had existed while the patient was alive. Staining with the periodic acid-Schiff reagent and the Grocott stain revealed scattered Candida with spores and elongated pseudomycelia in the thrombus . The pathogen was detected from two distinct areas of the catheter tube. In contrast, by light microscopy, the outer wall of the catheter was clear, without fixations (arrow, Figure C).