A 19 year old young man was admitted to our hospital complaining of chest pain during the previous two weeks. He was not obese; he was an active athlete, and a nonsmoker. He does not consume alcohol regularly nor does he abuse drugs. The patient had no hypertension, hyperlipidemia or diabetes mellitus. He had no prior history of cardiovascular events. He has a positive family anamnesis for coronary artery disease. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm (HR 55/min), normal cardiac axis, 2 mm Q waves in D3, AVF, T wave negative in D2, D3, AVF, no ST segment elevation. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed hypokinesia of the inferior wall with preserved systolic function of the left ventricle. Laboratory analysis showed increased levels of the cardiac enzymes: creatine kinase 411 U/L (32-211 U/L), creatine kinase MB 8.8 ng/ml (0-15 ng/ml), troponin 16 ng/ml (0.78 ng/ml), and lactate dehydrogenase 947 U/l (208-378 U/l). Subacute inferior nonST segment myocardial infarction was diagnosed according to the patient’s history, electrocardiographic and laboratory findings . Coronary angiography was performed. It revealed subocclusive thrombus in the proximal, medial and distal part of the right coronary artery (TIMI 2) .
The other coronary arteries had no stenosis. Anticoagulant and antiagregant therapy (heparin, acetilsalicilic acid and clopidogrel) was started according to protocol . The hospital stay was uneventful. After discharge, blood was drawn according to the guidelines for thrombophilia tests and sent for thrombophilic testing.
Homozygous endothelial nitric oxid synthase (eNOS) T-786C mutation, heterozygote prothrombin gene mutation (G-20210-A), and protein S deficiency were verified from the thrombophilia testing. Protein S deficiency activity was estimated at 10% (reference range 60-150%).
Deficit of antithrombin III, protein C and presence of antiphospholipid antibodies were excluded. There were no genetic mutations for factor V Leiden, genetic variants of the beta fibrinogen gene, gene for PAI-1, polymorphism in human platelet antigen (HPA1) (1a/1a), MTHFR C677T gene mutation, high levels of apolipoprotein B and factor XIII.
We recommended dual antiagregant therapy (acetilsalicilic acid a 100 mg plus clopidogrel a 75 mg per day) during one year after the myocardial infarction. After that, we recommended lifelong treatment with acetilsalicilic acid tablets.
Another coronary angiography was performed three months after discharge from hospital. It revealed normal coronary arteries .
During 4 years follow up the patient was asymptomatic, without another acute coronary event.