An 88-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with a one-day history of nausea and vomiting associated with severe, crampy, and diffuse abdominal pain beginning that morning. The patient also reported daily diarrhea for longer than one month, but it was never problematic and had spontaneously resolved approximately one week prior to arrival. He described his pain as similar to what he had experienced in a previous episode of peritonitis as a young man, which required an exploratory laparotomy; he also reported a history of multiple abdominal surgeries. The vomit was non-bilious and non-bloody; he stated it looked just like the tea he regularly drinks. He denied any associated symptoms of fever, chills, weakness, or body aches.
The patient’s last primary care visit was two weeks prior to arrival where routine labs including renal function and electrolytes were performed. All studies were reported within his baseline. He had an extensive medical history that included diet-controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and stable stage 3A CKD. Baseline renal function was recorded as creatinine 1.60 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (normal range 0.6–1.3 mg/dL) and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 45 milliliters per minute per 1.73 meters squared (mL/min/1.73 m2) (rnormal range for non-African American ≥ 60).
While he had spontaneous improvement of his abdominal pain prior to emergency physician assessment he continued to have generalized tenderness to palpation, without rebound. We obtained a complete blood count with differential, a comprehensive metabolic panel, and a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis. The initial laboratory results revealed hyperkalemia of 6.9 milliequivalents per liter (normal 3.6–4.9 mmol/L, critical high >6.0 mmol/L), which was not included on the original differential diagnosis. We also noted mild worsening of his baseline renal function with an increase of creatinine to 1.75 mg/dL, and decrease of GFR to 35 mL/min/1.73m2. Once the hyperkalemia was identified as a non-hemolyzed sample, therapy was initiated with one-gram intravenous (IV) calcium gluconate, performance of an electrocardiogram (ECG), one liter normal saline fluid bolus, 10 units IV insulin, 25 grams D50, plus 7.5 mg nebulized albuterol. The ECG revealed a paced rhythm at 60 beats per minute and T-wave inversions in leads V3–V6 without hyperacute T waves . The CT revealed no acute process, and the patient was admitted to the hospital for further management and treatment of his hyperkalemia.
Once admitted, the patient reported a long history of xerostomia, which he self-treated by eating hard caramel candies throughout the day for many months. His medication list included clopidogrel, atorvastatin, enalapril, and spironolactone. At this time a lengthy conversation ensued in an attempt to determine the cause of his sudden, symptomatic hyperkalemia. It was determined that he previously had been taking supplemental potassium while he was taking furosemide. In November he discontinued the supplemental potassium because his serum level was “borderline high.” In December, he switched from furosemide to spironolactone due to a recurrence of hypokalemia. His monthly follow-up in January revealed a normal potassium, but he was subsequently admitted two weeks later for this episode of hyperkalemia with abdominal pain .
His diet consisted primarily of canned soups, sandwiches, and one gallon of sugar-free peach iced tea daily. He further reported consuming a large quantity of hard caramel candies each week. When asked about the candy he stated that he bought a 10-pound bag weekly for himself, roughly 200 candies consumed daily. During his primary care visit in December, he switched to sugar-free caramel candies as part of an attempt at improving his glucose control. Also, at this visit furosemide was discontinued, and he was started on spironolactone . This happened to coincide with the onset of his reported chronic diarrhea. One week prior to ED presentation, he stopped eating the sugar-free candies because the taste “just wasn’t the same,” and switched back to the original caramel candies. This resolved his diarrhea, although he had never noticed the correlation until after his conversation with care providers.