A 62-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our institute with acute right hemiparesis, neglect, and aphasia (National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score of 24). On examination, her blood pressure was 129/74 mmHg, pulse 84 beats per minute and regular, and temperature 36.8 °C. She had global right-sided weakness with a power grading of 1/5, with increased tone and brisk reflexes on the upper and lower limbs. Her plantar reflexes were downgoing. The examination of the left side of her body was unremarkable. It was not possible to assess for sensory, proprioceptive, and vibration changes, given her expressive and likely receptive dysphasia. She also had a pansystolic murmur audible in the mitral area, and her lungs were clear to auscultation. Her calves were soft and nontender bilaterally, and no peripheral edema was present. She was treated with intravenous alteplase and transferred to a tertiary center for endovascular clot retrieval (ECR) within 2 hours of her initial presentation. She was transferred back to our institute for ongoing care 3 days later. Once back under our care, we were able to confirm that she had no significant cardiovascular risk factors except for cigarette smoking of unknown pack-years and her age. She did not consume alcohol regularly. She had no similar or significant family, social, environmental, or employment history. She was receiving no regular medications prior to her stroke. We were also made aware that she was being investigated for a possible malignancy of undetermined source. The history was based on review of her medical records and collateral information provided by her family.
An immediate computed tomographic angiogram of her brain showed an occlusion of the proximal M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) . Her cerebral vasculature was otherwise normal. Investigations assessing for vascular risk factors and secondary causes of stroke returned normal results. This included screening for underlying autoimmune disease and coagulopathy. The results of liver and renal function tests, electrolytes, and full blood counts were all within normal limits. Her fasting lipids and blood sugars were also normal. She had normal telemetry (≥ 72 hours) and imaging of the aortic arch and carotid arteries. She had no evidence of significant atherosclerosis or stenosis. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed mild to moderate mitral regurgitation with no vegetation or other sources of emboli.
Further imaging revealed metastases to the lung and liver with a pancreatic mass and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy . Her serum cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was 1650 U/ml (reference range < 38 U/ml). Follow-up imaging of the brain showed an established infarct of the left MCA with evidence of luxury perfusion within the infarct but no frank hemorrhagic transformation . A contrast-enhanced study of the brain showed evidence of probable cerebral metastases but not within the area of infarct .
Our patient had a stroke of undetermined mechanism. The imaging studies suggested a thromboembolic pattern, but no source of clot was identified in the heart or major arteries. She likely had an undiagnosed metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, based on her imaging and CA 19-9 levels, although we did not have the benefit of a tissue diagnosis. Screening for breast, ovarian, and colorectal carcinomas was negative. We suggest that a possible mechanism of stroke in our patient was an embolus arising centrally. The patient’s TTE showed evidence of mitral valve disease but no obvious vegetation. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) would have been preferred, but the patient was not clinically stable enough to undergo the examination.
Treatment with thrombolysis and ECR was unsuccessful in our patient. We commenced her on secondary stroke prevention, as well as low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) for prevention of further thromboembolic events. In addition to the 67.5 mg of alteplase that she received, she was also started on aspirin 100 mg daily, amlodipine 5 mg daily, perindopril 5 mg daily, atorvastatin 80 mg daily, fluoxetine 20 mg daily, and enoxaparin 70 mg twice daily. She had ongoing physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and speech evaluation. Once she was diagnosed with metastatic malignancy, we consulted the oncology team and held a family meeting to discuss treatment options. Based on the family’s request and their opinion about the patient’s wishes, a tissue diagnosis was sought, albeit unsuccessfully.
The patient’s condition continued to decline, and she refused further treatment. Comfort measures were initiated following discussion with her family, and she died approximately 1 month following the stroke. An autopsy was not performed, in accordance with the family’s wishes.