In August 2021, a 26-year-old female with unremarkable past medical history presented with a chief complaint of chest pain from a few months ago to Kasra hospital, Tehran, Iran. She had also experienced progressive shortness of breath afterward. On the first admission, physical examination showed no abnormal findings, except for decreased auscultation of the left lung. Chest X-ray revealed a huge circular, homogenous mass lesion occupying most of the left hemithorax . Follow-up chest computed tomography (CT) showed a hypodense mass with a well-defined margin measuring 9.3 cm in the left upper lobe and multiple hypodense lesions with a lobulated appearance with a total diameter of 15.5 × 13.5 cm in the left lower lobe of the lung . In August 2021, the patient underwent transthoracic needle biopsy, which revealed hypocellular bland-looking spindle cell proliferation in the loose edematous stroma. Immunohistochemistry results from needle biopsy showed negative staining for S100, smooth muscle actin, and CD34 and 1% staining for Ki67. No specific diagnosis was concluded. In August 2021, she underwent a thoracotomy, which was unsuccessful, and the surgeon conducted no resection. However, due to worsening symptoms, the patient was referred to our tertiary center (Thoracic surgery ward of Imam Khomeini complex hospital Tehran, Iran). In September 2021, we gave it a second chance, and a left postero-lateral thoracotomy was carried out. A giant lobulated mass arising from pulmonary parenchyma was evident, occupying all left hemithorax. We performed left pneumonectomy. Although the tumor had some adhesions to the left pulmonary veins and arteries, the tumor had not invaded the hilar vessels. The adhesions were removed successfully with surgical intervention with no complications, and no intraoperative cardiopulmonary bypass was needed. The patient was uneventful in the postoperative period.
The pneumonectomy specimen consisted of a well-circumscribed, homogeneous tumor measuring 30 × 28 × 7 cm with a portion of the lung measuring 10 × 8 × 4 cm and a small portion of the bronchus (1.5 × 1.2 cm) . Microscopically, the tumor was composed of alternating fibrous and myxoid stroma with occasional collagen rosettes. In the hypocellular area, tumor cells had dark oval spindle to ovoid nuclei without obvious pleomorphism. In some areas, a collection of epithelioid cells in a whirling pattern with plump nuclei and acidophilic cytoplasm were noted. Rosettes revealed collagen fibers in the center and a collection of epithelioid cells at the periphery. Curvilinear vessels predominantly in myxoid hypocellular areas are prominent . Mitotic figures were scanty, and focal areas of ischemic necrosis were noted. In the immunohistochemistry study, tumor cells were negative for CKAE1/AE3, EMA, S100, Sox10, and CD34. Patchy weak staining of BCL2, Cd99, desmin, and TLE1 with very low proliferative activity in Ki-67 staining was also noted . These findings were in favor of the diagnosis of low-grade fibromyxoid sarcoma.
At the six-month follow-up, the patient was disease-free and had no symptoms.