A 51-year-old woman had irregular menses for 6 mo.
The patient had irregular menses for 6 mo. She had pelvic pain and prolonged menstruation but no nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal bloating, or fever. Pelvic computed tomography (CT) at a local hospital revealed a mass in her pelvis. Five days later, she came to our hospital for further treatment. We investigated whether the patient experienced mild limitations in performing life activities and societal participation, congruent with the domains on the International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health.
She had been suffering from hypertension for 2 years, and had been treated with nifedipine extended-release tablets. She underwent surgery to remove a fibroadenoma from her right breast 4 years prior to presentation. The patient had no history of diabetes, heart disease, alcohol consumption, or smoking.
The patient denied a relevant family history.
Gynecological examination revealed a cervical nodule, approximately 7 cm × 9 cm in size, with a soft texture, no tenderness, a clear boundary, and blood vessel pulsation on the surface without adnexal masses; the vulva, urethra and vagina were normal.
Her blood potassium level was 3.20 mmol/L. All tumor marker results were within the normal range. The reactivity tests for hepatitis B virus, human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, and hepatitis C virus were all negative.
A pelvic ultrasound (US) revealed an 87 mm × 60 mm mass with heterogeneous echo on the right side of the pelvic cavity, consisting of hypoechoic intracystic effusion and a hypoechoic intracystic tumor with local honeycomb changes. Color Doppler imaging showed high degrees of vascularity. The mass had no clear boundary with the cervix and seemed to adhere to it . Pelvic US also suggested multiple uterine fibroids. Pelvic CT revealed a round, low-density mass in the pelvic cavity with uneven internal density. Contrast-enhanced CT showed uneven enhancement in the arterial and venous phases of the scan and no enhancement in low-density areas . The results suggested a malignant pelvic tumor. No enlarged lymph nodes were found in the pelvic cavity.