A 28-year-old male laborer was admitted to the department of infectious disease of our hospital with a 2-month history of intermittent fever with shivers, anemia and thrombocytopenia. During the previous month, the patient complained of fatigue and decreasing of appetite, as well as a 2kg weight loss. antiinfection treatment was given in local hospital, along with a suspected diagnosis of TB infection and atypical chronic myeloid leukemia, but had poor response. No remarkable medical history was reported, and the patient declared no cigarette and illicit drugs usage. There was no family history of immunodeficiencies, autoimmune diseases nor early childhood deaths. Notably, the patient was employed as a laborer and lived in a dormitory with poor living condition.
On physical examination, His baseline vital signs included a temperature of 38.3°C, a blood pressure of 95/59 mm Hg and a heart rate of 137bpm (tachycardia on ultrasonic cardiogram). Cardiovascular and pulmonary examinations were unremarkable. Abdominal examination revealed splenomegaly, and neck examination found a swelled lymph node at left neck.
Bone marrow smear and biopsy in local hospital suggested a suspected diagnosis of chronic myeloid leukemia with a proliferated myeloid series. Baseline laboratory evaluation revealed normocytic anemia, a hemoglobin level of 72 g/L (130–175g/L), a platelet count of 94 × 109/L (125-350 × 109/L) and a raised white cell count of 13.77 × 109/L (3.5-9.5 × 109/L), including 93.8% neutrophils. Liver function tests were deranged with mildly raised alanine aminotransferase 57 U/L (≤41 U/L), raised aspartate aminotransferase 73 U/L (≤40 U/L), raised alkaline phosphatase 293U/L (40–130 U/L), raised γ-glutamyl transferase 511U/L (10–71U/L), raised lactate dehydrogenase 768 U/L (135–225 U/L), raised triglycerides 2.4 mmol/L (normal < 1.7 mmol/L), and mildly decreased albumin 31.5 g/L (35–52 g/L). Renal function tests were within normal threshold. Tests for acute phase reactants revealed raised C reactive protein 83.5 mg/L and raised serum ferritin 7688.7 ug/L (30–400 ug/L), and his serum IL-2R level was 2260U/ml (223–710U/ml). Clotting test revealed raised fibrinogen 5.88g/L (2.00–4.00g/L) and prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 44.9 s (29–42s). And baseline screening for pathogens was negative (bacteriological cultures of blood, sputum and bone marrow were negative, while multiple induced sputum smear samples were negative for acid-fast organisms, and the serum G/GM test were negative.). CT scan of his chest reveals both lungs infiltrates with scattered multiple stripes, patch shadows and nodules, bilateral pleural thickening and adhesions, small amount of bilateral pleural effusion and pericardial effusion, increased mediastinal lymph nodes and splenomegaly . Ultrasonic examination of abdomen revealed hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. The bone marrow smear showed a proliferated myeloid series with left shift and toxic changes, while no abnormal cell was found; bone marrow biopsy showed proliferated myeloid series and megakaryocyte could be seen 2~9/HPF . Both the bone marrow aspirate and biopsy did not find hemophagocytosis. No immunophenotypic evidence of a lymphoproliferative disease by flow cytometric analysis and no monoclonal component was identified. In addition, serum investigations were negative for HIV, hepatis C antibody and treponema pallidum antibody. Hepatitis B surface antibody, hepatitis B e antibody, and hepatitis core antibody were positive. T-spot test showed negative result of TB specific immune response. DNA copies of cytomegalovirus were below detection limit, while DNA copies of Epstein-Barr virus were lower than 500 copies/ml. Considering his polyserous effusions, tests for connective tissue diseases were administrated. The results showed that antinuclear antibodies, liver-kidney microsomal antibody and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were all negative, excepting the antismooth muscle antibody. Hemolytic and nutritional anemia tests were all within normal range.
The patient’s hospital course was notable for intermittent fevers as high as 40°C and worsening anemia. During the first 25 days in his hospitalization, the patient received antiinfection treatment including moxifloxacin, amikacin, tigecycline and linezolid, but did not alleviate his symptoms. The reexamination of chest CT scan on day 15 showed enlarged pulmonary nodules and worse pericardial effusion. The patient experienced a nadir hemoglobin level of 37 g/L, and underwent several transfusions of red cells. According to the manifestations of fever, splenomegaly, anemia and thrombocytopenia, hyperferritinaemia, hyperglyceridemia and elevated IL-2R, the diagnosis of hemophagocytic syndrome was made on the basis of the HLH-2004 diagnosis criteria.[ The patient was then referred to the department of hematology.
Another bone marrow aspirate was performed in the hematology ward. The karyotype analysis revealed a normal 46, XY male karyotype, and there was still no immunophenotypic evidence was found by flow cytometric analysis. BCR/ABL fusion gene and MPN related genes had not been detected. No significant change could be found from bone marrow smear with the previous one . Then a fine-needle aspirate (FNA) was performed on the enlarged cervical lymph node, but histopathology of the lymph node didn’t support the diagnosis of lymphoma or TB. In the purpose of a clear-cut diagnosis, a high-throughput sequencing (using Ion Torrent PGM/Illumina NextSeq 550Dx Platform) of HLH related gene was applied , and a missense mutation in exon 3 of GZMB gene was identified, c.314T > G, p.Phe105Cys (p.F105C). We assume that the mutation of GZMB in the patient may results in the decline of the cytotoxicity of his lymphocytes and be associated with the hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.
Empirical antibiotic therapy started at day 26 since hospitalization, including teicoplanin, meropenem, moxifloxacin and voriconazole. The patient’s condition deteriorated by the day 28 as brisk drop of platelet, steep elevation of ferritin and possible development of disseminated intravascular coagulation (ferritin above 50000 ug/L, D-dimer 42.39 ug/ml, APTT 48.1s, 41 × 109 platelet per L, fibrinogen 1.72 g/L, procalcitonin 2.09 ng/ml), the patient got transfusion dependency (red cells and platelets) . Another chest CT scan on day 29 showed some exacerbation of his pulmonary infection and worse pleural and pericardial effusion. Treatment was initiated with dexamethasone 10 mg and gamma immunoglobulin 5 g intravenously on day 29, and following by a 4-day therapy of higher dose of immunoglobulin (20 g intravenously daily). Meanwhile teicoplanin, meropenem, moxifloxacin and voriconazole were discontinued, multiple courses of antimicrobials (including tigecycline, linezolid, cefoperazone/sulbactam, caspofungin and ganciclovir) were administrated to control his infection. A total of 1250ml fresh frozen plasma, 400ml cryoprecipitate and 1g fibrinogen were infused during day 29 to 34 to correct his coagulation abnormalities. Given the history of poor living condition in dormitory and emaciation, empirical oral isoniazid 0.2 g daily was given started from day 37 despite of no definitive evidence of TB. Etoposide was given on hospital day 33–35 and day 39 (0.1 g intravenously daily), and dexamethasone was administrated 15 mg intravenously daily for a week (day 31–38), then reduced to10 mg daily for 3 days, and reduced to 7.5 mg daily for another week (day 42–49), 5 mg daily for day 50–57, and which finally tapered to 30 mg oral prednisone daily. On day 38, a chest CT scan showed aggravated infection than the previous CT , but his serum ferritin and procalcitonin level decreased to 11308.0 ug/L and 0.61 ng/ml, respectively .
On day 39, his blood sample was sent to Wuhan BGI Co. Ltd. for mNGS. mNGS detected sequences of TB complex in the sample within 48 hours of the sample receipt. After 7-day application of isoniazid, the patient’s condition improved, as he had no fever and abated symptoms, the laboratory tests showed a WBC count of 4.73 × 109/L with 95.6% neutrophils and 4% lymphocytes, a hemoglobin level of 67.0 g/L, platelet count of 28 × 109/L, and serum ferritin level decreased to 2552.6 ug/L. Tigecycline and ganciclovir were discontinued, and caspofungin was replaced by voriconazole (0.2 g bid intravenously). To confirm the NGS finding of TB existence, on day 60, a fiberoptic bronchoscopy and bronchial lavage (BL) was performed. No other special finding on fiberoptic bronchoscopy than bilateral bronchial mucosal edema. Plenty of translucent secretions on the left bronchus were found, which were suctioned clear and sent for cultures for bacteria, fungus and tuberculosis . BL fluid was sent for examinations including organism cultures, acid-fast stain, GeneXpert, liquid-based cytology and flow cytometry. The cultures turned out negative, and the acid-fast stain found nothing, liquid-based cytology only revealed a few ciliated columnar epithelium cells and macrophages, flow cytometric analysis found no evidence of immunophenotypic abnormity. However, nucleotide of TB and rifampicin resistance gene were detected from GeneXpert. Combining this finding with the NGS report, the diagnosis of TB infection was confirmed. On day 61, an electronic colonoscope was administrated to rule out possible intestinal tuberculosis infection that may lead to the HLH, which turned out no organic lesions in his intestines. On day 63, the CT scan showed the lesions in his lungs were gradually absorbed, and there were no pleural effusions anymore . Before discharge, the patient’s anemia and thrombocytopenia were relieved, fever was also vanished. Blood routine test showed a hemoglobin level of 92 g/L and a platelet count of 40 × 109/L, biochemical and clotting tests showed a normal liver function, and his INR was 0.92, APTT and fibrinogen levels were within normal range. His serum ferritin level had decreased to 1989.4ug/L, which was 74% lower than admission. Based on the HLH-2004 standard, he was evaluated as clinical response. On discharge, he was administrated with anti-TB medication including isoniazid, ethambutol and moxifloxacin. The patient was then transferred to a specialized tuberculosis hospital, and had largely recovered after underwent standard antituberculosis treatment there.