A 36-year-old man was referred to us with a 30-day history of imbalance while walking, lower backache, tingling, and numbness in the left gluteal region radiating to the left lower limb. He was evaluated outside with a contrast-enhanced computed (CECT) scan suggesting a mass lesion in the presacral region with destruction and involvement of the underlying bone . He also had an image-guided fine-needle aspiration from lesion suggestive of metastatic deposit.
On clinical evaluation, the patient had an antalgic gait with weight-bearing on the right lower limb. Neurological examination showed normal higher mental functions and cranial nerves. Muscle power was 3/5 at left hip, 4/5 at the left knee, and ankle joints. Power in the right lower limb joints was normal. No sensory abnormalities were identified. The straight leg-raising test on the left side was restricted to 40° and was associated with sharp pain. Superficial and deep reflexes were normal in both limbs. The patient had neither bowel and urinary complaints nor history of fever, night sweats, or weight loss. Per abdomen, per rectal, and supraclavicular fossa examination revealed no abnormality. No clinically palpable nodes on systemic examination were found. With a tentative diagnosis of bone secondaries from an unknown primary, he was planned for image-guided core needle biopsy from the sacral mass that was carried out under full aseptic precautions. The histopathology (HPE) was suggestive of malignant round cell tumors. On immunohistochemistry (IHC), cells were positive for CD20 (score 4+), CD10 (score 1+), and ki67 (score 4+). The histological diagnosis was high-grade B cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) compatible with diffuse large B cell lymphoma . Hematology, biochemistry, and bone marrow study were normal. 18F-fluro-2-deoxy-d-glucose-positron emission tomography (FDG PET) scan showed lytic lesion in the sacrum with no other areas of FDG uptake.
The patient was staged as IAE and started on rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone (R-CHOP regimen). After completion of 3 weekly, 6 cycles, the patient was relieved of his pain and numbness and regained 5/5 power in the left lower limb muscles on clinical examination. Reevaluation by FDG-PET was done which showed a mild FDG avid sclerotic lesion of 1.3 × 1.2 cm in the left ala of the sacrum with standardized uptake value (SUV) of 3.22 suggesting a mild active residual disease . He was started on maintenance rituximab and external photon radiotherapy to the sacrum (45Gy/25#) after multidisciplinary discussion.
Post-treatment FDG-PET was repeated after 3 weeks, which showed metabolically inactive sclerosis at the left sacral ala scored as 1 on Deauville criteria using a 5-point scale as per Lugano classification . The entire treatment was completed in 2017. The patient was placed on regular 3 monthly follow-up and had no fresh complaints. Follow-up FDG PET done in 2018 showed a stable ill-defined small sclerotic lesion in the left sacral ala without significant FDG uptake, representing metabolically inactive disease. It also showed FDG uptake (SUV 4) at the site of sacralization of L5 , which was not appreciated in pervious scans representing arthropathy due to altered biomechanics. The patient was asymptomatic and clinically no abnormality was noted. Follow-up FDG-PET in 2019 showed non-FDG avid ill-defined sclerosis in the left sacral region and resolution of previously visualized mild FDG at L5-S1 facet . No fresh complaints were noted. Recent follow-up FDG-PET in June 2020 showed no significant changes compared to previous FDG-PET . The patient is asymptomatic without obvious clinical abnormalities and has metabolic complete response 42 months after completion of treatment.