A 68-year-old female, who suffered from repeated loss of consciousness for 3 d went to the Jiujiang University Affiliated Hospital on June 9, 2022.
The patient complained that there was no obvious cause for loss of consciousness 3 d ago, and the family members complained that the patient's consciousness recovered 10 s later, but he did not pay attention to it at that time and did not diagnose and treat it. The patient complained of repeated episodes of loss of consciousness, especially when turning sideways. He went to the emergency department of our hospital for treatment, and the electrocardiogram showed a pacemaker electrocardiogram . Interestingly, when the patient was sitting on the bed and describing his medical history, she suddenly said that she had amaurosis symptoms, and the bedside electrocardiogram (ECG) monitor showed intermittent poor pacing, which was recorded in time by the ECG . When the heart resumed full pacing, the patient complained of dizziness and amaurosis symptoms relieved, and the pacemaker programming indicated that the electrode impedance was 323 ohms, and the pacing threshold was 5v.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years. She took amlodipine besylate 5 mg QD regularly to control her blood pressure, noting that the blood pressure level was controlled well. She did not take any other medications. The patient denied history of coronary heart disease, cerebral infarction, diabetes.
The patient denied smoking, drinking history, and family disease history.
Body temperature, 36.3 ℃; breathing, 20 breaths/min; blood pressure, 114/70 mmHg; heart rate, 80 beats/min. Nerve examination and physical examination showed no abnormality
No abnormality is found in blood routine test, liver function, kidney function, electrolyte, thyroid function, blood coagulation function and stool routine test.
Brain computed tomography showed no abnormality, Chest X-ray showed a broken electrode line at the junction of the left clavicle and the first rib .