A 68 year-old Caucasian man was admitted in our department complaining of gross haematuria. A cystoscopic examination found a 2.5 cm solid lesion located on the posterior wall of the bladder. A total body Computed Tomography (CT) scan was performed and showed a bladder lesion with loco-regional node enlargement. The CT scan revealed a hypodermic 38 × 22 mm nodular lesion located on the right chest wall with increased enhanced contrast . Cytological characterization of this lesion was obtained with a fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) and "epithelial type cells with nuclear atypia" were found. Considering the CT scan results and the cytology report, a transurethral resection of the bladder (TURB) lesion was performed, along with surgical resection of the chest wall nodule . The histological diagnosis of the surgical specimen revealed sarcomatoid carcinoma invading the bladder musculature staged pT3aN3M1 and graded G3 . The skin lesion specimen showed poorly differentiated neoplastic infiltration with morphologic aspects of urothelial tissue with immunochemistry positivity for CK7 and cerb-B2 and immunochemistry negativity for CK20 CD117 and TTF-1. The TURB specimen showed neoplastic elements which were poorly differentiated, round and spindle shaped and with a high mitotic index (70 mitosis/10 HPF) . Small segments of these elements demonstrated epithelial type immunochemistry (CK7 and CK20 positive) whilst the major part of the neoplasm was composed of sarcomatoid type differentiated cells positive for desmin and negative for cytokeratins. The immunochemistry was also cromogranine A, smooth muscle actin, CD3, CD20, CD117, EGFR negative. The proliferative index evaluated with Ki67 was positive in the 60-70% of the sarcomatoid cells and the Cerb-B2 was positive at cytoplasmic membrane staining of the epithelial component and was negative in the sarcomatoid component. The histopathological report was summarized as an invasive poorly differentiated bladder carcinoma metastasis with a component of mixed, giant and spindle, sarcomatoid cells. Once recovered from surgeryg the patient received four cycles of chemotherapy consisting of gemcytabine, carboplatin and paclitaxel (Taxol). At six months post-surgical follow-up, a repeat CT scan showed, despite these treatments, a progression of loco-regional nodal disease and pulmonary metastasization.