A 54-year-old Turkish male patient admitted to the emergency department with abdominal pain and dyspnea ongoing for 2 days. He had general abdominal tenderness in all quadrants, and lung auscultation revealed decreased respiration sounds on the left. He had a history of a stabbing wound in his left subcostal region 3 months prior without any pathological findings in the thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan . The patient was followed up with a daily physical examination. He had no abdominal pain and fever. Oral intake was started. He tolerated the regimen. The patient was discharged on the 3rd day of hospitalization.
Diaphragmatic hernia was considered due to the history of a stab wound, accompanied by the physical examination findings. Thoracoabdominal CT revealed a diaphragmatic hernia and fluid in the hernia sac . Due to respiratory distress and general abdominal tenderness, the decision to perform an emergency laparotomy was made. Operative exploration showed the herniation of the transvers colon through the diaphragmatic defect . After the removal of the dense adhesions, the colon segment was taken into the abdomen. Ischemia, necrosis and perforation were observed in the colon . There was a 6 cm defect in the diaphragm . There were also necrotic fluids and stool in the hernia sac in the thorax. The hernia sac and necrotic tissues were excised. It was decided to perform colon resection and anastomosis because the abdomen was clean. The defect in the diaphragm was sutured with a non-absorbable suture. The patient was taken to the intensive care unit for close follow-up. He had respiratory distress. On the 3rd postoperative day, chest X-ray showed fluid accumulation in the basal lobe of the left lung, and thorax tube was performed and exudative fluid was drained. The patient was followed with effective lung care in addition to medical therapy. On the 5th postoperative day, respiratory distress was seen. He was intubated because of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which was confirmed with a chest X-ray and decreased saturation. The abdominal drain was taken out on the 6th postoperative day. The patient was started to be fed enterally through a nasogastric tube. ARDS findings regressed during follow-up. The patient was extubated on the 8th postoperative day. On the 9th postoperative day, the nasogastric catheter was removed and oral intake was started. The regime was increased gradually. The thorax tube was taken out. The patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day.