A 67-year-old man with SIT was diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer using Gastrointestinal endoscopy, performed at an outside hospital during investigation for epigastric discomfort. The patient was subsequently referred to our hospital for further evaluation. He was diagnosed with SIT at the age of 17 years. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an elevated lesion with an ulcer (type 2) on the posterior lower body of the stomach , and histological examination revealed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Double-contrast imaging revealed a lesion in the deformed posterior wall of the middle gastric body . Additionally, computed tomography (CT) revealed inverted abdominal organs and irregular thickening of the gastric wall with swollen lymph nodes and no distant metastasis . A three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction image of CT angiography showed complete transposition of vessels and branching of the common hepatic artery (CHA) directly from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) . The tumor marker levels were within the normal ranges. The patient was preoperatively diagnosed with a clinical T3N2M0 Stage IIIA according to the third edition of Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma . Consequently, LDG with D2 lymph node dissection and Roux-en-Y reconstruction were planned.
Surgeons with the Endoscopic Surgical Skill Qualification System (ESSQS) accreditation participated in this operation. During the operation, the surgeon stood on the left side of the patient, opposite the usual side for surgery at our hospital. Four trocars were inserted in the left and right subcostal and lateral abdominal regions. The laparoscopic view showed an inversus of the intra-abdominal organs, including the stomach and the spleen . After the position of the spleen was confirmed, ligation of the left gastroepiploic vessels with partial omentectomy was performed. During the operation, the usage of the dominant hand was often the opposite of the usual manner. For example, the non-dominant hand of this operator handled the energy device shown in Fig. b. While dissecting the region around the right gastroepiploic vessels, the surgeon moved to the right side. However, we found that sometimes it was technically easier to perform this dissection from the opposite side, and the surgeon occasionally alternated between the right and left sides. In lymph node dissection of the infrapyloric area, the pancreas head, duodenum, and transverse colon mesenterium are considered anatomical landmarks. Therefore, each landmark was confirmed during the procedure, and finally the right gastroepiploic vein and artery were identified and ligated .
Next, the surgeon moved to the left side, and the lateral segment of the liver was retracted instrumentally. The lesser omentum was resected, and the right gastric artery from the proper hepatic artery (PHA) was identified and ligated. As this patient had the CHA originating from the SMA, the anatomical landmarks of lymph node dissection in the suprapancreatic area were considered the upper border of the pancreas, portal vein, and left gastric artery (LGA) from the celiac axis . In addition, an enlarged lymph node of 3 cm diameter was found along with the coronary vein and LGA and therapeutic lymph node dissection was performed without touching the enlarged lymph node . Then, lymph node dissection was performed along the dorsal plane of the proximal splenic artery (SPA) and was performed for another enlarged lymph nodes along the lesser curvature up to the esophagogastric junction . Finally, a Roux-en-Y antecolic gastrojejunostomy was performed under minilaparotomy . Notably, the operation time was 446 min, and the blood loss was 3 mL.
In the resected specimen, it was observed that the tumor was 30 × 21 mm in diameter, and pathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma with subserosal invasion and three metastatic lymph nodes. The final pathological stage was pT3N2M0 stage IIIA according to the third edition of Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged at 14 days after surgery. Notably, the patient was administered adjuvant chemotherapy with oral anticancer agents. There is no evidence of recurrence at 6 months postoperatively.