A 47-year-old man presented with a 6-day history of left leg swelling and discomfort. He reported a history of hypertension for 5 years and had undergone gamma knife radiosurgery for an intracranial dural arteriovenous fistula 4 years ago. The patient denied any history of precipitating factors for DVT, including recent trauma, surgery, or immobilization.
Duplex ultrasonography (DUS) conducted at the time of presentation revealed DVT extending to the distal femoral vein; this was confirmed in the subsequent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), which also revealed pulmonary embolism in the right segmental pulmonary artery . Laboratory findings at initial presentation did not show any abnormalities (hemoglobin, 15.1 g/dl; platelet count, 180 K/µl, prothrombin time, 10.9 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 26.2 s). Additionally, laboratory tests for hypercoagulability revealed normal values for natural anticoagulants, such as protein C, S, and antithrombin III; factor V Leiden, prothrombin, and JAK2 V617F mutations were not found. Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic venous thromboembolism; anticoagulation therapy with rivaroxaban was administered for 1 year, with a dosage of 20 mg for the initial 6 months and 10 mg for the subsequent 6 months for extended therapy, which was eventually discontinued. At this time, the follow-up DUS demonstrated partial recanalization of the popliteal vein (PV) with residual hyperechoic fibrotic material . The waveform of PV venous flow showed continuous waveform and the axial reflux of PV was also noted. The patient complained of swelling in the left calf worsening in the afternoon or with exercise.
Two years after this event, the patient again visited our outpatient clinic with sudden-onset claudication in the left calf for 1 week. On physical examination, the left ankle pulse was not palpable compared to a normal pulse in the right ankle [the ankle-brachial index (ABI) decreased to 0.62 on the left ankle]. Repeat DUS revealed occlusion of the PA with distal embolization to the dorsalis pedis artery. Subsequent CT angiography (CTA) showed occlusion of PA caused by type 2 PAES, i.e., medial deviation of the PA due to abnormal lateral attachment of the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle between PA and PV . A careful review of the CT conducted during the previous DVT event also confirmed this abnormal gastrocnemius insertion, and PV was thought to be compressed by both heads of the gastrocnemius muscle .
Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with PAES with DVT and subsequent PA occlusion, for which he underwent surgical correction three days after presenting with PA occlusion. A myotomy of the medial head of the gastrocnemius was performed using a posterior S-shaped incision. Next, the injured part of the PA was resected and interposition grafting with the great saphenous vein harvested from the medial thigh was done . The PV was not explored because the patient did not exhibit severe symptoms associated with chronic venous insufficiency. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the follow-up ABI before discharge was normalized to 1.10. The follow-up CTA before discharge also demonstrated a patent interposition graft with a typical course of PA , so the patient was discharged a week after the operation. The patient received aspirin 100 mg monotherapy indefinitely following interposition grafting, and anticoagulation therapy was not restarted. During the subsequent 6 years of follow-up, he remained asymptomatic with a patent interposition graft which was monitored using DUS .
This study, serving as a care report, adhered to the CARE (CAse REport) guidelines. This study was approved by the institutional review board; informed consent was obtained from the patient (approval number: 2024-01-0033).