A 55-year-old man of Bangladesh descent was referred to the Outpatient Allergy Clinic at Queen’s University for evaluation of anaphylaxis caused by ingestion of Indian jujube. He presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with symptoms of scalp pruritus, dyspnea and generalized urticaria. This occurred 2 h after he had consumed a homemade candied fruit cocktail consisting of Indian jujube, water, Thai and Indian sweetener (made by locally grown sugar cane from Thailand and India). In ED, anaphylaxis was diagnosed and symptom resolution was obtained with epinephrine, intravenous diphenhydramine and steroids. The patient did not have any known history of environmental or food allergies. He grew up with a Z. Mauritiana Lam tree in his backyard and regularly consumed Indian jujubes throughout his life, since childhood. However, when he moved to Canada, its consumption considerably decreased and last time he ingested Indian jujube was 5–6 months prior to this event. He reported no other episodes of anaphylaxis over lifetime. He had a medical history comprising of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia. His medications’ list included hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg once daily, ramipril 10 mg once daily, metformin 500 mg twice daily, and simvastatin 25 mg once daily.
In clinic, we performed skin-prick testing with various formulations of Indian jujube, environmental and latex allergens. The skin -prick testing (SPT) was considered positive when the longest diameter of the wheal response was 3 mm greater than the saline control. SPT to a saline slurry (1/20 weight/volume) of candied jujube resulted in a wheal and flare response (W&F) with longest diameters of 5 mm and 25 mm (5 × 25 mm), respectively, with appropriate controls . Subsequently, SPT were performed with saline slurries (1/10 weight/volume) of the Thai and Indian sweeteners used to make the cocktail, which were negative with appropriate controls . On a further visit, he underwent prick-to-prick testing with dried Indian jujube soaked in normal saline, which resulted in a W&F response measuring 4 × 5 mm. Subsequently, SPT through dried jujube soaked in normal saline and applied on the forearm caused a W&F reaction measuring 5 × 15 mm; W&F response to histamine was 6 × 30 mm and to saline control was 1 × 4 mm. . Specific IgE to Indian jujube was not available. All tests were applied to a healthy volunteer and no false positives were noted. Latex allergy was excluded based on tolerance of latex products, as well as negative SPT and serum latex IgE level (< 0.10 kU/L). A SPT to a panel of common environmental allergens demonstrated a positive W&F response to dust mite, bird feathers and showed no tree, grass or ragweed pollen sensitivity. He was diagnosed with an IgE-mediated anaphylactic reaction to Indian jujube, without a latex-fruit syndrome. He was advised to avoid consumption of Indian jujubes and carry an epinephrine autoinjector.