A 34-year-old male presented 2 months of mid thoracic pain, gait impairment/ataxia, and hypoesthesia from T11 downward. A post contrast thoracic MRI showed a dumbbell tumor between the T7 and T9 (i.e., maximal width T8) levels contributing to severe spinal cord compression [-]. This lesion was hypointense on T1/T2-weighted images , hyperintense on STIR sequences , and intensely enhanced with contrast [ and ]. The whole-body PET-CT-scan revealed multiple diffuse osteoblastic lesions, and the high level of a radioactive tracer involving the 8th/9th ribs bilaterally, sternum, pelvis, and C6-C7 and T3 pedicles.
Blood tumor markers, that included beta-2-microglobulin, alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and human chorionic gonadotropin-beta, were negative. Alternatively, serum neuron-specific enolase levels were high (48.4 µg/L; normal range: 0–16.3 µg/L) consistent with a neuroendocrine tumor origin.
The patient underwent a T8 total/partial T7-T9 laminectomies to decompress the spinal cord. The tumor was hyper vascularized and there were significant adhesions between the tumor and the dura mater. Ultimately, a partial resection of the extradural lesion was accomplished. Postoperatively, the patient’s gait disturbance and dorsal pain were improved. The 1-week postoperative thoracolumbar MRI documented complete removal of the extradural tumor [ and ].
The histopathological examinations showed multiple round-small cells whose Ki67 level was about 30%, compatible with a neuroendocrine tumor of unknown etiology. Immunostaining showed a positive check for chromogranin and synaptophysin [ and ] . The combination of studies allowed for documentation of a well-differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasm (i.e., NEN sec WHO 2019) .
The patient has started a chemotherapy (i.e., etoposide and cisplatin). After 10 months, his gait ataxia and lower limbs hyposthenia improved. At that point, he underwent a 68 Gallium-DOTATOC positron emission tomography/ computed tomography (PET/CT) that demonstrated stable disease.