A 53-year-old female presented to our outpatient department with low back pain that had persisted for few years. The patient experienced severe left lower extremity pain for several weeks with no history of trauma. The pain limited her walk to <10 m in a stretch. She had no history of previous spinal surgery. The patient was treated at a local hospital with oral analgesics. However, intermittent claudication and pain persisted. The motor examination did not reveal any weakness; however, there was hypoesthesia in the S1 dermatome. Plain radiographs revealed degenerative Meyerding Grade I spondylolisthesis at L5-S1 . Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging done revealed an associated prolapsed intervertebral disc and lumbar canal stenosis ( and ). She was given a trial of caudal epidural steroid injections for symptomatic relief. The patient did not improve, and hence, surgical intervention in the form of bilateral pedicle screw fixation with interbody cage was planned. The patient underwent posterior decompression through left- sided laminotomy followed by pedicle screw fixation on the right side. Screws were inserted in the pedicle of L5-S1. An optimal hold of the screw in the left pedicle of L5 could not be achieved due to the poor quality of bone; hence, intraoperatively, the plan was revised from bilateral to unilateral pedicle screw fixation. Further, a transforaminal interbody cage was inserted. Optimal placement of the implant and the reduction was confirmed intraoperatively under C-arm . The patient was given a lumbosacral corset, and physiotherapy was initiated from the 2nd post-operative day. The patient’s leg pain decreased immediately after surgery, and ambulation was started 3 days later ( and ). The patient started complaining of severe pain on the 8th post-operative day, for which she was treated with oral analgesics. X-ray done on the next day revealed loosening of the rod from the L5 pedicle screw, with back out of the insert screw . The patient was subsequently posted for revision surgery, where the insert screw was found to be loose and out . The screws were inserted now on the left pedicle of L4 and S1. Another screw was placed in the right pedicle of L4, and a longer rod was placed . The patient was discharged after suture removal on the 14th post-operative day. The patient was relatively pain-free and ambulating at the time of discharge. During the subsequent follow-up at 6 months, the patient has shown significant symptomatic improvement and has resumed her routine daily activities.