A 4-week-old female presented to the dermatology clinic with a 2-week history of erythematous annular lesions on the chest, abdomen, lower back, and bilateral posterior auricular regions consistent with NL .
The 31-year-old mother, who is gravida 2, para 2, abortus 0 after delivery of the case-patient, has a history of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Sjögren syndrome with known anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La autoantibodies. She was diagnosed with SLE 7 years ago at 18 weeks gestation during her first pregnancy with her son. Her son, born at term, did not develop NL and is currently healthy with mild asthma. She has not seen a rheumatologist since her first pregnancy and takes no medications for SLE. There is no known or documented major organ involvement. She did not receive prenatal rheumatologic care or medications for SLE during her pregnancy with the case-patient. The mother retrospectively reported a self-limiting flare of arthritis in the last 2 weeks of the pregnancy. Maternal anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La autoantibody levels were not obtained during her second pregnancy. Weekly second trimester and 30-week fetal echocardiograms showed no structural abnormalities or bradycardia. There was no evidence of fetal 3rd degree AVB and the ventricular function was normal. The patient was born via an uncomplicated vaginal delivery at term weighing 3450 g with APGAR scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The newborn and mother were discharged to home after 24 h without any concern for NL or other medical conditions.
The patient initially did well with appropriate weight gain and no cyanosis, shortness of breath, or diaphoresis when feeding. The cutaneous findings, starting at 2 weeks of life, led to a screening electrocardiogram at 4-weeks of life which showed LBBB . Echocardiography at 5 weeks of life revealed severely dilated cardiomyopathy with an ejection fraction of 25%, a thin echogenic dyskinetic ventricular septum, normal appearing origins of coronary arteries, mild tricuspid insufficiency, and mild mitral insufficiency . Despite adequate weight gain and no symptoms other than the rash, the patient was admitted for further workup and medical management of her heart failure.
Initial blood testing confirmed the diagnosis of NL by revealing an antinuclear antibody titer of 1:640 (normal value: less than 1:80) and robust anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La autoantibody levels greater than 8 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) units (normal value: less than 1 ELISA unit). Screening for lysosomal acid alpha-glucosidase deficiency (Pompe disease), muscular dystrophies, Barth syndrome, fatty acid oxidation disorders, mitochondrial disorders, congenital disorders of glycosylation, mucopolysaccharidoses, and a cardiomyopathy genetic screening panel (a molecular evaluation for hereditary causes of cardiomyopathy; screening for abnormalities in over 100 known genes) were all negative. Cardiac enzymes and screening for viral pathogens was not obtained. She was started on heart failure management consisting of aspirin, captopril, furosemide, and carvedilol. LBBB persisted but no AVB was detected during the hospital stay. The patient was discharged on day 5 with stable hemodynamics and a plan to further titrate the heart failure medications as tolerated.
Two-month and 3-month follow up echocardiography were unchanged from her first study. She was admitted at 3-months of age for intermittent tachypnea and diaphoresis with feeding. Frequent non-sustained atrial tachycardia was discovered, and she was started on digoxin. Due to her persistent myopathy, and the unusual appearance of her thin, echobright, dyskinetic ventricular septum, she was taken to the cardiac catheterization laboratory to assess for other possible causes of perinatal infarction. Cardiac catheterization revealed unremarkable, patent coronary arteries. Endomyocardial biopsy of the right ventricle obtained during catheterization revealed no significant histologic abnormalities or antibody deposition. During catheterization, the patient developed bradycardia which was non-responsive to epinephrine and led to pulseless electrical activity requiring 44 min of emergent resuscitation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). During the subsequent cardiovascular intensive care unit stay, repeat anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La autoantibodies at 3 months of life were 4.7 ELISA units and greater than 8 ELISA units, respectively. A biventricular pacemaker was placed at 3 months and 12 days of life which converted the LBBB to a narrow complex paced rhythm with significant improvement in septal dyskinesia and stroke volume. Plasmapheresis at 3 months and 13 days of life resulted in a decrease of anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La autoantibody from 2.4 ELISA units and 5.2 ELISA units to 0.1 ELISA units and 1.3 ELISA units, respectively. At 3 months and 14 days of life one dose of IVIG 1 g/kg was given, and the patient was successfully weaned off ECMO after 7 days of therapy (lasting from 3 months and 8 days to 3 months and 14 days of life). Subsequent echocardiography 6 days after stopping ECMO revealed improved systolic function with an ejection fraction of 30%. She was medically optimized and discharged on captopril, digoxin, carvedilol, furosemide, and aspirin.
At 8 months of age, approximately 4 months after discharge, she had a narrower LBBB (QRS duration 100 msec) paced rhythm with her biventricular pacemaker working appropriately. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular volume and systolic function (ejection fraction 70%), and furosemide and aspirin were discontinued. She has remaining neurologic complications from the emergent resuscitation; however, she is starting to achieve milestones and has reestablished an appropriate weight and height percentile for her age.