A 62-year-old European Caucasian woman presented at our emergency department with fever, sore throat and painful swallowing for four days. Clinical findings at presentation included inarticulate speech, left-sided tonsil and soft-palate swelling and enlarged left cervical lymph nodes. Her past medical history revealed that BD had been diagnosed eight years earlier. At that time, our patient presented with oral and genital ulcerations, painful metacarpal swelling of her ring finger, thrombophlebitis and painful lower leg swelling and erythema. Treatment at that time had consisted of high-dose methylprednisolone, cyclophosphamide and colchicine. The course of the disease had been oligosymptomatic with a single episode of relapse with oral and genital ulcerations, seven years earlier. Maintenance treatment with colchicine and azathioprine was discontinued one year earlier. Co-morbidities were insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and osteoarthritis of her left knee following anterior cruciate ligament surgery.
Our patient was immediately referred to otolaryngology for treatment of an assumed peritonsillar abscess. A pharyngeal incision yielded no pus. Antibiotic treatment with clindamycin was started. Computed tomography (CT) of her neck showed inflammation of the left peritonsillar tissue, but no peritonsillar abscess. A bilateral tonsillectomy was performed the next day. Histological examination showed acute phlegmonous inflammation of her left tonsil. There was no streptococcal (or any bacterial) growth in throat cultures or in the removed tonsillar tissue. During the following weeks, our patient had persistent fever up to 39°C and painful swelling of her neck. Compression of her upper airways caused moderate dyspnea and a daily dose of 125mg methylprednisolone was administered from day three onwards for one week, to reduce the swelling. Her C-reactive protein level was persistently elevated (range 200 to 400mg/L). On day seven, a repeat CT of her neck showed diffuse pharyngeal swelling but no abscess. Imipenem was added as a broad-spectrum antibiotic to prevent parapharyngeal and mediastinal spreading of a presumed infection. Our patient did not respond to treatment and her fever and neck swelling persisted.
On day 15, our patient was referred to our internal medicine ward. A CT scan of her neck, chest and abdomen ruled out superior vena cava syndrome, pulmonary embolism and thoracic or abdominal abscess. On day 17, she newly developed single, non-palpable petechial palmar and plantar lesions on her right hand and foot. Transthoracic echocardiography showed no signs of endocarditis. Blood and urine cultures tested negative. Syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus were ruled out. A vasculitis screening (antineutrophil antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, urinary sediment) was negative. On day 20, magnetic resonance imaging of her head and neck showed diffuse, predominantly left-sided inflammatory infiltration of epi- and mesopharyngeal tissues (Figure
). A transcutaneous biopsy involving skin, subcutis and sternocleidomastoid muscle tissue confirmed leukocytoclastic small vessel vasculitis and perivasculitis, compatible with a relapse of BD (Figure
).
Our patient showed rapid clinical and laboratory improvement upon treatment with methylprednisolone 1g daily for three days. The prednisone dose was then reduced to 1mg/kg body weight over three weeks and azathioprine was concomitantly up-titrated to a daily dose of 200mg over four weeks. Because of the side effects of azathioprine, the treatment was switched to mycophenolate mofetile (daily dose of 1g) after three months. Prednisone was tapered to 5mg over the course of one year. To date, our patient has experienced no recurrence of BD under the immunosuppressive maintenance therapy.