A 38-year-old Asian male patient presented to our hospital with complaints of frequent palpitations and weakness. His past medical history was significant for an acute respiratory infection in 2012, which supposedly had initiated the tachycardia. The patient’s tachycardia had increased since 1 month before admission to our hospital for which his cardiologist had prescribed amiodarone 600 mg/day before 10 days. The patient was haemodynamically stable, and his heart auscultation revealed frequent premature beats. Surface electrocardiography (ECG) revealed that both premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) and ventricular tachycardia (VT) had similar left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology and inferior axis with R/S transition in V3 . However, transthoracic echocardiography and complete standard blood tests were unremarkable.
After finding no contraindication for the procedure, we performed the electrophysiological study of the heart. During activational mapping, we determined the earliest activation time (dT = 32 ms) in the posterior RVOT. After failure of ablation (45 W, 17 mL/min) in this area (irrigated EZ Steer™ Bi-Directional Ablation Catheter, Biosense Webster), we assumed that the focus of arrhythmia was located in the left side of the heart and consistently checked coronary cusps to find the earliest activation site. Activation mapping performed to identify the earliest activation site showed a dT of 20 ms in the right coronary cusp and a dT of 32 ms in the LCC. Because ablation procedure in the left sinus of Valsalva (45 W, 17 mL/min) was unsuccessful , we used the CS approach. The earliest activation time in the GCV was 32 ms. To avoid coronary artery injury, we performed selective angiography of the left coronary artery (LCA). The catheter tip was located in the projection of the proximal left anterior descending artery 5–6 mm away from the vessel’s margin. Ablation through the GCV (20 W, 17 mL/min, 60 s) did not eliminate the arrhythmia.
A focal reaction of the underlying tissue (accelerated ventricular rhythm with clinical PVC morphology) was observed during the unsuccessful catheter ablation through the distal CS and LCC. The earliest activation time was 30–31 ms in all three structures (RVOT, LCC, and CS), and accelerated ventricular rhythm was found during CS and LCC ablation. Because we could not reach total match of the QRS morphology during pace mapping through the LCC, RVOT, and GCV , we supposed that the arrhythmia focus was located epicardially, somewhere between these structures. Hence, we attempted to map and ablate the arrhythmogenic myocardium through the left atrial appendage (LAA). After transseptal puncture, we approached the LAA and simultaneously contrasted it with the LCA to determine the dimensional relationship between these two structures . The LAA appeared to have windsock morphology. The ablation electrode was then inserted into the LAA and directed towards the left ventricular summit (LVS). We found the earliest activation site, and the measured dT at this point was 32 ms. We could not achieve pace mapping from the LAA even with high stimulation parameters (25 V, 3 ms). Before ablation, selective left coronary angiography was performed and the tip of the catheter was found to be 4–5 mm away from LCA bifurcation in two projections . Radiofrequency (RF) energy was increased slowly to 40 W for 40 s and lesions were made in two neighbouring points of the myocardium in the posterior apical portion of the LAA by using an irrigated tip catheter with 17 mL/min saline inflation. After the ablation, we could not initiate VT performing standard pacing protocol. In 3 days follow-up on 24 h ECG (Holter) monitoring 1314 single monomorphic PVCs were documented. QRS morphology of newly detected PVCs was different from that of pre-ablation clinical PVCs. The patient was discharged with a prescription of allapinin 25 mg/day. At the 1 month follow-up, 2298 single monomorphic PVCs were detected. The patient had no VT episodes after the ablation.