An 11-year-old intact male Dalmatian dog was presented with a complaint of intermittent ataxia and lethargy after surgical removal of a skin tumour 10 days earlier. The dog’s clinical signs included a slightly elevated rectal temperature, moderate depression, marked bilateral iris atrophy and reduced indirect and direct pupillary light responses. Both pinnae were thickened and fibrotic with brown exudate in the external acoustic meatus, consistent with chronic otitis externa. Elleven hours later, the dog had difficulty maintaining balance, displayed spontaneous nystagmus, seemed to be circling to the left, was ataxic and had lost positional reflexes in both hind limbs. A tentative diagnosis of vestibular syndrome was made, but due to the dog’s old age, the owner opted for euthanasia without any further examination or treatment.
Additional historical information included chronic atopic dermatitis and intermittent otitis externa since the age of 6 months. Topical treatment had been administered intermittently and included antibiotics (Fucidin, Polymyxin B), antifungal drops (Miconazole) and unspecified corticosteroids. In addition, the dog has been treated with low dose oral prednisolone for the past 6 years.
At necropsy, a grey soft material was present in the external ear canals and pearly white, dry material consistent with keratin was found in the tympanic bullae bilaterally . Grey-white, firm, fibrous tissue partially obliterated the right bulla. The brain and meninges were grossly unremarkable. Both kidneys had pitted, irregular cortices and granular cut surface, and urinary stones were found in the pelvis of the right kidney and urinary bladder. Swabs for bacteriological culturing were collected from the urinary bladder and the surgical skin-incision, but unfortunately not brain or ears.
The brain and tissues from the kidney, myocardium, intestine, liver and lung were collected for histology. Both ears were collected en bloc by sawing transactionally through the tympanic bullae and cranium. Tissue samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin, and bone tissue was thereafter decalcified in 10% EDTA. The brain was sectioned transversely to include tissue from three levels of the cerebrum, just cranial to the optic chiasm, at the cranial aspect of the pituitary gland and caudally through the midbrain to include hippocampus and cerebral aqueduct. The cerebellum was sectioned in the midsagittal plane and then transversely to include the pons, while a single transverse section of the medulla of the brain stem was made. All samples were routinely processed, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 2–4 μm and stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Serial microtomic sections of both ears and the caudal most section of the cerebrum were Gram stained and Periodic Acid-Schiff-stained. Immunohistochemistry for rabies virus antigen was performed with monospecific polyclonal rabbit serum N161-5 (Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research Institute for Animal Health, Germany). As negative controls serum from a non-immunized rabbit and a brain sections from a rabies-negative fox were used. Brain tissue from a rabies–positive reindeer served as a positive control. The slides were counterstained with haematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted in aqueous medium (Aquatex; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).
The external ear canals were stenotic with marked orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis, epidermal and ceruminous gland hyperplasia and dermal fibrosis expanding the otic integument. Ceruminous glands were dilated and contained mixed inflammatory infiltrates. Multifocal infiltrates of plasma cells, neutrophils, lymphocytes and macrophages were present in the dermis, while there were pustules, yeast cells and coccoid bacteria in the stratum corneum.
Compared to a normal canine ear marked histopathological changes were found in the middle ears of this dog. Both left and right tympanic membranes were unapparent, and there was direct communication between the external acoustic meatus and tympanic cavity. A keratinizing squamous epithelial layer continuous with the external acoustic meatus lined the middle ear compartment consistent with bilateral tympanokeratomas . Abundant laminar keratin and bacterial cocci were seen in the lumen of the right tympanic bulla. Additionally, the right bulla was filled by mature, dense, fibrous tissue containing multiple glands lined by a single layer of ciliated respiratory epithelium mixed with goblet cells. Marked mucoperiosteal fibrosis, pseudogland formation and cholesterol clefts with mixtures of neutrophils and macrophages were found within the remainder of middle ear compartment.
In the left ear focal, complete bony erosion of the petrous portion of the temporal bone was present adjacent to the tympanokeratoma . An aggregate of keratinized squamous epithelial cells, marked infiltrates of neutrophils and multiple Gram-positive bacterial cocci were observed in the left cochlea . The inflammation extended to the spiral ganglion of the vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII) and inflammatory infiltrates and haemorrhage were observed within the spiral ganglion and in the surrounding bone tissue . There was no evidence of extension of infection through the vestibular (oval) window, but involvement of the cochlear (round) window could neither be confirmed nor excluded.
Multifocal to coalescing inflammatory infiltrates of neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages and plasma cells suggestive of bacterial meningitis was found in the meninges of all examined sections from the brain, including, cerebrum, cerebellum and brain stem . However, bacteria were not identified in the Gram-stained brain section. Eosinophilic, round to oval, intracytoplasmic inclusions were found in neurons of the thalamus and in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum (see Additional file for photomicrograph). Inclusions were PAS-negative and negative for rabies virus antigen most consistent with rabies-like inclusions. A mixture of bacteria dominated by Staphylococcus pseudintermedius was cultured from the urinary bladder, while no bacteria grew from the surgical incision. Additional diagnoses included chronic, interstitial, lymphoplasmacytic nephritis and glomerulosclerosis, mild eosinophilic enteritis and mild, interstitial, lymphohistiocytic pneumonia.