A 64-year-old male had suffered from right leg pain accompanying an enlarging mass in his right gluteal area. The patient received steroid pulse therapy because of sudden deafness at another hospital at 5 months prior to consult. Right leg pain appeared 1 month later. There was no neurological deficit.
A firm, soft tissue mass with poor mobility was palpated deep to the area of the right gluteal crease. Before surgery, Tinel’s sign was positive. Computed tomography (CT) showed no phleboliths or foci of calcification within the tumor, and thallium-201 scintigraphy showed accumulation on the area of the mass (see Fig. ). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed enlargement and homogenous contents with high T2-weighted signal intensities, suggesting cystic degeneration (see Fig. ). Elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) and increased white blood cells (WBC) were observed before surgery. Differential diagnoses comprised of schwannoma and sarcomas including malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with necrotic change.
Before excision of the tumor, an open biopsy was performed. During the open biopsy, exudate with necrotic tissue was seen (see Fig. ). A part of the tumor tissue and the exudate was obtained. Pathologic findings show spindle-shaped, S100-positive cells arranged in fascicles with no nuclear atypia, with scattered lymphocytes and degenerative necrotic changes. Culture of the exudate yielded group B Streptococcus, and postoperative antibiotics were shifted to intravenous cefazolin, at a dose 500 mg every 8 hours. Taken together, the mass was diagnosed as infected schwannoma.
After the confirmation of the existence of bacteria and pathological diagnosis released 5 days following the open biopsy, enucleation was imperative because CRP and WBC counts were persistently elevated (see Table ). Enucleation of the mass with debridement and irrigation was performed on the day of release of the final histopathological report. The mass had a thickened capsule and was seen attached to the sciatic nerve (see Fig. ). Nerve stimulator was used during surgery to prevent postoperative motor deficits. Following tumor removal, debridement of surrounding devitalized tissues and copious irrigation with saline solution was done.
The mass was round, firm, and brownish-yellow in color, measuring 11 cm × 6.5 cm × 5 cm (see Fig. ). Gross (see Fig. ) and histopathologic findings with hematoxylin and eosin staining (see Fig. ) revealed cystic necrotic tumor degeneration with abundance of macrophages and lymphocytes accompanying Antoni A and B cells, consistent with a diagnosis of schwannoma with degenerative changes. Culture yielded group B Streptococcus. The patient was continually administered intravenous cefazolin for 1 week, and oral cefdinir for 1 month. Successive CRP determinations decreased (see Table ), and the pain had been improved after the surgery.