A 49-year-old Caucasian woman working on a farm in Vichy, France, experienced an open fracture of the left tibia caused by a hook lifting a haystack. Subsequently, she was admitted to hospital. The fracture was reduced with a locking compression plate (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland). Then, five days later, our patient developed a fever of 38.5°C, and oral treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 6 g/day, was started; eight days after starting this treatment, the first antibiotic was replaced with oral ciprofloxacin (1.0 g/day) for three months. During that time, the cutaneous wound healed, but successive X-rays showed that bone healing was not obtained. Seven months following surgery, our patient broke her tibia locking compression plate while walking. Then, four weeks later, she was admitted to hospital. On examination, our patient had swelling and pain of the leg at the fracture site without any evident clinical sign of infection. X-rays showed a non-union of the tibia at the fracture site and the broken locking compression plate. Her blood test results showed a leukocyte count of 7.39 × 109 cells/L (73% polymorphonuclear cells, 24.9% mononuclear cells), a C reactive protein level of 1 mg/mL, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 5 mm/first hour. The patient underwent removal of the locking compression plate, immediately followed by an intra-medullary nailing associated with a cancellous autologous bone graft harvested on the homolateral iliac crest. A peri-operative bone biopsy of the fracture site was performed in sterile conditions and sent to the microbiology laboratory of the Timone Hospital, Marseille, France. Direct microscopic analysis showed the presence of numerous polymorphonuclear leukocytes, but no bacteria were detected using Gram stain. The biopsy was cultivated in aerobic and anaerobic conditions at 37°C for one month. Plates were checked for bacterial growth twice a week. On the 28th day of culture, white colonies that were convex, powdery and adherent were detected on blood-enriched Columbia agar . The strain was named Timone, according to the name of our hospital. Gram staining demonstrated that the colonies were made of irregular and extensively branched Gram-positive bacilli less than 1 μm in diameter . The bacterium could not be stained using the Ziehl-Neelsen method. Its identification was obtained using 16S rRNA amplification and sequencing. Briefly, DNA was extracted from a colony using the QIAamp Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer's instructions. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of a 1441 bp section was performed using the fD1 and rp2 primers as previously described . Following comparison to sequences in the GenBank database (; sequence deposited under accession number GenBank:), the nucleotide sequence obtained from the PCR product was 100% identical to unpublished sequences recorded under accession numbers GenBank:, GenBank:, and GenBank:. The first two sequences were obtained from Actinomadura sp. from seawater from Costa Rica, and the latter from an Actinomadura sp. detected in shallow water sediments from Norway. By comparison with those of all officially validated Actinomadura species , our sequence exhibited a similarity ranging from 95.63% with Actinomadura libanotica (GenBank:) to 99.37% with A. meyerae (GenBank:). Using the MEGA software , we performed a phylogenetic analysis among Actinomadura species and found our patient's strain to be grouped with A. meyerae . The strain was deposited in the Collection de souches de l'Unité des Rickettsies (CSUR, WDCM875) under reference CSUR P15. The antimicrobial susceptibility of strain Timone was assessed using E-test strips (AB BIODISK, Solna, Sweden) on Mueller-Hinton agar. The strain was susceptible to gentamicin (minimal inhibitory concentration 0.5 μg/mL), doxycycline (0.25 μg/mL), cotrimoxazole (1 μg/mL) and vancomycin (2 μg/mL), and resistant to amoxicillin (8 μg/mL), imipenem (4 μg/mL), erythromycin (16 μg/mL) and rifampin (2 μg/mL). Subsequently, an oral treatment with cotrimoxazole (sulfamethoxazole, 4800 mg/day and trimethoprim, 960 mg/day) was started and continued for six months. Within 15 days of the onset of antibiotics, our patient's operative wound healed and local inflammatory symptoms resolved. A year later, our patient remains asymptomatic.