A 47-year-old Arabic woman, previously diagnosed with rectal cancer metastasized to bones, lymph nodes, and lungs (stage T4N2M1) and post-Hartmann procedure, reported to the emergency department complaining of worsening dyspnea for 2 weeks, significantly more in the supine position. There was no reported family or psychological history or any history of other medical illness, but the patient had a productive cough with yellow sputum.
On clinical examination, the patient had tachypnea with a respiratory rate reaching 30, a pulse rate of 130 beats per minute, and a temperature of 37 ℃. Oxygen saturation was 95% in the O2 mask, she was in 2 L of oxygen, and blood pressure was within normal limits. The patient’s respiratory system examination revealed dullness associated with reduced breath sound on the left side. The rest of the physical tests were unremarkable. The laboratory test results indicated leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 13,000/cm2, C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were at 116 mg/L, troponin levels at 32 ng/L, and creatinine levels at 60 μmol/L. The patient was previously diagnosed with pericardial effusion. The chest radiographs revealed severe hydro-pneumopericardium, total opacification of the left lung, and air space consolidation . A spiral computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram showed that there was heterogeneous soft tissue mass involving left upper and lower lung, with the mass invading the pleural surface and pericardium .
Emergency pericardiocentesis was planned to drain excess fluid.
Over 180 cc of bloody fluid was drained from pericardial sac. Pericardial fluid analysis revealed red blood cell (RBC) count of 166,400 (normal range less than 500) cells/µL, white blood cell (WBC) count of 196,800 cells/µL, neutrophils 91%, macrophages 7%, lymphocyte 2%, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 4054 unit/L, total protein (TP) 46 g/L, glucose 0.21 mmol/L, and high RBC count; hematocrit level 40% suggested the presence of hemopneumopericardium with no immediate complications. Cytological analysis was negative for malignancy. The pericardial tube was removed after 1 day. Post-intervention, chest radiograph revealed interval resolution of marked hemopneumopericardium. The rest of the study remains unchanged . The patient was then evaluated by a cardiologist and discharged from the hospital.
She was admitted for poor feeding after 1 week and discharged after 5 days. During hospitalization, a multidisciplinary meeting was conducted by the oncologists, radiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, and pulmonologists. She was put on palliative care after expert decision. However, 3 weeks later, the patient’s primary malignancy progressed, and the patient died.
Table presents a complete summary of all cases.