A 59-year-old woman presented to the emergency department after 5 days of occipital headache with associated visual floaters. Initial neurological examination was unremarkable with preserved visual fields and acuity and no limb weakness. Cardiovascular examination was unremarkable with no signs of heart failure or cardiac murmurs. Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm.
Non-contrast computed tomography did not demonstrate any acute intracranial pathology. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain identified two areas of diffusion restriction consistent with recent bilateral occipital lobe infarcts.
Background medical history included myelofibrosis with recurrent arterial and venous thromboembolism. Two years prior to presentation the patient suffered a multifocal right occipital lobe infarct consistent with a thrombo-embolic source after her regular anticoagulation was withheld for a dental procedure. Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) at the time demonstrated a patent foramen ovale, although with a left-to-right shunt and negative bubble study. There was no left atrial thrombus. Following this likely thromboembolic stroke and despite the negative bubble study, 6 months prior to presentation, the patient underwent percutaneous PFO closure at another institution with a 35 mm Amplatzer PFO occluder (Abbott Laboratories). During the PFO closure procedure, a 25 mm Amplatzer device was initially trialled; however, intraprocedural TOE demonstrated a malpositioning of the left atrial disc against the inter-atrial septum and the device was exchanged for a larger 35 mm device with improved positioning on TOE.
Baseline medications included warfarin, aspirin 100 mg daily, and hydroxyurea 500 mg daily. International normalized ratio was sub-therapeutic at 1.5 (target 2.0–3.0) on presentation. The patient denied non-compliance with warfarin or aspirin. Haemoglobin level was low at 99 g/L (normal range: 115–165 g/L). Platelet count was elevated at 780 × 109/L (normal range: 150–450 × 109/L). White cell count was normal at 7.30 × 109/L (3.50–11.00 × 109/L).
Resting transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a mobile thrombus (1.8 cm by 1.0 cm) in the left atrium attached to the PFO closure device . There was no residual inter-atrial shunt. There was separation of the left atrial disc of the 35 mm Amplatzer PFO device from the inter-atrial septum adjacent to the thrombus . The patient was commenced on intravenous heparin anticoagulation.
During her admission, the patient subsequently developed left upper limb weakness and paraesthesia. Repeat MRI demonstrated further multifocal embolic infarcts in the right parietal and frontal lobes.
Multi-disciplinary discussion between cardiology, neurology, cardiothoracic surgery, and haematology teams was undertaken. Given the patient’s history of myelofibrosis and hypercoagulable state, surgical device explantation and subsequent repair were deemed inappropriately high risk. Given the sub-therapeutic INR, the patient was transitioned to subcutaneous enoxaparin anti-thrombotic therapy long-term. Repeat TTE 6 days following the initial TTE demonstrated a reduction in thrombus size to 0.7 cm by 0.7 cm and the patient was discharged home .
Transoesophageal echocardiogram 5 weeks after initial presentation demonstrated residual device-associated thrombus with no significant change in size since discharge. Factor Xa assay at this time showed the patient’s enoxaparin anticoagulation was at a therapeutic level. On follow-up at 6 months, she had not suffered any further neurological events, repeat echocardiography was not performed at this time.