An 89-year-old woman collapsed at the dinner table and was helped to the floor by family members who report that she transiently lost consciousness. On regaining consciousness, she complained of chest pain and dyspnoea. Prior to this episode, the patient had a very stressful few days with the sudden death of a family member.
An ambulance was called, the 12-lead ECGs showed CHB with a broad QRS and T-wave inversion in leads V1–V6 . On arrival to the emergency department, she was bradycardic at 45 b.p.m. and hypotensive 80/60 mmHg. On admission, blood tests revealed a normal full blood count and renal profile, a raised D-dimer at 2200 ng/mL (normal <400 ng/mL), high-sensitivity troponin-I 550 ng/L (normal <11.6 ng/L), and brain natriuretic peptide 1341 ng/L (normal <20 ng/L). C-reactive protein was mildly elevated at 22 mg/L (normal <10 mg/L). She was given a bolus dose of atropine followed by an isoprenaline infusion to good effect with haemodynamic stability achieved.
A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram was performed showing no evidence of pulmonary embolism.
Subsequently, a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed akinesis of all left ventricular apical segments and apical ballooning with hyperdynamic basal segments .
The patient was transferred to a tertiary centre for an angiogram given the presentation of what appeared to be an acute coronary syndrome (ACS). On arrival to the catheter lab, the patient had persistent CHB with intermittent non-sustained ventricular tachycardia, possibly precipitated by isoprenaline. The isoprenaline was stopped and a transvenous temporary pacing wire was inserted.
Coronary angiography revealed minor coronary artery disease with a dominant right coronary artery . A left ventriculogram showed a classic appearance of TTS with extensive apical and mid wall akinesia, with hyperdynamic basal segments and high left ventricular end-systolic pressure of 25 mmHg (; Video 1). Given the absence of significant coronary disease and the persistence of haemodynamically compromising CHB, the patient underwent dual-chamber pacemaker implantation.
Her past medical history included carotid artery stenosis (under surveillance), hypercholesterolaemia, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, and anxiety. She was an ex-smoker of 60 pack-years and had a good baseline functional status, being independently mobile and independent of all activities of daily living. Her regular medications included Bezafibrate MR 400 mg once a day, Citalopram 10 mg once a day, Clopidogrel 75 mg once a day, Lansoprazole 30 mg once a day, and Paracetamol PRN and Ranitidine 150 mg twice a day.
Departmental echocardiography was performed and demonstrated biplane left ventricular ejection fraction of 48% and persisting regional wall motion abnormalities consistent with TTS. Inflammatory markers and troponin levels were reduced on the days following her admission and after a period of observations on the wards, she was discharged home.
Interrogation of her pacemaker at both 6 weeks and 6 months showed underlying CHB, stable lead measurements and >97% pacing in the right ventricular lead. Repeat echocardiography at 6 months also demonstrated near normalization of left ventricular function with no apical regional wall motion abnormalities.