A 53-year-old male with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hepatitis C, alcohol abuse, and chronic back pain presented with altered mental status after a presumed suicide attempt after estrangement from his girlfriend. The patient did not have any known cardiovascular history. Family became concerned after the patient failed to wake up, and 911 was called. The patient was found to be stuporous with pinpoint pupils. An intravenous line was established, and after administration of naloxone the patient became belligerent. After discussion with family and review of his medications, it was determined that the patient likely overdosed on an acetaminophen/hydrocodone product and carisoprodol. He was admitted to the ICU requiring a naloxone drip (0.5 mg/h). He had an acetaminophen level of 49 mcg/ml with an unknown time of ingestion. His transaminase levels and coagulation factors were within normal limits (AST 32 IU/l, ALT 47, and INR 0.97). Because of the detectable acetaminophen level with an unknown time on ingestion, intravenous NAC at 150 mg/kg (84 kg-12,600 mg NAC) was ordered.
Immediately after initiation of the intravenous NAC, which was to be infused over 1 h, the patient developed periorbital edema, rash, and hypotension with a systolic blood pressure of 80 mmHg. The infusion was stopped. He was rapidly intubated without medications, and resuscitation was initiated with intravenous normal saline. Hypotension persisted despite fluid resuscitation with 2 l normal saline, and therefore phenylephrine (0.1 mg/min) was started. The ECG obtained prior to the administration of phenylepherine showed pronounced ST segment elevation in the inferior leads, and an emergent cardiology consult was obtained. Because the patient remained unstable he received aspirin and started on heparin, but no further invasive tests or procedures were obtained at that time. His troponin obtained prior to NAC infusion was 0.012 ng/ml and rose to 658 ng/ml over the next 10 h. An echocardiogram obtained 2 h after the initial EKG obtained showed global severe hypokinesis with an ejection fraction of less than 20%. He died approximately 17 h after the initiation of the intravenous NAC loading dose. On further review, a compounding error was discovered that had resulted in an initial dose of 126,000 mg, which was ten-fold greater than the appropriate loading dose for his weight.