A 40-year-old female presented to us with complaint of pain and swelling at the right wrist from the past 3 months with inability to carry out her daily routine activities. Pain was dull aching in nature, non radiating, aggravated with wrist movements, and relieved with rest. Swelling gradually increased in size. On examination, swelling was present over DER, had normal temperature overlying swelling compared to surrounding skin, no crepitus, tenderness present, and movements were painful.
Pre-operative anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiograph of the wrist were done which revealed an expanded osteolytic lesion at the epiphyseal region of the distal radius. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fine-needle aspiration cytology were done and GCT was diagnosed Campanacci Type 3. The patient was operated and treated by excision of tumor and reconstruction with contralateral fibular grafting with K-wire fixation of DER and biopsy of growth was sent. Above elbow slab was applied ( and ).
The patient came for regular follow-up at the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd months. Union was confirmed at the 3rd month and slab was removed and K-wire removed at 9 months . The patient was further followed at 3 months interval for the next 18 months with no complaints with the functional score of 21 done using the musculoskeletal tumor society system.
After 7 years, the patient again turned with a swelling at the same region, which is also gradually increasing in size for the past 3 months and was able to do daily routine household activities. X-ray AP and lateral views of wrist showed gross lytic expansion of the fibular graft with lytic lesions of the multiple proximal carpal bones. MRI of wristshows expansile lytic lesion, with corticomedullary destruction. A radiological diagnosis of GCT Campanacci Grade 3 was made. Bone scan was done to rule out any metastasis and showed abnormal increased uptake seen in radiotherapy. She subsequently was managed by resection of tumor tissue by volar approach to DER with proximal row carpectomy with ulnocarpal fusion with retrograde K-wire fixation of the 3rd metacarpal resulting in centralization of ulna. Wound is closed without tension and above elbow pop slab is applied. Above elbow pop slab is applied for 12 weeks. Physiotherapy is commenced immediately after the surgery, starting with finger movements. Wrist physiotherapy is commenced at 12-week post-surgery after confirming union.
Biopsy sample sent which confirmed the diagnosis of GCT of the distal radius. depicts hematoxylin and eosin staining of the sample smear showing features of GCT of bone with osteoclastic type of giant cells, and multinucleate cells interspersed in proliferating stromal cells( and ).The patient developed necrosis which healed on regular dressing.
No recurrence noted till the last follow-up and the patient functional score was 15 done using them usculoskeletal tumor society system.