A 66 year old male presented with abdominal pain and a 3 week history of a right lower quadrant (RLQ) lump that had progressively developed since he attempted to move a large bottle of oil (approximately 15 L). This was associated with 2 weeks of anorexia and a 5 kg weight loss in 2 weeks. He was not clinically obstructed, he had opened his bowels the morning of presentation and was passing flatus. He had no symptoms of nausea or vomiting. He has got no significant medical or surgical history. He was not a diagnosed diabetic and his random blood sugar level was 5 on presentation. He denied any previous medical history including any kidney or liver related conditions. He has never had a colonoscopy in the past and denied any history of bowel cancer or inflammatory bowel disease in the family.
His vital signs on arrival to the emergency department included the following: Temperature of 37 degree Celsius, Heart rate 75 beats per minute, Blood pressure 123/75 mmHg, Respiratory rate 15, Oxygen saturation 98 % on room air. His abdomen was very distended on examination, with overlying erythema over the right side . His RLQ was tender over certain parts with a fluctuant mass underneath. There was no crepitus on clinical examination of the abdomen. He had raised inflammatory markers – white cell count (WCC) of 16.4 and C reactive protein of 160. His eGFR on presentation was 80 mL/min (normal) and Creatinine level was 87 (normal range between 60 & 110). His liver function tests were as follows: ALP 190 (slightly elevated, normal range 30–110), GGT 79 (very mild elevation, normal range 5–50), ALT 20 (normal range < 51) AST 29 (normal range < 36).
He underwent a CT Abdomen which demonstrated a complex collection in the right anterior abdominal wall, containing multiple locules of gas and air fluid levels (187 × 91 mm axial dimension and 106 mm craniocaudal dimension) (A and B). This was seen in close proximity to a markedly abnormally thickened right colon and hepatic flexure with significant surrounding oedematous change and fluid (C and D). He was resuscitated with IV fluids and commenced on IV antibiotics.
A bolus of IV Hartmanns was prescribed followed by IV Hartmanns at a maintenance rate of 125 mL/h. Triple antibiotics (empirical treatment for necrotising fasciitis) were charted as per the therapeutic guidelines – IV Meropenem, Vancomycin and Clindamycin.
He underwent an emergency operation during late hours that night, wherein the anterior abdominal wall over the right lower quadrant demonstrated necrotising fasciitis, containing extensive purulent fluid needing drainage, and dead tissue including fascia needing debridement. A transverse incision was made over the right lower quadrant overlying the abscess. Extensive debridement was performed of all necrotic tissue including fascia.
This was then followed by a laparotomy to determine the cause of the necrotising fasciitis. Laparotomy was performed through the initial incision, cut was extended to facilitate adhesiolysis – careful adhesiolysis was done to separate small bowel from the anterior abdominal wall and then further adhesiolysis to separate omentum and hepatic flexure from the anterior abdominal wall. A mass was found at the hepatic flexure which was presumed to be the source of the necrotising fasciitis due to perforation. However, given the mass was quite adherent to the duodenum and due to lack of safety deemed with regards to separating the mass in order to perform a right hemicolectomy, the decision was made to perform a diverting ileostomy and for a relook the next day during day hours.
Ileostomies are normally made on the right side of the abdomen given the location of the terminal ileum, however it was challenging in this case as the anterior abdominal wall was debrided in the right lower quadrant. Hence, an end ileostomy was brought out at a trephine in the left abdomen that was marked preoperatively.
He was sent intubated to Intensive care post operatively, with a view to bring him back to the operating theatre the next day for an oncological resection. He was requiring minimal vasopressor support in Intensive care whilst awaiting the second operation – about 7 mL of Noradrenaline.
During the relook the next day, the mass appeared to be perforating into the duodenum thereby needing a right hemicolectomy with resection of part of duodenum. The 3rd part of the duodenum was involved. Therefore, it was difficult to mobilise the hepatic flexure away from the duodenum as part of the right hemicolectomy. Transverse colon was then resected using a EndoGIA 80 mm stapler. Mesentery was then controlled with a ligasure impact (energy device) followed by stitch ties. Ileocolic pedicle was then taken down. An EndoGIA 60 mm stapler was then used to resect duodenum off hepatic flexure by stapling across the duodenum. A patent lumen was noted post stapling. Transverse colon stump was then brought out via stoma opening – for mucus fistula and end ileostomy was refashioned. His management was then continued with vac dressings and a slow diet upgrade. 2 weeks later, his abdominal wound was eventually closed in the operating theatre. He also had a barium meal which revealed a patent duodenal anastomosis (A and B).
The initial tissue culture showed a heavy growth of mixed coliforms, the histopathology of the abdominal wall was consistent with an abscess – dense neutrophilic abscess in the subcutaneous tissue with necrotic debris. No fungal organisms were seen. There was no evidence of invasive malignancy.
His hepatic flexure histopathology came back positive for high grade adenocarcinoma with mucinous differentiation, loss of MSH-6 → pT4b with tumour perforating into the duodenum. There were 16 lymph nodes in the final specimen but none of them were positive for metastases.
There was positive staining with CK20 and CDX2 and negative staining with CK7. He was then referred to medical oncology for adjuvant chemotherapy who have organised follow up for the patient in the community. He was then discharged home. His chemotherapy was initiated about 4 weeks after the surgery. There were no post operative complications that delayed his treatment.