A woman in her 80s presented to our hospital for a pericardial pain examination. Her medical history included breast cancer and dementia. Laboratory analysis demonstrated an elevated inflammatory response with pancreatic enzyme, normal carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels. However, elevated levels of duke pancreatic monoclonal antigen type 2 (DUPAN-2) were observed (454 U/mL). Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 20-mm hypovascular tumor in the body of the pancreas and a 27-mm pseudocyst. The distal part of the main pancreatic duct was dilated due to obstruction by the tumor, and the pancreatic cyst was continuous with the pancreas. A contrast effect was observed in the early phase without significant lymph node enlargement . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed a tumor in the pancreatic body and complete obstruction of approximately 12 mm of the main pancreatic duct. A high-signal pancreatic effusion and a pseudocyst were seen on a T2-weighted image of the pancreatic tail . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed that the main pancreatic duct stenosis in the body of the pancreas was so severe that cannulation was impossible, and contrast media extravasation was due to pancreatic duct disruption in the pancreatic tail Endoscopic ultrasonography fine-needle aspiration revealed that the tumor was PASC.
Aeromonas caviae was detected in culture examination of the pancreatic fluid, and a diagnosis of an infected pancreatic cyst was made. Central intravenous nutrition and antibiotics were administered, which stabilized her general condition. The patient was diagnosed with resectable PASC and underwent distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy. We performed washing cytology, which revealed a negative result by frozen section analysis. The intraoperative duration was 280 min, and the blood loss was 600 mL.
Macroscopically, a 25 × 22 × 22 mm lesion was observed in the body of the pancreas, indicating complete occlusion of the main pancreatic duct. The pancreatic resection margins were negative, and no lymph node metastases were identified. The caudal part of the pancreas showed evidence of chronic sclerosing pancreatitis. Yellow-cell granuloma formation was observed after pancreatic effusion . The cellular picture of adenocarcinoma was characterized by enlarged nucleoli, small and large immobile nuclei, and SCC with enlarged nuclei and an oval shape. Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor showed that periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining and anti-p40 immunostaining were positive, leading to the diagnosis of SCC of the pancreatic gland .
The postoperative course was uneventful. Immunohistochemical analysis of the resected specimen confirmed the diagnosis of tumor node metastasis [TNM] classification as T2N0M0 stage IB. Systemic adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 is ongoing without any recurrence.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images.