A 20-year-old male presented with a mass in the right parotid region of one year duration. It was enlarging gradually and was not associated with any other symptoms. His medical history was nonrevealing for any systemic disease. He gave no personal or family history of tuberculosis, and no other relevant symptoms such as night sweats, weight loss or pulmonary symptoms. Physical examination revealed a mobile, non-tender mass occupying the superficial lobe of the right parotid gland. There was no overlying skin changes suggestive of parotitis. Facial nerve function was normal. Other physical findings were also normal and there was no palpable cervical lymphadenopathy.
A provisional diagnosis of a neoplasm of the parotid gland was made and the patient was investigated accordingly. The complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, other biochemical investigations and chest X-ray were normal. Ultrasound examination (US) showed a well-defined, hypoechoic solid mass lesion in the superficial lobe of the right parotid gland. Fine needle aspiration cytology was performed, but the cytological findings were not diagnostic. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-defined mass lesion, measuring 16 × 21 × 30 mm in size, hypointense on T1-weighted images, and hyperintense on T2-weighted images with homogenous contrast enhancement, located in the posterior part of the superficial lobe of the right parotid gland .
Because the findings were compatible with a parotid neoplasm, a right superficial parotidectomy was performed. The superficial lobe was removed in toto with the mass while preserving the facial nerve. The postoperative course was uneventful. The histopathologic examination of the specimen was reported as caseating granulomatous infection with Langhans giant cells . An intradermal test with purified protein derivative (PPD) was performed and it was strongly positive with 24 mm of duration. Arrangements were made for the patient to receive antitubercular chemotherapy with rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamid and ethambutol for six months of duration.