A 67-year-old man from eastern Purwakarta, Jawa Barat, Indonesia, presented with chronical painless mass of testis since one year ago. Currently, the mass was getting larger in size and become firm in consistency. This complaint was accompanied by significant weight loss within two months. Patient also complained for frequent urination with weak stream and dribbling since 3 years ago and the complaint become worst during this 5 months. There was no history of fatigue, malaise, dyspnea, loss of consciousness, trauma, fever, infertility, lymphadenitis, lymphangitis, or previous history of testicular tumor. There was no history of hematuria and stone within the urine. There was no history of allergies. Patient had history of urinary catheter insertion since 5 days before when he was admitted to inpatient care of hospital nearby his hometown. Since the catheter was being removed, patient complained of anuria. Patient had history of controlled Diabetes Mellitus since one year ago. No previous history of hypertension. There was no history of similar disease in family.
On physical examination obtained normal penile structure with descended testicles, palpable intrascrotal mass with size of 10 × 7 × 5 cm, firm consistency, immobile, without any tenderness, and no lymphadenophaty in groin . Palpation of the bilateral testis and spermatic cords were found no remarkable abnormality. There was no inguinal lymphadenopathy.
The laboratorium tests revealed anemia with Hb was 10.8 g/dL and Hematocrite was 29.2%, white blood cells of 8600 cells/μL, Platelet was 246,000 cells/μL. Ureum and creatinine were increasing, with ureum was 77 mg/dL and Creatinine was 2.60 mg/dL. Natrium was 137 mEq/L and Kalium was 3.5 mEq/L. Random blood glucose within normal limit (109 mg/dL).
Scrotal USG showed intratesticular mass, without peristaltic, homogenous parenchym, showed no intralesion vascularization during Doppler examination. The right and left testis, bilateral epididymis, and bilateral spermatic cords were of normal size, shape, and echotexture .
After assessing the testicular mass, an informed consent was taken. Thereafter left trans-scrotal orchiectomy was performed by urologist resident who experience in this field for around 3 years in operating room and specimen sent to pathology anatomy department. Histopathological examination revealed the specimen of right scrotum with size of 12.5 cm × 8.5 cm × 6.1 cm with red-brownish colored, during lamellation, obtained encapsulated mass with size of 12.2 cm × 7.9 cm × 6 cm, hollowed space filled with porridge-like texture with capsule thickness of 0.1–0.3 cm. Microscopically, right scrotum was covered with keratinized simple squamous epithelium, nuclei within normal limit. Subepithelial revealed fibrocollagenous connective tissue with inflammatory cells, lymphocyte, and histiocyte. Adnexa and hair follicle within normal limit. Cysts were found covered with simple squamous cell . After a week after patient discharged, patient came to outward clinic and no complication was found. Patient feels better in carrying out daily activities.