A nulligravid, 46-year-old German woman presented to the gynecology clinic because of abnormal uterine bleeding and a slowly increasing abdominal extent in the past 15 years. She had no bowel or bladder complaints. The patient reported two episodes of polymenorrhea and menorrhagia in the past years. Due to the patient’s general fear of physicians and absence of frequent symptoms, she consulted her gynecologist and general physician sporadically. The gynecologist did not use ultrasound to clarify the uterine pathology. The general physician attributed her progressive abdominal extent to weight gain and advised dietary change and physical exercise as management. Both primary health care providers did not perform a thorough physical examination, including imaging methods, leaving the fibroid undiagnosed and untreated.
In our clinic, a preliminary physical examination was performed, which indicated good general condition and no evidence of pallor or pedal edema. The patient’s preoperative body mass index (BMI) was 32.1 kg/m2. Her abdomen was enormously enlarged and pendulous with flank fullness on both sides. An irregular mass arose from the pelvis up to the xiphisternum and was not discernible owing to abdominal wall obesity. There were no hernias or abdominal varices. Renal angle fullness was not observed. Because of the patient’s anxiety, a vaginal examination could not be performed. Transabdominal ultrasound showed a huge intraabdominal mass. The right kidney showed impaired cirrhosis, while the left kidney showed compensatory enlargement. A small amount of ascites was observed. An urgent computed tomography (CT) scan was performed revealing a large tumor that occupied the abdominopelvic cavity completely. On the CT scan, the mass measured 32 × 27 × 34 cm (intralesion diameter) and could not be visibly separated from the uterine cavity, bladder, or liver . The tissue of origin and extent of tumor invasion remained unclear. The mass appeared heterogeneous, containing cystic and necrotic areas along with solid components. It compressed the intestines, right kidney, and both ureters. The spleen was mildly enlarged. The hepatorenal recess (Morison’s pouch) showed minimal ascites. No lymph nodes were observed. Due to the slow growth of the tumor, few ascites, and negative lymph nodes, malignancy was highly unlikely.
A midline longitudinal incision was made from the xiphisternum to the pubic symphysis, and the abdomen was opened. A large mass arising from the uterus up to the xiphisternum, firm in consistency with enlarged superficial veins, was seen. The mass extended laterally to both flanks and occupied the right and left hypochondrium. No adhesions to the intestinal organs were observed. The bilateral ovaries were enlarged to twice the normal size, with ovarian artery pulsation seen on both sides. Additionally, the bilateral fallopian tube round ligaments were thickened . Due to the in situ findings, a total abdominal hysterectomy en bloc with bilateral salpingectomy was performed, and both ovaries were left intraabdominally. Postoperatively, bilateral ureteric peristalsis was confirmed. Intraoperative blood loss was 400 ml. The patient’s postoperative clinical course within 5 days of hospital stay remained complication-free with quick recovery. She was discharged after 5 days of surgery and had good overall health.
Pathology confirmed a myomatous uterus measuring 52 × 37 × 3 cm and weighing 16.4 kg. The tumor consisted of two separate myomas with diameters of more than 30 cm. Macroscopically, the shape was irregular, with overall consistency being firm with few soft areas. The tumor was pinkish-red in color, similar to (smooth) muscle cells. On the surface, enlarged aberrant blood vessels were observed. The cervix appeared normal, as well as bilateral fallopian tubes, although they were enlarged. For further histopathological examination, a cut section (total of 38 blocks) was performed, and tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined under a light microscope. The cut sections revealed a heterogeneous phenotype with predominant white whirling structures. Microscopically, the tumoral mass consisted of smooth muscle cells and collagen bundles. Few areas had nuclear polyploidy, blood vessels, and enlarged glands with some superficial hemorrhagic areas. There was no evidence of malignancy.