A 68-year-old Caucasian man living in Porto, who had previously been autonomous regarding his daily activities, was admitted to the Emergency Department of Hospital São João on August 4, 2009, presenting complaints of two months of severe dyspnea after minimal effort, with anasarca, progressive asthenia and mild atypical thoracic pain in the left hemithorax. He had a previous medical history of chronic gastritis, systemic arterial hypertension (which had been diagnosed 15 years earlier and had been medicated and controlled), a diffuse degenerative osteomuscular pathological condition (with sporadic used of non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs), sleep apnea corrected with surgery and benign prostatic hyperplasia. He was medicated with lisinopril in association with hydrochlorothiazide, lorazepam, finasteride, lansoprazole and furosemide. While under observation, he seemed to be aware, well-oriented and cooperative in time and space, and was hemodynamically stable. Pulmonary auscultation reveled diminished bilateral breathing sounds, associated with diffuse crackles (which were more accentuated in the expiratory phase), and also anasarca. An initial analytical assessment was made, which revealed renal failure and nephrotic proteinuria . An electrocardiogram revealed poor progression of R waves. A chest roentgenogram presented a small bilateral pleural effusion.
The patient was admitted to the Internal Medicine Department to evaluate the etiology of the nephrotic syndrome, among which the possibilities were: lupus nephritis, amyloidosis, nephropathy associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), multiple myeloma or idiopathic origin. In the Internal Medicine ward, the patient still showed anasarca and now presented macroglossia . He was given diuretic therapy, without much response. Evaluations on auto-antibodies and HIV serology were negative. He presented normal hepatic function and coagulation. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to screen for adjacent neoplasia, and this revealed an aerial bronchogram with condensation of the middle segment of the medial lobe. For this reason, he underwent bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage, which revealed Enterobacter gergoviae that was sensitive to sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim. He was on this antibiotic for 10 days.
To screen for multiple myeloma, light chain and 24-hour urine immunofixation were performed, and this revealed free lambda light chains. A renal biopsy performed on August 7, 2009, revealed an image compatible with positive Congo red findings. Subsequently, under a polarizing optical microscope, apple-green birefringence was identified , thereby diagnosing renal amyloidosis. The patient's status improved and he was discharged with reinforcement of the diuretic therapy.
However, on September 1, 2009, the patient was admitted to the hospital again with an episode of kidney failure. An abdominal CT scan was performed to screen for another associated neoplasia, which turned out to be negative. He improved, and was discharged on September 15, 2009. Subsequent to this, he was again admitted, this time in the intensive care unit, with anasarca, severe renal failure and orthostatic hypotension. He started hemodialysis on October 9, 2009, by means of a central venous line. His status evolved to urine and catheter infections, which were treated with adequate antibiotic therapy, with subsequent resolution of the inflammatory markers.
In the second week of October, the diagnosis of lambda light chain amyloidosis was confirmed through immunohistochemistry. The patient was classified as a high-risk case because he presented stage V renal failure and high basal brain natriuretic peptide at an age older than 65 years. He was started on chemotherapy with six cycles of bortezomib 0.7 mg/m and dexamethasone 40 mg, and his condition improved, with good tolerance to the medication. After beginning the treatment, he also presented level IV+ hemiparesis in the left upper arm, which improved after rehabilitation treatment and over the course of the chemotherapy cycles. Currently, the patient is stable and the disease has stagnated.