A 66-year-old female patient was referred to the authors’ center for gradual progressive loss of vision in both eyes and photophobia of 2 years duration. She reported having no family history of inherited ocular diseases, no history of trauma, no history of inflammation or infectious diseases. Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 65 ETDRS letters (Snellen equivalent 20/50) in the right eye and 61 ETDRS letters (Snellen equivalent 20/62.5) in the left eye. The anterior segment was unremarkable in both eyes. No relative afferent pupillary defect was found. The intraocular pressure was normal. Funduscopic examination after pupillary dilation found bone-spicule pigmentation and retinochoroidal atrophy along the retinal veins, bilaterally, without macular involvement or signs of inflammation.
Ultra-wide field fundus autofluorescence imaging revealed demarcated hypoautofluorescent areas corresponding to the atrophic patches in the peripheral paravenous distribution, surrounded by a relatively hyperautofluorescent band . Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) imaging found an obvious thinning of the entire outer retina, but the microstructure of the macular remained intact . Fluorescein angiography (FA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed a window defect with visualization of medium-to-large-caliber choriocapillary vessels and hypofluorescence, respectively , corresponding to the atrophic area along the veins and the optic disc. FA also show staining along borders of atrophic areas. In order to better reveal the subtle abnormalities that may not be detectable on routine FA and ICGA, 6*6 mm optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA, SSADA) images were acquired to capture more information. Within the choroid capillary layer, the en face OCTA images demonstrated areas of flow void beneath the retinal pigment epithelium-Bruch membrane layer suggestive of choriocapillaris hypoperfusion that corresponded with ICGA, and there also appear to be more large-caliber vessels in areas of choriocapillary loss. . Electroretinogram (ERG) of both eyes showed mildly subnormal responses. A diagnosis of PPRCA was arrived at. The nature of the disease its prognostic was explained to the patient.