We report a novel observation in a 47-year-old Indian woman with no comorbidities who developed acute bilateral abducens neuropathy with post-tetanic facilitation alongside acute hypokalemia after infusion of oxaliplatin. She was first diagnosed with peritoneal carcinomatosis arising from metastatic gastric adenocarcinoma, and was commenced on a palliative chemotherapy regimen of continuous infusion 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 200 mg/m2/day and weekly oxaliplatin (50 mg absolute dose). After the first cycle totaling 150 mg oxaliplatin, during which significant clinical and radiological improvement in her intestinal function was documented permitting administration of oral medication, her regimen was modified to a three-weekly regimen of oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2 on day 1 over 2 hours) and capecitabine (2000 mg/m2/day on day 1 evening - day 15 morning) (XELOX). One hour into the infusion of oxaliplatin of the 2nd cycle of XELOX, she developed acute neuropathy comprising acute bilateral abducens neuropathy, dysarthria, laryngopharyngodysesthesia, perioral and peripheral numbness. In addition to oxaliplatin, she had received 8 mg of intravenous dexamethasone and 8 mg of intravenous ondansetron as premedication. The patient had not taken any oral medications other than capecitabine up to one week previously. The patient demonstrated physical signs consistent with bilateral abducens neuropathy, with bilateral gaze-evoked diplopia. Surprisingly, post-tetanic facilitation was observed, with unilateral resolution of diplopia and abducens neuropathy following sustained lateral gaze over one minute. Contralateral abducens neuropathy remained unchanged following apparent resolution of the unilateral abducens neuropathy. The apparently resolved unilateral abducens neuropathy recurred following a two-minute rest. Decreased tendon reflexes diffusely were noted, but no focal or generalized weakness was found. New electrocardiographic changes in terms of diffuse T-wave inversions were noted, as well as mild elevation of her serum creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) levels by mass assay. Also noted was a serial decrease over 16 hours (7.0 μg/L immediately, 5.2 μg/L 8 hours later and 3.9 μg/L 16 hours later), but the diffuse T-wave inversions persisted. Corresponding serial serum creatine kinase (CK) levels were 72 μg/L, 63 μg/L and 52 μg/L, and troponin-T levels were not elevated at any of these three-time points.
Baseline blood counts and electrolytes drawn two days prior were unremarkable; in particular, her potassium level was 3.5 mmol L-1 (3.3-4.9 mmol L-1). She was asymptomatic up till this event. In particular, there was no intervening symptom of vomiting or diarrhoea, and the patient did not report the use of any oral medications. The patient did not have prior hypokalemia up to this point. Electrolytes drawn immediately upon onset of neurological symptoms revealed acute hypokalemia, with a serum potassium level of 2.5 mmol L-1 with a normal serum bicarbonate level of 23.1 mmol L-1 (19.0-31.0 mmol L-1), normal corrected serum total calcium level of 2.28 (2.10-2.60 mmol L-1) and magnesium level of 0.78 mmol/L (0.70-0.95 mmol L-1).
The patient was placed in a warm environment and an aggressive potassium replacement was undertaken. She did not receive calcium or magnesium infusions. The bilateral abducens neuropathy, dysarthria and laryngopharyngodysesthesia resolved over two hours. The hypokalemia, perioral and peripheral numbness resolved over twelve hours. Due to the short duration of the episode, no electromyogram (EMG) or nerve conduction testing was performed. The diffuse T-wave inversions on ECG did not resolve and remained six months following this event.
The patient was re-challenged with the same dose of oxaliplatin for her fourth cycle, with infusion time extended from 2 to 6 hours, together with calcium and magnesium infusions, and did not experience subsequent neurotoxicity. She continued to receive second-line irinotecan and cisplatin, third-line docetaxel, fourth-line epirubicin, cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil and fifth line 5-fluorouracil and cetuximab. All treatments were tolerated reasonably without further adverse events. The patient eventually passed away from progressive disease approximately fifteen months after initial diagnosis while on best supportive care.