A 45-year-old Caucasian male initially presented with reduced acuities in both eyes since childhood. His medical and family history was unremarkable, with best-corrected acuities 20/60 in each eye and correction −8.00–2.00×135 OD and −8.00–1.25×020 OS. External examination was normal, but slit lamp examination revealed midperipheral iris transillumination defects , pigment on the corneal endothelium and dense, and symmetrical pigment on the posterior lens capsules. Gonioscopy revealed angles open to ciliary body with grade 2+ pigment in all quadrants and no evidence of angle recession. Intraocular pressures (IOPs) were 17 and 18 mmHg in each eye. Dilated fundus examination with binocular indirect ophthalmoscopy and scleral depression revealed an intact retina, with no holes or tears and no signs of pigmented cells in the vitreous. The optic nerves were small: ~1 mm ×1 mm as measured with Spectral Domain Optical Coherence Tomography (SD-OCT; © 2017; Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Jena, Germany). We confirmed optic disc hypoplasia in both eyes as the likely cause of the patient’s decreased vision. Over the course of 3 years, the IOP remained in the 15–19 mmHg range in both eyes. During this time, retinal nerve fiber layer thinning and corresponding visual field defects were evident. Given the presence of optic nerve hypoplasia in addition to PDS, it was difficult to assess the damage solely related to glaucomatous changes. For this reason, glaucoma therapy was initiated using Travatan Z ophthalmic solution once daily in both eyes. IOPs remained stable at 13 mmHg in each eye, and he continues to be monitored for any changes. Of particular interest was the unusual presentation of pigment deposition on the posterior lens capsules of each eye. The pattern of pigment was dense, oblique, and curvilinear and located along the posterior lens capsules . The pigment on the posterior capsule created shadows on the retina, which were best documented with Optos Daytona ultra-widefield imaging (© 2017; Optos plc, Dunfermline, UK), which provides ultra-widefield fundus imaging . Over time, it appeared that there was an increase in pigment deposition along the posterior lens capsule. Comparing photos 1 year apart, one can observe the apparent increase in the size of pigment deposition . Interestingly, photos taken 2 years later showed a marked decrease in pigment deposition on the posterior lens capsules . There were no changes in the patient’s medical history in that same time span, including a repeated denial of medication changes or incidents of trauma. A search of literature published in the last 15 years did not reveal any cases of bilateral, dense, and symmetrical pigment deposition on the posterior lens capsule with a change in morphology over time.
The patient described in this case has given written informed consent to have the case details and accompanying images published.