In her fourth pregnancy, a healthy 32-year-old woman at 40 + 6 weeks of gestation was admitted to the hospital due to a dubious CTG record. She complained of mild lower abdomen pain. The patient’s first child was born by spontaneous delivery. The second pregnancy was ended by CS due to a breech position, followed by the delivery of a healthy child by VBAC two years later. She had no significant medical history, and her antenatal care had been uneventful. During routine CTG recording at hospital admission, the FHR baseline showed normal variability with accelerations. During the recording, there was a single deceleration without systolic activity (up to about 80 beats per minute), which was immediately corrected to normal values. The CTG record was evaluated. No repetitive decelerations were found. The recording was assessed as normal according to the FIGO classification . During admission, the patient was clinically stable. Lab results showed hemoglobin = 10.7 g/dL, white blood cells = 7.72 G/L, platelets = 223 G/L, C-reactive protein = 1.2 mg/dL, and an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 24.4 s. Vitals were stable. An ultrasound revealed a eutrophic child in the longitudinal occipitoanterior position, with an estimated fetal weight of 3300 g and a normal amount of amniotic fluid. The biophysical profile test score result (Manning’s score) was 10/10. There were no ultrasonographic signs of abruption of the placenta or placenta previa. Doppler examination of the umbilical and middle cerebral arteries showed a normal spectrum of blood flow. Sonographic measurement of the lower uterine segment (LUS) thickness showed 3.4 mm. There was no bleeding or oozing of amniotic fluid during a vaginal examination. The Bishop score of the cervical examination was >6, with 3–4 cm cervical dilation and 60–70% cervical effacement . During her stay in the pregnancy pathology ward, several repeat CTG recordings were performed, which showed no disturbing symptoms and were classified as normal according to the FIGO classification.
Using the VBAC calculator [,], the chances of a successful vaginal birth were estimated at 95%. Due to her advanced gestational age and favorable cervix (Bishop > 6), the patient qualified for a trial of vaginal labor (TOL). According to the local induction of labor (IOL) low-dose protocol, an oxytocin infusion containing 5 units in 19 milliliters of a saline solution was set up. Induction of labor was started with an initial dose of 0.5 mUI/mL, increasing the dose by 1 mUI/min. After an hour and a half, the patient developed strong contractions. The labor pain was relieved using Entonox gas (a mixture of 50% nitrous oxide and 50% oxygen). The woman in labor administered the gas herself through a face mask connected to a valve, which allowed the patient to inhale fresh gas with each breath. Gas administration was continued until the end of the contraction, at which point the patient was breathing room air. Monitoring during labor consisted of a continuous fetal electrocardiogram and tocometer. In addition, the patient’s vital parameters were measured periodically. After approximately one hour of regular uterine contractions, abrupt, deep (up to approximately 50 beats per minute), prolonged deceleration of FHR was observed . The oxytocin infusion was stopped immediately. In total, the patient received approximately 300 mUI of oxytocin. During the examination, she complained of increasing abdominal pain and the abrupt cessation of contractions. Examination revealed a 6-cm dilated cervix with a preserved amniotic bladder. Subsequently, in order to assess amniotic fluid staining, an amniotomy procedure was performed—a large amount of bloody amniotic fluid (about 300–350 mL) was obtained. Vital parameters were stable. Suspecting a uterine rupture, the patient was wheeled to the operating room for an emergency cesarean section under general anesthesia.
Two 16-gauge intravenous cannulae were immediately secured, and 1000 mL of the multi-electrolyte solution was infused rapidly prior to the induction of anesthesia. Induction was conducted intravenously with propofol and succinylcholine, and rapid tracheal intubation was performed. Anesthesia was maintained with air, oxygen, and 2% (1 MAC) sevoflurane. At the same time, the patient’s blood type was immediately confirmed and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), 4 units of red blood cell concentrate (RBC), and 4 units of cryoprecipitate were reserved according to the Holocomb algorithm (the RBC:FFP ratio of 1:1). In addition, the availability of fibrinogen concentrate (hFC) and prothrombin complex concentrate (PCC) has been confirmed as an emergency bridging therapy until blood components are available.
The abdomen was rapidly opened by a Joel-Cohen incision. A significant amount of bloody amniotic fluid was encountered in the abdominal and pelvic cavities. The previous cesarean section scar was ruptured entirely, and the fetus was partially outside the uterus. The head and shoulders of the fetus were in the abdominal cavity, while the rest of its body remained in the uterine cavity. The fetus was delivered without a fetal heart tone and immediately passed to the neonatal team, who successfully resuscitated the baby after 3 min. The newborn girl of weight 3150 g had an Apgar score of 0/6/8/8 at 1, 3, 5, and 10 min. The uterine rupture was confirmed, with complete damage to the anterior uterine wall from the left to the right broad ligament. One hundred micrograms of Carbetocin and 1 g of tranexamic acid were infused. Blood loss was estimated at 500–600 milliliters (mL). The patient received 1500 mL of multi-electrolyte solution in total. The anatomy of the uterus was not affected—there was no need for an emergency hysterectomy. The rupture was closed with two layers of sutures. Blood and clots were removed. The patient’s pelvis showed no other abnormalities. Further examination showed no damage to the uterine ligaments, adnexes, rectum, or urinary bladder. Vital signs (including Shock Index and mean arterial pressure), hemoglobin, platelet count, clotting times, and lactate levels were within the normal range during and after surgery. One hour after surgery, the patient was extubated in the recovery room and transferred to the maternity ward. The patient was monitored and placed on intravenous cefuroxime and analgesics after surgery. These were continued for four days postoperatively. The patient did not develop any alarming signs and symptoms in the postoperative period. The patient made an uneventful and complete recovery and was discharged home after 4 days with a healthy baby .