A Saudi male in his 50s, chronic smoker, with a past medical history of papillary thyroid carcinoma presented to the emergency department complaining of severe shortness of breath and chest pain. The past medical and surgical history also demonstrated total thyroidectomy and an administration of the LENVIMA chemotherapy on a daily basis for 4 weeks. In the emergency department, chest radiology showed left-side hemithorax opacity associated with mediastinal shifting to the right side. This finding is consistent with a large left-side pleural effusion, while the right lung is clear, as shown in Fig. : X-ray and ultrasonography of the chest . Ultrasound of the chest showed a left-sided collection of pleural effusion presenting as a crescent-shaped hypoechoic area measured as 8 × 1.9 cm . Radiology examination provides a high specific yet less sensitive diagnostic tool for the detection of pleural malignancy . To achieve the conclusive diagnosis, the patient underwent thoracentesis, a procedure to obtain fluid from the space surrounding the lungs, and around 150 ml of bloody fluid was aspirated from the pleural space for biochemical analysis and cytopathologic evaluation. Cytologic examination revealed the presence of an exudative effusion.
As shown in Fig. : cytopathology analysis of pleural effusion aspiration ; preparation of the cytology slides was performed using Diff Quick and Papanicolaou stains to aid in making differentiation and diagnosis of the pathological specimen. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining was also performed and demonstrated the presence of highly proliferative malignant cells in a papillary cluster with pleomorphic nuclei, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and intranuclear inclusion features . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to assess the level of various biological markers to assist in determining the final diagnosis of metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma in pleural effusion.
As shown in Fig. : immunohistochemistry studies for different biological markers ; IHC analysis revealed positive staining of different markers that were reported to associate positively with the development of PTC including cytokeratin-7 (CK-7) , thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) , thyroglobulin , and a thyroid-specific transcription factor; human paired box-8 (Pax-8) was identified as the most dysregulated target gene in PTC . Furthermore, the metastatic tumor cells exhibited positive results when using Ber-EP-4, a monoclonal antibody , which was found to be positive in metastatic PTC and is used to differentiate epithelial from mesothelial cells . On the other hand, the cancer cells showed negative IHC results for cytokeratin-20 (CK-20) and clathrin . Thus, confirming the diagnosis of metastatic PTC. In addition, molecular pathology analysis of the original tumor was performed in Germany for the detection of predictable genetic alterations such as BRAFV600E and NRAS gene mutations. BRAFV600E mutation was positive in the tumor samples while no alteration in the NRAS gene was observed.