A 35-year-old female Asian Arab patient was referred to a tertiary health care facility in Jakarta, Indonesia, with transverse myelitis following severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection. She was previously diagnosed with mild COVID-19 (flu-like symptoms, including anosmia) and underwent self-isolation. However, 3 weeks later, she started experiencing pain in her lower extremities (hyperalgesia), followed by tingling sensation and gradual weakness in all four limbs. Within a few days, she was also unable to urinate and defecate. Her spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed T2 hyperintensities along the cervicothoracic region , suggestive of longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis (LETM). The patient had no significant prior medical history.
One day after her naso-oropharyngeal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) result for SARS CoV-2 was negative, the patient was transferred to our hospital. Upon neurological examination, it was found that she had tetraparesis, with more severe weaknesses in her lower extremities, hyperreflexia, and positive Babinski’s signs for both legs. She also had hypoesthesia, paresthesia, and proprioceptive disturbance below Thoracal 4 (Th4) level, as well as urinary and fecal retention. Blood evaluation revealed an elevated D-dimer level (4660 µg/L), with normal C-reactive protein and procalcitonin concentrations. Anti-aquaporin-4 immunoglobulin G (IgG) was not detected in her serum. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis (70 leukocytes/μl) and normal protein level. SARS-CoV-2, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, fungi, and other viruses were not detected by CSF PCR tests, while Gram and acid-fast bacillus stains also yielded negative results. Brain MRI showed paraventricular hyperintensity on T2 and FLAIR .
The patient received high-dose methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for 5 days, which was tapered off afterwards. Her motor strength improved remarkably, enabling her to stand up. However, her sensory and autonomic disturbances persisted. After 12 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged to continue treatment in the outpatient clinic.
Two days later, the patient was readmitted to our hospital with complaints of persistent high fever (> 38 °C), nausea, and worsening of her lower limb strength . Blood tests revealed normal levels of leukocytes, C-reactive protein (CRP), and procalcitonin. Meanwhile, routine urinalysis showed the presence of bacteria and nitrites, with positive urine culture for Enterobacter sp. (> 105 colony-forming units/mL). The patient was thus diagnosed with a urinary tract infection (UTI) and treated with intravenous fosfomycin on the basis of bacterial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing results.
Nevertheless, her fever persisted even after 3 days of treatment with combinations of intravenous antipyretics and the use of a surface cooling device. On day 3, she tended to be in a somnolent state; we suspected the fever was not only due to the UTI, but might have a central nervous system (CNS)-underlying etiology. The patient was given 250 mg of intravenous methylprednisolone, and her consciousness improved. We performed a second brain MRI scan and found no notable changes compared with the first one . The following day, the patient was once again somnolent, accompanied by tachycardia, tachypnea, and fever, and was transferred to the intensive care unit. We escalated the methylprednisolone dose to 500 mg/day, and the patient quickly regained consciousness.
Between day 7 and day 14, the patient’s consciousness fluctuated considerably, from obtundation to a fully alert state; she even experienced disorientation and hallucinations (visual and auditory), along with intractable fever. Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed slowing background within theta frequency and intermittently high amplitude of rhythmic delta–theta wave at the bilateral frontotemporal lobe . Another lumbar puncture was performed, and CSF analysis revealed mild pleocytosis (12 cells/µL) and a positive result for anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody (28 U/ml) with serum titer 250 U/ml. On the basis of the clinical progression and MRI and laboratory findings, the final diagnosis of COVID-19-related encephalomyelitis was made. Extensive workup did not result in any other notable findings. As high-dose corticosteroid did not provide optimal clinical resolutions, intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg body weight) was administered for 5 days. The patient’s conditions improved substantially without any adverse event; she remained alert and did not have any hallucinations, and her EEG showed improvement, with alpha frequency dominating as background rhythm and delta waves at the bilateral frontotemporal lobe being significantly reduced . On day 23, the patient was discharged. Her autonomic functions gradually recovered, whereas no significant improvement was reported for her motor and sensory disturbances. On 4-week follow-up, she showed improvement in her motor strength and she still continued her rehabilitation program. Sometimes she remembered words that she said during her hallucination, and she was glad that it did not come up again.