A 59-year-old Taiwanese woman with an unremarkable medical history visited our outpatient department due to post-menopausal bleeding and back soreness for three months on April 2020. The report of her previous Papanicolaou smears and cervical biopsy was normal. Pelvic examination found a necrotic cervical mass with upper third vaginal involvement, and multiple cervical biopsies revealed VH. Informed consent for data publication was collected from the patient.
The pelvic 3T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 3.7 × 3.6 × 4.0 cm necrotic mass with peripheral enhancement in the right lateral aspect of the uterine cervix. An enlarged lymph node measuring 1.8cm in diameter was found in the left pelvic cavity posterior to the left external iliac artery .
Positron emission tomography with computed tomography (PET/CT) with F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) was performed and demonstrated an FDG-avid cervical mass with intense FDG uptake. The initial and delayed maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) were 13.75 and 12.64, respectively. Besides, there were two FDG-avid lymph nodes at the left pelvic cavity. One measuring 0.94cm in size was at the medial side of the left internal iliac artery, showing increased FDG uptake with initial/delayed SUVmax of 2.21/3.97. The other one measuring 1.8cm in diameter posterior to the left external iliac artery, showing moderate FDG uptake with initial/delayed SUVmax of 6.84/6.23 respectively . They were compatible with the same lesion under MRI imaging. According to the radiographic findings, cervical malignant tumor was highly suspected.
Due to the discrepancy between the clinico-radiological features and biopsy reports, we performed fractional dilatation and curettage (D&C) for further pathological confirmation prior to surgical intervention. The pathological reports of fractional D&C revealed parakeratosis and VH in the squamous epithelium. Due to the bulky tumor and close approximation to the bladder, a cystoscopy during operation was done with unremarkable finding. Although the pathological report was inconclusive, malignancy was still highly suspected with regard to the clinical and radiological manifestations.
Under high suspicion of cervical VC, stage IIIC1r based on the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging system, frozen section over left pelvic lymph node was removed first which reveal only lymphoid hyperplasia. We then performed radical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, as well as bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection and partial vaginectomy . An 8 × 4.5cm necrotic cervical tumor, with cauliflower-like appearance, invading to the upper 1/3 vaginal canal was found .
The microscopic findings of the surgical specimen illustrated an exophytic papillary squamous epithelium with apparent acanthosis and hyperkeratosis. There were also endophytic bulbous rete pegs and finger-like sheets of well-differentiated neoplastic cells invading the underlying stroma with pushing border . The parametrium was not involved. The pathological report of the left pelvic lymph nodes only showed reactive hyperplasia. Immunohistochemical staining of HPV was negative. P16 and p53 immunostaining was not over expressed, and only revealed a 10 percent focal positivity. According to the aforementioned histological results, a well-differentiated verrucous carcinoma, IIA2 by FIGO classification, was the final diagnosis .
Two months after the surgery, the patient received follow-up at the gynecological outpatient unit. Both the reports of Papanicolaou smear and HPV testing were again normal at the initial follow up. Patient did not receive any chemotherapy or radiotherapy after surgery. Until now, twoyear after the initial therapy, there has been no evidence of recurrence or disease related complications.