A 37-year-old man who was a taxi driver presented with a complaint of blurred vision, especially in the inferior visual field (VF) and dyschromatopsia in his left eye (LE) which started one day prior to presentation. He had a motor-cycle accident 25 days before his presentation. After trauma, the ophthalmic examinations had revealed best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/20 in both eyes (monocular and binocular visual acuity), negative relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), normal fundus and optic nerve appearance, normal color vision and confrontation VF tests, and a limitation of abduction in the LE. Imaging studies of his brain and orbit were unremarkable. Two days prior to his referral to us while in another center he had undergone an injection of BTA into the left MR (DysportⓇ with a dose of 15 units) because of intolerable horizontal binocular diplopia due to traumatic sixth nerve palsy. Before the BTA injection, the ophthalmic examinations had shown BCVA of 20/20 in both eyes (monocular visual acuity testing), negative RAPD, normal fundus and optic nerve appearance, normal color vision and VF tests, and a 25 prism diopters ET in the LE. At the initial visit, his BCVA was 20/30 in the LE and 20/20 in the right eye (RE). The intraocular pressure measurements were 11 mm/Hg in the LE and 13 in the RE. Pupillary examination showed positive RAPD in the LE. External eye examination revealed limitation of abduction in the LE without any signs of proptosis, ptosis, and ecchymosis. Ocular motility examination revealed limitation of abduction, and alternate cover test demonstrated 18 prism diopters ET in the LE [Figure 1A]. Color vision test (Ishihara color plates) was abnormal (with 4 correct responses out of 12 plates) in the LE and was normal in the RE. The Humphrey VF test was normal in the RE and demonstrated inferior hemi-field scotoma (altitudinal defect) in the LE [Figure 2A]. Fundus examination revealed healthy retina and optic disc in both eyes. The optic nerve head optical coherence tomography (peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer [RNFL] analysis) [Figures 3A and 3B] and the fluorescein angiography of the optic nerve were within normal range in both eyes. Visual evoked potential (VEP) testing showed decreased P100 amplitude and normal latency in the LE and was normal in the RE. Magnetic resonance imaging of the orbit and brain was normal. The Color-Doppler sonography of the carotid arteries and echocardiography was normal. Complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, antinuclear antibody, and angiotensin-converting enzyme were within normal ranges. The patient was diagnosed with ON associated with BTA injection. Oral prednisolone at a dosage of 75 mg/day (1 mg/kg/day) was initiated and continued for 14 days and tapered during the second week. Two weeks following medical therapy, RAPD was negative and BCVA increased to 20/20. At the three-month follow-up examination, the BCVA was 20/20 in both eyes, the VF defect disappeared [Figure 2B], the color vision test was normal, and the RAPD was still negative. In primary position, the patient had no deviation [Figure 1B] but the alternate cover test showed a 4 prism diopter ET in the LE. The fundus examination revealed mild temporal disc pallor [Figure 4], and RNFL optical coherence tomography demonstrated a reduction in the RNFL thickness in the temporal disc area [Figures 3C and 3D].