A 48-year-old female patient, from Bolivia , consulted at our hospital for a painful, fixed, firm lesion, on the left side of her neck.
A Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) was requested to evaluate the extent of the lesion and its anatomic characteristics, to allow staging and surgical planning. It showed a voluminous expansive lesion centered in the left carotid space, compatible with paraganglioma of the carotid body with a maximum diameter of 100 mm .
The left ICA, the ECA, as well as the left internal jugular vein (IJV) were displaced dorsally and compressed at the level of the proximal and middle section of the cervical segment (C1), with an absence of flow signal. The study also showed an alteration in the intracranial flow signal, linked to slow/absent antegrade flow due to the cervical compression of the ICA described above, possibly associated with arterial circle substitution.
To clarify the case, a carotid angiography was performed. A tumor irrigated by the ECA was observed, which compressed the ICA, causing severe stenosis. The IJV was also completely occluded. No metastasis was reported.
To accurately predict the possible consequences of direct ICA ligation, a balloon occlusion test (BOT) was carried out. The patient tolerated the study adequately, without developing a neurologic deficit. There were no manifestations of hypo perfusion after measuring the cerebral blood flow, cerebral blood volume, and mean transit time. These results showed that an ICA sacrifice without the need for bypass could be performed.
The case was discussed by a multidisciplinary committee and surgical treatment was decided. Due to the size of the lesion and vascular compromise, we performed a mandibular swing approach, to ensure an adequate surgical field. The mass was fixed to the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the external jugular vein. Dissection started at the CCA caudally and then progressed cranially towards the bifurcation. To attempt negative margins, the ICA and IJV had to be sacrificed. The vagus nerve was encased 360º by the tumor, above and below the carotid bifurcation, so it was resected. The hypoglossal, glossopharyngeal nerves, and the high cervical plexus were preserved.
After the intervention, the patient was extubated and remained in the Intensive Care Unit for the first 48 hours postoperatively. Blood transfusions were not necessary during or after surgery, accounting for an approximate blood loss of 500 ml.
Pathological analysis of the piece revealed a characteristic Zellballen pattern, suggestive of a CBT. Although atypical mitoses were not identified, we found confluent necrosis and infiltration of the capsule among the piece, characteristics highly associated with malignant behavior .
With the sacrifice of the vagus nerve, signs of its functional impairment were revealed. The patient presented dysphonia due to ipsilateral vocal cord paralysis, which was subsequently resolved with voice re-education by a speech therapist. She had no subjective difficulty swallowing.
The patient did not manifest any ischemia-related symptoms.
The aesthetic result was adequate and, in the year following the intervention, there were no signs or symptoms of disease recurrence.