A 35-year-old lady reported to us with severe ankle equinus deformity since childhood. She suffered from poliomyelitis at the age of 4 years. Then, she developed the deformity at ankle and started walking on her toes. As she never received any treatment for the deformity in childhood, the deformity became fixed till adulthood. Because of severe deformity, she could not use footwear. She came to us for treatment when she started getting pain in ankle, hip, and lower back. To maintain the length of foot, we gave her an option of midfoot osteotomy and gradual correction with Ilizarov external fixator, but due to time and cost involved in it, she refused gradual correction. We offered her single-stage correction of the deformity for which she was ready. Talectomy and tibiocalcaneal fusion was planned for her affected foot.
Thorough clinical examination was performed to detect components and rigidity of the deformity , limb length discrepancy, and neuromuscular evaluation. True and apparent limb lengths were measured. There was 1 cm shortening of tibia. The strength of quadriceps and other proximal muscles was evaluated and it was normal. Examination of spine and hip was performed to rule out associated pathology.
Weight bearing anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of foot and ankle were taken . Radiographs showed posterior part of talus articulating with distal tibia. Arthritic changes were noted in ankle and subtalar joints.
Patient was operated in supine position under spinal anesthesia. A thigh tourniquet was applied. The patient was prepped with Povidone-Iodine Solution and draped under sterile conditions.
Anterolateral approach was taken to expose the ankle joint. The incision measured 10 cm in length starting 8 cm above the ankle joint line and 1 cm anterior to the anterior border of fibula. It was extended vertically downward up to 2 cm below the ankle joint and ended at the base of fourth metatarsal. Incision was deepened in layers and dissection was done to expose the fibula. Distal 4 cm of fibula was excised . Osteotomy of distal 4 cm of fibula was done for transfibular approach . Ankle arthrotomy and subperiosteal dissection around the talus was performed. All ligament attachments of talus were excised and talectomy was done . Although significant correction of equinus was achieved at this stage , there was significant tightness in Achilles tendon and posterior soft tissues. To achieve complete correction, 1 cm of distal tibial metaphysis was excised with the saw. Percutaneous tenotomy of the Achilles tendon was done. While correcting the foot to neutral position, there was rupture of delicate posterior skin at the tenotomy site. The defect thus created in the skin measured 3 × 2 cm in size. At the end of the procedure, this defect was covered with split thickness skin graft obtained from left thigh.
For the tibiocalcaneal fusion, superior surface of the calcaneum including all three facets was prepared with the help of curette, rongeur, osteotome, and multiple drills. Distal tibia and superior surface of calcaneum were opposed to each other and held together with two 2 mm Kirschner’s wires (K-wires) passed from calcaneum into tibia.
The K-wires passed from calcaneum into tibia helped to maintain good alignment . One K-wire was passed from navicular into tibia. after preparing tibial and navicular surfaces .
To fix the tibiocalcaneal arthrodesis site, Charnley fixator was used. Charnley clamps were applied to two dunham pins. First 4.5 mm dunham pin was passed from medial to lateral in the calcaneum. Another pin was passed from lateral to medial side in the distal tibia . Calcaneal and tibial surfaces were opposed to each other with compression by two Charnley clamps applied on each side of dunham pins. Three extra connecting rods were applied on the posterior aspect of heel to make a square frame to protect the skin graft . Anterolateral incision was closed in layers with loose sutures without drain. Sterile dressing was applied.
Patient was hospitalized for 7 days. Circulation, swelling, and toe movements were assessed in the post-operative period. Patient was ambulated non weight bearing and encouraged to do knee and toe movements.
After discharge, patient was asked to keep follow-up every week in the outpatient department.. All three K-wires were removed after 6 weeks and Charnley fixator was removed 10 weeks after surgery. Then below knee cast was given for 3 weeks. After removal of the cast, patient was advised gradual weight bearing with walker. Radiographs were taken every month.
Satisfactory soft-tissue healing was noted in 6 weeks. Sound fusion at tibiocalcaneal and tibionavicular joints joint was noted in 3.5 months.
At 2 years follow-up, patient was able to walk plantigrade without pain and use footwear with shoe raise. The radiographs at 2 years follow-up showed sound tibiocalcaneal and tibionavicular fusion . There was 4 cm shortening of the limb for which shoe raise was given. Patient was happy with the functional and esthetic outcome of the surgery (, ). Patient was a daily wages worker and was able to perform her earning activities without any difficulty.
American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score had improved from preoperative 13 to post-operative 61 and revised foot function index score had improved from pre-operative 234 to post-operative 85.