A 65-year-old Japanese man, who had no chest pain or symptoms of syncope but was being treated for dental caries, presented with a body temperature that had increased, for reasons unknown, to 38 °C. However, because of a blood culture positive for Streptococcus dysgalactiae, IE was suspected. A physical examination revealed conjunctival petechiae and Janeway lesions in his bilateral upper and lower extremities. Auscultation showed a significant systolic murmur (Levine III/VI), heard best at the second right upper sternal border and radiating to his neck, but no diastolic murmur. His white blood cell count was 10,500/μL and C-reactive protein concentration was 18.1 mg/dL. Transthoracic echocardiography found an abnormal complex, which was not a tricuspid structure, on an aortic valve leaflet. The peak velocity of the left ventricular outflow tract was 4.5 m/second. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a thick valve leaflet, a rounded vegetation with a diameter of 5 mm, a calcified surface, and border irregularity attached to the equivalent position of the aortic valve’s right coronary cusp, and mobility during diastole (Additional file ).
On the basis of a previously reported definition , a UAV, with a commissure at 12 o’clock and raphae at 4 o’clock and 8 o’clock , was confirmed (Additional file ). Moderate aortic insufficiency, with a vena contracta of 8 mm and a pressure half time of 401 milliseconds, was found with eccentric regurgitant flow to the left ventricle’s posterior wall but without valve damage, rupture of chordae tendineae, or a perivalvular abscess . The aortic stenosis was moderately severe with a valve area of 1.42 cm2. Based on the transesophageal echocardiographic findings of thickness and calcification of a valve leaflet, vegetation seems to have been formed with a chronic process, suggesting the characteristic of nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE). However, owing to the fever spike and positive blood culture, he was admitted to our hospital for further management of presumable IE with valvular heart disease.
Because an acute cerebral infarction was found with magnetic resonance imaging on day 1 of admission, treatment with penicillin G was started. Despite this treatment, paralysis of his right upper and lower extremities had developed owing to a newly diagnosed cerebral infarction confirmed with another magnetic resonance imaging examination on day 2. Moreover, a body temperature greater than 38 °C was found with the inflammatory markers of a white blood cell count of 13,200/uL and a C-reactive protein concentration of 10.7 mg/dL on day 3.
Because of the uncontrolled infection, the aortic valve was urgently replaced with a bioprosthetic valve on day 3. Evaluation during surgery confirmed a UAV with a connection via raphae of all cusps, except for the commissure between the left coronary cusp and the noncoronary cusp . With appropriate antibiotic therapy for 6 weeks after surgery, he completely recovered from IE and was discharged on day 48.