A 47-year-old South Asian woman presented with a 3-month history of recurrent left-sided chest pains. Initially, her pains were non-exertional and were relieved by massages and antacids. The onset of her pains usually coincided with the second or third day of her menstruation each month and usually lasted up to 4 days. Rests frequently eased her pains, hence she did not seek medical attention.
She eventually presented to our Emergency Department in the fourth month. She had sudden onset sharp chest pain, 10/10 in intensity, which radiated up to her jaw and travelled down to her arms. The pain was non-exertional and sublingual nitrates did not help. She also complained of diaphoresis, hot flushes and persistent lethargy. This presentation coincided with the second day of her menstruation.
Aside from a raised Body Mass Index (BMI) of 37.2 and anaemia, she did not have any other cardiac risk factors. Her fasting blood glucose was 6.8 and she did not have a history of ischaemic heart disease. These risk factors had not changed over the last year.
Her menstrual periods were usually regular in interval and she rarely suffered from menorrhagia. She had had two myomectomies about 25 years ago. A fibroid of the size of a 3-month-old foetus was discovered in a recent laparotomy. She had three failed attempts of in-vitro fertilization (IVF). There was no family history of ischaemic heart disease or gynaecological conditions. She did not take any medication on a regular basis.
On examination, she was found to have peripheral and central cyanosis. There were no other relevant findings. Her electrocardiogram showed ST-segment elevation and Q waves in the anterior leads and ST-segment depression in the inferior leads. This together with a rise in troponin T and creatine kinase levels to 50ng/ml and 2045U/L, respectively was suggestive of a ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). Other abnormalities in the serum laboratory studies were a raised C-reactive protein (CRP) of 70mg/L and haemoglobin of 9.2g/dL. She was transfused with a unit of blood as a result. A coronary angiogram revealed a left anterior descending (LAD) artery occlusion. A stent was inserted.
Her chest pain recurred the following month, again coinciding with her menstruation. The nature of her pain in this admission was similar to that in her first admission although it was reported to be milder in severity. Her electrocardiogram this time showed ischaemic changes only to the inferior region. Troponin T was elevated to 3.2ng/mL. Oestrogen and progesterone levels were consistently normal to her phases in menstruation.
Given that the troponin level usually takes about 10 days to decline to normality post-myocardial infarction, troponin detected in this second admission may be a misnomer and may be attributed to the slow decline in troponin from her first admission. In that case, the diagnosis in this admission would be unstable angina rather than STEMI, as per definition .
Although the failure of symptom resolution after angioplasty may indicate an early stent failure or incomplete coronary revascularization, it could also indicate the presence of another underlying pathology. Dynamic obstructions due to intense focal spasm of arteries as seen in Prinzmetal's angina could also explain the persistence of her symptoms. Coronary vasospasm itself may also trigger a rise in troponin . It was agreed at that time that she should be managed conservatively but a coronary angiogram should be repeated if her symptoms changed in nature, character or frequency.
Monthly serial electrocardiograms were done. Ergonovine or acetylcholine could be used to induce coronary vasospasm during coronary angiography but was not attempted due to safety concerns and lack of prognostic values. A trial of luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) analogues in an attempt to induce early menopause only brought limited benefit although she experienced multiple relapses. While LHRH might be a choice to halt menstruation, it does not stop the underlying cyclical oestrogen decline. Instead, it completely removes oestrogen.
Ultimately, hormonal replacement therapy (oestrogen replacement) was used to address the cyclical oestrogen decline with good response. Her symptoms largely resolved in the subsequent 12 months, with only one episode of repeat chest pain. An angiography performed eventually showed patent arteries and stent. She was planned to continue with antithrombotic modulation (aspirin and clopidogrel) for her underlying atherosclerotic disease.