A 37-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital, because of worsening skin rash and exertional dyspnoea. His dyspnoea gradually worsened over the first week before admission, and in parallel, the erythema spread over his whole body.
He had originally presented 4 months prior with fever, morbilliform eruption, eosinophilia, and liver dysfunction, which had developed 1 month after the prescription of lithium 600 mg and quetiapine 25 mg for his bipolar disorder. When his systemic manifestations appeared, the drug lymphocyte stimulation test (DLST) was negative for quetiapine but positive for lithium. According to the European Registry of Severe Cutaneous Adverse Reaction (RegiSCAR) criteria, he was diagnosed with DRESS syndrome (the DRESS score was seven, indicating definite). Upon diagnosis, lithium and quetiapine were discontinued, and oral prednisolone (1.0 mg/kg/day) was administered for four months, followed by a taper to 0.5 mg/kg/day.
On admission, he was afebrile and had a systemic cutaneous eruption, presenting with keratinizing erythema, papules, and oedematous erythema on the back and dorsum of his hands and fingers . A dermatologist diagnosed the rash as a manifestation of DRESS syndrome. The patient’s blood pressure was 105/63 mmHg, and his heart rate was 53 b.p.m. An S3 gallop rhythm, a pan-systolic heart murmur, and moist lung crackles were noted. Electrocardiography showed sinus bradycardia. On chest X-ray, his cardiothoracic ratio was 52% with pulmonary congestion .
Haematological examination indicated a marked increase in cardiac troponin T (cTnT) to 2.35 ng/mL (reference range 0–0.014). No increase in human herpesvirus (HHV)-6 IgG or DNA in paired-serum samples was found. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed reduced systolic function in both ventricles, with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 43% and pericardial effusion . Acute coronary syndrome was excluded by the coronary angiography. Results of cardiac 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography with chest computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) showed diffuse FDG uptake in both ventricular walls , indicating active myocardial inflammation.
An endomyocardial biopsy revealed a mixed eosinophilic and lymphohistiocytic infiltration without necrosis or fibrosis . The patient was managed in the general ward after diagnosis of DRESS-associated myocarditis. We treated the patient with high-dose prednisolone (1.0 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks with a slow taper to a maintenance dose of 0.5 mg/kg/day. Concomitantly, an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (enalapril, 2.5 mg/day) was started as a treatment for heart failure; the patient was intolerant of β-blockers due to his symptomatic bradycardia. An endomyocardial biopsy at 3 weeks after initiation of treatment confirmed the attenuation of eosinophil accumulation . The LVEF evaluated by TTE improved to 61% as cardiac enzymes decreased, and the patient was discharged on the second month.
While we continued to slowly taper the prednisolone to 0.25 mg/kg/day, no exacerbation of clinical symptoms was observed at a regular outpatient visit. By month 5, his cTnT level had risen again to 0.287 ng/mL in parallel with a return to a 43% LVEF. FDG-PET/CT showed focal FDG uptake in the LV anterior to anteroseptal wall , indicating persistent inflammation. The follow-up endocardial biopsy demonstrated sustained infiltration of mixed inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes and eosinophils . In response to this, we increased prednisolone to 0.5 mg/kg/day, and the LVEF improved to 50% but was not completely normalized. Since this case seemed to be steroid-resistant, mycophenolate mofetil was started on top of the prednisolone at month 9. At month 15, FDG uptake was moderately improved , but was not completely diminished, and the LVEF fell again to 44%.
At month 17, the patient was readmitted due to worsening heart failure [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III]. TTE showed a dramatic decrease in LVEF to 20%. Repeat endomyocardial biopsy revealed myocyte necrosis associated with an eosinophilic and lymphocytic infiltrate, compatible with ANEM . He was managed symptomatically using an inotropic agent with increased prednisolone (1.0 mg/kg/day). At month 27, he died of uncontrolled heart failure.