D.M.S., female patient, 50 years old, Caucasian, single, pharmacist, initially went
to a hospital emergency room complaining of red eyes and body aches in the last
fifteen days as the first manifestations of the disease, which was treated as
conjunctivitis but without resolution. She had had a history of renal microcapsules
for two years, and bilateral renal parenchymal nephropathy, due to increased
medullary echogenicity found on kidney ultrasonography. Therefore, serial renal
function and metabolic tests were ordered; which reported anemia, hematocrit drop
from 25.5% to 24.9% (RV: 36-45), and progressive urea elevation of 75 mg/dL to 132
mg/dL (RV: 16-40); and creatinine from 1.2 mg/dL to 2.5 mg/dL (RV: 0.6-1.2) upon
seven days of follow-up, confirming an Acute Kidney Injury (AKI).
We started her on prednisone at 2 mg/kg daily for 3 months, with reduction of 5 mg
per week after that period, until complete suspension. In the meantime, serology for
hepatitis B and C, anti-DNA, C3 and C4, anti-streptolysin O antibody (ASLO) and
gamma globulin, all with negative results, besides normal albumin of 4.4 g/dL (RV:
3,5-4,8); ruling out several possible infectious and autoimmune etiologies. However,
there was a persistent increase in C-Reactive Protein (CRP) of 11 mg/L (RV: < 8),
which is an inflammatory marker; increasing proteinuria reaching 856.3 mg/24h in 60
days of follow-up (RV: up to 150), hypercalcemia of 13.1 mg/dL (RV: 8.5-10.2) and
hypercalciuria of 504.7 mg/24h (VR: 100-300) .
Therefore, due to the acute renal damage associated with hypercalcemia and
hypercalciuria, the patient had an indication of renal biopsy. Histopathological
examination revealed inflammatory granulomatous reactions in the renal interstitium,
a finding that is not uncommon in cases of ruptured tubular lesion and exposure of
the content into the interstitium, suggesting a diagnosis of Renal Sarcoidosis.
However, adding such a finding to the clinical and laboratory data of the patient,
by ruling out other causes, and after evaluation by ophthalmologist and pneumologist
- reporting absence of other manifestations, a diagnosis of Isolated Renal
Sarcoidosis was confirmed.
High-dose corticosteroid therapy was completed and successful, and the patient
reported improved clinical status and laboratory stability.