We report the case of a 13-year-old boy who fell down during a skiing trip. He developed left hip pain that prevented him from weight bearing on the affected limb. The patient was Caucasian, had a body mass index (BMI)<20 and no history of endocrinopathy. The patient was evaluated by an orthopaedic surgeon who diagnosed him with an acute unstable SCFE and took the patient to surgery for a percutaneous in-situ fixation. The procedure was uncomplicated with appropriate center-center positioning of the screw within the head and epiphysis [ and ]. The patient returned home with his family at the conclusion of their vacation and followed up with a local orthopaedic surgeon (senior author).
At 3 weeks he was ambulating without difficulty when he developed recurrent pain and inability to weight-bear. New X-rays were obtained that demonstrated failure of the hardware with progression of the SCFE displacement, with a Grade 3 slip angle measured at 60 degrees [ and ]. The patient was taken back to surgery for hardware removal and revision closed reduction and percutaneous pinning of the SCFE. Surgical dislocation of the hip with hardware removal, open reduction and pinning was the also listed on the consent if the closed procedure failed. Insitu pinning and remodeling was deemed unlikely to have a successful outcome due to less then 3 years remaining until the patient turned 16 and the patient already achieving nearly the same height as his father and skeletally mature older brother.
The patient was brought to the operating room and placed on a fracture table in the supine position. Under fluoroscopic guidance minimal traction was applied to the left leg through the boot harness and the leg was internally rotated so that on both AP and lateral images the long axis of the screw shaft and the distal screw fragment within the epiphysis were co-axial. A guide wire was then threaded back through the screw allowing the cannulated screw driver to be easily seated within the screw head and the proximal screw fragment was removed.
A cannulated Conical Extraction Screw (Synthes (r) Screw Extraction Set) commonly referred to as an “Easy Out” device was then inserted over the guide-wire into the fractured distal screw fragment within the epiphysis through tract left after the removal of the proximal screw fragment. The sharp reversed threads of the of the Conical Extraction Screw / Easy Out allows this device to gain purchase in the fractured screw fragment and then back the screw fragment out. Once the screw fragment was removed from the epiphysis three trans physeal 7.0mm screws were placed for improved fixation strength of the SCFE.
At 2 weeks post-op the patient had all restrictions lifted and returned to normal activities without pain. Follow-up at 9 months demonstrated a fused physis and no signs of avascular necrosis of the femoral head.