A 65-year-old male presented to a community emergency department (ED) following a snake envenomation to his thumb. Approximately four hours prior to arrival, he had attempted to pick up a copperhead in the field by his home and “it turned around and bit me on the thumb.” He complained of pain and swelling to thumb, hand, and wrist, along with shortness of breath. His past medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, coronary artery disease, and diabetes. His daily oral medications included amiodarone 400 milligrams (mg), apixaban 5 mg, atorvastatin 40 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, furosemide 20 mg, lisinopril 5 mg, and metoprolol succinate extended release 25 mg. He had been taking the lisinopril as prescribed for almost two years.
Initial vital signs were temperature of 36.5° Celsius, heart rate 74 beats per minute, blood pressure 128/82 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), and respiratory rate 26 breaths per minute with saturations of 96% on room air. Initial examination was notable for wheezing bilaterally, an irregularly irregular heartbeat, and edema of the thumb, hand, and wrist without ecchymosis or necrosis. His white blood cell count was 10 × 109 per liter (L) (reference range 3.50–10.50 × 109/L), hemoglobin 13.7 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 12–15.5 g/dL), hematocrit 41.5% (reference range:34.9–44.5%), and platelets 163 × 109/L (reference range 150–450 × 109/L). Prothrombin time was 12.8 seconds (s) (reference range 12.5–15.1 s) with an international normalized ratio 1.09 (reference range 0.9–1.2), and partial thromboplastin time 27.9 s (reference range 25.8–35.6 s). Electrolytes were within normal limits.
An electrocardiogram demonstrated atrial fibrillation at a normal rate with no ischemic changes. His wheezing resolved with a nebulized albuterol breathing treatment. Shortly into his ED stay, the patient complained of increasing pain and swelling along with nausea. On re-examination, edema was noted up to the level of his elbow. Six vials of crotalidae polyvalent immune fab (FabAV) were administered intravenously (IV), and he was transferred to a referral center.
Upon arrival at the referral ED, the patient only had mild edema of his hand and wrist. Ink markings placed at the community ED and transport team were noted on his forearm and upper arm, with the edema not extending past the highest levels of the markings. Vital signs were normal. He was admitted overnight for serial examinations and analgesia with ketorolac and oxycodone.
Approximately 18 hours after the envenomation, the patient complained of tongue swelling and difficulty speaking. He did not develop new wheezing or a rash. There was evidence of angioedema with the right side of the tongue significantly enlarged when compared to the left side. The patient had difficulty controlling his secretions but could swallow his saliva without problem. However, his voice was muffled compared to when he arrived. He received famotidine 20 mg IV, methylprednisolone 125 mg IV, and 50 mg of IV diphenhydramine without improvement; 0.2 mg epinephrine was administered intramuscularly.
Otolaryngology performed a bedside rhinoscopy. Nasal mucosa was examined and was within normal limits. The nasopharynx, soft palate, and oropharynx were unremarkable. Fullness of the base of his tongue was noted. His epiglottis was normal with questionably minimal thickening; the remainder of the glottis and supraglottis were normal. True vocal cords were mobile bilaterally.
Given increasing symptoms, the patient was intubated without difficulty. He remained intubated for three days and was extubated without difficulty. The day after extubation, the patient complained of seeing bugs on the ventilator of his room overnight, as well as spiders and birds outside his window. He received benzodiazepines for either delirium vs alcohol withdrawal with improvement over the next 24 hours. Symptoms improved in less than 24 hours. He was discharged the next day.