A 38-year-old man was found in his car with butane-containing cans for a portable cooking gas stove 6 days after disappearance and four days later he was brought to the emergency room because of altered mental status. On arrival, he was mildly drowsy and disoriented to time. He could obey commands; however, his reaction was slow. He showed short-term memory deficits and asked the same questions repeatedly. He exhibited emotional blunting. His vital signs and oxygen saturation were within normal limits. He had isocoric pupils without dilatation. Neurological examination findings were unremarkable. Routine laboratory examination results, including arterial blood gas analyses, cardiac markers, COHb (0.1%), and metHb (0.6%) were all normal. There were no abnormalities on the electrocardiogram or echocardiogram. A mini-mental state examination score was 24 of 30. T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery brain MR images showed symmetric high signal intensities involving the bilateral hippocampus and globus pallidus, which were also detected in diffusion-weighted images . The apparent diffusion coefficient values were also high. FDG-PET revealed glucose hypometabolism in the bilateral precuneus, occipital, and left temporal areas . An electroencephalogram showed intermittent theta to delta slowing. On the third day of admission, his mental status recovered from drowsiness to alertness. Detailed neuropsychological test results showed deficits in verbal and visual memory and frontal executive function . Six days after admission, he remained stable without clinical aggravation. At the 8-month follow-up neuropsychological evaluation, he showed mild improvement compared with his initial performance but still significant deficits in memory and frontal functions in comparison with education-matched, 45-year-old cognitively normal controls . However, abnormal behaviors such as irritability, obsession with food, and lethargy became more prominent. Follow-up brain MRIs showed diffuse cortical atrophy with white matter hyperintensities . Follow-up FDG-PET revealed glucose hypometabolism more extensively involving the bilateral frontoparietotemporal areas (worse on the left) than the previous one . Two months after the second evaluation, he died unexpectedly, and a brain autopsy was performed. Grossly, there was no definite cortical atrophy. However, necrosis and cavitary lesions in the globus pallidus and atrophy in the hippocampus were detected. Microscopically, hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed severe gliosis, necrotic changes, and neuronal loss in the globus pallidus and hippocampus . Luxol fast blue staining revealed widespread demyelination of the subcortical white matter . Immunohistochemical staining for tau, β-amyloid, TAR DNA binding protein, and α-synuclein revealed no abnormalities in immunoreactivity.