A 47-year-old Japanese woman presented with no subjective symptoms. Mammography revealed a clustered pleomorphic calcification in the left C region . She was referred to our hospital for further examinations. Her medical history stated that her mother had bilateral breast and ovarian cancers. Physical examination did not reveal a mass and papillary secretion in the breasts. The serum levels of the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA15-3, NCC-ST-439, and BCA225 were normal. Ultrasonography identified a solid (13 mm × 12 mm × 7 mm), irregularly shaped low echo mass with a clear boundary in the left CD region and a high echo spot in the interior . The findings of mammography and ultrasonography comprehensively classified the tumor as category 4, according to Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) 5th edition. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lesion (14 mm × 11 mm × 12 mm) with clear margins in the left C region, confined to the same area . Analysis of a core needle biopsy of this mass led to a diagnosis of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), nuclear grade (NG) = 2, which was negative for the expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), and human epidermal receptor 2 (HER2). The Ki 67 labeling index was 32.4%. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed a breast tumor with a maximum standardized fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake value of 3.54 in the left C region. However, we did not detect an abnormal accumulation of FDG that would indicate metastasis to the axillary lymph nodes, lungs, liver, or bones .
Although hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome (HBOC) could be considered a possibility because of the patient’s age and family history, she did not desire genetic counseling or BRCA testing. Upon the patient’s request, we performed total left mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). SLNB was negative for metastasis and therefore axillary lymph node dissection was omitted. Macroscopic findings included a relative clear boundary and a yellowish white mass in the left C region, and continuity with the skin and papilla was not observed . Histopathology revealed stromal microinvasion (≤ 1-mm diameter) with predominant CIS. Numerous cells exhibited a clear and minute vacuolar cytoplasm, suggesting sebaceous differentiation . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 50 to 90% of the tumor cells expressed adipophilin , leading to a diagnosis of SC of the breast. The CIS lesions comprised tumor cells with similar phenotypes, and comedo necrosis was confirmed. Further tests did not detect venous or lymphatic invasion, NG = 3, or expression of ER-, PgR-, or HER2. The Ki 67 labeling index was 90% . Lymph node metastasis was not observed. Together, these findings were consistent with pathological T1mi, N0, M0 Stage I. The lesion was mainly CIS with minimal stromal invasion, and we therefore did not offer the patient chemotherapy. Metastasis or recurrence was not observed 16 months after surgery.