A 29-year-old man presented to the retina clinic with complaints of sudden blurring of vision in the left eye of 3 days duration. He was not a known diabetic or hypertensive and had no significant treatment history. His presenting visual acuity in the right eye (RE) and left eye (LE) was 6/6 and 6/18, respectively. Anterior segment examination and intraocular pressure in both eyes were normal. Fundus examination of the RE was normal. Fundus examination of the LE showed multiple blot- and flame-shaped haemorrhages with markedly dilated retinal veins in all quadrants. Macula showed no visible changes . A clinical diagnosis of central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) in LE was made. His blood pressure on examination was 140/80 mm Hg. Multimodal imaging was done which included conventional and pseudo-colour fundus photography (CFP), multicolour imaging and OCT (Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany). Horizontal line OCT scan passing through the macula showed a hyperreflective plaque at the outer side of the outer plexiform layer with hyperreflectivity of the outer nuclear layer and disruption of the ellipsoid zone involving the nasal, superior and inferior macular quadrants. No intraretinal fluid was seen . These features on OCT suggested an associated type 2 AMN as well. He was advised for haematological investigations including serum homocysteine levels, Mantoux test and chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scans. Patient followed-up after 1 week with reports. Routine haematological investigations were normal including the serum homocysteine levels (15.6 μmol/L; range 5–16 μmol/L). Positive Mantoux test was noted with induration size measuring 15 × 15 mm with 5 TU PPD. HRCT chest showed an area of interlobular septal thickening involving the right middle lobe lateral segment and right and left basal segments. Few tiny nodules involving the right posterior basal segment were identified as well. These findings were suggestive of pulmonary TB. One week after presentation, the left eye fundus showed a subtle choroidal elevation temporal to the macula suggestive of choroidal granuloma. Based on the ocular findings, radiological and immunological evidences, a diagnosis of probable intraocular TB presenting with combined CRVO and type 2 AMN was made. The patient was referred to the pulmonologist to start treatment with ATT and obtain clearance for oral corticosteroids. He followed-up 2 weeks later with the left eye fundus showing multiple increasing choroidal granulomas. Fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography were done which delineated the location and extent of these tubercular choroidal granulomas. Also, extensive leakage at the disc and peripapillary region was noted due to inflammation from active peripapillary retinal and choroidal granuloma and presence of peripapillary choroidal neovascular membrane (CNV) . The patient was started on treatment with oral ATT and corticosteroid therapy. A single dose of intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (1.25 mg/0.05 ml Bevacizumab, Roche Pharma) injection was given for the peripapillary CNV. After 6 months of therapy with ATT and tapering course of oral steroids, there was a complete resolution of all clinical signs including the choroidal granuloma with improvement in visual acuity to 6/6.