A 31-year-old male presented to our institute because of exophthalmos affecting the left eye for 1.5 years; this symptom was accompanied by eye redness, eye swelling and prurigo present on the whole body, but there was no eye pain, diplopia, blurred vision, or other symptoms. The patient used to take small doses of corticosteroids irregularly, which relieved the symptoms, but the symptoms recurred after stopping the drug. The patient stopped taking corticosteroids nearly 1 month before his initial visit. Masses in the cubital fossas and groin had been surgically removed at the local hospital 10 years prior, and the pathology result demonstrated "lymphoproliferative disease". One year later, masses reappeared adjacent to the surgical sites; the masses were slow growing and shrank after the administration of corticosteroids.
The eye examination on admission showed the following: the best-corrected visual acuity of both eyes was 1.0 (international standard visual acuity chart: right eye, -6.50 Spherical Diopter (DS); left eye, -6.00 DS); the non-contact intraocular pressure of both eyes was 17 mmHg; and the exophthalmos values (as measured by a Hertel exophthalmometer) were 14 mm in the right eye and 19 mm in the left eye. The movement of both eyeballs in all directions was normal. Conjunctival congestion and chemosis were observed in the left eye, while no other abnormalities were observed in either eyeball. The general physical examination revealed the following: the masses in the bilateral cubital fossas and groin were palpable, slightly textured, but had distinct borders.
Laboratory examinations were performed on admission. The routine blood tests showed the following results: the proportion of eosinophils in peripheral blood was 13.4% (normal, 0.4% ~ 8%); the absolute eosinophil count was 1.19*10^9/L (normal, 0.02 ~ 0.52*10^9/L); the total IgE level was 26,900.00 IU/mL (normal, ≤ 100); the high-sensitivity C-reactive protein value was 4.5 mg/L (normal, 3); and the IgG4 level was 1.910 g/L (normal, 0.05 ~ 1.540). There were no obvious abnormalities in the levels of vasculitis-related markers (P-ANCA, C-ANCA, MPO-Ab, PR3-Ab, and ACA), anti-extractable nuclear antigen peptide antibody (anti-ENA antibody) or rheumatoid factor, and the results of routine urine and stool tests and liver and kidney function tests were normal. The smear and flow cytometry results of bone marrow aspiration did not show obvious abnormalities related to leukaemia or high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome.
Imaging examinations were performed on admission. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations of the orbit showed a lesion occupying the left orbital subnasal space. The lesion had unclear boundaries, adhered to the medial rectus muscle and inferior rectus muscle, and was locally adjacent to the optic nerve; in addition, there was thickening of the surface subcutaneous tissue. On enhanced orbital MRI, the orbital space-occupying lesion showed significant enhancement. Enhanced orbital CT showed inhomogeneous contrast enhancement of the orbital mass . CT of the lower abdomen revealed multiple nodular masses in the groin on both sides, with inhomogeneous contrast enhancement in the arterial phase . CT of the parotid glands, salivary glands, neck, chest, upper abdomen and kidneys revealed no obvious abnormalities.
Colour Doppler ultrasound showed that the left orbital subnasal space-occupying lesion and the bilateral elbow masses were oval in shape and had a heterogeneous hypoechoic-isoechoic appearance; in addition, the signals revealed relatively rich blood flow. .
On admission, the proptosis, conjunctival congestion and chemosis, and swelling of the patient's left eye were obvious and could not be relieved by the topical administration of tobramycin-dexamethasone eye drops. To alleviate the uncomfortable symptoms, an intravenous drip of methylprednisolone (40 mg) was given for 5 days, which obviously relieved the symptoms . In addition, the cubital fossas and groin masses were significantly reduced, and the peripheral blood eosinophil proportion (1.4%) and absolute count (0.14*10^9/L) returned to normal. Surgical removal of the left elbow mass was performed at the time of three days with methylprednisolone treatment . The pathological examination (Olympus Corporation, Japan; Qualcomm Pathology Reporting System) showed hyperplasia of numerous lymphoid follicles with active germinal centres and strong eosinophil infiltration in the interfollicular area (eosinophilic micro-abscesses formation), accompanied by postcapillary venule proliferation with intermingled fibrotic changes . Based on the patient's medical history, clinical manifestations and pathological characteristics, the patient was diagnosed with KD. Considering that the patient had good visual acuity and positioning and movement of the eye and that the lesion significantly shrank after glucocorticoid treatment, surgical excision was not performed.
After hospital discharge, the patient took oral methylprednisolone tablets (32 mg/d) for 30 days. At the second follow-up visit, the peripheral blood eosinophil proportion (2.5%) and absolute count (0.29*10^9/L) were well within the normal ranges, the total IgE level was decreased to 17,850.00 IU/mL, and the left orbital space-occupying lesion and the fossa cubitalis and groin masses were significantly reduced. In addition, the whole-body skin pruritus and prurigo disappeared. No other complications were observed. The dosage of methylprednisolone was tapering monthly and is currently being maintained by prednisone of 7.5 mg per day. Given the patient's reproductive needs, combined therapy with immunosuppressive agents has not yet been performed. The patient is currently under close follow-up observation and has been in a stable condition for eighteen months.