A 24-year-old man manifested the symptoms of dysuria, urinary frequency, and urgency for more than a week. Urogenital ultrasonography (US) revealed a hypoechoic mass at the dome of the bladder. The patient was treated with anti-inflammatory therapy and discharged from the local hospital after improvement. Thereafter, the patient sought consultation at our hospital for further evaluation. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a heterogeneous 2.7 cm × 2.1 cm × 2.1 cm mass at the dome of the bladder . The boundary of the mass was obscure, and the adjacent bladder wall was irregularly thickened. Inhomogeneous enhancement of the mass revealed a thickened bladder wall in the arterial and venous phases. Putative clinical diagnosis included urachal adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, urachal cystic mass, or abscess. Cystoscopy showed that the tumor had invaded the dome and right-side bladder wall, and the biopsy revealed some normal urothelium. Chest CT and whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed no metastasis of tumor. After sufficient preoperative preparation, a partial cystectomy and excision of the urachus were scheduled for both definitive diagnosis and therapeutic purposes. The intraoperative findings are: the tumor had infiltrated the whole urachus and adhered to the peritoneum; the tumor was located at the dome of the bladder, infiltrating the bladder wall, with a size of 4.2 cm × 3.5 cm × 3.5 cm; the tumor was fish-meat like appearance; no necrosis or bleeding was noted. Pathological and immunohistochemical examinations (desmin (+), SMA (+), Bcl-2 (–), MyoD1 (-), myogenin (-), CD117 (-), CD34 (-), DOG1 (-), S100 (-), PHH3 (+, with mitotic activity), Ki-67 (+, 20%)) of the mass confirmed the diagnosis of a leiomyosarcoma originating from the urachus . Our diagnostic criteria for interpreting a carcinoma as of urachal origin are (, ): (a) tumor located in the dome or anterior bladder wall; (b) tumor growth in the bladder wall; (c) absence of atypical intestinal metaplasia and cystitis/glandularis beyond the dome/anterior wall; (d) absence of a urothelial bladder neoplasia; (e) exclusion of a primary adenocarcinoma of a different origin. Some urachal remnants were identified within the tumor tissue that near the abdominal wall side, covered with columnar and transitional epithelium cells. The result is in accordance with the consensus statement by the Canadian Urological Association and Genitourinary Medical Oncologists of Canada . In the consensus, urachal remnants were reported in only 15%-62.5% of patients; their absence should not be considered exclusionary for a urachal primary. The patient was discharged after a week , and no recurrence was noted at one and a half years .