A 49-year-old woman came to the Outpatient Service of our hospital complaining of a cough, chest discomfort and fatigue on January 20, 2020.
The patient's symptoms started 5 d ago with a cough, expectoration and chest congestion.
She mentioned a travel history to Wuhan one week ago, the center of this CoVID-19 outbreak.
On admission, symptoms of cough, expectoration of white sputum, chest congestion and fatigue were observed, but her body temperature was normal 37.0°C (98.6°F). Coarse breath sounds in both lungs with wet rales distributed at the base of both lungs were heard on auscultation.
Laboratory studies showed a normal leukocyte count (white blood cell count, 5.58 × 109/L) and normal lymphocyte count (lymphocyte count, 1.47 × 109/L). The leukocyte differential count indicated 64.9% neutrophils, 26.3% lymphocytes, and 5.9% monocytes. There were elevated blood levels of C-reactive protein (12.50 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (37 mm/h). Albumin (32.1 g/L) and serum calcium (3.26 mmoL/L) were lower. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody of Mycoplasma pneumoniae was positive .
Unenhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed ground-glass opacities in bilateral lower lobes and a patchy and striate shadow in the right upper lobe. According to these findings and due to her travel history to Wuhan, we speculated that she had Mycoplasma infection and suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection; therefore, we sent a throat swab for analysis and the results were expected to take several days. Considering her CT images and the rapid development of CoVID-19, we treated the patient with anti-inflammatory and empirical antiviral drugs in the first three days. CT images showed progressive manifestations.
Three days later, real-time fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of sputum was positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid and her diagnosis of CoVID-19 was finally made based on laboratory results, chest CT images, clinical manifestations and epidemiologic characteristics. We were glad that we performed early intervention with antiviral therapy based on the previous CT manifestations.
CT showed multiple patchy ground-glass opacities and consolidated opacities in bilateral lower lobes and a patchy and striate shadow of slightly high density in the upper right lung . This asymmetrical lesion in the upper right lobe was quite rare in the cases reported so far.