We would like to present the case of a 68-year-old gentleman who had a brachial plexus block performed at two levels as the sole anesthetic to undergo an above elbow amputation. He was a frail gentleman and suffered from severe COPD and peripheral vascular disease. He presented with a severely ischemic left forearm at the Royal Albert Edward Infirmary, Wigan, UK. He previously had an axillo-femoral bypass for the affected upper limb which failed followed by a subclavian artery stent insertion which blocked subsequently. He was consented him for a left above elbow amputation by the vascular surgeons as his forearm ischemia was rapidly worsening. He had severe ischemic pain in his left forearm, which was controlled with a supraclavicular brachial plexus block the night before his operation.
His forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was measured as 1.6 liters and his echocardiogram showed moderate left ventricular dysfunction. General anesthesia deemed to carry a very high risk of cardio-pulmonary complications. Therefore, it was planned to perform this procedure under regional anesthesia as the sole anesthetic technique after obtaining patient’s consent. He was very restless due to the severe pain in his left hand and forearm and was not very cooperative.
The initial plan was to perform an axillary brachial plexus block to control his severe ischemic forearm pain but the axillary block could not be performed as he could not position his arm due to the severity of the pain. Therefore, the supraclavicular brachial plexus was technically easier to perform in this case and was performed using 20 mls of 0.375% bupivacaine under ultrasound guidance to control his pain and to perform surgery if the block proved adequate. The block was tested to cold and pinprick prior to the surgery but only provided adequate surgical anesthesia in the forearm up till the level of elbow, not above it.
We assumed that the block had been inadequate most probably due to technical difficulty to perform the block as the patient had not been able to lie still owing to the severe pain below his elbow. Having waiting for forty minutes after performing supraclavicular brachial plexus block, it was eventually decided to perform the rescue interscalene brachial plexus block. We were aware of the fact that performing an interscalene block could cause postoperative respiratory complications as the patient had severe COPD. However, as general anesthesia was considered to carry a very high risk, we decided to perform a supplementary low volume interscalene block using 7 mls of 0.375% bupivacaine under ultrasound guidance and nerve stimulation. The patient, thus eventually had adequate surgical anesthesia using the combined supraclavicular and interscalene approaches. He was cooperative throughout the surgical procedure and had the above elbow amputation completed successfully and uneventfully. He was pain free in the recovery and did not suffer from any postoperative respiratory complications.