The patient was a 27-year-old gravida 7 para 4 who presented with vaginal spotting at 23 weeks and 2 days of gestation. Her obstetric history included 4 preterm deliveries and 1 spontaneous abortion at 16 weeks. Her cervix was 4–5 cm dilated with a bulging bag. Ultrasound showed a live pregnancy with breech presentation, as well as a placental mass with differential diagnosis of a chorioangioma measuring 10x40 mm. Cervical length was unable to be accurately measured secondary to the anatomical changes. The patient was counseled and she consented to undergo amniocentesis and rescue cerclage placement. The amniocentesis showed a karyotype of 46XX. A cerclage was placed using the McDonald technique. The patient also received betamethasone for fetal lung maturity secondary to the risks for preterm delivery. The patient was discharged in stable condition after 2 days. Tocolytics or progesterone was not used.
She returned with vaginal bleeding and premature rupture of the membranes at 25 weeks and 2 days. The potential benefit of retaining the cerclage in order to prolong latency and decrease complications related to prematurity was considered. The decision was made to remove the cerclage at 25 weeks and 6 days due to the presence of heavy vaginal bleeding and the suspicion of preterm labor. She went into spontaneous preterm labor and vaginal delivery of a viable female fetus weighting 625 grams. The delivery was uneventful; however, the placenta was partially retained after delivery. An exploration of the uterine cavity and cervix was performed. This was followed by curettage due to continued heavy bleeding. Grape-like structures were seen during the procedure.
The placenta weighted 200 grams. The tissue appeared to have two distinct areas, one with normal placental tissue and one mixed with vesicles. This vesicular placental tissue was reported by pathology to represent gestational trophoblastic disease. Today, the fetus discussed previously is a healthy 4-year-old girl without major medical problems, aside from mild intermittent asthma. Her mother had a beta-hCG level less than 5 mIU/ml at 8 weeks post partum and is full remission today.