An 86-year-old male was admitted on November 8, 2020 due to sudden onset of unconsciousness for 3 h.
In the early morning of November 8, 2020, the patient suddenly screamed with involuntary tremor of the left upper limb during sleep, out of breath, followed by disturbance of consciousness with eyes tightly closed. The conditions lasted for about half an hour prior to relief. Then, the patient felt dizziness and weakness of the four limbs accompanied by slurred speech. The symptoms were completely relieved in 3-4 h.
The patient had a history of hypertension and diabetes for more than 10 years. Antihypertensive drugs were taken regularly, but no hypoglycemic agent was administered.
The patient had a smoking history for several decades, approximately 10 cigarettes/d. He denied a history of alcohol abuse or other bad habits.
The blood pressure and glycemic control were basically normal.
On November 12, a lumbar puncture was performed with the pressure at 250 H2O. CSF routine revealed the nucleated cell counts at 4 × 106/L, chloride at 124.5 mmol/L, CSF pressure at 0.58 ↑g/L, glucose at 3.56 mmol/L, anti-SS-A antibody (+), ANA cytoplasmic granular pattern, ANA titer at 1:100, anti-TPO at 198.8 U/mL, and anti-TG at 128.8 U/mL. Anti-sulfatide antibody IgG was positive. The timeline information of this case was shown in Figure .
Abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded on November 9. Starting from the right hemisphere leads, the amplitude gradually increased and the frequency decreased after appearance of a fast-wave rhythm of 14.0-22.0 Hz, 15-50 μV. Slow-wave rhythm was observed on all leads, and sharp-wave rhythm was observed in the right occipital area, lasting 30-60 s, without obvious clinical seizure or discomfort during this time.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography were consistent with subcortical arteriosclerotic encephalopathy and indicated ischemic changes in the right postcentral gyrus and possible early laminar cortical necrosis . Magnetic resonance angiography showed cerebral arteriosclerosis manifestations and reduced branching of the left middle cerebral artery, suggesting poor blood supply. On November 11, video-EEG during epileptic seizures showed low-amplitude fast-wave rhythms at 15.0-22.0 Hz, on all leads, with increasing amplitude and gradually decreasing frequency . After about 30 s, slow-wave activities were observed on all leads, and mixed with a large number of sharp waves and sharp-slow waves, mainly on the right side. Twitching of the right upper limb occurred at this point and recurred at a 4-12 min intervals. This seizure pattern recurred many times, during which the EEG indicated that the symmetrical appearance of 14.0-22.0 Hz, 5-15 μV β-rhythm was the basic rhythm, emitting a large number of 5.5-7.5 Hz low-amplitude θ waves .