A 43-year-old woman who presented with a 2-month painful blurred vision of her left eye was referred to our uveitis clinic with hypopyon panuveitis in the left eye. Ocular examination revealed a visual acuity (VA) of 6/6 in the right eye and counting fingers at 1-ft in the left eye, intraocular pressure was 12 and 6 mmHg. Her left eye showed 4+ anterior chamber cells with 1.7 mm of hypopyon and a 2+ to 3+ flare with only mild conjunctival injection. There were multiple iris nodules, as shown in Fig. . Fundus was obscured. The examination of the right eye was unremarkable. Ultrasonography of the left globe showed a heterogenous vitreous echogenicity, from which endogenous endophthalmitis was initially suspected. She was treated for bacterial endophthalmitis with intravitreal (IVT) vancomycin and ceftazidime injection, and fortified vancomycin and fortified ceftazidime eye drops. Systemic treatment included vancomycin 1-g intravenous infusion every 12 h and ceftazidime 1-g intravenous infusion every 8 h. Relevant investigations to identify the pathogen included vitreous gram stain, potassium hydroxide test, acid-fast bacilli stain, aerobic/anaerobic/mycobacterium culture, and polymerase chain reaction for bacteria/fungus/mycobacteria, which all returned negative results. Also, a hemoculture was performed and displayed no microbial growth. Whole abdominal ultrasound was performed and revealed only a few gallstones, a prominent size of the spleen, and possibly myoma. An echocardiogram showed no evidence of infective endocarditis. A Mantoux test, pathergy test, and anergy test were performed and all returned negative results. The chest radiograph was unremarkable. A plain-film radiograph of the paranasal sinuses showed maxillary sinusitis. Four days later, her clinical presentation worsened, and her VA was recorded as light projection (LP). Atypical mycobacterial infection was considered, for which an injection of IVT amikacin was given. Due to the patient’s worsening clinical status, a blood sample was taken and sent for analysis to identify the cause of the inflammation, as shown in Table . Prednisolone at 1 mg/kg/day was given without clear supportive evidence of the inflammatory cause. However, the clinical outcome became even worse. Despite an improving VA from LP to hand motion (HM), her ocular examinations showed increasing hypopyon to 2.0 mm. Newly developed scleral thinning and melting were also found over the vitreous tapping and intravitreal injection sites (superonasally and superotemporally) with a prolapsed uveal tissue, as shown in Fig. . During admission, an oral ulcer at the palatoglossal fold and tonsillar bed was found together with enlargement of the cervical lymph nodes. A cervical lymph node and oral ulcer biopsy was done by an otolaryngologist, with the pathological report revealing ENKTL, as shown in Fig. . A computerized tomography scan of the chest, neck, and whole abdomen was done presuming ocular masquerade syndrome with NKTL. Topical and systemic antibiotics were then withdrawn, and a hematologist consultation was done. The patient underwent bone marrow biopsy and aspiration, which showed minimal marrow involvement by ENKTL with scattered Epstein–Barr virus positive cells. NKTL stage IV was diagnosed. Then, preparations were made for the patient to receive chemotherapy via a SMILE regimen [steroid (dexamethasone), methotrexate (MTX), ifosfamide, L-asparaginase, and etoposide]. After her first cycle of chemotherapy (CMT), it was found that her VA in the left eye was LP, there was no progression in the scleral melting, the hypopyon contracted, and the size and amount of iris nodules were decreased, as shown in Fig. . Unfortunately, her left eye became phthisis with a complicated mature cataract, 9 months following the diagnosis. Regrettably, after her 5th cycle of CMT, or 2 years after the initial diagnosis, she developed septic shock and died.