A 43-year-old woman without psychiatric or substance use disorder history was admitted in a thoracic surgery unit for a suicide attempt by self-stabbing. She had been treated for Grave's disease by carbimazole for six years. Almost four months before the suicide attempt, she received radioiodine therapy. Because of a misunderstanding, carbimazole was not switched by the patient for levothyroxine but had been continued until one week before admission. She presented three self-inflicted knife wounds, causing a hemopneumothorax and a pulmonary contusion. The initial clinical evaluation reported a significant exophthalmos, a cutaneous myxedema, and a hoarse voice. She had a normal-size thyroid gland without nodule. A consultation-liaison psychiatrist's evaluation was requested on day one, before chest drainage under general anesthesia.
The first evaluations showed that the patient was disoriented with incoherent speech and intermittent agitation, compatible with mild delirium. She did not express suicidal ideation and did not remember stabbing herself. However, she clearly reported harm command hallucinations. Her relatives described behavioral changes seven days before the admission, including sleep disorders and persecutory delusions; she thought that she was under surveillance by her employer. Just before the suicide attempt, which occurred at night, she tried to leave the house naked.
Blood investigations on day three showed an extremely high thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level (152 mUI/L; reference range 0.20-5.10), low free thyroxine (fT4) level (1.5 pmol/L; reference range 11-24), and low free tri-iodothyronine (fT3) level (< 1.3 pmol/L; reference range 2.5-7). Thyroid peroxidase (1712 UI/ml; reference range <40), thyroglobulin (192 UI/ml; reference range <120), and anti-TSH receptor antibodies (6 UI/L; reference range < 1.6) levels were also elevated. The electroencephalogram and the cerebrospinal fluid on day six were normal. A brain magnetic resonance imaging scan showed nonspecific subcortical hyperintensities in the white matter. A thyroid ultrasound revealed signs of thyroiditis, without nodule.
Oral antipsychotic treatment (chlorpromazine 100 mg per day) was initiated on day three to reduce both the impulsivity and anxiety. On day seven, the patient also started oral thyroid replacement therapy (levothyroxine 50 μg per day for seven days, then 100 μg per day for two days, and finally 125 μg per day) because of a persistent increase of the TSH level. The psychotic symptoms rapidly disappeared between day 14 and day 19 and did not uncover any underlying mood disturbance. The cutaneous myxedema drastically reduced on day 18. The antipsychotic treatment was gradually stopped from day 19 to day 25. Endocrine blood tests on day 22 showed TSH level at 83.1 mUI/L and fT4 level at 8.4 pmol/L. The patient was discharged on day 32.
At follow-up visits one week and one month after discharge, the patient was asymptomatic and the TSH level was 22mUI/L and 8.37mUI/L, respectively. She did not remember in detail the suicide attempt but could express a feeling of “not being herself” at that time.