A 53-year-old woman presented to the emergency department for evaluation of abdominal pain, chills, and nausea. Her medical history was notable for psoriasis vulgaris, diagnosed at age 42, for which she had received intermittent treatment, but had not received any treatment in the preceding 6 months . She also had high blood pressure, received a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes at age 30, and underwent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty for unstable angina at age 52. Her gynecologic history was notable for one Caesarian section. She underwent menopause at age 48, and was found to have a right ovarian cyst at age 52. She had no recent history of sexual intercourse for at least 5 years.
The patient had felt abdominal bloating and pain for 3 days prior to presentation. Two days before presentation, the pain had moved to the lower left part of the abdomen, where it was localized. On the day of presentation, she had felt chills and nausea and requested transportation by ambulance for emergency treatment.
On presentation, the patient’s body mass index was 38.2 kg/m2. Her vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 40.1 °C; blood pressure, 98/65 mmHg; pulse, 108 beats/min; respiratory rate, 16 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 98 % on room air. On physical examination, she was tender to palpation throughout the left abdomen, but no clear peritoneal irritation symptoms were noted. Poorly controlled psoriasis vulgaris also was found, and because she had not bathed for more than 10 days, the skin was covered by filthy sebum secondary to poor hygiene. Laboratory findings were as follows: leukocyte count, 5480/μL; neutrophils, 92 %; C-reactive protein level, 20.3 mg/dL; procalcitonin level, 2.41 ng/mL; blood urea nitrogen level, 22.2 mg/dL; and creatinine level, 1.99 mg/dL . Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a 38 × 44 × 68-mm mass surrounded by dense adipose tissue in the left adnexa, which raised suspicion of infection . T2-weighted contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis revealed edematous change surrounded by liquid formation in the left adnexa, which raised suspicion of ovarian abscess .
At the time of admission, the patient was in a preshock state with findings of peripheral circulatory insufficiency and renal dysfunction, and was admitted to the intensive care unit. Based on laboratory and imaging findings, she was diagnosed with severe sepsis secondary to tubo-ovarian abscess. She was started on empiric antibiotic therapy comprising of meropenem 1 g every 12 h, vancomycin 1 g every 24 h, and minocycline 100 mg every 12 h. Although there was no evidence of rupture of the tubo-ovarian abscess on imaging, her clinical status deteriorated acutely due to progression of sepsis. During hospitalization, her circulatory dynamics were disrupted (she had hypotension and tachycardia) and addition of a vasopressor became necessary. Urine volume also declined and renal function worsened, such that maintaining blood pressure became increasingly difficult even with a vasopressor. On the second day of hospitalization, given that the patient was demonstrating signs of septic shock, emergency abdominal surgery was performed to control the infection source.
An abscess had formed from the left ovary, entangling the fallopian tube; thus, resection of the left adnexa was performed. While no evidence of rupture was found, there were significant adhesions in the large intestine around the left adnexa. Infection lesions were found in the left ovarian parenchyma extending to the surrounding organs, including the fimbriae of the fallopian tube, with diffuse infiltration of inflammatory cells of neutrophil bodies across a wide range, and randomly spaced formation of large and small abscesses. No malignant findings were noted. Gross findings of the excised specimens are shown in Fig. .
Blood cultures detected Prevotella spp., ovarian abscess cultures identified Prevotella and C. striatum, and vaginal and perineal skin cultures also revealed C. striatum. C. striatum was identified by using the API Coryne identification panel (bioMerieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Vaginal and ovarian abscess cultures were negative for Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and other microbes. Also, Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae were negative according to polymerase chain reaction. Based on these culture results, meropenem was changed to ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g every 8 h, and vancomycin and minocycline were continued.
After surgery, the patient’s hemodynamics slowly stabilized, urine volume gradually increased, and renal function improved. Blood cultures on the eighth day were negative; thus, antibiotic therapy was implemented for 14 days. On the 15th day, she was moved from the intensive care unit to a general ward. A summary of the patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . She was discharged 45 days after admission. Currently, it has been 6 months since her discharge from the hospital, and she has been in good health.