A 68-year-old White male presented with fatigue and unintentional weight loss at the 2-year follow-up visit after distal gastrectomy and lymphadenectomy due to locally advanced gastric adenocarcinoma. The medical history included hypertension and hypothyroidism, and the primary gastric cancer treatment consisted of perioperative chemotherapy according to the fluorouracil plus leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel (FLOT) protocol [, ]. According to a local oligometastatic treatment protocol, a left adrenalectomy was performed at the time of the gastrectomy due to a suspect adrenal metastasis detected on diagnostic imaging that had remained unchanged at preoperative evaluation imaging. The adrenal mass proved to be histologically benign with nodular hyperplasia, but no signs of malignant cells, while the pathology report of the gastrectomy specimen indicated high risk of recurrence, including a distressing ypTNM (pathological tumor–node–metastasis) stage after preoperative treatment, according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging manual 8th edition, and poor tumor regression according to Becker [, ].
Physical examination revealed a tired, cachectic man reporting 8 kg of unintentional weight loss over the last months, skin hyperpigmentation, and low blood pressure (100/70 mmHg). Routine blood tests showed minor deviations of serum electrolytes; elevated plasma potassium (5.0 mmol/L, reference range 3.5–4.6 mmol/L) and decreased plasma sodium (135 mmol/L, reference range 137–145 mmol/L). A routine control computed tomography (CT) scan, performed 2 weeks prior to the visit, revealed a 3 cm × 6 cm right adrenal mass .
The patient history of contralateral adrenalectomy, together with clinical symptoms and signs, biochemical findings, and imaging, was indicative of adrenal insufficiency. Primary adrenal insufficiency was confirmed by decreased serum cortisol levels (73 nmol/L at 9 am, reference range 135–540 nmol/L), increased plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels (89 pmol/L, reference range 1.6–14 pmol/L), and a positive (that is, no steroid response) ACTH stimulation test. Glucocorticoid replacement therapy (10 mg of hydrocortisone twice daily) was initiated in consultation with an endocrinologist, with rapid improvement in fatigue, normalized body weight, and normalized serum electrolytes. Pathological examination of an ultrasound-directed biopsy of the right adrenal gland was consistent with metastasis from the previously treated gastric adenocarcinoma. The cancer cell proliferation rate was high and the predictive biomarkers human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), were negative. The final diagnosis was thereby primary adrenal insufficiency caused by surgical removal of the left and gastric cancer metastatic invasion of the right adrenal gland. Mineralocorticoid replacement therapy was not initiated after balancing the potential side effects of mineralocorticoid therapy (edema, muscle weakness, electrolyte deviations) against the expected complications of advanced cancer and chemotherapy, together with the poor prognosis that metastasized gastric cancer entails.
Radiological evaluation after 3 months (six cycles) of first line palliative chemotherapy, according to fluorouracil plus lecovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI), showed no signs of extra-adrenal metastases and stable disease regarding the adrenal mass . The latter was hence treated locally with stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT); 50 Gray in five fractions. The patient has thereafter been evaluated clinically together with radiology (CT, chest and abdomen) and laboratory tests (including a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver panel, and the gastrointestinal cancer markers CEA, CA 19-9, and CA125) every 2–3 months. More than 17 months after the pathology-confirmed relapse of gastric adenocarcinoma, the patient is fully recovered and clinically well on glucocorticoid replacement therapy and with no radiological or biochemical signs of active malignant disease, except the residual right adrenal gland metastasis .