Our patient was a 66-year-old Somali non-English-speaking woman, weighing 65.2kg with a height of 1.57m. She had a past medical history of Helicobacter pylori infection, acid reflux disease, hyperlipidemia and diabetes mellitus type II. She was recently diagnosed with a large pelvic sarcoma that required surgical excision.
A preoperative evaluation was unremarkable. Her Mallampati score was 2 and her cervical, atlanto-axial and atlanto-occipital joints demonstrated full range of motion. She had a normal mouth opening measuring three fingerbreadths. She was noted to have a somewhat hypoplastic mandible and her thyromental distance was measured to be less than three fingerbreadths. She was premedicated with 2mg of midazolam then taken to the operating room, where she underwent a standard intravenous induction with 50μg of fentanyl, 80mg of lidocaine, 150mg of propofol and 50mg of rocuronium. She was reported to be easy to mask without an oral airway.
A direct laryngoscopy was performed once with a Miller 2 blade; a grade 1 view was obtained and intubation was atraumatic. Following intubation, a nasogastric tube was placed without difficulty. She underwent placement of bilateral ureteral stents and a large pelvic sarcoma excision over the course of 11 hours. Spontaneous respirations returned by the end of the procedure; however, she was slow to respond to commands so she was brought to the post-operative care unit (PACU) on a T-piece and supplemental oxygen. She was extubated without difficulty and transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) in the evening.
During the night, a nurse notified the on-call surgery resident that our patient was unable to close her mouth, and appeared to be in severe pain. After examining our patient, a diagnosis of muscle spasm was made and a hydromorphone patient-controlled analgesia was ordered. In the morning, the primary surgical team, followed by the SICU team, examined our patient, who was still unable to close her mouth. Both teams considered the diagnosis of muscle spasm as the most likely etiology. A rotating anesthesiology resident on the SICU team proposed a diagnosis of TMJ dislocation. Imaging confirmed the diagnosis of anterior bilateral TMJ dislocation (Figure ). The oral surgery team were consulted and our patient was seen in the afternoon. With 1mg of diazepam, the dislocation was reduced without difficulty via an intraoral closed reduction technique.
It is uncertain the exact time at which the dislocation occurred in our patient, but it should be noted that there was at least an 18-hour window from the time the surgery resident was notified of the patient’s inability to close her mouth to the time of the reduction. Unfortunately for our patient, the pathology went undiagnosed due to unfamiliarity of the surgical and SICU teams with the condition.