A 51-year-old man was admitted to the hospital for treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). The patient's anamnesis was negative for allergic events. Before hospitalization he was being treated with alfuzosin, which belongs to a group of medications known as alpha-1A-receptor antagonists used to treat the symptoms of enlarged prostate and BPH. On admission to the hospital alfuzosin treatment was suspended and the patient underwent transurethral resection of the prostate under epidural anesthesia, followed by post-surgical administration of antibiotics (modivid) and lactated Ringer's solution. Twenty-four hours after surgery, routine prophylaxis for stress ulcer (one phial of Zantac® 50 mg, intravenous, in normal saline solution) was prescribed. Within minutes of the injection of ranitidine, the patient developed a combination of wheezing, dyspnea and hypotension followed by loss of consciousness. Despite intensive resuscitation attempts, no cardiac activity reappeared and death was certified 30 minutes later. As the circumstances of death appeared suspicious to the treating emergency physician, a forensic investigation was initiated and the public prosecutor ordered a forensic necropsy.
The autopsy revealed pulmonary congestion with widespread upper airway edema, the presence of petechial hemorrhages and brain swelling with diffuse petechial hemorrhages. There was no evidence of recent myocardial infarction or other structural heart diseases. The rest of the organs were unremarkable. Histological sections confirmed the presence of widespread hypolaryngeal and pharyngeal mucosal and submucosal edema with inflammatory cells and an abundance of mast cells . Testing for specific IgE antibodies and mast cell tryptase was not performed because of post-mortem degradation of the serum.
Toxicological analyses on blood performed using a gas chromatography-mass spectrometry technique revealed the presence of ranitidine at less than 10 ng/ml (limit of quantitation); see Figure . No other drugs were found. Death was attributed to anaphylactic shock due to an adverse reaction caused by intravenous injection of ranitidine, suggestive of a pathogenic mechanism of immediate-type hypersensitivity reaction type I, according to the Gell and Coombs Classification System.