A 20-year-old female presented with sudden onset of severe headache associated with nausea followed by disturbance of consciousness, and was admitted to another hospital. The diagnosis of cerebellar and subarachnoid hemorrhage from AVM supplied by the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) was based on the findings of computed tomography (CT) and cerebral angiography. Emergency evacuation of the hematoma was performed via a midline suboccipital approach. Four months after surgery, vertebral angiography demonstrated left cerebellar hemispheric AVM supplied by the PICA . Fourteen months after the initial hemorrhage, gamma knife radiosurgery was performed to treat the AVM nidus with a volume of 0.487 cm3 at another institution using a Leksell Gamma Knife model B unit (Elekta AB). The procedure was planned using GammaPlan software based on stereotactic digital subtraction angiography and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. A prescribed dose of 20 Gy was delivered to the lesion margin at the 50% isodose line. Three years after the first radiosurgery, vertebral angiography showed a small residual nidus in the left cerebellar hemisphere . The patient underwent repeat radiosurgery at the previous institution using a Leksell Gamma Knife model C unit (Elekta AB) 4 years after initial radiosurgery. The target volume of the nidus was 1.5 cm3, a larger volume than that at the initial radiosurgery, and was intended to improve the treatment efficacy. The procedure was planned using GammaPlan software and a prescribed dose of 24 Gy was delivered to the lesion margin at the 60% isodose line. Vertebral angiography obtained at 5 years after the second radiosurgery revealed complete disappearance of the AVM . However, T2-weighted MR imaging and postcontrast T1-weighted MR imaging obtained at 7 years after the second radiosurgery revealed an enhanced lesion adjacent to the cyst formation in the left cerebellar hemisphere [Figure , ]. The patient was lost to follow up during the 18 months after the last examination. The patient subsequently presented with headache and nausea, which had persisted over 3 weeks, at age 34 years in the 32nd week of pregnancy, and was referred to our institution 9 years after the second radiosurgery.
The patient had headache and nausea, but no other neurological deficits were identified except for House–Brackmann grade 3 facial palsy persisting since her childhood. Other medical history was unremarkable. On admission, CT demonstrated an irregularly shaped, heterogeneous high density hematoma with perifocal edema in the vermis extending to the left cerebellar hemisphere . Her infant was delivered by cesarean section immediately after admission and osmotic therapy was started. Despite conservative management, disturbance of consciousness developed and deteriorated due to the extensive perifocal edema and hydrocephalus. Three-dimensional CT angiography revealed no vascular abnormality around the lesion.
Midline suboccipital craniotomy was performed and cerebrospinal fluid was released from the ventricular drainage. A very firm, reddish angiomatous nodular granuloma with adjacent cyst was visualized in the cerebellar hemisphere. Indocyanine green videoangiography confirmed the absence of abnormal vasculature around the lesion. The lesion contained angiomatous capsule and firm organized hematoma. Gross total resection was achieved without injury to the surrounding structures. No AVM nidus was observed during surgery. Her symptom was completely resolved immediately after surgery and the postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MR imaging revealed total resection of the hematoma with the adjacent cyst . Postoperative angiography confirmed disappearance of the AVM. Her baby's growth and development was also normal.
Histological examination of the lesion obtained during surgery demonstrated encapsulated hematoma consisting of a dense collagenous outer layer and a granulated, newly vascularized, angiomatous inner layer with extensive multinodular hemorrhage at various stages of organization . Hemosiderin deposits and coagulation necrosis were also observed . The microvasculature in the inner layer demonstrated inflammatory infiltration in the vascular walls and thickening of the vessel walls with hyaline degeneration, which are characteristic findings of vasculitis . Immunohistochemical examination demonstrated strong staining for CD34 in the microvasculature .