A 54-year-old male with a past medical history (PMH) of chronic hepatitis C and alcohol abuse with cirrhosis, stage III chronic kidney disease, and chronic hyponatremia was admitted to the hospital for acute on chronic hyponatremia, recurrence of ascites, and acute on chronic kidney disease. He was recently admitted for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) and had been discharged with a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line for 10 days of antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone. Unfortunately, the patient returned 4 days after discharge when he was found to have acute on chronic hyponatremia on routine outpatient lab work.
At the time of readmission, ceftriaxone was resumed, and blood cultures were sent. Ascitic fluid analysis revealed total nucleated cells of 156, with 77% lymphocytes. Nephrology was consulted for his acute on chronic hyponatremia (sodium of 117 on admission with baseline being around 127), and he was placed on albumin and octreotide for possible hepatorenal syndrome. Due to frustration over his readmission, the patient left the hospital against medical advice. Within hours of discharge, the patient returned with worsening fatigue, and the initial blood cultures taken the day prior had resulted positive for yeast in both tubes, with speciation pending. With those results, the patient was started on micafungin for the fungemia.
Physical exam at this time was significant for ongoing ascites and an erythematous, macular, non-blanchable, non-pruritic, painful rash over the thighs. The combination of fungemia and rash raised concerns for disseminated candida. However, within 2 days, both tube cultures and the repeat blood cultures grew Cryptococcus neoformans and the patient's antibiotic regimen was switched to amphotericin B and flucytosine. There were also ongoing concerns of a related intracranial infection as the patient was more lethargic and complained of a headache. However, a lumbar puncture was not performed due to concurrent coagulopathy. There was a suspicion for disseminated intravascular coagulation as the patient had persistently low fibrinogen levels despite multiple units of fresh frozen plasma. Confirmatory testing for the serum cryptococcal antigen was also sent at this time, which reaffirmed the diagnosis of cryptococcemia. The peritoneal fluid with a lymphocytic predominance eventually grew cryptococcus confirming disseminated cryptococcosis.
During the hospital stay, the patient's kidney function progressively worsened. He was initially managed for hepatorenal syndrome with octreotide, midodrine, and albumin. After initiation of amphotericin B and flucytosine, the creatinine level rapidly worsened from 2.71 to 5.75. In the context of oliguria and worsening respiratory status, the patient was intubated, transferred to the intensive care unit, and urgent hemodialysis was initiated. Despite these changes, the patient continued to decline. The decision was made to transition the patient to comfort care measures based on his previously verbalized wishes in the context of worsening renal failure and underlying cirrhosis.