A 72-year-old, right-handed man with a past medical history of urothelial carcinoma of the prostatic urethra presented with left homonymous hemianopsia and headaches. The patient was previously diagnosed with urothelial carcinoma of the prostatic urethra when he was 68 years old. At that time, he was treated with total cystourethrectomy. The pathological diagnosis revealed urothelial carcinoma with no metastasis to the lymph node but invasion into the vein . At the time of urothelial carcinoma diagnosis, computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed a tumor in the upper right lobe of the lung, which was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma with a transbronchial lung biopsy. Three months after total cystourethrectomy, the patient was treated with a left upper lobectomy of the lung and dissection of the lymph node with video-assisted thoracic surgery. The pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma of the lung with no metastasis to the lymph node and was considered to have no relationship to urothelial carcinoma.
A follow-up abdominal CT scan 1 year after cystourethrectomy showed metastasis of urothelial carcinoma to the lateral external iliac of the right lymph node. He was treated with six cycles of gemcitabine and cisplatin chemotherapy. During post-chemotherapy follow-up, other metastases were not found.
Three years after cystourethrectomy, the patient presented with left homonymous hemianopsia and headaches. Neurological examination upon admission revealed no other neurological deficits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an irregularly-shaped, heterogeneously-enhanced mass with gadolinium enhancement on T1-weighted images surrounded by marked edema in the right occipital lobe and the calcarine area. Metastatic tumors were not found elsewhere. The diameter was approximately 30 mm and was considered to have partial attachment to the dura mater. We removed the tumor via a right occipital craniotomy. The tumor had attached to the dura and so we incised it from the edge of attachment. The tumor was soft, yellowish-gray, and fairly well-demarcated from the surrounding brain with no apparent feeding artery. The pathological conclusion was that this was a well-differentiated urothelial carcinoma with necrosis, which was considered to have metastasized from the urothelial carcinoma of the prostatic urethra .
Postoperative MRI showed gross total removal of the tumor . Whole brain radiation therapy, 30 Grays in 10 fractions, was performed following tumor removal. The patient had no other neurological deficits except for left homonymous hemianopsia.