The patient is a 32-year-old gravida 4 para 2012 who presented for routine obstetrical care at 12 weeks gestation. Prior pregnancies were complicated by two prior cesarean deliveries and elevated copper levels. Postpartum, her copper levels normalized. Evaluation for Wilson's disease, in both the patient and her children, was negative. Her two sons, from different fathers, had elevated copper levels at birth. Her first child was diagnosed with autism and had three myocardial infarctions. He is still being treated for elevated copper levels. Her second child was diagnosed with autism and his copper levels are now normal. During those pregnancies, the patient declined treatment for elevations in her copper.
During the current pregnancy, copper levels were again elevated. She was followed in the high-risk obstetrical clinic. In the first trimester, her copper level was 154 μg/dL, the high end of normal, with normal copper levels ranging from 70–155 μg/dL. As her pregnancy progressed, the levels rose as high as 260 μg/dL with zinc levels decreasing to 61 μg/dL (normal levels of zinc range from 70–150 μg/dL). The remainder of her blood work, including liver function tests, urine drug screens, and complete blood counts were within normal limits. She repeatedly refused treatment with chelation therapy, but instead she opted to increase her intake of zinc. Following zinc supplementation of 100 mg daily, her serum zinc levels normalized to 140 μg/dL. This led to a decreased, but still elevated, copper level of 245 μg/dL.
At 36 weeks, an amniocentesis was performed, which showed lung maturity. A repeat cesarean section was performed. She delivered a liveborn male weighing 2700 grams with Apgar scores were 9 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Pathological examination of the placenta, membranes and cord were negative for copper. Additional staining for copper was also negative. The infant's blood copper levels and hemoglobin were within normal limits. He showed no evidence of infection; all of his labs and physical examinations were normal. While thyroid function tests were normal, the baby did not have evidence of heart disease during cardiac and NICU evaluation and workup. The newborn has achieved appropriate developmental milestones to date. Maternal serum copper levels returned to normal during the postpartum period.