In May 2020, a 6-year-old Han nationality girl presented with the chief complaint of neck pain that had lasted for a week. She didn’t take any medical treatment, but 3 days after the initial onset, her symptoms did not improve. She did not report a history of trauma, infection, or past illness. On admission, there was no personal and family history, congenital diseases, or non-specific infections such as tuberculosis, among others. Physical examination revealed that the movement of her cervical spine was limited. No torticollis nor palpable mass was found. Further neurological examination didn’t reveal apparently motor dysfunction or myodynamia deficit. A plain MRI scan revealed a localised reduction of the T2-weighted signal and soft tissue swelling in the PLL at the C4/5 intervertebral discs. Contrast-enhanced MRI (T1 FS sequence) after intravenous injection of a gadolinium-based contrast agent indicated obvious enhancement of masses in the nucleus pulposus (NP) and PLL at the C4/5 level . A preliminary diagnosis of inflammatory lesions of intervertebral discs with concomitant abscess formation in the PLL was considered. However, results of laboratory examinations, including inflammatory markers, complete blood count, calcium level, and phosphorus level, were within the normal range, which was inconsistent with this diagnosis. To achieve a more comprehensive examination, CT scans were performed and the results indicated the presence of calcification in the C4/5 NP and localised PLL ossification posterior to the C4/5 vertebral bodies. We also observed axial height reduction in the C4 and C5 vertebrae and endplate sclerosis in the opposite edges of the C4 and C5 vertebrae . Based on the CT examination results and relevant literature, a final diagnosis of paediatric IDC combined with OPLL was made.
Considering that the disease was benign and self-limited, and the patient’s symptoms were not very severe, we adopted a non-interventional approach. At 8-month-follow-up visit, the patient’s symptoms greatly improved and we performed an imaging re-examination. Both the plain and contrast-enhanced MRI scans indicated swelling in the C4/5 intervertebral discs and disappearance of the previously observed enhancement in the NP and PLL at the corresponding levels . CT examination showed the disappearance of both the C4/5 NP calcification and localised PLL ossification posterior to the C4/5 vertebral bodies . The patient got a satisfactory recovery.