An 84-year-old male with severe AS and severely calcified ascending aorta underwent AAC using a valved conduit with a 21-mm Freestyle valve (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and a 20-mm vascular graft combined with coronary artery bypass grafting 8 years earlier. The conduit was directly anastomosed to the LV apex without an apical connector. Since he had a severe stenosis in the proximal portion of left anterior descending artery, a saphenous vein graft (SVG) was anastomosed from the AAC to a left anterior descending artery. His past medical history included hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidaemia, Y-graft replacement for abdominal aortic aneurysm, and femoral–femoral bypass surgery. Two years after an AAC (in 2010), he had developed acute decompensated heart failure classified as New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV which required intubation and mechanical ventilation. After the medical therapy including vasodilators and diuretics, he recovered to NYHA Class II symptoms. A physical examination revealed a prominent systolic ejection murmur at the apex which radiated to the axilla and the left back, and decreased breath sounds on the left side. Abdominal examination was unremarkable. Mild pitting oedema of the legs was present. A transthoracic echocardiography revealed increased peak velocities at the anastomosis of the LV apex and the AAC (4.6 m/s), and at the heavily calcified native aortic valve (4.3 m/s). A cardiac cine magnetic resonance imaging revealed the flow void directed from the LV apex to the AAC, which suggested the presence of severe stenosis at the anastomosis site . His functional capacity was NYHA Class II and remained stable after the hospital discharge, we decided to manage him conservatively. However, he began to experience severe anaemia that required frequent blood transfusions from 2014 and suffered from shortness of breath and fatigue after walking about 100 m on level ground (NYHA Class III). An esophagogastroduodenoscopy and a colonoscopy showed no signs of gastrointestinal bleeding. Laboratory findings demonstrated elevated levels of serum lactic dehydrogenase and reticulocyte counts, reduced levels of serum haptoglobin, negative Coombs test and presence of urine haemosiderin, which confirmed the diagnosis of haemolytic anaemia with intravascular haemolysis. He did not receive any drugs that can cause immune haemolytic anaemia or thrombotic microangiopathy including cephalosporins, penicillins, platinum compounds, quinidine, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, cyclosporine, or thienopyridine antiplatelet agents. The serum level of B-type natriuretic peptide increased to 1078.3 pg/mL, suggesting that his symptoms were consistent with heart failure. Medications included loop diuretics, angiotensin receptor blocker, and calcium channel blocker for heart failure and hypertension. A left heart and AAC catheterization were performed to evaluate haemodynamics more accurately . A slow pullback of the end-hole catheter from the distal limb of the AAC to the ascending aorta showed increased peak-to-peak pressure gradient of 83 mmHg at the anastomosis of the LV apex and the conduit, and that of 72 mmHg across the native aortic valve. Coronary angiography and computed tomography revealed a stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending artery and a patent SVG. There was no significant stenosis in the left circumflex artery and the right coronary artery .
We speculated that his haemolytic anaemia might result from a turbulence and a shear stress at the stenosis of the anastomosis of the LV apex and the conduit, and might be a major cause of dyspnoea. In this case, treatment for the native aortic valve stenosis would reduce the blood flow at the anastomosis site and thereby improve haemolytic anaemia and dyspnoea. However, there was a concern that reducing the conduit flow might reduce myocardial perfusion through the SVG and exacerbate ischaemia. Therefore, a balloon aortic valvuloplasty (BAV) was planned at first. Because he had histories of a Y-graft replacement for an abdominal aortic aneurysm and a femoral–femoral bypass surgery for a right common iliac artery occlusion , an antegrade transseptal BAV using a 22-mm Inoue balloon (Toray Medical, Japan) via a right femoral vein was chosen. After transseptal puncture, multiple inflations of the Inoue balloon with stepwise increases from 16 to 20.5 mm were successfully performed . Since BAV was effective in improving his haemolytic anaemia and there were no signs of marked exacerbation of myocardial ischaemia such as worsening angina or new ST-T changes on electrocardiogram, TAVI was performed 4 months after BAV. Because of the porcelain ascending aorta and histories of a Y-graft replacement, a femoral–femoral bypass and an AAC, we chose a transsubclavian approach . Computed tomography findings revealed his basal ring area was 423 mm2 and perimeter was 74 mm, suggesting a 29-mm self-expandable valve (CoreValve, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) would be suitable. After predilatation using a 20-mm balloon, a 29-mm CoreValve was successfully implanted and additional postdilatation using a 22-mm balloon was performed. A postoperative echocardiography showed a favourable transcatheter aortic valve performance. The peak velocity was 1.9 m/s and the mean gradient was 6 mmHg, in addition, paravalvular aortic regurgitation was mild. The peak flow velocity at the anastomosis of the LV apex and the conduit was remarkably reduced to 1.4 m/s. After the TAVI procedure, the patient reported no angina and his electrocardiogram showed second-degree Mobitz type I atrioventricular block with no new ST-T changes. The serum levels of haemoglobin and lactic dehydrogenase were normalized . The follow-up transthoracic echocardiography performed in 2019 demonstrated that there was still flow in the conduit with a peak velocity of 2.0 m/s and there were no signs of transcatheter aortic valve failure. The patient remained clinically stable with NYHA functional class II without the recurrence of haemolytic anaemia.