In 2015, a 46-year-old woman presented to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery of Tokai University Oiso Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan, with the complaint of gradually moving mandibular teeth (for 6 months) and changing facial appearance. She had been referred by her family dentist, who had noticed the early stages of mandibular bone loss 9 years prior. She had received no treatment other than periodontal therapy performed by her dentist.
The patient was the youngest of two children. Her mother and father were 32 and 36 years old, respectively, at the time of her birth. Her father died in an accident at the age of 40. Her sister did not exhibit similar symptoms or present with facial malformation.
Birth weight and intelligence level were normal. The patient’s history was remarkable for 10 episodes of bacterial meningitis, which occurred between 31 and 39 years of age. She was premenopausal at presentation.
We consulted an orthopedic surgeon and genetic physician with the intent of performing a comprehensive screening for systemic disorders. Upon skeletal examination, there were no abnormal findings outside of the oral and maxillofacial area; the patient had a height of 157 cm and bone mineral density (according to dual energy x-ray absorptiometry) of 90%. Results of blood and urine tests for bone metabolism markers, including calcium (9.8 mg/dL), phosphorous (4.4 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase (284 IU), 25-OH-Vitamin D (55 pg/mL), and collagen cross-linked N-telopeptide (18.4 nmol), as well as neurological and cardiovascular examinations, were normal.
Extraoral examination revealed mandibular hypoplasia but no asymmetry . Intraoral examination revealed an anterior open bite (inter-incisor distance: 23 mm) and no crowding of the mandibular teeth. There were no abnormal findings pertaining to the oral mucosa .
Posteroanterior and lateral radiographs of the skull did not reveal any abnormal morphology of the head or facial height and width . Panoramic radiographic images and computed tomography scans showed axial and coronal thinning of the alveolar bone, anterior wall of the maxillary sinus in the maxilla, and the entire mandibular (condyle, angle, body, and alveolar) bone . Magnetic resonance imaging did not show any soft tissue masses in the maxillofacial area (data not shown). Technetium (99mTc) bone scintigraphy showed tracer uptake in the maxillary and mandibular bones .
Genomic DNA was extracted from 100 μL of whole blood from the patient and her mother (as a negative control) using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Initial DNA sample quality assessment, library preparation, and sequencing were conducted by GENEWIZ, Inc. (South Plainfield, NJ, USA). The SureSelectXT Target Enrichment System for Illumina Paired-End Multiplexed Sequencing Library and SureSelect Human All Exon V6 bait library (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were used for target enrichment and DNA library preparation following the manufacturer’s recommendations.
The sequencing library was loaded onto an Illumina HiSeq instrument (San Diego, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Raw sequence data (.bcl files) generated from the Illumina HiSeq instrument were converted into fastq files and de-multiplexed using bcl2fastq software 2.17 (Illumina). One mismatch was allowed for index sequence identification. The data of whole exome sequence was assigned on The DNA Data Bank of Japan Center (NBDC number: hum0190) .
The average coverage depth of the entire panel was 137×, and 99.9% of targeted bases were covered by sequence reads at a depth of at least 20 × .
Sequence reads were aligned using BWA (version 0.7.12) [doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp324]. Local realignment and base quality recalibration was performed using GATK (version 3.5) [doi: 10.1101/g.107524.110]. Variant calling was performed with SAMtools (version 1.3.1) . Variants were annotated using the ANNOVAR tool [doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq603].
Only non-synonymous sequence differences between the mother and patient in the sequenced genes were analyzed. Candidate gene sequencing revealed 83 heterozygous variants in 79 genes, which were confirmed by Sanger sequencing . These single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) were not present in any of the queried population databases [(Integrative Japanese Genome Variation Databas (iJGVD), The International Genome Sample Resource and Providing ongoing support for the 1000 Genomes Project data (1000 Genomes), The Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), snp138, Human Genetic Variation Database (HGVD), and The Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD)]. Among the 83 heterozygous variants, 12 SNVs in 11 genes (AHNAK, CCDC15, COBL, DCAF5, MCF2L, NSRP1, NSRP1, PCNT, RMDN3, and TTYH2) were considered to be “probably damaging” according to Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (PolyPhen-2) and Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) . These databases predict the potential effect of an amino acid substitution on the structure and function of a human protein using straightforward physical and comparative considerations .
The 11 genes with probably damaging SNVs were analyzed using the Genecards® human gene database version 4.5 . AHNAK may be involved in diverse processes such as blood-brain barrier formation, cell structure and migration, cardiac calcium channel regulation, and tumor metastasis . COBL may play a role in maintaining intestinal homeostasis . NSRP1 is an mRNA binding protein that has not been associated with any clinical features . The molecular and clinical functions of CCDC15, DCAF5, and RMDN3 have not been clarified according to Genecards®. MCF2L is related to the Rho/Rac signaling pathways, which play key roles in cell proliferation, migration, and motility, including in cancer metastasis . Among the 11 genes, only PCNT is expressed in the cortex and skeletal muscle. We speculate that the PCNT variant (chr21 47783755: NM_006031, exon14, c.2515 T > C, p.839C > R; NM_001315529, exon 14, c.2161 T > C, p.721C > R) in the patient may affect the cell division of osteoblasts or osteoclasts and bone homeostasis in the oral and maxillofacial area. This differs from the result of PCNT-null disorders . Thus, we considered PCNT a candidate gene for this disorder because of its high mRNA expression in the cortex and skeletal muscle and the lack of clinical reports for AHNAK, CCDC15, COBL, DCAF5, MCF2L, NSRP1, NSRP1, RMDN3, and TTYH2. Notably, p.C721R/p.C839R of PCNT has not yet been reported as a candidate variant for skeletal disorders in the Nosology and Classification of Genetic Skeletal Disorders, which serves as a “master” list of genetic disorders of the skeleton to facilitate diagnosis and to help delineate variants or newly recognized conditions .
Because this osteolytic disorder had not been previously reported and no specific treatment was indicated, the patient was placed under observation with periodontal maintenance. No progression has been noted in the 2.5 years since diagnosis.