Ms. H. was a 40-year-old, right-handed woman with a medical history of chronic migraine with aura, dyslipidemia, obesity, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, endometriosis, and gastroesophageal reflux disease. She had a psychiatric history of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) and trichotillomania. She had no history of previous vestibular or depressive symptoms.
Ms. H. presented to the emergency department at her local hospital after experiencing acute dysarthria and distal numbness in both arms. These symptoms had resolved by the time that she presented for evaluation. Medical records showed that her general physical examination was normal except for mild tachycardia. On neurologic examination, she was awake, alert, and fully oriented. Her pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation. Visual fields were intact to confrontation. Examination of cranial nerves II–XII demonstrated no abnormalities, specifically no oculomotor deficits, including no spontaneous nystagmus. Motor strength was 5/5, sensation was intact to light touch in all extremities, and speech was normal. Finger-to-nose testing was performed normally. She also had a normal gait. National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 0. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) with and without contrast revealed stenosis within multiple M2/M3 branch vessels of the right middle cerebral artery (rMCA) . Noncontrast MRI of the brain revealed a small region of restricted diffusion in the right mid insular cortex consistent with evolving ischemia . She was admitted to her local hospital for acute treatment. She was outside the time window for tissue plasminogen activator, so she was treated emergently with aspirin 325 mg and clopidogrel 300 mg daily followed by heparin via continuous infusion due to concern for a partially occlusive thrombus. After 3 days on heparin, a repeat CTA showed reconstitution of blood flow within the M2/M3 segments of the rMCA. A transthoracic echocardiogram with bubble study found a large patent foramen ovale (PFO). Hypercoagulable panel and ultrasound of the legs were negative. She was discharged on aspirin 325 mg daily and rosuvastatin 40 mg daily. Two weeks later, she underwent closure of her PFO.
Within a few days of hospital discharge following her stroke, Ms. H. noticed gradual onset of vestibular and depressive symptoms that interfered with daily life. She described daily sensations of spinning vertigo, unsteadiness, and lightheadedness. These symptoms were exacerbated by her own movements such as standing upright or bending over quickly, by exposure to moving visual stimuli or complex visual patterns, and when performing tasks that required precise visual focus such as driving, watching television, or working on a computer. Spinning vertigo resolved gradually within days, but her other space and motion symptoms consolidated into a chronic pattern. They were exacerbated by subsequent attacks of migraine, but she did not develop a distinct pattern of vestibular migraine. There was no pattern of dizziness associated with cephalalgia, photophobia/phonophobia, nausea/vomiting, or aura. Ms. H. did not report symptoms suggesting bilateral vestibular loss (e.g., her visually induced symptoms occurred even when sitting still, and there was no head-motion–induced gait unsteadiness or oscillopsia).
Simultaneously, Ms. H. experienced onset of low mood and anhedonia with notable disturbances of sleep and appetite. Her daily activities were restricted by prominent fatigue. She developed burdensome feelings of guilt and worthlessness, but no hopelessness, helplessness, or suicidal ideation. She continued to have symptoms of preexisting GAD including excessive worry, restlessness, tension, difficulty concentrating, irritability, and sleep disturbance. Laboratory and radiologic evaluation completed at that time including complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, thyroid-stimulating hormone, B12, and repeat head computed tomography demonstrated no new abnormalities.
Six months after her stroke, Ms. H. continued to report vestibular symptoms that interfered with activities such as riding in a car, being under fluorescent lights, watching traffic at busy intersections, going down escalators, and walking over patterned floors. She was referred to our tertiary center and underwent vestibular and oculomotor examinations that found normal smooth pursuit, saccadic, and convergence eye movements with no spontaneous or gaze holding nystagmus. Vestibulo-ocular reflex cancellation maneuvers were normal. Dix–Hallpike and roll tests were negative. Audiometric evaluation found normal hearing, acoustic reflexes, and Eustachian tube function.
Ms. H.'s psychiatric symptoms also continued with moderately severe depression on the Patient Health Questionnaire (score = 13) and mild anxiety on the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7; score = 7). Psychiatric consultation using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview identified a first lifetime major depressive episode and confirmed the presence of preexisting GAD. There was no evidence of mania, hypomania, panic disorder, agoraphobia, posttraumatic stress disorder, psychosis, eating disorder, or illness anxiety.