A 16-year-old left-handed young man came to the clinic with a history of quick jerks since childhood. They were first noticed when he was 2 years old and were localized to the head, trunk, and arms. They occurred at rest, worsened with activity, and were slowly progressive. There was no diurnal variation. His initial assessment at age 4 included a normal brain MRI and an EEG with central sharp waves during sleep, yet he had no history of seizures. He was the product of a normal pregnancy and delivery, and reached motor milestones in timely fashion. His family history, on the other hand, was quite remarkable. He had three paternal cousins and two half-brothers on the paternal side with jerky movements. His father and paternal uncle were also affected. Some of them had mild dystonia, too. Our patient, however, was the most severely impaired of the family.
When he was 6 years old, he visited a movement disorders clinic and, on the basis of his personal and family history, myoclonus-dystonia syndrome was suspected. Still, he had no complaints about stiffness or abnormal posturing. Sequencing of the SGCE gene identified a single-base deletion in exon 3 (c.285delA, p.Asp96Thrfs*36) (BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The deletion results in a shift in the translational reading frame, yielding a truncated protein. Five symptomatic relatives were also recruited for genetic study and they were found to have the same heterozygous deletion as the proband. While waiting for the results, he began using carbidopa/levodopa; however, he only took it for a week because it made him sick with no benefit. He was then started on trihexyphenidyl which he tolerated well enough and did allow some improvement, although mild. Symptoms progressed gradually over the years, spreading to his legs, and interfering with most of his daily activities such as eating, writing and self-care. He had not been diagnosed with any learning disability, yet he had an individualized education plan at school due to his abnormal movements. He was later prescribed clonazepam, without benefit, and zonisamide, which caused malaise and headaches, and provided no benefit. He never tried alcohol.
When he was 16 years old, he was referred to our clinic for surgical evaluation. His examination was notable for moderate to severe spontaneous, non-rhythmic myoclonic jerks that worsened with activity but were not stimulus-sensitive. Jerks involved his head/neck, trunk, and all extremities. Surprisingly, his gait was quite normal. He was overall independent in his activities of daily living, but had problems with simple tasks such as carrying a tray or drinking a glass of water without spilling. No abnormal posturing was noted. A neuropsychological evaluation revealed mild difficulty with executive functions, mainly verbal fluency and problem-solving, and occasional difficulties with anxiety, though there were no major affective disorders nor any other psychiatric comorbidity. The remainder of the exam was unremarkable.
He underwent bilateral GPi DBS surgery. His Unified Myoclonus Rating Scale (UMRS) before and 1 month after surgery changed from 83 to 6 for myoclonus at rest and from 46 to 8 for action myoclonus. Other sections of the scale were not administered. On follow-up visits, he described a dramatic improvement in quality of life. At 1 year after surgery, myoclonus is minimal and he is doing all his activities of daily living without difficulty.