A 24-year-old Pakistani man presented to the emergency room of our hospital suffering from diffuse abdominal and bilateral loin pain, diarrhea, vomiting and fever which began three days after a cricket match. The laboratory tests revealed kidney failure (serum creatinine 5.8 mg/dl; reference range 0.5-1.2), and the patient was admitted to our department. The patient appeared alert without neurological deficits, his temperature was 38°C, blood pressure was 146/75 mmHg, pulse was 72 beats per minute rhytmic and regular, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute. Complete laboratory tests confirmed acute renal failure (serum creatinine 6.3 mg/dl) with metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia and hyperphosphatemia. Urinalysis showed many UA crystals, microscopic hematuria and significant eosinophiluria (2%) without proteinuria. The patient’s serum UA was 2.9 mg/dl, creatine kinase was 1,155 U/l, and Prothrombin Time (PT) was 52% with an International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 1.6. All other laboratory tests were within the normal range . Renal ultrasound showed only mild cortical hyperechogenicity, and renal vasculature was normal. The patient was not taking medications, and his medical history was unremarkable except for recurrent episodes of loin pain (frequently radiating to the right groin with fever and vomiting) over the last five years. These episodes had started frequently after cricket matches or other physical activities. The family history was unremarkable except for a 28-year-old sister, who was noted to have similar episodes of recurrent loin pain and vomiting.
Intravenous infusions of 5% dextrose, normal saline and 1/6 M sodium bicarbonate were started. The next day, kidney function worsened further, and one hemodialysis session was performed.
A presumptive diagnosis of acute renal failure due to tubulo-interstitial nephritis was made, and prednisone therapy was started (67.5 mg/day, i.e., 1 mg/kg BW/day).
Kidney function gradually improved after the first dialysis session, and over the following nine days, there was complete recovery of renal function along with the disappearance of loin and groin pain and fever. Laboratory tests repeated before discharge were unremarkable, except for a very low plasma UA level (0.2 mg/dl). Steroid treatment was rapidly tapered off, and the patient was discharged on the thirteenth day with a serum creatinine level of 1.6 mg/dl.
Five months later, the patient presented again with recurrent loin pain, vomiting, diarrhea and acute renal failure (creatinine 2 mg/dl); two days before he had played a cricket match and the day before he had taken 1 g of paracetamol to treat a fever above 38°C.
The physical examination only showed bilateral loin tenderness; there were no signs of fluid overload, blood pressure was 121/68 mm Hg without orthostatic hypotension, and body temperature was 37°C.
The chest radiogram was normal, and renal ultrasonography showed normal-sized kidneys with only slightly increased echogenicity. Blood tests showed serum creatinine of 2.1 mg/dl, hypouricemia (0.4 mg/dl), hypophosphatemia (2.2 mg/dl) and a slight increase in creatine kinase (723 U/l). Urinalysis showed only rare red and white blood cells and a mild mixed proteinuria (0.4 g/day). Blood tests repeated after renal function recovery showed a very low serum UA concentration (0.09 mg/dl). The daily urine UA excretion was 411 mg with a FE-UA higher than 150%. This severe clinical manifestation, low UA and very high FE-UA in both admissions were suggestive of RHUC, which led us to perform mutational analyses of the two known casual genes. The patient provided written, informed consent and authorized the processing of his personal data according to Italian bioethics laws as well as the collection of blood and urine samples for biochemical and genetic analyses.
Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood by standard protocol and all the exons and intron flanking regions of the SLC22A12 gene (NM_144585.2, NP_653186.2) and of both SLC2A9 isoforms (GLUT9L, NM_020041.2, NP_064425.2; GLUT9S, NM_001001290.1, NP_001001290.1) were analyzed by direct sequencing with the ABI3130XL Genetic Analyzer.
Sequence descriptions of the mutations were verified using the Alamut software, version 2.2.
Sequencing analysis of SLC22A12 did not identify casual mutations; however, in SLC2A9, two distinct missense mutations were identified . In particular, heterozygosity for p.Gly216Arg and p.Arg380Trp substitutions was identified. Both missense mutations have already been described in patients with RHUC2: the p.Gly216Arg mutation was found either in homozygosis or in compound heterozygosity , and the p.Arg380Trp substitution was found only in heterozygosity .
The phase of the p.Gly216Arg and p.Arg380Trp mutations was not determined given the long distance between the variants, and segregation analysis was not performed owing to the unavailability of the proband’s family.
The p.Arg380Trp mutation occurs in the sugar transport protein signatures 1/2, in the fourth cytoplasmic loop, which is highly conserved in all known GLUT9 orthologs . Previous studies have shown that this arginine residue plays a critical role in forming cytoplasmic anchor points that are essential for the appropriate conformation of GLUT proteins . Loss of cytoplasmic anchor points of the membrane topology results in a significant reduction in UA transport activity in mutated GLUT9. In addition, the p.Arg380Trp mutation was functionally characterized in the Xenopus model, where it demonstrated a marked reduction of UA transport activity compared to wild type GLUT9 [,].
The p.Gly216Arg mutation occurs in the fifth transmembrane domain and replaces a highly conserved glycine residue with a basic charged amino acid, which strongly suggests its pathogenicity, as also predicted by the computational tools of the Alamut software.