A 76-year-old man was referred to the gastroenterology department of our hospital by a local doctor for exacerbation of edema and anorexia. His medical history was noncontributory except for gastrectomy for a gastric ulcer. Blood biochemistry revealed anemia (red blood cell count: 304 × 106/μL) and hypoproteinemia (serum total protein: 5.0 g/dL; albumin level: 1.8 g/dL), and urinalysis demonstrated proteinuria (2.9 g/day). His total cholesterol was 111 mg/dL. Multiple bladder tumors were suspected on thoracoabdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography and ultrasonography , and the patient was referred to our department. There were no abnormal findings in either kidney on computed tomography. The patient noted occasional episodes of gross hematuria.
His height and weight were 150 cm and 42 kg, respectively. His blood pressure was 114/72 mmHg, pulse was 93 beats per minute, and body temperature was 36.0°C. The entire body was edematous, especially the face and legs. Cystoscopy revealed multiple sessile papillary tumors extending from both lateral walls to the posterior wall of the bladder. Urine cytology was class V. Transurethral resection of the bladder tumor was performed. The pathological diagnosis was urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation and invasion to the muscular layer. Further investigation demonstrated no evidence of metastasis. Edema gradually exacerbated, and his 24-hour urine protein level increased to 11.1 g/day. The patient was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome. Simple cystectomy and ileal conduit formation were performed. No typical lymph node dissection, urethrectomy, or renal biopsy was performed considering the patient’s general condition. Simple cystectomy was selected considering the anatomical condition of the prostate and general condition. Macroscopically, the bladder was almost filled with tumors . Microscopically, lesions differentiated into glandular epithelia were extensive, and the following diagnosis was made: urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation, pT3a, u-rt0, u-lt0, ur0, ew0, ly1, v1, stage III . The postoperative course was uneventful, and edema and proteinuria disappeared 4 weeks after surgery. His abnormally low blood levels of protein and albumin returned to normal 2 and 4 months after surgery, respectively. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not performed because he did not want to be admitted to the hospital. Urethral recurrence developed 20 months after cystectomy. There was no edema, with serum total protein and albumin levels of 6.2 g/dL and 3.0 g/dL, respectively. Urethrectomy was performed by using a perineal approach. Prostatectomy was not performed. The pathological diagnosis was urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation. Tumor invasion into the corpus spongiosum of the urethra was observed. As the patient did not wish to receive further treatment, he was treated palliatively and died 15 months after urethrectomy.