A 63-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension who was undergoing treatment for a well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma presented to our institution complaining of 3 months of progressive lower extremity oedema. Her physical exam was notable for basilar crackles bilaterally and a soft II/VI systolic murmur at the right mid sternal border accompanied by jugular venous distention. She was initially diagnosed with the neuroendocrine carcinoma 1 year previously. Six months previously, the patient presented to our hospital with complaints of chest pain that was ultimately diagnosed as stress-induced (Takotsubo’s) cardiomyopathy. Repeat transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) during the present evaluation revealed a recovered left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) (55–60%) compared with previous studies but, unexpectedly, the patient now displayed severe tricuspid regurgitation. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed 1 week later to further define her valvular anatomy, and demonstrated a severely regurgitant tricuspid valve with fixed leaflets in a retracted position (and). The valve leaflets, as well as the subvalvular apparatus including the chordae and papillary muscles, appeared markedly thickened . The affected valve appeared to be stented open, displaying both regurgitant and stenotic behaviour. Paralleling her diagnostic workup by the patient’s internal medicine doctor and endocrinologist, a comprehensive evaluation was undertaken in the structural heart valve clinic including discussions with oncology and cardiothoracic surgery as to the potential and feasibility of repair options. Ultimately the patient was referred for surgical intervention of her dysfunctional tricuspid valve, and she underwent a surgical valve replacement with a 27 mm Epic porcine valve 1 month after TEE.
Following surgery, our individual patient’s valve was sent to the pathology department, and the only significant finding was the demonstration of fibrous plaques, thought to be correlated with an underlying endocrine tumour. Unfortunately, 3 days into the post-operative period, and prior to discharge, our patient suffered an in-hospital cardiac arrest and expired due to an unstable arrythmia.