A 29-year-old woman without the history of oral contraceptives use presented with hoarseness, dysphagia, vomiting, and headache. Later physical examination in our neurology department also revealed paralysis of the right CNs IX to XII. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the head and neck revealed an interruption of flow in the right sigmoid and transverse sinuses, with no apparent tumor on contrast-enhanced CT scan. Coagulation profile including the prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time was normal. She was diagnosed with Collet-Sicard syndrome caused by thrombosis of the sigmoid and transverse sinuses. She was treated with anticoagulant therapy, and the hoarseness and paralysis of the accessory nerve improved, but recanalization of the sigmoid sinus and transverse sinus was not identified. The hoarseness later worsened again, when she was 31 years old. In another hospital, contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed a tumor in the jugular foramen extending into the deep cervical region and medially displacing the internal carotid artery. The patient was referred to our hospital for further examination of this tumor. The tumor was investigated using contrast-enhanced CT and magnetic resonance imaging. It showed hypointensity on T1-weighted MRI and iso-to hyperintensity on T2-weighted MRI. The smooth tumor rim was enhanced on contrast-enhanced MRI. On a contrast-enhanced CT scan, the tumor displayed slightly heterogenous enhancement. She was diagnosed with jugular foramen schwannoma (Kaye's Type C) causing thrombosis of the sigmoid and transverse sinuses. No personal or family history of tuberous sclesosis was reported.
At the one-year follow-up, however, her tumor had grown rapidly, and we found that the tumor had started to surround the internal carotid artery . This clinical course was thought to be atypical for a jugular foramen schwannoma. We decided to perform a tissue biopsy of the tumor in both the jugular foramen and the deep cervical area. In open biopsy, the jugular bulb and internal jugular vein were filled with the tumor. Histological sections showed a proliferation of epithelioid cells with enlarged nuclei and eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, arranged in sheets or nested patterns with narrow blood vessels. Immunohistochemically, the tissue tumor cells were positive for HMB-45, Melan-A, and α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), but negative for desmin, AE1/AE3, and S-100 protein. Pathological analysis revealed a perivascular epithelioid cell tumor. (A tumor size of >5 cm with a mitotic index of 2 (counts per 10 high-power fields, HPF) and vascular invasion was identified. Based on these features, a diagnosis of PEComa with malignant potential was made. After discussing treatment options with otorhinolaryngologists, radiologists, and an oncologist, we decided to perform surgical treatment first. preoperatively, the superficial temporal artery-middle cerebral artery bypass was performed. We applied a postauricular transtemporal approach with anterior facial nerve rerouting to remove the tumor sacrificing the internal carotid artery involved by the tumor . However, it resulted in incomplete tumor resection, because the cardiac arrest and bradycardia was found during the removal of the tumor around the inferior petrosal sinus and anterior condylar confluence. The CNs IX to XI were sacrificed because these structures were invaded and it was extremely difficult to separate these structures from the tumor. Post-operative dysphagia, horseness and accessory nerve palsy were found. Six months after surgery, radiotherapy was added to treat the residual tumor volume. After one year follow up, there is no evidence of the regrowth of the residual tumor and metastasis.
Written informed consent for the current study was obtained before obtaining the patient's data.