The patient was a 29-year-old Black African woman referred for physiotherapy with a diagnosis of bilateral facial palsy 3 months post incidence. There was history of sudden onset of the condition when she woke up from her sleep. She was a known sickle cell patient and had her first delivery of a baby girl 2 months pre-incident of the condition. The delivery was by caesarean section done under spinal anaesthesia after 9 months gestation period. The patient was not diabetic nor hypertensive. There was no history of ear infection, influenza or trauma to the head/temporal region. There was no antecedent headache, recent travel or previous history of facial nerve palsy. She however had sickle cell crises 9 weeks post incidence of the condition.
There was no history of trauma and travel in the 5 weeks preceding onset of condition. There was no history of smoking, alcohol intake, unsupervised or unprescribed blood transfusion, or engaging in promiscuous sexual activities. Power in all limbs was normal; deep tendon reflexes were normal. Sensory examination was unremarkable and there were no cerebellar signs.
Medical examinations and report had earlier ruled out any other associated conditions such as viral infections, metabolic, vasculitic and immunological conditions. All other cranial nerves were intact; her motor system examination was normal; she had a normal gait and speech and co-ordination was normal. Affectation of other cranial nerves was also ruled out as were other neurological signs and conditions. She was seronegative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Full blood count, urea and electrolytes, bone profile, liver function tests and glucose were all within normal limits. Post incidence magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a subarachnoid cyst.
Examination at presentation revealed:
Facial grimacing Inability to wrinkle forehead skin Bilateral loss of nasal folds Inability to smile, laugh and talk properly Inability to whistle and close both eyes (positive Bells phenomenon). No swelling/tenderness/pain at the parotid gland region Severe synkinesis on left side and slight synkinesis on right side House Brackmann Facial Grading Scale (HBFGS) Score: Right = 3, Left = 4 Gross Muscle Power = 5, bilaterally (oxford muscle grading).
Patient was treated on alternate days with the following treatment regime:Faradic Stimulation from Enraf Nonius Sonoplus 6 series was applied to both sides of the face with the following treatment parameters:Triangular wave Phase duration = 1 second Phase interval = 300 milliseconds Current intensity = 9.2 mA Time = 10 minutes. Facial Exercises, 20 repetitions of assisted active exercises to each of the facial muscles using mirror as biofeedback. Soothing stroking massage (20 repetitions) with talcum powder to both sides of the face. Treatments 2 and 3 were given as home programme to be done thrice daily (this was confirmed from the patient whenever she reported for treatment).
After 4 treatment sessions of the above stated therapy, patient had to relocate. The assessments at this point are as follows:
Slight asymmetry of smile with maximal effort Synkinesis was barely noticeable Complete closure of the eye Restoration of nasal folds HBFGS Score was 2 bilaterally.