We present the case of a 60-year-old lady who initially presented with a pseudomonas empyema and a right hilar mass. Initial diagnostic bronchoscopy revealed no endobronchial lesion. She was treated under the respiratory and infectious diseases' teams with decortication and antibiotics which resulted in marked clinical improvement. Follow-up imaging showed a persistent right hilar mass, necessitating a repeat diagnostic bronchoscopy and biopsy. This revealed a non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) adenocarcinoma which was EGFR and ALK negative.
Baseline staging imaging revealed that she had metastatic disease with a right lung primary lesion, mediastinal nodes, and adrenal, frontal skull bone, and left pelvic bone metastases (T4N2M1c). She underwent an FDG-PET scan as part of her staging investigations in June 2017, revealing an area of intense heterogenous FDG-PET avidity in the sigmoid colon. This was suspicious for a metastatic deposit or a complication secondary to diverticular disease . However, a colonoscopy done 6 months prior had been normal. A CT scan was performed which demonstrated a focal area of thickening of the sigmoid colon ; however, given the recent colonoscopy findings, the possibility of malignancy was deemed less likely in this situation.
The patient had minimal comorbidities and palliative systemic treatment, including radiation, was organised. She proceeded to carboplatin plus gemcitabine chemotherapy and completed 4 cycles in September 2017. She received palliative radiation to the right frontal bone and left pelvis metastatic deposits. She was then commenced on maintenance pemetrexed chemotherapy in October 2017.
In March 2018, she had a repeat colonoscopy, which revealed two polyps and evidence of diverticulosis in the sigmoid and descending colon. The polyps were removed, and histopathology revealed no evidence of malignancy.
In April 2018, she developed asymptomatic low-volume brain metastases in the left temporal, left occipital, and right posterior frontal lobes ranging from 3 mm to 16 mm in diameter. She underwent gamma knife treatment to these lesions and proceeded to Nivolumab immunotherapy in April 2018.
After 2 cycles of Nivolumab, our patient developed mild lower abdominal pain, which she complained of during her outpatient oncology visits. This had been diagnosed as diverticulitis by her general practitioner, who commenced antibiotic treatment.
A CT scan demonstrated circumferential thickening of the bowel wall in the sigmoid colon and a suspicious-looking intraluminal tubular structure distal to this, suspicious for a foreign body . The patient could not remember ingesting anything unusual or ingesting a bone. She, also, did not have any further colonic instrumentation after her colonoscopy. There was some thought that this may have been a clip from her colonoscopy, although the appearance of the foreign body was not consistent with this. Nivolumab was ceased and antibiotics were continued.
The patient continued to eat normally during this time and reported no changes in her bowel habits. She had no fevers and the only abnormality on her blood results was a raised C-reactive protein. The clinical decision was to follow this closely with serial imaging. Progress imaging 2 weeks later confirmed persistence of this foreign body. Consequently, our patient was admitted due to ongoing lower abdominal and suprapubic pain and for intravenous antibiotics. A repeat FDG-PET-CT scan was conducted, revealing an intensely FDG avid mass in the midsigmoid colon . The increase in size of the mass was concerning for a primary neoplasm or an extramural metastatic deposit from our patient's advanced lung cancer, given she had a colonoscopy which revealed no mucosal neoplasm.
Despite these findings, it was still possible that this was secondary to an inflammatory rather than a neoplastic process. The patient was scheduled for a flexible sigmoidoscopy to evaluate the intracolonic foreign body. This revealed a chicken bone impacted in the sigmoid colon . The extent of the inflammation was such that the scope could not be passed 10 cm beyond the chicken bone. Nevertheless, the bone was easily removed with a snare. Imaging was conducted after 3 days to ensure there was no perforation or complication, as a result of procedure, given our patient's concomitant chemotherapy, following which she was discharged.
The patient unfortunately represented the day after discharge with a hip fracture following a mechanical fall. She underwent a hip replacement and during her postoperative recovery developed more abdominal pain. A further CT scan raised concern that this mass had become an intramural abscess with images displaying some gas locules within it . She was managed with further intravenous antibiotics for 2 weeks. Progress imaging had revealed little change in the mass, and the antibiotics were ceased.
She was discharged and remained well the first week following her discharge. The following week, she developed worsening pain, fevers, and a subacute large bowel obstruction. She underwent an emergency laparotomy, at which time, she was found to have a large, fungating, and hard mass, which was densely adherent to the bladder. She underwent a resection of this sigmoid mass along with a contiguous segment of the bladder . The segment of the bladder was repaired, and an end colostomy was fashioned. Histopathology confirmed that this mass was a large deposit of metastatic lung cancer .
Unfortunately, during the course of her recovery, our patient had another fall and broke her other hip. She has since had this hip replaced and has recovered from her surgery and is managing her stoma. She underwent further rehabilitation and was discharged home. She remains on systemic treatment for metastatic lung cancer.