A 66-year-old woman with a history of pulmonary embolism in 2004, Factor V Leiden (heterozygote for trait), severe cellulitis of left leg in 2006 resulting in left lower extremity lymphatic insufficiency, benign essential hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea with nightly continuous positive airway pressure usage, and partial thyroidectomy in 1996 for multinodular goiter. Complete thyroid resection in 2006 for recurrent thyroid nodules identified an unsuspected papillary thyroid cancer. She underwent treatment with radioactive iodine and had no evidence of residual or recurrent disease. She presented to her primary care physician regarding a mass in her left breast that had grown rapidly over several months. Mammography in July 2014 showed an irregular mass measuring 15.5 cm AP × 16.3 cm ML × 12.6 cm CC, with circumscribed margins in the central region of the breast . Ultrasound demonstrated a hypervascular complex cystic and solid mass with circumscribed margins in the central region replacing nearly the entire breast. A core biopsy showed a fibroepithelial neoplasm with stromal atypia and marked hypercellularity . All cytokeratin stains and p63 were negative in the stroma, ruling out metaplastic carcinoma; the differential diagnosis included periductal stromal sarcoma and PT. Systemic staging with chest CT showed no evidence of metastatic disease. Excision of the tumor followed by mastectomy confirmed malignant PT, 16 cm in greatest dimension, with stromal hypercellularity, nuclear pleomorphism, >10 mitoses per 10 high-power fields, necrosis, and infiltrative margins . Both classic and pleomorphic lobular carcinoma in situ were also seen. The margins were free. The skin and nipple were negative for tumor.
The patient was well for 1 year, but presented to the emergency department in October 2015 with sudden intense back pain, accompanied by immediate weakness and loss of sensation in her left leg. Imaging showed a pathological compression fracture of the L4 vertebrae . Core biopsy of the paraspinal lesion showed spindle cell neoplasm consistent with metastatic PT . Further staging showed pulmonary parenchymal disease and hilar/mediastinal lymphadenopathy and a cerebellar metastasis in addition to the lesion in the lumbar spine. Metastatic thyroid cancer to these locations was considered, but felt to be unlikely due to the low likelihood of metastatic papillary thyroid cancer in this setting and the biopsy-proven phyllodes metastases.
Despite the use of high-dose steroids and radiation therapy (8 Gy in 1 fraction), the patient noted progressive weakness and numbness of the left lower extremity, without change in bowel or bladder function. She underwent surgery with tumor debulking and lumbar spinal fusion. Pathology showed spindle cell sarcoma similar to her prior malignant PT morphologically and immunohistochemically.