A 59-year-old African American female suffered an acute traumatic patellar tendon rupture after slipping on ice at work. The patient underwent primary repair for the patellar tendon rupture 1 week later using an anterior longitudinal incision with ultra-high-strength suture tape in Krackow stitch fashion within the tendon and fixated to the patella using bone anchors. The retinaculum was repaired in a standard fashion similar to previously described techniques [, ]. It is generally accepted that primary repairs for patellar tendon ruptures should follow a rehabilitation protocol that includes early ROM exercises and persistent therapy for several weeks and avoid prolonged immobilization to ensure maintained ROM . The general post-operative protocol for this type of surgery was intended; however, the patient’s physical therapy was delayed approximately 4 weeks due to ongoing worker’s compensation claim. Once the patient was able to initiate therapy, she participated for 3 months. On follow-up office visits every 3–4 weeks, the patient’s ROM after the patellar tendon repair did not improve beyond 20 degrees of knee flexion and five degrees knee extension with firm endpoints. 6 months after the primary patellar tendon repair the patient elected to undergo diagnostic knee arthroscopy with lysis of adhesions and MUA.
During diagnostic arthroscopy, the trocar was placed through medial and lateral portals, breaking up adhesions in the process. The patient’s ROM remained unchanged after this intervention. While attempting to enter the patellofemoral joint, the trocar repeatedly hit a firm endpoint at the inferior pole of the patella and was unable to pass through what was suspected adhesions. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was utilized to identify and localize any osseous abnormalities and to confirm portal placement. After confirming accurate portal placement and finding that the trocar was unable to be passed despite fluoroscopic guidance, the procedure was converted to an open arthrotomy through a medial arthrotomy incision in order to expose the knee joint for better visualization. A bone bridge was noted in the inferior patellofemoral joint adjacent to the repaired patella tendon. An osteotome was used to break apart the patellofemoral bone bridge (, ). Further lysis of adhesions and manipulation of the knee was performed and the patient fixed 20-degree contracture immediately improved to 90 degrees of flexion, most significantly enhanced following osteotomy of the bone bridge.