A 32 year old presented for a rheumatologic evaluation for a several month history of fatigue, dry eyes, dry mouth, weight loss, alopecia, arthralgias and dyspnea on exertion.
Review of medical records noted an unusual presentation to her local emergency room 4 years earlier with profound weakness where she was found to have marked hypokalemia with serum potassium 1.4 milliequivalents per liter. She also had a non-anion gap metabolic acidosis at that time with a serum bicarbonate of 12–14 milliequivalents per liter and a urine pH of 7–8. Magnesium level was normal. This episode was never explained but was attributed to possible “occult” diarrheal illness even though patient had denied diarrheal illness. The hypokalemia resolved with potassium chloride supplementation and she was maintained on potassium supplementation for some time subsequently.
Approximately one year after this episode she started having issues with flank pain and recurrent episodes of nephrolithiasis. CT scan noted nephrocalcinosis ( Figs. and ).
After her Rheumatology visit further work up included a positive ANA and positive double-stranded DNA (ds DNA) titer of 1:320. She also had a positive SSA and SSB. Rheumatoid factor was elevated at 28. C-ANCA was positive at 1:160 but specific PR 3 and MPO antibodies were negative. Serum protein electrophoresis revealed a polyclonal gammopathy. At that time her sedimentation rate was elevated at 50 mm/hr with a CRP that was mildly elevated at 2.2 mg/dL. She was found to have hypocomplementemia with a C3 level of 32 mg/dL and a C4 of 2.1 mg/dL. Microalbumin to creatinine ratio was within normal limits at 27 mg/g. Urinalysis revealed no proteinuria, but microscopic hematuria was present with 3–5 nondysmorphic red blood cells/high power field but no white blood cells or casts. A complete blood count showed a white blood cell count at that time was 4.7 k/mcL with a hemoglobin of 10.7 g/dL and a platelet count of 251 k/mcL. Serum creatinine at that time was 0.9 mg/dL with a potassium of 4.3 meq/L and a serum bicarbonate level of 18 meq/L.
Following the above lab testing along with her clinical symptomatology, she was given the diagnosis of Systemic Lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Sjogren's syndrome. Mycophenolate was initiated at a dose of 500 mg twice a day and she was also given a pulse dose of IV methylprednisolone and started on hydroxychloroquine. She had modest improvement in her symptoms and mycophenolate was increased to 1000 mg twice daily and was maintained on 8 mg of oral methylprednisolone per day with subsequent improvement in her symptoms. She also had improving sedimentation rate to 21 mm/hr and improving complement levels with C4 level of 13 mg/dL and a C3 level of 98 mg/dL. In addition, her double stranded DNA titer was declining. Hemoglobin had improved to 12.5 g/dL.
Because of the recurrent complicated nephrolithiasis, her rheumatologist also suggested a nephrology evaluation. Nephrology assessment included normal parathyroid hormone level ( 55 pg/ml, normal 11–68), 25 hydroxy Vitamin D was low at 18 ng/mL normal 30–100), 1,25 dihydroxy Vitamin D was normal range at 59 pg/ml, normal 20–79). Urinalysis revealed no proteinuria, some microscopic hematuria, variable amounts of pyuria without cellular casts or dysmorphic hematuria, occasional calcium oxalate crystals seen. 24 h stone profile revealed marked hypocitraturia (75 mg/d, normal > 550) with normal urine calcium (52 mg/d, normal less than 200), normal urine oxalate (21 mg/d, normal 20–40) and uric acid (459 mg/d, normal < 750). Kidney stone analysis noted predominantly calcium oxalate with a component of calcium phosphate. Bone density studies did not reveal any osteopenia or osteoporosis. After completion of 24 h urine, she was treated with potassium citrate (20 Meq BID) to replace her potassium chloride. Serum potassium levels remained within normal range with supplementation. Serum bicarbonate was intermittently low between 18 and21 meq/L, so additional sodium bicarbonate was added to her regimen. Vitamin D repletion was initiated. While there was initial concern about replacing Vitamin D because of nephrolithiasis, stone profiles documented low urine calcium which did not increase after Vitamin D repletion.
She had multiple issues over the ensuing years with stones and infections on both sides. Interventions included extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy as well as open lithotomy and eventual auto-transplantation of left kidney for recurrent ureteric stenosis. She required over 20 interventions related to her renal stones. There were intermittent episodes of acute kidney injury related to obstruction and sometime associated infection. She developed some associated chronic kidney disease with serum creatinine rising from 0.8 mg/dl to 1.3 mg/dl over an 8 year span.
Follow up urine examinations noted pyuria, non-dysmorphic hematuria, no casts, protein quantification of 200–300 mg/ g creatinine with urine pH 6 to 6.5.
Mycophenolate was eventually stopped due to the recurrent urinary tract infections and she was started on Belimumab. This failed to control her SLE with worsening symptoms and decreasing C4 and rising ds-DNA, so mycophenolate was resumed and required intermittent escalation in steroid dosing. Because of recurrent SLE flares despite the mycophenolate, treatment was changed to Rituximab (every 6 months) with clinical and serologic improvement. Her kidney stone frequency and severity gradually improved over time- with less than one stone episode per year and no further interventions needed although she continued to require citrate repletion for hypocitraturia.
Patient comments: “" go ahead and use, my case. I think it is wonderful, as long as it helps somebody else, that would be great".