An 87-year-old man presented to our hospital with macroscopic hematuria in August 2018. He had a history of prostate cancer, which was treated with permanent seed brachytherapy in January 2009. At that time, his serum PSA concentration was 7.79 ng/mL and the Gleason score was 6 (3 + 3). He was diagnosed with a cT1c prostatic adenocarcinoma, which was treated with 90 iodine-125 seed implant. X-ray images obtained after brachytherapy showed no evidence of seed migration to the urethra .
No tumor recurrence or metastasis was detected in the following 9-year period, and the patient's serum PSA concentration decreased to 0.02 ng/mL. However, 4 years after brachytherapy, he developed several episodes of gross hematuria. No obvious seed migration was detected on X-ray images . Cystoscopy revealed an erythema on the bladder neck . He underwent TUR of the mucosa with erythema to achieve control of bleeding, and the gross hematuria was resolved. The pathology report showed inflammatory cell infiltration, erosion changes and Von Brunn's nests. A pathological diagnosis of cystitis with regenerative atypia was made. There was no evidence of malignancy.
Upon presentation with gross hematuria in August 2018, urine testing revealed no pyuria, and the patient reported no other urinary symptoms. Laboratory data were within the standard limits. X-ray images showed no migration of seeds. T2-weighted MRI showed a 12-mm lesion with low intensity on the bladder neck . Cystoscopy was performed and revealed an adhesion of stones consistent with the MRI findings .
We performed a transurethral lithotripsy under spinal anesthesia in October 2018. Three iodine seeds were found inside the stone, suggesting that the nidus of stone formation was an aggregate of iodine seeds . The stones comprised 68% calcium phosphate and 32% calcium oxalate. The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7. The patient's hematuria resolved, and there has been no recurrence.