A 67 year old man of Mediterranean descent presented with vomiting and diarrhoea. His past medical history included advanced HIV-1 infection diagnosed 4 years prior and hepatitis B virus (HBV) co-infection on combination antiretroviral therapy (ART) targeting both viruses, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD), vitamin D deficiency and depression. Medications at presentation were: atazanavir 400 mg, zidovudine 250 mg, etravirine 200 mg BD, raltegravir 400 mg BD, ranitidine 300 mg, fluconazole 200 mg, sertraline 50 mg and cholecalciferol 25 μg.
On examination, he had a low grade fever to 37.7 °C and a normal cardiopulmonary examination. He had palpable discrete cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy. There was generalised abdominal tenderness and hepatosplenomegaly without ascites.
Laboratory investigations on initial presentation are shown in Table . The most salient finding was an elevated CRP of 132 mg/L . The CD4 T-cell count was 0.34 x 109 cells/L and the HIV-1 RNA plasma viral load was undetectable to a level of 37 copies/mL. Five blood cultures and two urine cultures returned no growth. Stool microscopy, culture and serum cytomegalovirus (CMV) DNA quantitation were negative.
The palpable lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly were further investigated by a positron emission tomography (PET) scan that demonstrated increased metabolism in the spleen and mild-to-moderately increased metabolism in the bone marrow. Metabolism was also increased in lymph nodes above and below the diaphragm, many of which were not enlarged. These findings were reported as being most consistent with a well-differentiated lymphoproliferative disease process. The patient had attended an outpatient CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis eight days prior to admission which found mild splenomegaly at 13.5 cm but no evidence of pathologic lymphadenopathy.
A bone marrow aspirate and trephine was performed to investigate for haematological malignancy or occult infection such as Leishmania. The bone marrow was hypercellular with moderate tri-lineage dysplasia, reported as consistent with HIV infection. There was no evidence of bone marrow involvement by a lymphoproliferative neoplasm. The patient’s symptoms improved with supportive intravenous fluid and he was discharged after ten days with an outpatient Haematology appointment and a plan to further investigate for an underlying lymphoproliferative disease, however he did not attend this appointment.
Over the following 4 months, between December 2013 and March 2014, the patient had three hospital admissions each characterised by fevers >38 °C, generalised abdominal pain, urinary frequency and a CRP >100 mg/L . Each of these admissions was managed as presumed urosepsis on the basis of fever, abdominal pain and urinary frequency and involved treatment with empirical intravenous antibiotics. However, numerous blood and urine cultures taken on each occasion failed to isolate a pathogen. Admission #2 was seven days long. During this time the patient had two sets of blood cultures and one urine culture which showed no growth prior to treatment with IV ceftriaxone and gentamicin. A CT of the renal tract showed left perinephric stranding with no features of obstruction, reported as possibly consistent with a recent calculus. Admission #3 (twelve days duration) included four sets of negative blood cultures and two negative urine cultures. All were taken prior to IV ciprofloxacin therapy. During this admission the patient had a systolic blood pressure of 78 mmHg requiring IV fluids in an ICU. During admission #4 (eleven days duration) the patient was hypotensive on admission (95/40 mmHg), but responded to IV fluids. He had four negative blood cultures and two negative urine cultures prior to treatment with IV ceftriaxone and gentamicin. He was commenced on tamsulosin, prophylactic sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim 400/80 mg daily and referred for outpatient cystoscopy for further investigation of recurrent urosepsis. In January 2015 the patient re-presented to the Emergency Department with urinary frequency and loin pain . He was febrile (38.1 °C) with flank tenderness. He was again admitted with presumptive urosepsis and commenced on IV ceftriaxone and gentamicin. A CT of the renal tract was performed and found a left hydroureter and abdominal lymphadenopathy. The patient remained febrile, however antibiotics were ceased on Day 3 after urine and blood cultures found no growth and clinical suspicion for an underlying neoplastic process was high. A PET scan was performed, this time demonstrating multiple active lymph nodes above and below diaphragm considered suggestive of a slowly progressing well-differentiated lymphoma . A CT chest, abdomen and pelvis showed splenomegaly , right supraclavicular adenopathy, peripancreatic adenopathy and mild retrocaval adenopathy. The patient underwent an ultrasound guided core biopsy of the right supraclavicular node. The patient defervesced and he was discharged on Day 12 with plans for outpatient follow-up.
The histopathology of his excised lymph node found preserved architecture with expanded interfollicular areas including numerous mature, polyclonal plasma cells. Immunohistochemistry for HHV-8 showed occasional positive staining cells in the mantle zone . These findings were reported as diagnostic of the plasma cell variant of Castleman’s disease. A plasma IL-6 level was elevated at 29.6 pg/mL (reference range <6.0 pg/mL) and HHV-8 DNA was detected in the serum in a qualitative assay as quantitation was unavailable.
The patient presented to the Emergency Department again 4 weeks later, prior to his outpatient follow-up, with a three-day history of dysuria, frequency and flank pain . The patient was febrile to 38.6 °C, hypotensive (98/66 mmHg) and tachypnoeic, meeting the criteria for SIRS . His abdomen was distended with palpable hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory values are shown in Table . A CT of the renal tract was performed and reported no identifiable calculus however there was bilateral peri-nephric and peri-ureteric fat stranding with mild dilatation of both ureters. IV vancomycin and gentamicin were commenced to cover for urosepsis. The patient remained hypotensive and unstable despite fluid resuscitation, necessitating transfer to an ICU.
The patient was commenced on single strength noradrenaline (SSNAdr) initially requiring 32 mL/hr to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of >65 mmHg. He received 1 L of 4 % albumin. This reduced his SSNAdr requirements to 12 mL/hr and increased his urine output from 0 to 15 mL/hr to 60 mL/hr.
A renal DTPA-scan was performed and found normal renal perfusion but minimal renal function, a result likely confounded by use of noradrenaline. An intravenous pyelogram again made mention of bilateral perinephric stranding and the absence of hydronephrosis. An abdominal ultrasound was performed to exclude a biliary cause of sepsis. No cause for the patient’s clinical deterioration could be identified. A total of three sets of blood cultures and two urine cultures were obtained. No growth was reported in any of these specimens. While there was initial uncertainty surrounding attributing the patients fevers, flank pain and hypotension to the recently diagnosed haematological disorder, ultimately the cause for the patient’s symptoms was considered to be progressive MCD as previously described . His SSNAdr infusion was ceased on Day 3 by which time the patient had been afebrile for 48 h. The patient was transferred to the ward on Day 6 of admission and was discharged on Day 12 with outpatient follow-up, with an application for use of rituximab therapy submitted.
The patient was subsequently treated with rituximab monotherapy infusions at 375 mg/m2 for four doses weekly which was well tolerated. A progress CT found significant reduction in the size and number of the prominent lymph nodes and a reduction in splenomegaly . A serum IL-6 level taken 3 weeks after the final rituximab dose had decreased from a pre-treatment level of 29.6 pg/mL to 0.9 pg/mL (reference range <6.0 pg/mL). The patient remains clinically stable and regularly attends follow-up clinics. There have been no further admissions characterised by fever and/or hypotension.