Our case concerns a 48-year-old male with a history of syphilis and heterozygous AS sickle cell trait. Mantle cell lymphoma with multiple lymphomatous polyposis had been diagnosed based on a bone marrow biopsy. The patient received three cycles of R-Maxi CHOP and three cycles of R-High Dose-Ara-C (Nordic protocol
) with complete response on the CT scan. His peripheral blood stem cells (PBSC) were mobilized and harvested on his last cycle of R-High Dose Ara-C with granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) and plerixafor. Seven months after his diagnosis and two months after his last chemoimmunotherapy, he underwent the BeEAM protocol for an autologous HCT, which consists of bendamustine 200 mg/m2 intravenously given on days –8 and –7, cytarabine 200 mg/m2 intravenously twice a day on days –6 to –3, etoposide 100 mg/m2 intravenously twice a day on days –6 to –3, and melphalan 140 mg/m2 intravenously on day –2. He was only taking vitamin D supplements at the time.
Baseline laboratory workup was unremarkable, as shown in . On day –8, he began the BeEAM protocol and received his first dose of intravenous bendamustine 440 mg (200 mg/m2). He also received intravenous fluids as part of the BeEAM protocol. From day –6, his urine output, serum sodium and serum creatinine started to increase . His urine output markedly increased from 3725 mL on day –8 to 7425 mL on day –3 and the serum creatinine increased from 75 µmol/L on day –7 to 155 µmol/L on day –3. His serum sodium also increased to a peak of 155 mmol/L on day –2. During this time, the patient only complained of mild nausea. Vital signs were stable. Forced diuresis with furosemide was suspended and oral hydration was optimized.
On day –1, the patient started complaining of polyuria, nocturia and thirst. However, he could not drink, since he had severe mucositis and odynophagia due to his chemotherapy, which led him to be put on total parenteral nutrition a few days after. A nephrology consultation request was made. Laboratory studies revealed the following values: random urine sodium 56 mmol/L; random urine osmolality 307 mOsm/kg and specific urine gravity from urinalysis 1.006. Despite the normal range of urine osmolality, the nephrologist team suspected a nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) along with concomitant dehydration in absence of other identified causes of polyuria. However, no water deprivation test or desmopressin challenge was done since the patient had developed an acute kidney injury (AKI), and required fluids for his hypernatremia and his upcoming HCT. After the HCT, the patient’s infusion was first switched to 0.45% sodium chloride and subsequently to dextrose 5%. Serum sodium levels showed little improvement while fluid balance improved but remained negative. On day 5, desmopressin 1 mcg was administered subcutaneously with no effect on diuresis. The following day, a desmopressin (4 mcg) challenge was administered intravenously and showed a 33% increase from baseline urine osmolality of 204 mOsm/kg to an average of 277 mOsm/kg with a decrease in diuresis. These values were compatible with a diagnosis of diabetes insipidus. The patient remained polyuric and highly dependent on fluids due to his hypernatremia. Since he was partially responsive to the desmopressin challenge, intranasal desmopressin was started on day 8. The dose was increased until it reached desmopressin 40 mcg twice daily intranasally on day 11 . A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed on day 12 to rule out central lymphomatous infiltrates, which came back negative and therefore reinforced a diagnosis of partial NDI. On day 13, his natremia returned to normal range along with diuresis decreased to 600-800 cc/8 h, intravenous dextrose 5% was stopped. Desmopressin was weaned off and then stopped on day 15. By then, the patient’s nocturia had markedly improved and NDI was considered resolved. On day 18, the patient was discharged from the hospital. To this day, he remains in remission of his lymphoma.