A 63-year-old postmenopausal Japanese woman (gravida 2, para 2) presented to the internal medicine of our hospital with a 2-month history of lower abdominal pain. Although uterine adenomyosis was noted in her forties, it was not followed up. She had no atypical genital bleeding. As the serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was high at 64,868 U/mL, close inspection of the pancreas, gallbladder, liver, and gastrointestinal tract was performed. Although gallbladder adenomyomatosis was detected, no malignant diseases were observed in these organs. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed an enlarged uterus; therefore, she was referred to the department of gynecology. Ultrasound demonstrated thickening of the entire uterine wall, but the endometrium was not thick. Cytological testing of the endocervix revealed atypical glandular cells. Although it was not possible to pass the probe beyond the cervix, owing to the specimen of endocervical curettage, adenocarcinoma originating from the endometrium was suspected. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated an enlarged uterus with thickening of the entire uterine wall, suggesting adenomyosis. Both T1- and T2-weighted imaging revealed no uterine nodules . Three weeks later from the measurement with internal medicine, the serum CA19-9 level was markedly high at 115,950 U/mL. The serum cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level was high at 113.7 U/mL, whereas the carcinoembryonic antigen level was normal. No metastatic lesions were found on chest and abdominal CT.
Total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed to confirm the diagnosis. Intraoperative ascitic cytology was negative, and there was no peritoneal dissemination. Macroscopically, the resected enlarged uterus had no nodules and exudation of mucin was observed from the cut surface of the thickened myometrium. The surface of the endometrium was smooth, and the bilateral ovaries were unremarkable .
On histological examination, mucinous carcinoma (not otherwise specified; NOS) invaded almost the entire myometrium . The tumor cells had a cribriform pattern composed of mucin-producing columnar epithelium. The nuclei of the tumor cells were hyperchromatic; mitotic figures were sporadically observed. Adenomyotic lesions were distributed focally in the uterine wall, and transition from adenomyotic glandular epithelium to mucinous carcinoma was detected within several foci . Although adenocarcinoma cells proliferated adjacent to the endometrium, the primary endometrial epithelium was atrophic without atypia . Throughout the myometrium, the mucinous carcinoma cells proliferated and floated in dilated lymph vessels with abundant mucin pools . Microscopic metastatic lesions were observed in both ovaries. Endocervical epithelium and stroma of the uterine cervix were free of malignancy. Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinoma cells were positive for p53 and CA19-9, but negative for estrogen receptor and p16.
According to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging, we diagnosed this case as stage IIIA mucinous carcinoma originating from adenomyosis, pT3aN0MX. The patient received intravenous adjuvant chemotherapy (paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC6). After six courses of chemotherapy, the serum CA19-9 and CA125 levels decreased to 36 U/mL and 7.4 U/mL, respectively.
Three months after the last course of chemotherapy, the serum CA19-9 level increased to 455 U/mL, and pelvic CT revealed swelling of left common iliac lymph node. Although the progressive disease was noted, the patient underwent five more courses of intravenous chemotherapy (paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 and carboplatin AUC6) in consideration of the patient’s desire. However, the degree of swelling of the lymph node on CT did not decrease and the left pelvic lymph nodes were resected. Microscopically, metastasis of adenocarcinoma was observed in the left common iliac lymph nodes. After a month of the second operation, CT revealed large swelling of paraaortic and mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient died of disease 18 months after the first operation.