A 2-year-old girl had an accident of spoke injury. On the day of the accident, she visited a clinic, where she was diagnosed with a laceration on her left ankle. Because the bone fracture was less likely, ultrasonography or x-ray was not examined. She received wound cleaning and an oral antibiotic. However, she stopped visiting the clinic on her parents’ decision after a few days. Six months after the accident, she had a fever at 39 °C, general fatigue and localized pain at the left ankle. She revisited the clinic and received oral third-generation cephalosporin. On the same day (Day 1), she presented with generalized tonic-clonic convulsions for 5 min. The convulsion stopped spontaneously. She was transferred to our hospital because her consciousness remained disturbed after the convulsion. On admission, her body temperature was 39.8 °C, heart rate 160/min, blood pressure 120/82 mmHg, and respiratory rate 50/min. Capillary refilling time was 3 s. Consciousness was evaluated as GCS 7 (E1V2M4). The left ankle was swollen. Laboratory tests showed leukocyte counts of 10,700 /μL with 90% neutrophils. C-reactive protein and procalcitonin were 9.6 mg/dL and 55.5 ng/mL, respectively. Ammonia levels and coagulation studies were normal. The cerebrospinal fluid contained nucleated cells at 1/μL, total protein 17 mg/dL, and glucose 81 mg/dl. IL-6 and IL-8 levels were increased to 37.1 and 455.2 ng/ml in the cerebrospinal fluids, respectively. After the diagnosis of sepsis, she received the administration of cefotaxim and vancomycin. Repeated tests of blood culture proved bacteremia with methicillin- susceptible Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). No pathogens were detected in the cerebrospinal fluid . The cellulitis on her ankle was thought to be the focus of systemic infection. However, the diagnosis was not confirmed until MRI was taken on day 3 of admission.
Her consciousness did not recover during the next 24 h. Electroencephalograms showed poorly organized background activity, consisting of frontal-dominant, diffuse high-voltage slow waves. Epileptiform discharges were not evident . Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed the T2-prolonged lesions in the mesial frontal cortex of the right hemisphere, accompanying the feature of reduced diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI, b factor of 1000 s/mm2) and apparent diffusion coefficient mapping . Based on the diagnosis of SAE, intensive care was started with 1 g/kg intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for 2 days and 0.5 mg/kg/day edaravone infusion for 4 days. We used both agents because we had not removed the possible complications of SAE with immunocompromised state, autoimmune, hyper-inflammatory or secondary ischemia, including Moyamoya disease [–].
From the third day of admission, her consciousness began to recover. However, swelling of the left ankle further progressed. T1-weighted image of the left lower leg detected high-intensity signals with enhancement in the adjacent regions of soft tissues Osteomyelitis was not detected . Subcutaneous abscess was surgically drained, from the culture of which MSSA was also isolated. On the fourth day, the swelling on her ankle improved and her consciousness became clear. On the 10th day after admission, brain MRI showed no abnormal findings . She was discharged from our hospital on the 14th day of admission . Immunological tests did not support evidence for primary immunodeficiency or immunocompromised status (data not shown). She has been fully recovered, and presently attends preschool without any neurological disability.