A 6-year-old girl was consulted to our vascular center because of suspicion of femoral vein injury during left inguinal hernia repair. According to the first general surgeon, she had unusual bleeding from the surgical site which inevitably ligated the vessel. He ordered bedside Doppler ultrasound and noticed femoral vein ligation. We advised him to prescribe intravenous heparin with loading dose (80 IU/Kg) then refer the patient to our hospital. After 5 hours and as soon as the patient arrived our center, we visited her. She was awake, oriented, and hemodinamically stable, and had pressure bandage in her left lower limb. After reserve of packed red blood cells (RBCs), she was transferred to the operation room. The inguinal surgery site wound was opened and extended. The inguinal ligament was partially cut and beneath that, the femoral vein was separated and ligated. The femoral artery was explored and had normal appearance and continuity. The defect between distal and proximal ends of the femoral vein was about 1.5 cm .
The superficial epigastric collateral vein was normal and drained the blood of the limb. Because of the low diameter of the saphenous vein and the disadvantages of artificial graft, we decided to do primary anastomosis of the vein with inevitably mild tension. After release of both ends of the femoral vein with preservation of collaterals, the anastomosis was made with end-to-end method with 7-0 non-absorbable monofilament suture .
It should be noted that most important concern of operation was distal limb thrombosis and subsequent venous thromboembolic events. After control of distal end of the femoral vein, and in coordination with the anesthesia team, we milked the limb from distal to proximal with pressure band and evacuated about 300 cc blood and a few clots. At the end of operation, the inguinal canal floor was repaired. The patient was stable and extubated with good respiratory function and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). The limb was in compression bandage and elevated. Heparin infusion (18 IU/Kg) was prescribed with control of partial thromboplastin time (PTT) (therapeutic range 60-80). In the first 12 hours of the post-operation time, she had normal urine output with normal blood pressure and heart rate. However, the blood oxygen saturation gradually decreased to 92% without any respiratory distress, which with nasal oxygenation, the saturation increased up to 97%. The body temperature was 36.8 degrees Celsius. Our first differential diagnosis was pulmonary emboli, so we performed echocardiography. The function of the right heart chamber was normal. To rule out other respiratory pathologies such as the coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia, we performed chest spiral computed tomography (CT) scan and found non-specific lesions in lower part of right lung .
On the 3rd post-operation day, the patient's general condition was good with no change. The limb was soft and non-tender, the foot passive and active flexion were normal, but the blood oxygen saturation was still low and the same as before. So we performed pulmonary CT angiography and found no pathologic signs compatible with pulmonary emboli. The COVID-19 antigen test was negative. We did not find definite diagnosis for her low oxygen saturation. Color Doppler ultrasound showed patent vein continuity with no leg and thigh thrombosis. The patient was discharged at the 5th post operation day with good health and under treatment with 2.5 mg warfarin daily. We visited the patient weekly. After a month, we performed Doppler ultrasound and the blood flow was normal in the femoral and popliteal veins.