The patient, a 70-year-old female, developed numbness and weakness in her right lower limb for no apparent reason 18 mo ago, with the sensation of “walking on cotton” in her right foot.
She did not experience postural headache, nausea, vomiting, neck and shoulder pain, or radiating pain. The patient was treated with physiotherapy and massage of her lower back and lower limbs at a local hospital for the sequelae of cerebral infarction. Treatment was ineffective, and her symptoms continued to worsen. One year prior, she had fallen twice due to unstable walking and developed pain in her neck and right shoulder, radiating to her right upper limb. The patient did not visit the hospital on time due to the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic and was treated with traditional Chinese medicine. She underwent 10 neck massages, 8 acupuncture sessions, and 10 modulated medium-frequency electrotherapy sessions at a local clinic, but her symptoms were not relieved. Recently, these symptoms had worsened, affecting her everyday life and work.
Straightening of normal cervical lordosis and muscle spasms on the right side of the neck and shoulder. Hypoesthesia far to the right of the sternal angle; diminished abdominal wall reflexes; bilateral biceps, knee, and Achilles tendon hyperreflexia; bilateral positive ankle clonus, positive patellar clonus, positive Hoffmann sign, and positive Babinski sign. There was increased muscle tone in the right lower limb, with grade 3 muscle strength in the right anterior tibial muscle and grade 4 strength in the rest. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association score was 10, the score was 6, and the Cervical Dysfunction Index Scale score was 37.5%.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine showed protrusion of the cervical spine 4/5 (C4/5) disc into the spinal canal, stenosis of the spinal canal at the level of the corresponding disc, a strip of leaking cerebrospinal fluid at the level of the posterior C1-4 vertebrae, loss of epidural space, compression of the spinal cord, and a high-signal area in the medulla . Computed tomography (CT) of the cervical spine revealed “sickle-shaped” disc prolapse and calcification at the level of C4/5, small sagittal diameter of the cervical spinal canal, and loss of epidural fat .