In March 2016, a 75-year-old man with a history of radical cystectomy and cutaneous ureterostomy for UC of the bladder (G3 > G2, pTis) 5 years previously, presented with erythema and red spots around the external urethral orifice . At the first transurethral resection of bladder tumor in October 2011, UC was not detected from the urethra; hence, urinary diversion was initially planned for neobladder reconstruction. When the radical cystectomy was performed, malignant cells were detected from the left ureteral stump by rapid intraoperative pathological diagnosis, and two additional resections resulted in CIS or dysplasia; hence, urinary diversion was changed to cutaneous ureterostomy. No malignant cells were detected from the right ureteral stump. The length of the ureter was insufficient because the left ureter had to be excised twice additionally, and a stoma was created on the left side of the navel. Urethral resection was not performed because the urethral stump was negative. The resected margin of the specimen was negative except for the left ureteral stump. After surgery, bacillus Calmette-Guérin perfusion was performed six times in the left ureter, and no recurrence of bladder carcinoma in the upper urinary tract was observed. Postoperative urethroscopy was performed regularly and no recurrence of carcinoma was detected from the urethra.
Initially, he was treated with external medicine, but the lesion failed to improve. In June 2016, urethroscopy showed red spots on the urethra, without any tumors . A skin biopsy of the glans penis was performed to obtain a histopathological diagnosis of secondary penile EMPD that originated from UC. Immunostaining revealed CK7-positive and CK20-positive results. Chest abdominal computed tomography showed no lymph node metastases.
We suspected that the patient had a urethral recurrence of bladder carcinoma and that the recurrence had infiltrated the glans penis, with pagetoid phenomenon. In November 2016, he underwent a total penectomy. The operation time was 124 min, and estimated blood loss was 30 mL. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and he left the hospital on the 11th postoperative day.
Histopathological findings of the resected specimen revealed UC recurrence (G3, pTis) on the urethra. Consistent with biopsy results, the histopathological findings supported the diagnosis of the glans penis, and the patient was diagnosed with Paget's disease progression to the glans penis . The resection margin was negative, and the patient remained recurrence-free during follow-ups.