A Mongolian male, aged 19 years, resident of a hilly district of Nepal, presented to our outpatient department with chief complaints of pain and swelling in both hands and feet for 6 years. The pain was insidious in onset, throbbing in nature and not relieved by over-the-counter medications. The patient also complained of profuse sweating, progressive enlargement of hands and feet, and gradual coarsening of facial features. His family history was significant for consanguinity – his grandparents have a consanguineous relationship. There was otherwise no history of a similar illness in the family members, and this was the first time the patient sought medical attention for this issue. There was no history of scalp dandruff or rashes, and the patient denied having symptoms such as fatigue, eye redness, eye or mouth dryness, chest pain, or exertional dyspnea. There was no history of fever, palpitations, heat intolerance, or tremors.
The patient was hemodynamically stable, alert, and conversant when he presented. On examination, there were marked skin folds in his forehead, face, and eyelids . Clubbing and swelling of bilateral knee joints and ankle joints were also evident . Cardiovascular, respiratory, neurological, and thyroid examination performed for the patient was otherwise unremarkable. There was no scalp dandruff, rashes, psoriatic nail changes, subcutaneous nodules, or eye redness noted on examination.
We performed biochemical investigations including a full blood count (total lymphocyte count 9.5 × 109/L, hemoglobin 12.4 mg/dL, platelet 410 × 109/L), liver function test (normal), and renal panel (normal). Thyroid function test, rheumatoid factor, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide were normal. As there was a suspicion of acromegaly, we investigated the levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 and performed an oral glucose tolerance test; the results of both of these tests were normal.
Radiography of the skull showed mild cortical and subperiosteal thickening . Bilateral knee x-rays revealed symmetrical, irregular, and periosteal hypertrophy with subperiosteal new bone formation in the proximal tibia and fibula and distal femur . Radiographs of bilateral ankles demonstrated irregular subperiosteal new bone formation and cortical thickening of distal tibia, fibula, calcaneum, and talus . The x-rays of bilateral hands showed soft tissue tumefaction, particularly in the distal phalanges and periostitis and hyperostosis of metacarpal and proximal phalanges .
Aspiration of synovial fluid from knee joint was done to rule out other forms of arthritis. Synovial fluid analysis proved it to be non-inflammatory, non-hemorrhagic, and non-septic.
The patient stayed in our center for 6 days and was managed with selective COX-2 inhibitors (Eltrocoxib 60 mg PO, OD), steroids (Prednisolone 5 mg PO, OD), oral retinoids (20 mg morning and 10 mg HS), and retinoid ointment. The joint pain and swelling improved markedly with treatment. He was subsequently discharged with outpatient follow-up scheduled 1 and 6 months later, respectively.
However, the patient has since returned to his hometown and missed his physical appointments. Follow-up was established via telephone on both occasions, and it was found that his joint pain and swelling was minimal and the pachyderma had reduced gradually since discharge. The patient experienced no relapses or complications from the condition or the medications.