A 75-year-old man, with a history of mesh plug repair for a right indirect inguinal hernia 8 years ago, presented to the emergency department of a secondary care hospital with a right groin lump. He had felt a lump in his right groin for 5 days, but there was no pain. His body mass index (BMI) was 19.57 kg/m2, and he was afebrile and had normal pulse and blood pressure.
The lump was located on the foot side of the inguinal ligament, but there was no discernible redness in the area. Palpation revealed that the lump was elastic and hard, with no tenderness. The patient’s abdomen was soft, also without tenderness. The white blood cell count was 5500 /µL, the C-reactive protein level was 1.06 mg/dL, and other values in the blood test were normal. Abdominal plain computed tomography (CT) revealed a right femoral hernia that contained the appendix . He was diagnosed with an incarcerated appendix into a right femoral hernia and underwent surgery on the same day.
Laparoscopic surgery was initiated by inserting a 12 mm port above the navel and 5 mm ports in the left and right lower abdomen. The mesh-plug blocking the right internal inguinal ring could be seen through the peritoneum, and the femoral hernia where the appendix had been incarcerated was visible . The appendix was relieved by traction of the incarcerated appendix itself, the appendiceal mesentery, and the peritoneum around the femoral ring. Thereafter, careful observation of the appendix and femoral ring area was performed using laparoscopy. There was no white mass observed around the appendix, and although there was serous ascites inside the hernia, there was no pus. Furthermore, although the appendix was slightly dark red, it was not clearly necrotic. The area around the internal inguinal ring where the mesh plug was placed was scarred and severely hard, making it difficult to free the peritoneum. However, the prevesical space located medial to the internal inguinal ring could be expanded without any problems, allowing sufficient exposure of Hesselbach’s triangle. The area around the femoral ring was also dissected as much as possible.
As a new mesh was deployed (3D Light Mesh; Bard, Inc, New Providence, NJ), we particularly focused on making sure that it overlapped as much as possible around the femoral ring. The new mesh was rotated 180 degrees and the inner edge was then inserted into the dorsal side of the existing mesh plug (outside of the femoral ring) . Since the inner part of the 3D mesh is designed to be wider than the outer part, we considered it would be effective to deploy the new mesh in this way to cover not only the femoral ring, but also Hesselbach’s triangle as widely as possible. The peritoneum was closed without any defects . To perform the appendectomy, a single-use ligature (2-0 polydioxanone (PDS) EndoLoop ligature; Ethicon, Cincinnati, OH) was used at the proximal end of the appendix to close the appendiceal stump.
Oral intake was initiated on postoperative day 2, but a fever of 38 degrees occurred in the evening of that day, and treatment with antibiotics (CMZ 2 g/day) was started for 3 days. The fever subsided the day after it started, and no fever occurred thereafter. There was also no increase in inflammation values in blood tests. He was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8. Pathological examination revealed no infiltration of neutrophils into the appendiceal mucosa or deeper layer, therefore no inflammation occurred , and neoplasm was also not found.