The patient was a 60-year-old man who was independent in all ADL before his illness. His medical history included left testicular cancer, for which he had undergone high-level vasectomy 12 years ago. The patient was diagnosed with low-risk MDS due to pancytopenia during a routine urologic visit 1 year ago, and supportive care was initiated. Six months ago, he had progressive pancytopenia and increased blast counts (white blood cell [WBC] 1140/µL, neutrophil count 216/µL, hemoglobin 8.8 g/dL, platelets 28000/µL, blasts 4%) and was on an allo-HSCT waiting list due to transition from low-risk to high-risk. As he had a fever of 39.0°C with a low neutrophil count (<500) for 1 month, he was diagnosed with febrile neutropenia and was urgently admitted to the hematology department of this hospital.
Rehabilitation was initiated on the fourth day of hospitalization. To assess motor function, the 6-minute walking distance (6MWD) by the 6-minute walking test (6MWT) and knee extension strength using a hand-held dynamometer (μ-tas F-1; ANIMA Co., Tokyo, Japan) were measured at the start of rehabilitation, before MAC, and at discharge. The 6MWT assesses exercise tolerance, and a strong correlation between 6MWD and maximal oxygen uptake has been reported.[ The 6MWT was performed according to the American Thoracic Society guidelines, and the patient was instructed in advance to rest if a break was required during the examination.[ He walked on a flat 30-m straight corridor for 6 minutes under maximal effort conditions, and the total distance was measured. The 6MWT was performed once at each measurement point. Knee extensor strength was measured in a sitting position with both upper limbs crossed in front of the chest and hip and knee joints flexed at 90°. A sensor pad was applied to the distal portion of the right lower leg, secured with a post and non-stretchable strap, and a 3-second maximal isometric exercise was performed. The test was performed 3 times with a 1-minute break in between, and the maximum value among the 3 values was noted.[ Aerobic exercise was performed on a mobile bicycle ergometer (915E; Monark Exercise AB, Vansbro, Sweden) for 20 to 30 minutes with a target heart rate set at 60% exercise intensity using the Karvonen method. The step exercise was performed using a 30-cm movable step bench, with 2 sets of 30 repetitions to the left and right in the forward direction and 2 sets of 30 repetitions to the side.
Physical examination at the start of rehabilitation revealed anemia in the eyelid conjunctiva but no purpura or petechial hemorrhage in the extremities or trunk. Muscle strength was measured using manual muscle testing according to muscle strength grading.[ The patient’s manual muscle testing score was grade 5 in all extremities and all ADL were independent; however, his activity level decreased due to anemia and fatigue, and he tended to lie in bed during the day. Laboratory examination revealed WBC 850/µL, hemoglobin 6.3 g/dL, platelet count 11,000/µL, easy infection, anemia, and bleeding due to decreased blood cell counts. At the start of rehabilitation, his 6MWD was 470 m, and knee extension strength was 27.3 kgf on the right and 29.1 kgf on the left. On day 16, the patient was moved to a clean room for MAC and continued with a bicycle ergometer and step exercises indoors. The 6MWD before MAC was 523 m, and knee extension muscle strength was 27.9 kgf on the right and 29.8 kgf on the left. On day 17, MAC therapy with fludarabine and busulfan was initiated . On day 21, the patient experienced fatigue and nausea and could no longer sustain the step exercise; therefore, the 30 times, 4 sets were changed to 10 times, 12 sets, and continued. The bicycle ergometer was maintained at the target heart rate. On day 24, allo-HSCT (HLA full-match) was performed. On day 31, acute graft-versus-host disease (skin stage 0, liver stage 0, gastrointestinal stage 2, Grade 3) developed. Owing to diarrhea symptoms and fatigue, the step exercise was changed to 10 times and 12 sets. Laboratory results were WBC 140/µL, neutrophil count 42/µL, hemoglobin 8.0 g/dL, and platelet count 10,000/µL. On day 41, the number of neutrophils increased, and live implantation was confirmed. Laboratory results were WBC 3560/µL, neutrophil count 2990/µL, hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL, and platelet count 34,000/µL. On day 50, the patient was discharged from the clean room. He was able to walk independently in the ward and required no assistance with ADL. On day 59, all ADL were independent, and the patient was discharged. At discharge, the 6MWD was 536 m, and knee extension strength was 29.2 kgf on the right and 30.9 kgf on the left. No serious rehabilitation events occurred between the start of rehabilitation and discharge. The results of the assessment parameters are presented in Table , and detailed laboratory results during the study period are presented in Table .
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the release of this case report. This study complied with all the case report guidelines and reported the required information accordingly.