A 61-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital complaining of exertional dyspnea (NYHA III) and chest pain. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a large pericardial effusion. Pericardiocentesis revealed 1500 ml of an acellular, sterile pericardial effusion and symptoms were markedly relieved.
The patient was re-admitted three months later, and transthoracic echocardiography showed a recurrent large pericardial effusion with partly organized fibrinous structures inside the effusion. There were no signs of cardiac tamponade, but there was a thickened right ventricular pericardium . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the pericardial effusion, and the slightly thickened pericardium .
An F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) scan demonstrated an intrapericardial accumulation of the tracer, indicating a local infection or a tumor .
The patient's level of intrapericardial fluid declined after repeated pericardiocentesis, and cytology of the pericardial fluid revealed signs of chronic infection, but no malignant mesothelial cells. Subsequently, the patient developed a hemodynamically relevant pericardial constriction (SD5). Therefore, a partial pericardiectomy was performed, and histological examination revealed a primary malignant pericardial mesothelioma (PMPM). This finding initiated additional subtotal pericardiectomy with resection of as much pericardium as possible. The inspection of the epicardium by the surgeon showed a pericardial thickness of 10 mm and a white-colored spot of the pericardium at the right ventricle. There was no indication of tumor spread to adjacent structures, and there was no tumor on the epicardial site.
This was considered to be a PMPM because no signs of a pleural mesothelioma were found. Despite the above-mentioned findings of the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the chest, FDG-PET, echocardiography and pericardiocentesis, we suspected PMPM but could not definitively declare a preoperative diagnosis of PMPM.
Subsequently, four cycles of chemotherapy with pemetrexed and cisplatin (four cycles in four months - dosage according to recently published trials) were administered, and remission was achieved -. The patient remained asymptomatic, and there was no recurrence of the tumor during the next three years.