A 45-year-old man presented to our outpatient appointment with the complaint of dyspnoea on exertion. He was an office worker and his functional status was good. He had no past medical history other than the cardiac disease that is described hereafter. Ten years before the visit, he had experienced New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II heart failure symptoms and was diagnosed with HOCM on echocardiography. The LVOT peak pressure gradient at initial diagnosis was 35 mmHg. He was put on 12.5 mg of atenolol, which was further titrated to 25 mg soon after. His symptoms did not improve and gradually progressed to NYHA class III. Moreover, AF was initially documented 1 year before the consultation to our hospital and he had started taking amiodarone along with a direct oral anticoagulant.
While his symptoms were exacerbated by the AF, the AF burden was determined to be 7.1% with Holter electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring whilst the patient was taking amiodarone. During paroxysms of AF, the patient reached NYHA class IV, however, the paroxysms terminated spontaneously and did not require electrical cardioversion. His blood pressure and heart rate at the initial appointment was 145/80 mmHg and 67 b.p.m., respectively, during sinus rhythm. The heart rate increased to 90 b.p.m. during AF. On physical examination, the systolic ejection murmur was auscultated in the lower-left sternum border, which enhanced during the Valsalva manoeuvre. There were no crepitations on auscultation of his lungs and no pitting oedema in his legs. His serum sodium and potassium levels were 144 and 4.8 mEq/L, respectively (reference level, 139–145, 3.6–4.8 mEq/L, respectively). His free T3, free T4, and thyroid-stimulating hormone level was 2.09 pg/mL, 1.11 ng/dL, and 1.62 µ international unit (IU), respectively (reference level, 1.88–3.18 pg/mL, 0.7–1.48 ng/dL, and 0.35–4.94 µIU, respectively). His plasma N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level was 1022 pg/mL (reference level, <125 pg/mL). The ECG during sinus rhythm showed a complete right bundle branch block, while there was no T-wave inversion in any leads . The Holter ECG showed the paroxysmal AF with the burden of 7.1%, whereas neither long pause nor ventricular tachycardia was documented. The echocardiogram showed significant LVOT obstruction with a peak pressure gradient of 98 mmHg during the sinus rhythm ( and Movie 1). There were elongated mitral valve leaflets, with 15 mm coaptation length, causing SAM and moderate mitral regurgitation . The patient’s left ventricular ejection fraction was preserved (79%). Therefore, his dyspnoea seemed to derive from LVOT obstruction and the subsequent decreased cardiac output, which was significantly exacerbated during AF.
Since he had drug-refractory HOCM with mitral structural abnormalities, surgical myectomy with mitral repair was initially suggested. However, he declined open surgery and requested catheter intervention. To ameliorate his heart failure symptoms, both septal reduction and the maintenance of sinus rhythm seemed necessary. After a cardiac team conference, we decided to perform the AF ablation first, followed by the ASA if needed. This was partly because we thought that the patient’s symptoms were primarily related to AF and the reduction in cardiac output during AF, which would be alleviated by the AF ablation alone. Also, we took into consideration that the AF ablation might be delayed and complicated if a permanent pacemaker had to be implanted after the ASA.
Initially, pulmonary vein isolation was performed with a cryo-balloon (Arctic Front Advance 28 mm, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and box-isolation was completed with a radiofrequency catheter (TACTICATH, Abbott, Abbott Park, IL, USA), inserting a 15-French sheath through the femoral vein. After AF ablation, the paroxysmal AF frequency decreased significantly, and the plasma NT-proBNP level decreased to 270 pg/mL . Despite being relieved from the discomfort of the AF attack, the patient’s symptoms remained at NYHA class III, with a peak pressure gradient of 77 mmHg through LVOT during sinus rhythm. After discussing in the heart team conference, we advanced with the ASA to relieve his symptoms on exertion and to also maintain the effect of AF ablation, through an improved LVOT obstruction and reduction of the left ventricular end-diastolic pressure.
For the ASA, a 6-French guide catheter was inserted into the left coronary artery ostium via the femoral artery. The first septal artery was tracked using a 0.014-inch hydrophilic wire (Fielder FC, Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) and was then occluded with an over-the-wire balloon (Emerge Over-the-wire 1.5 × 8 mm, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA). After confirming the staining of the basal septum with contrast echocardiography, 2.5 mL of absolute ethanol was injected. Subsequently, the second septal artery was occluded using an over-the-wire balloon (Ryujin Plus Over-the-wire 1.25 × 10 mm, TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan) and 1.5 mL absolute ethanol was injected . After ablation of two septal arteries, the peak-to-peak pressure gradient between the left ventricle and the ascending aorta decreased from 55 to 7 mmHg, during sinus rhythm . Complete atrial-ventricular block never occurred both during and after the ASA .
One week after the ASA, we confirmed the late gadolinium enhancement at the basal septum on CMR imaging . The patient’s heart failure symptoms improved to NYHA class I, and there were no reported symptoms of AF attack, though amiodarone use was continued. Six months after the ASA, the patient’s serum NT-proBNP level decreased to 124 pg/mL and it remained between 100 and 200 pg/mL until one and a half years after the ASA . On comparing his LA volume from the first visit with that 6 months after the ASA, the diameter decreased from 56 to 45 mm on echocardiography, and the volume decreased from 203.0 to 178.4 mL on multi-detector computed tomography . Multi-detector computed tomography also revealed thinning of the basal septum and an enlarged LVOT after the ASA . The peak pressure gradient of the LVOT was maintained at 12 mmHg through echocardiography during sinus rhythm, and the SAM decreased from Grade 4 to Grade 2, even though the elongated mitral valve leaflets remained ( and , and Movie 2). On 4D-flow CMR (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) performed 6 months after ASA, focused at the peak systolic phase, the left-curved streamlines from the posterior side of LVOT, lifting up the posterior mitral valve leaflet, were visualized before the ASA ( and Movie 3). The curved flow contributed to the drag force towards the mitral valve leaflets, resulting in the obvious SAM. The curved flow became straight after the ASA, resulting in a weakened SAM ( and ). The enlargement of the LVOT and the decreased mitral regurgitation were also visualized on 4D-flow CMR .,