A 34-year-old woman presented with chest pain that had started on that day, and abnormal shadows were displayed on chest computed tomography (CT). She had no past medical history and no smoking history. On physical examination, her vital signs were within the normal range. No significant abnormalities were detected in laboratory blood tests. Chest X-ray displayed a solid nodule in the right lower lung field . Enhanced chest CT displayed a solid mass of 4.5 × 3.1 cm in the right S10 area . An aberrant artery was found running from the celiac artery through the diaphragm to the thoracic cavity, which was located along the border of the mass. The mass lacked continuity with the bronchus. Chest magnetic resonance imaging displayed high intensity on T1-weighted images and low intensity on T2-weighted images in the area of the mass . Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction images showed aberrant arterial inflow into the mass, and the involvement of pulmonary veins in the mass, but no involvement of pulmonary arteries or bronchioles . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as having pulmonary sequestration Pryce type III, and surgical resection was performed.
The patient was put under general anesthesia and in the left lateral decubitus position, and wedge resection of the right lower lobe and dissection of the abnormal vessels were performed by four-port video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). A 2-cm port at the seventh intercostal midaxillary line and a 0.7 cm port at the sixth intercostal posterior axillary line were used as the surgeon’s ports. A 1.2-cm port for the camera was placed at the fifth intercostal anterior axillary line, and a 1.5 cm port for the assistant surgeon at the sixth intercostal anterior axillary line. Intrathoracic findings demonstrated the presence of increased capillaries in the pleura of the right lower lobe, where the pulmonary sequestration was suspected to be located, but the borders could not be clearly identified . Furthermore, a 5-mm aberrant artery was present in the pulmonary ligament that penetrated the diaphragm and drained into the pulmonary sequestration in the right lower lobe. No adhesion or pleural effusion was observed.
After dissecting the tissue surrounding the aberrant artery, the proximal side of the abnormal artery was stab-ligated with a 4-0 prolene suture (Ethicon, Japan), and the peripheral side was coagulated and sectioned with an energy device. Five mg of ICG (DAIICHI SANKYO CO., LTD, Japan) was intravenously injected, and near-infrared light thoracoscopy (VISERA ELITE II, OLYMPUS CORPORATION, Japan) clearly demarcated the border between the normal lungs and the pulmonary sequestration .Wedge resection of the right lower lobe was performed with the observed boundary as an indicator. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, with no adverse events. Six months after the surgical resection, the patient was being followed up in the outpatient clinic, without the development of an aneurysm.
Grossly, a 4.5 × 3.5 × 2.5 cm cyst was observed in the resected lung, which contained brown fluid inside . Histologically, pulmonary tissue was observed in the mass, and the inner surface of the cyst was coated with multiciliate epithelia. The aberrant artery was an elastic vessel, with a fibrous and mildly thickened internal lumen. The lesion was concluded to be a pulmonary sequestration, which was consistent with the preoperative diagnosis.