A 55-year-old gravida 2 Japanese woman presented to the emergency department with complaints of acute-onset lower abdominal pain on day 30 of her menstrual cycle. She reported a history of regular menstrual cycles with 4–5 days of bleeding each month. She had a medical history of uterine fibroids and no remarkable family history. Her heart rate, blood pressure, and temperature were 103 beats per minute, 111/81 mm Hg, and 36.8 °C, respectively. Physical examination revealed generalized tenderness and a positive Blumberg sign around the right iliac fossa. Vaginal ultrasonography revealed a pelvic mass with hyperechoic fluid filling almost the entire abdominal cavity. On admission, the total white blood cell count was 7900/μL, and the C-reactive protein level was 0.2 mg/L. The patient was transfused with four units of packed red blood cells since she had a reduced hemoglobin level (6.6 g/dL) and hematocrit (22.3%). An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan showed a heterogeneous pelvic-abdominal mass that measured 7.9 cm with uterine mass lesions . An exploratory laparoscopy was performed under the preoperative suspicion of intra-abdominal hemorrhage caused by torsion of a subserosal uterine fibroid. During laparoscopy, the subserosal uterine fibroid (11 cm in diameter) along with a large amount of hemorrhagic ascites was observed, as also shown on the preoperative computed tomography scan . The laparoscopy showed active bleeding from the superficial ruptured vessels overlying the subserosal fibroid on the uterine fundus . Detailed examination of the entire abdominal cavity did not reveal the torsion of fibroids and other areas of hemorrhage. The hemoperitoneum was thus diagnosed to be a result of spontaneous rupture of these vessels. The fibroid was enucleated and hemostasis of the bleeding site was attained with bipolar coagulation forceps (BiClamp; ERBE GmbH, Tubingen, Germany) . After the enucleation, the myometrial defect was closed in two layers using 0 PDS II sutures (Ethicon Japan, Tokyo, Japan) . The entire procedure of the laparoscopic surgery is presented in the video (Additional file ). The surgery was completed in 100 min, and the total amount of blood lost was 400 mL. The specimen weighed 240 g. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the fourth day after the operation. Pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a benign uterine fibroid.