The proband, a 15-year-old female, was born to a 28 year-old father and a 27 year-old mother. Her father and sister are phenotypically normal. The mother presented a relatively short stature (cm 160), and corneal degeneration, diagnosed at birth, for which she underwent enucleation, and left eye prosthesis. Family history was remarkable for not otherwise specified anxiety disorders, and epilepsy in the maternal line.
An intrauterine growth restriction was revealed at the 22th gestational week. She was born at 38 weeks gestation via emergency cesarean section, due to fetal distress. Birth weight was 2.530 gr (10th centile), length 47 cm (10-50th centile) and head circumference 33 cm (10-50th centile). The Apgar scores were 7 and 8. Immediately after birth, several life-threatening respiratory distress events occured, requiring patient intubation. Slight asymmetry of the cerebral ventricles with hyperechogenicity of the parenchyma on the superior-lateral horns of the lateral ventricles was detected at ultrasound examination of the brain.
The newborn female showed linear and erythematous skin lesions on the cheek, extending to the nose and chin. Ophthalmologic evaluation revealed leukoma cornea and microphthalmia of the right eye, and sclerocornea and anophthalmia of the left. The clinical diagnosis of the MLS syndrome was made.
Motor development was slightly delayed: she walked independently at 2 years of age, as commonly observed in blind children, instead speech development was normal until 18–24 months of age (she was able to speak simple sentences), after that she started to show echolalia and verbal stereotypy. At the age of 30 months, a further deterioration of language and cognitive abilities occurred, with loss of previously acquired skills: expressive language was limited to two-three single words, and unintelligible verbalizations. She gradually developed seriously impaired communication, socialization and cognition skills, as well as sleep disturbances (difficulty falling asleep).
The patient was admitted to our department at the age of 15 years, due to progressive social avoidance and self-harm behaviors developing during the last year. Physical examination revealed skeletal abnormalities such as micromelia, lower limb asymmetry, left scoliosis and pes cavus bilaterally. Our patient had evident dysmorphic features, including microcephaly (head circumference < 3rd centile), flattened occiput, hypotelorism, low setting ears, micrognathia, height and weight below the third percentile, and a broad based gait. In addition, she showed areas of scar-like aplasia cutis following the Blaschko lines along the cheek, nose and chin . Neurologic examination showed diffuse hypotonia. An ophthalmologic evaluation revealed right eye microphthalmia with opaque cornea and left eye anophthalmia (with a prosthesis), with total blindness in the left eye, and perception of light in the right one.
Cardiac and otorinolaringoiatric examinations were normal, as well as auditory brainstem responses and asleep electroencephalography. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a slight hyperintensity in the peritrigonal white matter bilaterally, probably due to neonatal distress. Routine blood tests, plasma amino acids, urine organic acids and lactate were unremarkable.
Psychiatric and behavioral assessments, conducted by direct observation of the patient’s spontaneous behavior, revealed social withdrawal. Indeed, she preferred to be alone, she did not turn around if her name was called, and she did not respond to instructions and appeared distant when attempts were made to interact with her. She showed limited emotional non-verbal contact and lacked social skills. Communication was limited to two-three single words and vocalizations such as vowel sounds or unintelligible verbalizations and failure to compensate through gesture. She also showed stereotypic and repetitive motor mannerisms, many restricted, ritualistic and “sameness” behaviors (e.g., listening to the same music all the time), that were not due to visual impairment. Moreover, she displayed self-harm tendencies and restricted personal autonomy. Autistic features identified in our patient were not due to visual impairment and were confirmed by standardized rating scales including the Childhood Autistic Rating Scale (CARS), Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R), Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale. Indeed, on the CARS she scored 44 points (cut-off score 30), reflecting severe autism. The diagnosis was confirmed by the ADI-R. The Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale showed severe deficits in adaptive behaviors. Her cognitive abilities were not assessed using the standardized intelligence test because of the severe blindness. However, empirical judgment suggested moderate intellectual disability.
A diagnosis of the MLS syndrome with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and moderate intellectual disability was made, according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th Edition (DSM-V) criteria. Written informed consent was obtained from the parent of the patient.
Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples. DNA concentration was measured by fluorimeter (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ) using the Hoechst reagent and adjusted to 400 ng/ml.Array-CGH analysis was performed using the Cytochip oligo ISCA 4x44K (Techno Genetics Srl, Italy). This array is composed of 60-mer oligonucleotides spaced at about 75 Kb density across the genome. Labeling and hybridization were carried out following the manufacturer’s protocol. Slides were scanned on the InnoScan 710 (Innopsys), and analyzed using the BlueFuse Multi v3.1 (Bluegnome). The analysis revealed a terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome X, with a loss in copy number at the Xp22.33p22.2 region [chrX:702–12,949,422 (hg19), size 12,948,721 bp] .
Result of array CGH analysis were confirmed by FISH. BAC probes RP11-509B6, RP11-109P4, and RP11-102 M2 (Bluegnome), mapping in the deleted region, produced hybridization signals only on the normal chromosome X. The same deletion was revealed in the patient’s mother, and confirmed by FISH analysis which also excluded chromosomal mosaicism on interphase nuclei.
Therefore the final karyotype of the patient was designed as (ISCN 2013): 46,XX.arr Xp22.33p22.2(702–12,949,422)x1 mat.
X inactivation state was investigated using HUMARA X-chromosome assay . X-chromosome inactivation was skewed, with preferential inactivation of the X chromosome carrying the terminal deletion (ratio of 10% to 90% in the proband; 15% to 85% in the mother).