A 57-year-old Taiwanese man presented to our facility with a one-month history of progressive difficulty in swallowing, particularly liquids. In addition, a body weight loss of 10 kg was noted. His medical history included chronic sinusitis and chronic serous otitis media. A chest X-ray revealed incidental right middle lobe collapse when he was admitted for surgical treatment for chronic paranasal sinusitis. Obstructive pneumonitis with a right lower lung field mass lesion was suspected. A physical examination revealed left ptosis, dysarthria, and mild bilateral shoulder girdle weakness without a definite diurnal change. He was subsequently diagnosed as having MG based upon the decremental response to repetitive stimulation on electrophysiological testing in association with a positive anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody test. The MG stage was assessed as grade IIA according to the Osserman classification at that time.
A clinical swallowing evaluation by a speech/language pathologist showed our patient had mild difficulty in oral preparation and transport during trial swallows of food and liquid. A delay in his swallow reflex trigger without fatigability was also noted. The strength of his oral muscles, head rotators, extensors and flexors were assessed as grade four by manual muscle testing. We accordingly conducted a videofluoroscopic study with three mL boluses of thin liquid, thick liquid, and pudding administration. In the oral phase of swallowing, it was noted our patient had poor oral holding and tongue movement. During the pharyngeal phase, we observed our patient had a delayed swallowing reflex (onset of swallow reflex trigger: 2.5 seconds) with incomplete laryngeal closure, and poor pharyngeal wall motility. Silent aspiration was observed on administration of three mL pudding. Residual food was pooled in the bilateral pyriform sinuses and valleculae after swallowing three consistencies of sample material. After repeated consecutive swallows, the residues in the bilateral pyriform sinuses increased in volume, particularly on the left side . However, the residues decreased in volume when his head was turned to the left side and there was no evidence of silent aspiration . In contrast, chin tuck or head tilting to the right side were ineffective measures for reducing the pharyngeal stasis. Our patient was instructed on the correct postural technique to adopt (head turning to the left side) in order to improve his swallowing safety and efficiency. Due to MG crisis-related respiratory failure, our patient was admitted to an intensive care unit and underwent thymomectomy and tracheostomy. After seven plasma exchanges were performed, his condition improved and his tracheostomy tube was successfully removed. His swallowing ability was evaluated again after he was transferred to an ordinary ward. Mildly delayed swallow reflex (onset of swallow reflex trigger: 1.5 seconds) and occasional choking were noted only when he consumed about 10 mL of thin liquid from a cup. Following his discharge, he was able to eat food of ordinary consistency.