A 79-year-old Persian male presented to the emergency department with history of weakness, anorexia, drowsiness, and mood changes for 2 months. He was a shopkeeper, and before the onset of symptoms, he regularly performed activities such as cycling and walking, but in the last 2 months he had lost his ability, with his symptoms having worsened in the last 2 weeks. There was no complaint of fever, nausea and vomiting, headache, abdominal pain, altered bowel habits, and other gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. His past medical history included hypertension, ischemic heart disease, previous coronary artery bypass surgery, and an ischemic cerebral vascular accident episode 3 months prior to his admittance. He had no positive family history of diseases, including cancer, vascular, or heart problems.
Physical examination showed a low-grade fever [temperature (T), 37.9 °C], hypotension [blood pressure (BP) 83/55 mmHg], pulse rate (PR) of 88 beats per minute, and respiratory rate (RR) of 16 breaths per minute. There was no sign of tenderness, or rebound tenderness, on abdominal examination, and the only positive finding was a bilateral basal reduction of respiratory sounds on lung auscultation.
He was admitted to the emergency department with an impression of “sepsis,” based on a positive Quick Sepsis Related Organ Failure Assessment (qSOFA) score.
Initial laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis [white blood cell count (WBC), 14,700 with 80% neutrophils], normochromic normocytic anemia [hemoglobin (Hb), 11.9 g/dL; mean corpuscular volume (MCV), 86; mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), 30 pg], and high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 103 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein (CRP+++) levels. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The lung computed tomography revealed moderate bilateral pleural effusion and passive collapse consolidation of the lower lobes of basal segments. Thoracentesis demonstrated transudative effusion, and echocardiography showed heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF-EF, 40%).
There were no positive findings on abdominopelvic ultrasonography. Since the source of infection was not found, an abdominopelvic computed tomography examination was performed, which showed 35 × 52 mm abscess formation in the right iliac muscle and dilated appendix with peripheral inflammation .
On the basis of these findings, percutaneous drainage was done under a guided ultrasound, and antibiotic therapy was continued. After these interventions, the patient’s hypotension and mood changes improved. Subsequent tests revealed improved leukocytosis (WBC, 5100 cell/microliter) and anemia (Hb, 12.5 gr/dL); however, the ESR level was still high (87 mm/hour). Due to the iliac abscess and changes in the appendix location, the patient underwent antibiotic therapy for 6 weeks, with suspected appendiceal phlegmon and subsequently, an interval appendectomy was performed after 6 weeks. The pathology report showed involvement of the appendiceal wall by tumoral glands (adenocarcinoma), most probably of gastrointestinal origin. Consequently, a colonoscopy was performed to determine the origin of the tumor, and there were no positive pathological findings except a few polyps in the transverse colon. Eventually, the patient underwent upper endoscopy, which revealed an infiltrative and circumferential tumoral stenosis in the body of the stomach. The pathology report showed severe dysplastic gastric mucosa, with an ulcerative feature compatible with gastric well-differentiated adenocarcinoma . Due to distant metastasis, the patient was referred to the oncology ward with diagnosis of stage IV gastric cancer and underwent chemotherapy. According to age, physical conditions, and clinical judgment of the oncologist, the oral chemotherapy drug capecitabine was started for the patient.