An 8-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat weighing 5.8 kg presented to the Small Animal Specialist Hospital (North Ryde) emergency department for lethargy and having vomited 2h after a meal. There was no recent history of illness, dietary indiscretion or diet change.
On physical examination the cat was dull, tachycardic with a heart rate of 220 beats per min, had abdominal pain and a rectal temperature of 40ºC. Bloodwork was performed, which revealed neutropenia 0.09 × 109/l (reference interval [RI] 1.48–10.29 × 109/l), hyperglycaemia 10.2 mmol/l (RI 3.95–8.84 mmol/l), total calcium 1.94 mmol/l (RI 1.95–2.83 mmol/l), alkaline phosphatase 10 U/l (RI 14–111 U/l), pH 7.43 (RI 7.24–7.4), HCO3 20.4 mmol/l (RI 22–24 mmol/l), PCO2 33 mmHg (RI 34–38 mmHg) and K+ 3 mmol/l (RI 3.5–5.8 mmol/l). A rapid immunomigration test for the detection of feline leukaemia virus antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus antibody was negative.
An abdominal-focused assessment with ultrasonography for trauma scan showed scant free abdominal fluid and a bright mesentery. Orthogonal abdominal radiographs were unremarkable. The patient was treated supportively with intravenous fluids and buprenorphine (0.02 mg/kg SC q8h) overnight. There was concern that the patient was developing systemic inflammatory response syndrome due to persistent pyrexia and tachycardia, and an abdominal ultrasound was recommended to screen for a source of infection.
On day 2 of hospitalisation the cat’s temperature had normalised to 38.8°C. A full abdominal ultrasound was performed, which revealed a trace amount of anechoic fluid – an irregular, complex echogenicity mass measuring 23 ×15 mm between the spleen and the kidney with two hypoechoic spherical structures adjacent to it measuring 7 ×11 mm in diameter. The mesentery in the region of the mass was hypoechoic. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the mass was performed and submitted for cytology. Aspiration of the hypoechoic structures revealed purulent material, which was submitted for culture and susceptibility. An in-house cytology review of the purulent material revealed intra- and extracellular rods, and treatment with marbofloxacin was initiated at 2 mg/kg q24h PO and amoxicillin (20 mg/kg IV q8h).
On day 3 of hospitalisation, the cat had developed a grade III/VI parasternal systolic heart murmur and was comfortable on abdominal palpation with suspicion for a mass effect in the right cranial abdomen. Repeat abdominal ultrasound identified a mass in the caudal aspect of the left pancreatic limb measuring 1.1 ×2.1 cm, surrounded by thin-walled structures suggestive of fluid pockets ( and )
The most likely differentials were pancreatic neoplasia, abscess, pancreatitis or granuloma. Repeat complete blood count showed a neutrophilia of 24 × 109/l (RI 1.48–10.9 × 109/l) with a left shift and monocytosis 0.82 × 109/l (RI 0.05–0.67 × 109/l). Supportive care was continued. Orthogonal thoracic radiographs were negative for changes suggestive of gross metastatic disease. Cytology of the mass revealed epithelial dysplasia with septic pyogranulomatous inflammation. Exploratory laparotomy was recommended.
Exploratory laparotomy and oesophageal feeding tube placement were performed on day 4. A partial pancreatectomy was performed. The liver contained a few small patches of grossly different coloured tissue, and there were multiple discrete flat lesions within the falciform ligament, so both were biopsied. All tissue samples were submitted for histopathology.
During the postoperative period the patient had an echocardiogram, which was unremarkable. Culture of the abdominal fluid revealed a Gram-negative anaerobic bacillus (Bergeyella zoohelum) and Clostridium perfringens, both of which are sensitive to marbofloxacin. Histopathology revealed pancreatic duct carcinoma with moderate pleiomorphism and tumour tissue extending into the surrounding mesentery, normal liver and multifocal mesenteric steatitis. The patient was discharged 3 days post-surgery with an oesophageal feeding plan, marbofloxacin and metronidazole.
Seven days post-discharge the patient presented for an oncology consultation. The cat was eating the resting energy requirement on its own and had recovered well from surgery. Treatment with toceranib phosphate (Palladia; Zoetis) 15 mg (2.78 mg/kg) every second day was initiated.
Four weeks after starting toceranib a grade 1 increase in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) occurred, which self-resolved. Restaging with thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound performed by a board-certified radiologist was performed 12 months after initial diagnosis, which did not show any evidence of metastatic or recurrent disease.
Fourteen months after starting treatment the patient developed a generalised change in haircoat from black to grey . Six months later, at a routine check-up, the patient was found to have lost 600 g (10% body weight). The patient had a drug holiday for 2 weeks and the toceranib was restarted at three times weekly (Monday, Wednesday, Friday).
The patient last underwent repeat staging with thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound performed by a board-certified radiologist 38 months after diagnosis. At this time the patient did not have evidence of metastatic disease or recurrence, resulting in a progression-free interval of 1148 days. At the time of writing, the patient was known to be alive and well 1436 days after diagnosis and still being treated with toceranib.