A 40-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with the chief complaint of right upper abdominal pain for more than 4 months.
The patient had no previous medical history or family history of tumors.
More than 4 months before admission, the patient had a sudden outbreak of pain in the right upper abdomen without obvious inducement. The initial ultrasonography showed heterogeneous echo around the right liver, while computed tomography (CT) suggested subcapsular mass shadow with regular shape, clear boundary and uneven density, suggesting subcapsular haematoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) presented with an irregular mass with mixed short T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), mixed long T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and high diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . After conservative treatment in another hospital, the patient's symptoms were eliminated and the size of the tumor gradually decreased gradually as detected by regular MRI examination (every 1–2 months). However, the patient experienced acute right epigastric pain again six days before admission. Laboratory tests showed that haemoglobin was 111 g/L. Abdominal enhanced CT indicated multiple heterogeneous dense masses with regular morphology and clear boundaries between the right lobe of the liver and the diaphragm. The largest mass was approximately 13.4 × 9.2 cm and the CT value was between 20 and 45 Hu with no obvious enhancement of enhanced scans . There was blood and fluid in the abdominal cavity. The right kidney was normal.
The patient only had right upper abdominal tenderness and no other positive signs.
Liver-occupying lesion, HCC rupture hemorrhage?
After admission, the patient was given conservative treatment such as hemostasis, analgesia and rehydration. Two days later, the hemoglobin level dropped to 82 g/L, with normal liver function, coagulation function, and tumor markers (AFP, CEA, and CA19-9). The tumor had a large amount of bleeding, but the patient's vital signs were stable. In this case, hepatic arterial embolization and then assessment of the cancer biology before surgery, or direct surgery were feasible treatment options. After communication with the patient and her family, they directly chose exploratory laparotomy. Intraoperatively, there was approximately 4000 ml old hemorrhage in the abdominal cavity. A large cystic mass with a size of 15 × 11 cm, was observed between the right hepatic lobe and diaphragm. There was no cirrhosis or obvious abnormalities in other abdominal tissues or organs. To ensure an adequate residual liver volume, we performed modified right hemihepatectomy (based on standard right hemihepatectomy, the liver cross-section was shifted approximately 1 cm to the right, and the middle hepatic vein was preserved).
Postoperative pathology revealed pleomorphic tumor cells with vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical staining showed diffuse cytoplasmic-positive staining for vimentin and cytokeratin (CK) 8/18 , focal positivity for CD56 and SMA, and negative expression of AFP . Further detection of INI-1 was also negative . The final pathological diagnosis was considered as EMRT.
After surgery, the patient underwent genetic testing. Considering the patient's frail condition and while waiting for genetic testing results, the patient was discharged from hospital without immediate chemotherapy. Later, the results of genetic testing failed to screen out effective chemotherapy and targeted therapy drugs.
After discharge, the patient underwent abdominal CT examinations every 3–6 months, but did not receive further treatment. When abdominal CT in another hospital one year after surgery revealed metastatic tumors in the abdominal and pelvic cavity, the patient chose to be treated with traditional Chinese medicine (astragalus, scubelia, hedyotis, oyster and other medicinal materials). After one year of treatment with traditional Chinese medicine, based on what the patient described, abdominal CT reexamination showed that the metastatic tumors had progressed compared with before, but the patient was generally in good condition without obvious symptoms and signs.