A 74-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital on September 11, 2017 with repeated abdominal distension for 3 months. The patient denied smoking, alcohol, or any other medical or family history. Abdominal CT showed thickened gastric wall in the antrum and surrounded by enlarged lymph nodes , along with multiple lesions in liver, suggesting metastasis . Subsequently, the patient received gastroscopy examination, the results of which revealed a large ulcer (3.5 cm × 3.5 cm), with dirty surface and scattered bleeding spots . Based on the biopsy findings by gastroscopy, the patient was diagnosed as having gastric adenocarcinoma, with metastasis on interstitial lymph nodes of the liver and stomach, and liver . Immunohistochemistry outcomes were presented as CDX2 (positive), CK18 (positive), CK19 (positive), CEA (negative), CK20 (negative), and Her-2 (negative). Additionally, results of next-generation sequencing (NGS) using tissues revealed microsatellite stability (MSS), programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) negative, and low tumor mutation burden (TMB). His palliative therapy was started with regimen XELOX (oxaliplatin of 130 mg/m2 on day 1 and oral capecitabine of 1,000 mg/m2 twice a day, from day 1 to 14, every 21 days) combined with immune checkpoint inhibitor nivolumab on September 15, 2017. After three cycles’ exposure of the treatment strategy, the efficacy was evaluated as partial response (PR), with complete response (CR) for lesions on liver according to the criteria of Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1. He finally completed six cycles of first-line treatment, with manageable toxicities, and subsequently received maintenance therapy with mono-nivolumab. However, after 2 months of maintenance, significantly elevated glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (ALT = 637 U/ml) was detected, which was considered as immunotherapy-related hepatitis. Based on that, maintenance therapy was terminated, but follow-up continued. On July 11, 2020, his regular abdomen CT showed re-enlargement and fused interstitial lymph nodes of the liver and stomach , suggesting progressive disease (PD). Metastatic lymph nodes invaded the portal and splenic veins . The symptom of abdominal distension appeared again, leading to performance status (PS) being degraded to 3. The patient refused any cytotoxic medication treatment but agreed to receive palliative medical care. After discussion by the multidisciplinary team including medical oncologist, surgical oncologist, radiation oncologist, and medical imaging doctors, intensity modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) on enlarged and fused interstitial lymph nodes of the liver and stomach was finally adopted as symptomatic care. Radiation schedule was set as 95% planning-gross target volume (P-GTV), with a total of 50 Gy for 25 times. The palliative radiation was started on August 11, 2020 and ended on September 19, 2020. Abdominal distension was relieved. Efficacy assessment for radiation was conducted by abdomen CT scan in October 2020 , which suggested a stable disease (SD, by 16% regression for target lymph nodes). During the radiotherapy, we surprisingly detected a dynamic change in elevated level of LMR, accompanied with lowered level of NLR and PLR , which suggested a potential response to systematic therapy with immune checkpoint inhibitor (–). In addition, we also observed a significant variation in the means of LMR, NLR, and mPLR (PLR/50) before radiotherapy (2 months before radiotherapy) and after radiotherapy (2 months from the beginning of radiotherapy), the results of which are presented in . Based on this, re-challenge treatment of PD-1 inhibitor was considered as consolidation therapy. However, due to the elevated ALT observed during the treatment of nivolumab, monotherapy of sintilimab, another PD-1 inhibitor, was prescribed as maintenance treatment from November 20, 2020. After 2 months treatment of sintilimab, repeat abdomen CT scan revealed a partial response (PR, by 64% regression for target lymph nodes; ). The latest CT scan was performed on August 4, 2021, the results of which still suggested a continuous PR, with complete regression on portal vein and splenic vein (by 67% regression for target lymph nodes; ). There was no treatment-related adverse event observed during the administration of sintilimab. The patient still received the regimen regularly, with overall survival time of 52 months. The variation in tumor size for target lymph nodes is presented in . It should be noticed that the main gastric tumor was presented as thickened gastric wall with ulceration. There was no clear boundary for the thickened gastric wall with ulceration, which caused difficulty in measurement. That was the reason why the enlarged and fused interstitial lymph nodes of the liver and stomach, rather than the main gastric tumor, were selected as target lesion. In addition, the timeline with relevant data during the treatment is presented in .