A 24-year-old male patient, was admitted at the emergency department with his left leg impalement with a wooden object after a motorbike fall. .
At the initial approach in the emergency room, the patient did not have impaired airway, ventilation, and circulation. In the secondary evaluation, presented a wooden object proximal third left leg impalement with an antero-posterior direction. The leg entry wound was at the antero-external aspect and an exit wound on the posterior aspect, without active bleeding. Upon vascular evaluation, the patient had a vacularized limb, with no anterior tibial pulse, and normal posterior tibial pulse. Lower limb neurological assessment showed a tibial nerve partial sensory deficit and foot dorsiflexion MRC Grade 3 muscular strength. Superficial peroneal nerve function was normal. The patient started at the emergency room, prophylactic intravenous antibiotics with ceftriaxone 2 g / day and gentamicin 160 mg / day for 2 days. Leg AP and lateral X-rays were requested. Where the presence of a foreign body was observed in the proximal tibio-peroneal space with proximal third fibula shaft fracture .
The patient was urgently sent to the operating room for foreign body removal and wound debridement. During positioning, we selected a right lateral decubitus position, since it allowed us to approach the entry and exit wounds, and the foreign object did not conflict with the operating table. A tourniquet was applied but not inflated. The patient was then subjected to foreign body removal through the entry and exit holes after sectioning the anterior foreign body end with a bone saw, allowing the passage of the foreign body in a shorter length through the created path, decreasing iatrogenic injuries risk during its removal. After foreign body extraction, wound exploration and debridement were performed. Anterior tibial pulse was recovered after foreign body removal. Deep peroneal nerve and anterior tibial artery exploration were realized and no anatomical interruption was documented. No major bleeding was observed after impaled object removal. Primary wound closure was not performed. . No immobilization was applied for fibula fracture treatment.
In the early post-operative period, wounds evolved favorlyfavor without infection signs and foot dorsiflexion MRC Grade 4 muscular strength was observed. On the 3rd post-operative day, the wounds were sutured. The patient was discharged on the 5th post-operative day without early complications. Walk training according to pain tolerance was performed and advised. .
The patient was followed up at 2 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year, and 2 years. Wound healing, foot dorsiflexion MRC muscular strength, knee and ankle range of motion, walking ability, and leg X-rays were recorded. At 2 weeks, the suture material was removed, and normal wound healing was observed, and physical therapy was started. At 6 months, foot dorsiflexion Grade 5 MRC muscular strength and normal walking ability was observed. The fibula fracture evolved to union without complications. The patient returned to normal life activities without limitations. .