A 68 years old male had undergone total mesorectal excision 10 years before a skeletal metastasis of the lower leg was diagnosed. The patient was otherwise healthy except mild hypertension and there was no familial accumulation of endocrine or malignant diseases. Histology from the primary surgery showed a 5 cm intermediately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum with no signs of neuroendocrine biology. The tumor was CK7 negative and CK20 positive. Distance to the nearest circumferential margin was 3 mm, and end resection margins were clear. There was no infiltration in the removed lymph nodes nor signs of distant metastases, thus the final TNM status was pT3N0M0. Total calcium was normal (2.37 mmol/L). Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) dropped from 18.0 μg/L preoperatively to 1.5 μg/L after surgery. No neo-adjuvant or adjuvant radiochemotherapy was given during the primary treatment. He underwent standard follow-up regimen with bloodwork, rectoscopies, ultrasound of the liver and chest x-ray for 4 years without any signs of relapse. CEA values were stable under 2.0 μg/L and only 1.0 μg/L when follow-up was completed.
Ten years after surgery, the patient presented with a tumor in the lower leg. X-ray and magnetic resonance imaging showed a 4.4 cm osteolytic lesion of the fibular head, in addition to a 4.7 cm tumor in the left lung and paratracheal pathological lymph nodes. Biopsies of the fibular head confirmed adenocarcinoma negative for CK7 and positive for CK20, and the pathologist concluded metastasis from the rectal cancer. The histological pattern was similar to the previously resected rectal tumor . CEA had now increased to 15.4 μg/L. He was treated by radiation therapy to the leg (8 Gy × 1) and commenced chemotherapy (fluorouracil, irinotecan, calcium folinate and bevacizumab). His lung pathology stabilized during this treatment and he reported less pain from the leg after the radiation therapy. However, the fibular tumor progressed radiologically and was 7 cm in diameter when it was resected 15 months after discovery. Resection margins were uncertain, and he developed a wound infection with a chronic fistula to the skin.
Three months later, the patient presented with hypercalcemia after being normocalcemic during all previous follow-up. Due to rapidly growing inguinal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, he started treatment with fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin (FLOX). CT-scan showed stable disease after three cycles of therapy. Bloodwork revealed that CEA had increased markedly to 380 μg/L. He developed severe hypercalcemia with free ionized calcium reaching 1.81 mmol/L (total calcium 3.33 mmol/L), concurrent with peaks in CEA and PTH levels . Creatinine and estimated GFR was normal, phosphorus was low (0.62 mmol/L), and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D was low (24 nmol/L). He had no arrhythmias or other clinical symptoms related to the hypercalcemia. Fluid therapy and zoledronic acid had only short-lasting effect on the calcium levels. PTHrP was negative, but intact PTH was elevated to 54.4 pmol/L (normal range 1.1–7.5 pmol/L). The lab used a standard two-site immunoassay for measurement of the 84 amino acid long PTH, requiring binding in both the N and C terminals for detection. The high PTH led us to consider primary hyperparathyroidism as a differential diagnosis. Ultrasound of the neck and parathyroid scintigraphy with 900 MBq of 99mTc-methoxyisobutylisonitrile (MIBI) showed no signs of parathyroid adenomas. The diagnostic challenge was to distinguish primary hyperparathyroidism from ectopic PTH production in a colorectal bone metastasis or potentially another tumor.
To investigate if the tumor of the fibular head was responsible for the PTH elevation, we biopsied the tumor and stained for PTH. No significant staining was observed, using monoclonal antibody immunohistochemistry. Because such a large tumor can contain different clones of cells, a negative biopsy does not rule out that PTH could be produced from a part of the tumor not represented in the biopsy. Also, PTH immunohistochemistry on bone biopsies could be false negative for unknown technical reasons. We therefore measured blood PTH levels while excluding the lower right leg from the circulation by use of a blood pressure cuff on the thigh (modified Casanova test , Fig. a). PTH levels measured in blood samples from the arm fell rapidly during the 20 min of right leg ischemia, consistent with local PTH production from the fibular tumor .
We concluded that the diagnosis was hypercalcemia caused by PTH secretion from the bone metastasis in the fibular head, and focused further treatment against the fibular tumor. The osteoclast inhibitor denosumab 120 mg was administered subcutaneously and further radiotherapy was given to the lower leg (3 Gy × 10). This made free calcium level stabilize at values around 1.40 mmol/L, and PTH was also attenuated . The patient received further cycles with FLIRI/bevacizumab until a year before his death. Six months before the patient died, another surge in PTH and calcium levels arose. Now, the patient received another course of radiotherapy (4 Gy × 5) towards his fibula, followed by a drop in PTH levels and normalization of calcium levels. No adverse events or side effects were reported by the patients or treating clinicians. The patient did not develop further episodes of severe hypercalcemia during the remainder of his life and died approximately 24 months after the first incident of severe hypercalcemia, due to disseminated disease involving skin, lymph nodes, lung, pancreas and brain.
As immunohistochemistry failed to show PTH in the fibular bone metastasis, we analyzed messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) from the same biopsies post mortem. Despite the long interval from biopsy to RNA extraction (5–16 years), we were able to extract total RNA from formalin-fixed paraffine embedded (FFPE) tissue sections and quantified PTH by reverse transcriptase quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). We found evidence of PTH transcription in both the original rectal specimen and in the fibular biopsy taken after onset of hypercalcemia, but not in the fibular biopsy that was taken before onset of hypercalcemia, nor in ipsilateral inguinal lymph node metastasis . This is consistent with development of clinically significant PTH production within the fibular metastasis, after local recurrence and radiation therapy to the lower leg.