In July 2017, a 46-year-old man of Han Chinese ethnicity was referred from a local community hospital with complaints of fever of 2 weeks’ duration, along with hematuria, proteinuria, and rapidly deteriorating renal function. He was being treated with intravenous antibiotics and expectant treatment for his kidneys without any improvement. The patient had a 5-year history of hypertension without treatment (peak blood pressure 145/110 mmHg). In February 2017, he was diagnosed with pancreatitis, and he recovered after treatment. He denied any history of diabetes, alcohol intake, intravenous drug abuse, and smoking. He had no history of familial disease and no known environmental exposure. He was a farmer, was married, and had a daughter. He had not undergone any examination for infectious diseases, including HBV, HCV, or HIV.
On admission to our hospital, his mental status was normal. His body temperature was 36.9 °C, pulse rate was 92 beats/min and regular, respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 116/78 mmHg. His physical examination revealed a systolic murmur (Levine classification 3/6) in the apex area and a diastolic murmur (Levine classification 2/6) in the aortic area. The result of his neurological examination was normal. A series of laboratory tests was performed after admission.
On the day of admission, laboratory results indicated 1+ proteinuria (1.28 g/24 h), 3+ urine occult blood with 2959.9 red blood cells per high-power field, a white blood cell count of 6.22 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 81 g/L, albumin level of 32.3 g/L, globulin level of 48.7 g/L, serum creatinine level of 196 μmol/L, and blood urea nitrogen level of 7.7 mmol/L. His hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B e-antigen (HBeAg), and hepatitis B core antibodies were positive. His DNA level of HBV was 1.38 × 104 IU/ml. The findings for rheumatoid factor, HCV antibody, and HIV were negative. The level of MPO-ANCA was normal, whereas that of PR3-ANCA was 170.4 relative units/ml (normal range, < 20). Blood cultures were obtained three times, and examination revealed the presence of Abiotrophia defectiva. Ultrasound cardiac examination revealed aortic and mitral valve vegetation (13 × 10 mm, 11 × 6 mm). Moderate regurgitation and turbulence could be seen in the diastole of the aortic valve orifice and the systole of the left atrial side of the mitral valve orifice . A chest computed tomographic scan showed no obvious pulmonary infection .
Given the clinical information provided, including the results of the blood culture and ultrasound cardiac examination, IE was identified. However, it was difficult to determinate whether HBV or more acute IE was the main cause of this patient’s ANCA positivity. Due to the patient’s rapidly deteriorating renal function, he was supposed to undergo kidney biopsy to clarify the type of glomerulonephritis (GN), but the results of echocardiography stopped us from performing a biopsy. The patient’s echocardiogram revealed mitral and aortic valve vegetation (11 × 6 mm, 13 × 10 mm) and regurgitation. Doctors in the cardiothoracic surgery department suggested valve replacement surgery be considered to avoid systemic bacterial emboli. Severe regurgitation and heart failure due to valvular destruction was another consideration. Because of these complex conditions, the patient’s diagnosis was a challenge.
When the patient was admitted to our hospital, he had a fever the first night. He was treated with antibiotics because blood culture results indicated A. defectiva infection. The patient’s temperature decreased gradually . Meanwhile, he was given other medications, including niferex (150 mg once daily by mouth), folic acid (5 mg three times daily by mouth), and medicinal charcoal tablets (1.2 g three times daily by mouth). On the 15th hospital day, the patient underwent mitral and aortic valve replacement and was then treated with warfarin (2.5 mg once daily by mouth) and antibiotics for more than 1 month . On the 57th hospital day, the patient was discharged. His urinary abnormalities and renal function were gradually recovering. Four months after being discharged, his PR3-ANCA levels had returned to the normal range. The patient’s whole clinical course can be seen in Fig. .