A 71-year-old Chinese man presented with recurrent fever and persistent cough, sputum, and asthma 2 weeks. Antibiotic treatment in the community hospital initially led to symptom alleviation, but was followed by a relapse, and the patient came to our hospital for treatment. The patient had type 2 diabetes and chronic cholecystitis with gallstones and was receiving subcutaneously injected recombinant insulin glargine (7 units QN) and insulin aspart (7 units TID), and oral acarbose and sitagliptin, but without adequate glycemic control. In the past 20 years, the patients had experienced recurrent cough, expectoration, and asthma, usually in autumn and winter. In the past 3 years, the patient was diagnosed with exertional dyspnea, and the symptoms improved after each antibiotic treatment. The patient has a long history of smoking for nearly 40 years.
The patient had a barrel chest and slight dyspnea. Percussion of both lung fields elicited hyperresonance. Auscultatory breath sounds were muffled, and widespread wheezing and rales were heard without pleural rubbings.
Laboratory examinations that were conducted at admission included routine blood investigation that revealed WBC 14.7 × 109/L (neutrophile granulocyte: 85.8%). Sputum smear examination did not reveal fungal, bacterial, mycobacterial, or other infection. The T-spoT test showed a negative result. Despite a normal glycated hemoglobin level, the fasting plasma glucose remained approximately 234 mg/dL. CT of the chest revealed multiple high-density pulmonary masses bilaterally in the bronchial openings of the upper, middle and lower lobes, accompanied by bronchiectasis . Access for fiberoptic bronchoscopy was limited as new growth obstructed the bronchoscope lumen at all lobar bronchi. We performed forceps biopsy, brushing, and alveolar lavage at multiple bronchial openings in batches. Examination of the bronchoscopic brushing and lavage fluid revealed ciliated columnar and bronchial mucosal epithelium, respectively, but no signs of carcinoma. Pathological examination of the specimen revealed chronic inflammation of the mucosa, trabecular bone structure with calcification, fat, and neovascularization. Due to the limited amount of tissue obtained by forceps biopsy, the pathologic diagnosis only demonstrated a non-specific airway tumor. The specific diagnosis required further bronchoscopic pathological biopsy.
To obtain definitive diagnosis and effective treatment, we scheduled bronchoscopic tumor resection and cryotherapy under general anesthesia again. The multiple bronchial openings were reluctantly selected for a liquid nitrogen cryobiopsy . Then APC was used to ensure hemostasis.
A relatively large piece of tissue taken from the bronchial opening of the upper lobe of the left lung can be seen roughly 0.6 cm × 0.4 cm × 0.3 cm grayish red with slightly hard cut texture. Microscopically, ciliated columnar epithelium covered the surface, and multifocal nodular tumor areas were seen in the fibrous tissue. The nodules were surrounded by semicircular and c-shaped trabecular bone. The tumor cells were mainly aggregated granulocytes, erythrocytes, and scattered multinucleated giant cells that were distributed among mature adipocytes . Immunohistochemistry revealed a mix of megakaryocytic (CD61, FVIII, CD68, LCA, CD3, CD20, CD43) and granulocytic (MPO) origin. . These results support the definite diagnosis of myelolipoma. Postoperatively, the patients experienced slight alleviation of the airway stenosis and the symptoms of infection were effectively controlled. Postoperative contrast-enhanced CT showed that the state of inflammation and atelectasis had subsided although they had not completely disappeared. Subsequently, the patient actively fought infection and controlled blood glucose, and the symptoms improved further. Although the patient’s condition was slightly reduced in terms of symptoms and examination results, multiple bronchial masses still existed, so the prognosis of the patient remains guarded.