A 22-year-old male gave a history of pain and swelling in the left knee before 10 years for which he got radiologically diagnosed as synovial hemangioma and arthroscopic debridement and biopsy was done. Now the patient resulted in similar swelling and pain in the left knee which was dull aching pain and vague. The pain was aggravated on movements and relieved partially by rest and medications. On examination, the left knee swelling was tender, euthermic with boggy consistency, and synovial hypertrophy. The patient had a painful terminal range of movements of his left knee. The plain radiograph of the left knee was shown in . USG of the left knee revealed a well-defined, encapsulated mass of 4.2 × 1.9 cm2 which was hypoechogenic in nature. Color doppler revealed the hypervascular nature of the lesion. MRI scan of the left knee was performed to understand the pathology, which revealed an encapsulated, well-defined, lobulated mass measuring 41 × 23 × 19 mm (approx.) in the substance of synovium lining of the left knee with hyperintense signals on T2W images and hypointense on T1W with a foci of gradient-echo images as shown in (, ). PD-FS sequence shows hyperintense signals from the lesion in the anterior compartment of the left knee as shown in (, ).
Under spinal anesthesia, surgical exploration of the left knee was done and performed excision biopsy of the mass along with the synovium as shown in (, ). Grossly, the synovium of the left knee was admixed with the vascular tumor measuring 5.8 × 3.2 cm. The cut surface of the mass revealed numerous vascular channels with areas of thrombus and hemorrhages. The histopathological examination of the mass revealed fibrous tissue along with the papillary proliferation of vascular channels and organized thrombus as shown in . Few cells are dilated and lined by plump endothelial cells which show mild atypia. The histopathology section in shows the papillary proliferation of blood vessels along with deposition of fibrin. Immunohistochemical studies showed positive staining for α-SMA and Ki-67 markers as shown in (, ). The aforementioned findings were suggestive of MH. During the follow-up of 8 months, the patient showed a full range of movements over the left knee without any recurrence of the lesion.