The patient was a previously healthy 68-year-old man, with no risk factors, who received the first dose of ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccine on April 19, 2021. He denied any further assumption of drugs except for fermented red rice and berberine supplement. Blood testing was performed 15 days before vaccination since the patient worried about adverse events related to the procedure and it was found normal. After 9 days, he was admitted at the emergency room because of acute malaise, dispnoea, severe abdominal pain, myalgia and difficulty with ambulation. Patient’s vital signs at the admission at the ICU were as follows: pressure 156/91 mmHg, hearth rate 97 beats/min, respiratory rate 14 breaths/min. His temperature was 36.2°C and he always remained apyretic, even though the patient was under steroid treatment. A good pressure control was obtained after 48 hours from the admission. A severe interstitial pneumopathy was documented at the computed tomography (CT) scan. A progressive contraction of diuresis was also reported. At clinical evaluation, the patient showed a slight clouding of the sensory, associated with weakness in the four limbs without any other focal neurological deficits. Several atrial fibrillation events were successfully treated with beta-blockers. Laboratory tests performed in the first hours from symptom onset showed elevated serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT): 1432 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 7815 U/L, creatine phosphokinase (CK): 376 UI/L, creatinine: 3.72 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 89 mg/dl, lactic acid: 4.2 meq/L, as well as hyperkalemia (7.3 mg/dl), hypocalcemia (5.8 mg/dl) and lymphopenia (380 cells per mm3) . Inflammatory markers were elevated, and a rapid and dramatic increase of CK and of myoglobin was observed, as illustrated in detail in the Table. Multiple trans-thoracic echocardiography evaluations and serum troponin levels were normal except a slight increase of troponin I on day +1 after the admission (+10 from the vaccination). IgG levels were 638 mg/dl (normal values 700-1600 mg/dl), IgA levels 179 mg/dl (normal values 70-400 mg/dl), and IgM 59 mg/dl (normal values 40-230 mg/dl). Because of the rapid progression of multi-organ failure, the patient was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU). Echo-color doppler examination excluded a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in the explored vessels. Abdomen CT was normal. No infections were identified at blood, urine and bronchial cultures. Serological tests for hepatitis A, B or C, varicella–zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, rubella virus and Toxoplasma gondii, were negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) nasal swab for SARS-CoV-2 was negative. Serum IgG or IgM antibodies to nucleocapsid and SARS-CoV-2 spike antigens were evaluated 10 and 14 days after vaccine administration by electro-chemiluminescence immunoassay (ECLIA), respectively, and were negative. Further common causes of rhabdomyolysis including trauma, strenuous exercise, recent surgery, alcohol use, toxic, autoimmune disorders and malignancies were excluded. Despite appropriate intravenous fluid therapy, a progression of the kidney injury was documented, requiring continuous renal replacement through venovenous hemodialysis (CRRT-CVVHD). On day +10 from the vaccination the patient was intubated due to severe respiratory failure (PaO2/FiO2: 140 mm/Hg) and respiratory muscle weakness. Since the rapid increase of the inflammatory markers and of the muscle injury were suggestive of a cytokine storm, intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone (100 mg daily) and subcutaneous anakinra, an interleukin-1–receptor antagonist, were started. Due to the severe acute phase, anakinra was administered at the dose of 200 mg daily during the first 3 days, 300 mg daily from day +4 to day +10, and 200 mg daily thereafter. Twenty four hours after the start of immunosuppressive therapy, eculizumab (600 mg per week) was added to block a potential complement mediated rhabdomyolysis. CK and AST levels progressively decreased and after 17 days of treatment CK levels were close to normal, even though weakness of respiratory muscles persisted requiring tracheostomy. Despite a significant reduction of inflammatory markers, lymphopenia and kidney injury never recovered.
On day +14 form the vaccination (+ 5 from the admission), the patient underwent muscle biopsy. Tissue samples of quadriceps were analyzed at the Federico II facility (cryopreserved sample) and at the National Institutes of Health (formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue) (protocol NCT04582903, “Send-in sample collection for comprehensive analyses of innate and adaptive immune responses during acute COVID-19 and convalescence”). Routine histological and immunohistochemical staining were performed. A myopathic process with focal necrotic myofibers and myophagocytosis was found , along with a histiocytic infiltrate, with no CD20+ or CD3+ lymphoid cells. Only a modest alteration of oxidative metabolism was noted at the cytochrome c-oxidase and succinate dehydrogenase stain . We next examined by Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) the patient’ plasma acylcarnitine profile to rule out an inherited disorder of mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation, that could predispose to rhabdomyolysis under certain circumstances. A urine sample for urinary organic acids analysis was not available at that time. A slight increase of multiple serum acyl carnitines was found (C0, C2, C3, C4, C5, C5OH, C8, C3DC, C5DC, C12:1 C6 DC). Based on the hypothesis of a multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD), an exome sequence analysis targeted at 19 genes associated with mitochondrial fatty acid β-oxidation disorders was performed, and no genetic variations were detected. However, a heterozygous variant c.233C>T (p.Thr78Met), confirmed by Sanger sequencing, in caveolin 3 (CAV3) gene was found . Furthermore, a c.800-1G>A in MYH3 gene, encoding for Myosin heavy chain-embryonic (MyHC-emb) molecule, a skeletal muscle-specific contractile protein, was also documented. This variant, of unknown significance, is unlikely to have played a role in the clinical phenotype of our patient, since the gene is only expressed during embryonic and fetal stages of muscle development and its alteration is responsible for Freeman-Sheldon and Sheldon-Hall congenital contracture syndromes. After 32 days of treatment, for the persistence of lymphopenia (160 cells per mm3) and low platelet count, suggesting a bone marrow failure, anakinra was discontinued to rule out a potential drug induced effect. However, 5 days after discontinuation no recovery of bone marrow was observed and CK levels increased from 202 to 559 UI/L. A chest CT revealed a severe bilateral pleural effusion. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from bronchial aspirate and treated with meropenem. Worsening of clinical conditions, with multi-lineage cytopenia, hypoglycemia, dramatic increase of PCT, and severe hypotensive shock refractory to intravenous fluid replacement therapy led to death on day +48 from the vaccination, despite empiric antimicrobial therapy with liposomal amphotericin B, tigecycline, meropenem, fosfomycin, and cotrimoxazole.