A 2-year-old boy had received a prenatal diagnosis of left MDCK and right hydronephrosis. The patient was delivered at 39 weeks, with a body weight of 2910 g, and then received a definitive diagnosis of left MCDK and right hydronephrosis (grade I) after birth. The renal function of the left MCDK with a thin cortex had been almost entirely ablated, but the right kidney was suspected to have adequately compensated for the left MCDK. The patient also had a chromosomal abnormality (46, XY, der(5)t(5;13)(p15.3;q22)), atrial septal defect and mental retardation.
At six months old, magnetic resonance urography (MRU) and renal scintigraphy revealed HSK with right PUJO . The left kidney had a non-functioning pattern, and the right kidney had an obstructive pattern. Renal scintigraphy showed no response to the furosemide loading test . The patient also showed recurrent urinary tract infection, and his right hydronephrosis had gradually worsened with age .
Once the patient reached two years old, we decided to perform surgery for the right PUJO to prevent renal dysfunction. Preoperative enhanced computed tomography detected three right renal vessels independently branching from the abdominal aorta . The middle renal vessels (renal artery 2) were located at the ventral side of the pelvis and were coincident with the site of PUJO . We therefore suspected the possibility of extrinsic obstruction due to these CVs in addition to intrinsic stenosis preoperatively.
The patient underwent laparoscopic surgery electively. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the left semi-lateral position. A 5-mm trocar was inserted at the umbilicus via the open Hasson method for a 5-mm, 30° rigid scope. Pneumoperitoneum was established with 8 mmHg carbon dioxide inflation (4 L/min). Two additional ports were then inserted under laparoscope inspection: a 5-mm port below the xiphoid for the operator’s right hand and a 5-mm port at the middle lower abdomen for the operator’s left hand. The dilated right pelvis and CVs were detected after the ascending colon was dissected and mobilized . To confirm the pathogenesis of PUJO, the CVs were dissected and taped with vessel tape . After taping the CVs, an intraoperative diuretic test was performed by an anesthesiologist using furosemide loading (Lasix®, 1 mg/kg, Nichi-Iko Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Toyama, Japan) (Additional file : Video S1). Peristalsis of the right ureter due to urine flowing was recognized after furosemide loading . Extrinsic PUJO owing to the CVs was definitively confirmed. We therefore decided to perform transposition for the CVs (VH) instead of AHDP.
The CVs were mobilized in the cranial direction and those were loosely wrapped by dilated pelvic anterior wall using three interrupted sutures of 4–0 non-absorbable monofilament . Similar to laparoscopic fundoplication, the wrap construction was made in order to keep the blood perfusion of the CVs. An intra-abdominal drain and stent catheter of the right ureter were not inserted. There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications.
The post-operative course was uneventful, and MRU showed improvement of the right hydronephrosis . In addition, the renal scintigraphy findings improved and showed a favorable response of furosemide loading .