A 6-year-old boy was brought to the orthopedic emergency department following a motor vehicle accident (MVA) with an injury to his right ankle. He complained of pain on the right side of his foot and difficulty in walking, with obvious deformity of the injured ankle. The clinical and radiological examination revealed the loss of overlying skin and an osteochondral fragment from the medial malleolus. The condition was diagnosed as the Salter-Harris type VI physeal injury of the medial malleolus of the right ankle.
The patient has been treated with a two-stage procedure. In the first stage in emergency department, the wound was meticulously washed, debrided, and kept in a vacuum sealing drainage for 5 days. Intravenous antibiotics were administered as a part of the management of open fractures. The wound bed was prepared for granulation tissue formation. After the formation of healthy granulation tissue, the split-thickness skin graft was grafted over it with a cast for immobilization by injury surgeons. The boy was discharged from the hospital 7 days after skin grafting and requested follow-up at the outpatient clinic. However, the boy lost the follow-up. At 20 months after the primary surgery, the boy again appeared in the hospital complaining of significant ankle pain, deformity, and abnormal gait. On examination, there was an obvious varus deformity of the ankle joint. Radiographic examination revealed the medial malleolus defect with cavovarus deformity of the right ankle .
In the second stage, the boy was treated with the reconstruction of the medial malleolus using an autogenous iliac crest apophyseal graft by pediatric orthopedic surgeons. In this procedure, the graft was placed on the medial malleolus in such a way that the physeal line of the iliac crest graft was parallel to the physeal line of the distal tibia . The graft was then held by 4 mm cannulated screws (Asnis III stainless steel screws, Stryker, France) and 1.5 mm Kirschner wires (K-wires) . The ankle joint was then stabilized with an external fixator (Trauson, ChangZhou, China) without the cast, in order to provide longitudinal traction to avoid unnecessary pressure on the graft and correct the cavovarus deformity.
The external fixator was removed after 3 months when the radiological evidence of graft union was present , and the remaining implants were removed after 12 months following the second surgery. After 20 months following the reconstruction, a physeal bar on the distal medial tibia appeared on the radiograph , which was excised using the Langenskiold procedure. Despite such an effort, the reconstructed medial malleolus did not develop as expected compared to the contralateral side . There was still a residual varus deformity of the ankle joint; however, no leg length discrepancy was evident 36 months after the second operation. Despite the residual deformity, functional and cosmetic evaluation score was satisfactory, and further supra malleolar osteotomy was not required .