A 56-year-old woman was admitted in March 2019 for diagnostic work up. She had received treatment for follicular lymphoma with R-CHOP from October 2017 to April 2018 and was still on rituximab. She had no other significant medical history.
She first presented in April 2018 with arthritis of the right knee and received ceftriaxone, then cefpodoxime-proxetil as a probabilistic antibiotic therapy, with favourable outcome. Arthrocentesis was not performed.
In October 2018, the patient reported dysuria and haematuria. Urine tests showed leukocyte count > 1000/mm3 and red cell count > 1000/mm3, but culture remained sterile. Bladder ultrasonography revealed vesical thickening and intravesical clot deposits, evocative of haemorrhagic cystitis. The patient declined cystoscopy and received empirical treatment with furadantine 50 mg target dose for 5 days.
In November, she presented left-knee arthritis, recurrence of haemorrhagic cystitis and bilateral conjunctivitis. The right knee was clinically normal. Arthrocentesis showed an inflammatory liquid (leukocyte count 12,600/mm3) with no crystals and negative Gram stain. Cultures remained sterile; broad-range 16 S ribosomal RNA PCR of synovial fluid was negative. Reactive arthritis was considered, but urine samples were negative for Chlamydia trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Mycoplasma genitalium. STI multiplex real-time PCR of a urine sample was positive for U. parvum on retrospective analysis (not done at that time). No antibiotics were administered, and the evolution was favourable without sequelae.
In March 2019, the cystitis worsened, and fever recurred. The patient was admitted with contralateral (right) knee arthritis and acute renal failure. The left-knee examination was unremarkable at that time. CT revealed cystitis and bilateral ureteral stenosis responsible for dilatation of the urinary tract . CT did not reveal any stone formation.
Double-J stents were placed and ceftriaxone was initiated. Blood and urine culture remained sterile and fever persisted. Right knee puncture retrieved purulent liquid, with leukocyte count 1620 000/mm3 (80% neutrophils, negative Gram stain). Then, hypotension developed: piperacilline-tazobactam was started, surgical knee drainage was performed, and intracellular arthritis was suspected. Multiplex STI real-time PCR (Allplex STI Essentials, Seegene), was strongly positive for U. parvum on synovial fluid and on a urine sample. Specific culture media was inoculated (A7agar, Biomérieux and MYCOFAST RevolutioN ElitechGroup), and A7 agar culture was positive for U. parvum in urine sample, but antibiotic susceptibility testing was negative. Bladder biopsy showed aspecific inflammation; PCR was negative for U. parvum although after 5 days of doxycycline treatment. 18 F-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography showed right-knee and right latero-uterine hypermetabolism , but the left knee was not hypermetabolic. Uterine echoendoscopy was non-contributive.
The diagnosis retained was U. parvum subacute ureterocystitis complicated by oculo-urethro-synovial syndrome (reactive arthritis) and subsequently by obstructive renal failure and septic arthritis. Antibiotic therapy with doxycycline 100 mg twice a day was started for 3 months. The fever receded, but local inflammation persisted. A control arthrocentesis after 15 days without antibiotics showed persistent arthritis but negative PCR results for U. parvum. Clarithromycin was introduced for 6 weeks, with marked clinical improvement: signs of erythema, swelling and pain disappeared, despite functional sequelae (flexion limitation 90°). Antibiotic treatment was well tolerated, and no clinical or biological event appeared during treatment.