We present the case of a 23-year old-Caucasian man who was initially diagnosed with CG of the lower lip in 2009. He underwent a number of first topic and then systemic treatments with antibiotics and steroids with little or no improvement in the lower lip. In the same period, he underwent psychotherapy for low self-esteem and bad school performance due to his mouth appearance. In January 2011, to confirm the diagnosis of CG, a lower lip biopsy was taken. The pathologist described normal keratinizing squamous epithelium overlying inflammatory tissue with non-caseating granulomatous inflammation in the deeper subcutaneous and parafollicular tissues, consistent with cheilitis granulomatosa. His Ziehl-Neelsen, silver, periodic acid-Schiff, and Warthin–Starry staining results were negative for acid-fast (Mycobacteria and Actinomyces, specifically), fungal, and spirochetal organisms. In February 2011, he complained of pain during defecation and underwent an evaluation. His rectal examination showed a diffuse, severe, perianal disease characterized by perianal fissures, fistulae, and abscesses. After an in-depth interview, he revealed that in 2009 he had an over-the-counter topic preparation prescribed by his general practitioner (GP) for anal fissuration and had had a moderate discomfort at evacuation since then. The severity of the anal disease and the previous diagnosis of CG alerted us to investigate the possibility of Crohn’s disease by colonoscopy. His endoscopy examination showed a diffuse aphthosis in a very limited region of the rectal ampulla and terminal ileum, and ileal and rectal biopsies were suggestive of a diffuse granulomatous inflammation, compatible with Crohn’s disease . Intestinal ultrasound and magnetic resonance of the intestine confirmed the diagnosis of terminal ileal and perianal Crohn’s disease. After surgical drainage of perianal disease, he was started on infliximab (given as intravenous infusions at dosage of 5mg/kg at 0, 2 and 6 weeks, and at maintenance schedule of 5mg/kg every 8 weeks). He also underwent regular follow-ups that included an endoscopy, histology, and intestinal ultrasound, as per our protocol.
Since the beginning of anti-tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) therapy in 2011, we observed a slow decrease of the swelling of his lips as shown in Figure , together with a healing of the terminal ileum assessed by endoscopies and magnetic resonance imaging examinations. His perianal lesions disappeared, although a diffuse fibrosis of the anal canal, requiring anal dilations, is still present. No adverse events were noted during the three-year therapy. Notably, the psychological impairment improved and recently he has entered into a nursing school program.