A 52-year-old man with a history of epilepsy and drug eruption due to an amoxicillin/clavulanate was transferred from the local hospital because of a persistent headache and a suspicion of chronic subdural hematoma. There were no other symptoms before the persistent headache occurred, and he could perform his work normally. He had no history of head trauma and no meningeal irritation symptoms, such as neck stiffness. He kept an outdoor dog for years, but he had no contact with other animals, such as rats, hamsters, dogs, cats, birds, or monkeys, during the past year.
Computed tomography and nuclear magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed a right subdural mass with high and mixed density/intensity . Because of these findings, we suspected intracranial subdural empyema (SDE).
Neurosurgical drainage was performed via burr holes. Gram staining of the purulent material showed no bacteria, and he had no predisposition for sinusitis or periodontal disease. Therefore, we thought the possibility of anaerobic and aerobic gram-negative bacteria involvement was low. Two sets of blood cultures were drawn, and empirical antibiotic therapy was started with intravenous vancomycin targeting only aerobic streptococci and staphylococci. However, the results from abscess cultures were negative. After 7 days of incubation, the blood culture (BACTEC FX system, Nippon BD, Tokyo, Japan) yielded Gram-negative, long spiral-shaped bacillus. Microaerobic subculture on blood agar plates with hydrogen gas showed thin transparent colonies. Because of these findings, we suspected Helicobacter cinaedi intracranial subdural empyema. The human immunodeficiency virus antibody screening test administered just after surgery showed negative results. An additional two sets of blood culture specimens were drawn, and he was given an antibiotic regimen consisting of 2 g of ceftriaxone twice a day. The blood culture results were negative, but the size of the abscess was not reduced in size at all after 3 weeks of treatment .
Neurosurgical drainage was performed again, and the antimicrobial regimen was switched to 2 g of meropenem 3 times a day. Although the microaerobic culture of the abscess was negative, H. cinaedi was identified from the abscess and blood culture by cdtB virulence factor gene-based PCR. The 16S rRNA sequence analysis revealed with 100% similarity between the abscess and blood culture . Antimicrobial susceptibility testing for H. cinaedi using the broth microdilution method revealed minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of 4 μg/mL for ceftriaxone and 0.06 μg/mL for meropenem . The size of the abscess was reduced after 2 weeks of the second drainage and antimicrobial drug change to meropenem . After 4 weeks treatment with meropenem, the patient was discharged, and his symptoms had completely resolved. The patient has continued visiting the hospital for more than 1 year after discharge, and there has been no recurrence to date .