We present a unique and intricate case involving a 74-year-old male patient from Han nationality who was urgently admitted to our emergency department with a 1-hour history of altered consciousness. The patient had no prior high-risk vascular factors, significant head trauma, or surgical history. Upon initial assessment, the Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was 4, with positive signs of meningeal irritation. Emergency cranial CT imaging revealed a substantial subarachnoid hemorrhage accompanied by a intraventricular hemorrhage. Additionally, a high-density linear metallic opacity was observed within the M1 segment of the right middle cerebral artery, raising suspicion of a foreign body . Further inquiry with the patient’s family revealed a history of head acupuncture therapy performed two decades earlier, associated with transient episodes of headache. A head and neck computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed calcified plaques and significant narrowing of the vessel lumen and the presence of a foreign body at the M1 bifurcation of the right segment of the middle cerebral artery . A subsequent meticulous cerebral angiography confirmed the penetration of a foreign body within the right middle cerebral artery, with an associated pseudoaneurysm formation on the undersurface of the arterial wall . Emergent microsurgical intervention was deemed necessary, during which a metallic foreign body, approximately 1 cm in length, was meticulously extracted from the M1 segment of the right middle cerebral artery. The foreign body, observed to be metallic and gold colored, had one end embedded approximately 3 mm into the arterial wall (with a slightly pointed tip) and approximately 3 mm exposed within the surrounding inflammatory tissue . Adjacent to the point of vascular entry, a pseudoaneurysm was evident. The therapeutic strategy involves using a microsurgical clip to address a pseudoaneurysm in the M1 segment of the right middle cerebral artery. encapsulation of the pseudoaneurysm will be performed, and any foreign bodies will be removed during the procedure. . Subsequent postoperative computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed that the foreign body was removed . Ten days after surgery, cranial CT scans revealed significant absorption of the subarachnoid hemorrhage , and ventilator support was discontinued. Regrettably, the patient developed a severe pulmonary infection, possibly precipitated by the sudden loss of consciousness, which ultimately resulted in his demise 3 weeks postoperatively.