A 51-year-old Korean man presented with stiffness and limitation of active and passive range of motion (ROM) in the non-dominant left shoulder for more than five months.
Approximately 5 mo earlier, the patient received the second BNT162b2 vaccination dose into the left deltoid muscle. The next day onward, the patient experienced left shoulder pain (VAS; Visual Analogue Scale, 7-8) and decreased range of motion. There were no adverse effects reported about people who vaccinated on the same day with the same lot number. Owing to persistent pain and impaired overhead activities, the patient visited another local hospital and received conservative treatment, including transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, superficial heat therapy, ultrasound as pain modalities and oral NSAIDs (Ibuprofen, three capsules per day, each containing 400 mg ibuprofen) for 1 mo. However, the left shoulder pain persisted and the ROM decreased further. Therefore, the patient self-administered aspirin 500 mg per day for 2 d without a doctor’s prescription following which the pain resolved immediately although the shoulder ROM limitation persisted. After 3 mo, the patient visited our department with stiffness and limitation of active and passive ROM in left shoulder.
The patient engaged in office work and had not experienced any significant shoulder pain, stiffness, and trauma prior to the administration of the COVID-19 vaccine.
The patient had no specific family history and no allergic reactions prior to the vaccination.
At the first visit, the ROM of shoulder was ascertained as shoulder flex 130, abduction 110, internal rotation 30, and external rotation 40. The strength at the shoulder was normal. The patient had a negative O’Brien test and a positive Hawkins test, without any local tenderness, swelling, sensory disturbance, and apparent trauma or shoulder pathology. There was neither atrophy around the deltoid or shoulder girdle nor any scapular winging.
All laboratory test results were within the reference values.
Standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the affected shoulder were checked and found to be within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was conducted and showed no rotator cuff tear; however, coracoacromial ligament thickening (6.2 mm, whereas normal value < 4 mm; Figure ) was noted.
For facilitating the differential diagnosis, an electrodiagnostic study was conducted and revealed results that were within normal limits.