A forty-year old Caucasian male was referred by his general practitioner for urological assessment because of persisting, painless hemospermia, which had initially been treated with several courses of oral antibiotics for almost seven months. The patient denied prior trauma or genitourinary tract infection. The patient denied a past medical history of bleeding disorders, hypertension or malignancy of the urinary tract. On physical examination there were no signs of malignancy except a moderate swelling of the right inguinal lymph nodes. External genitalia, the prostate on digital rectal examination, the vasa deferentia, abdomen and pulmo were found to be normal. Urinalysis was sterile with a moderate microscopic hematuria of 25 Erythrocytes/μl (normally absent in urine). Full Blood Count, prostate specific antigen (PSA) level and clotting was normal. Semen analysis for the presence of melanospermia was not performed. Transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) showed a normal prostate of 35 cm3 and a round, hypo echoic, solid mass measuring 19 × 16 mm within the right seminal vesicle . The left seminal vesicle appeared normal. The lesion was further investigated by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis confirming the ultrasound finding .
In order to assess the nature of this suspicious lesion the patient underwent transrectal ultrasound (TRUS) guided biopsy of the right seminal vesicle. Histopathology revealed infiltration of the right seminal vesicle with strongly pigmented melanoma cells positive for S 100 and Hematoxylin-Eosin representing metastatic disease and was negative for Cytokeratines AE1/3 .
S 100 is a sensitive immunohistochemical marker for melanoma and belongs to the family of calcium binding proteins such as calmodulin and troponin C. It is localized in the cytoplasma and the nucleus of the cell and is divided in two subunits namely S100A and S100B. Although highly sensitive for melanomas and their metastases, is also expressed in non-melanocytic tumours such as Schwannommas, glial and neural cells and Langerhans cells.
Hematoxylin-Eosin staining on the other hand is a typical histological staining and not an immunohistochemical marker as S100. It has been in use for more than a century and is still an essential tool for recognizing various tissue types. Hematoxylin has a blue-purple color and stains nucleic acids. Eosin is pink in color and stains proteins nonspecifically. Hematoxylin-Eosin staining is also used for the measurement of tumour thickness, which is also known as the Breslow thickness, and represents a main prognostic factor for melanoma.
In our try to locate the primary site of the melanoma, dermatological assessment and computed tomography (CT) of both thorax and abdomen were performed. While pulmonary, hepatic and supraclavicular lymph node metastasis were found, the primary site of the melanoma remained unidentified. Since no primary site of the melanoma could be identified a melanoma of unknown primary was finally diagnosed.
The case entered our institutional multidisciplinary tumor board. Following respective recommendation the patient was included into an adequate clinical trial (EORTC 18032 Study) .
Despite active treatments in both arms the disease remained progressive. Following a further institutional multidisciplinary tumor board consensus, the supraclavicular lymph nodes and pulmonary masses were resected revealing largely necrotic metastases of the malignant melanoma. Subsequently further progression occurred and the patient refused any further specific therapy. He succumbed six months later to his progressive disease.