A 40-year-old man with no significant past medical history except tobacco use presented to the emergency department (ED) at a local hospital with right arm paresthesia and worsening pain for two days. He reported lethargy over the preceding few months and night chills but no measured fevers. He recalled a transient episode of diarrhea several weeks prior, at which point he felt moderately fatigued. He fully recovered from this episode without seeking medical care. On initial exam, the patient was afebrile but tachycardic with a heart rate of 135 beats/min. A VI/VI systolic cardiac murmur was present. His right radial pulse was undetectable both manually and by Doppler sonography. A CT angiogram of the right arm showed evidence of an occlusive thrombus in his right brachial artery. The patient was started on full dose therapeutic anticoagulation with a heparin drip and was transferred to our hospital for management of the acute arterial occlusion.
On the day of transfer, he underwent right brachial artery cutdown and thrombectomy of the axillary, brachial, radial, and ulnar arteries. Intra-operatively, an inflamed brachial artery was seen and a large volume of white embolic debris with mixed acute thrombus was removed and submitted for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial culture. The Gram stain showed many neutrophils without organisms. Intact distal flow and Doppler signals were seen in both radial and ulnar arteries post-op. A post-operative bedside echocardiogram showed severe aortic regurgitation. A formal transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an irregularly shaped, multilobar mobile mass measuring greater than 2.5 cm on the aortic valve with severe 4 + /4 + aortic valve regurgitation; this was corroborated on transesophageal echocardiogram . He developed a fever of 101.7 F (38.7 C). He had a white blood cell (WBC) count of 18,200 /mm3 on admission, and a basic metabolic panel and liver function test within the normal range. He was empirically given vancomycin and ceftriaxone after blood cultures were drawn.
One day after admission, within 24 h after starting antibiotics, he was taken to the operating room for an aortic valve replacement with a 23 mm bovine valve. Intra-operatively, his aortic valve appeared bicuspid, although no clearly identifiable native tissue remained due to valvular destruction. There was also a significant paravalvular leak. Aortic valvular tissue submitted for aerobic and anaerobic culture showed no organisms or neutrophils on Gram stain and had no growth after four days. Histologic examination of the valvular tissue showed extensive necrosis and fibrin-rich vegetations with bacterial forms present . In total, 10 blood cultures were drawn with no growth.
The patient quickly defervesced on vancomycin and ceftriaxone, with interval improvement of leukocytosis without resolution. The patient continued to recover post-operatively with intact right upper extremity neurovascular recovery, and his heparin drip was quickly discontinued in light of known removal of his embolic source on hospital day 2. Physical exam showed no other evidence of embolic phenomena. Full mouth dental extraction was pursued given his extensive dental caries and new bioprosthetic valve. No further imaging workup was pursued. A timeline of relevant clinical events and data points follows .
Additional laboratory work-up for blood culture-negative endocarditis was initiated, including urine antigen testing for Legionella pneumophila and serum antibody testing for Bartonella spp. and Mycoplasma pneumoniae, all of which were negative. Without travel or obvious farm animal exposure, serologic testing for Brucella melitensis and Coxiella burnetii was deferred. Given the negative tissue culture results and the visualization of microorganisms on histologic examination , the formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) valvular tissue was sent to a referral laboratory for amplification and sequencing of a highly variable fragment of the bacterial 16 s ribosomal RNA gene (“broad-range bacterial NAAT”) .
On discharge a C-reactive protein resulted at 130 mg/L The patient was discharged with outpatient parenteral vancomycin and ceftriaxone therapy for 6 weeks. After discharge, the broad-range bacterial NAAT returned with detection of T. whipplei. Vancomycin was discontinued at that point after 2 weeks of therapy, IV ceftriaxone 2 g daily was continued to complete a 4-week course, followed by oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 800–160 mg BID to complete 12 months of treatment. The patient tolerated therapy well at a 12-month follow up. A duodenal biopsy with PAS stain confirmed absence of T. whipplei.