A 23-year-old woman admitted to our hospital with complaints of intermittent chest pain for half a year. Half a year ago, computed tomography scan revealed the left pleural thickening and left pleural effusion, and tuberculous pleural effusion was considered. Thoracic puncture and culture of tuberculosis in pleural effusion suggest tuberculous pleurisy. Standardized anti-tuberculosis treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin, and ethambutol was given in the local community hospital, and then adjusted to isoniazid, rifapentine, ethambutol, levofloxacin after two months. The total course of treatment was 6 months. A reexamination of chest CT revealed that left encapsulated pleural effusion. The maximum diameter of encysted abscess cavity was 10 cm, the thickness of the hypertrophy pleural fiberboard was 2 cm . The diagnosis was Stage III tuberculous encapsulated empyema. Considering that the patient was young and unmarried, we decided to perform minimally invasive pleural decortication through a single port. Chest B-ultrasound was performed to draw the border of the abscess cavity on the chest wall before the operation.
A 2.5 cm single port was opened at the eighth intercostal space on the lower margin of the abscess cavity, just anterior to midaxillary line . After entering the thoracic cavity, the finger was extended into the chest to make appropriate blunt dissection, and a small cavity was expanded. A 10-mm 30° thoracoscope was placed at the posterior side of the incision and other working instruments at the anterior side. First, the visceral peel should be removed from the lung surface using the tip of the suction and electrocautery. Because the operating space is narrow, we bent the coagulation scalpel head to fit the angle of the thoracic cavity. Then, the empyema pouch was suspended on the chest wall, which facilitated the decortication of the empyema pouch. Then the parietal pleura was dissected by electric scalpel close to the inner side of the rib. The margin of the empyema was extrapleural dissection, and the empyema pouch was completely removed. To avoid contamination of the chest cavity, we remove the empyema pouch closed without opening it. before taking out the empyema pouch, the abscess was sucked out by suction to reduce its volume and specimen was collected for various microbiological tests. The chest cavity was repeatedly irrigated with 0.9% warm saline, the leakage position was sutured intermittently. One chest tube was inserted via the port after removal of the instruments. The operation time was 240 min, and blood loss was 100 ml. The patient recovered well and the narcotic analgesics were stopped on postoperative day 1. The anti-TB treatment continued after operation with rifampicin, ethambutol, and isoniazid, along with the continuous use of liver-protective drugs. The patient was followed up without recurrent disease for 6 months .