A 90-year-old white woman presented with a large neck mass and a 6-week history of increasing dysphonia, stridor, and left-sided otalgia. On examination, there was a firm 2×3 cm left-sided level III neck mass with no overlying skin changes. Flexible fiberoptic nasolaryngoscopy revealed a large exophytic mass with complete airway obstruction. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the mass to measure approximately 3.3×3.7×3.1 cm. It was shown to involve her left supraglottic larynx and extend down to at least the level of her glottis .
Eight years earlier, she was diagnosed as having primary Hodgkin lymphoma in a left cervical node. Pathology of the node revealed large atypical cells, Reed–Sternberg cells, and a fine reticular sclerosis pattern. Immunophenotyping performed on a paraffin block demonstrated positive staining of the large atypical cells with cluster of differentiation (CD) 15 and CD30. The stains were negative for leukocyte common antigen (LCA), CD20, EBV-encoded small ribonucleic acid (RNA) (EBER). She was classified as Stage 1A classical Hodgkin lymphoma, mixed cellularity type, which was a rare diagnosis at age 82. Due to her localized disease, she was treated with definitive radiotherapy at a dose of 3500 cGy in 20 fractions delivered over 4 weeks.
Her past medical history was otherwise significant for a left hip fracture and surgical repair 1 year earlier, as well as mild cognitive decline, with difficulties in sequencing, planning, memory, attention, and insight. Due to her cognitive status, she was reliant on family members for many of her daily activities.
Following presentation, she underwent an emergency awake tracheostomy with laryngoscopy and biopsy of the supraglottic tumor. Microscopic examination revealed infiltrating sheets of poorly differentiated lymphoid cells with round nuclei containing several small nucleoli and dispersed chromatin and a small amount of amphophilic cytoplasm . A high mitotic rate and a “starry sky” appearance, due to numerous tingible body macrophages, were noted. An extensive immunohistochemical panel was performed and the tumor cells were immunoreactive for CD20, BCL6, PAX 5, c-myc, and EBER . Ki-67, a proliferation index marker, highlighted almost 100% of cells . BCL2 was negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed and demonstrated the confirmatory myc rearrangement. The final histopathological diagnosis was a non-Hodgkin, B cell lymphoma of Burkitt type. This was distinct from her previous diagnosis of Hodgkin lymphoma 8 years prior.
This case was reviewed at a multidisciplinary tumor board to determine the appropriate course of management. She was not deemed a candidate for systemic therapy in light of her age and functional status. She underwent a 7-day course of high-dose prednisone (100 mg daily) before starting palliative radiation at a dose of 3600 cGy in 18 fractions. She subsequently developed mucositis, and was treated palliatively for symptom control. She had recurrent aspiration and developed bacteremia secondary to aspiration pneumonia for which she opted to forgo antibiotics. She died approximately 3 months following her initial presentation, before a repeat laryngeal examination could be conducted.