A 53-year-old male patient complained of weakness and myalgia with rashes for a half month. His skin rashes had spread from the face, scalp, chest, and back to hips, with itching, and the symptoms increased after exposure to sunshine. His generalized fatigue and weakness worsened, which was accompanied by dyspnea, dysmasesis, and dysphagia. Physical examination showed that the muscle strength of the neck flexors and proximal upper and lower limbs was 3/5. Erythematous patches over the scalp, minimal heliotrope rash, and fuscous rashes over his chest, back and hips were discovered during the skin exam. He had a history of perianal abscess surgery 5 years prior, gastrointestinal polyp resection 3 months prior, and left hip replacement due to avascular necrosis of the femoral head one month prior.
Laboratory tests showed a minor positive ANA 1:100, and myositis-specific antibodies (MSAs) and myositis-associated antibodies (MAAs), extractable nuclear antigen (ENA), and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) were all negative. Other laboratory findings included extremely elevated creatine kinase 8875 U/L (ref ≤ 190), with increased ALT 125 U/L, AST 413 U/L, LDH 940 U/L, ferritin 2573.8 ug/L (ref 30–400), CEA 10.70 ng/ml (ref ≤ 5.0), IL-6 8.41 pg/ml (ref 0.1–2.9) and decreased C3 0.73 g/L (ref 0.8–1.8). His blood hemoglobin (HB) (136 g/L) and platelet count were normal. Basic coagulation testing revealed elevated D Dimer 5.91 µg/ml FEU (ref < 0.5) with normal PT, APTT, and fibrinogen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected diffuse edema in the bilateral thigh muscle groups and intermuscular fascia . Electroneuromyography (EMG) demonstrated electrophysiological features of multiple types of myogenic damage. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed given that the patient had unusually high levels of CA19-9 (400.60 U/ml) and CEA (10.7 ng/ml). PET-CT revealed that muscle metabolism was increased (both upper extremities, the right pectoral muscles, and bilateral scapular muscles were the most prominent and swollen); and the retroperitoneal lymph nodes were increased in size and metabolism. Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with DM.
On admission, he was started on pulse methylprednisolone 200 mg per day for 5 days, since he was treated with prednisone 40 mg per day without improvement before admission, plasmapheresis for one time, and prophylactic low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) 3200 IU per day. On Day 3, he presented with severe pain in the right arm. Swelling of the right arm and hand was found with purple bruises. He also had pain in both shoulders and right chest. Ultrasound showed that the muscle fibres in the right upper extremity were swollen, and liquid dark areas were seen locally (consider hematoma). MRI showed extensive edema of the right shoulder girdle muscle and muscle groups of the upper arm . APTT was slightly prolonged (50.2 s), with decreased fibrinogen (1.33 g/L), and HB had dropped from 136 g/L to 82 g/L, platelet decreased from 125 × 109/L to 67 × 109/L . Emergent angiography confirmed that a small branch of the brachial artery was bleeding . Since embolism therapy and surgery were impropriate in that situation, a conservative pressure dressing treatment was placed (Additional Figure ). LMWH was stopped and transfusion with red blood cells and fresh frozen plasma was supplied with hemostatic therapy. The bleeding was controlled after therapy. He remained stable for 10 days. Due to critical dysphagia and weakness, pulse IVIG 20 g per day for 5 days was given. Considering that the increased D-dimer level (10.76 µg/ml) and prolonged recumbency increased the risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE), prophylactic LMWH was started again. The weakness was not worse, while the creatine kinase (CK) level decreased to 1831 U/L. However, 4 days later, he complained of abdominal distention and gradual right thigh pain. MRI showed hematoma formation in the right psoas major muscle, and the CT scan showed bilateral swelling of the iliopsoas muscle and new-onset hematoma formation in the right psoas major muscle . Hemostatic drugs were immediately administered, together with blood transfusion and supportive treatment, and the hematoma did not expand.
In addition to the routine coagulation tests, the patient’s coagulation factors, protein C and protein S, were also tested (Additional file ). Furthermore, special bleeding tests were carried out, including coagulation and fibrinolysis. Fibrin degradation products (FDPs) were elevated to 5.5 µg/ml, with increased thrombin-antithrombin III complex (TAT) 10.4 ng/ml (ref < 4), plasmin-α2-plasmininhibitor complex (PIC) 3.16 µg/ml (ref < 0.8) and tissue plasminogen activator-inhibitor complex (t-PAIC) 41.9 ng/ml (ref < 17). These results indicated hyperfibrinolysis, perhaps progressing to disseminated intravascular hemolytic (DIC). Fortunately, he was rescued after transfusion and hemostatic therapy with the termination of anticoagulant therapy.
After active treatment, abdominal distension had not resolved. Electronic gastroscopy found a gastric sinus ulcer, and histopathology of the biopsy showed signet-ring cell carcinoma . We rechecked CA19-9, which was > 1000 U/ml, and CEA was 24.84 ng/ml. Gastric signet-ring cell carcinoma was diagnosed, and he was transferred to the oncology department and started chemotherapy (paclitaxel 300 mg). Unfortunately, he was discharged from the oncology department and died shortly after arriving home.