A 35-year-old woman was referred to the outpatient’s clinic with a long-standing nonunion, persistent pain on a functionless hand and wrist, and a severe angular deformity of her left forearm. Eight years ago, the patient fell from the horse back and sustained a closed bifocal fracture of the radius (radial shaft and distal radius) and a fracture of the ulnar shaft , initially treated with open reduction and internal fixation (plates and screws for the forearm diaphyseal fractures and a palmar plate for the distal radius fracture) . According to past medical records, 3 months after the initial procedure, she presented with persistent forearm pain and radiological signs of hardware failure and loosening. She underwent surgical debridement and revision of the osteosynthesis applying new plates and screws enhanced by bone grafting. Intraoperative sample cultures were obtained and one of them proved positive for Escherichia coli. The patient was subsequently given intravenous antibiotics for 3 weeks.
One year later, due to nonunion and presence of a bone gap, she underwent reoperation with “enhancement of the union potential” use of eptotermin alfa, bone morphogenetic proteins, and autologous iliac bone grafting, which were proved effective for the radial shaft fracture. Five months later, the ulnar nonunion and bone gap were treated with distraction osteogenesis with the use of an external fixator. Enhancements with two more surgical interventions with corticocancellous bone grafting were done with 4 months interval. The external fixation remained for 3 weeks after the last procedure, until clinical and radiological signs of union. The patient experienced a period of 4 years free of symptoms with no significant functional impairment. However, eventually she gradually established pain, swelling and severe deformity of her left forearm with magnetic resonance imaging and Ga 67 bone scan raising suspicion for infection. She was admitted for surgical debridement, hardware removal, and intravenous and then oral antibiotic treatment (ciprofloxacin and rifampicin) while intraoperative culture samples were negative. The patient’s medical and family history is clear, while she referred smoking from her social history.
At her presentation in our department, she had a significant deformity with angulation of the forearm, lack of motion with pronation and supination <10°, and severe functional loss, obliged to use a splint to use her hand. Elbow flexion was restricted to 20° and wrist range of motion was 20–0–20° . Lack of swelling, erythema, and increased local temperature, or any other clinical sign of infection was detected. Laboratory tests were negative for infection (white blood cell: 6800, C-reactive protein: 0.2, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 7 mm).
At the operating theater, after an extensive and demanding approach at the site of the non-union arduous approach of the nonunion, debridement was done along with excision of all non-viable bone segments, and shortening of about 2.5 cm so as to allow reduction without excessive stretching of the nerves and vessels. Internal fixation with reconstruction plates was carried out, augmented with posterior iliac crest autograft. Intraoperative cultures of soft tissues and bone were obtained to rule out infection . The patient had a short hospital stay, the culture results were negative and she was discharged wearing a long arm splint for 6 weeks. The patient was followed up at 1, 2, 4, and 7 months and 1 year postoperatively with clinical evaluation and radiological examination (, ). At last follow-up supination and pronation of the forearm were approximately 100°. Elbow flexion was significantly improved at more than 90° and range of motion of the wrist was 50–0–50.