A 13-year-old girl was referred to the ophthalmic emergency department of Khatam-Al-Anbia eye hospital, Mashhad, Iran, which is affiliated with Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), in May of 2013 with painless subacute visual loss in her right eye for one week. She denied any focal neurologic condition, pain on eye movement or ophthalmodynia, or any other systemic symptom. She also stated that she had not engaged in outdoor camping or any other related activity. Furthermore, she had no remarkable past medical and ophthalmologic history, and she had no contact or proximity to pets, especially cats.
Upon examination, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/250 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Moreover, the patient had a grade 2+ relative afferent papillary defect (RAPD) in the right eye. An examination of the anterior segment demonstrated 2+ cells in the anterior chamber (A/C) and 1+ vitreous reaction with normal intraocular pressure (IOP) in the right eye. The investigation of the right fundus revealed optic disc swelling, macular star lipid (hard exudates) deposition, and peripapillary vascular sheathing . The examination of the left eye proved to be fully normal. Many tests were performed for the patient, including the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), complete blood count differential (CBC diff.), C-reactive protein (CRP), toxoplasmosis serology, purified protein derivative (PPD), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE), FTA-ABS, brain and orbital MRI, chest x-ray, and infectious and rheumatologic consultation. Bartonella henselae serology was not available in our ophthalmology center, nor in any other nearby neighborhood.
Based on our clinical results, neuroretinitis etiology revealed CSD as the most common infectious etiology, along with the negative systemic and ocular history, and empirical treatment commenced including azithromycin 500 mg daily, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and the application of a topical steroid.
After 72 hours, all the above-mentioned laboratory indices returned to the normal level, except for the toxoplasmosis serology. Furthermore, the serologic test for toxoplasmosis was negative for IgM antibody whereas the IgG antibody titer was > 100 IU/mL. Relying on the positive IgG toxoplasmosis serology and the absence of any response to initial treatment, we embarked on shifting to classic anti-toxoplasmosis treatment, i.e., sulfadiazine 500 mg qid (four times a day), pyrimethamine 50 mg/day, and folinic acid. After 72 hours had passed, prednisolone 1mg/kg/day was added and thereafter tapered during the treatment.
The disc edema diminished over the course of a week. Also, visual acuity gradually improved and the A/C inflammatory reaction faded away. After the decrease in disc swelling, a very small hyperpigmented focus appeared in the juxtapapillary position. The patient then received a 6-week course of toxoplasmosis treatment. Gradually, over the next two months, the patient’s visual acuity improved to 9/10 and the optic disc swelling and macular exudates resolved .