A 49-year-old woman presented to the retina clinic with recent onset visual complaints of blurring and metamorphopsia in her right eye that had been present for the past two weeks. Her right eye and left eye presenting visual acuities was 20/60 with − 16D and 20/20 with − 13D, respectively. Axial length measured was 28.16 and 27.35 mm in the right eye and left eye, respectively. Slit-lamp ophthalmoscopy found a normal anterior segment in both eyes, with clear lenses and normal intraocular pressure. Pathological myopia with posterior staphyloma and peripapillary atrophy in both eyes, with focal chorioretinal atrophy in the right eye, was noticed during a posterior segment examination of both eyes. Horizontal macular volume scans were obtained using the Spectralis optical coherence tomography (OCT) device (Heidelberg Engineering, Germany). OCT scan of the right eye revealed an irregular fusiform subretinal lesion with ill-defined margins, indicating mMNV, as well as intraretinal fluid, minimal perifoveal inner and outer MRS, detached posterior hyaloid at the fovea with a focal posterior vitreous traction along the inferotemporal retinal arcade . The patient was given an intravitreal Aflibercept (2 mg/0.05 ml) injection for the active mMNV and was asked to return in two months. At 2 months follow-up visit, the patient complained of persistent visual complaints and 20/60 vision in her right eye. The results of the fundus examination revealed no significant differences from the previous visit. At this visit, OCT scans revealed the mMNV with well-defined margins, indicating regression with worsening outer MRS and the development of multiple perifoveal retinal detachment inferior to the fovea. There was also an ERM over the macular region . Unable to explain the likely cause of the MRS’s progression and with no further deterioration in visual acuity, the patient was advised to observe with close self-monitoring of her visual symptoms and a fixed follow-up after 2 months. Two months later, her visual complaints had not improved, and her visual acuity remained at 20/60. At this visit, OCT scans revealed further progression and worsening of MRS, as well as an increase in the size of the neurosensory detachment pockets . Fluorescein angiography was used to detect activity from the existing mMNV, which revealed only staining and no active leakage from it.
Based on the visual symptoms, worsening MRS, presence of ERM and lack of reactivation of the existing mMNV, a 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy surgery was performed, which included complete removal of the posterior cortical vitreous, Brilliant Blue G-assisted peeling of ERM along with complete removal of the internal limiting membrane at the macula and intraocular gas endotamponade with 20% sulfur hexafluoride. Follow-up visits at 10 days and 30 days after surgery revealed resolution of patient symptoms, maintenance of visual acuity at 20/60, and reduction in MRS and regressed pre-existing mMNV on OCT . The patient provided informed consent for the sharing of clinical information and the use of images for publication and research purposes.