A 57-year-old female presented to the ED with upper abdominal pain and hematemesis for two to three hours. She had been experiencing malaise and fatigue during the preceding night. Past medical history included schizoaffective disorder, diabetes, gastroesophageal reflux disease (not currently on medical management), and chronic pain. She lived at an adult foster-care facility. Due to her underlying psychiatric issues, history was very limited. She reported associated nausea with vomiting three times. These episodes involved bright red blood about the size of her palm. She reported normal bowel movements. She did smoke cigarettes but denied any alcohol or illicit drug use.
Vital signs revealed slight tachycardia with heart rate at 105 beats per minute. Other vital signs were within normal limits with blood pressure of 101/65 millimeters of mercury, temperature of 97.9 degrees Fahrenheit, and respirations of 20 breaths per minute with 94% oxygenation. On physical examination, she was in mild distress from pain. The patient exhibited tenderness to palpation of the epigastrium, as well as the right and left upper quadrants, without rebound or guarding. Laboratory analysis revealed results significant for a hemoglobin of 14.1 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 12–16 g/dL), a blood urea nitrogen of 24 milligrams (mg)/dL (reference range 6–20 mg/dL), normal prothrombin time, normal partial thromboplastin time, and normal platelets. An upright chest radiograph did not reveal free air under the diaphragm or other signs of perforation. The patient was initially treated with normal saline bolus, anti-emetics, pantoprazole, and fentanyl.
Due to limited history, a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was also ordered. CT of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a 3.1-centimeter (cm) posterior-inferior fundal gastric diverticulum. . General surgery consult recommended pantoprazole infusion and planned for EGD later that day. The patient required additional pain management. She underwent EGD the next day and was found to have a wide- mouthed gastric diverticulum at the posterior fundus without active signs of bleeding. . No other abnormalities on EGD were noted. The procedure had to be aborted slightly early due to hypoxia that resolved with simple maneuvers.
She did not have any further pain, nausea, or hematemesis during the remainder of her hospitalization. She was discharged the next day on proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy with plans for further partial gastrectomy and diverticulectomy. She returned one week later and underwent a laparoscopic resection of the gastric diverticulum and lysis of adhesions. She had an unremarkable postoperative course. Upon follow-up 11 days later, she had no further issues and has not returned with recurrent symptoms. She was continued on PPI therapy. Pathology of the diverticulum revealed normal gastric mucosa without malignancy.