38 years old lady current Para 2, living 2, presented at our centre 8 years ago with history of recurrent lower abdominal pain since menarche (Attained at 11 years of age). It was of intermittent dull aching in nature, non-radiating, more severe on bending and squatting. It was severe to the extent that it was interfering with her daily working activities. It was relieved with resting and massaging the abdomen. The pain was severe during menstruation to the extent that she would require intravenous analgesia to relieve the pain, her illness was associated with irregular menstruation and heavy menses bleeding require her to change 4–5 pads per day which were fully soaked. At times it was accompanied with awareness of her heartbeat and easy fatigability. She also reported to have experienced very painful sexual intercourse, which was one of the aggravating factors of her chronic lower abdominal pain.
During her illness, she has been trying to conceive for the last 4 years without any success, her husband has done multiple semen analysis with normal results.
Her illness was accompanied with loss of interest and having low mood at times to extent that she has been seeing psychologist for minor depression episode. She reports no history of painful urination, no change in bowel habit, no history fever and no blood in stool or difficult defecating.
She has a history of open appendectomy in 2005, however no history of chronic illness or significant family history of similar disease/symptoms, no drug allergies and did not smoke or drink alcohol.
On examination she was alert, not pale, no lower limb edema and had stable vital signs. Per abdomen revealed mild distension, gridiron's incision scar, no obvious mass palpable, mild tenderness on Suprapubic region with no shifting dullness and rest of systemic examinations were normal.
Initial work up was done in outpatient gynecology clinic and results were CA-125, CA19-9 and CEA of 2.77 ng/ml, 20.81 U/ml, 37.65 U/ml and 2.05 ng/ml, respectively. Initial ultrasound showed fluid filled bowel loops noted with increased peristaltic movement and minimal interloop collection, bilateral ovarian cyst, right side measuring 6 × 4 cm and left side measuring 5 × 3 cm each adhered to the posterior surface of uterus together with rectum. Uterus had a small intramural myoma in the lower posterior wall. Bilateral fallopian tubes were inflamed, urinary bladder appeared normal, features suggestive of advanced Endometriosis (Stage IV) with partial intestinal obstruction.
Her partial intestinal obstruction was treated conservative by medical therapy for 3 days in the ward then she was counseled for diagnostic laparoscopic and biopsy at our centre, however patient opted to travel to a hospital in India for second opinion to undergo robotic surgery since she had read in many websites it carries less morbidity and less hospital stay.
Initial work ups were done as shown below.
Based on laboratory results above together with sonographic features, we had diagnosis of Advanced Endometriosis, with differential diagnosis of severe adenomyosis. Then patient consented for diagnostic robotic-laparoscopy bilateral cystectomy for tissue biopsy and possible adhesiolysis. Under aseptic presenting, Robotic arms introduced through abdominal ports and findings were two bilateral endometriotic cysts present, right side measures 8 × 8 × 8 cm, Left side measures 5 × 3 × 3 cm adhered with each other to the posterior surface of uterus up to fundus .
Small adenomyoma fibroid in lower segment posterior myometrium, rectum adherent to posterior wall of uterus and bilateral fallopian tubes were inflamed.
The following was done both endometriotic cysts were punctured, chocolate fluid aspirated, cyst wall excised and sent for histopathology. Extensive adhesiolysis done and small endometriotic spots present on post surface of uterus were coagulated. The rectum was dissected from the posterior uterine wall. Hemostasis was achieved. Chromopertubation was done, left side free spill of dye present, right side had delayed spill of dye. Hemostasis reconfirmed, the estimate blood loss was <50 mls. Port closure done. Her histopathology report confirmed endometriosis . The procedure was done by highly Gynecologist experinced in laparoscopic and robotic surgery.
Post-operative patient was kept on IV paracetamol 1 g 8 hourly for 3 days, IM pethidine 100 mg as per required and IV ceftriaxone 1 g 12 hourly for 3 days.
She was discharged day 4 post-operative with the following medication Tabs olanzapine 2.5 mg nocte for 14 days (Depression), Tabs Ovares 25 mg 8 hourly after food for 2 months (androgenic agonist to enhance ovulation), Tabs Folic acid 5 mg daily 30 days and Tabs multivitamin 1 tab daily for 30 days. And patient was encouraged to have timed sexual intercourse monthly.
In view of surgical findings, endometriosis stage IV was suspected, and conception was unlikely however after consecutive follow up every monthly, patient was able to conceive after 9 months of using above medication, she reported during pregnancy her pelvic pain was reduced significantly, and she was able to deliver 3.2 kg male baby in 2018 and again in early 2020 she was able to conceive naturally without assistance of medication and deliver her second child 2.8 kg by cesarean section.