An 80-year-old Caucasian woman sustained a right subtrochanteric femoral fracture following a domestic fall, classified according to the AO Foundation (AO)/Orthopaedic Trauma Association (OTA) fracture classification system as 31-A3.3 . The fracture was reduced and stabilized with a TGN . The patient had an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged to home. After three months, the patient reported pain on ambulation, and radiographs failed to demonstrate sufficient callus formation. Subsequent radiographs obtained at four and six months revealed delayed union; therefore, the nail was dynamized by removing the two distal locking screws to promote union. At 10 months following revision surgery, the patient's pain had increased, making her unable to bear weight, and at that time a further radiograph revealed failure of the TGN with fracture of the proximal end of the nail, nonunion of the fracture site and varus deformity of the proximal femur . A computed tomographic scan confirmed the diagnosis of nonunion , and revision surgery was planned to remove the failed TGN and to stabilize the fracture with an extramedullary device and graft.
The patient was placed in a lateral decubitus position without traction on a radiolucent table. Four hundred milligrams of teicoplanin were administered preoperatively according to the standard antibiotic prophylaxis protocol for revision trauma surgery at our institution. The old incision was incorporated and extended distally into a straight lateral approach to the femur with the fracture site fully exposed. The broken TGN was removed through the fracture site, and the fibrous nonunion tissue was taken out until bleeding bone was exposed . Care was taken to protect the vascular supply to the fracture site by minimal muscle stripping. Six tissue samples were sent for microbiological testing to exclude infection according to revision surgery protocol. The fracture was then aligned over an intramedullary guidewire for reaming. The RIA reamers were used to ream and irrigate the endosteal bone-implant interface, and thereafter intramedullary corticocancellous reaming autograft was collected following the standard RIA protocol . Reduction forceps were then used to accurately reduce the fracture in the desired anatomical position, and guidewires were placed to determine the direction and starting point for the CBP insertion. A 90° CBP was inserted, restoring the proper shaft-neck hip angle compared to the contralateral site . Prior to CBP insertion, the femoral neck was filled with injectable HA cement (BoneSource BVF; Stryker Biotech) to fill the void created by the removal of the proximal TGN screw and augment its mechanical strength. The RIA autograft was mixed with the rhBMP-7 implant (Stryker Biotech) and added onto the fracture site.
Postoperatively, the patient was administered low-molecular-weight heparin prophylaxis for six weeks. Partial weight bearing was commenced from the second postoperative week onward as dictated by the patient's tolerance of pain. Clinical and radiographic follow-up was arranged at 6 weeks and 3, 6, 12 and 18 months. The fracture united fully at 10 months following revision surgery, with no sign of femoral head avascular necrosis at the 18-month follow-up examination. The patient achieved a full range of hip movement, scoring 80 on the Charnely D'Aubigne Postel scale .