An 82-year-old male with permanent atrial fibrillation [CHA2DS2-VASc score 5 for age, hypertension, history of cerebrovascular accident (CVA)] was referred for the management of residual leak following LAAO. His atrial fibrillation was initially managed medically with rate control and anticoagulation with warfarin, and his clinical course was complicated over the last 2 years with recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding presenting first with melena and subsequently with haematochezia requiring invasive intervention. He was deemed too high risk to continue indefinite anticoagulation in multidisciplinary discussion given his HAS-BLED score of 4 (age, history of CVA, hypertension, antiplatelet use) and was thus referred for transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) and LAAO implantation. His anticoagulation was modified pre-procedurally to aspirin and clopidogrel given significant CHADS2-VASc score. Vitals and physical exam was largely unremarkable with a well-nourished male in no acute distress, normal lung exam, and cardiovascular exam with regular rhythm and heart rate in the 70 s. There was a soft II/VI systolic murmur at the right upper sternal border without radiation consistent with known history of mild aortic stenosis.
His pre-operative TOE showed the LAA to be of windsock type measuring 28 mm at the ostium and he underwent LAAO with a 31 mm Watchman device (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) and was amenable to short-term anticoagulation therapy post-procedurally. After initial device placement, angiography showed mild residual leak of ∼7 mm.
On routine 45-day follow-up TOE, significant peri-device leak was noted in an uncovered anterior lobe and warfarin was continued per guidelines. A repeat TOE at 6 months showed persistent residual peri-device leak and given patient’s intolerance to long-term anticoagulation, percutaneous leak closure was planned. To minimize the risk of device embolization, leak closure was performed 6 months after the original LAAO procedure to allow time for endothelialization and provide more stable anchoring of the Watchman device in the LAA. After transseptal puncture, an 8 Fr Agilis steerable sheath with medium curve (St. Jude Medical, Saint Paul, MN, USA) was advanced into the left atrium and the defect was crossed with a 0.035 inch Wholey wire (EV3, Plymouth, MN, USA) and a 5 Fr multipurpose catheter under fluoroscopic and TOE guidance. The Wholey wire was then exchanged with a 0.018 inch V-18 wire (Boston Scientific). An 8 Fr × 90 cm Flexor sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was then advanced over the V-18 wire and was used to deliver a 12 mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug II (St. Jude Medical). Satisfactory position was confirmed by TOE and angiography (, Videos S1 and S2).
Post-procedurally he was continued on anticoagulation with warfarin without complication until his planned 45-day follow-up. At his 45-day TOE visit, no residual leak was visualized and there was no evidence of device embolization or thrombus formation and thus warfarin was discontinued with plans to continue high-dose aspirin indefinitely.