A 76-year-old woman (height 1.54 m; total body weight (TBW) 104 kg; body mass index 43.9 kg/m2; ideal body weight (IBW) 47 kg; and adjusted body weight (ABW) 69.7 kg) was scheduled for TAVI via the femoral artery approach for aortic valve stenosis. Preoperative laboratory investigations revealed an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 38 mL/min/1.73 m2, aspartate aminotransferase of 32 U/L, alanine aminotransferase of 11 U/L, and a total bilirubin level of 1.08 mg/dL. Pulmonary function tests showed a forced expiratory volume in one second at 72% of the predicted value and a vital capacity at 82% of the predicted value. Preoperative echocardiography showed a diastolic/systolic diameter of 52/34 mm, left ventricular ejection fraction of 64.6%, mild-to-moderate mitral regurgitation, mild aortic regurgitation, an aortic valve peak flow of 4.0 m/s, and an effective orifice area of 0.75 cm2.
Hemodynamic record is shown in Fig. . Her oxygen saturation was 94% in room air in the operation theater. Anesthesia induction was performed with a bolus of 100 μg fentanyl and a continuous dose of 0.4 mg/h of remifentanil, followed 2 min later by a 15-mg bolus of remimazolam. The bispectral index (BIS) was in the 40 s immediately after remimazolam induction. Subsequently, she received 60 mg of rocuronium and was intubated using a McGrath MAC videolaryngoscope (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland). Intraoperatively, remimazolam was administered at a dose of 35 mg/h. Additionally, noradrenaline 0.06 − 0.12 μg/kg/min was required for maintaining blood pressure until the aortic valve implantation, after which noradrenaline was discontinued and sevoflurane was administered to suppress an increase in BP.
The operative times were 1 h and 37 min. Following the completion of the surgery, desflurane was administered for 1 min as the BIS value temporarily increased to 70. Prior to extubation, remifentanil was discontinued, and the concentration of exhaled anesthetic gas was 0. The patient was administered 200 mg of sugammadex as the train-of-four count was 4. Thirty minutes after remifentanil was discontinued, and 5 min after remimazolam was discontinued, the patient exhibited a pharyngeal reflex and spontaneous breathing. Immediately thereafter, flumazenil 0.5 mg was administered, and the patient was successfully extubated. The patient’s conscious state after extubation was fully awake and well-oriented. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit on postoperative day one without complications.