A 59-year-old man underwent right radical nephrectomy for RCC of 3.8 centimeters in diameter (stage pT1a N0 M0). One year after the nephrectomy (when he was 60 years old), recurrence was seen in the adrenal gland. Consequently, resection of the adrenal gland was undertaken. Six years after the nephrectomy (when he was 65 years old), a routine checkup using computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen detected a small mass in the gluteus maximus muscle. The tumor was located in the gluteus maximus muscle adjacent to the fascia, and this was enhanced by contrast medium . On physical examination, the tumor was palpable in the gluteus maximus muscle. He had no tenderness or referred pain. Retrospectively, the tumor had been visible 5 years earlier, 1 year after the nephrectomy, as a mass of 1 cm in diameter . CT examination had not included the area of the gluteus maximus muscle until the latest CT examination.
Magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed that the lesion adjacent to the fascia had higher signal intensity than that of skeletal muscle on T1- and T2-weighted, and T2-STIR images. The lesion had a rather regular border to the surrounding gluteus maximus muscle, and was capsulated by a thin area with low-signal intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images . Edema of low-signal intensity on T1-weighted and high-signal intensity on T2-weighted images was observed . The lesion was mildly homogeneously enhanced by Gadolinium on T1-weighted imaging .
Primary soft-tissue tumor was a differential diagnosis. Because the growth of the lesion was slow over 5 years, benign soft-tissue tumor was suspected. The fact that the lesion was capsulated by a thin area as seen on MRI also supported the diagnosis. However, the MRI features were unusual for most soft-tissue tumors having low-signal intensity on T1-weighted imaging and high-signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging. Therefore a diagnosis of metastatic RCC was suspected rather than primary soft-tissue tumor. Because metastatic RCC was strongly suspected, wide resection including the surrounding skeletal muscle was undertaken. Biopsy was not performed in order to avoid unnecessary contamination from the procedure. The resected tumor was composed of alveolar proliferation of carcinoma cells with clear cytoplasm and small round-shaped nucleoli (Fuhrman grade 2), resembling the previously resected RCC, suggesting metastatic RCC .