A 60-year-old male, known case of epilepsy and chronic renal disease, presented to us with complaints of pain over the bilateral hip and inability to walk 5 days after the history of convulsion. On examination, the patient revealed the bilateral hip joint tenderness with an inability to perform straight leg raising. Anteroposterior traction view of both the hips with pelvis was taken, which revealed a bilateral fracture of the neck of the femur .
Preoperative physician’s fitness was obtained, and the patient was posted for surgery. Since the patient had a fracture following trivial trauma with poor bone quality, arthroplasty was chosen over osteosynthesis. Furthermore, the goal of early mobilization was aimed for such a comorbid patient. For the operative intervention, both cemented as well as uncemented prosthesis, proximal and distal loading stems, and wire loop system were kept ready. The patient was positioned into a lateral decubitus position with the left side up. The left side was first operated with Moore’s approach. A proximally deficient femur was noticed with a comminuted fracture of a greater tuberosity. THA was performed with uncemented distally loading long stem and uncemented acetabular cup replacement (Solution stem, Depuy J and J). Wire looping of the greater trochanter was added. The patient was turned, and the right side was operated. With similar intraoperative findings, the same procedure was carried out on the right side also. On both sides, screw fixation of greater tuberosity was added over and above wire loops. The post-operative X-ray showed the precise positioning of an implant .
Deep vein thrombosis prevention prophylaxis was administered. The patient was allowed in bed hip and knee range of motion exercises on the same day of surgery. The post-operative course was uneventful. The sutures were removed at 2 weeks. The patient was allowed protected weight-bearing after suture removal with the use of a walker and was discharged at 2 weeks. There were no wound complications. Protected weight-bearing using walker was continued up to 6 weeks, followed by a tripod stick. Stair climbing was allowed after 12 weeks. The patient was followed up every 2 months for 6 months. At the end of 4 months, the patient was carrying out all activities of daily living. Serial x-rays of the hip were done to look for the migration of the implant or the presence of translucent areas around the acetabular implant. No signs of aseptic loosening or subsidence of femoral stem are seen . The mean Harris hip score was 86 at the end of 6 months.