A five-year-old previously healthy male was brought to the ED in Cusco, Peru, by his parents, who reported two days of fever, cough, rhinorrhea, pruritus, and decreased appetite. His temperature was 38.3° Celsius, heart rate was 150 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 52 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation was 77% on room air, and blood pressure was 100/60 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg). He appeared lethargic, and his capillary refill was less than two seconds. He was using accessory respiratory muscles and had wheezing and diminished vesicular breath sounds in the left hemithorax.
His labs were notable for white blood cell count of 4.35×103 per cubic millimeter (mm3) (reference range: 5×103 – 10×103 / mm3) with 84.8% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, hemoglobin of 9.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 14–17 g/dL), platelets of 474,000 per microliter (μL) (reference range: 140,000–500,000/μL), and a creatinine of 0.24 milligrams (mg)/dL (reference range: 0–0.5 mg/dL). His arterial blood gas demonstrated metabolic acidosis with hypoxemia. The CXR showed radiopacity of the entire left hemithorax consistent with a massive pleural effusion .
Based on the patient’s overall presentation and CXR findings, the pediatrician suspected the patient was presenting with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure and septic shock from pneumonia complicated by a large parapneumonic effusion. Given the patient’s tachypnea, hypoxia, flash capillary refill, and severe tachycardia, there was concern for impending respiratory failure and warm shock. The pediatrician consulted the emergency physician to perform an ultrasound-guided diagnostic and therapeutic thoracentesis.
The emergency physician began his POCUS examination by performing a “triple scan,” which includes cardiac, inferior vena cava, and pulmonary ultrasound windows to evaluate for potential causes of the patient’s acute dyspnea and shock. The POCUS revealed a preserved ejection fraction on the parasternal long view and a collapsing inferior vena cava on the subxiphoid view consistent with the pediatrician’s concern for septic shock. Point-of-care ultrasound of the right hemithorax revealed a pleural effusion, a hyperechoic structure suggestive of a membrane in the pleural cavity, multiple B-lines, and a subpleural consolidation (, ).
In the left hemithorax, a complex, double-layered structure was noted on POCUS (, ). This was consistent with a “wall sign” and was thought to represent a cyst occupying the entire pleural cavity. This structure contained hypo- and hyperechoic regions (suggestive of multiple membranes), floating in heterogeneous fluid, which appeared to be pus.
Based on these ultrasound images and the endemic nature of E granulosus in Cusco, a ruptured hydatid cyst was suspected to be the culprit. Due to these unexpected findings, the emergency physician aborted the planned thoracentesis since disrupting the cysts further could prove fatal to the patient by releasing “highly antigenic fluid” into the pleural space. A chest CT corroborated the diagnosis of a ruptured hydatid cyst in the left lung. No abnormal CT findings were noted in the radiologist’s read of the right hemithorax, despite the abnormal findings seen on POCUS.
The patient was subsequently intubated for respiratory failure. He became hypotensive to 80/50 mm Hg and was started on an epinephrine infusion for treatment of septic and anaphylactic shock. Both were a concern since the patient had fever, cough, and evidence of purulent pleural fluid on POCUS, which suggested infection, in addition to wheezing, pruritus, and hypotension, which was concerning for anaphylaxis. The patient was also given hydrocortisone, vancomycin, ceftriaxone, meropenem and albendazole. Cardiothoracic surgery took him to the operating room for a thoracotomy where they removed a giant, multivesicular hydatid cyst containing purulent material that comprised the entire lower lobe and part of the upper lobe of the left bronchus. Their findings were consistent with superinfection of the hydatid cyst as well as rupture. Surgical pathology later confirmed the diagnosis: anhistic membranes of a hydatid cyst with active microorganisms.
Post-operatively, the patient improved gradually. On hospital day 12, he was transferred out of the intensive care unit, and on hospital day 25 he was discharged home with albendazole.