A 34 year old male non-smoker presented with recurrent episodes of febrile pneumonia since childhood, usually requiring admissions for treatment with antibiotics. However, he was not investigated further at that time. The episodes had become slightly less frequent during adolescence, but were now becoming increasing frequent and severe over the past few years, prompting the patient to seek medical attention. It was noted that the patient had normal lung function, and had no history of any other medical conditions.
A CT scan of the thorax arranged by another unit showed that most of the right lower lobe of lung was destroyed and replaced by cystic changes with multiple fluid levels within . Much of the remaining right lower lobe was also consolidated and inflamed, but all other lung lobes appeared normal. The initial working diagnosis was of congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM). On attendance of our unit, a CT of the abdomen with IV contrast was performed to exclude any other associated congenital defect, and it was then discovered that the right lower lobe of lung received anomalous arterial supply from the abdominal aorta . The diagnosis was revised to one of intralobar pulmonary sequestration. In view of the recurrent pneumonic episodes, surgery was offered.
A right lower lobectomy was performed using a uniportal VATS approach. Under general anesthesia and with pre-emptive paravertebral blockade, a 3.5 cm incision was made in the right 5th intercostal space between the anterior and mid-axillary lines. No rib-spreading was used, and an Alexis wound protector was applied (Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA). The entire operation was performed using a 30° 5 mm video-thoracoscope and conventional instruments (not dedicated uniportal instruments). Intra-operatively, extensive post-inflammatory adhesions were found over the entire postero-basal aspects of the right lower lobe. Careful release of these adhesions using a combination of energy devices (ultrasonic and diathermy) and long Metzenbaum scissors revealed three abnormal feeding vessels. Two larger feeding vessels entered from the abdomen into the thorax by penetrating the posteromedial diaphragm, with each approximately 8-10 mm in diameter . One vessel branched soon after entering the thorax to enter the sequestration as a further two branches. Each of these larger abnormal feeding vessels was first proximally ligated with a strong silk ligature, then proximally clipped with two Hemo-o-Lock vascular clips (Weck Surgical Instruments, Teleflex Medical, Durham, NC), and then finally staple-divided using an Endo-GIA stapler with a Tristaple Curved Tip vascular reload (Covidien, Norwalk, CT). The third abnormal feeding vessel was a small (2 mm) arterial vessel found in the lower pulmonary ligament. This was proximally clipped with two Hemo-o-Lock vascular clips, and then divided using an ultrasonic energy device. Once these three abnormal feeding vessels were divided, the right lower lobectomy was completed using the standard uniportal technique , dividing the lobar vein, artery and bronchus in that order. The operation was completed in 228 min, and the blood loss was 60 ml. One 22 F chest tube was inserted via the uniport , and this was connected to a digital chest drainage device (Medela AG, Baar, Switzerland) set to a negative pressure of -8 cm.H2O.
Post-operatively, the patient recovered uneventfully and was virtually pain-free whilst taking oral paracetamol (1 g 6-hourly) only. He was mobilize freely on the morning after surgery. There was no post-operative air leak, but the chest drain was removed on the third post-operative day because of initially high daily drainage of serous fluid. The patient was discharged home in good condition on the fourth post-operative day.
Histology of the resected lobe confirmed the diagnosis of an intralobar pulmonary sequestration.