Our case was an 11-year-old white male who presented to our emergency department after a high-speed motor vehicle collision with a Glasgow coma scale score of 5. On arrival, the patient was intubated and was hemodynamically unstable. He had a large scalp laceration that was not actively bleeding. FAST examination was negative for free fluid, but the orientation of the spleen was felt by the radiologist to be unusual and the possibility of a splenic injury could not be ruled out. Chest x-ray was concerning for an acute, traumatic DR.
The massive transfusion protocol (MTP) was activated and the patient was taken urgently to the operating room for an exploratory celiotomy. There was no significant blood in the abdomen and the stomach and other upper abdominal organs were found to be within the abdomen. The spleen was not injured. The diaphragm was examined and no gross defect/injury was seen (peritoneum was intact in all directions), although the diaphragm did appear to be thin and stretched out (elevated). Postoperatively the patient underwent CT imaging that was concerning for diaphragmatic rupture , but due to the patient’s severe head injury he was deemed too unstable for re-exploration from a neurosurgical standpoint.
As his neurological status began to stabilize, as demonstrated by his ICP measurements, imaging was repeated and was again felt to be conclusive for diaphragmatic rupture . The patient was then returned to the operating room where laparoscopic examination of the diaphragm revealed a 4.5 cm laceration in the diaphragm from the 11 o’clock position, at the diaphragmatic crura adjacent to the esophagus and extending towards the central tendon with herniation of a portion of the stomach into the chest . The procedure was converted to open due to poor tolerance of the pneumoperitoneum required for laparoscopy, and the laceration was primarily repaired.
The possibility that we may have missed a small diaphragmatic injury that later expanded to a detectable size (DDDR) or that a delayed diaphragmatic rupture (DDR) could have actually happened in this patient is a matter of speculation. Regardless of such possibilities (DDR versus DDDR), our case is an example that even a negative initial exploratory celiotomy in an injured patient does not rule out the possibility of a delayed DR.