The patient was a 36-year-old woman on her third pregnancy. Preoperative tests (blood collection, chest X-ray and electrocardiography) performed at 36 wk of gestation detected no remarkable findings. On day 4 of week 37 of gestation, elective caesarean section was performed with an indication of post-caesarean pregnancy. The operation lasted 34 min, and the estimated blood loss during the operation was 1010 mL, including amniotic fluid. With no problems occurring during and after surgery, the patient was discharged 6 d after the operation. On day 18 postoperatively, the patient underwent emergency examination at our institution for breathing difficulty.
The patient became pregnant through natural conception and presented at the outpatient department of our institution at 7 wk of gestation. The subsequent progress in pregnancy was favorable.
The patient’s first pregnancy at 28 years of age ended in an abortion and her second pregnancy at 30 years of age ended with an elective caesarean section indicated for foetal malpresentation.
She had no other remarkable personal or family history. No problems were noted in the previous pregnancy and puerperal course.
On admission, she was 154.5 cm tall, weighed 50.0 kg (non-pregnant weight: 42.0 kg), had a body surface area of 1.46 m2, was fully conscious, had a blood pressure of 123/78 mmHg, a pulse rate of 99/min, and SpO2 of 91% (supine position, room air). On chest auscultation, systolic regurgitant murmurs at Levine IV were recorded at regular heartbeats that maximised at the cardiac apex. Bilateral pedal oedema was observed.
The brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level was 642.5 pg/mL (normal range: ≤ 18.4). There were no other remarkable blood test results.
Chest X-ray revealed a cardiothoracic ratio of 55% and a bilateral pleural effusion . Electrocardiography revealed a pulse rate of 94/min, a sinus rhythm, no ST-segment abnormalities, and a slight right axis deviation . The patient’s ejection fraction (EF) was 44.6% (Simpson’s method) in the systemic circulation (right) ventricle, showing a diffuse decrease in wall motion. The systemic circulation ventricular diameter was 49.8 mm in the diastolic phase and 41.6 mm in the systolic phase, indicating a slight enlargement. Severe atrioventricular valve regurgitation was observed in the systemic circulation atrioventricular valve (tricuspid valve) . On contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT), the aorta was found to have the shape of a rough adductor muscle starting from the anatomical right ventricle, and the pulmonary artery started from the anatomical left ventricle .