A 60-year-old male from Ecuador residing in Spain for 5 years with a personal history of liver cirrhosis of enolic origin with portal hypertension; esophageal varices and episodes of hepatic encephalopathy. At the time of his admission, his prescribed medication comprised Vidagliptin and glimepiride.
The patient was referred to outpatient Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) as presenting left headache, otorrhea and otalgia. Examination revealed a polypoid lesion occupying the left external auditory canal (EAC), left vocal cord paralysis and normal nasal and sinus examination, including the nasopharynx. Computed tomography (CT) reported a large nasopharyngeal mass (2 × 5 cm) infiltrating the clivus with soft tissue component and heterogeneous contrast enhancement. Left ear images were compatible with chronic otitis media with no signs of cholesteatoma. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan confirmed the presence of an infiltrative mass hypointense on T1-weighted and T2-weighted with infiltration of adjacent bone marrow. Our first possible diagnosis was to consider the possibility of a tumor.
A first biopsy through functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) was performed reporting a mixed inflammatory infiltrate, without any microorganisms or malignancy.
Fifteen days later the patient was admitted to the internal medicine service with the diagnosis of hydropic decompensation. A second MRI scan was performed, revealing signs of hepatic encephalopathy, progression of the nasopharyngeal mass with intracranial extension and a new lesion in the left pons, not being able to rule out metastases . A second biopsy was performed finding a hard-fibrous tissue with withiest appearance . Histology informed of a connective tissue with acute inflammation without malignancy data. The microbiology study was negative whilst the positron emission tomography scan and a computed tomography scan (PET-CT) revealed small non-specific left lateral cervical lymphadenopathies. Several serologies for different microorganisms were extracted, obtaining a positive result for Toxocara canis immunoglobulin G enzyme-linked Immunoassay (IgG-ELISA) .
In the absence of tumor in the histology and serological findings, toxocariasis with an inflammatory lesion in the nasopharynx and pons was established as the most likely diagnosis. The ophthalmology service ruled out any ocular involvement. Treatment with albendazole (400 mg/12 h) and corticosteroids (1 mg/kg for 5 days) was decided. During treatment, albendazole was suspended due to recurrent leukopenia. However, the patient received a total of 28 days of albendazole and, after one month of treatment, demonstrated clinical stability, negative result for Toxocara canis IgG-ELISA serology two months after the treatment was finished, and radiological improvement of soft tissue lesion of the nasopharynx and pons, persistent after a year on control MRI and CT . The left vocal cord paralysis did not recover and speech therapy was indicated with good results. The chronic otitis media is currently under surveillance.