A 31-year-old Chinese man presented to our hospital with the chief complaints of cough, expectorations, and hemoptysis for two weeks without apparent cause. He denied other symptoms, including dyspnea, chest pain, fever, and recent weight loss. The patient’s chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multiple lymph nodes enlargement, tracheal and esophageal compression, and multiple lung nodules in the horizontal mediastinal window section. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed lower tracheal nodules, multiple infiltrations in the lower tracheal and left main bronchial wall, multiple mediastinal lymph nodes enlargement, and multiple bone lesions throughout the body, which suggested the possibility of tracheal carcinoma with multiple metastases. The patient underwent a fiberoptic bronchoscopy. A neoplasm was detected on the lower part of the total tracheal membrane, left side wall, and anterior wall, arising at 3 cm distal to the upper segment of the left main bronchus from the protrusion of trachea . An endobronchial fine needle aspiration (FNA) was performed on the mass under bronchoscopic guidance, and FNA smears were made. The cytologic smears were highly cellular and contained 3-dimensional clusters of neoplastic basaloid cells, which are rarely associated with the hyaline basement membrane material. The individual tumor cells were homogeneous in size. The neoplasm consisted of aggregates of basaloid cells with small to medium size, scant cytoplasm, and evenly hyperchromatic nuclei .
Bronchofiberscope biopsy tissue was observed under the microscope . The surface of the tumor tissue was covered by pseudostratified columnar respiratory-type epithelium. The tumor exhibited a predominantly solid (>90%) architecture comprised of basaloid-appearing cells. The solid nests were distributed under the mucosa and had microscopically invasive borders. The solid area, showing “geographic,” irregular, or “garland-like” islands, could also be seen in the local shape of a sieve or trabecular structure. The intervening stroma was typically fibromyxoid or hyalinized. The neoplastic cells had a predominantly basaloid appearance characterized by small to medium cells. The surrounding cells were arranged in a palisade. The tumor cells showed scant, mildly eosinophilic cytoplasm with a round to oval hyperchromatic nuclei and inconspicuous nucleoli. Nuclear atypia was moderate to marked. Mitotic activity was observed. Intercalated ducts within solid nests were poorly formed. Occasionally pseudoglandular structures were also seen with cribriform or glands with various sizes. These spaces were filled with homogenous, eosinophilic material. Focal necrosis was present in the nests of tumor cells.
The tumor tissue sections were immunostained with primary antibodies against broad-spectrum cytokeratin (CK), CK7, p63, p40, CD117 (c-kit), CK5/6, Calponin, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), Napsin A, LCA, FLI-1, S-100, Synaptophysin (Syn), Chromatin A (chgA) and CD56. All antibodies were purchased from Gene Company. After incubation with a primary antibody, the detection of antibodies was accomplished using the Streptavidin-peroxidase method. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was diffusely positive for CK and CD117. CK7 and CK5/6 were focally positive in the genuine glandular structures. P63, specific for myoepithelial cells, was completely negative in the majority of the neoplastic cells. Focal weak staining was seen in a small area. The tumor was negative for p40, Calponin, TTF-1, Napsin A, LCA, FLI-1, S-100, Syn, chgA, and CD56. The percentage of cells that stained positively for ki-67 was about 20–30% (, ).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on 5-um-thick paraffin sections . A dual-color break-apart interphase FISH assay was performed using centromeric (BAC clone RP11-349 J5, red) and telomeric (BAC clone RP11-641019, green) probes to detect MYB rearrangement. MYB break-apart assay: Nuclei with a positive MYB break-apart signal showed nonoverlapping single centromeric (red) and telomeric (green) signals in one allele of tumor cells, whereas the other allele (not rearranged) showed yellow signals due to superimposed red and green signals. Tumors with greater than or equal to 10% abnormal cells were considered positive for rearrangement.