A 38-year-old woman who had recently undergone epidural spinal anesthesia for a caesarean section 4 days prior presented to the emergency department (ED) of our institute complaining of severe neck and low back pain. Postpartum, her postoperative course was complicated by dyspnea and chest pain that was found to be secondary to a new pulmonary embolism. During her initial hospitalization, she received antithrombotic therapy sustained by unfractionated heparin (with close monitoring of her clotting mechanism) and was bridged to warfarin therapy prior to her discharge to home. At the ED, she did not have any weakness, paresthesias, or changes in motor “function,” although she described some nonspecific back pain.
On examination in the ED, the patient had 5/5 strength in all muscle groups in the upper and lower extremities, no signs of sensory deficits, or signs of cauda equina syndrome, but she did have several beats of clonus in the lower extremities. Laboratory testing demonstrated only a mildly elevated international normalized ratio of 1.8, which was below the expected value. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the entire spine demonstrated a large amount of mixed epidural and subdural blood collection within the high thoracic and lumbar spine as well as cord edema near T6-7 [Figures –]. The epidural component was located in the upper thoracic spine. Cervical MRI demonstrated pathology consistent with acute/subacute subdural hematoma in the cervical spine .
After the diagnosis was made, the patient was admitted to the neurosurgical intensive care unit (neuroICU) for reversal of her mild coagulopathy (due to previous warfarin therapy) with the administration of fresh frozen plasma and vitamin K, as well as for pain control and surveillance. While in the neuroICU, she experienced an episode of tachycardia and shortness of breath for which she underwent thoracic computed tomographic angiography, which showed a small right basilar atelectasis. These symptoms were thought to be due to a transfusion reaction to the plasma and vitamin K. She was treated conservatively with pain control management and bedrest. After gradual mobilization, she was discharged without any neurological deficits or complications. Her atelectasis and pain were resolved; the hematoma had stabilized according to the last imaging study performed during her hospitalization. The last MRI study, obtained 9 months after her discharge, showed that the hematoma is slowly resolving. The patient is neurologically stable and is completely mobile, although she is still having episodes of low back pain and wears a brace for comfort.