The propositus (V-4) is a Moroccan 5 years old boy, non-consanguineous, last child of three siblings, and was addressed for familial epilepsy . His parents and older sister appear to be healthy and have been free of epilepsy seizure in the past. He had neonatal hypotonia, psychomotor delay, and no seating position with the support of the head at 2 years old. Daily-generalized seizures started at 8 months old and treated by valproate of sodium, but without any response. At clinical examination, he had stature and weight delay at <3rd percentile, microcephaly at -2SD, severe hypotonia, with no facial dysmorphia nor nystagmus. The computerized tomography (CT) scan was normal, but the electroencephalogram (EEG) showed abnormal waves at right fronto-temporal region. Unfortunately, MRI could not be available for the patient.
Five cousins (V-5, V-7, V-8, V-9, V-10) and maternal uncles (IV-3, IV-9) were also followed for epilepsy. IV-3, IV-9, V-5 and V-8 died respectively at four, seven, three and two years. They had all neonatal hypotonia, psychomotor delay and epilepsy beginning at 6 months old.
In an effort to elucidate the causal mutation, we undertook a broader approach by WES on two family members, the propositus V-4 and his cousin V-7. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes using the salting-out method.
The WES was performed at McGill University and Genome Québec Innovation Centre (MUGQIC) on a HiSeq 2000 sequencing instrument (Illumina Inc.). The WES capture was done using SureSelect Human All Exon V4 in solution capture kit (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The well-validated GATK software (Genome Analysis ToolKit (GATK) has been used in conjunction with the gold-standard aligner BWA (Burrow-Wheeler Alignment) for assembly. Prior to the alignment, each read was properly assessed and trimmed using various tools from the Picard suite . Once the alignment was performed, quality of each base has been normalized for each sample, and local realignment for suspected indels region was performed. Variant calling has been performed jointly on all samples processed together using UnifiedGenotyper from the GATK suite. We also used the ANNOVAR software to annotate variants using the most up-to-date public databases (dnSNP, REFSEQ) . The potential functional impact of mutations was predicted using Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT), at , and Polymorphism Phenotyping 2 (PolyPhen2), at .
The putative mutation was validated via Sanger, sequencing the DNA of 9 family members with the following primers: Forward (AGCCTTGTTAAGGTGCTCGCT) and Reverse (GCTTGATGTTGGCCTCTGGA). Sequencing was performed using BigDye Terminator v3.1 cycle sequencing, and the obtained sequences were analyzed on an ABI 3000 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).
Informed consent for DNA analysis was obtained from all participants and parents’ patients.
A total of 188,043 variants were detected. The WES data covered all exons of known X-Linked Epilepsy related genes, and no known pathogenic mutations were identified in these genes. Nevertheless, we identified a single hemizygous base substitution in coding exon3, c.251C > A of the PLP1 gene (based on GRCh37/hg19, and transcript ID NM_000533), resulting in substitution of alanine by an aspartic acid at amino acid 84. This mutation was found in hemizygous state in the propositus V-4 and in his cousin V-7. Sanger sequencing confirmed this mutation in hemizygous state in the affected subjects (V-9, V-10) and in heterozygous state in the obligatory carrier mothers, showing co-segregation of the mutation with the disease phenotype . The non-affected IV-12 was wild type for this mutation .
Mutation c.251C > A (p.Ala84Asp) located within exon 3, results in changes of a non-polar alanine to a charged aspartic acid at position 84, it was predicted by Polyphen2 to be probably damaging with a score of 0.989 (sensitivity: 0.72, specificity: 0.97). The Mutation was also predicted to be damaging by SIFT with a score of 0. As shown in Fig. , this amino acid change affects highly conserved residues.