A 25-year-old woman with a fistula opening in her right hip since birth presented with intermittent pain in her abdomen for 3 years.
The patient complained of irregular dirty stool-like fluid discharge from the fistula and a pronounced limp while walking since she was a child. Additionally, scar tissue was found next to the fistula, which was a recurrent infection and abscess that had occurred and healed in the past. In addition, she had newly started experiencing intermittent abdominal pain frequently for the last 3 years without special signs, such as hematochezia, which was relieved by conservative treatment by oral or intravenous administration of antibiotics.
No local medical institutions were able to provide radical treatment to the patient owing to the complexity and high risk of complications of the disease. Severe acute abdominal pain was treated with intravenous antibiotics in the emergency department. Unfortunately, the patient cannot provide more detailed information concerning these treatments.
The patient was of a yellow race and worked as a radiology technician in a local medical institution her height and weight were 155 cm and 43 kg, respectively. During adolescence, the menstrual cycle of the patient was irregular, and the bleeding lasted longer than normal. She experienced occasional constipation and had no history of trauma or surgery. She had no history of hypertension, coronary artery disease, diabetes, or any other chronic and infectious disease. No family history was identified.
The fistula appeared as a neoplasm located in her right hip nearby (approximately 5 cm) to a scar with round features . A belly bulge on the right abdomen could be observed in the supine position. Abdominal palpation revealed a tubular structure. There was no tenderness, rebound tenderness, or tension.
Routine blood tests, such as blood routine examination, renal and liver function, electrolyte, coagulation function, and tumor markers did not reveal any abnormalities except mild anemia (90 g/L, 115–150 g/L). Given the patient’s history of the menstrual disorder and her compressed uterus and ovary, the serum levels of sex hormones were also evaluated and were found to be within the normal range.
Combined contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) with contrast epistolography revealed a large, dilated lumen structure with a large number of stored feces in the abdominal pelvic cavity . The organs around the duplicated tract were compressed and the fistula, which connected with the distal tubular structure, was clearly shown by contrast enhancement . It is possible that there was another sinus tract connecting to the proximal tubular structure with the recurrent infection area on the hip. Both CT and magnetic resonance imaging revealed abnormal morphology of the sacrum and absence of bone structures . Ultrasonography showed that the uterus and ovary had normal morphologies. A double ureter and renal pelvic on the right side could be observed using contrast-enhanced CT. The right foot radiograph showed a pes cavus . The colonoscope and gastrografin did not find any communication between the duplicated and normal tract.