CAJP, a 42-year-old male real estate businessman, was hit by gunshot bullets in 1992 during a holdup. Bullets were found in the abdomen and right leg, and laparotomy was needed in order to perform resection on a segment of the small intestine. Another bullet was retained close to the spinal cord .
Six years later, he developed intense lumbar back pain, and the physicians attending the case realized that the source of pain was probably the retained bullet, which was lodged between L5 and S1. At that time, he underwent laminectomy in an attempt to remove the bullet. However, this operation was unsuccessful and caused the bullet to fragment.
Nine years after the accident, the patient had his first episode of abdominal pain. He then underwent arthrodesis on L5-S1, but he developed intense abdominal pain after the surgical procedure. Radiographs produced at this time, two days after the surgical procedure, showed remarkable dispersion of lead from the bullet, with lead precipitation throughout the sciatic nerve sheath .
He was then treated with calcium versenate intravenously for five days, with a good response. ALA in urine was measured as 122 mg/l (reference value, RV = 4.5 mg/l) before this chelation therapy, and as 8.9 mg/l after the therapy. Total 24-hour lead in urine (PbU24h) over the five days of therapy was 47,623 mg, thus showing an outstanding level of lead excretion. Two weeks later, he showed recurrence of symptoms, with ALA of 55 mg/l. A new cycle of calcium versenate was then prescribed, with a good symptomatic response and a high level of lead excretion (26,679 mg).
Over the next three months, he remained well. Then, in August 2001, the symptoms recurred and ALA in urine was measured as 120 mg/l, and a new therapy cycle was administered, using ethylenediaminetetraacetic calcium disodium (EDTACaNa2). From this last chelation cycle onwards, he remained less symptomatic, necessitating one more cycle during 2001, another in 2002 and two more cycles in 2003, when he started to be asymptomatic. His ALA in urine decreased progressively to normal values during 2004 and 2005 . Over the last two years (2006 and 2007), he remained asymptomatic and he has not shown up for examination since then.