A 57-year-old male from Thailand with long-standing psoriatic arthritis presented with diffuse scaling of his skin. He was being treated for psoriatic arthritis with adalimumab, leflunomide, and topical clobetasol, but had stopped taking all medications two weeks prior to presentation. At baseline, the patient was a gardener and able to complete all his activities of daily living. However, during the disease course, he noticed diffuse skin scaling and had diarrhea, leading to fatigue. His only joint complaint was chronic left ankle pain, and he denied oral ulcers. Physical exam revealed diffuse yellow scaling covering his entire body with underlying erythema and tenderness without mucosal involvement . Empiric antibiotics were started until blood cultures ruled out infection. Labs were notable for a creatinine of 3.3 mg/dL, with no prior history of renal disease, calcium 7.8 mg/dL, phosphate 5.9 mg/dL, bicarbonate 13.0 mmol/L, urine pH 5.0, and uric acid of 12.7 mg/dL . The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit given >80% of body surface area involvement and acute renal failure. He received 4 L of normal saline for initial resuscitation. On day 2, the patient was determined to be euvolemic based on clinical exam with moist mucous membranes. Despite aggressive fluid administration, renal function did not improve, and creatinine continued to rise and peaked at 4.61 mg/dL, with phosphate of 7.0 mg/dL and 48 hours of anuria. Renal ultrasound showed 5 mm nonobstructing renal calculi in the left kidney and small echogenic kidneys consistent with chronic kidney disease . Subsequent urine microscopy showed diffuse polymorphic uric acid crystals, consistent with uric acid crystal-induced nephropathy . He was managed with rasburicase, urinary alkalinization, and fluids. The underlying erythrodermic psoriasis was treated with restarting leflunomide, topical isotretinoin, and clobetasol. His renal function improved dramatically; urine output, uric acid, and electrolytes normalized. He was discharged on topical clobetasol and leflunomide and new addition of secukinumab with little to no skin involvement.