A 12-year-old female child was referred to the pediatric clinic due to progressive ataxia, tremor of head, and anorexia. Although the patients’ symptoms have started at the age of 10 years with unsteady gait and tremor, no admission is obtained till the severity of symptoms. She was the only child from a healthy non-consanguineous parent who was born at 37 weeks through normal vaginal delivery (NVD) that had normal birth (Birth weight = 3700 g, Height = 50 cm, Head circumference = 33 cm) and development.
The past medical history was remarkable for mitral valve prolapse (MVP) (diagnosed confirmed via echocardiography) and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) for which propranolol 10 mg was taken. Recurrent and more frequent infections of ear and throat during these 2 years are also reported for which the patient received amoxicillin 500 mg every 8 hours or azithromycin 2 g single dose. The history of seizure episodes was negative. No notable family history of similar symptoms was found.
The vital signs were as follows; pulse rate: 105 rate/minute, blood pressure: 110/70 mmHg, temperature: 36.9°C, respiratory rate: 14 rate/minute, O2 Saturation: 98%. The examination showed no facial or skeletal dysmorphia. Mild to moderate dysarthria, head tremor, bilateral dysmetria, and ataxic gait were positive neurological findings in the physical exam. Besides, finger-to-nose, and heel-to-shin tests were abnormal. Eye examination did not show Kayser-Fleischer rings. The visual and auditory acuity were normal. The motor and sensory neuron systems showed normal development and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Babinski’s sign was absent. No telangiectasia was observed. Psychiatric examination represents a spectrum of anxiety and depression (mild to moderate according to DSM-5). The Wechsler intelligence test was normal.
Laboratory analyses are depicted in . The results showed a high lactate level (7.5 mmol/L, reference range [RR]: 0.5-1.6 mmol/L) and low CoQ level (0.4 µg/mL, RR: 1.31 ± 0.38 µg/mL). Blood urea level was elevated (49.4 mg/dL, RR: 15-36 mg/dL). Thyroid function tests were normal. Vitamin A, E, and B complex, Ceruloplasmin, copper, and autoantibodies levels were checked and all were in the normal range. 25 (OH) Vitamin D was deficient (<8 ng/mL, RR is mentioned in ). Urine analysis was positive for ketone. Urine culture and stool exam were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was not obtained since the patient and her parents did not consent to lumbar puncture. Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction study (NCS) were normal. However, muscle biopsy showed lipid droplets.
The patient was referred to pediatric neurologist at this time for further evaluation. Electroencephalogram (EEG) was performed and was normal. However, cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested pan-cerebellar atrophy, thinning of the corpus callosum, and white matter loss as depicted in .
Whole exome sequencing (WES) was done on DNA samples from the patient and her parents’ fibroblasts. Confirmatory tests were done using Sanger sequencing methods. A homozygous missense mutation for cytosine to thymidine at nucleotide 911 of CoQ8A (ENST00000366777.4: c.911C>T; [p.A304V]) was detected.
A mitochondrial disorder is suspected (MIM: 612016) and treatment with CoQ10 50 mg twice daily started on. The patient underwent follow-ups every 2 months while receiving CoQ10. After 2 months the symptoms improved and the progression is halted as shown by Scale for the Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (SARA) score (15 at baseline; and 10 after 2 months of treatment) . The most noticeable improvement was the resolution of tremor. The spinocerebellar degeneration functional scale (SDFS) was improved after 2 months of treatment (5/7 at baseline; and 2/7 after 2 months of treatment). Infections of ear and throat have no longer recurred. After treatment, the serum abnormality in lactate and CoQ status was resolved. The serum lactate decreased to 1.2 mmol/L (reference range [RR]: 0.5-1.6 mmol/L) and CoQ level increased to 1.8 µg/mL (RR: 1.31 ± 0.38 µg/mL).
In the last follow-up, the patient was advised to refer to psychiatrist for her concern about lack of self-esteem in the school due to unstable walking and less memorizing ability compared with other students. She also reported fear of being in crowded places.