A 76-year-old Caucasian female with a past medical history of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), hypertension, and gastroesophageal reflux disease presented to the hospital with intractable nausea and vomiting of one week duration. With regard to treatment of her MCL, she had failed first-line treatment with bendamustine-rituximab following which she had received R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisolone) chemotherapy. However, due to her advancing disease detected by positron emission tomography imaging and lymph node biopsy, she was started on ibrutinib 560 mg daily 11 days ago. She took the medication for 8 days after which she could not tolerate it due to intractable nausea and vomiting. She was unable to tolerate any of her other medications and quit taking all of them 5 days prior to admission. Her other home medications were reviewed, which included atorvastatin 20 mg daily, carvedilol 3.125 mg twice daily, citalopram 10 mg daily, and lisinopril 5 mg daily. While in the hospital, she continued to have nausea for two more days. During this time, her potassium (K+) level was low (range: 2.4–3.2 meq/L), and she received K+ replacement. In the first 48 hours of hospitalization, she experienced 2 episodes of brief syncope lasting a few seconds and sinus pauses (up to 6 seconds), which appeared to be vagally mediated, as they occurred immediately after an episode of retching or coughing. Her baseline 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with normal PR interval and preexisting right bundle branch block with QRS duration of 138 milliseconds. She had no prior history of syncope, bradycardia, or any cardiac illness. She had no family history of sudden cardiac death. At the time of the event, she was not on any medications known to have a potential to cause bradycardia. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed an ejection fraction of 60–65% and was otherwise normal.
By the third day of hospitalization, her symptoms had resolved and she was able to tolerate solid food with no difficulty. Her electrolytes were in normal range. However, she suddenly had a witnessed syncopal episode correlating with 26 seconds of sinoatrial arrest noted on telemetry . The episode was abrupt in onset. The patient was in bed and was talking to her nurse when she had this syncopal episode. She regained her baseline level of consciousness after the episode with no residual deficits. Cardiology consult was obtained, and a permanent pacemaker was planned. While awaiting pacemaker implantation, she developed two more symptomatic episodes of abrupt onset sinus pauses over next 24 hours without any trigger. A dual-chamber permanent pacemaker was implanted the next day. Patient was not given ibrutinib again.