A 79-year-old woman was hospitalized in our institution. She described since a few months the onset and gradual aggravation of exertional dyspnoea. No exertional angina was reported. This patient had a medical history of hypertension and surgical aortic valve replacement with a 21 mm Carpentier-Edwards bioprosthesis 14 years prior due to a severe and symptomatic rheumatic aortic stenosis.
Physical examination on admission showed no signs of congestive heart failure, but cardiac auscultation showed a severe aortic regurgitation murmur.
The preprocedural transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), without any kinetic anomaly, and a severe intraprosthetic leak: the Regurgitating Orifice Surface was measured at 34 mm2, the telediastolic isthmic reflux was measured at 20 cm/s, there was increased cardiac flow (10 L/min without indexation on body surface), and left ventricle (LV) dilation and hypertrophy were objectified.
She was scheduled for a valve-in-valve TAVI because of her comorbid condition including the need for re-operation and high-risk category (STS-Score was 10.1%, Euroscore II was 8.39%).
The procedure consisted of the implantation, without prior predilation, of a 23 mm Evolut R valve (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA), under locoregional anaesthesia, without fast ventricular pacing. The periprocedural TTE showed a well-implanted device, without leakage or pericardial effusion. The final procedural angiogram showed no leakage and showed no proximal coronary lesion (Video 1). The whole procedure was clinically and haemodynamically well-tolerated by the patient, who remained asymptomatic.
The re-evaluation TTE, performed a few hours after the procedure showed a well-implanted valve, without stenosis (mean gradient measured at 14 mmHg) or leakage, but identified an LV dysfunction and dilation (LVEF 40%, Telediastolic Diameter 59 mm), with apical akinesia and compensatory hyperkinesia of all basal myocardial segments.
The patient was asymptomatic at the time of the TTE. A complementary anti-aldosteronic treatment (spironolactone) was introduced (no beta-blocker was given since the patient had a resting heart rhythm between 45 and 50 b.p.m.).
The post-procedural resting electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a previously unknown R-wave planning in the anterior territory with no other abnormalities. The day-after resting ECG showed a lateral T-wave inversion.
On the day after the procedure, the patient briefly presented with mild heart failure, rapidly treated by intravenous loop diuretics. She then remained asymptomatic for the rest of her hospital stay.
The post-procedural blood testing showed significant elevation of cardiac markers:
NT-proBNP peaked at 29 971 pg/mL (norm <450) the day after the procedure (vs. 2322 at admission), then progressively decreased .
HS Troponin peaked at 602 pg/mL (norm <14) on the evening of the procedure (vs. 24 at admission), then progressively decreased .
The coronary computed tomography angiogram (coronary CTA) performed the day after the procedure showed no lesion and no stenosis on the epicardial coronary arteries.
Resting myocardial perfusion scintigraphy was performed 6 days after the procedure: it showed apical myocardial necrosis, apical ballooning, hyperkinesia of basal myocardial segments, and LV dysfunction (LVEF 30%).
The cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed 8 days after the procedure confirmed the LV dysfunction (LVEF 40%) but showed neither myocardial necrosis nor fibrosis. This was deemed compatible with a stress cardiomyopathy (takotsubo).
The TTE findings did not change in the days following the procedure, showing the aforementioned apical akinesia and basal hyperkinesia .
A control TTE and Radionuclide Ventriculography were performed 14 days after the procedure and showed an ad integrum LVEF recovery (evaluated at 50% on the TTE and 60% on the isotopic calculation).
From a rhythmological perspective, the patient went into atrial fibrillation 2 days after TAVR, which resolved spontaneously 3 days later. A QRS enlargement with complete left bundle branch block was objectified 6 days after the procedure, associated with a well-tolerated sinusal bradycardia. The 24-h Holter monitoring showed no significant sinus pause, and no paroxystic atrioventricular block.
During the entirety of her hospitalization, the patient did not present any functional signs except brief and mild heart failure the day after TAVR. Her clinical state never required the use of inotropic or vasopressor treatments. She was transferred to a cardiac rehabilitation unit 22 days after the procedure, preceding her returning home. Informed consent to report her case was obtained at that time.
Latest follow-up was obtained 5 months after the procedure: the patient was asymptomatic, TTE showed no secondary deterioration of LVEF (measured at 65%) and no wall-motion abnormalities. Valve was well-implanted without any regurgitation, mean prosthetic gradient was stable (29 mmHg).