A 33-year-old woman sought evaluation of right-sided abdominal pain. She had EDS and was bedridden. Her hip joint was contracted and she had severe scoliosis, for which a spinal fusion was performed. Her right lung was atrophied due to scoliosis, and a tracheotomy was performed due to repeated pneumothoraces; she was placed on a ventilator at night. She had no intellectual impairment. Abdominal ultrasonography and CT were performed, revealing a right ureteral calculus in the right distal ureter (maximum diameter, 8 mm) and right hydronephrosis.
Accumulation of high CT value material was also detected in the bladder . The maximum CT value for the ureteral calculus was 1473 HU. ESWL was first considered as a minimally invasive treatment; however, the patient had severe joint contractures and difficulty breathing when supine on the lithotripter, making it difficult to perform the procedure. ESWL under ventilator management was considered, but returning to the hospital was difficult when multiple crushes were required, due to poor activities of daily living. Therefore, TUL was performed to crush the ureteral calculus.
The lower extremity contractures did not affect the TUL. When the cystoscope was inserted, large amounts of sandy calculi were noted in the bladder and removed. We were cautious when approaching the ureter to avoid mucosal injuries due to physical dilation of the ureter. We used the smallest diameter ureteral fiber we could prepare, a WiScope single-use digital flexible ureteroscope® (8.6 Fr; OTU Medical, Union City, CA, USA). A ureteral access sheath was not used because of the increased risk of damaging the ureteral mucosa. The perfusate was pressurized with a Heiwa PC2® (Heiwa Medical Instruments, Co., Yamaguchi, Japan). The pressure setting for pressurization was changed from 200 mmHg (normal setting) to 100 mmHg to prevent excessive mucous membrane development due to water pressure. We did not measure the internal pressure in the urinary tract.
The ureteral fiber was inserted without difficulty. The ureteral calculus was immediately identified, crushed, and the fragments were removed . The fiber was then advanced into the renal pelvis to ensure that there were no uncollected calculi. The mucosa within the urinary tract appeared normal to the unaided eye, but some mucosal bleeding was noted. There were no findings consistent with inflammation or other abnormalities at the bleeding site . The entire procedure required 65 min. Minimal ureteral inflammation was noted intraoperatively and there was no mucosal damage to the ureteral orifice following intraureteral manipulation. Given the possibility of mucosal abrasion damage, ureteral stent placement after lithotripsy was not performed. The ureteral calculus was equally comprised of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate. The sandy bladder calculi stored in the bladder consisted of acidic ammonium urate, calcium oxalate, and calcium phosphate. There was no evidence of bacteriuria postoperatively; however, the post-void residual was >200 mL. Treatment with oral medications was ineffective, so intermittent catheterization was continued.