An 8-year-old boy visited our unit for "motor and intellectual retardation". He was G1P1 (first pregnancy & first delivery) of non-consanguineous healthy parents and was delivered naturally at term with a birth weight of 3.25 kg (-0.39 SD). The movement retardation was noted after birth. He was not able to walk until the age of 18 months. Up to now, he continued to walk unsteadily and unsymmetrically. Moreover, he could only unconsciously utter the word "mother", and his intellectual disability prevented conscious communication. The growth retardation also was noted that the growth rate was only 2 cm per year in recent years. Since the age of 3 years, there have been dense red rashes on the palms of both hands. The rashes spread from hand to trunk. The patient used to suffer from recurrent respiratory infections. He had a right inguinal hernia at 5 years old and then underwent high ligation of the hernia sac under the laparoscope in the same year. No similar genetic family history was reported.
Physical examination showed a height of 116.5 cm (-2.48 SD) and a weight of 25 kg (-0.60 SD). The ability to communicate was missing. He had dull eyes, slightly coarse facial features, black hair, and thick eyebrow. The liver was relatively enlarged and about 3 cm under the ribs. The spleen was not palped under the ribs. Muscular hypotonia was noted. Each finger couldn’t be fully extended . Numerous red rashes were seen on both palms . Cardiopulmonary auscultation showed no abnormality. The muscle strength of the limbs was normal. Eye manifestations were undetected. No other obvious abnormality was found.
The hepatosplenic ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with the length of 4.5 cm under the ribs. Echocardiography indicated mild tricuspid regurgitation without valve thickening or myocardial hypertrophy. X-ray of the spine revealed the presence of physiological curvature of the spine, tapering of the anterior vertebral body with irregular morphology, and local bone hyperplasia of the vertebral body. The proximal end of the ribs was concave. Each acetabulum was shallow, and its margin was irregular . In the brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging(MRI), the globus pallidus showed symmetrical hyperintensity on T1-weighted images and symmetrical hypointensity on T2-weighted images with a linear high-intensity zone in the middle. The volume of cerebral white matter was decreased slightly. Liver and kidney function, blood gas, electrolyte, blood glucose, thyroid function, and the genetic metabolic indexes of peripheral blood were all normal.
MPS was initially suspected. Urinary glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) screen for MPS was performed by dimethylmethylene blue dye binding assay with the boundary result. Hence, other genetic diseases (e.g., myxolipomatosis or fucosidosis) were considered. Whole exon sequencing performed for the boy and his parents showed a presence of a homozygous pathogenic variant (c.671delC in exon 4) of FUCA1 gene, inherited from his parents . The c.671delC is a de novo and frameshift pathogenic variant that causes a premature stop codon (p.Pro224LeufsTer3). This variant was not reported previously in GnomAD data and was regarded as pathogenic according to the ACMG criterion. In order to make sure, the α-L-fucosidase activity analysis was done that the level of α-L-fucosidase in white blood cells was 0.08 nmol/h.mg (normal range 31.44–104.84). The patient was eventually diagnosed with fucosidosis.