A 57-year-old female presented to the emergency department with heavy vaginal bleeding accompanied by mild dizziness. She denied any abdominal pain, distention, fever, chills, or weight loss. Her medical history was significant for end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and chronic hepatitis B. Her medications included tenofovir, carvedilol, atorvastatin, calcitriol, hydralazine, isosorbide dinitrate, and nifedipine. She had a Papanicolaou smear 2 years prior to her presentation, which was normal. She never took oral contraceptive pills. She denied any history of tobacco use or alcohol consumption and her family history was non-contributory.
Her vital signs were remarkable for blood pressure of 100/60, heart rate of 105 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 15, and temperature of 36.7°C. Her initial laboratory workup showed a hemoglobin level of 6.5 g/dL, white blood cell count of 12.7 cells/µL, platelet count of 238 platelets/µL, serum creatinine of 4.6 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen of 24 mg/dL, and serum electrolytes were within normal limits.
She initially received 2 U of packed red blood cells. Bedside pelvic ultrasound at the emergency department demonstrated a heterogeneous mass-like enlargement of the uterus. The patient was admitted to the hospital and shortly thereafter she underwent hysteroscopic dilation and curettage. The latter revealed a well-differentiated endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma (Grade I). During her hospital stay, she continued to have vaginal bleeding, for which she received transfusion of four additional units of packed red blood cells. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen, which was done in the setting of preoperative evaluation of the tumor, revealed a thickened uterus with a 5.3 cm retroperitoneal mass .
Two days later, she underwent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Intraoperatively, the uterus was enlarged about 17–20 weeks in size, both ovaries and fallopian tubes looked healthy, and intraoperative frozen section of the uterus revealed endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma with superficial invasion of the myometrium. The right retroperitoneal mass had a feeding vessel from the ovarian suspensory ligament. Resection was done after clamping the feeding vessel, and frozen section of the mass revealed a necrotic leiomyoma. Examination of the full pathological specimen of the uterus demonstrated a well-differentiated endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma with an invasion depth of 2.5 cm out of the 8.5 cm thickness of the myometrial wall in addition to the presence of lymphovascular invasion. Moreover, there was a 4 cm polypoid mass arising from a distinct area in the posterior wall of the uterus , which—under pathological examination—revealed a poorly differentiated biphasic tumor containing both carcinomatous ( and ) and sarcomatoid components ( and ). The former was adenocarcinoma in differentiation, while the latter had cartilaginous differentiation with no evidence of myometrium invasion at the site of the endometrial polyp. This was consistent with heterologous carcinosarcoma that emerged from the endometrial polyp without myometrial invasion. Moreover, the retroperitoneal mass showed a well-circumscribed globally necrotic acellular lesion, likely a torsed leiomyoma.
The patient recovered from the surgical procedure uneventfully, and she was discharged from the hospital after a few days.