An 88-year-old woman who presented with non-healing ulceration in the dorsalis pedis of the left foot despite treatment for several months was admitted to our hospital . She had undergone axillo-bilateral femoral bypass surgery for right critical limb ischaemia (CLI) 3 years previously with bilateral common iliac artery (CIA) stenosis with severe calcification and vessel tortuosity and bilateral superficial femoral artery (SFA)-popliteal artery (Pop. A) chronic total occlusion (CTO). Unfortunately, a year later, she required right below-knee amputation due to diabetic gangrene. On admission, the ankle-brachial pressure index (ABI) of the left side was 0.5 and skin perfusion pressure (SPP) was markedly low: 19 mmHg for the dorsal artery and 21 mmHg for the plantar artery. Ultrasound and contrast computed tomography demonstrated bypass graft occlusion, left SFA-Pop. A long CTO from the origin with severe calcification and severe stenosis in the bilateral common femoral artery was close to the anastomotic site . We considered that the cause of CLTI was the left SFA occlusion. Endovascular therapy for the left SFA occlusion was necessary to save the left foot, but access sites for EVT were limited.
The contralateral femoral artery was a difficult option because the right CIA had stenosis with a calcified lesion and blood vessel meandering. The ipsilateral femoral artery showed stenosis by the anastomosis of the bypass graft, and the left SFA was occluded from the origin. We decided to puncture the occluded axillo-femoral prosthetic bypass graft. First, ultrasonography was performed, and the border of the thrombus in the graft lumen was confirmed. We punctured the occluded side of the border on rib bone in consideration of haemostasis . A 6 Fr 45 cm sheath (TERUMO, Japan) was inserted in an antegrade manner, and 5000 units of unfractionated heparin were administered intravenously. Control angiogram demonstrated left SFA occlusion from the origin to the popliteal artery with severe calcification and short occlusion of the anterior-tibial artery. A 0.014-inch wire (Command, Century, Japan) could not pass through the SFA-CTO lesion with an antegrade approach. Only a penetration wire (Astato9-12, ASAHI INTECC, Japan) could be slightly advanced into the CTO lesion. Next, distal puncture from the dorsalis pedis artery was performed; a 0.014-inch soft-tip wire (Cruise, ASAHI INTECC, Japan) was passed retrogradely to the popliteal artery through the anterior-tibial artery CTO lesion. Subsequently, a 0.035-inch wire (Radifocus 1.5 J stiff, TERUMO, Japan) could be advanced to the popliteal artery antegradely using the knuckle wire technique. The antegrade and retrograde wires could meet by using the Rendez-vous technique in the popliteal artery in the CTO site . After repeated pre-dilatation with a non-compliance balloon, self-expandable bare-nitinol stents (LIFE stent; Medicon, Japan, Innova; Boston Scientific, USA) were deployed from the proximal SFA to the popliteal artery. Finally, angiogram demonstrated complete revascularization, although the intravascular ultrasound revealed an incomplete expansion of stent only in the part of calcification . Hemostasis of the puncture site was safely achieved with only 5 min of manual compression. After treatment, the ABI improved to 0.9 and the level of SPP improved to 56 mmHg for the dorsal artery and 52 mmHg for the plantar artery. The ulceration epithelized within a month.