The patient was a 52-year-old Chinese man who was admitted to the hospital due to two cerebral infarctions. Initially, a sudden speech disorder was the main cause of hospitalization. Physical examination at that time revealed only Broca’s aphasia-like symptoms. Coagulation tests indicated a coagulation disorder, which was characterized by a decrease in the plasma level of Fib as determined by the Clauss method, an increase in Fib plasma concentration as detected by ELISA, and prolongation of PT and TT. In addition, brain imaging examinations revealed ischemic changes in multiple brain regions. As a result, the patient was diagnosed with unexplained multiple cerebral infarction and was treated with aspirin, clopidogrel, and atorvastatin. Although the short-term treatment alleviated his speech disorder, it failed to prevent the recurrence of the cerebral infarction. A second ischemic stroke manifested itself in the form of mild aphasia and weakness of the right upper extremity. Through family screening and genetic testing, we identified a rare heterozygous missense variant FGG c.952G>A (rs267606810) in the patient and his asymptomatic sister, both of whom exhibited the same alterations in Fib, characterized by reduced functional levels (Clauss method) but increased antigenic protein (ELISA assay). Taking the findings together, the patient was definitively diagnosed with CD. Finally, the patient underwent long-term therapy with clopidogrel and atorvastatin, which has so far brought about a satisfactory recovery from cerebral infarction and the associated neurological symptoms.
A 52-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on 30 April 2022 due to a sudden speech disorder that had persisted for 17 h. On admission, his blood pressure was 118/69 mmHg, and his heart rate was 58 beats per min. He was conscious and had normal facial expressions. The bilateral pupils were equal in size, round (diameter approximately 3.0 mm), and reacted to light. Notably, he exhibited Broca’s aphasia-like symptoms with repetition of words or simple phrases, but not fluent grammatical sentences, and he was aware of his own speech impairment. Nevertheless, the ability to understand was not impaired. Physical examinations showed normal systemic motor and sensory functions and normal muscle strength (grade V) in four limbs, and neither pyramidal signs nor meningeal irritation signs were observed. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 4, which indicated minor to moderate stroke. Brain computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed patchy hypointense signals in the left frontal lobe. The distal branches of the left anterior cerebral artery were sparser than those of the contralateral artery . Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DW-MRI) further revealed ischemic changes in multiple brain regions, including the left frontal lobe, the parietal lobe, the occipital lobe, the basal ganglia, and the corona radiata . Vascular ultrasound showed intima–media thickening of the right carotid artery and bilateral lower limb arteries. A complete blood count showed a high platelet count (366 × 109/L), leucocyte count (12.5 × 109/L), and absolute neutrophil count (9.0 × 109/L), and a low erythrocyte count (4.23 × 1012/L). Importantly, laboratory tests showed reduced activity of plasma Fib (0.6 g/L, Clauss method), prolonged PT (16.1 s) and TT (26.6 s), and an elevated international normalized ratio (INR; 1.34), although APTT (32.7 s) and D-dimer (0.19 mg/L) were within normal reference ranges . Moreover, plasma anticardiolipin antibody, antithrombin antibody, homocysteine, glycated hemoglobin, triglyceride, and cholesterol were normal. Electrocardiogram and cardiac ultrasound revealed normal cardiac function. Echocardiography with agitated saline contrast, also known as a bubble study, showed no bubbles within the left heart . As a positive control, bubbles were visualized in the left heart within 3–5 beats in a patient with a patent foramen ovale (PFO) . Abdominal ultrasound also showed no obvious abnormalities. Kidney and liver function were normal.
The patient was diagnosed with unexplained multiple cerebral infarction. As there was no indication for interventional therapy, he was treated with dual antiplatelet and hypolipidemic therapy for 10 days, including aspirin (100 mg, q.d.), clopidogrel (75 mg, q.d.), and atorvastatin (20 mg, q.d.). He was subsequently discharged with significant relief from Broca’s aphasia-like symptoms. After discharge, clopidogrel was continued for a further 11 days, and aspirin and atorvastatin were taken regularly.
On 16 June 2022, the patient was readmitted to the hospital due to mild aphasia and persistent weakness of the right upper limb for 29 h. On the second recording, his consciousness, pupils, blood pressure, and heart rate were normal, but he showed mild symptoms of aphasia. Strikingly, his right nasolabial sulcus was flat, and his mouth was tilted to the left. The muscle strength of his right arm was grade IV, and the other limbs were grade V. DW-MRI of the brain showed new ischemic lesions located mainly in the left frontal and parietal lobes, while encephalomalacia of previous ischemic areas was observed . Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) further revealed cerebral microbleeds and remote hemorrhage in the left frontal and parietal lobes and in the left basal ganglia . Again, routine blood tests showed a high platelet count (385 × 109/L) and low erythrocyte count (4.19 × 1012/L). Importantly, the PT-derived method detected a normal concentration of plasma Fib (3.02 g/L; ), which was dramatically higher than the concentration detected by the Clauss method. The PT-derived/Clauss ratio of plasma Fib was 6.71. In addition to the previously observed abnormalities of common coagulation markers, we found an increased plasma level of von Willebrand factor (vWF) antigen (182%; normal range: 77.9%–137.1%), while plasma levels of protein S, protein C, antithrombin III, lupus anticoagulant, and fibrin/Fib degradation products (FDPs) were normal. Moreover, the activity of coagulation factor VIII was increased, while plasminogen (PLG) activity was normal. As the antiplatelet agents had been unable to prevent the recurrence of cerebral infarction, the patient was treated with atorvastatin and the anticoagulant rivaroxaban (15 mg, q.d.). However, the 2 days course of treatment with rivaroxaban led to nosebleeds, so rivaroxaban was discontinued. The patient then took clopidogrel and atorvastatin for a further 10 days, which gradually improved his aphasia, abnormal facial expression, and right arm weakness. After discharge, clopidogrel and atorvastatin were taken regularly, and strict follow-up was required. No further neurological symptoms had occurred at the time of writing of this article.
The patient stated that he had no family history of neurological, hemorrhagic, and/or thrombotic diseases. Nevertheless, his asymptomatic older sister (55 years old) underwent the usual coagulation function tests, which also revealed a reduced plasma level of Fib (Clauss method), prolonged PT and TT, and an increased INR . Other family members refused coagulation function tests. To determine the genetic etiology, we collected peripheral blood genomic DNA from the patient and performed WES analysis using standard protocols. After filtering common variants and variants that were irrelevant to neurological and coagulation disorders, we identified a rare heterozygous missense variant in exon 8 of the FGG gene, i.e., FGG c.952G>A (rs267606810). By Sanger sequencing, we further confirmed the presence of this FGG variant in the patient and his sister, but not in his healthy mother or son (,).
FGG c.952G>A (rs267606810) leads to the replacement of non-polar and aliphatic glycine with polar and uncharged serine at position 318 in the C-terminal of the Fib γ-chain, which plays a crucial role in binding to the N-terminal of the Fib α-chain. FGG c.952G>A was predicted by REVEAL, ClinPred, SIFT, and PolyPhen2 to be highly detrimental to the function of the encoded protein. This missense variant has been reported in a patient associated with thrombotic disease . In the ClinVar database, FGG c.952G>A is defined as a variant of undetermined significance.
Notably, ELISA assay using a human Fib γ-chain ELISA kit (Cat No.: JL19902, Jianglai Biological, China) further revealed that the patient and his sister had similar plasma levels of Fib γ-chain, which were higher than those of the patient’s healthy wife and five healthy control subjects , suggesting that FGG c.952G>A may cause a compensatory increase in abnormal Fib γ-chain. Considering these genetic results, we speculate that FGG c.952G>A may contribute to the pathogenesis of the patient’s coagulopathy and recurrent cerebral infarction. Finally, a definitive diagnosis of CD was made for this patient.