A 32-year-old right hand dominant female, housemaid by occupation, presented to our outpatient department with pain in the right shoulder and restricted range of motion for 1.5 months. She had a history of fall from stairs 1.5 months back and sustained direct blow to the right shoulder for which she was managed conservatively at local hospital. On clinical examination, she had tenderness over the anterolateral aspect of the right shoulder and abduction, internal rotation and external rotation movements were restricted. There was no associated neurovascular deficit.
Initial impression on plain radiograph anteroposterior (AP) view of the right shoulder showed displaced greater tuberosity fracture with no other obvious bony injury . CT scan with sagittal and axial cuts demonstrated comminuted greater tuberosity fracture and displaced lesser tuberosity fracture with head shaft in continuity (-). CT scan with three-dimensional reconstruction (3-D) was done for further understanding of fracture configuration which confirmed fracture of greater tuberosity which was displaced 10 mm superiorly and 5 mm posteriorly, furthermore, to our surprise, lesser tuberosity fracture displaced 6 mm medially was also noticed . It also confirmed that there was no impacted fracture between the humeral head and shaft. Open reduction and rigid internal fixation and anatomical reconstruction of tuberosities were the pre-operative plan.
The patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia through deltopectoral approach after obtaining written informed consent. The greater tuberosity was displaced superiorly and posteriorly due to the pull by supraspinatus. The lesser tuberosity was displaced medially due to subscapularis attachment. Ethibond (polyester) suture no. 5 was passed through the subscapularis tendon and lesser tuberosity was secured. Greater tuberosity was reduced anatomically with the help of Ethibond no.5 passed through the supraspinatus bone tendon junction. The reduction of greater tuberosity was held temporarily with Kirschner wires. PH locking plate was applied and the Ethibond sutures were passed through islets of the plates . Reconstruction of both the tuberosities and stability of the construct was confirmed under fluoroscopy.
Postoperatively, pendulum exercises were started from the 2nd post-operative day. Shoulder range of motion exercises (active and passive) were started from the 2nd week. At 2 years follow-up, plain radiographs of the right shoulder confirmed united greater and lesser tuberosities (, ). Functional outcome assessed by shoulder range of motion during final follow-up revealed abduction of 160°, flexion of 140° and 30° degrees of internal and external rotations, and excellent UCLA score of 30 (range 16–35).