Our patient was a 4-year-old previously healthy female who came in at a peripheral hospital for intense pain in the left foot and one-week history of cyanotic discoloration in her left toes. The discoloration progressed rapidly and involved the dorsal surface of the left foot . The working impression at the peripheral hospital at first was a possible snakebite since the family lived in a rural area were the incidence of scorpions or snakes was highly considered, also the history had poor reliability. They introduced five vials of snake anti-venom along with acetaminophen for pain and kept her for four hours for observation and eventually discharged her with instructions on when to return to the Emergency Department (ED) for further follow-up. The left foot discoloration has been completely resolved in two days after first presentation to the ED. However, within five days after the resolution of the left foot discoloration, the right foot had exhibited the discoloration at the toes where the patient presented to the ED.
Her left foot and toes had completely resolved within a couple of days but her right foot started to develop the same symptoms, bringing her back to the ED .
The patient had no history of fever, weight loss, or appetite changes. There was no history of rashes, and the other limbs or joints were unaffected. She had no history of headaches, blurry vision, chest pain, palpitations, and respiratory symptoms. She had an unremarkable antenatal and neonatal history. Past medical and family histories were negative for rheumatological diseases or similar episodes. She was not on any medication nor had she received any vaccinations recently. Both parents were college graduates with good socioeconomic status.
There was a history of COVID-19 infection one year prior, where she developed a mild upper respiratory tract infection that did not require hospitalization and was managed conservatively. Two days before her presentation to our ED, her father had a positive nasopharyngeal swab test for COVID-19 reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) as he had an upper respiratory tract infection for the past week.
Upon examination, the child was alert, active, and anxious but was not in distress. She noted severe pain in her right foot and an inability to ambulate. Her vital signs were as follows: temperature, 37.2 °C; heart rate, 110 bpm; blood pressure, 105/65 mmHg; respiratory rate, 23 bpm; and glucose, 4.5 mmol. Her oxygen saturation level was 100% in ambient air. Lower limb examination showed five cyanotic toes on the right foot that extended to the dorsal and plantar surfaces . The pulses of the dorsalis peds, posterior tibia, and popliteal arteries were palpable. The oxygen saturation of the toes was normal. The results of cardiorespiratory and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
Initial laboratory evaluation showed mild thrombocytosis, high alanine transaminase (ALT) level, mildly high direct bilirubin level, and a significantly high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) .
The patient was then admitted for further investigation. Advanced imaging was performed using a computed tomography angiogram of the lower limbs, which showed mild-to-moderate attenuation of the right anterior and posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries .
COVID-19 was diagnosed using Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing and serology was positive for Immunoglobulin G (IGG) and Immunoglobulin G (IgM). The patient was placed on airborne precaution and started on pulse steroids protocol 30 mg per Kg infusion over 3 h given as an in-patient which followed by oral prednisolone at dose of 1 mg per kg once daily for five days as an outpatient then it was discontinued. In addition to two doses of IL-6 (12 mg/kg; tocilizumab). Also, received single dose of intravenous immunoglobulin (2 g per kilogram). Multiple specialties were consulted during admission. The hematology service recommended to measure serum protein S and C which were found to be not significantly elevated above the normal limit. Also, they recommend that the patient start Enoxaparin at a dose of 0.5 mg per kg per dose every 12 h subcutaneously for twenty-one days as recommended by the in-house consultant hematologist and was discontinued before discharge. Pediatric orthopedics advised fasciotomy to preserve homeostasis. In addition, vascular surgeons were consulted and advised that no further interventions were needed, as there was only a mild attenuation. On the tenth day of her initial symptoms, the patient's right foot became darker and charcoal in color with preserved pulses and oxygen saturation on the toes .
On the fourteenth day of admission, after medical and surgical interventions, her right foot and toes markedly improved in color, the pain subsided, and she was able to ambulate. The patient was discharged during the follow-up. The patient was seen one month later with significant improvement on the dorsal surface of the foot and some fingers. Four months later, the patient lost her second toe due to autoamputation as a complication . However, she was doing well with complete resolution of the signs and symptoms of her right foot and was able to walk without pain.