In 2018, the 7-year-old girl was referred to our outpatient clinic, due to recurrent left ankle sprain and pain in the lateral malleolus area. Two years before, in 2016, the patient suffered a severe supination-distortion trauma of the left ankle after another child jumped on her left foot on the trampoline. Ankle pain and instability resulted during sports and normal walking.
The X-ray showed an os subfibulare, a supernumerary bone of the lateral malleolus, with no other radiological abnormalities. A conservative treatment was started with physical therapy for proprioception training and strengthening of the lateral ligaments. Initially, the symptoms improved.
Three years later, she was sent again by her pediatrician due to persistent and progressive symptoms. The patient meanwhile suffered from left ankle pain during activities of daily living, for example, with normal walking and cycling. Sports were no longer possible.
A tenderness over the subfibulare bone, the tip of the fibula and at the ATFL on the left, was reported. In addition, there was a significant lateral instability of the left ankle with a positive anterior drawer sign. The peripheral sensorimotor function and blood circulation were intact.
The X-ray (left ankle, AP and lateral view, standing) showed the os subfibulare and an otherwise normal upper ankle joint . Meanwhile, compared to the X-rays from 2018 , there was a marked cystic, sclerosed lesion in the marginal portion of the distal fibular epiphysis adjacent to the os subfibulare.
In addition, subchondral bone cysts of the distal fibular epiphysis as well as bone marrow edema in the subfibulare bone and in the fibular epiphysis were found in magnetic resonance imaging of the left upper ankle. The lateral ligaments were elongated and the ATFL was attached to the os subfibulare .
As in 2018, we first started again with a conservative treatment. We advised her to do without sports and to wear an ankle brace for 6 weeks. We reinstalled the physiotherapy for strengthening of the musculature and proprioception training. The patient was then seen in our outpatient clinic after 6 and 12 weeks without any improvement.
Due to the lack of response to conservative management , the high level of suffering of the patient, the significant instability of the ankle and the radiological findings, the decision was made to proceed with surgical treatment.
In similar cases without edema or cysts in the distal fibular epiphysis, we usually perform a resection of the os subfibulare and a Broström/Gould operation with reattachment of the ATFL to the fibula . Due to the pathological changes at the desired anchor entry point in the distal fibula with suspected questionable stable fixation at the anatomically correct attachment point of the ATFL, we made the decision to reattach the ATFL to the talus instead.
The operation was performed in the supine position under general anesthesia. Non-sterile thigh tourniquet was used. First, we marked the anatomical landmarks and the os subfibulare using the portable X-ray. A slightly curved incision was made from the anterior edge of the fibula in line with the ATFL in an anteroventral direction onto the talus of approximately 4 cm. The individual layers were split until the extensor retinaculum was clearly visible. We slightly detached the distal portion of the retinaculum. Next, we exposed the anterior talofibular ligament, which was intact. In the neutral position of the foot, the ATFL was elongated without tension and the lateral instability could be reproduced intraoperatively. The subfibulare bone was located underneath the ATFL .
We detached the ATFL from the subfibulare bone while the attachment at the distal fibula was left intact and untouched. The subfibulare bone could be gradually removed from the ATFL in toto .
We followed the ligament to the talar attachment, which was then detached. A 1.8 mm Q-Fix anchor (All-Suture Anchor; Smith and Nephew) was placed at the anatomic talar attachment point. Using the sutures form the anchor, the ATFL was reinforced in a baseball-stitch manner and secured to the anchor.
This was performed in a neutral position of the ankle (0° dorsiflexion) and slight pronation of the foot putting the ATFL under moderate tension .
For reinforcement, the extensor retinaculum was stretched over the ATFL with a 3.0 Vicryl suture. Finally, a layered wound closure was done.
Postoperatively, the ankle was immobilized in a high walker boot for a total of 6 weeks with a partial weight-bearing of 15 kg. After 2 weeks, the foot was allowed to be carefully mobilized passively and actively-assisted from the walker boot with physiotherapy while strictly avoiding supination and forced plantar flexion movements.
Six weeks after the operation, the boot was changed to a simple laced upper ankle joint orthosis, with transition to full weight-bearing. The X-ray showed complete removal of the os subfibulare . Physiotherapy was adapted to improve mobility and to gain muscle strength with proprioception and coordination training. Return to sports 3 months postoperatively was encouraged.