A 38-year-old male presented to our outpatient clinic with the complaints of swelling and pain around the posterior of the ankle for the past 3 months. We revealed that he underwent an open repair of the Achilles’ tendon after it was cut by a piece of glass at 3 years of age. The operation report indicated that silk was utilized for the repair of the Achilles’ tendon.
On physical examination, a quasi-solid soft tissue mass, almost 3 cm × 3 cm in size, painful with palpation, was noted on the former incision scar of the ankle . There was neither fistula nor drainage. Muscle power of the plantar flexion was graded as 5/5 in addition to a slightly limited range of motion in the ankle due to pain. The infection parameters, white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation, and C-reactive protein were normal in the laboratory tests (8 × 103/mL and 5 mm/h, 2 mg/L, respectively). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed a lesion of 3 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm with low signal on both T1 and T2, and the zone around the lesion demonstrated low signal on T1 and high signal on T2, consistent with granulomatosis formation with reactive tissues around . Similarly, an ultrasound revealed a heterogeneous cystic mass with echogenic material associated with the Achilles’ tendon. Together all pointed to the possibility of a chronic infection at the ankle. Aspiration of the mass showed a serohemorrhagic fluid which had negative cultures. Due to normal laboratory results and no bacteria in the culture, our initial diagnosis was that the patient had a foreign body reaction. As a result, an operation was undertaken by the senior author based on the preliminary diagnosis, physical, and radiological examination.
A prophylactic single dose of cefazolin administered 1 h before spinal anesthesia. The patient was put into sleep in prone position under spinal anesthesia, and a knee above tourniquet was fastened. An incision approximately 8 cm which included the former one was longitudinally made just medially to Achilles’ tendon. There was no sign of infection at the ankle. After the enough exposure, the granulomatosis tissue was excised. Suture materials were detected inside the mass . After excision of the mass, the defect about 3 cm on the tendon was repaired with polyethylene non-absorbable sutures. At the operation, the mass was dispatched to pathology and culture. After 1-wound drain was put inside the wound, the subcutaneous tissue and skin were primarily closed. Finally, a below knee circular cast was applied with the ankle at 10° of plantar flexion.
Histopathological examination indicated classical findings of the foreign body reaction: Hemosiderin-loaded macrophages, giant cells, and eosinophilic infiltration. No microorganism was derived from the wound culture. 3 weeks after the operation, the circular cast was removed and the patient was followed up with an air cast until the 6th week.
At the 12th month follow-up, the patient had no complaint and functional evaluation was excellent based on AOFAS .