The patient was a 33-year-old parous woman. When the patient was 30 y.o., she underwent left salpingo-oophorectomy due to a serous borderline tumor, FIGO stage Ia. Three years after the surgery, she started infertility screening and intercourse timing therapy. During the screening and treatment, a 35-mm cystic mass with a solid part in the remaining right ovary was identified, and she was then referred to our hospital. Transvaginal ultrasonography and MRI revealed a cystic mass with solid part in the right ovary similar to the previous left ovarian tumor . The preoperative diagnosis was a recurrent right ovarian serous borderline tumor after left salpingo-oophorectomy. We first recommended right salpingo-oophorectomy, total hysterectomy, and omentectomy to the patient; however, she and her husband strongly desired to preserve fertility. We then proposed fertility-preserving surgery (FPS) which preserves the normal part of the ovary, since numerous successful cases have already been reported by this procedure . However, they refused FPS due to the risk of recurrence. In addition, they refused ordinary transvaginal oocyte retrieval because of possible tumor dissemination caused by ovarian puncture. Ovarian tissue cryopreservation was also refused due to the risk of tumor reimplantation. Eventually, we devised a method of retrieving oocytes ex-vivo from the surgically resected ovary allowing us to cure the tumor and preserve fertility simultaneously. This strategy was approved by the ethics committee of our institute, and the following procedures were performed after obtaining a written consent.
Preoperative blood sampling showed AMH of 4.78 ng/mL, indicating that her ovarian function was preserved. We set the operation day between the 7th to 9th day of menstruation before the predominant follicle appears. However, because the menstruation was delayed, right salpingo-oophorectomy and partial omentectomy were performed on the third day of menstruation. The serum level of progesterone on the operation day was still high, at 3.6 ng/mL. Five thousand units of hCG (Mochida, Japan) were intramuscularly administered 35 h before the expected time of removal of the ovary, according to a previous report describing that the maturation rate of IVM increases when hCG is administered before oocyte retrieval . At that time, six follicular follicles smaller than 10 mm were observed in the right ovary by transvaginal ultrasound. During laparotomy, there was no peritoneal dissemination, and cytology of ascites was negative. In order to minimize the ischemic time, ovarian vessels were amputated as the last step of surgery. We immediately retrieved oocytes from the resected ovary on a workbench in the operating room. The procedure of oocyte retrieval from the resected ovary is shown in Fig. . The location of the tumor was carefully determined by palpation and ultrasound . In the normal ovarian region, five grossly visible follicles were identified. They were subsequently punctured, and the follicular fluid was aspirated using an 18-gauge needle . Then, invisible follicles were retrieved by aspiration of the entire ovarian cortex . Accordingly, eight immature oocytes were obtained, and subjected to IVM. We used SAGE In Vitro Maturation Media Kit (CooperSurgical Inc., USA) based on the manufacturer’s instructions. Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 75 IU and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 5000 IU were added to the oocyte maturation medium. IVM resulted in six mature oocytes: two at 24 h, three at 28 h, and one at 52 h. ICSI was then applied for fertilization, and three embryos were obtained. They were cryopreserved by the vitrification method on Day 3 (8-cell Veeck2, 4-cell Veeck2, 5-cell Veeck2).
The postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological diagnosis was a serous borderline tumor of the right ovary, and no additional treatment was given. Three months after the surgery, we planned a frozen-thawed embryo transfer using the same procedure as that of usual IVF-ET. Since the bilateral ovaries had been removed, a hormone replacement cycle was needed. From the third day of menstruation (Day 3), conjugated estrogens (1.25 mg/day, daily) were administered orally and increased to 1.875 mg/day from Day 9. Oral administration of chlormadinone acetate (6 mg/day, daily) was initiated on Day 21. Approximately 58 h after the start of chlormadinone acetate, we conducted a single embryo transfer, 8-cell Veeck2, and confirmed a positive urine hCG two weeks after embryo transfer. Then, conjugated estrogens were switched to transdermal estradiol absorption formulation (1.44 mg, every other day), and chlormadinone acetate was replaced with transvaginal progesterone (600 mg/day, daily). Hormone replacement was discontinued at ten weeks of pregnancy. Although the subsequent pregnancy course was uneventful, the patient was admitted to the hospital due to nausea and vomiting at 36 weeks of gestation and diagnosed with intestinal obstruction. Emergency cesarean section and intestinal obstruction repair were performed. The cause of the bowel obstruction was adhesion of the ileal terminal and sigmoid colon. The postoperative course was uneventful, the newborn’s condition was good (2906-g boy), and no anomaly was observed.