Here, we present a 67-year-old man who underwent heart transplantation (biatrial anastomosis) because of ischaemic heart disease in 2003. He underwent aortic valve replacement because of severe aortic stenosis in 2010. The patient presented with progressive severe dyspnoea [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III] in 2018 and signs of right heart failure with ascites. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal graft and aortic prosthesis function, but massive tricuspid regurgitation of functional aetiology with dilated right ventricle (56 mm basal), right atrium (53.5 cm2), and impaired right ventricular function (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion 14 mm) (, Videos S1 and S2, ). Additional medical history comprised chronic kidney disease (stage G3b) and persistent atrial fibrillation. Liver function was slightly impaired with decreased albumin (34 g/L) and cholinesterase (4.3 kU/L), mild increase in bilirubin (2 mg/dL), and normal alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase.
The heart team decision was an interventional approach using the Cardioband System (Cardioband, Edwards Lifesciences) to treat TR based on the high risk associated with a third cardiac surgery and impaired right ventricular function. Coronary angiography excluded relevant allograft vasculopathy. Cardiac computed tomography was performed for the planning of the procedure which estimated a 112.8 mm device length according to annulus circumference and showed acceptable proximity of the right coronary artery . The procedure was performed in general anaesthesia with transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) guidance. Starting anterior close to the aorta the Cardioband was implanted clockwise along the tricuspid annulus using 16 anchors (device size E) . The aortic valve prosthesis moderately impaired echocardiographic visualization particularly around the inferior segments in this case. Finally, the Cardioband was successively cinched under TOE control to the maximum stage 5.0 . Tricuspid regurgitation improved from massive [vena contracta (VC) 16 mm, effective regurgitation orifice area 0.79 cm2, mean pressure gradient 1.6 mmHg, coaptation gap 7 mm] to mild (VC 3 mm, no coaptation gap) with a mean pressure gradient of 2.9 mmHg and a reduction in annular diameter from 41 mm to 36 mm in the four-chamber view (, Videos S3 and S4, ). The patient improved to NYHA Class II at 3 months follow-up visit with a decrease of NTproBNP levels from 6361 ng/L to 3291 ng/L after 6 months.