A 54-year-old Mexican woman, resident of Mexico City, was referred for evaluation to our Endocrinology department due to severe and painful edema of her legs accompanied by indurate skin tumors, along with palpebral edema and generalized joint pain that caused difficulty in ambulation. She had a family history of gastric cancer (mother) but no history of thyroid disease or other autoimmune diseases. She had a history of appendectomy 15 years ago and GD was diagnosed 2 years ago, which was treated with radioactive iodine (20 mCi of I131). She was on thyroid hormone replacement with levothyroxine at time of evaluation. She had no other medical or psychosocial history of relevance.
The physical examination revealed bilateral exophthalmos, grittiness, and swollen eyelids leading to mechanical ptosis, and well-demarcated thick erythematous lesions in both legs and feet, indurated and painful on palpation with appearance of peau d’orange (pretibial myxedema) and skin nodules of 0.5 cm . The rest of the examination was normal.
Laboratory tests reported a normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 2.5 μU/mL (reference 0.27 to 4.2 μU/mL) with free thyroxin (fT4) level of 1.4 ng/dl (0.93 to 1.7 ng/dl), and anti-TSH receptor (anti-sTSHr) antibodies of 49.4 IU/L (range 0 to 1.75 IU/L). Bone dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) reported a T-score in her hip of − 1.09, Z-score of 0.44 (osteopenia), and in column a T-score of − 2.82 and Z score of − 1.05 (osteoporosis). Radiographic findings in her hands and feet showed joint space narrowing of the proximal phalanges, carpometacarpal joints, and tarsometacarpal joints, and periostitis, compatible with hypertrophic osteoarthropathy . Due to the severity of the edema , it was decided to evaluate skin histopathology of her legs that disclosed pretibial myxedema. In view of her history of thyroid disease and involvement of eyes, skin, and joints, she was diagnosed as having EMO syndrome.
Regarding her treatment, she received methotrexate over a 1-year period with weekly increasing doses up to 15 mg. In addition, she was treated with weekly up-titrating doses of prednisone (15 to 25 mg/day), without clinical improvement. Because of this lack of effectiveness, we decided to suspend methotrexate and prednisone (progressive decrease of 5 mg every week until definitive suspension) and prescribed rituximab after an adequate evaluation discarding viral infections such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, bacterial and fungal infections (through blood culture), and tuberculosis. She also had a normal blood count and hypo/agammaglobulinemia was ruled out (as indicated by our Rheumatology department). Six months after addition of rituximab (two doses of 500 mg by intravenous injection 2 weeks apart), there was a significant clinical improvement. Eight months after treatment, myxedema and nodules disappeared and she recovered her leg movement capacity without pain. During her last evaluation a year after treatment, slight exophthalmos still persisted, but there were no clinical signs of eye inflammation, she could close her eyelids without difficulty, and her eye movements are preserved.