A 78-year-old woman with a history of atrial cardiomyopathy, sinus node disease and long-standing dual-chamber pacemaker presented with palpitations and an incessant atrial tachycardia despite antiarrhythmic therapy, leading to tachycardia induced cardiomyopathy. Atrial cardiomyopathy was diagnosed on the basis of structural and electrophysiological changes such as the presence of sinus node disease, documentation of several previous atrial tachycardias, and significant atrial enlargement. She was medicated with rivaroxaban 20 mg i.d., amiodarone 200 mg i.d., and bisoprolol 5 mg b.i.d. Physical examination was unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 40%, global hypokinesia of the left ventricle, and dilation of both atria (left atrium volume of 45 mL/m2 and right atrium of 32 mL/m2). Twelve-lead electrocardiogram of the tachycardia showed a regular, narrow QRS with a ventricular rate of 120 beats per minute (b.p.m.) and a 2:1 conduction, with positive F waves in lead V1, isoeletric in lead II, suggestive of atypical atrial flutter .
Electrophysiological (EP) study was performed after transoesophageal echocardiogram that excluded intracavitary thrombi and identified a patent foramen ovale. Intracardiac electrogram (EGM) showed a regular tachycardia with 2:1 conduction, a tachycardia cycle length (TCL) of 230 ms, and a proximal to distal coronary sinus (CS) activation . Right atrium (RA) mapping was performed using CARTO™ (Biosense Webster, Inc.) three-dimensional navigation system and PentaRay™ (Biosense Webster, Inc.) high density catheter. Voltage map showed extensive scarring in the right posterior wall and around the inferior vena cava (see , —right panel). Propagation mapping documented two independent activation wavefronts, circulating the cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI) in a counterclockwise manner. Each wave followed the same circuit at the same time and had a TCL of 460 ms, that is, twice the apparent tachycardia cycle length (see , —left panel). Entrainment manoeuvres were not performed at the risk of terminating the tachycardia. The presence of an atrial ectopy resulted in reset of the tachycardia followed by an alternating cycle length of 258 and 209 ms . The sum of both these intervals was double the TCL, suggesting a double-wave mechanism. Cavotricuspid isthmus ablation was performed using Thermocool Smarttouch™ catheter (Biosense Webster, Inc.) with a power setting of 35 W, contact force of 5–30 g, and an Ablation Index™ (Biosense Webster, Inc.) target value of 450 (see , ).
This ablation resulted in conversion of the atrial flutter into a distinct tachycardia with simultaneous proximal and distal CS activation and a cycle length of 250 ms, suggestive of left atrial roof origin . Left atrium (LA) access was established via the patent foramen ovale, and mapping was performed with PentaRay™ (Biosense Webster, Inc.) catheter. A complex left atrial macrore-entrant tachycardia with an earliest pseudofocal activation at the proximal insertion of the Marshall ligament, below the left pulmonary veins, was noted. Extensive scarring of the LA was also evident on the voltage map (see , ).
Linear ablation in this location (see , ) led to slowing of TCL to 435 ms with change to concentric CS activation, so a new RA map was obtained. Once again, a CTI dependent atrial flutter with counterclockwise activation was noted, but this time with only one wavefront (see , ). Comparison of EGM tracings from double to single-wave showed the same activation sequence in the CS decapolar catheter . Further ablation with a second, more lateral, line in the CTI (see , ) led to interruption of the tachycardia. Bidirectional CTI block was confirmed and no tachycardia was induced at the end of the procedure.
Ultimately, given the extensive atrial scarring and high probability of arrhythmic recurrence, atrioventricular (AV) node ablation was performed. The pacemaker was programmed as DDD at 80 b.p.m.
At follow-up 12 months after ablation, the patient has experienced no recurrent palpitations or symptoms of heart failure. Interrogation of the device showed paroxysmal recurrence of atrial high rate episodes that were self-limited.