A 21-year-old woman, previously a healthy, nonsmoking woman, with no known history of surgical and chronic diseases, presented to our emergency department with a complaint of severe generalized abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting for 3 days and lower limb edema for 3 weeks. She had no history of similar conditions. Her family history was unremarkable. On examination, she looked ill; she had a swollen face and was in some distress. Physical examination of the cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous systems was unremarkable. Her abdomen was mildly distended; she had diffuse pain and rebound tenderness in her abdomen; and she had significant guarding around her abdomen. There was no evidence of organomegaly. Bowel sounds were normal on auscultation of the abdomen. The patient had bilateral grade 2 lower limb edema reaching the knees. Her vital signs were as follows: pulse 70 bpm, blood pressure 110/80, respiratory rate 16, and temperature 36.9°C.
Laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 12.5 g/dl, aspartate aminotransferase 87 U/l, alanine aminotransferase 102 U/l, urea of 56 mg/dl, creatinine of 1.5 mg/dl, serum sodium 132 mmol/l, and potassium of 3.72 mmol/l. Total protein was 3.99 g/dl, albumin was 1.88 g/dl, total cholesterol was 310 mg/dl, and low-density lipoprotein was 218 mg/dl, prothrombin time 14 s, international normalized ratio 0.9, fibrinogen 2.02 g/l (normal range: 2–4 g/l), d-dimer 2.5 mcg/ml (normal range: 0–0.5 mcg/ml), and activated partial thromboplastin time 24 s. Protein was detected in urinalysis, and the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio resulted in 14.27 g/day. A chest radiograph revealed mild pleural effusion. Abdominal doppler ultrasound was performed and showed features of PVT. An abdominal computed tomography scan with contrast enhancement was ordered and showed filling defects in the lumen of the portal vein, suggesting PVT . On the basis of the above-mentioned results, the patient was admitted to our internal medicine unit with the established diagnosis of NS complicated by PVT. She was started with methylprednisolone, ramipril, atorvastatin, and furosemide, and low–molecular-weight heparin. After 2 days, warfarin was added to her regimen. Her symptoms improved after 1 week of hospitalization; her abdominal pain and lower limb edema decreased. After 2 weeks of treatment, her urine protein-to-creatinine ratio was decreased to 5 g/day and she was discharged in good health. The patient had returned for her routine follow-up 3 weeks later after discharge, and her general health condition was very good. She did not have any abdominal pain, and her urine protein-to-creatinine ratio was 1.8 g/day. The follow-up abdominal ultrasound did not reveal any thrombus or dilated portal vein.