A 38-year-old female developed symptoms of headache, dizziness, occasional diplopia and drooping of the left eyelid. Imaging confirmed a large left suprasellar mass (3.5 cm in diameter) with midbrain compression, suggesting a meningioma [Figures , and ]. A biopsy via a right pterional approach at an outside institution showed a benign spindle-cell neoplasm. The material was too small to definitively distinguish between meningioma and schwannoma. No tumor was resected at this operation. At MDACC her examination confirmed a bi-temporal hemianopsia related to previous surgery. There were no clinical signs of oculomotor palsy. The preoperative diagnosis in our patient was a meningioma, given the paucity of clinical findings. A left pterional craniotomy, drilling of the sphenoid wing and wide splitting of the Sylvian fissure for tumor access was carried out. The tumor was well encapsulated. After substantial debulking of the mass, the third nerve appeared from the interpeduncular cistern as a bundle and ran straight into the base of the mass. No other significant attachments of the tumor were recognized. Postoperatively, the patient developed complete third nerve paralysis on the left side. At 6-month follow-up, she continued to have complete third nerve palsy with no evidence of residual tumor [Figures , and ].
Pathologic description: Multiple rubbery fragments of tumor aggregated to a mass about 3.5 cm in diameter. Multiple histologic sections showed typical appearance of a benign schwannoma with short-spindled cells and random nuclear pleomorphism . Most of the tissue was the denser, more organized, Antoni A type, with very few Antoni B areas. No Verocay bodies were seen. Focal perivascular hemorrhage was identified. Occasional histiocytes and small aggregates of mature lymphocytes were sometimes present around blood vessels . A few blood vessels showed mural hyalinization. Immunohistochemistry for S-100 protein showed diffuse strong nuclear and cytoplasmic reactivity in the schwannoma . Because of the consideration of meningioma, an immunohistochemical stain for epithelial membrane antigen was performed but was entirely nonreactive .