An 11 year old male with CF (homozygous for ΔF508), mild lung disease and pancreatic insufficiency presented with facial swelling that progressed to generalized anasarca over four days. There was a history of preceding upper respiratory symptoms. He denied any change in his urine color or bowel habit and there was no history of headache, visual disturbance, jaundice, chest pain or palpitation. The patient remained on his regular medications which included albuterol, multivitamins and pancreatic enzymes.
He was admitted with similar symptoms 6 months prior to this admission. At that time he had hypoalbuminemia without proteinuria on a random urine sample. An extensive workup was negative including liver function tests, viral hepatitis panel, Alpha 1 antitrypsin (stool, blood), abdominal ultrasound and upper GI endoscopy. He was treated with albumin infusion and furosemide and no corticosteroids were needed. However, the etiology for the hypoalbuminemia was uncertain.
On this admission, he had mildly elevated blood pressure at 131/73. His weight was 46.7 kg with 8 kg of recent weight gain. He had periorbital and facial edema and moderate pitting edema of both lower extremities and around the sacral area. Otherwise physical examination was normal.
Laboratory evaluations showed hypoalbuminemia (1.6 mg/dl) with normal kidney function (BUN of 11 mg/dl, creatinine of 0.4 mg/dl and normal urine microscopic evaluation without evidence of RBC casts). 24 hour urine collection revealed nephrotic range proteinuria (3 gm/24 hour). Other laboratory evaluations were normal including ASO, C3, C4 and ANA. He underwent percutaneous renal biopsy which revealed minimal change disease. The interstitium showed scattered mixed mononuclear inflammation with rare eosinophils and neutrophils without any evidence of fibrosis. There was no immune deposit and no significant glomerulosclerosis. The patient was treated successfully with oral corticosteroids 2 mg/kg/day and achieved remission after about six weeks of therapy.