A 36-year-old Iranian man, married, and resident in Shiraz, Fars Province in the south of Iran, presented to our institute with the chief complaint of proximal upper and lower extremities muscle weakness. His problem started 5 months ago when he noticed a lack of strength of his proximal muscles, often causing difficulties climbing stairs, standing, or walking. He did not complain of any weight change, sleep or mood disorder, headache, or visual changes. There was no surgical history, and no family history for endocrine or rheumatologic disorders. The patient is a water pipe smoker.
He visited an outpatient clinic and, according to his proximal myopathy and heliotrope rash (based on the rheumatologist note) with the impression of dermatomyositis, prednisolone and azathioprine were prescribed, which did not improve his symptoms and, owing to gradual progression of myopathy, he was wheelchair dependent.
Four months later, he was referred by his physician for hospital admission and evaluation. On admission, he had a pulse rate of 92 beats per minute and blood pressure of 145/90 mmHg. His physical examination was normal, except a decrease in muscle power and deep tendon reflexes (muscle power was 4/5 in shoulders and arms, 3/5 in thigh muscles, biceps and triceps deep tendon reflexes were 1/2, and patella deep tendon reflex was 0/2). He failed to rise from squatting position and from sitting with arms crossed. His physical examination did not show any evidence of moon face, purple striae on the abdomen, easy bruising, buffalo hump, or visual abnormality .
The patient was admitted to the rheumatology department. Initial workup showed normal muscle enzymes. Full serology of the patient is presented in Table .
Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) revealed a decreased velocity in muscle fiber conduction, indicative of a neuromyopathic process, and recommended that paraneoplastic syndromes should be considered. For locating primary malignancy, some imaging studies were performed including chest X-ray, abdomen–pelvic sonography, brain computed tomography (CT) scan, and lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Abdomen–pelvic sonography findings were unremarkable; Lumbosacral MRI showed decreased vertebral body height with enhancement noted in multiple lumbar vertebral bodies (especially in L3), suggestive of multilevel pathologic fracture, and atrophic change of paraspinal muscles. Brain CT scan showed a round, well-defined hyperdense structure measuring 14 × 13 mm in the sellar and suprasellar areas, with the possibility of anterior communicating artery aneurysmal dilation or sellar mass.
Brain MRI demonstrated a 30 × 12 mm homogeneously enhancing mass in the sellar region with extension to the suprasellar region and a pressure effect on the optic chiasma and invasion to the right side of the cavernous sinus and involvement of posterior clinoid processes, suggestive of pituitary macroadenoma versus meningioma .
Table demonstrates the endocrine workup of the patient .
Following the diagnosis of Cushing’s disease, trans-sphenoidal surgery was scheduled for the patient. Pathologic report of pituitary lesion was signed out as pituitary adenoma.
In the follow-up visit, 2 months after trans-sphenoidal surgery (TSS), the patient’s condition had partially improved. He was on levothyroxine 100 µg daily, his muscle weakness improved, and he can walk using a walker; his proximal muscle power was 4/5 in lower extremities.
At this time, follow-up MRI was performed, which showed a 28 × 14 × 13.4 mm sellar mass, isointense in T2W1 and hypersignal in T1W1 with extension to the suprasellar region. We did not find suppression of cortisol after low-dose (4 mg) dexamethasone (cortisol: 283.9 ng/mL; normal (NL): 54.9–287.5 ng/mL). The endocrinology and neurosurgery teams of our institute decided to reoperate. The patient underwent further surgery 6 months after the first operation, and now, 1 year after the second operation, he is not wheelchair bound, can walk without help, and uses levothyroxine 100 µg daily, testosterone 250 mg monthly, alendronate 70 mg weekly, and calcium and vitamin D supplements.