The patient was a 79-year-old man who presented bilateral upper and lower limb paralysis after falling while walking. He had left lateral upper arm pain. Manual muscle testing revealed the following results: Right deltoid muscle, 3; left deltoid muscle, 4; right biceps muscle, 3; left biceps muscle, 4; right triceps muscle, 3; left triceps muscle 4; bilateral wrist flexors, 3/3; right wrist extensors, 2; left wrist extensors, 4; bilateral finger flexors, 2; right finger extensors, 1; left finger extensors, 2; right lower extremities, 1; left lower extremities, 0. His deep tendon reflex was decreased on the bilateral upper limb, and his bilateral patella tendon reflex showed hyperreflexia. Computed tomography showed the fracture through the right TF at C5 . Functional cervical X-ray showed no instability but slight posterior spondylolisthesis of C5. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed VA stenosis at the C5 level and wall irregularity distal of the stenotic lesion . We performed DSA and determined the necessity of embolization for VAI before direct cervical spine surgery. Right VA angiography showed no intimal flap, with only slight stenosis at the C5 level . The plan for cervical spine surgery was only to perform posterior decompression. Fixation was considered unnecessary. We decided not to embolize the VA based on the angiogram findings: Slight stenosis without obvious dissection. The next afternoon (17 h after injury), we performed C4-6 laminoplasty and dome-like laminectomy at C3 and C7. His medical history included cardiogenic cerebral embolism due to atrial fibrillation. Anticoagulant (Edoxaban) treatment was stopped from the day after injury to 2 days after spinal surgery.
After cervical spine surgery, he had no additional neurological deficit. However, at 3 and 4 days after the surgery, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed dot-like high signal at the right thalamus and right posterior lobe, and MRA showed that the right VA was almost completely occluded ( and ). The blood flow from the dissected site to the cranial region was already very low. Because the risk of additional neuro-ischemic disorder was considered low unless recanalization of the flow of right VA occurred, we observed the injured VA by follow-up MRA. At 8 days after surgery, the proximal flow of the right VA tended to be increased in comparison to that observed on three days after the surgery MRA, although the signal intensity of the intracranial right VA flow remained lower than that observed on MRA on admission . We performed VA embolization to prevent the scattering of emboli to the distal region during blood flow recanalization.
Under local anesthesia, a 6-Fr short sheath was inserted in the right brachial artery. A 4.2-Fr catheter (Hanaco Medical Co., Ltd, Saitama, Japan) was advanced into the right VA, because a 6-Fr guiding catheter could not be advanced to the right VA. The angiography of the right VA showed that the stenosis of the right VA at the C5 level had progressed in comparison to that observed on initial DSA . A Phenom 17 microcatheter (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was also advanced at the C6 level of VA. Using seven AXIUM PRIME detachable coils (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland), we achieved complete occlusion of the right VA ( and ). The blood supply from the left VA into the cranial region was observed to be sufficient. The patient did not experience any complications in association with endovascular treatment. After endovascular therapy, DWI shows no additional infarction.
The patient was transferred to the rehabilitation hospital 7 weeks after suffering cervical injury with a modified Rankin scale grade of 4. At that time, his MMT demonstrated a mild improvement compared to the pre-operative findings with the following scores: Right upper extremities, 3; left upper extremities, 4; and bilateral lower extremities, 3.