Our patient is a 55-year-old Ethiopian woman, gravida IV para III abortion 0, who gave birth to three children at home by spontaneous vaginal delivery. She presented to our hospital claiming she was carrying a dead fetus in her womb from a pregnancy that had been there for 22 years. The pregnancy lasted up to nine months uneventfully at which time the membrane ruptured and she went into labor. After 3 days of labor at home, she developed vaginal bleeding and visited a nearby hospital where she was informed that she had a uterine rupture which had to be operated on. However, she refused the surgery and went home. Over time she developed urinary incontinence.
She lost all her three children from an unspecified medical illness before their first birthday, although she claimed all the pregnancies and the labor were uneventful. Since the incident, she is divorced and lives alone supported by her sister.
At her current presentation, she had lower abdominal pain which had increased in severity, vaginal discharge, and urine per vagina since the onset of the condition. She had no other known medical illness.
On physical examination there was a gravid uterus of 20-week size and a non-tender, fixed, and firm abdominopelvic mass with no signs of fluid collection in her peritoneal cavity. There was a continuous leakage of urine through her vagina but a leak point was unidentified. Her vaginal canal was filled with a 4 cm by 5 cm, oval and stony hard mass.
Laboratory findings, complete blood count, and organ function tests were in the normal range. An abdominal ultrasound was difficult to perform as there was only shadowing in her pelvis from the bony structures and our patient was incontinent, therefore, she was unable to retain urine.
Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) findings: On the scanogram, multiple calcified tubular fetal parts were demonstrated in the pelvis of our patient . On the post-contrast images, the uterus was enlarged and the fundus extended up to the level of the umbilicus. Well-formed tubular bony parts were detected within the uterine cavity which had compressed and displaced the bladder. A diffuse pelvic and lower abdomen inflammation and focal adhesion of the uterus to the abdominal wall were additionally noted .
In January 2019, our patient underwent exploratory laparotomy. It was difficult to enter the peritoneal cavity because of the extensive adhesion of her uterus to the anterior abdominal wall. Her uterus was completely covered by the omentum forming a complex mass. Therefore, the peritoneal cavity was entered at the level of the epigastrium. Lysis of the adhesion and omentectomy were done starting from above to free her uterus from the anterior abdominal wall and the omentum which had gone into the uterine cavity through the anterior uterine wall rupture site.
Multiple pieces of old necrotic fetal bones were extracted from her uterine cavity and those that were difficult to separate from the complex mass were removed along with the mass, the uterus, and adnexa . Removal of the mass abdominally freed the fetal skull bones in the vagina; the fetal skull bones were later easily removed transvaginally. A 3 cm defect was identified on the upper anterior vaginal mucosa and bladder wall that was obscured by the fetal skull. A Foley catheter was left in situ to drain urine but it could not prevent leakage through the fistula.
She had a fairly stable postoperative course and was discharged with a referral to a fistula hospital for repair of the VVF.