A 90-year-old Hispanic male dairy farmer with a complex medical history notable for a left total hip arthroplasty (THA), bladder carcinoma in situ status-post intravesicular Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) (a live attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis) treatment, and chronic kidney disease who presented with subacute worsening pain of his left thigh. He had a THA placed thirty-one years previously. He had papillary bladder tumor status-post fulguration five years prior to admission with subsequent recurrence of bladder carcinoma in situ diagnosed a year later; he underwent six initial and six maintenance instillations of BCG treatment with remission of his bladder cancer.
Four years after BCG therapy, the patient developed new-onset drainage from the left lateral thigh. This was followed by swelling of his entire left thigh with increasing purulent discharge and pain with movement. He subsequently experienced chills, rigors, and a fever of 101 °F the morning prior to admission. On presentation he was afebrile with normal vital signs. His exam was significant for an open wound on the lateral left thigh with purulent drainage and surrounding erythema. Pain was noted adduction of the left hip. Initial laboratory tests were notable for a white blood cell count of 10,200 cells/mm3, a C-reactive protein of 9.7 mg/dL, and sedimentation rate of 71 mm/hr. Radiograph of the left hip showed “extensive lucencies” around the left THA .
The patient underwent incision and drainage with an antibiotic spacer placed following admission. Wound, hip fluid, and abscess cultures obtained during irrigation and debridement were negative for bacterial pathogens, however given his history of prior BCG therapy the microbiology laboratory was asked to additionally perform mycobacterial cultures and these grew acid-fast bacilli (AFB) concerning for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. After a brief course of clindamycin, ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and metronidazole, he was started on isoniazid 300 mg PO daily, rifampin 600 mg PO daily, pyrazinamide 1500 mg daily, ethambutol 1200 mg daily, and Vitamin B6 50 mg PO daily. He was placed in temporary airborne isolation while he had three sputa assessed for active pulmonary tuberculosis, which were negative for Mycobacterium spp. Nucleic Acid Amplification Testing (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, California) detected Mtb complex in his hip fluid culture.
Susceptibility testing for Mtb complex showed monoresistance to pyrazinamide, which was suggestive of M. bovis. As the patient had prior exposure to livestock and BCG therapy the isolate was further evaluated by spacer oligonucleotide typing (spoligotyping) and found by the California State Department of Health to be identical to that of the vaccine strain M. bovis BCG used previously in the treatment of his bladder cancer. The patient completed a 12 month course of rifampin, isoniazid and ethambutol without event and free of symptomatic, or radiographic recurrence.