A 22-year-old man presented to our hospital with ongoing dry cough for more than 1 month prior to admission. Other symptoms included chest pain, fatigue, low grade fever, and night sweats, which have worsened in the past 2 weeks. Physical examination revealed normal respiratory and heart function. Chest X-ray demonstrated mediastinal enlargement and left pleural effusion.
CECT images showed a walled cystic mass lesion measuring up to 56 × 50 mm in close proximity to the upper left atrium, ascending aorta and pulmonary artery, potentially localized in the pericardium, with a 10 mm endoatrial filling defect, findings were compatible with hydatid cyst, left pleural effusion and peripheral pulmonary upper left lobe consolidation .
On MRI and transesophageal ultrasound , an extracardiac multicameral cystic mass adjacent to the left atrium was observed, with a mass effect in the left upper pulmonary vein with no cardiac infiltration after contrast medium.
The patient underwent FNA of the upper left lobe consolidation and thoracocentesis for the cytological evaluation of the fluid. No malignancy was seen, while the biopsy evidenced the presence of pulmonary infarction.
As far as the imaging findings suspected a hydatid cyst, a test of antibody titers was performed and was negative.
After an intensive pre-operative work up and consultations and 7 days of premedication with albendazole, the patient underwent left anterolateral thoracotomy by thoracic surgeons. The opening of the pericardium was performed behind the phrenic nerve in order to follow from hilum of the lung the entrance of pulmonary veins intrapericardial. It was very difficult to localize the cystic mass once the pericardium was opened because of its retrocardiac location. In order to have a better access to the area where it was located, we decided to release the Botali duct. It took approximately 30 min to mobilize the cyst because it was densely adherent with the left atrium and in close proximity with left pulmonary veins compressing them. The cystic mass measured 5 cm in diameter and its content was completely removed after the surgical field was isolated with gauze impregnated with hypertonic solution (NaCl 10%). The cystic mass found was an echinococcal cyst with several daughter cysts measuring up to 10 mm within it. After removal of the daughter cysts and a partial resection of the pericyst, no involvement/penetration of the heart wall was found . The remained cavity of the cyst was washed out with hypertonic solution (NaCl 10%) and left open. A wedge resection of the left upper lobe consolidation area was performed (the biopsy of specimen confirmed lung infarction, as was previously reported on biopsy performed by FNA). The pericardium was left opened and before the closure of the chest cavity, a chest drain was placed next to the area of pericardiotomy. Postoperatively the patient had a good recovery and was discharged from the hospital 5 days later in good conditions and was treated with three courses of 28 days with albendazole 400 mg × 2 tb/day.