Frequent and urgent urination and discovery of an abdominal mass.
A 16-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with frequent and urgent urination. She had no nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or feeling of bloating. Gynecological examination using ultrasonography revealed no obvious uterine adnexal abnormalities. A hypoechoic cystic mass measuring approximately 173 mm × 84 mm × 138 mm with clear boundaries and an unclear blood flow signal was observed in the abdominal cavity, extending from the lower edge of the left liver lobe to the upper edge of the bladder.
The patient was in good health condition with no history of acute or chronic infectious diseases, no history of drug or food allergies, no history of surgery or trauma, and no history of blood transfusion. She was fully vaccinated per societal schedules.
The patient had a history of pancreatitis in the previous year, no history of hypertension or diabetes, and no family history of liver or renal cysts. Her family members had no similar medical history. Furthermore, she denied any history of familial hereditary diseases.
Physical examination revealed the following: Temperature, 36.8°C; heart rate, 108 beats/min; respiratory rate, 18 beats/min; and blood pressure, 114/82 mmHg. There was no yellowing of the skin or sclera, or swelling of superficial lymph nodes throughout the body. The neck was soft, and the chest was symmetrical, with no obvious abnormalities heard during cardiac and pulmonary auscultation. Her abdomen was flat. A mass measuring approximately 12 cm × 10 cm was palpated in the lower abdomen. The mass was soft in texture, with smooth surface, rounded edges, and clear boundaries, had a range of motion, and could be pushed forward without tenderness. It did not extend to the liver or spleen under the ribs, and Murphy’s sign was negative. There was no pain on percussion in the renal area and no bilateral lower limb edema. Her examination was negative for shifting dullness, and bowel sounds were normal.
Laboratory examination revealed the following: White blood cell count, 3.93 × 109/L; neutrophil percentage, 36.00%; neutrophil count, 1.421 × 109/L; hemoglobin concentration, 109.00 g/L; serum C-reactive protein level, 0.23 mg/L; β-human chorionic gonadotropin level, 0.23 mIU/mL; serum albumin level, 38.6 g/L; total bilirubin level, 21.0 μmol/L; and serum alanine aminotransferase level, 12.4 U/L. After 2 d of bladder fluid cultivation, no bacterial or fungal growth was observed. The remaining findings are shown in Tables -.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a giant cystic mass in the abdominal and pelvic cavities, possibly originating from the liver. Furthermore, a small amount of free fluid was observed in the pelvic cavity . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large cystic mass in the abdominal and pelvic cavities, with features suggesting a benign lesion .