A 2-year-old Indian girl was referred to the general dentistry clinic of Prestos Hospital of Nagpur for evaluation of green discoloration of her teeth. Her medical records revealed that she was a preterm baby born at 30 weeks gestation with a low birth weight of 1.5 kg. She had patent ductus arteriosus at birth which was closed after single dose of ibuprofen. She also had electrolyte imbalance and received intensive treatment for several months after birth. She had signs of respiratory distress for which she was kept on ventilator. She also had neonatal enterocolitis for which she was kept nil by mouth (NBM), and she had generalized edema for which she was given diuretics. Patient was severely jaundiced and her bilirubin levels increased from 29.8 mg/dL to 32.3 mg/dL within few days. She was diagnosed with neonatal cholestatic jaundice and neonatal sepsis with Staphylococcus aureus. On discharge, her bilirubin levels were 19.5 mg/dL and this further reduced to normal levels at approximately 4 months after birth.
The initial clinical examination of green teeth revealed completely erupted upper and lower primary incisors, erupting mandibular canines, and first molars. The clinical portion of incisors revealed a distinct green discoloration of incisal and middle one-third of the crowns in contrast to the normally colored cervical one-third . The child's mouth was otherwise exceptionally clean; the oral soft tissues were healthy, pink, and normal. Differential diagnosis included the following:
Extrinsic stains caused due to chromogenic bacteria.
Dentinogenesis imperfecta.
Amelogenesis imperfecta.
Rh incompatibility.
Based on the history, clinical findings, and investigations, we came to the final diagnosis of green pigmentation due to hyperbilirubinemia.
Parents were explained about poor esthetics due to green pigmentation and dental management for the same. They were also informed about probable involvement of permanent teeth. But as the patient was very young, the parents did not agree for any treatment at this stage. So they were explained the importance of oral hygiene and was kept on regular follow-ups.
On a follow-up visit, at thirty-six months of age, all her primary teeth were completely erupted and a striking demarcation was visible between the green incisal thirds and cusp tips and the normally colored cervical one-third of the clinical crown. A significant finding that was observed was that the greenish discoloration covered most of the crown structure of incisors while the discoloration reduced to only the incisal thirds in canines and was further reduced to the cuspal region in primary molars . The child continued to display good oral hygiene and healthy soft oral tissues.
The child reported for oral health checkup at 7 years of age. Intraoral findings revealed completely erupted permanent upper and lower incisors and first molars. These teeth did not display green pigmentation .