A previously healthy 66-year-old man fell off of his bicycle onto dry pavement, and sustained an open olecranon fracture of his left arm. He subsequently underwent open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), with insertion of an olecranon locking plate and two locking screws. Chlorhexidine-based sterilizing solution and peri-operative cefazolin were used in accordance with our institution’s protocols. The procedure was uncomplicated and the patient was discharged home on the third post-operative day.
Ten days after surgery, the patient developed increasing pain at the surgical site and noted green discharge from the wound. He was re-admitted to hospital for surgical drainage of the affected elbow, and piperacillin-tazobactam was prescribed empirically. Culture of the wound discharge yielded anaerobic spore-forming Gram-positive rods in broth media and anaerobic 5 % sheep blood agar, identified by the RapidANA® microbial identification system as C. difficile (profile 000010, 99.1 % probability). The aerobic cultures were negative. Given the rarity of C. difficile joint infections [, ], was reported as “Clostridium species” and the isolate was sent to the provincial reference laboratory for speciation. Our patient did not have any evidence of C. difficile-associated diarrhea and his stool specimen was negative for C. difficile toxin by PCR. He was subsequently treated with intravenous vancomycin and oral metronidazole, pending results of antimicrobial susceptibility testing.
At the Laboratoire de santé publique du Québec (LSPQ), latex agglutination (Microgen Bioproducts Ltd) yielded a positive result indicating a possible C. difficile strain. However, according to the manufacturer package insert, C. glycolicum is known to cross react with this reagent. The isolate was identified as C. glycolicum by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry using the bioMérieux VITEK MS system (IVD database version 2.0). The clinical isolate, designated LSPQ-04251, was definitively identified by 16S rRNA gene sequencing using a BigDye method with ABI3130 XL sequencing (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Pairwise nucleotide sequence similarities of the 16S rRNA gene indicated that the closest known relatives of the isolate were Clostridium glycolicum (99.3 %) (recently reclassified as Terrisporobacter glycolicus), and Clostridium mayombei (99.2 %) (recently reclassified as Terrisporobacter mayombei) . Based on the 16S rRNA gene sequence comparison, T. glycolicus and T. mayombei were genetically highly related, displaying 99.4 % sequence similarities with 0.6 % divergence. No further characterization of isolate LSP-04251 to separate both species T. glycolicus and T. mayombei, (requiring additional analysis of the genomic DNA G + C content, predominant cellular fatty acids and products from peptone yeast extract) was performed .
As there is little experience with clinical infections from these bacteria , we relied on minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) determination by Etest®, according to the manufacturer’s application guide, to guide antimicrobial treatment (see Table ). Treatment was changed to oral moxifloxacin and metronidazole due to logistical barriers to intravenous therapy in this patient and their excellent bioavailability and bone penetration [, ], for a total of 8 weeks. One year after stopping antibiotics, the patient was well, without signs of recrudescent infection.