In 2009, a 27-year-old woman was admitted to our psychiatric department. She had been found by emergency response firemen, sitting with her 8-month-old twin babies on the window ledge of her 9th floor apartment tossing personal effects into the air.
The patient had no prior personal or family psychiatric history. She was of Algerian origin and had arrived in France 18 months earlier. Her husband was unemployed, drug-dependent, and was rarely present at home. It had been her first pregnancy, and she had given birth to two girls via caesarean section, due to uterine haemorrhage during the 35th week of amenorrhoea.
Upon admission, an examination found fluctuating psychomotor agitation, anxiety, emotional lability, and impulsivity. The patient had incoherent speech, persecutory delusions, auditory hallucinations, and was disoriented in time and space. According to her family, symptoms had appeared three months earlier and had progressively worsened. She was not known to be taking any medications nor did she suffer from substance abuse. Considering the clinical picture and because of the presence of classical risk factors (first-time mother with multiple births associated with obstetrical complications, recent immigration, father of the children barely present), post-partum psychosis was firstly suspected even though the delayed onset of psychiatric symptoms 5 to 8 months after birth was longer than what is usually admitted for such a diagnosis . As a consequence, oral risperidone 2 mg daily and cyamemazine 30 mg daily were introduced. Forty-eight hours later, symptoms worsened, and the patient presented with permanent auditory hallucinations, psychomotor instability, as well as aggressive behaviour alternating with mutism, negativism, stereotypic gestures and diffuse rigidity with catalepsy. A vesperal aggravation was noted. According to DSM-IV and DSM-5 criteria, catatonia was diagnosed. Oral lorazepam was introduced and progressively increased until 12.5 mg daily. Because the clinical picture worsened and to avoid an evolution towards malignant catatonia, antipsychotics were stopped and complementary investigations were conducted.
Electroencephalography (EEG) showed a widespread slowing of background activity without sharp-waves, suggestive of encephalopathy. Brain imaging including CT-scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT-scan) were all normal. The patient was euthyroid but had elevated titres of anti-thyroglobulin (TGAB) and anti-thyroperoxidase (TPOAB) antibodies (200 and 10 times compared to normal, respectively). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed normal cell count, protein, and glucose levels. CSF cultures were negative and TGAB and TPOAB titres in the CSF were normal. Thyroid echography showed a heterogeneous gland without any sign of inflammation. No other abnormality was found from further testing, including blood tests for regular auto-immune disorders, serological tests for herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, viral hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, as well as blood sampling for vitamins B 12, PP, and ceruloplasmin.
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy (HE) was suspected given the association of high concentrations of anti-thyroid antibodies and the presence of an otherwise unexplained neuropsychiatric condition. Although medication with risperidone 2 mg daily, cyamemazine 30 mg daily, and eventually lorazepam 12.5 mg daily, was ongoing, no clinical amelioration was observed. Therefore, oral prednisolone was introduced at 60 mg daily. It was quickly followed by a dramatic improvement of the clinical picture; within 72 h, the patient was again oriented in time and space, and auditory hallucinations, as well as catatonia, disappeared. A follow-up EEG returned normal. Corticosteroid treatment was maintained at a dosage of 60 mg daily for a month before being progressively decreased and stopped within a year. In 2013, after three years of follow up, the patient still remained free of any psychiatric symptom.