An 18-year-old Caucasian man presented to his local hospital with acute shortness of breath (T = 0). Physical examination showed marked reduction in air entry to the left lung. Chest X-ray showed left lung collapse.
Five years prior to this, he started experiencing episodic breathlessness and was eventually diagnosed with asthma. He was initiated on inhalers which did not provide significant symptomatic relief. During this period, he had episodes of bronchitis, about twice a year, which responded to antibiotics. Up until his acute presentation to the hospital (T = 0), his symptoms have been episodic, did not cause significant impact to patient’s quality of life and as such was managed conservatively in the community.
During his acute presentation, he was admitted to his local hospital for further investigations (T = 0). A CT thorax with contrast showed an area of high density likely representing a tumour at the left main bronchus causing obstruction and collapse secondary to this . In addition, PET-CT showed an avid solitary calcified subcarinal node of unknown significance . At bronchoscopy, tumour was visible at the left main bronchus and the initial biopsy was non-diagnostic. Repeat biopsy with rigid bronchoscopy and Nd-Yag laser treatment to intraluminal tumour was performed. Biopsies showed spindle-shaped cells which expressed H-Caldesmon, ALK-1, CK8/18 and CD31. This was in keeping with inflammatory myofibroblastic tumour. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) confirmed ALK translocation (2p23).
The patient was discussed at the Multidisciplinary Team meeting (MDT). Treatment options suggested were to repeat bronchoscopic laser treatment and debulking or Crizotinib, an ALK-inhibitor. The patient was referred by the local Oncologist to the TYA unit at a Tertiary Oncology Centre to discuss this further (T = 1 month). As the patient was doing his final year school exams, he was keen to balance the proposed treatment and associated side-effects with his personal plans, including travelling and having a gap-year after his A-levels. Patient was also concerned about the potential side-effects, particularly hypogonadism associated with Crizotinib. He was offered sperm banking but declined it. Other treatment options including surgery, chemotherapy as well as corticosteroids were considered at MDT discussion. It was felt surgery would involve pneumonectomy. Furthermore, a concern was raised that given the extent of tumour extension from the left main bronchus into the carina, there was a strong possibility of a positive margin after pneumonectomy. Furthermore, at presentation he had subcarinal lymphadenopathy on imaging. There was concern of disease recurrence despite pneumonectomy. Subsequent radiology review in MDT showed an interval reduction of mediastinal lymphadenopathy on imaging spontaneously and a period of observation of mediastinal lymph nodes was recommended (T = 3 months).
A repeat rigid bronchoscopy five months after initial bronchoscopic intervention showed left main bronchus occlusion (T = 5 months). Rigid bronchoscopic dilatation and Nd-Yag laser was applied to tumour regrowth. Over the next two years, the patient had this intervention repeated six times further due to aggressive tumour recurrence.
Nine months following his diagnosis, after careful discussion with his Oncologist, the patient decided to start prednisolone 60 mg once daily (T = 9 months). He struggled with side-effects from steroids, including increase in appetite, acne and weight gain. He was weaned off his steroids after a three-month trial period (T = 12 months). Patient had modest benefit from corticosteroids at best and required two further therapeutic bronchoscopic procedures during this period. He also developed bronchiectasis due to recurrent airway obstruction and infections. He was referred to Respiratory physicians and started on prophylactic antibiotics (Moxifloxacin). His performance status remained zero.
Due to limited treatment options and patient’s reluctance to commence on an ALK inhibitor, he was rediscussed at the MDT and radical radiotherapy was recommended. For radiotherapy planning scan, patient was scanned supine, arms up on chest board, with activated breathing control device. To aid radiotherapy planning, he had bronchoscopic tumour mapping of macroscopic disease to aid radiotherapy delineation. Macroscopic disease was delineated as Gross Tumour Volume (GTV), which included left main bronchus, extending to and including sub-carina superiorly, and proximal right main bronchus as suggested by bronchoscopic findings . GTV to Planning Target Volume (PTV) margin was 7 mm in all directions. 3D-conformal planning was used and a four-field plan was generated, using anterior and posterior 10 megavoltage (MV) beams and left and right lateral 6MV beams . He received 45 Gy over 25 fractions over five weeks (T = 15 months). He was supported with pulsed steroids (prednisolone 30 mg one week on, one week off) during radiotherapy. This was weaned upon completion of radiotherapy.
Patient was clinically stable following radiotherapy and was able to go abroad for a field trip. He had a bronchoscopic assessment three months following radiotherapy and biopsies showed no sign of IMT (T = 18 months). CT scan confirmed an improvement in the left main bronchus patency. Further bronchoscopy four months later showed a patent lumen in the left main bronchus where previously this was completely occluded (T = 22 months). Despite this, patient proceeded to developing recurrent chest infections and exacerbation of bronchiectasis. He required multiple courses of antibiotics and was started on prophylactic antibiotics (Azithromycin). He was discussed at the MDT in light of these recurrent infections. Although there was no disease identified on biopsy, the MDT raised concern over an area of increased soft tissue thickening in the left proximal bronchial tree in the latest CT. Due to this radiological finding and the clinical deterioration, it was felt that NSAIDs such as Ibuprofen or Celecoxib could be considered. There was concern over cardiac toxicities associated with Celecoxib. As a result, patient was initiated on Ibuprofen 400 mg TDS one year following radical radiotherapy (T = 30 months).
Patient developed good clinical response following this, and bronchoscopic assessment and biopsy six months later confirmed no further disease in the airway (T = 36 months). He stopped his NSAIDs within a year (T = 42 months) and remained in remission for the last seven years (T = 11 years). He has an ECOG performance status of zero, remains fully active. He has since completed a University degree and is now in full-time employment. He continues to have annual clinical follow-ups with chest x-rays.