The patient, a 51-year-old man with a history of autoimmune hepatitis, was prescribed prednisolone (30 mg/day) and had been used for 1 month together with tenofovir (300 mg/day) and azathioprine (50 mg/day). The patient was admitted to our institution after subacute fever and dyspnea for 10 days. Physical examination and the investigations showed sepsis due to pneumonia where the pathogen was not yet revealed from the culture study. The patient has been prescribed piperacillin (16 g/day) and tazobactam (2 g/day) for empirical therapy. Other infection sources were ruled out, including unremarkable results of echocardiography. After 2 days of admission, the patient developed drowsiness where physical examination revealed 13 on Glasgow Coma Scaling. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed cerebral infarction in bilateral anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory, which is more prominent on the right side, and intracerebral hemorrhage in the right frontal region without evidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage [ and ]. The impression was cerebral infarction with hemorrhagic transformation. CT angiography was performed on the same day to investigate the cause of the stroke, which showed an abnormal outpouching lesion at the left distal A2 segment of ACA [ and ]. The aneurysm was wide-necked and located at a distal location; the infected aneurysm was suspected. However, the aneurysm was treated conservatively.
The following day, the patient’s status deteriorated to 5 on Glasgow Coma Scaling. The patient was intubated and underwent another CT brain. CT brain showed expanded hematoma at the right frontal lobe with intraventricular hemorrhage, and left ACA territory infarction was more apparent . Rupture of the infected left ACA aneurysm was suspected, and the decision to perform emergency bifrontal decompressive craniectomy for aneurysm obliteration and to correct an increased intracranial pressure was made.
The procedure was to obliterate the aneurysm with clot evacuation. The patient was set in a supine position, and a bicoronal incision was made. After bifrontal craniotomy, durotomy was performed first on the right side, where brain swelling was prominent, and the clot was partially evacuated. Before interhemispheric dissection, the pus was noticed in the right side subdural space [ and ] and collected for culture study. We performed interhemispheric dissection to the exposed A3 segment of ACA and planned for A3 side-to-side bypass in case aneurysm clipping was not amenable. However, an unusual irregularity with whitish tissue representing vessel wall destruction of the left A3 was observed. No flow was detected by intraoperative Doppler ultrasound, which led to the diagnosis of the left ACA thrombosis secondary to severe infection [-]. The microsurgical dissection was continued until the aneurysm neck and proximal ACA were encountered . During dissection, premature rupture of an aneurysm was encountered due to severely fragile tissue of the parent artery and aneurysm neck. Nevertheless, the revascularization procedure was not feasible since the left A3 segment was severely infected and already thrombosed. Therefore, the decision to perform an aneurysm trapping was made by the application of clips at both proximal and distal to the aneurysm . The clot was further evacuated, where the brain was relaxed with good pulsation. We also observed the pus in the left Sylvian cistern .
On the day of an operation, the previously sent sputum culture study revealed Nocardia otitidiscaviarum, where the Gram stain showed only mixed organisms. The Gram stain and modified acid-fast stain of subdural pus and thrombus in an aneurysm also showed Gram positive with branching filament, which put suspicion on the Nocardia spp. [ and ]. The aerobic bacterial cultures from pus, thrombus, and aneurysm wall grew chalky white colonies on chocolate media (Oxoid Limited, France), and macroscopic growth on the Lowenstein-Jensen medium was also noted [ and ]. The isolate was further identified by 16s ribosomal RNA sequencing (BIONEER Corp., Korea) of the first 500 base pairs as N. otitidiscaviarum. All of the other cultural studies, including fungus, were negative. The antibiotics were then changed to imipenem (2 g/day) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) (15 mg/kg/day). Two days later, the antibiotics susceptibility test using the broth microdilution method revealed the susceptibility of the organism to TMP-SMX (MIC 0.5 ug/mL), amikacin (MIC 2 ug/mL), and moxifloxacin (MIC 1 ug/mL), and resistance to imipenem (MIC >16 ug/mL). Hence, the treatment regimen was switched to TMP-SMX (15 mg/kg/day), amikacin (1 g/day), and moxifloxacin (400 mg/day).
The postoperative CT brain showed multiple infarctions at bilateral subcortical white matter and internal capsule, including the brainstem, which corresponded to an invasion of the bilateral internal carotid artery and basilar artery [-]. Regarding the patient’s comatose status, the dilated right pupils were noted, which was explained by the right midbrain infarction. Unfortunately, the patient was eventually deceased 3 days later as a consequence of septic shock, where the disseminated infection was unable to control.