A 22-year-old male patient presented with a 3-month history of both lower limb weakness progressing rapidly to paraplegia. There was associated burning pain in the same area. The patient was catheterized due to urinary retention 2 months back. There was no associated fever, lymphadenopathy or significant weight loss. On examination both the lower limbs were hypertonic with gross spasticity. Motor power was grade 0 (MRCS scale) around all the joints with the patient being bed ridden with trophic ulcer at the sacral region. Deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated with bilateral patellar and ankle clonus. There was a specific sensory level at T10 below which all modalities of sensation were impaired.
Plain x-ray was nonspecific. On MRI, there was a grossly infiltrating lesion at the level of T8, T9 and partially extending to T10 level [Figure and ]. Signal changes were also noted in the T8, T9 vertebral bodies. The lesion was extradural compressing the cord all around like a cylinder which was well seen in the axial cut . The lesion had an irregular margin with intense homogenous enhancement on the gadolinium contrast image. Routine blood investigations, bone marrow study, bone scan, chest x-ray, ultrasound abdomen, and pelvis were normal.
T8, T10 laminectomy was done. Just beneath the laminae a vascular, pinkish white, friable, soft mass found completely carpeting the cord from all sides. It was nonadherent to the cord and was easily separated from it. The posterior and lateral part of the mass was removed. Component anterior to cord could be removed by partial medial facetectomy at T8 and T9 level. Part of the tumor was seen entering intervertebral foramen at T8 level which was removed piecemeal.
Histopathology showed sheets of large, pleomorphic, mononuclear cells showing marked cytologic atypia admixed with large no of lymphocytes . Cells were large epithelial like with abundant pale eosinophilic cytoplasm with oval to irregular nuclei, vesicular chromatin, prominent nucleoli with numerous mitotic figures . There were binucleate and multinucleated giant cells . Few areas showing phagocytosis of red cells, leukocytes, and tumor cells by the histiocytes called emperipolesis were seen. Immunohistochemistry typically showed positivity toward S-100 , CD68 , and particularly lysozyme and was negative for CD1a, CD21, langerin suggesting the final diagnosis as histiocytic sarcoma. Staining for myeloperoxidase, CD34, and CD117 were negative excluding myeloid sarcoma. Trephine biopsy of bone marrow form iliac crest showed no tumor cells confirming the isolated involvement of spine.
After 30 days postoperatively, the patient's power in both lower limbs improved to grade 2. The patient refused to take both radio- and chemotherapy and is alive 5 months after surgery without any recurrence.