A 19-year-old woman was admitted to the medical intensive care unit for acute kidney failure associated with severe neurologic impairment. She had no relevant past medical history and her familial history was unremarkable. She presented with asthenia and dyspnea of several weeks duration. Clinical examination showed high blood pressure of 170/90 mmHg and lower limb edema. No systemic sign was detected and no gastrointestinal disorder reported. The initial laboratory test results were as follows: serum creatinine 246 μmol/L, hemoglobin 8,9 g/dL, platelets 151 G/L, lactate deshydrogenase 700 U/L (normal < 246), haptoglobin < 0,08 g/L, with schistocytes on peripheral blood smear, proteinuria 7.6 g/g of creatinine, and hematuria 348.103/mL. Direct antiglobulin and pregnancy tests were negative. Transthoracic echocardiography showed preserved left ventricular function and renal ultrasonography excluded an obstructive cause of acute kidney injury. A diagnosis of TMA was considered. Samples for an extensive diagnostic work-up were obtained and plasma exchanges were started in emergency. On day 2, after thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura had been excluded on the basis of normal serum ADAMTS13 values (101%), plasma exchanges were stopped and eculizumab (900 mg per week) was initiated.
The diagnosis of STEC-HUS was ruled out on the basis of negative Shiga toxin tests. Antibody testing for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus, antinuclear antibody, lupus anticoagulant, antiphospholipid, anti-deoxyribonucleic acid and neutrophil cytoplasmic antigen antibodies was negative. Exploration of the alternative complement pathway including measurement of serum levels of hemolytic complement CH50, complement C3, C4, Factor H (CFH) and factor I was normal, 109%, 697 mg/L, 153 mg/L, 106, and 95%, respectively. No mutations in C3, MCP, factors B, H, and I genes were identified. Antibody testing for CFH was positive: 7450 UA/ml; reference range < 100 AU/mL. The serum level of homocysteine was increased: 285 μmol/L for reference values ranging between 3.2 and 10.7. The serum levels of vitamin B12 and folate were normal.
A kidney biopsy performed on day 2 obtained 17 glomeruli and showed mesangial sclerosis, noticeable thickening of the capillary wall with a duplication aspect of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and the presence of intraglomerular and intravascular thrombi . No tubular or interstitial damage was observed. Immunofluorescence studies showed mild glomerular capillary wall IgM and C3 deposits and were negative for IgG and IgA. The duplication of GBM, the presence of positive IgM deposits, the worsening of kidney function with increased serum creatinine levels of 700 μmol/L despite eculizumab treatment, and high serum levels of homocystein suggested an inborn error of intracellular cobalamin metabolism and prompted complementary tests. Results of plasma and urinary amino acid chromatography indicated low levels of plasma and urine methionine: 12 μmol/L (reference range of 21–35), < 1 (reference range of 2–16 μmol/mmol of creatinine), respectively. Results of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry of urinary organic acid indicated high levels of methylmalonic aciduria: 247 mmol/mol of creatinine (normal < 4 μmol/l). Both results guided etiological diagnosis toward cblC disease.
Continuous vitamin supplementation with hydroxycobalamin 1 mg/d by intramuscular route, folinic acid 10 mg/d, betaine 12 g/d and levocarnitine 3 g/d was started. In the following days, kidney function dramatically improved and hemolysis resolved . Normal values of serum homocysteine and of plasma methylmalonic acid were achieved within the following month. Rituximab infusion at 375 mg/m2 was administered once a week for 4 weeks and resulted in a dramatic decrease in serum anti-factor H antibody (< 1000 UA/ml) and led to weaning from eculizumab. Six months later, the patient had no signs of hemolysis, a serum creatinine value of 75 μmol/L (eGFR 100 mL/min CKD EPI) and serum anti-factor H antibody were negative.
Methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type C (MMACHC) gene sequencing showed two heterozygous pathogenic variants in our patient, c.556G > A (p.Arg189His) and c.271dupA (p.Arg91Lysfs*4), with c.271dupA (p.Arg91Lysfs*14) variant identified in her father and c.566G > A (p.Arg189His) in her mother. cblC deficiency associated with anti-factor H antibody-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome was ultimately diagnosed.