An 84-year-old Japanese female with hepatitis C virus (HCV)-associated chronic hepatitis and diabetes mellitus treated at another hospital was referred to our hospital for further examination because of elevated α-fetoprotein (AFP) in a routine blood test. The patient was negative for a history of alcohol consumption, smoking, excessive weight loss and medications including herbs. The patient’s height and weight were 1.48 m and 45.4 kg, blood pressure was 138/76 mmHg, pulse rate was 70 beats/min and body temperature was 36.3 °C, respectively, with no specific physical abnormalities. The patient’s blood platelet count was found to be 16.0 × 104/µl (normal range, 14.0–37.9 × 104/µl) with slightly elevated aspartate aminotransferase levels of 35 IU/l (normal range, 13–30 IU/l) and alanine aminotransferase levels of 32 IU/l (normal range, 7–23 IU/l). The levels of AFP and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II (PIVKA-II) were both elevated, with values of 414 ng/ml (normal level, < 10 ng/ml) and 236 mAu/ml (normal level, < 40 mAu/ml), respectively. HbA1c was 7.4% (normal level, < 5.9%) under insulin treatment, and no improvement in diabetes mellitus was observed prior to admission. No inflammatory or coagulating system abnormalities were observed.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed a 3.4-cm solid tumor in liver segment 8 (S8), with a heterogeneous irregular center but no fibrous capsule . A tumor 3 cm in size was observed in S8 on abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed at the time of admission, which showed heterogeneous enhancement in the arterial phase and washed out insufficiently in the portal and equilibrium phase . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor in S8 with low- to iso-intensity on T1-weighted imaging, high- to iso-intensity on T2-weighted imaging, high intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging and low intensity on hepatocellular imaging , and the enhanced pattern was the same as that of the CT scan. As regards the enhanced pattern, HCC is always enhanced strongly in the arterial phase, and washed out in the following phase. On the contrary, in the present case, the tumor was enhanced heterogeneously in the arterial phase, and washed out insufficiently in the following phase. Although the imaging findings were not typical, HCC was the most probable diagnosis in this case. Therefore, liver resection (S8) was performed.
The surgically resected specimen contained a tumor 2.5 cm at the largest diameter without fibrous capsule. The cut surface of the tumor grossly showed a heterogeneous appearance . Accordingly, histological examination showed that it had several different components. As illustrated in Fig. a, four major components could be identified, although the boundary between each was unclear.
In the nodular area colored brown in Fig. a, hepatocyte-like cells were arranged in a thin trabecular pattern with increased cellularity . This component was immunohistochemically positive for glypican3 and regarded as well-differentiated HCC. Within the nodule of well-differentiated HCC, an area accompanied by marked lymphocyte infiltration in the tumor stroma was noted (colored gray in Fig. a), and the tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) were predominantly CD8+ T cells . Epstein–Barr virus infection was not detected in carcinoma cells by an in situ hybridization technique. Lymphocyte infiltration did not spread throughout the nodule of HCC, and the feature did not fulfill the criteria of HCC of lymphocyte-rich subtype according to the latest WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system, in which lymphocytes must outnumber tumor cells in most microscopic fields . The area of well-differentiated HCC with or without TILs occupied approximately half of the entire tumor.
The other half of the tumor was replaced by fibrotic tissue accompanied by infiltration of lymphocytes and foamy macrophages, colored in yellow in Fig. a. The histologic picture of this area closely resembled inflammatory pseudotumor of the fibrohistiocytic type . Additionally, small nodular lesions that grossly showed pale yellow color were scattered within the nodule of well-differentiated HCC and inflammatory pseudotumor-like lesion (colored red in Fig. a). The small nodules were entirely composed of necrotic tissue, and a thick trabecular pattern could be recognized by reticulin staining , indicating moderately differentiated HCC with extensive coagulative necrosis, existing in a nodule-in-nodule pattern.
To address the status of tumor immunity, immunostaining of programmed death 1 (PD-1) and programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) were performed. The expression of PD-1 was diffusely observed on TILs, and its expression was observed irrespective of the extent of infiltration of TILs within the tumor . PD-L1 was expressed on carcinoma cells and tumor-associated macrophages . Interestingly, the positivity of PD-L1 expression was restricted to the area of well-differentiated HCC with dense infiltration of TILs, and other areas of the tumor were negative for PD-L1 expression. The analysis of microsatellite instability was performed for five mononucleotide markers (BAT25, BAT26, NR21, NR24, and MONO27) using tumor and normal DNA obtained from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. In the analysis, no unstable marker was detected, showing that the tumor was microsatellite-stable.
The background liver showed cirrhosis with lymphocyte infiltration in portal tracts, which was consistent with liver cirrhosis due to HCV infection. The histological changes related to nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases were unremarkable in the background liver.
The patient’s postoperative course was favorable, and she was discharged 27 days after surgery. The values of AFP and PIVKAII were both normalized. Since then, she has visited the hospital regularly for more than 6 years, with no signs of HCC recurrence on CT scan.