A 57-year-old woman presented with a 1-year history of progressive paraparesis. She reported pain radiating to both legs for several years and had been unable to walk for the previous 3 months. Her examination confirmed a severe paraparesis and a T12 sensory level but no bowel of bladder deficits.
A magnetic resonance (MR) scan revealed an enhancing tumor on the right side of the thoracic spine at the T11–T12 level [Figures , and , ]. A right extended T12 laminectomy was performed to expose a large dumbbell tumor located in the intradural and extramedullary space. The tumor was dissected from the spinal cord and completely removed using standard microsurgical techniques. Following a short thoracic pedicle fixation T10-T11-T12 , dural closure was achieved with 4-0 and 5-0 silk, Gelfoam, and fibrin glue. A dural tear was not appreciated during the procedure.
Pathologic examination revealed a tanycytic ependymoma, described only rarely in this location.
Postoperatively, she experienced a rapid and progressive recovery of lower extremity motor and sensory function. Her walking ability improved, and she was discharged 10 days later.
One month following her resection, the patient complained of a persistent headache and was found to have a mild right hemiparesis. The remainder of her neurologic examination was unremarkable.
She denied any history of recent or remote head trauma or alcohol abuse and had no detectable coagulopathy.
Her thoracic incision was well-healed without evidence of CSF leakage.
A computed tomography (CT) scan showed an 18 mm thick collection of hypodense fluid in the subdural space over the left frontoparietal region with an 8 mm midline shift .
An MR imaging (MRI) of her thoracic spine showed a CSF collection at the resection site. She was felt that CSF leakage at the surgical site had produced intracranial hypotension and a chronic subdural hematoma that accounted for her symptoms and signs [Figure and ].
The subdural space was evacuated through single burr hole, and a follow-up CT scan confirmed the resolution of the fluid and the midline shift . Her symptoms completely resolved, and she was discharged 2 weeks later with no neurological sequelae.