A 16-year-old male patient presented to the Department of Endodontics at the University of Barcelona referred by the Orthodontics Department. The patient had a non-remarkable medical history except for a traumatism occurred ten years before, in which he hit his front teeth. At the time, no dental treatment was performed, and since he did not have symptoms in the following years, he did not follow-up either. Upon examination during his orthodontics consultation, an asymptomatic extensive radiolucent lesion in the upper right maxilla was noticed in the panoramic X-ray .
The endodontic clinical examination revealed staining and an untreated enamel-dentin fracture on the maxillary right central incisor. The percussion test showed an augmented response for this tooth, while the cold vitality test (Endo Ice, Hygenic, Coltène/Whaledent Inc. Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio) was negative, being positive for the neighbouring teeth. No spontaneous pain was referred, and periodontal probing depths (CP-12, Hu-Friedy, Chicago, USA) were 2mm all around the tooth, with no signs of mobility. A periapical radiograph (PA) using a paralleling technique revealed an incomplete root development showing an open apex for the right central incisor, corresponding to Nolla’s eighth stage and associated with a large periapical radiolucency. The computed tomography evaluation (CBCT) confirmed the presence of an extensive periapical lesion (19 x 12 x 16 mm) and its intimate contact with the apexes of the maxillary right central and lateral incisors . A small fenestration was observed affecting the buccal bony wall of the maxillary right central incisor. Based on clinical and radiographic examinations, diagnosis of pulp necrosis and chronic apical periodontitis was established for this tooth. As it exhibited an open apex, REP with autologous Plasma Rich in Growth Factors (PRGF) was considered as a treatment option. As the periapical lesion was so extensive, it was decided to debride it simultaneously to the REP. The patient agreed, written informed consent was obtained and the treatment was conducted in accordance with ethical principles of the University of Barcelona Dental Hospital.
On the first appointment, a pulp chamber access was created. Minimal mechanical instrumentation was performed 2 mm above the apex with an ISO #70 H-file, followed by copious irrigation with 5.25 % NaOCl solution. After drying the canal, a bi-antibiotic paste (BAP) consisting of a mixture of 250 mg of metronidazole, 250mg of ciprofloxacin, and sterile water was introduced in the canal using a #1 Buchanan hand plugger (SybronEndo, Orange, California, US) up to the apex. The access cavity was temporarily restored with 3 mm of Cavit™ (ESPE, Seefeld, Germany).
Two weeks later, during the second appointment, extraoral antisepsis was carried out using iodine solution, and local anaesthesia was administrated (articaine with epinephrine 40mg/ml + 0,01mg/ml - Artinibsa, Laboratorios Inibsa S.A., Lliçà de Vall, Barcelona, Spain). A full thickness mucoperiosteal flap was reflected from a sulcular incision extended from distal of the maxillary right canine to distal of the maxillary left central incisor. A large periapical bone defect associated with partial loss of the buccal cortical plate of the right central and lateral incisors was encountered. This fenestration was extended using a tungsten round bur 023 (Komet, Lemgo, Germany). The lesion was circumferentially separated from the bony crypt and the affected teeth using a 10 miller surgical curette (Hu-Friedy, Chicago, USA). Once removed, it was measured (11 mm x 8 mm x 12 mm), fixed in 10 % buffered formalin, and sent for histopathological examination. The surgical area was then rinsed with sterile saline solution. When the apical involvement of the lateral incisor was confirmed, a conventional endodontic treatment was performed, and its apex was resected, followed by the retrograde placement of a Mineral Trioxide Aggregate (MTA) apical barrier (Dentsply Tulsa Dental, Johnson City, TN).
With the flap raised and the apex exposed, the root canal of the central incisor was irrigated with sterile saline to remove the BAP, which was carefully collected with a surgical suction system positioned through the fenestration in the apex area. In a similar fashion, the canal was then rinsed with 5.25% NaOCl solution from coronal to apical. After complete disinfection, a final irrigation with sterile saline was performed.
Plasma rich in growth factors (PRGF®-Endoret®) was prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BTI Biotechnology Institue S.L, Vitoria, Spain): Then, the plasma column was divided into two fractions: fraction 2 (F2), defined as the 2 mL of plasma just above the buffy coat, and fraction 1 (F1), defined as the plasma column above the F2. This gave a total of 8 mL of F2. The volume of F1 would depend on the haematocrit value of the patient.
The PRGF was used in the REP as follows: 2 mL of inactivated F2 was injected in the apical third of the root canal using a sterile syringe. The remaining 6 mL were gently poured in a sterile glass container and activated by adding 300 µL of 10 % calcium chloride solution, which triggered the formation of a three-dimensional fibrin clot as well as the release of growth factors and proteins from autologous platelets . This clot was divided in two: the first 3 ml clot was used to fill the apical third of the root canal from the surgical access until 3 millimetres below the cementoenamel junction (CEJ), occupying both the apical foramen and the periapical tissues ; the other 3 ml clot was mixed with 1cc Tri-calcium phosphate (ß-TCP) (Isios, Kasios, l’Union, France), generating a new sticky bone that was used to fill the bone defect . The activated F1, kept at 37 ºC to obtain a haemostatic and elastic fibrin membrane, was placed over the bone graft, acting like a membrane by closing the entire defect . The mucoperiosteal flap was repositioned and held in place using 4-0 non-absorbable surgical sutures (Supramid, Aragó, Barcelona, Spain).
MTA was mixed with saline solution and placed inside of the root canal from an orthograde way, on the top of the PRGF and until 1 mm below the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) to prevent crown staining. The F1 fibrin membrane’s consistency allowed to place the MTA safely as it permitted the total control of its final position. A moistened cotton pellet was placed in the pulp chamber, and 3 mm of Cavit™ (ESPE, Seefeld, Germany) sealed the access cavity. A postoperative radiography was taken. The patient was kept under antibiotic and analgesic coverage. Chlorhexidine gluconate solution (0.2%) was prescribed as a mouth rinse for a period of five days.
After a week, the suture was removed, and as the healing was uneventful, the final restoration was performed using an adhesive composite. The previously excised tissue sent for histopathological examination was diagnosed as Periapical Granuloma. In the follow-up visits at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months, there were no symptoms of pain, discomfort or inflammation. CBCT at 24 months showed the complete disappearance of the extensive apical lesion and its replacement with new bone-like tissue, thus confirming the satisfactory healing of the defect and the overall treatment successful outcome . CBCT at a 6-years follow-up confirmed the stability of the results and the slight ingrowth of bone-like tissue inside of the root canal space in the apical portion of the tooth, a slightly increase of root length was observed too .