The patient is a 6-year-old Chinese boy (ethnic Han), who was admitted to the hospital due to dysuria and intermittent abdominal pain for the last ten days. A stone was passed spontaneously by the patient seven days before sent to the urological clinic. The boy was born in Henan Province of China (Central China, Han) and was the second child of non-consanguineous parents. The family denied the presence of PH in the family history. The physical examination of the patient was in normal range. The boy has moderate nutrition, normal intelligence, a height of 130 cm, a weight of 24 kg, a blood pressure of 105/77 mmHg. A computerized tomography (CT) scan showed the hydronephrosis in his right kidney, and stones occurred in his left kidney, right ureter and bladder . The crystals passed by the patient spontaneously were identified as mostly (> 95%) composed of calcium oxalate monohydrate according to the infrared spectroscopy test (Supplementary Fig. ). From the examination of his renal and liver function, we found the serum creatinine concentration was as low as 2.07 mmol/1.73m2/24 h, the concentration of urinary oxalate was 2.44 mmol/1.73m2/24 h .
Due to the high concentration of urinary oxalate and the composition of the stone from the patient, we highly suspected that the subject might suffer PH because of a genetic variant inherited from this family. In order to identify the type of PH for the patient and appropriately conduct further treatment, the Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was performed on the patient (described below).
Based on the four follow-up visits of the patient, the function of his liver and kidney were back to normal and all clinical examinations were within the normal range after the first treatment. Four 2–3 mm new kidney stones were found in the second examination and passed with the aid of physical auxiliary vibration, no obvious stone residue was found afterward. The patient was under a conservative treatment that consisted in a prescription of oral pyridoxine and drinking plenty of fluids (2 ~ 3 L/m2 water per day). During this period, the urinary oxalate level decrease but the citrate level increased .
WES was conducted on the patient to identify the specific type of PH that the subject has. We obtained the original data size of 15.74G with 93.2% of bases having Phred quality score of > = 30 (Q30). The mapping rate of sequencing reads to the reference genome was over 99.9%, and the average sequencing depth was 100X with 97% of captured regions that have a minimum depth of 20X. Variant characterization and filtering found two variants in the AGXT gene in the proband (supplementary Table ).
Both variants of AGXT found in the proband are heterozygous. The nonsense variant (c.864G > A: p.Trp288X) identified in the proband is on exon 9 and inherited from his mother, which leads to a sense codon changing to a stop codon. The other variant (c.346G > A: p.Gly116Arg) is a missense variant from the father that occurs in a domain of aminotransferase that is essential to the function of the AGT protein.
According to “The Standards and Guidelines for The Interpretation of Sequence Variants” enact by The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) , the nonsense variant (c.864G > A: p.Trp288X) was classified as “likely pathogenic”. This variant has not been reported in the healthy populations from the database of gnomAD and ExAC (PM2). By detecting this variant in the proband’s parents, a likely pathogenic variant was identified at the trans position of the variation site (PM3). Multiple statistical methods predicted that the variant would result in damage to the gene or its products (PP3). Moreover, the clinical phenotype was a promising match for the disease caused by the variant of AGXT (PP4). We also classified the missense variant (c.346G > A: p.Gly116Arg) as “likely pathogenic”. This variant has a low frequency (0.00001878) in the healthy population database of genomAD (PM2) and it has been reported as pathogenic/likely pathogenic (PMID: 26252291). Additionally, the homozygous variants (PMID: 25629080) found at its trans position (PP3) and multiple statistical methods predicted that the variant would result in damage to the gene or its products (PP3). The clinical phenotype was promising with the disease caused by the variant of AGXT (PP4) (Supplementary Table ).
We designed and synthesized primers flanking the variants of the AGXT gene (Supplementary Table ). Both variants were detected in the proband, while the nonsense variant (c.864G > A:p.Trp288X) was only found in his mother and the missense variant (c.346G > A:p.Gly116Arg) was only found in his father .
We collected the blood samples from 300 healthy Chinese people locally (Han, Henan Province) and conducted the whole-genome sequencing to establish a local healthy reference genome for studying genetic disorder (Unpublished data). We searched for c.864G > A:p.Trp288X and c.346G > A:p.Gly116Arg of AGXT in this local reference genome database and also PGG.SNV dataset , but both of them were absent from the local reference genome (300 Han people) and PGG.SNV dataset. To test the variant burden in the local population, 110 pathogenic variants (Supplementary Table ) of gene AGXT reported previously (HCMD, the Human Gene Mutation Database, ) were searched in this local database. As we expected, none of these rare variants were detected in the local reference genome, which indicates that these rare pathogenic variants in AGXT occur at a significantly low frequency in the local population. We also identified the variants in gene AGXT of the samples from this local reference genomes and 238 variants found in the healthy local population (Supplementary Table ).