The patient was a 71-year-old man complaining continuous pain on the right back. Imaging studies showed that 10 cm of contrast-enhanced soft tissue mass on the right posterior chest wall was involving the 11th and 12th ribs, and developing to the spinal canal via the Th11–Th12 intervertebral foramen . The incisional biopsy was suggestive of peripheral nerve tumor or unusual vascular neoplasm with neuroendocrine marker expression.
The patient was anesthetized on prone position. Skin incision was determined to perform the posterior spinal fusion and prepare the skin and muscle flap for covering the chest wall defect after the tumor resection, i.e., longitudinal midline skin incision over the spine to expose the right side of the thoracic spine and the second incision along the rib and over the tumor. After splitting the spinalis thoracis muscle, the Th11–Th12 transverse processes and the Th11–L1 spinous processes were cut off at the levels of the base and the lamina was partially removed to approach the Th11 spinal canal. The Th11 thoracic nerve was dissected at the level of the root so that the proximal end of the tumor was clearly identified as developing to the exact proximity of the dura mater . The tumor end was separated together with the epidural venous plexus from the dura mater so that the resection margin was considered to be free from the tumor, but minimal. Then, the proximal ends of 11th and 12th ribs were separated from the vertebra. The posterior spinal fusion was established to mend Th9–L1 vertebras. Via thoracotomy, the distal portions of the 10th–12th ribs were cut with at least 2 cm of surgical margin and the resection line on the diaphragm and the paravertebral area was determined . There were no gross pleural dissemination and direct invasion to the right lung. The tumor mass was carefully separated from the vertebras so that the en bloc resection was achieved . The thorax wall defect (Additional file : Video S2) was covered with a thick GORE-TEX® sheet and the muscle flap coverings which the latissimus dorsi muscle and the longissimus dorsi muscle had been partially spared for at the beginning of the surgery. Microscopically, the tumor was characterized as an admixture of epithelioid and retiform areas , suggestive of composite hemangioendothelioma. Tumor cells were focally positive for anti-CD31 (an endothelial marker) and anti-synaptophysin (a marker protein for neuroendocrine cells and neoplasms) immunohistochemistry staining , but negative for CD56 and chromogranin. The patient was able to walk by himself on postoperative day 1, and the post-surgery course was uneventful. A split-course adjuvant radiotherapy in dose of 50 Gy was applied against the right lateral part of the Th9–L1 vertebras. Chest CT at 12 months after the surgery showed no signs of recurrence.