A 68-year-old male was admitted to the emergency room with retrosternal chest pain. A year ago, he underwent implantation of a dual chamber permanent pacemaker due to symptomatic complete atrioventricular block. Because he experienced pacemaker failure 2 months earlier, a single chamber permanent pacemaker was implanted in the right ventricle for him through right subclavian vein. Chest x-ray findings indicated a dual chamber leads through left subclavian vein and a single chamber permanent pacemaker lead through right subclavian vein in the right ventricle . The angiography report revealed that the patient had a patent left main artery (LMA) and a 3- vessel disease involving the left anterior descending (LAD), second obtuse marginal (OM), and right coronary arteries (RCA). Therefore, the patient was a candidate for elective OPCAB surgery after reprogramming the pacemaker to VOO mode.
Under general anesthesia with standard monitoring for cardiac anesthesia using a bipolar ESU (electro surgical unit) and after completion of the anastomosis LIMA to LAD while lifting the cardiac ventricular apex for anastomosis to OM artery, suddenly the RV was perforated by the tip of the ventricular lead of the previous dual chamber pacemaker . Then, blood pressure decreased rapidly and the patient unexpectedly experienced cardiac arrest. Immediately, the patient was resuscitated with administration of epinephrine (up to 4 mg), atropine (up to 2 mg), and internal cardiac massage for 7 minutes. After establishing CPB (cardio-pulmonary bypass), dexamethasone 8 mg, thiopental sodium 3 mg/kg, lidocaine 1 mg/kg, and magnesium sulfate 30 mg/kg were administrated intravenously according to our institutional protocol. When all the grafts anastomoses were performed successfully, the RV perforation was repaired with a pledgetted mattress suture, and the perforated lead was withdrawn slowly as the suture was tightened.
Subsequently, the patient was rewarmed and weaned off CPB with the same single chamber permanent pacemaker (VOO Mode). The previous dual chamber pacemaker leads were not removed because of technical difficulties of extraction of the leads.
The operation was uneventful and the patient was extubated after 6 hours with the same permanent pacemaker (VOO Mode). He was completely alert with no hemodynamic complications. Finally, he was discharged from the hospital in a good overall condition, with the same single chamber permanent pacemaker (VVI mode).