A 41-year-old man visited the emergency room with abdominal pain and a palpable abdominal mass for 1 day. He had no history of disease apart from an appendectomy performed 1 year ago, and histological examination of the appendix showed features of appendicitis only. A large, soft, tender mass was palpable in the right lower abdomen. Laboratory data upon admission were within normal limits, and tumor markers such as carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) were also normal. A few hours later, he complained of severe abdominal pain, and the abdominal mass was enlarged. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 15 × 10 cm slightly enhancing solid mass, with a cystic lesion that was located in the ascending colon, without any enlarged lymph nodes. Some high-density fluid collections were observed in the pelvic cavity . The hemoglobin level was rechecked and it was found to have decreased from 13.1 to 12.0 g/dl.
An emergency laparotomy with midline incision was performed. About 800 ml of blood was in the pelvic cavity and a huge, lobulated, oozing soft mass that had ruptured was noted in the ascending colon. The patient underwent a right hemicolectomy. After the colon was excised, a further large retroperitoneal mass (measuring about 10 cm in the largest dimension) was revealed and this was also radically excised.
Macroscopic examination of the ascending colon revealed a large, lobulated, dumbbell-shaped soft mass that measured 20 × 13 × 10 cm, along the mesenteric border . A portion of tumor was exposed and underlying hematoma was observed. Upon opening the intestine, the mucosa was discolored but intact. Upon sectioning, the cut surface was soft, friable, dark-red, and gelatinous, with a focal, yellowish-gray, solid portion, and hemorrhage . Microscopic examination demonstrated loose proliferation of stellate or spindle cells on myxoid stroma, with occasional mature lipocyte-like cells . They were supported by thin arborizing vasculature . Rare multivacuolated lipoblasts were found . Tumor cells extended upward to the submucosa, accompanied by extensive submucosal hemorrhage, but the overlying mucosa was intact . The retroperitoneal masses were multiple, isolated, or conglomerated, golden to pale-yellow, glistening solid nodules, which measured 12 cm in their largest diameter. Their microscopic findings were compatible with well differentiated liposarcoma . Immunohistochemical staining was negative for CD117 and positive for S-100 protein.
After surgery, the patient was discharged without any complications, and has been well, without any evidence of recurrence or metastasis for 24 months with outpatient follow up every 6 months.