A 44-year-old healthy woman presented to our hand surgery department with spontaneous flexor tendon rupture of the right middle finger and contracture of the right ring finger.
The patient was diagnosed with tenosynovitis of the right ring finger and middle finger at a local hospital and underwent acupotomy release of her middle finger 2 wk prior to admission. Five days after the release, a sudden complete loss of active flexion of the right middle finger was observed during routine domestic activities. Two months after the surgery, re-rupture of the repaired middle finger tendon was encountered when the patient was pulling on her pants.
The patient denied any past illnesses.
The patient denied any personal or family history of related diseases.
Loss of active flexion of the right middle finger and contracture of the right ring finger were observed. There was no swelling, tenderness, or numbness of the digits. No other positive findings were observed during systematic physical examination. During the operation, all lacerations of the flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS) and flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) of the right middle finger were identified in Zone II around the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint . Significantly, a high level of tension and loss of elasticity were observed at the proximal end of the FDP, whereas the proximal FDS seemed normal in tension and elasticity.
Initial laboratory studies revealed high alkaline phosphatase (116 U/L, normal range: 35–100 U/L) and normal serum creatinine, creatine phosphokinase, and calcium levels. No further positive findings were noted in the laboratory examinations.
Histopathology revealed granulomatous involvement in the FDP muscles and tendons, showing a typical sarcoid shape with tubercles consisting of Langhans' giant cells and lymphocytes .
High-resolution computed tomography (CT) revealed widespread nodules in both the lungs .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a central dark star surrounded by a peripheral high-signal area in the right forearm muscles on axial images and a three-stripe pattern on coronal and sagittal images, typical of sarcoid myopathy [-].