A 58 years old Caucasian female diagnosed with NPC disease was referred to the Regional Coordinator Centre for Rare Disease of Udine (RCCRD) in 2010. Her latest medical history (previous 2 years) had been characterized by progressive neurological symptoms: pain and hyposthenia of the left inferior leg followed by pain and hyposthenia of the left arm, psychomotor impairment, ataxic gait, tongue enlargement, dysarthria and dysphagia. Her medical history included mild thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly since the age of 32 years, dorsal skin itching nodular lesions resembling prurigo nodularis since the age of 40 years, and chronic lymphedema of the left leg since the age of 43 years. Electromyography (EMG) of the legs showed bilateral demyelinating motor neuropathy; brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was negative. Haematological parameters showed the presence of pancytopenia (haemoglobin 10.2 g/dl, leukocytes 3700/ul, platelet 109000/ul), a bone marrow biopsy evidenced foam cells, interpreted as a lysosomal storage disorder. On the basis of clinical and histological data a diagnosis of NPC was made and therapy with miglustat (300 mg/day) was commenced.
After 4 months of therapy a regression of neurological symptoms, tongue enlargement, and left leg lymphedema was observed as well as a marked improvement of the skin lesions.
When the patient was for the first time admitted to RCCRD (after 6 months of miglustat therapy), her neurological examination was negative, skin lesions were very mild and both tonsils were normal in size and color. The EMG of upper and lower limbs was normal.
Specific diagnostic exams for NPC were then performed. Filipin test showed mild intracellular storage of unesterified cholesterol in cultured fibroblasts. However, no mutations were found in the NPC1 or NPC2 genes.
Lipid profiling showed the presence of severe hypocholesterolemia, total cholesterol 60 mg/dl (n.v. 130-200 mg/dl), very low levels of HDL-cholesterol, 2 mg/dl (n.v. 45-65 mg/dl) and apoAI, 5.19 mg/dl (n.v. 110-170 mg/dl) and hypertrigliceridemia, 448 mg/dl (n.v. 40-150 mg/dl). This profile was strongly suggestive for a diagnosis of TD, which was confirmed by molecular analysis.
When PCR analysis of ABCA1 gene was performed, all exons could be amplified and sequenced with the exception of exons 32, 33 and 34. This observation suggested that the patient might be homozygous for a deletion of these exons. To test this hypothesis the genomic region spanning from intron 30 to intron 35 was amplified. This amplification generated a ~6 kb fragment from control DNA as opposed to a ~ 2.5 kb fragment from the patient’s DNA, thus indicating that the patient was homozygous for a novel ~3.5 kb deletion . By using a set of specific nucleotide primers the deletion breakpoint (i.e. the junction between intron 31 and intron 34) was characterized. The deletion was generated by a recombination between two Alu sequences (Alu-SX in intron 31 and Alu-SQ2 in intron 34 respectively) . At the genomic level the mutation was designated as c.4464-486_4698 + 382 Del (Ex32_Ex34del). As expected, the RT-PCR amplification of the cDNA region spanning from exons 31 to exon 35, revealed that the genomic deletion lead to the exclusion of exons 32, 33 and 34 from the mature mRNA, with no disruption of the reading frame (Additional file : Figure S1). The predicted translation product of this abnormal mRNA would be a protein with an in frame deletion of 77 amino acids (from residue 1489 to residue 1566 of ABCA1 protein) (p.R1489_K1566del). As shown in Figure , cholesterol efflux was negligible in the patient’s fibroblasts, either under basal conditions or after stimulation of ABCA1 expression with 9-cis-retinoic acid and 22-hydroxycholesterol. Based on these results, the diagnosis of NPC was ruled out substituted with that of TD. Miglustat treatment was then interrupted. Further examinations were conducted to assess possible TD complications: the echocolor Doppler of carotid arteries showed a 3 mm thick atherosclerotic plaque in the left common carotid trunk without hemodynamic significance, the brain angio-MRI was normal. Mild corneal opacity was present at slit lamp examination.
Seven months after miglustat discontinuation skin lesions worsened, and the patient complained about reduced ability to focus attention, memory defects and slower thought processes. Skin biopsy of one dorsal nodular lesion was performed. Electron microscopy examination showed a lipid accumulation in Schwann cells of cutaneous nerves .
These observations prompted us to hypothesize a correlation between miglustat therapy and the patient’s clinical improvement. Thus the therapy was restarted and continued for another 6 months.
During this period the patient showed a progressive amelioration of the skin lesions and a subjective improvement of general and mental wellbeing, with less fatigue and faster thought processes. No substantial improvements were noted in spleen volume, blood counts and plasma levels of HDL, ApoA1, total cholesterol and triglycerides.