A previously healthy 29-year-old female developed two months of progressively worsening headaches. She had been treated with amitriptyline and sumatriptan, and with antibiotics for presumed sinusitis. Ten days before presentation, she developed horizontal binocular diplopia, initially occurring at the end of the day, and then becoming more persistent. She did not describe visual loss in either eye. She was evaluated in our emergency room.
Her neurologic examination was notable for her eye examination. On examination, the visual acuity without correction was 20/20. Color vision and confrontation visual fields were normal. The pupils reacted normally without anisocoria or an afferent pupillary defect. There were slight bilateral abduction deficits, greater on the left. Alternate cover testing revealed a 6 prism diopter esophoria in primary gaze which increased to 8 prism diopters in right gaze and 10 prism diopters in left gaze. The abducting saccades were slowed bilaterally, greater on the left. There was no nystagmus. Examination of the fundus revealed normal optic nerves without pallor or swelling. In summary, the patient had partial bilateral sixth nerve palsies causing binocular horizontal diplopia.
Her laboratory panel was normal, showing no abnormalities of calcium metabolism or pituitary hormones.
Imaging revealed a large mass occupying the sella turcica, sphenoid sinus and encroached upon the prepontine cistern in displacing the clival dura posteriorly. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a heterogeneous lesion causing bony erosion of the dorsum sella and clivus. The infundibulum was minimally deviated to the right and normal pituitary appeared elevated and was seen underneath the optic chiasm. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the lesion was T1 isointense with moderate contrast enhancement [Figures –]. The diagnoses considered based on imaging included pituitary macroadenoma, primary sinus abnormality, plasmocytoma, metastasis, lymphoma, or chordoma.
She underwent an endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal resection of this lesion so that a diagnosis could be established, and symptomatic relief was provided by complete resection. A mass emerging from the right sphenoid ostium was immediately appreciated during the sphenoidotomy. Similar findings were observed in the left sphenoid ostium, though the face of the sphenoid had not been eroded. The mass, however, filled the entire sinus. A frozen section suggested a reactive and non-neoplastic process. Therefore, it was felt that surgical resection should be undertaken in this young patient for immediate symptomatic improvement and removal of the offending process. It was highly vascular and was dissected from the roof, walls, and floor of the sphenoid sinus. The sellar floor, superior clivus, and posterior clinoids had been partially eroded and the mass was highly adherent to the clival dura; the tumor did not appear to be emanating from the pituitary as the sellar dura was intact. The mass ultimately was entirely extradural, with no dural violation and no intradural cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. It was most adherent to the clival dura. Macroscopically, a gross total resection was achieved as the tumor was resected off the dura. The MRI showed gross total resection [Figures and ].
Postoperatively, she recovered well and her headaches and diplopia resolved within a month after surgery.
Histopathological examination demonstrated a large number of osteoclast-like, multinucleated giant cells within a background of mononuclear stromal cells and spindle-shaped fibroblasts associated with areas of hemorrhage. The final histopathological diagnosis was consistent with GCRG . The pathologic differential diagnosis includes (but it is not limited to) GCT, solid areas of ABC, and brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism. GCRG is distinctly different from GCT of bone, both histologically and clinically. Hemorrhagic foci and osteoid production, an unusual feature in GCT, is commonly seen in GCRG. Cystic degeneration and components of ABC are uncommon. The histologic appearance of GCRG is similar to brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism, and this diagnosis should be excluded with laboratory analysis.
Her symptoms resolved soon after surgery. She was lost to follow-up in the short term, but we were able to see her again at six months. Although the patient was asymptomatic, we performed a routine surveillance MRI six months after surgery, given the rarity of the lesion, which showed a recurrence of the mass . We performed repeat endoscopic resection of the lesion , and follow-up imaging six months after surgery shows no further recurrence.