A 20 year old woman previously diagnosed with primary Sjögren syndrome and autoimmune thyroiditis with hypothyroidism presented with two week history of muscle cramps, gradual onset, progressive lower limb weakness and salt craving. The weakness was not associated with ingestion of high carbohydrate meals, diurnal variation of symptoms, easy fatigability or other neurological symptoms including diplopia, bulbar involvement and paresthesia. There was no preceding respiratory tract infection or gastroenteritis. She was on Thyroxin 50 µg daily and denied the use of diuretics or laxatives. There was no personal or family history of similar episodes. Her blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg. Pulse rate was 78 bpm. She was not volume depleted. There was no apparent wasting or tenderness of muscles. Muscle power was 3/5 on MRC scale. Deep tendon reflexes were diminished. Rest of the clinical examination was normal.
Her investigation results revealed that she was having hypokalaemia. ECG revealed T wave flattening and U waves. Imaging did not reveal nephrocalcinosis. Her investigation results are summarized in Table .
Previous records revealed that she was diagnosed with primary Sjögren syndrome and autoimmune thyroiditis 2 years ago, when she presented with salivary gland swelling and sicca symptoms. She did not have any other symptoms and signs suggestive of connective tissue disorders. Salivary gland biopsy showed periductal and periacinic lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate that was compatible with Sjögren syndrome. Rheumatoid factor ,anti-Ro (SSA) antibody, anti TPO antibody and Thyroglobulin antibody were positive. ANA titer was positive at 1:320. At that time, serum potassium was noted to be within normal parameters.
Presence of symptomatic hypokalemia with high Trans-tubular Potassium Gradient (TTKG) was suggestive of renal loss of potassium. Coexisting metabolic alkalosis, absence of hypercalciuria, increased renin activity with normal blood pressure in the absence of diuretic or laxative use favored a diagnosis of Gitelman syndrome, either inherited or acquired. Previous records revealed persistent normokalaemia prior to this presentation. New onset hypokalaemic alkalosis in a previously normokalaemic patient with Sjögren syndrome (which is frequently associated with the renal tubular dysfunctions) and autoimmune thyroiditis strongly favored acquired Gitelman syndrome of immune origin. Genetic studies are crucial in differentiating between the inherited and acquired forms of Gitelman syndrome, but we did not have access to genetic studies to confirm our diagnosis.
She was treated with intravenous and oral potassium salts which resulted in improvement of symptoms. At discharge, maintenance potassium salts and spironolactone were prescribed which she tolerated well. Two months later she had a relapse due to poor compliance. After ensuring the compliance she had no further relapses and remained symptoms free thereafter.