A 73 years old male patient was found to have calcified aortic stenosis after a syncopal episode. He had a history of hypertension and a previous diagnosis of obstructive chronic broncopneumopathy. He was 170 cm tall, his weight was 75 kilos and body surface area was 1.85 sqm. At preoperative investigations he was found to have a borderline dilated ascending aorta of about 45 mm . At the time of aortic valve replacement a written informed consent was obtained even for treatment of the ascending aorta if needed but no specifications were made about the type of intervention.
After median sternotomy, cannulations of distal ascending aorta, right atrio-caval, coronary sinus and left ventricle via right superior pulmonary vein were performed. For myocardial protection intermittent anterograde and retrograde warm blood cardioplegia was used. At inspection, the mid ascending aorta showed an external diameter of about 50 mm . Aortic wrap was constructed before aortic cross-clamping: a vascular dacron prosthesis 12 × 26 mm (Woven Dacron Gelweave, Vascutek Ltd, Inchinnan, Scotland, UK) was taken. The prosthesis was cut into two halves of 6 cm length . Both halves were opened longitudinally by a curved cut. As a reference the black lines on the prostheses were used. The cuts were about 4 mm apart from the black line in the centre of the length of the prostheses, and 4 mm apart from the black line on the opposite sides at the extremities . Thus two dacron sheets were obtained from the prostheses, each of them having one concave and one convex side. Finally the sheets were joined by suturing the two convex sides together and the two concave sides together too . A curved dacron hose 5 cm in diameter was obtained for external wrapping of the ascending aorta . The joining sutures of the two sheets were made of single separate stitches so that the extremities could be shortened if needed. After cross clamping, the aorta was cut transversally above the commissures at the sinotubular junction. Aortic valve replacement was then performed as usual. A 25-mm biological prosthetic aortic valve was inserted with 15 pledget-supported stitches. Then, before aortic closure, the posterior aspect of the ascending aorta was freed completely from the pericardial reflection up to the innominate artery. In this way the custom-built prosthesis was easily inserted, like a trouser leg, to wrap the ascending aorta. The aorta was closed by a continous running suture. The cross clamp was released after 64 min while extracorporeal circulation was arrested after 78 min without inotropes. Then, the prosthesis was pulled down to cover the suture line and fixed with few adventitial stitches. No solid transmural stitches were needed because the curved prosthesis fitted the curved ascending aorta best. Similarly, after decannulation, the prosthesis was pulled up to cover the cannulation site. Therefore the whole ascending aorta was covered by the prosthesis which appeared to fit perfectly without wrinkles or bends .