A 21-year-old male patient was admitted to our institution for recurrent symptoms of right heart failure for more than 10 years, associated with 2 episodes of syncope. On the basis of physical examination, he was found to have marked jugular venous distension, abdominal fullness with significant ascites, and slightly lower extremity edema. No pericardial knock or third heart sound was detected on auscultation, and the lungs were clear. His medical history was unremarkable with the exception of chronic hepatitis B that had been well controlled. The diuretic was taken for relieving the recurrent edema and dyspnea. There was no family history of premature cardiac symptoms or sudden death. Results of laboratory tests, including blood biochemistry, renal, and liver function, were within normal limits, except for the mild anemia with hemoglobin of 95 g/L. The serum N-terminal probrain natriuretic peptide of 2467 pg/mL was elevated (normal range of <900 pg/mL). Electrocardiogram demonstrated sustained atrial fibrillation with the inversion of T wave at precordial derivations of V1 to V3, and no epsilon waves. A chest X-ray showed an enlarged and irregular ball-like cardiac silhouette .
Echocardiography revealed the right ventricular dilation associated with a giant RVOT = 47 mm, the biatrial enlargement, especially the massive right atrium = 59 mm, and absence of the ventricular hypertrophy . There were slight regurgitations at mitral and tricuspid valves. Ejection fraction (EF) was noted to be impaired (EF = 40%). However, the tissue Doppler revealed an increased early diastolic septal mitral annular velocity . Subsequently, cardiac computed tomography (CT) not only confirmed the above echo findings of remarkably dilated RVOT, but also incidentally showed the focally calcific pericardium in a ring-like pattern encircling the left ventricle (LV), which provided us with the clue to the suspicion of localized constrictive pericarditis . Cardiac catheterization revealed the discordance of the ventricular pressure tracings with respiration and the “dip and plateau” sign of ventricular diastolic pressure, thus confirming the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis.
On the basis of the diagnosis, the patient underwent pericardiectomy. In the operation, dense, fibrothickened, and calcified pericardium was found to mainly encircle the LV, partial right ventricle (RV), and atrioventricular groove, which could cause regional compression and constrictive effects. Hence, the right ventricular outlet tract, overlying normal pericardium, was dilated gradually for higher intraventricular filling pressure. The pathology of resected pericardium showed significant fibroplasias and hyalinization with mild calcification . Ultimately, the patient was uneventfully discharged after surgery. Nowadays, he is able to undertake ordinary physical activities, and his echocardiography follow-up after the pericardiectomy suggests improved cardiac function.