A 15-year-old girl presented for evaluation of AIS in 2015. The patient complained of constant worsening right back pain. 36-inch radiographs completed in 2016 demonstrated a 49° dextroscoliosis of the thoracolumbar spine centered at T9/T10 and a 30° levoscoliosis of the lower lumbar spine centered at L4 . She did not take any medications, is a nonsmoker with no comorbidities, and has a BMI of 21. The patient underwent uncomplicated posterior spinal fusion from T3 – L3 . The surgery was well tolerated and the patient was deemed stable for discharge on the 6th day postoperatively.
Seven years postoperatively, the patient presented to the emergency department with severe low back pain that began when she fell. The patient complained of lumbar back pain exacerbated with movement and alleviated by immobilization. She denied any paresthesia or sensorimotor deficits in the extremities. Computed tomography imaging and magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a burst fracture of the L4 vertebral body with a 9 mm of retropulsion and focal narrowing of the central canal at that level . The fracture was believed to be unstable due to the magnitude of vertebral body destruction and location caudal to a long fusion- although, the posterior ligamentous complex was intact. Attempt at brace treatment was unsuccessful with inability to stand and mobilize due to unrelenting pain despite multimodal pain management.
The patient was taken to the operating room 2 days after the trauma for fracture fixation by posterior segmental spinal instrumentation from L2 to the ileum without fusion. The decision was made to instrument to the pelvis in order to maintain alignment in the absence of interbody support or corpectomy. There were no complications during the surgery and imaging studies upon discharge showed adequate sagittal and coronal alignment with maintenance of adequate lumbar alignment .
Fourteen months after the L4 burst fracture surgery, the patient was evaluated for continued axial lumbar spine pain and stiffness that was not relieved by medication and physical therapy. The patient desired instrumentation removal and CT showed complete healing of the fracture. Plain radiographs completed at that time demonstrated her scoliosis fixation construct with burst fracture fixation and extension to the pelvis with a fracture of L4 which appeared likely healed without any loosening or fracture of the instrumentation . Therefore, the patient underwent elective removal of segmental spinal instrumentation at L5, S1, pelvis with L3–4 fusion. The screws in L5, S1, and the ileum were removed bilaterally as well as all connectors. Bilateral pedicle screws were placed in L4 and rods with connectors and setscrews were placed. The posterior elements at L3 and L4 were decorticated and allograft bone graft was placed for fusion. The decision was made to fuse to the fractured segment due to the high possibility of progressive kyphosis across the injured disc and cranial endplate of the fractured level. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged on post-op day 3. On postoperative follow-up the patient reported 100% improvement in the perception of stiffness and denied any pain or complications at that time. Lateral flexion-extension lumbar radiographs demonstrated retained mobility in L4–5 and L5–S1 with 39.6° of lordosis from L4–S1 on extension which reduced to 20.5° of lordosis on flexion from L4–S1. .