A male patient aged 6 years reported to Department of Pedodontics and Preventive dentistry, VS Dental College and Hospital, Bengaluru. Patient’s mother complained of severe bleeding from gums from past 1 week and inability of the child to eat. The child is known case of cerebral palsy with microcephaly and mental retardation with developmental age of only a few months . Patient showed minimal response to verbal commands.
On intraoral examination, erythematous gingival overgrowth was noted on labial and palatal aspects of 54 and labial aspect of 64. On palpation, profuse bleeding was noted.
A detailed case history was taken and it was noted that the patients teeth were cleaned once daily by mother by wiping with a wet cloth. No brushing or use of any dentifrice was done from the beginning.
Depending on clinical examination and based on the oral hygiene status of the patient, a provisional diagnosis of inflammatory gingival hyperplasia due to poor oral hygiene was obtained.
Pediatric opinion on general state of patient was obtained and after performing all the necessary blood investigations, excision of hyperplastic gingiva in relation to 54 was planned and done under local anesthesia . The excisional biopsy specimen was sent for histopathological examination .
Meanwhile, mother was educated regarding the importance of oral hygiene, method of brushing and other oral hygiene practices. Chlorhexidine mouth rinse was also advised and the surgical excision of the tissue in relation to 64 was deferred till the final diagnosis was obtained.
The histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of inflammatory gingival hyperplasia secondary to poor oral hygiene status.
Patient was recalled after 1 week for excision on the other side, i.e in relation to 64 but it was observed that there was spontaneous healing of the gingival tissues probably due to the oral hygiene measures adopted ( and ). Therefore parents were advised to continue with oral hygiene measures and patient is being reviewed regularly.