A 31-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital due to “paroxysmal syncope for 4 d”. The patient suddenly felt chest tightness and fell due to syncope when she awakened in the morning 4 d previously. After approximately 2 min, she recovered spontaneously but felt exhausted after waking up. During the following 3 d, she had the same symptoms and recovered in the same way. To make a definite diagnosis, she was admitted to our department on November 27, 2022.
The patient felt chest tightness and fell due to syncope when she awakened in the morning 4 d previously.
The patient previously had a hysterectomy that was performed for a “hysteromyoma” in September 2020.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
The patient’s body temperature was 36.0 ℃, pulse rate was 100 bpm, respiratory rate was 21 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 100/85 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa). A 3 cm traumatic scratch was seen at the corner of the right eye; bilateral lung breath sounds were heavy; no obvious dry and wet rales were heard; and the heart boundary was not large, with low and blunt heart sounds and an even heart rhythm. A tumor flapping sound was heard in the tricuspid valve auscultation area with conduction limitation. The abdomen was flat and soft, the liver, spleen and ribs could not be palpated, and a 10 cm long transverse incision scar was seen below the umbilicus. There was no edema in either lower limb, and arterial pulses in the limbs were good. The vulva was normal, and the vaginal stump had healed well. There was a solid lump that was the size of a small duck egg on the right side of the pelvic cavity, with an unclear boundary on the left side, and was inactive. On the second day after admission, the patient suddenly lost consciousness when using the toilet and did not respond to calls. After approximately 10 s, she recovered spontaneously and had no abnormal vital signs. At 04:35 AM on November 31, 2022, the patient suffered syncope again, which was associated with defecating in bed, accompanied by cyanosis of the lips, without urinary and fecal incontinence. The patient’s syncope lasted for approximately 10 min. After successful bedside cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for further treatment.
Routine blood examinations showed the following: white blood cell count 11.88 × 109/L; neutrophilic granulocyte percentage 78.11%. Routine urine and stool analyses, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, thyroid function, plasma D-2 polymer and B-type natriuretic peptide were basically normal. Coagulation analysis, carcinoembryonic antigen assay, alpha-fetoprotein assay, infectious disease screening test, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein assay, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate test were normal. Arterial blood gas analysis showed the following: Oxygen partial pressure of 147.7 mmHg and oxyhemoglobin saturation of 99.2%. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed: (1) Sinus rhythm; and (2) ECG within the normal range .
The right ventricle was relatively enlarged, and the left atrium and left ventricle were not enlarged. Multiple moderately heterogeneous echogenic nodules were observed in the right atrium and right ventricle, with loose internal structures and irregular boundaries, one of which was attached to the anterior valve body of the tricuspid valve, approximately 5.7 cm × 3.6 cm in size, and swung between the right atrium and right ventricle with the cardiac cycle. A number of these nodules were attached to the free wall of the right ventricle and prolapsed into the right ventricular outflow tract during the systolic phase, one of which was 3.8 cm × 2.1 cm in size, and no abnormal space was found in the proximal segment of the superior and inferior vena cava. A chest far-reaching radiograph showed the following: the lung texture was heavy, the aortic node was slightly wide, the pulmonary artery segment was flat, the right cardiac margin was round, the right atrium was enlarged, and the heart-chest ratio was 0.51. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound showed no abnormalities on ultrasonography, no abnormalities in blood flow of the liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas and kidney, and after the hysterectomy, no obvious mass images were found in the bilateral adnexal areas. Computed tomography (CT) findings were as follows: In the proximal cardiac segment from the right iliac vein to the inferior vena cava, a cord-like low-density shadow was seen with irregular margins. On delayed scanning, the mass was enhanced. In the systolic phase, the mass protruded through the pulmonary valve into the main pulmonary trunk and right pulmonary artery, and in the diastolic phase, the mass retracted into the right ventricle. The pulmonary artery was not wide; the diameter of the main pulmonary artery was 26 cm; and a filling defect shadow was seen in the right upper pulmonary artery and pulmonary artery of the basal segment . An oval soft tissue shadow was seen in the upper right of the bladder in the pelvic cavity. The CT value was 78 HU, and the size was 58.8 cm × 32.9 cm.