A 65-year-old Greek man presented with a 9-month history of gradually progressive intermittent dysphagia. He also reported significant weight loss but no haemetemesis or melaena. The rest of his medical history was not significant. No specific abnormality was revealed during the physical examination.
Radiologic work-up with oesophagogram showed a dilated oesophagus, air bubbles with a mottled appearance, and contrast-filling defects from the cervical oesophagus to the upper body of the stomach . The computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a soft-tissue lesion in the oesophagus, extending from the level of the cervical oesophagus to the level of the upper body of the stomach . The lesion appeared as a relatively smooth, sausage-shaped intraluminal mass with bulbous distal tip.
CT with multiplanar reformatting provided valuable information regarding the location of the lesion as well as the size and anatomical attachment proximally, which was pivotal in directing surgery . The intraluminal polyp showed soft tissue densities and a central area with attenuation identical to that of fat . Endoscopy revealed a smooth submucosal mass occluding the oesophageal lumen. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration was performed and cytological examination revealed benign fibro-fatty elements. The lesion was diagnosed as a submucosal FVP of the oesophagus, originating from the cervical oesophagus.
A biapproach surgical technique was selected. The origin of the pedicle was attached to the anterior wall of the hypopharynx. The broad base of the stalk was divided by performing cervical vertical oesophagostomy. However, the head of the polyp was too large to be removed through pharyngotomy; therefore, the entire polyp was removed via gastrostomy . The length of the tumour was 16 cm and histopathology revealed an oesophageal mucosa-covered polypoidal lesion composed of lymphocytes and plasma cells interspersed with fibroblasts and blood vessels. No hyperplasia of the mucosal epithelium was evident. The final diagnosis was FVP of the proximal oesophagus. The patient recovered uneventfully and was cured of his dysphagia.