A 5-year and seven-month-old, 23-kg boy, 1.18 m tall, BMI 16.16, was admitted to the hospital suffering from congenital chest wall defect. Preoperative examination revealed deformity of the right thoracic cage. His sternum was depressed at its lower half section, and made a rightward rotation, which showed a profound depression of the right anterior chest wall. The patient had a sternocostal cartilage defect of approximately 4 × 4 cm2at the right side of the middle section of the sternum, and right anterior chest wall musculature loss. Paradoxical respiratory movements could be seen upon deep inhalation and pulsations of the heart were visible through the defect . Decreased excursion of the right hemithorax was revealed by palpation of the thorax, and decreased breath sounds was detected by auscultation on the right. Heart auscultation was normal. His right nipple was hypoplastic, and slightly inferior to the left nipple. There was no associated syndactyly or brachydactyly. The patient was asymptomatic. The chest X-ray showed a smaller right thoracic cage and an elevated right hemidiaphragm. High resolution computed tomography of three-dimensional reconstruction revealed a depression of the sternum, which was rotated to right, multiple ribs abnormally extended on right side, particularly from the right 3rd to 7th rib, parasternal absence of the right partial 3rd costal rib cartilage and absence of the right chest wall soft tissue, . Moreover, chest magnetic resonance imaging detected the absence of the pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, and latissimus dorsi muscles . Bilateral subclavian and brachial artery color Doppler echocardiography were normal and showed no angiostenosis on either side. Laboratory findings were normal. No abnormality was found on examination of the other systems. Chromosomal analysis of the patient has the normal testing result. The patient was born of an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. The patient’s elder sister showed no sign of deformity. The family history was unremarkable. The patient had no past history of anesthesia or surgery. He was diagnosed with Poland syndrome. Thoracoscopy assisted Nuss procedure was planned to correct the right chest deformity.
The patient was comfortable at rest and cheerful. Prior to surgery the patient fasted for 8 hours. Intravenous line was placed in the in-patient department. Heart rate was 129 bpm via ECG, respiratory rate was 22 per minute and pulse oximetry saturation was 100% in room air when the patient arrived in the operation room. Noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP) measured at left and right arms were 111/66 mmHg and 110/65 mmHg, respectively. The left upper arm was used to measure NIBP to avoid perturbation of blood pressure measurement. Airway examination did not show any anticipated difficulty. Midazolam (0.02 mg.kg− 1) was given intravenously as premedication. General anesthesia with controlled ventilation was planned. Anesthesia induction was performed with 4 mg.kg− 1of propofol after 0.3 μg.kg− 1 of sufentanil and tracheal intubation with an ID 5.0 mm cuffed tube was facilitated with 0.6 mg.kg− 1 of rocuronium. Propfol (8-10 mg.kg− 1.h− 1) and remifentanil (0.2 μg.kg− 1.min− 1) were used to maintain anesthesia. After intubation, pressure controlled ventilation was given (P 15cmH2O, R 16 bpm, I:E 1:2), end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) was maintained at about 37 mmHg. Nasopharyngeal temperature was monitored at 37.3 °C, patient warming system (warm touch™ 5200) and warm fluid via intravenous line were used to keep the patient warm. Bilateral single-shot thoracic paravertebral nerve bloke was given using 0.2% ropivocaine 10 ml per lateral at the level betweenT4-T5 under ultrasound guidance. After thoracic paravertebral block, the patient’s heart rate slowly dropped to 60 bpm and responded to 0.01 mg.kg− 1 atropine. Small incisions were made in the two symmetrical axillary midline areas of the chest along the lowest funnel point, at theT4-T5 intercostal level. Subcutaneous tunnels were made from the incisions to the funnel crest. Guided by thoracoscopy, an introducer was advanced through the right funnel crest to the sternum. A severe ST segment depression and a massive drop of EtCO2 (from 34 mmHg to 28 mmHg) and heart rate (from 110 bpm to 40 bpm) were evident. The introducer was removed immediately, ECG, EtCO2 and heart rate all spontaneously recovered. No injury to the heart and great vessels were revealed by thoracoscopy. Compression on heart or great vessels by the introducer was suspected responsible for the transient cardiopulmonary collapse. After successful placement of an artery line in left hand and a center vein catheter at right neck, surgery recommenced. The patient was placed in Trendleberg’s position to warrant good filling of the heart. Bolus of saline (20 ml saline), atropine (0.02 mg.kg− 1) and epinephrine (0.3 μg.kg− 1) were given intermediately to keep arterial blood pressure (ABP) above 60/40 mmHg and HR above 100 bpm. During the placement of introducer, ABP dropped to Zero for 2-3 s. At that time, HR was 156 bpm and EtCO2was 32 mmHg. After the bar was correctly positioned, ABP, HR and EtCO2 recovered to normal ranges spontaneously. The convexity of the previously prepared pectus bar faced posteriorly when it was passed through the track, and then, when in position, the bar was uneventfully turned over. The curvature of the anterior chest wall was assessed to be improved at the end of surgery. Temperature was 36.8 °C, when the operation was finished. The paravertebral nerve block segment was assessed by pin prick in PACU. The Face, Legs, Activity, Cry, Consolability scale (FLACC Scale) was scored at PACU and 12 h or 24 h after surgery. The patient had an uneventful post-operational recovery. Except for single shot PVBs, Diclofenac Sodium Suppositories (0.5 mg. kg-1) was given via rectum in need to relief the pain after surgery for 3 days. No pain and other complication were observed after the operation. Removal of that metal bar is scheduled for 36 months postoperative.
To identify reports for inclusion in this review, we searched PubMed for relevant studies published up to May 2017. The search was limited to studies conducted on humans. Only cases published in English were included. Search terms used included [“Poland syndrome” OR “Poland’s syndrome” OR “syndrome of Poland” OR “Poland anomaly”] and [“anesthetic management” OR “anesthesia” OR “anaesthetic management” OR “anaesthesia”].