A 16-year-old right-handed female complaining of headache and diminution of vision sought for ophthalmologic consultation and was found to have the 2nd degree papilledema, was then referred to our department. Full analysis of the complaint and full neurological examination were done. Computed tomography (CT) brain was free. A provisional diagnosis of pseudotumor cerebri was made. Spinal manometry revealed an elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure. A course of conservative measures (diuretics, steroids, and lumbar puncture) was decided, with no significant improvement. We decided to go for surgical management and a lumboperitoneal shunt was inserted. All patient’s symptoms improved postoperative, and papilledema improved in postoperative follow-up. Four months later, the patient started to complain of sudden severe back pain with recurrence of the headache, and the patient had a different complain of “something hitting the head from inside” in the patient’s own words. The patient went to an orthopedic surgeon to seek for the cause of the low back pain, and she ordered a pelvis and lumbar X-ray. The lumbar X-ray showed straightening of lumbar lordosis and a diagnosis of muscular low back pain was made and the patient was treated accordingly with improvement of her back pain. Accidentally, she found the proximal end of the shunt migrating upward and the patient was referred again to us. We ordered a full spine CT scan and a CT brain and we found the shunt migrating proximally up to the frontal horn of the right ventricle [-]. The condition was explained to the patient and the surgery for removal of the shunt was explained to her in full details, but she refused the surgery; the patient was given carbamazepine for the treatment of headache, diuretics, and steroids for the treatment of the elevated increased intracranial pressure, which all gave the patient a sense of relief and improvement of her symptoms, although the first round of conservative treatment failed to give the patient any relief of symptoms, and we do not have an explanation to this.