In February 2022, a 2-year-old boy with right-hand swelling and thrombocytopenia was admitted to the Department of Rheumatology Immunology & Allergy. One year ago, his parents found that his right hand turned swelling and red, even occasionally cyanotic. This condition became worse in response to cool environments and improved with warming. Additionally, blood routine examination indicated that platelet counts were between 50 ~ 80 × 10^9/L. The boy did not accept other therapies except for the avoidance of cold temperatures. Physical exam on admission showed visible tonsils; unrecognized rales in both lungs; no murmurs in his heart; abdominal softness, no hepatosplenomegaly; no positive signs on the nervous system; muscle strength examinations had no abnormal findings. The swelling and frostbite-like rash of the right-hand fingers were observed . Furthermore, the skin temperature of the right hand was significantly lower than the left. The radial pulse had identical shape on both sides.
Laboratory findings are shown in Table . Peripheral blood count showing WBC 11.95 × 10^9/L, neutrophils 44.2%, Hgb 132 g/L, platelet count 54 × 10^9/L. The coagulation function revealed fibrinogen 1.55 g/L and D-dimer 17.32 mg/L. Liver function, renal function, thyroid function, immunoglobulins, and electrolytes were normal. Hepatitis B and C viruses and human immunodeficiency viruses were all negative. Bone marrow aspiration revealed that the number of megakaryocytes increased, and the platelet production function was normal without leukemic changes and hemophagocytosis. On day 3 of admission, we noted that the boy had a lower right shoulder while walking. We suspected that the child could have scoliosis, and performed a chest CT. The chest CT results showed an irregular mass on the right side of the spine (T3-6 vertebral level) with about 31.3*31.7 mm . The enhanced CT demonstrated that T3-6 vertebrae and attachments, and multiple ribs had bone destruction, some mass appeared to extend to the spinal canal, even the right spine. The chest CT demonstrated no hemorrhagic or cystic zones. The boy was suspected of KHE and transferred to the surgical oncology department, performing an ultrasound-guided puncture biopsy. Pathological results demonstrated positive CD31, D2-40 (Podoplanin), and FLI1 (Friend leukemia integration 1) immunohistochemical staining on biopsy specimen, but negative GLUT1 (Glucose transporter protein isoform 1) staining, further confirming the diagnosis of KHE . Considering the high risk of surgery, the patient’s parents received methylprednisolone (4 mg/kg/day) and sirolimus (0.8 mg/m2/dose twice daily) treatments. The patient’s platelets remained stable within the normal range and his right hand gradually improved during the follow-up. After one year of treatment, the patient’s right hand swelling significantly improved, and chest X -ray revealed that tumor became smaller. Additionally, scoliosis is currently being corrected.
In addition to reduced platelet counts, the boy had a special Raynaud phenomenon. Therefore, we speculated that this patient could have vasomotor dysfunction. Because endothelin-1 (ET1) and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) play an important role in the contraction and relaxation of blood vessels, respectively . Moreover, ubiquitin-modifying protein A20 overexpression in endothelial cells can significantly increase basal eNOS mRNA and protein levels . Thus, immunohistochemical staining for ET1, eNOS, and A20 was performed on the biopsy specimen. Two previous cases without Raynaud phenomenon were chosen as a control group. Interestingly, we found that ET1 expression levels significantly increased, and eNOS and A20 expression levels significantly decreased compared with control patients .