A 24-year-old male presented to the Department of Operative Dentistry and Endodontics of the Fourth Military Medical University with complaints of pain upon biting and cold sensitivity on his maxillary left molar; notably, these symptoms had occurred for approximately 1 month.
For approximately one month, the patient felt pain in his maxillary left molar while chewing, and the tooth was sensitive to cold. Before this time, the tooth did not exhibit spontaneous pain.
The patient did not have a relevant medical history. He did not report any history of drug allergies or systemic diseases and exhibited no apparent dental treatment contraindications.
The patient did not report any personal and family history.
Clinical analyses revealed the presence of two extra teeth on the buccal aspect of the maxillary left second molar (#15); however, these teeth were separated by distinct developmental grooves . Long-term impaction of food caused gingival recession in this region, but no caries or other obvious defects were detected. Decay in the intersecting groove was evident. Pain was evident in response to percussion, but responses were normal for the adjacent and contralateral teeth. The visual analogue scale (VAS) score of the #15 tooth was 3.5. The readings of the pulp viability test of the #15 and #2 teeth were 21 and 20, respectively. A pulp electric viability test yielded normal responses, which were identical to those of the control teeth. The periodontal probing depth of the #15 tooth was < 3.0 mm. No mobility or swelling was evident. The Oral Hygiene Index-Simplified (OHI-S) and Decayed Missing Filled-Index (DMF-Index) scores are shown in Tables and .
This case did not have any laboratory examinations.
Digital periapical radiography was performed preoperatively, and the results did not provide sufficient information . Tooth fusion was suspected; therefore, CBCT was considered to be appropriate. After obtaining informed consent from the patient, CBCT imaging was performed to assess the root canal systems of the fused left maxillary second molar and supernumerary teeth via 3D technology (New Tom VG10048S; Quantitative Radiologys.r.l, Verona, Italy). The axial, sagittal, and coronal sections confirmed that the maxillary left second molar and two paramolars were fused, and no such abnormalities were evident on the other side . Three slightly curved and patent root canals were present in the maxillary second molar, and each of the fused paramolers contained a single similar canal. The apex area of the irregular bending isthmus was observed in the periapical transmission image .