A 67-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for investigation of an abnormal shadow in the left lower lung field on chest radiography . She was asymptomatic and had no significant past medical history. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a solitary nodule measuring 22 mm in diameter in the periphery of the left lower lobe . The laboratory findings, including tumor markers, an interferon-gamma release assay (T-SPOT.TB, Oxford, Immunotec, Abingdon, UK), β-d-glucan, and serum cryptococcal antigen were negative. There were no findings suggestive of immunodeficiency or diabetes mellitus. A bronchoscopy with transbronchial biopsy and bronchial lavage were performed to diagnose the solitary pulmonary nodule. Adequate specimens were collected; however, a chest radiograph obtained immediately after a bronchoscopy showed a left-sided pneumothorax . The pneumothorax was small and asymptomatic, so the patient was observed without intervention and recovered within a few days. Although Mycobacterium avium was cultured from bronchial lavage fluid, histologic examination of the biopsy specimens showed nonspecific chronic inflammation with atypical B-cell proliferation. We could not make a definitive diagnosis of the nodule, and malignancy was unable to be ruled out. To investigate the nodule further, surgical lung resection was planned. The patient was hospitalized for surgery 1 month after her bronchoscopy. Although she had no fever, cough, or shortness of breath, a chest radiograph on the day of hospitalization showed a left-sided pleural effusion . Given that there was no remarkable change in her general condition, video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was performed as planned. About 300 ml of pale yellow transparent pleural effusion was found in the thoracic cavity and removed by suction. The parietal and visceral pleura near the nodule were slightly thickened with numerous scattered white small granules. . There was partial adhesion between the parietal and visceral pleura . Partial resection of the left lower lobe including the nodule and a parietal pleura biopsy were performed. Histologic examination of the resected left lower lobe and parietal pleura showed an epithelioid cell granuloma with caseous necrosis . There was no evidence of malignancy. Although tissue and pleural fluid cultures were negative, Ziehl–Neelsen stain-positive bacilli were observed in both lung and pleural tissues . Based on the histological findings, the patient was diagnosed with SPN and pleuritis caused by Mycobacterium avium infection. Combination chemotherapy of rifampin (450 mg/day), ethambutol (500 mg/day), and clarithromycin (800 mg/day) for Mycobacterium avium infection was initiated after surgery. She had no complications, and there was no recurrence of pleural effusion 6 months after initiating postoperative chemotherapy.