A 16-year-old athletic and white male with no significant medical history presented to an outside facility for foot and ankle pain in September of 2017. The patient described left foot and ankle pain after sustaining an eversion injury secondary to a mechanical fall down a flight of stairs. The outside facility performed a diagnostic workup involving an X-ray of the patient’s foot and ankle. Ultimately, the patient was splinted and sent home with no instruction for provider follow-up after the evaluation.
One year later, in September of 2018, the patient was referred to SZ Foot and Ankle Clinic for specialist evaluation due to continued pain. The pain was localized to the arch of his left foot and no longer in his ankle. The patient was concerned because the pain had been negatively affecting his athletic performance. At that time, X-rays were performed , and the patient was diagnosed with an accessory navicular bone along with insertional tendonitis. MRI was ordered, the patient was given a CAM boot for immobilization, and the patient was instructed to follow-up in 2 weeks. The MRI displayed edema of the tarsometatarsal joints with possible AVN of the navicular bone.
The patient was then placed in a below-knee cast for 3 weeks with a roll-about scooter to remain non-weight bearing. Serial X-rays were performed to evaluate AVN status which was unchanged from baseline. One month later in October of 2018, the cast was removed and transition to a UCBL type of custom orthotic was attempted. However, the patient endorsed continued pain and he was recasted for an additional 2 weeks. At 6 weeks from initial casting, the patient was transitioned to stability shoes with UCBL type of custom orthotics.
For 2 months, from December 2018 to February 2019, the patient was asymptomatic. However, a sudden and unprovoked relapse in his pain occurred. During this relapse, we pursued inflammatory marker laboratories consisting of an erythrocyte sediment rate and C-reactive protein which were unremarkable. These findings were inconsistent with his prolonged relapsing and remitting symptomatology. The patient’s activity level deteriorated as he was forced to rely on his roll-about scooter to ambulate.
In March of 2019, the patient became severely impaired in his functional capacity due to his pain. Further investigation provoked a diagnostic ultrasound which suggested mild posterior tibialis tenosynovitis. The patient’s reported symptoms and imaging were inconsistent with AVN. A follow-up MRI with contrast was ordered which suggested bone marrow edema of the navicular consistent with TBME syndrome . The MRI findings and clinical examination led us to recommend exploratory surgical intervention.
In September of 2019, 2 years after his original injury, we planned for an open reduction with internal fixation of the navicular using Zimmer-Biomet Subchondroplasty with possible excision of the accessory navicular under general anesthesia. Ultimately, we injected a significant amount of subchondroplasty intraoperatively. The patient’s accessory navicular bone was found to be stable and therefore did not require excision. One-week post-operative radiographs were obtained and showed no significant change from baseline.
At the patient’s 1-week post-operative follow-up, he reported complete resolution of pain and was transitioned into a CAM boot. At 2-week post-operative, the patient was allowed to transition to a stable gym shoe. At 4-week post-operative, the patient reported pain over the tibialis anterior tendon, rating it a 2/10. He had no pain over the navicular. Supervised physical therapy was performed and the patient’s tendon pain resolved resulting in complete resolution of all symptoms. The patient was then able to return to all activities in his active lifestyle.
Finally, in March of 2020, a follow-up MRI was obtained for the purposes of this case study . The findings of this MRI suggested a mild reduction in edema with changes consistent with subchondroplasty. The patient denied pain and was symptom-free with continued participation in organized sports and activities. The patient’s most recent evaluation occurred in October of 2020, 3 years after his original injury, with no complaints per patient report. A diagrammatic representation of the patient’s history is summarized in .