We present a 29-year-old male who was admitted to our hospital with a previous diagnosis of increased IOP for 8 months in treatment with a combined drop of timolol-dorzolamide-brimonidine every 12 h and bimatoprost every 24 h in both eyes. The patient was referred having had LASIK surgery a year before admission.
His ophthalmologic exam revealed a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 0.20 LogMAR in both eyes. His IOP was 34 mm Hg in the right eye (OD) and 38 mm Hg in the left eye (OS), examination of the anterior segment was only relevant for a clear well-positioned LASIK flap and a gonioscopically open anterior chamber angle, and fundus examination revealed glaucomatous optic disc cupping of 80% in both eyes and peripheral vascular sheathing. No signs of media opacity, retinal hemorrhage, macular or peripheral detachments, or other abnormalities were observed in either eye. Automated visual fields were obtained to confirm glaucomatous visual field defect. Suspecting peripheral retinal vasculopathy, fluorescein angiography was performed revealing dye leakage with parietal staining of peripheral vessels. Blood work was ordered to rule out rheumatologic, infectious, and thromboembolic etiologies for retinal vasculitis. All tests were negative.
In the following week, IOP was poorly controlled in spite of maximum medical treatment and IOP values remained consistently over 30 mm Hg. An Ahmed valve implantation was scheduled and performed sequentially in both eyes. On the first postoperative day, BCVA was 1.00 OD and 0.50 OS, and IOP was 0 and 3 mm Hg, respectively. Slit-lamp examination revealed a functional filtering bleb, a formed anterior chamber and a free tube opening. Pupillary response was somewhat delayed and a slight afferent pupillary defect was present. Fundus examination showed blurred, hyperemic optic disc with peripapillary hemorrhages and scattered white-centered retinal hemorrhages in the periphery and posterior pole in both eyes accompanied with macular folds in the OS . Early postoperative treatment with prednisolone acetate 1% q.i.d. and atropine 1% t.i.d. was initiated. At the postoperative week, a new fluorescein angiography revealed blockage hypofluorescence in the areas of intraretinal hemorrhages and disc hyperfluorescence but no delay in venous filling , leading to the diagnosis of decompression retinopathy in both eyes (OU) and hypotonic maculopathy of the OS. One week postoperatively, his IOP was 10 mm Hg in OU, BCVA was 0.70 OD and 0.40 OS, and the retinal hemorrhages began to resolve. One month after surgery, the retinal hemorrhages showed gradual reduction in size. . At the third month of follow-up, BCVA improved to 0.40 OD and 0.30 OS, and IOP was 16 mm Hg in OU. Fundal hemorrhages had faded and hypotonic maculopathy had resolved.