An 80-year-old female living independently presented with sudden severe abdominal pain, weakness, and dizziness. The patient reported she had no constipation or a coughing episode that would increase the intra-abdominal pressure. She did not experience any recent trauma. The patient’s obstetric history included one full-term vaginal delivery and long-standing presence of uterine prolapse (grade 3) treated with pessary placement. However, she stopped using it 2 years ago. Other concomitant diseases were arterial hypertension and anxiety disorder managed with Diazepam. After examination by a gynaecologist, the patient was referred to our department because of established an irreducible small-bowel prolapse through the vagina and suspected changes of the intestinal vitality.
The physical examination revealed impaired general condition, pale skin, a pulse rate of 90 per minute, and blood pressure of 109/60. The patient’s position in the bed was passive. The abdomen was significantly tender in the lower quadrants with hypoactive bowel sounds. Perineal examination showed 40–50 cm of small bowel prolapsing through the vagina along with associated high-grade uterine prolapse. The loops appeared edematous and thickened, with changed colour, but without obvious necrosis. The mesentery was dusky red and ecchymotic with signs of impaired venous return . Routine laboratory tests revealed anaemia (haemoglobin 91 g/l), increased values of leukocytes (12.3 × 109 cells/l), CRP (68 mg/dL), and fibrinogen (6.4 g/l). Blood gas analysis showed decompensated metabolic acidosis (pH 7.24, BE – 9.7, satO2 79%, tCO2 16.5). Fluid resuscitation and intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic administration (Metronidazole and Cefoperazon) were timely initiated.
Because the intraperitoneal reposition of the eviscerated intestine was not possible and the diagnosis was visible from the examination, CT was not performed to save time. The decision for an early as possible operation was taken into account the status of the prolapsing intestine, and the goal was the preservation of intestinal vitality and avoidance of intestinal resection, if feasible.
The eviscerated intestine was wrapped with warm, sterile, saline-soaked packs. The surgical procedure started with a lower midline incision which later was extended proximally. After assessing the damage, the prolapsed small bowel was reduced into the abdomen. The exploration revealed a laceration of the peritoneum of the Douglas cavity and a defect in the posterior vaginal fornix. The vagina was distended and thickened in its upper third, probably due to the long-term uterine prolapse and pessary use. The affected intestinal loop was localized 30 cm proximally to the ileocecal valve. After the reposition, the small bowel loop restored its vital colour, so bowel resection was not required. Several small mesenteric tears were found and sutured subsequently. The uterus was enlarged due to the presence of several fibroids, and the uterine round ligaments were highly distended. There were no visible signs of malignancies. Intraoperative consultation with a gynaecologist was made because of the changes in the uterus and upper part of the vagina. A hysterectomy with resection of the upper third of the vagina was performed. Vaginal closure, plication of the uterine round ligaments, and fixation to the vaginal cuff were carried out. The peritoneum from the lateral pelvic sidewalls was mobilized, and the repair was performed. Subsequently, the peritoneal cavity was washed with saline. The additional pathological finding was the highly enlarged gallbladder with thickened walls and multiple gallstones inside. So, cholecystectomy was performed. Three drains were inserted—one was placed in the subhepatic space, one over the restored peritoneum of the pelvis, and the last was extraperitoneal, near the vaginal cuff. The same antibiotic regimen initiated prior to surgery was undertaken postoperatively. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day. Two years later, the patient has no complaints related to the surgery.