A 28-year-old woman had a history of sudden onset of syncope diagnosed as paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia. She underwent electric ablation and placement of an ICD in her left shoulder. She had poor wound healing at a 5-month follow-up visit and she was admitted to the hospital on December 1, 2008 for management of a pocket infection. Exposure of the ICD generator and pacing lead were found on February 26, 2009, and the generator was removed, leaving the pacing lead in place. She had episodic pyrexia beginning in May 2009 and her blood cultures grew MRSA (isolate st01, positive in one of two sets blood cultures collected). ICD device-related endocarditis was highly suspected. Intravenous antibiotics with vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours for 14 days followed by oral linezolid 600 mg every 12 hours for another 14 days were prescribed for her endocarditis, but the blood cultures still grew MRSA (isolate st02, positive in one of two sets blood cultures collected). A thoracotomy was planned to remove the pacing lead. However, because of three episodes of broken peripheral venous catheter tips left in the vessels, generator displacement requiring surgical intervention, and emotional fragility, the surgical intervention was postponed due to the high possibility of postoperative wound infection and further osteomyelitis. Daptomycin at a dosage of 6 mg/kg daily was prescribed for its effective biofilm penetration ability and rapid bacteriocidal efficacy, and the subsequent blood culture (one set collected) yielded negative finding. A total 65 days of treatment were completed and the patient was discharged on October 24, 2009.
Unfortunately, spiking fever and chills occurred 1 day after discharge and the blood cultures grew MRSA again (isolates st03, positive in one of two blood cultures collected). During antibiotic treatment with intravenous tigecycline (100-mg loading dose and 50 mg every 12 hours for 14 days), one of two sets of blood cultures grew MRSA (isolate st04). Teicoplanin 400 mg every 12 hours for another 14 days was given, but another one of two sets of blood cultures grew MRSA (isolate st05). Intravenous daptomycin was prescribed at a dosage of up to 9 mg/kg daily in combination with intravenous fosfomycin 6 g every 6 hours starting December 16, 2009, due to the persistence of MRSA bacteremia with the ICD device in place. The patient's fever subsided after these treatments and the next three sets of blood cultures were negative 1 week after the start of daptomycin-fosfomycin combination therapy. However, transesophageal echocardiography revealed vegetations growing on the pacing lead, and a scan for osteomyelitis showed increased uptake of the radiotracer in the left proximal clavicle. Moreover, the daptomycin Etest (AB Biodisk, Solna, Sweden) of MRSA isolate st05 indicated that it was nonsusceptible to daptomycin, with a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) ranging from 1.5 to 2 mg/L. After discussion among the surgeons and infectious disease specialists, a thoracotomy was performed on December 22, 2009 for removal of the pacing lead due to the previous persistence of S. aureus bacteremia; high-dose daptomycin 12 mg/kg intravenously daily was also started. A vegetation measuring 1.3 × 0.6 × 0.1 cm was found on the pacing lead, but the Gram stain showed no microbes. Tissue culture of the vegetation found on the pacing lead grew MRSA (isolate st06), as did as the tip of the pacing lead (isolate st07).
Because the osteomyelitis scan was positive, combination therapy with daptomycin 12 mg/kg intravenously daily and fosfomycin 6 g intravenously every 6 hours was administered for total of 56 days. The patient had no further pyretic episodes following hospitalization. A follow-up osteomyelitis scan on March 8, 2010 was negative, and follow-up transthoracic echocardiography showed no vegetation. The patient's symptoms were attributed to endocarditis; she remained symptom free during 12 months of follow-up.