The first animal was a 5-year-old male cynomolgus macaque (Macaca fascicularis) born in Mauritius and raised for 3 years in a group of 11 monkeys in an indoor/outdoor facility with open-air enclosure at SILABE platform, located near the Niederhausbergen forest (Alsace, northeastern France). Its diet had consisted of pellets completed with fruits and seeds. During the 3 years, 3 sanitary checks were performed, including general check-ups, weighing, tuberculination and injections of ivermectine (1 mg/3 kg, subcutaneously). No abnormalities were reported for the concerned animal until March 2011 when it presented a paresis of the lower limbs which evolved into paralysis. Blood tests revealed increased monocyte (2302/mm3; reference: 810/mm3) and neutrophile counts (11,040 /mm3; reference range: 5000-7000/mm3). Other values were within normal range. A computed tomography scan revealed the presence of one large hepatic mass (5 cm). A second one (3 cm), located in paravertebral region, was associated with vertebral lesions (T9-T11) and spinal deformation. The monkey was euthanatized and submitted to postmortem examination. Multiple vesicles and alveolar cystic lesions characteristic of AE were found (1–3 mm). Necrosis was observed in the liver parenchyma and cysts were surrounded by eosinophile and neutrophile infiltration. No cyst formation was present in the other tissues examined (lung, pancreas or spleen). Vesicles contained multiple protoscolices and calcareous corpuscles. Protoscolices were both invaginated or evaginated . Hooks were visible (<30 μm) . Serology was highly positive for Echinococcus multilocularis (using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with Em2+ antigen, Bordier Affinity Products SA, Crissier, Switzerland) and completely negative for Echinococcus granulosus. DNA isolated from the hepatic cysts confirmed the identification of E. multilocularis (200 bp), using primer pair EM-H15/EM-H17 and cycling conditions as described by Georges et al. . In April 2011, all animals of the colony were screened for E. multilocularis antibodies by serology (ELISA). All monkeys were asymptomatic and seronegative.
Twenty-seven months later, during a routine check-up, an abdominal enlargement was observed in a second cynomolgus macaque of the colony. At necropsy, a hepatic mass (12 cm) and a paravertebral mass (2 cm) close to the spine were observed associated with atrophy of the lungs and an important volume of ascites. The animal was an 11-year-old male cynomolgus macaque born in Mauritius that had lived in the center for 7 years. Half of the liver parenchyma was destroyed and multilocular cysts were present in both masses and were consistent with infection by the metacestode stage of E. multilocularis. Vesicles contained multiple protoscolices. Serology and DNA isolated from hepatic and abdominal cysts confirmed E. multilocularis infection. In September 2013, all animals of the colony were screened again for E. multilocularis antibodies by serology and all monkeys were seronegative.