A 62-year-old Japanese male was transported to our hospital by ambulance with a complaint of fever and dyspnea.
One day prior, he had developed fever and dyspnea, and symptoms persisted.
His medical history included untreated hypertension.
He smoked 80 cigarettes per day, with a 20-year history of smoking, and drank 1750 mL of beer per day, with a 40-year history of alcohol consumption. He did not undergo regular medical check-ups. He was engaged in transport work, and had no known allergies. He was single and lived alone. He did not require any assistance for everyday life activities. Additionally, the patient had no family history of hereditary diseases or malignant diseases.
The patient was 175 cm tall and weighed 70 kg (body mass index: 22.9). At the emergency department (ED), his vital signs were abnormal: His blood pressure was 190/90 mmHg, his heart rate was 150 regular beats/min, his body temperature was 39.5°C, his oxygen saturation was 77% under 10 L/min oxygen on a reservoir face mask, his respiratory rate was 40/min, and his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15 points (E4V5M6). Upon physical examination, fine crackling was heard bilaterally throughout his chest. Nothing else abnormal was detected upon physical examination, including skin and neurological findings.
A routine laboratory examination, taken upon arrival at the ED, revealed increased values for aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, uric acid, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio, activated partial thromboplastin time, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products, and d-dimer, and deceased values for white blood cells, platelets, albumin, sodium, chloride, and blood sugar. On the other hand, other values, including complete blood count and biochemistry, were normal . A urine qualitative test revealed positive results for occult blood and protein. A rapid urinary antigen detection kit, BinaxNOW™ Streptococcus pneumoniae (S. pneumoniae) (Abbott, United States), tested positive. A blood gas analysis taken from an artery, under 10 L/min oxygen on a reservoir face mask, revealed increased values for anion gap and lactate, and decreased values for potential of hydrogen, partial pressure of arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide, bicarbonate ions, base excess, and arterial oxygen saturation . An ID NOW™ COVID-19 assay (Abbott, United States), an isothermal nucleic acid amplification near-patient test that is marketed as providing a qualitative result (positive, negative, or invalid) in 15 min, tested positive.
An electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral ground grass opacity in the right middle and lower lung field, and the left lower lung field .