A 46-year-old Chinese man referred to us with one-month experience of gradually deteriorating right nasal block, epistaxis, and epiphora from the right eye. Nasoendoscopy revealed a reddish, friable mass arising from the right inferior meatus, extending over the anterior half of the right nasal cavity bleeding on touch .
The histology showed a malignant blue cell tumor infiltrating into the subepithelial stroma. Neoplastic cells displayed round to oval nuclei with fine chromatin and indistinct cytoplasmic membrane .
A final diagnosis of ES/primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) was made. The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed a polypoidal soft tissue mass at the right anterior nasal cavity floor, measuring 0.7×1.0×0.7 cm with mucosal thickening observed in the right maxillary sinus, without any bony erosion and no evidence of distant metastasis . The patient underwent right endoscopic medial maxillectomy with modified Denker’s procedure.
Intraoperative biopsy concurred with the initial biopsy diagnosis, and surgical margins were clear. He received three follow-up sessions over 3 months with monthly intervals. In the early stages, he complained of numbness and swelling on the right cheek, along with moderate epiphora; however, the conditions improved in subsequent follow-up. In this regard, no alar collapse was noted, and the rigid nasendoscopy showed good epithelialization at the operated site with no sign of relapse. Thereafter, he was referred to the oncology team with the intent of initiating postoperative chemotherapy, consisting of Vincristine, Ifosfamide, Doxorubicin, and Etoposide (VIDE regime), and completed six cycles. Repeated rigid nasendoscopy revealed no observed tumor relapse. After a month of post-chemotherapy, a bone scan was performed and revealed an increased tracer uptake over the right maxillary and nasal bone extending to the right orbital floor.
This indicated sclerotic changes of the bone which were suggestive of bone involvement with tumor. In this regard, he was advised to refer to local radiation therapy; however, he refused to continue his treatment. He was last seen at our clinic 11 months post-operation, with no sign of local recurrence. He defaulted the follow-up since then.