A 45-year-old male had a history of chronic hepatitis B infection and hypertension and a mild increase in glucose levels. He had been regularly followed up in a gastrointestinal outpatient clinic for chronic hepatitis B infection. Half a year before admission, a complicated liver cyst was incidentally found on liver sonography in another hospital, where computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy of the complicated liver cyst was performed. The pathology report revealed grade 2 neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) with a mitotic figure of 7 in 10 high-power fields. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed the diagnosis of NETs with positive chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD 56 staining. The lesion was negative for CK-7 and hepatocellular carcinoma markers, including Hepar-1, arginase-1, and glypican-3. Metastatic NET was considered. During this period, there was no abdominal pain, flushing, or diarrhea but mild cold sweating.
He was then hospitalized in our hospital. The hemogram and biochemistry investigations were normal, including serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) levels (<0.6 IU/L, normal: <37 IU/L), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (1.36 ng/mL, normal: <5 ng/mL), and alpha-fetoprotein levels (3.8 ng/mL, normal: <9 ng/mL). Serum chromogranin A levels were elevated (119.80 ng/mL, normal: <101.9 ng/mL), but adrenal function (cortisol 12.87 µg/dL, normal: 7-9AM 4.2-22.4 µg/dL, 3-5PM 3.1-16.7 µg/dL; adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 35.10 pg/mL, normal: 7.2-63.3 pg/mL), gastrin levels (44.2 pg/mL, normal: 28-185 pg/mL), and C-peptide levels (4.5 ng/mL, 1.1-4.4 ng/mL) were all within the normal range, as were urinary vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) (8.1 mg/day, normal: 1.9-9.8 mg/day) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) (4.8 mg/day, normal: 2-6 mg/day) levels. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) (7069.00, nonreactive: <0.9, equivocal: 0.9-10, reactive: >10), anti-HBs antibody (528.50 IU/L, nonreactive: <10), and anti-HBc antibody (0.005, non-reactive: >1.0) were all reactive but nonreactive to anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody. Subsequent abdominal CT showed a pancreatic body cystic tumor approximately 1.5 cm in size and a suspected pancreatic tail tumor associated with liver tumors in the right and left lobes . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen revealed a solid mass at the pancreatic tail with numerous liver tumors favoring metastases. The pancreatic body tumor was a cyst . Positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) with MRI also showed peripancreatic lymph node metastases . Transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) of the right lobe of the liver was performed during this admission. He was discharged 3 days after TACE.
He started to take 5 mg everolimus twice a day and 20 mg octreotide LAR every 28 days, starting from 8 days after the 1st TACE. No hepatitis B virus (HBV) prophylaxis treatment was administered. After he took everolimus for three months and octreotide 3 times, and subsequent abdominal CT showed stationary pancreatic NETs but decreased liver metastasis nodule numbers, suggesting partial response to concurrent everolimus . Therefore, he underwent laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy three and half months after the initial treatment of everolimus. The pathology report revealed grade 2 NETs of the pancreas with direct invasion of the spleen. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that tumor cells were positive for CD56, chromogranin A, synaptophysin and beta-catenin on the membrane and negative for insulin. Ki-67 index was 15% . The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 7 days after the surgery.
He continued everolimus 5 mg twice a day and octreotide 20 mg every 28 days after the operation. No HBV prophylaxis treatment was administered as before. Two and half months after the surgery, he underwent abdominal CT for follow-up, which disclosed no evidence of local recurrence at the pancreas and regression of the liver tumor where previous TACE was performed; the other liver metastases appeared as stable disease.
Approximately 2 weeks after the last abdominal CT, he had general weakness with an icteric look and then coma. He visited another hospital abroad, and was initially hospitalized there; hepatic failure progressed there. Four days later, he was transferred back to our hospital and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). The hemogram and biochemistry study showed coagulopathy but no thrombocytopenia (international normalized ratio (INR) 2.9, platelet count 22,6000/µL), jaundice (total bilirubin 11.1 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 6.9 mg/dL), abnormal liver function test (aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 824 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 636 U/L), azotemia (blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 21.2 mg/dL, creatinine 5.87 mg/dL) or elevation in ammonia level (408 µg/dL). The HBV DNA level was 1.832509 million cps/ml, and the anti-hepatitis B e antibody was reactive, so entecavir was prescribed. Anti-hepatitis C antibody, CMV-IgM, HIV antigen, EB-VCA IgM, and RPR were all nonreactive. Acute hepatitis B flare-up–related fulminant hepatic failure was diagnosed since other possible causes of hepatic failure were excluded. However, general tonic clonic seizures occurred in the ICU, but brain CT showed no obvious lesions. Five days after hepatic failure was apparent, pulseless ventricular tachycardia occurred. The patient expired after failed resuscitation.