The patient was a woman in her fifties who sustained a head injury as a result of DV by her husband. She was transported by ambulance to the emergency department of our hospital. Her medical history included panic disorder and sleep disorder. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right orbital floor fracture and sinusitis extending into the inferior of the orbit and into the maxillary and ethmoidal sinuses . The orbital floor fracture was judged by a radiologist to be an old fracture. An emergency physician explained to the husband the need for her to get an eye checkup for ocular symptoms because of the old blowout fracture.
Forty-three days after the first visit to our hospital, she was hit again by the husband but continued to endure eye pain at home by using over-the-counter drugs, specifically analgesics, eye drops, and eye ointments. The sharp right eye pain and periorbital swelling gradually deteriorated, and pus began to appear from the right eye. Twenty-eight days following second violence, she accepted to undergo ophthalmological examination at our hospital. On presentation to us, the ocular surface of the right eye was covered with pus. Swelling of the upper and lower eyelids made eyelid closure impossible, and exophthalmos, severe corneal ulcer, panophthalmitis, and no light perception were observed . Although antianxiety and antipsychotic drugs were used under the direction of a psychiatrist as she started having a panic attack in the consultation room, ultrasonography and electroretinography could not be carried out. There was no obvious bruising around the eye and no tear on the ocular surface at that time. Head CT showed the old blowout fracture and chronic sinusitis as observed previously, but also orbital cellulitis and maxilla fracture that had not been previously detected. Orbital CT also showed that the shape of eyeball was maintained and that there was neither foreign body nor abscess in the orbit. It was noteworthy that there was no new blowout fracture. These findings raised concerns that orbital cellulitis could progress to intracranial infection unless intensive treatment was started. These potential risks were explained to her and the husband, but consent to immediate admission could not be obtained. She also strongly insisted on returning to the marital home and did so. Gram stain of pus sample obtained from the ocular surface showed gram-positive cocci, gram-positive bacilli, and gram-negative bacilli. In addition, Mitis. streptococcus and P. micra were isolated on anaerobic culture, with gamma-streptococci on aerobic culture.
The patient returned to our hospital at thirty-five days following second violence due to intolerable pain. As it seemed the topical and oral levofloxacin hydrate (Cravit®) had been ineffective, we recommended enucleation for the purposes of reducing the pain as quickly as possible and preventing orbital cellulitis from progressing to encephalitis. After obtaining her consent, surgical drainage and irrigation of the sinuses and enucleation were performed on the same day. Examination of the enucleated eyeball confirmed large abscess in the anterior chamber and infiltration of neutrophils into the interstitium of the cornea and conjunctiva . From this pathological result, we considered that orbital cellulitis had progressed to panophthalmitis. Gram stain of a pus sample from the maxillary paranasal sinus at surgical drainage yielded gram-positive cocci, gram-positive bacilli, gram-negative bacilli, and leucocytes. Again, M. streptococcus and P. micra were isolated on anaerobic culture.
Postoperatively, following intervention by the police and medical social workers, the psychiatrist proposed that the patient be transferred to the psychiatric hospital secretly and be kept under isolation from the husband. Nevertheless, she showed strong intention to return home with the husband and did so. After the pain resolved, she was referred to the department of plastic surgery at another university hospital to receive a prosthetic eye.