A 15-year-old male presented with limp for 2 years. Clinically, the patient was having typical facies (flat forehead, depressed nasal bridge, hypertelorism, flat midface, bilateral clinodactyly, and spatulate fingertips). Parents were normal with no complaints. The pregnancy was complicated by oligohydramnios starting at 18 weeks of gestational age and continuing throughout the pregnancy. The patient was born as a preterm, premature breech delivery at 30 weeks with birth weight 1600 g. The patient did not cry after birth, had hyaline membrane disease and hyperbilirubinemia (5.2 mg/dl) at birth for which he received surfactant and phototherapy respectively and was admitted in NICU for 13 days. He underwent karyotyping on day 17 based on his skeletal and respiratory abnormality, which turned out to be normal. On genetic mapping, the diagnosis of LS was confirmed. Ultrasonography (abdomen and pelvis) suggests moderately dilated left renal pelvis. Cardiac echo was normal. The patient was diagnosed to have bilateral developmental dysplasia of hip, a month after birth for which both hips were immobilized in hip spica for 3 months. The child was able to ambulate without any support by 15 months of age. At 5 years, the patient complained of neck pain without any neurological deficit. On clinicoradiological examination, atlantoaxial instability was confirmed for which atlantoaxial fusion done . Post-operative outcome was uneventful with resolution of symptoms.
At 14 years of age, the patient presented with a limp. The right knee was having diffuse swelling with medial knee joint line tenderness . The knee having restricted flexion up to 80° with decreased sensation over the anterolateral aspect . The patient had coronal plane valgus instability which has significantly progressed over a period of past 1 year . The synovium was hypertrophied which was eroding the articular surface . The patient also had triple arthrodesis performed in the ipsilateral foot . Spine, bilateral sacroiliac joint, bilateral hip, and left knee examinations were normal. The distal pulses were equally palpable on both sides. Radiographs showed reduction in medial joint space with knee in a chronic fragmentation stage . The clinicoradiological finding of the joint was similar to the neuropathic arthropathy.