A 29-year-old volleyball player male with no significant medical history presented to
the emergency room with a chief complaint of worsening right hand and forearm pain
and cold IV–V fingers, 1 month after COVID-19 infection. Symptoms
started 1 week ago and aggravated in the last 2 days. The patient
reported that he was often affected by blunt trauma to his hands during the
volleyball training. On clinical examination, the temperature of the right hand was
lower than the left, the hand was tensed and swollen. Pulse in the right upper
extremity was not palpable at the ulnar artery. Doppler ultrasound revealed
8 cm long right ulnar artery occlusion, the right radial, and brachial
artery flow were maintained. A right hand computed tomography angiogram (CTA)
demonstrated long thrombotic occlusion of the ulnar artery. Evaluation of the
digital arterial supply by CTA was non-conclusive. The electrocardiogram showed a
normal sinus rhythm. The D-Dimer level was 3252 ng/mL on admission (normal
range < 250 ng/mL). Because of the severe ischaemic signs, invasive
angiography of the arm was proposed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of
angiologists and vascular and orthopaedic surgeons. Upper extremity catheter
angiography via right femoral access revealed high take-off occlusion of both radial
and ulnar arteries, with the poor collateral flow. The distal part of the ulnar
artery and interosseous artery were without any flow. Local thrombolysis with
alteplase (0.1 mg/kg/h) was initiated.
Twenty-four hours later, the radial artery was open but the ulnar artery and the
superficial palmar arch of the hand were still occluded . In an
effort to prevent tissue necrosis and to relieve symptoms, the aspiration procedure
was performed via the same femoral access through a 6F Flexor Check-Flo introducer
(Cook Medical LLC, Bloomington, USA). After the administration of 5000 I.U. of
intra-arterial heparin-sodium, the occlusion of the ulnar artery was passed with a
hydrophilic 0.014″–300 cm Progress 40 guidewire (Abbott
Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) on a CXI Support catheter (Cook Medical LLC,
Bloomington, USA) (the Penumbra catheter needs rail support, especially in this
case, with long distance between femoral access and palmar extremity). Initial
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) was tried in both arteries with a 2.0 mm
× 120 mm Armada balloon (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA), with no
improvement . As a last resort, mechanical
thrombaspiration was attempted. Thrombus was not retractable with the Penumbra CAT3
(3.4-Fr) aspiration catheter (Penumbra Inc., CA, USA) due to its small calibre but
then, upgrading to Penumbra CAT6 (6.0-Fr) aspiration catheter, a large amount of
thrombus could be retrieved . The wire was crossed retrogradely into
the radial artery and the superficial palmar arch was reconstructed using a long
2/2.5 mm× 210 mm Amphirion peripheral balloon
(Invatec, Roncadelle, Italy). Final angiography revealed good antegrade flow
(, Video 1). The hand regained normal colour and
temperature, with a Doppler signal in both forearm arteries. Medication at discharge
was clopidogrel 75 mg PO qDay and rivaroxaban 20 mg PO qDay.
The patient was seen in the outpatient clinic 6 months later, being
asymptomatic, with patent forearm arteries and continuing to play volleyball
(against medical advice). Because the thrombophilia screening came back negative
(antithrombin, protein C, protein S, antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus
anticoagulant, factor V Leiden prothrombin gene mutation,
anti-β-2-glycoprotein-1 antibodies), his antithrombotic scheme was stopped.
Histopathological analysis of the thrombus revealed local thrombosis.