A 17-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our hospital with a suspected CDH. He had experienced occasional left-upper-quadrant pain for two months. The pain then intensified and occurred more often. He consulted a neighborhood clinic, and was referred to our hospital. There was no history of trauma. Chest radiography showed elevation of the left diaphragm . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed CDH . The spleen and left colon had herniated into the left thoracic space through a left posterior diaphragmatic defect. We therefore diagnosed the patient as having a Bochdalek hernia.
He was prepared for surgery via a left thoracoscopic approach, under one lung ventilation, using a double-lumen trachea-tube. Thoracoscopic surgery was performed in the right lateral position. The first trocar for the thoracoscope was placed at the seventh intercostal space over the midaxillary line. We then checked the thoracic cavity and the herniated organs. The left colon and spleen were located in the left thoracic cavity, as seen on the preoperative chest CT . No hernia sac was found. We examined the herniated organs carefully. There was neither adhesion nor necrotic change. Second and third trocars were placed at the eighth intercostal space over the anterior and posterior axillary lines, respectively.
We used an Excel trocar® for CO2 gas insufflation to increase intrathoracic pressure. The herniated organs, the left colon and spleen, were carefully returned to the abdominal cavity. These innovations, aimed at safely returning the herniated organs to the abdominal cavity, were performed with the patient in the head-up (reverse Trendelenburg) position with artificial pneumothorax. First, the patient was placed in the right lateral position and then he was shifted into a reverse Trendelenburg position. Whilst he was in this position, the artificial pneumothorax with CO2 gas was maintained at 8 cm H2O. The patient's circulatory and respiratory status was carefully monitored. These innovations facilitated safe hernia reduction. Fortunately, there were no adhesions in the left thoracic cavity. We were able to insert the thoracoscope through the diaphragmatic defect into the abdominal cavity and confirm the safe placement of the herniated organs.
There was neither torsion of the bowel nor bleeding in the abdominal cavity. The diaphragmatic defect, 5 cm × 6 cm in size, with a smooth circular edge was located posterolaterally . The defect appeared to have gradually expanded at the thoracic wall. As he was a young man, we decided to perform primary closure of the diaphragmatic defect. We thought closing the defect of the diaphragm near the thoracic wall required unrolling and resuturing and we thought that it would be difficult to close the defect by thoracoscopic surgery alone. We thus added a small incision thoracotomy (5 cm in length) near the defect and repaired the diaphragm with a primary suture. The defect was closed using a single layer primary closure method with interrupted non-absorbable sutures . The diaphragm near the thoracic wall required unrolling of the posterior diaphragmatic rim. After detachment, the defect near the thoracic wall was closed and again sutured to the thoracic wall. The thoracic cavity was drained with a single chest tube. The operative time was 144 min and there was no significant blood loss.
The patient recovered uneventfully from anesthesia. A chest radiograph obtained 24 hours after surgery indicated adequate expansion of the left lung. On the first postoperative day (POD1), the chest tube was removed and he was put on a normal diet. After obtaining a final chest radiograph , he was discharged on POD5. Two months later an outpatient chest CT was performed and revealed that there had been no diaphragmatic hernia recurrence .