A 20-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history was admitted to the emergency department with acute chest pain. He was an active smoker and had no family history of premature atherosclerosis. At presentation, haemodynamic measurements and physical examination were normal. The ECG showed mild ST-segment elevation in Leads III and V1-2 without reciprocal ST-segment depression . Transthoracic echocardiography showed akinesia of the basal anteroseptal segment and apical inferior and lateral wall segments. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 45–50%. Shortly thereafter, chest pain increased, and the ECG changed significantly with ST-segment elevation in Leads II, III, aVF, and V6, with ST-segment depression in Leads V1–V5 . These findings are suggestive of a diagnosis of ST-elevation MI. Possible aetiologies include plaque rupture or erosion, coronary artery spasm, spontaneous coronary artery dissection, and thrombo-embolism. Differential diagnoses were myocarditis, Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, and pulmonary embolism. Although non-coronary pathology was considered highly unlikely due to the clinical presentation and dynamic ECG changes correlated to patient’s complaints, it could not be excluded at this point.
Immediate ICA was performed, showing multiple intraluminal thrombi (mid segment LAD with TIMI III flow) and occlusion of the distal segments of the left anterior descending (LAD and diagonal branch) and circumflex (RCx) coronary artery (, upper panels). The right coronary artery showed no abnormalities. During ICA, patient became asymptomatic and his ECG showed regression of the ST-segment changes . Initially, at the time of the procedure, the differential diagnosis of the observed intracoronary thrombi was a thrombo-embolic MI with distal embolization or a spontaneous coronary artery dissection with thrombus formation. Therefore, no coronary intervention was performed, but as distal embolization was suspected the patient was treated with an intravenous glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor (tirofiban) and dual antiplatelet therapy afterwards. Laboratory results showed a high-sensitive troponin-T (hs-TnT) peak value of 5146 [<14] ng/L, and creatinine kinase reached a maximum of 2571 [<225] U/L with a creatinine kinase-MB fraction of 204.9 [<4.9] μg/L. Recent drug abuse was excluded with urine toxicology screening. To assess the efficacy of the initiated antithrombotic therapy, CCTA was performed 2 days afterwards. Three soft plaque lesions in the LAD, distal embolization of the first diagonal branch and RCx were observed (, upper panels). The intraluminal lesions in the mid-LAD on prior ICA were considered to be compatible with intracoronary thrombi. At day 3, CMR was performed to evaluate left ventricular dimensions, function, and infarct size in this young patient. Cine imaging showed akinesia of the mid-basal anterior-anteroseptal, apical inferior-lateral wall segments and true apex with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 47%. Dark-blood DE-CMR showed transmural infarction of the mid-basal septal, apicolateral, and apical segments. In addition, several focal hyperenhanced areas in the mid-myocardial and epicardial layers of the apico-anterior, apico-septal, mid-septal, and basal anterolateral segments were observed in the stack short-axis images, corresponding to LAD and RCx territory (, middle left panel). The orthogonal long-axis views confirmed that all five observed areas of focal non-endocardial hyperenhancement are clearly isolated and not contiguous with proximal or distal scar (, lower panels). Furthermore, a mural intraventricular thrombus was observed in the apex. Since this patient was admitted during the COVID-19 pandemic, routine SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction testing was performed. Although a ‘weak’ positive test result was obtained (cycle threshold 42), the patient lacked classic respiratory symptoms and fever. No signs of inflammation were observed, as inflammatory markers C-reactive protein < 1 [<10] mg/L and leucocytes 7.6 [3.5–11.0] × 109 were not elevated, in addition no characteristic parenchymal abnormalities on CT (i.e. ground-glass opacities, consolidations) were observed.
The patient received triple antithrombotic therapy for 1 month, followed by clopidogrel and a vitamin K antagonist thereafter. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged after 9 days. At 1 year follow-up, no events had occurred. An overview of the follow-up period is given in the timeline.