A 71-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with signs of hypotension and disturbed consciousness. The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes, but due to treatment default he was not receiving any regular medication. There was no other specific medical, social, family, or surgical history. On examination, the patient appeared pale and ill, and he had livedo reticularis. The patient’s blood pressure was 85/47 mmHg, pulse rate was 125 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min with O2 saturation of 99% in room air, and rectal temperature was 33 ℃. The neck was supple. Results of the cardiovascular examination were normal, lungs were clear to auscultation, and the results of the abdominal examination were unremarkable. On neurological examination, his pupils were dilated to approximately 5 mm and were nonreactive to light; the Glasgow Coma Scale score was 6 (E4V1M1). Results from the initial laboratory tests revealed signs of macrocytic anemia (hemoglobin level 9.1 g/L, mean cell volume 112 fL), increased number of white blood cells (25,800 cells/μL), and elevated C-reactive protein level (40.4 mg/L). The patient had hyperglycemia (710 mg/dL). The arterial blood gas test showed metabolic acidosis (pH 6.723, base excess − 32.1 mmol/L) with an anion gap of 30.8. The urine test showed the presence of acetone bodies. Computed tomography without contrast of the whole body (head, chest-pelvis) showed bilateral pulmonary consolidation and mild pancreatic enlargement.
Based on hyperglycemia, presence of urinary acetone bodies, and metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap, the patient was diagnosed with DKA . Initial treatment with fluid resuscitation (2000 mL per 1.5 h, lactated Ringer’s solution), insulin intravenous bolus of 5 U followed by intravenous continuous infusion (3 U/h), and active external rewarming with warm blankets was initiated in the emergency department. After the initial treatment, the patient was admitted to the ICU. Despite fluid resuscitation (400 mL/h), hypotension persisted, and treatment with norepinephrine and vasopressin was initiated. Twelve hours after admission to the ICU, his glucose level had decreased to 385 mg/dL, and 7600 mL of crystalloid fluid was administered. Complete blood count showed the progression of anemia. Biochemical analysis revealed elevated bilirubin levels, and he received a non-warmed blood transfusion. On day 3, his hemodynamic parameters improved. Thus, therapy with norepinephrine and vasopressin was discontinued, and the infusion rate was reduced .
On day 5 of the patient’s ICU stay, RBC agglutination was observed . Based on RBC agglutination and elevated bilirubin levels, CAD was suspected. The result of the direct Coombs test was positive, and the CA titer test revealed an elevated autoantibody titer (1:8192 at 4 ℃). The patient was therefore diagnosed with CAD. No bacterial or viral infections causing CAD or DKA were detected . He was discharged from the ICU on day 6. As a preventive measure, the patient was recommended to avoid cold exposure. During the hospital stay, there was no recurrence of anemia. On day 32 following presentation, he was discharged from the hospital.