A 62-year-old Caucasian gentleman presented to respiratory clinic with persistent cough, hemoptysis, and recurrent chest infection. He was unwell for 6 months with increased breathlessness, mild hoarseness of voice, fatigue, reduced appetite, and weight loss. A chest X-ray showed left-sided opacification and a small effusion.
Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax showed a large 7 × 9 cm complex centrally necrotic lesion of the left lower lobe with distal collapse and consolidation . This was associated with multiple, enlarged bilateral hilar nodes, supraclavicular node, and a thrombus in the left inferior pulmonary vein. The radiological stage was T4N3M1a/c.
He had a background of osteoarthritis, hyperlipidemia, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. He was an ex-smoker with 25–30 cigarettes/day until recently.
After 6 months, he presented to vascular surgery with sudden onset left leg pain. On examination, the left leg was cold, mottled, pale, and lacking sensation but he was able to move his toes. He had a palpable femoral pulse but an absent left popliteal pulse. He was diagnosed with acute limb ischemia and was started on intravenous heparin.
The CT angiogram showed an occlusive thrombus in the mid superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The inferior mesenteric artery was patent and iliofemoral arteries were patent with no opacification of the arteries from mid-thigh onward. He was recalled for delayed phase imaging, which showed a large popliteal artery occlusion at the bifurcation with no run-off distally .
In addition, the large necrotic tumor was noted and was causing complete collapse of the left lower lobe. The tumor extended along the inferior pulmonary vein into the left atrium and appearance had worsened since previous imaging. The lower pole of the right kidney was infarcted . A diagnosis of tumor embolism into the SMA, right renal artery, and left popliteal artery was made. He did not have any symptoms of abdominal pain or any signs of intestinal necrosis on the CT scan.
He underwent a left popliteal embolectomy along with calf fasciotomies. This involved open surgical exposure of the popliteal artery using a medial approach below the knee. The popliteal artery was carefully dissected free. Proximal and distal vessel control was obtained and a transverse arteriotomy was made. A Fogarty balloon catheter was used to perform the embolectomy and adequate blood flow was seen. Polypropylene suture was used to close the arteriotomy in an interrupted manner. Four-compartment fasciotomies were then performed.
Postoperative arterial duplex did not identify flow in the tibio–peroneal trunk, the posterior tibial artery, and the distal peroneal artery. There was monophasic flow in the anterior tibial artery. However, the foot was warm and well perfused. Postoperatively, he was anticoagulated with subcutaneous therapeutic dalteparin injections, 12,500 units/day. The fasciotomy wounds were closed a week later, and the patient was discharged.
The embolectomy specimen sent to the lab contained three pieces of arterial tissue and multiple fragments of gray tissue, which measured 15 × 25 × 8 mm in aggregate. Microscopic examination showed that all pieces of tissue had histological features of a recent thrombus. The pieces of gray tissue macroscopically resembled lung tissue. Immunohistochemical staining was not done to formally identify tumor cells in the specimen.
He subsequently underwent a bronchoscopy and biopsy, which confirmed squamous cell lung cancer, characterized by sheets of large, polygonal, malignant cells containing keratin. This was treated palliatively with chemotherapy and radiotherapy.