A 79-year-old man was diagnosed with pancreatic IPMN, gallstones, and common bile duct stones before surgery for aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, and tricuspid regurgitation. Pancreatic IPMN worsened after cardiac surgery and the patient was referred to our department. Pancreatic IPMN showed high-risk stigmata of enlarged cyst and dilated main pancreatic duct of 48 mm and 18 mm in diameter, respectively . Prior to surgery, endoscopic sphincterotomy was performed for common bile duct stones. We found that the common channel connecting the bile duct and the pancreatic duct was relatively long at 12 mm in length. The pancreatic duct was simultaneously visualized when the contrast agent was injected into the common bile duct . Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy were performed using a stapler with biological reinforcement. The intraoperative appearance of the stump of the pancreas appeared to be well enclosed . The stump of the pancreas was covered with a polyglycolic acid mesh with fibrin glue. The operation time was 323 min, and the bleeding volume was 90 ml. Concomitant cholecystectomy was avoided to reduce operation time and physical burden. Although the drain amylase level at the stump of the pancreas on postoperative day (POD) 1 was elevated, it gradually decreased day by day after treatment with non-eating, antibiotic, and somatostatin analog . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) on POD 4 showed no obvious PA formation (data not shown). Sudden bleeding was observed from the abdominal drain near the stump of the pancreas on POD 6 . Emergent stent graft placement. Emergent stent graft placement and coil embolization were performed for the ruptured PA from the stump of the splenic artery (SA) to the common hepatic artery (CHA). Initially, we placed a stent graft (φ 6 mm × 25 mm, GORE® VIABAHN®) extending from the celiac artery (CA) to the CHA. However, extravasation from the SA persisted even after stent-graft placement, and we thought that this was because the stent graft was smaller than the CA. Next, we performed coil embolization at the proximal side of the stent graft. Then, we performed additional distal coil embolization from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The ruptured artery was completely isolated from the systemic circulation, and hepatic arterial flow was maintained from the SMA to the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) . The aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were not elevated after the placement of stent graft and coil embolization. We then replaced the abdominal drain and initiated continuous irrigation and suction of saline. On POD 9, the drainage fluid changed to yellowish in color with bile contamination . Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography confirmed leakage from the main pancreatic duct. Endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage (ERBD) tube and endoscopic retrograde pancreatic drainage (ERPD) tube were placed as internal drainage of the digestive fluid . On POD 24, second emergent coil embolization was performed for bleeding from the periphery of the left gastric artery (data not shown). On POD 25, open abdominal drainage, omental filling around the pancreatic stump, cholecystectomy, and tube ileostomy were performed. The second operation time was 252 min, and the bleeding volume was 1090 ml. The second operation revealed that the arterial wall of the CHA had disappeared, and the stent graft was exposed . On POD 32, third emergent coil embolization was performed for the ruptured PA at the gastroduodenal artery . Intrahepatic arterial flow was maintained from the right inferior phrenic artery . A balloon catheter was placed at the root of the celiac artery. Subsequently, remnant pancreatic resection was performed. The stent graft placed at the CHA was removed under balloon occlusion of the celiac artery. During the operation, massive bleeding occurred from the right side of the portal vein and was controlled by continuous sutures. The third operation time was 506 min, and the bleeding volume was 5372 ml. After total pancreatectomy, the patient developed renal failure, liver failure, and sepsis. The AST and ALT levels after the third operation were 1662 U/L and 867 U/L, respectively. On POD 39, massive bleeding was again observed from the abdominal drain. Emergent arterial portography under occlusion of the intra-aortic balloon revealed stenosis of the portal vein sutured during the third operation. The bleeding point was the right wall of the superior mesenteric vein, where the remnant pancreas was removed . Although we attempted a percutaneous transhepatic approach, it was unable to treat due to poor blood flow in the intrahepatic portal vein. The patient died of hemorrhagic shock on the same day.