A 62-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a chief complaint of vomiting, abdominal pain, and dorsal pain that had been aggravated for more than 2 months.
Symptoms started more than 2 months before presentation with lower abdominal pain.
There is no special abnormality in the patient's past medical history.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
Tenderness and rebound pain were found on the left abdomen, but the peritoneal irritation sign was negative, not accompanied by jaundice and hepatosplenomegaly.
Blood amylase was 181 U/L. Urinary amylase was 4841 U/L. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was 381.2 U/L. No abnormality was found in routine stool, urine analyses, levels of serum tumor markers, liver function, carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9).
Computed tomography (CT) revealed irregular low mixed-density masses in the head of the pancreas, uncinate process, and adjacent abdominal cavity with multiple exudative changes that were malignant. Abdominal color doppler ultrasound confirmed that the head of the pancreas presented a low-echo lesion of approximately 71 mm × 33 mm × 42 mm, and the boundary was not clear. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed irregular and low mixed-density masses in the head of the pancreas and adjacent abdominal cavity. The maximum cross-section length was approximately 51 mm × 41 mm, and the maximal standardized uptake values (SUVmax) was approximately 20.3 .
We performed EUS-FNA and successfully obtained biopsy tissue from the pancreatic head. During the EUS-FNA, a mass approximately 8 cm in diameter was found in the head of the pancreas, and the mass had invaded the mesenteric root vessels. Intraoperative frozen sectioning of the pancreatic head revealed that nuclear hyperchromatic heterotypic cells were observed in fibrous connective tissue, and there was a high likelihood of malignancy. Postoperative pathology revealed T-cell-based non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with consideration of anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) and CD30+ PTCL . Based on these pathological results, stained sections were also evaluated independently by six pathologists. Finally, combining the patient's medical history, physical examination, imaging studies, and pathological biopsy, they came to this conclusion: CD30+ PTCL-NOS. Thus, the diagnosis of malignant lymphoma was suspected.
Postoperative pathology via endoscopic ultrasonography-guided FNA (EUS-FNA) revealed small lymphocytes and sporadic atypical tissue cells with pleomorphic vesicular nuclei. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed that the interspersed large atypical lymphoid cells were positive for the pan-T-cell markers CD30, vimentin, CD3, P53, CD2, CD4, CD5, CD34 and TIA-1, with a Ki-67 index of 90%, and negative for ALK, CK, CK7, CD56, SyN, CD20, CD10, CD8, MPO, CD79a, Bcl-6 and EBER. Bone marrow biopsy revealed decreased bone marrow proliferation, and IHC revealed that the interspersed large atypical lymphoid cells were positive for the T-cell markers CD3, CD56, CD20, CD7, CD79a, and TIA-1 and negative for CD30. Flow cytometry revealed a small number of CD3+CD5-T cells. A total of 8 differential genomic variations were obtained by comparing the results of next-generation sequencing, which included ERBB4, STAT3, CARD11, B2M, CXCR4, RELN, CDKN2B and CDKN2A, but no first-order variation was found . Based on these histological features and immunophenotypes, a diagnosis of primary pancreatic PTCL-NOS was established. According to Ann Arbor staging, the patients were in the stage III.