A 29-year-old female presented with a lump in the left breast for 2 months. She had no family history of any malignancy including the breast. On physical examination, the patient had a poorly demarcated mobile firm lump in the left breast. The lump was non-tender measuring 7 × 4 × 3 cm in the subareolar region. There was no evidence of axillary lymphadenopathy. The right breast appeared normal. The patient underwent total mastectomy without axillary dissection following core biopsy report of malignant spindle cell tumor.
Gross examination of the mastectomy specimen revealed fleshy ill-circumscribed lesion . Thorough sampling of the lesion was done. Microscopic examination of the sections showed fascicles of spindle cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm tapering at the end intersecting with each other in a diffuse pattern. These spindle cells were seen palisading around the areas of geographic necrosis. Bizarre cells, multinucleated giant cells, and lymphocytes were seen admixed with the spindle cells. Mitotic count was >10/10 hpf . Focally adipose tissue was infiltrated by tumor cells. Initial diagnosis of spindle cell sarcoma was made. The morphological differential diagnosis at this stage was metaplastic carcinoma, leiomyoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, malignant phyllode tumor, and stromal sarcoma.
On immunohistochemistry, only vimentin was positive. Cytokeratin (CK) and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) negativity ruled out metaplastic carcinoma and phyllodes. Smooth muscle actin (SMA), desmin, CD64, and CD34 excluded leiomyoma, stromal sarcoma, inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and phyllode tumor. The possibility of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor and liposarcoma was not considered as S-100 protein and synaptophysin were negative . Based on histological features and immunohistochemical study, diagnosis of undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma was made.
Previous reports in literature suggest that 10.5–24 % of all primary breast sarcomas are undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. It has been a diagnosis of exclusion following thorough sampling and critical use of ancillary diagnostic techniques [, ]. Most undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcomas of the breast affect mainly women over 64 years of age. To our knowledge, ours is the first case report in young women, but it has also been described in older women and men . On gross examination, it can be identified as pale fibrous and fleshy areas admixed with zones of necrosis, hemorrhage, or myxoid features .
Microscopically, lesions exhibit cells showing marked pleomorphism admixed with bizarre giant cells, spindle cells, and variable foamy cells . A storiform growth pattern and variable chronic inflammatory cells are also common . However, clinical history, physical findings, or any histologic pattern is not specific of this tumor. We found many osteoclast-like giant cells also reported by Balbi et al. in literature, and it can lead to diagnostic difficulty mimicking malignant fibrous histiocytoma [, ]. Microscopically, it is impossible to differentiate as it mimics many of the malignant epithelial and mesenchymal tumors. Immunohistochemistry will be useful to distinguish primary breast sarcomas from non-mesenchymal malignant tumors and to delineate the level of differentiation of primary breast sarcomas [, ]. In our case, the patient underwent total mastectomy without axillary dissection, since these tumors rarely spread through the lymphatic system. The role of adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation also has been unclear . Limited data in literature on undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma suggest an aggressive clinical course and high incidence of recurrence and metastasis .