A 62-year-old man, who was an ex-smoker with hyperlipidemia, was diagnosed with CML in 2010. The patient was initially treated with imatinib. However, due to the appearance of a rash, the patient was switched to 300 mg nilotinib twice daily in May 2011, resulting in a major molecular response in May 2013. Subsequently, nilotinib was maintained at this dose. The patient had no history of heart disease and had not undergone any cardiovascular procedures before the start of CML therapy. In April 2019, 8 years after the initiation of nilotinib treatment, the patient complained of several episodes of rest angina, which most frequently occurred in the early morning. Resting chest pain, sometimes accompanied by cold sweats, was quickly resolved with nitrates. The patient was admitted to the hospital with suspected angina pectoris.
Electrocardiography (ECG) performed at the time of admission revealed no ST-segment abnormalities. No abnormal left ventricular wall motion was detected on echocardiography (Supplemental Figure ). The patient underwent coronary angiography, which showed a 25% stenosis of the proximal right coronary artery, 50% stenosis of the proximal to mid right coronary artery, and no remarkable stenosis in the left coronary artery. Since coronary angiography revealed no severe organic stenosis, an acetylcholine spasm provocation test was subsequently performed. Intracoronary administration of 100 μg ACh into the left coronary artery resulted in 90% vasoconstriction of the mid segment of the left anterior descending artery . The patient experienced severe chest pain, and ST-segment depression in the V3-V5 leads was recorded on the electrocardiogram . Coronary flow, chest symptoms, and ST-segment depression on ECG promptly improved after the injection of nitroglycerin into the left coronary artery .
The patient was diagnosed with vasospastic angina, and treatment with a calcium channel blocker and nicorandil was initiated. Although the administration of coronary vasodilators reduced the frequency of chest pain, angina symptoms continuously recurred (1–2 times a month). At 10 months post discharge, the patient complained of an increase in the frequency of angina; therefore, the nilotinib dosage was reduced to 150 mg twice daily. Consequently, the patient reported a significant improvement in chest symptoms (Supplemental Figure ).