A 26-year-old male diagnosed with first-episode schizophrenia had predominant negative symptoms for nearly 6 years without anti-psychotic medication because of stigma and family neglect of his symptoms until his first visit to our hospital in February 2022. The patient, from a rural family of middle socio-economic status, had been unemployed since he graduated from high school. Due to lack of insight, the patient did not seek any medical care by himself. When the patient's family realized that the patient had psychiatric symptoms, they brought the patient to our hospital for treatment. The main clinical manifestations of this patient are affective blunting, alogia, avolition, attentional impairment, and delusion of reference. The major differential diagnosis was major depression. The diagnosis of major depressive disorder was excluded because this patient with markedly impaired social functioning had no obvious depressed mood or anhedonia, and his clinical course was persistent over 6 years. Physical examination, electrocardiogram, and routine blood tests were performed on admission with no abnormal findings. After admission, routine examinations were applied to rule out organic disease and improve clinical medication safety. The cranial computed tomography and electroencephalogram did not reveal any abnormalities. Furthermore, laboratory examination showed normal renal, liver, and thyroid functions. Serum electrolytes, blood glucose and lipid levels, and serum myocardial enzymes were also within normal limits. The patient was treated with amisulpride 400 mg/d. After 2 weeks of treatment, routine serum laboratory tests showed that high creatine kinase of MB (CK-MB) (104 U/L), serum creatine kinase (CK) (13660 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (387 U/L), and myoglobin (Mb) (360.6 ug/L) with normal levels of cardiac troponin I (cTnI). Furthermore, the patient had significantly high levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (146 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (71 U/L). And when the ECG revealed bradycardia (52 beats per minute), the Holter monitor showed high-frequency heart rate variability (HF-HRV) (2081.01 ms2) and low-frequency heart rate variability (LF-HRV) (1542.12 ms2) increased significantly compared to the baseline HF-HRV (1649.44 ms2) and LF-HRV (1325.24 ms2), while the LF/HF ratio (0.74) decreased than the baseline (0.80) . There were no reports of discomfort, such as chest pain or myalgia, and echocardiography revealed no abnormalities. Moreover, the patient had no medical history or family history of cardiovascular disease. Because of the poor therapeutic efficacy, bradycardia, and CK-MB elevation, the medicine was reduced (200 mg/d) on the 17th day after admission and discontinued on the 21st day after admission. After that, the level of the myocardial enzyme spectrum decreased and eventually recovered to the normal range. Furthermore, due to low overall efficacy and the adverse effect of amisulpride, the treatment scheme was modified to include aripiprazole medication. After the aripiprazole medication, this patient's serum myocardial enzymes and heart rate were within the normal range . The negative symptoms of this patient improved significantly and remained stable.