A 68-year-old man presented a weight increase of 7 kg during the last year and symptoms compatible with hypoglycemia (objective vertigo, feeling of an empty head, sweating, palpitations). During some of these episodes low blood glucose levels (< 40 mg/dl) were documented by glucometer measurement. The symptoms regressed with food intake. These episodes initially occurred during physical activity and later also during fasting.
He had no family history of endocrine disease.
At admission, his body mass index was 28 kg/m2. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Biochemical assessment did not show any abnormality, and glucose level was 70 mg/dl (n.v. 65–110). Plasma cortisol at 8 a.m. was in the normal range (394.8 nmol/l, n.v. 138–685 nmol/l), anti-insulin antibodies were negative, chromogranin A was 69 ng/ml (n.v. 10–185), prolactin was 247 mU/l (n.v. 53–369), gastrin was 12.7 pg/ml (n.v. < 180), PTH was 6.4 pmol/l (n.v. 1–6.8) and serum calcium level was 8.8 mg/dl (n.v. 8.6–10.4).
The fasting test was performed, which was interrupted after 12 h due to the onset of symptomatic hypoglycemia (44 mg/dl, glucometer measurement). Plasma glucose level was 41 mg/dl, insulin level 16.3 U/L and C-peptide 1.27 nmol/l . Per protocol, 1 mg of glucagon was injected intravenously after interruption of the fasting test and plasma glucose was measured (time 0′, 41 mg/dl; after 10 min 75 mg/dl, after 20 min 94 mg/dl and after 30 min 93 mg/dl). The patient’s laboratory results showed endogenous hyperinsulinemia, according to published guidelines (fasting test: plasma glucose < 55 mg/dl, with insulin and C-peptide levels > 3 U/L and > 0.2 nmol/L, respectively; glucagone test: > 25 mg/dL increase of glucose levels after fasting) . The short octreotide test (subcutaneous infusion of 100 mg of short-term octreotide at 7.00 a.m. after an overnight fast, and blood glucose, insulin and C-peptide hourly sampling for six hours) was performed to evaluate the efficacy of a possible treatment with somatostatin analogs, in order to counteract hypoglycemia . No food was allowed during the test. The test showed an increase in plasma glucose above 100 mg/dl , and the patient was considered to be responsive to somatostatin analogs .
Additional procedures included:MRI, which revealed a lesion of the uncinate pancreatic process of about 4 cm, which presented a brief contact with the upper mesenteric artery and a > 180° contact with the superior mesenteric vein with suspected infiltration . Octreoscan, which showed a lesion located in the pancreatic site, with a high somatostatin receptor (sstR) density . Abdominal CT scan with contrast, which revealed a polylobed lesion with sharp margins at the level of the uncinate pancreas process, in contact with the superior mesenteric vein and reaching the margins of the superior mesenteric artery. No signs of vessels infiltration were observed.
All these imaging procedures were indicative of the presence of an insulinoma as the cause of endogenous hyperinsulinemia.
Surgical treatment was scheduled. Before surgery, considering the response to the short octreotide test, the patient was treated with short acting octreotide (0.1 mcg twice a day), obtaining a good control of glycemia by glucometer measurement, disappearance of hypoglycemic symptoms and no recurrence of hypoglycemic episodes.
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy and duodenocephalopancreasectomy after one month.
The postoperative course was complicated by the appearance of a pancreatic (grade B) and a biliary fistula, whereby the patient was conservatively treated with fasting and parenteral nutritional intake and subsequenty via a naso-enteral tube. The control CT scan, performed a month later, did not reveal intra-abdominal spill and drainages were removed. Oral feeding was resumed one month after the operation.
The definitive histological examination revealed a neuroendocrine tumor with insulin receptors (insulinoma) of 3.5 cm infiltrating the duodenum, retroperitoneal adipose tissue, with widespread neoplastic thrombosis, and with metastasis in 3 pancreatic-duodenal lymph nodes among the 48 that had been surgically removed (T3N1MO, AjCC VIII edition G1), with a low replicative index (Ki67: 2%); radical resection (R0). Vascular and adipose tissue infiltration by the tumor, which are indicative of malignancy, were observed. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for insulin and synaptophysin .
The most recent abdominal MRI, performed 6 months after surgery, did not reveal any recurrence of disease and currently the patient is in good conditions and with normal glycemic levels.