A 53-year-old lady presented to the otorhinolaryngology clinic with complaints of foreign body sensation at the back of the throat for the past 2 years, which had increasingly worsened over the past 2 weeks. She did not have any hoarseness of voice, dysphagia, or odynophagia. She was otherwise well, with no constitutional symptoms of malignancy.
A clinical examination of the neck revealed neither an enlarged thyroid gland nor palpable cervical lymph node. The systemic examination was otherwise unremarkable. Indirect laryngoscopy showed a soft tissue lesion in the posterior pharynx with medialization of the right vocal cord. Routine bloodwork and thyroid hormones were normal. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the neck showed a right supraglottic enhancing mass within the pyriform fossa measuring 2 x 1.8 x 2.2 cm .
Two small thyroid nodules were found on the right (0.2 x 1.0 cm) and left (1.3 x 1.3 cm) .
Ultrasonography (USG) of the neck was done and reported benign-looking right ACR-TIRADS 1 (0.5 x 0.8 x 1.0 cm) and left ACR-TIRADS 2 (0.4 x 0.5 x 0.6 cm) nodules with normal-appearing sub-centimeter cervical lymph nodes.
An initial tissue biopsy of the posterior pharyngeal mass showed benign mucosal tissue. A trans-oral excision of the posterior pharyngeal tumor was then performed, in which histopathological examination (HPE) revealed a fibrocollagenous tumor infiltrated by neoplastic cells with classical nuclear features of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) and positive for TTF-1 but no lymphovascular invasion .
It was interesting to note that there were no lymphatic structures or cells found within the specimen to deduce that the tumor may have metastatically spread to a parapharyngeal lymph node.
A multidisciplinary team meeting was held, and the patient was planned for total thyroidectomy followed by radioactive iodine ablation as the primary tumor in the ectopic thyroid had been completely excised.
However, definitive surgery was delayed by 9 months due to the COVID pandemic, and she returned with palpable right cervical lymph nodes. Repeated USG showed an upgrade of the left thyroid nodule to ACR-TIRADS 4 and a new suspicious right cervical lymphadenopathy with the loss of normal fatty hilum.
The patient underwent total thyroidectomy with selective neck dissection to the right cervical level II, III, IV, and bilateral level VI central nodes. The thyroidectomy HPE showed small multifocal classical PTC foci involving both lobes with tumor sizes ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 mm, no lymphovascular invasion, and only 1 of 29 lymph nodes with metastasis .
The patient subsequently received 150 mCi of radioactive iodine (RAI) ablation, and a whole-body scan did not reveal any distant metastasis. At the time of writing, 1-year post-surgery, she continues to be well, and serum thyroglobulin (TG) shows a reducing trend of 9µg/L from pre-RAI values of 15µg/L, and no structural recurrence has been detected from follow-up imaging thus far. The patient continues to be on TSH suppression therapy and is scheduled for a repeat RAI whole-body scan 6 months post-RAI ablation with further monitoring of the TG trend.