A 2-month-old Asian-Indian female born full-term at 39 weeks gestation and weighing 2.92 kg at birth was found at 6 weeks of age to have leukocoria of the right eye, suspicious for retinoblastoma. She was referred to the Ocular Oncology Service at Wills Eye Hospital for further evaluation.
On examination, visual acuity was no fix or follow in the right eye (OD) and fix and follow in the left eye (OS). Intraocular pressures were 13 mm Hg OD and 16 mm Hg OS. The anterior segment examination revealed microcornea with horizontal diameter of 10 mm OD, scattered posterior synechiae of the iris, and dense retrolental fibrovascular membrane with anterior and centripetal displacement of the ciliary processes . On anterior examination, OS appeared normal with horizontal corneal diameter of 11 mm.
Fundus examination OD revealed a total closed-open funnel tractional retinal detachment with contraction posterior to the lens and anterior loop fibrovascular contraction. There was mild hemorrhage inferiorly within the vitreous cavity . Fundus examination OS was normal without evidence of peripheral traction or retinal detachment . Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed diffuse late hyperfluorescence and leakage consistent with retinal neovascularization OD. FA OS exhibited normal arterial and venous filling with no evidence of peripheral hypofluoresence consistent with nonperfusion in late frames. There was no evidence of leakage OS . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and orbits disclosed total retinal detachment with a decreased axial length of 17.1 mm OD compared to 18.0 mm OS. These features were suggestive of tractional retinal detachment with microphthalmia OD.
The parents denied other family members with similar findings. They indicated that the infant was found at birth to have a vesicular cutaneous rash over the entire body that spontaneously resolved. Cutaneous examination disclosed extensive linear hyperpigmented streaks along the lines of Blashko . Given the ocular and cutaneous features, the diagnosis of incontinentia pigmenti was suspected and confirmed on skin biopsy. The pain-free OD was managed conservatively with observation. Given the risk for future ischemia OS, close serial examination with FA was advised.