The patient who had previously been exposed to poultry was a 44 years-old female that had avian Influenza A(H7N9) infection and presented with ARDS. After 15 days of flu-like respiratory symptoms and fever, the patient developed severe respiratory distress and was admitted to the emergency ward of local hospital. Two days after the beginning of treatment with antibiotic, the patient developed mild ARDS.That was initially treated with non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NIV) in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of superior hospital. Later, ARDS evolved to the severe stage and a significant septic shock occurred. For this reason, three days after the onset of respiratory failure, the patient received endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation(MV).The patient was referred to ECMO center of our hospital in March 13, 2016 since conventional protective MV did not improve the patient's condition..Severe ARDS (PaO2/FiO2 = 46 mmHg) due to pneumonia caused by avian influenza A(H7N9) virus was diagnosed since the bronchial lavage fluid (BLF) and pharynx swab were positive for H7N9-RNA. Chest X-ray and CT scan showed diffuse and bilateral pulmonary real change opacities .
Upon arrival at the referral ECMO center, sepsis, septic shock, acidosis and so forth, were treated and veno-venous ECMO (VV-ECMO) was initiated (18 F cannula was inserted into right jugular vein and right femoral vein, respectively). The by-pass was established with a blood flow of 4.13 L/min and sweep gas of 4 L/min. This strategy offered the advantage to rest the lung and minimize the risk of ventilator-induced lung injury . Details of antiviral therapy, steroid therapy, antibiotic,antifungal treatments and so on are shown in Table .
With the application of ECMO, the patient's blood gas analysis results gradually improved . Chest radiography was taken every day. In the first radiograph , opacities and consolidation of almost the entire left lung were demonstrated as “white lung”. However, the opacities and consolidation disappeared gradually when the infection was controlled, and the number of white cells returned to normal too.
Treatment with ECMO was maintained for 6 days and stopped due to severe thrombocytopenia because heparin must be applied when starting ECMO. Subcutaneous hemorrhage occurred in fingers and left thigh of the patient. Bloody liquid was sucked out from bronchi. Platelet antibodies were detected in blood and platelet transfusion was ineffective. Fortunately, platelets gradually returned to normal after the withdrawal of ECMO . At the same time, multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter Baumannii infection was found in BLF, sputum and blood. It was fortunate that infection and thrombocytopenia were found in time and gradually cured. On April 9, the patient was successfully extubated and ventilated with non-invasive ventilation (NIV) by face-mask. After 11 days, the patient was discharged to a step down ICU and then at home. After more than eight months of follow-up, the pharynx swab H7N9-RNA remained negative and she was alive finally with a good physical condition.