During the last influenza season a 6-month-old boy born to Turkish, unrelated healthy parents, was admitted after 5 days of febrile bronchitis and without any history of recent diarrhea, with pallor, edema of the eyelids and reduced urine output. Hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin 5.7 g/dL (10.1–13.1 g/dL)), thrombocytopenia (58/nL (150–500/nL)), and renal failure with raised serum creatinine (1.42 mg/dL (0.2–0.5 mg/dL)) lead to the diagnosis of HUS. A blood smear showed schistocytes, the urine analysis proteinuria and an ultrasound enlarged hyperechogenic kidneys. ADAMTS13 activity was normal, while complement activation could be confirmed by mildly reduced serum C3 (69 mg/dL (90–180 mg/dL)) and increased plasma terminal complement complex sC5b-9 (450 ng/ml (<320 ng/ml)). We could not detect any pathogenic enterobacteria (enterohemorrhagic E. coli, Yersina-, Shigella-, Campylobacter species) by culture and no Shiga toxin by PCR in multiple stool samples. A nasopharyngeal swab showed presence of Influenza B DNA by multiplex-PCR and genotyping identified the subtype Yamagata.
Subsequently, genomic analysis of the patient’s CFH, CFI, C3 and MCP genes by Sanger-sequencing identified a pathogenic heterozygous mutation in the MCP gene (c.104G > A (p.Cys35Tyr)) confirming the diagnosis of aHUS . In addition, quantitative MLPA-analysis showed a suspicious signal of a non-allelic homologous recombination (NAHR) in the regulators of complement activation gene cluster (RCA) on chromosome 1 . Meanwhile, we had started the patient on the antiviral drug Oseltamivir, antihypertensive medication and symptomatic treatment. After initial spontaneous recovery the patient developed clinical signs of relapse. Eculizumab treatment was started immediately after vaccination against meningococcal diseases. This resulted in a complete and sustained remission ever since . Previously not immunized, the patient will now be vaccinated against influenza with quadrivalent vaccines for maximum protection before each start of the upcoming seasons.