A 43-year-old woman had a positive fecal occult blood test and underwent a diagnostic colonoscopy at a local hospital. The colonoscopist found a 20-mm pedunculated polyp in the descending colon and performed endoscopic resection. Histopathologic examination revealed non-solid type poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, invading the submucosa (3500 μm from the muscularis mucosa), with lymphatic invasion. The patient was referred to our hospital for additional bowel resection.
The patient was 163-cm tall and weighed 86.1 kg, giving a body mass index of 32 kg/m2 (slightly obese). Her medical and family history was unremarkable, and her abdominal examination yielded no significant findings. All laboratory tests were within normal limits, including the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9).
At a local hospital, endoscopy revealed a 20-mm pedunculated polyp in the descending colon, with a depression at the apex . Computed tomography performed prior to endoscopic resection showed wall thickening in the descending colon but no enlarged lymph nodes or distant metastasis.
Based on the preoperative diagnosis of descending colon cancer (T1bN0M0, stage I), we performed a laparoscopic descending colectomy with regional lymph node dissection. The surgery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 6 days after surgery. Histopathologic examination revealed a non-solid, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with surrounding adenoma. According to the Haggitt classification, this was a level 2 lesion with lymphatic invasion and budding. Because there was no residual cancer after the initial endoscopic resection, the diagnosis was early-stage cancer; however, metastasis was found in one regional lymph node. Pathologically, the cancer was classified as T1bN1aM0, stage IIIA according to the TNM classification system . The patient is currently undergoing postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy using S-1 (a combination of a prodrug of 5-fluorouracil, 5-chloro-2-4-dihydroxypyridine [CDHP], and oxonic acid).