A 41-year-old woman presented to another institution with persistent left chest pain for 8 days, but no incident cause or other complaints. The chest pain was more severe when the patient took a deep breath. The patient had no history of recent surgery or deep venous thrombosis, she had never taken oral contraceptives, and she denied drinking alcohol and smoking cigarettes. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed scattered small ground-grass opacities in the bilateral lung field and a well-defined dense shadow in the left lung . Chest ultrasound confirmed left pleural effusion. The patient was diagnosed with double pneumonia and left pleural effusion. The patient received antibiotics for 8 days, which slightly alleviated the left chest pain. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. On admission her clinical parameters were body temperature 36.5°C, pulse 71 beats/min, respiratory rate 15 breaths/min, blood pressure 118/85 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation when breathing room air 98%. Physical examination was unremarkable. White blood cell count, liver function, kidney function, myocardial markers, and brain natriuretic peptide values were normal, and D-dimer level was 0.02 mg/L. A repeat chest CT scan on the first day after admission showed scattered small ground-grass opacities in the bilateral lung field, but no pleural effusion in the left lung . ECG revealed sinus rhythm and ST-T wave changes, and myocardial ischemia was suspected . Echocardiography showed that ejection fraction was 77%, the right ventricle end-diastolic diameter was 23 mm, tricuspid valve regurgitation, and a valve area of approximately 2.0 cm2. Abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormalities of the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, or kidney. Double pneumonia was suspected, and the patient was prescribed another course of antibiotics. Two days later, the patient's left chest pain was alleviated; however, a similar but more severe pain appeared in the right chest. Further clinical assessments showed the patient's D-dimer level was 0.08 mg/L, and chest CT scan revealed right pleural effusion had emerged . After discussion amongst the clinical team, a computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) was performed. Findings were consistent with a PE in the right pulmonary artery , and a small amount of pleural effusion was seen on the right. No filling defects were seen in the bilateral lower limb veins.
The patient was treated according to the guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of PE.[ Low-molecular-weight heparin calcium injection 4100 IU was administered twice daily by subcutaneous injection. Chest pain was fully alleviated after 6 days, and oral anticoagulant rivaroxaban was given after discharge. Three months later, a lung perfusion scan showed the PE in the right pulmonary artery had significantly improved, and ultrasound showed no evidence of pleural effusion .