A 17-year-old male with non-contributory past history presented to our spine outpatient department with a deformity in the back noticed by the parents 2 years ago, which progressed gradually. Neurological status of the patient was normal.
On clinical examination left sided thoracolumbar curve was seen with left shoulder elevation, truncal shift to the left, left rib cage prominence posteriorly, which became more obvious on Adam’s forward bending test. There was left flank asymmetry, absence of neuro-cutaneous markers with no neuro-deficit. His weight was 51 kg and height measured 170 cm, with BMI being 17.64. Radiological evaluation shows left sided thoracolumbar curve with 70 degree Cobb’s angle with apex at D12 vertebra with D3, D7, D9 and D12 hemi-vertebra with fusion of right sided posterior element of D3 and D4 vertebra .
Preoperative evaluation was done and patient underwent scoliosis correction with posterior instrumented fusion from D4 to L4. Post-operative Cobb’s angle was 22 degree after correction (68.5% curve-correction) and had well-balanced spine in sagittal and coronal plane . Post-operative course was uneventful and patient was discharged after suture removal on postoperative day 15. Patient had episodes of vomiting after consumption of food on post-operative day 30. There was no resolution of vomiting with antiemetic medication prescribed by local healthcare provider. Patient was brought to the hospital on post-operative day 51 with multiple episodes of vomiting, abdominal pain and distension. At the time of presentation to hospital, weight of the patient was 40 kg, due to weight loss of 11 kg over 3 weeks.
He was further evaluated by ultrasonography and computed tomographic angiography which showed intestinal obstruction with greatly distended stomach with first and second part of the duodenum, with collapsed third part of duodenum. CT angiography showed decreased aorto-mesenteric angle of 20 degrees (normal-38–65 degrees) along with reduced aorto-mesenteric distance of 4.4 mm (normal-10–28 mm) which confirmed diagnosis of SMA syndrome .
Medical therapy with correction of dyselectrolemia, nasogastric tube decompression and intravenous hydration, complemented with nutritional support, was initiated. The patient continued to deteriorate on medical therapy. In view of a delayed presentation, severity of symptoms, and a picture of long-standing, gradually progressive symptom complex, the patient was treated surgically by exploratory laparotomy and gastro-jejunostomy with side-to-side jejuno-jejunostomy on post-operative day 54. Intraoperatively, a grossly dilated proximal duodenum and stomach was found, and distal part of the duodenum was collapsed beyond the compression caused between the SMA and the aorta. No other significant cause of obstruction was found. Postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient made complete recovery. He was discharged 14 days after surgery. Patient is doing well at 1-year follow up with maintained spinal correction, and no recurrence of gastrointestinal symptoms or complication os surgery.