A 69-year-old Japanese man experienced a sensation of abdominal fullness and whole abdominal pain for 2 weeks. His body weight decreased by 3 kg over 3 months. He visited his family physician in September 2014 and was referred to our hospital the same day. He had received a colonoscopy and polypectomy 3 years prior. His past medical and family histories were noncontributory. A physical examination revealed a palpable fist-sized, right-lower-quadrant mass accompanied by tenderness. Laboratory tests, including a blood cell count (white blood cells (WBCs): 6300/µL; neutrophils: 70.6%; lymphocytes: 20.6%), electrolytes, liver and renal function and nutritional values, showed no abnormalities. The serum levels of epithelial tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 1.7 ng/mL) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9; 0.1 U/mL), and the lymphoma-specific marker soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R; 435 U/mL) were within normal limits.
The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) examination with contrast medium injection, and an extreme circumferential wall thickness in the ascending colon with a contrast effect, measuring 50 × 50 mm in size, was detected in the right abdomen . According to the frontal plane of the reconstructed view, the large mass was measured to be 68 × 46 mm . Bulky swollen lymph nodes involving ileocolic vessels were detected . Swollen lymph nodes were also observed in the retroperitoneal space on the right side of the psoas muscle , attached to the right side of the inferior vena cava , and on the right-to-posterior side of the right iliac vein, compressing it . Distant metastases (ie, to the liver, lungs or peritoneum) were not found. Colonoscopy did not reveal anything beyond a constriction of the tumor at the ascending colon . The observable tumor border was covered by a normal mucous membrane , and the diagnosis of carcinoma was not made by the biopsy specimens. We conducted fluoroscopy using gastrografin simultaneously, revealing that the stenosis was irregular, measuring 62 mm in length and accompanied by a niche reflecting an ulceration, which strongly suggested that the tumor consisted of an epithelial neoplasm . Considering these imaging findings, we made a preoperative diagnosis of stage IV T4N2M1 (lymph nodes) ascending colon cancer.
During the surgery, which was performed in October 2014, liver or peritoneal metastasis was not revealed. The tumor of the ascending colon was fixed to the neighboring swollen lymph nodes. A right hemicolectomy accompanied by lymph node dissection along the superior mesenteric vein was conducted. After excision of the ascending colon tumor, the swollen lymph nodes located at the neighboring psoas muscle were resected; however, the paracaval and parailiac lymph nodes were abandoned.
The circumferential ascending colon tumor was cut and opened . The resected specimen consisted of a polypoid tumor accompanied by ulcer formation, measuring 60 × 40 mm, located at the circumferential wall of the ascending colon.
The tumor was comprised of a moderately to poorly (solid type) differentiated adenocarcinoma component [, ×200]. In a portion of the tumor, a poorly differentiated carcinoma component accompanied by remarkable lymphocyte permeation was found [, ×200]. In the component, glandular formation was not observed, and the component was arranged in cords or clusters. The individual tumor cells were large and pleomorphic with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasms, large vesicular nuclei, irregular nuclear profiles and prominent nucleoli; however, the findings of a syncytial growth pattern of undifferentiated malignant epithelial cells and ill-defined borders were obscure [, ×400]. The lymphocytes appeared small, round and mature. There were more infiltrating lymphocytes than tumor cells. The glandular component was accompanied by a fibrous stroma; on the other hand, the stroma was modest in the abundant lymphocyte permeation component. Lymph node metastases were noted in the nodes neighboring the tumor and retroperitoneal lymph nodes; however, metastasis was not observed in the nodes located in the root of the ileocolic artery or along the superior mesenteric vein. Intermediate degrees of lymphatic, venous, and perineural infiltration were also noted. In the metastasized lymph nodes, tumor cells exhibited both poorly and moderately differentiated histologies with gland formation, suggesting that the metastasis originated from the nonlymphocyte-rich component [, ×400].
We performed a MSI assay (BML, Inc., Japan) after obtaining the patient’s consent, and the result was negative.
Immunohistochemical staining (details of the antibodies are shown in ): Immunohistochemical staining using an antibody for leukocyte common antigen (LCA; CD45, catalog number: M 0701; Dako, Japan) clearly showed a lymphocyte permeation department with an apparent demarcation line [, loupe]. Additional staining with an α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA, catalog number: M 851, Dako, Japan) antibody clearly showed the muscularis propria. Interestingly, while the glandular component invaded the subserosa, the lymphocyte permeation-rich component invaded the superficial part of the muscularis propria [, loupe]. The tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes were revealed to have CD3-positive T lymphocyte predominance (CD3, catalog number: 413241, Nichirei, Japan) [, ×400]. In addition, mild CLR consisting of CD20-positive lymphocytes was observed in the slightly remote colon wall from a tumor accompanied by lymphoid follicles (CD20, catalog number: NCL-L-CD20-L26, LicaBiosystems, UK) [, ×40 and E, ×100]. The Ki67 labeling index showed a higher value in the nonlymphocyte-rich component (42%) [, ×400] than in the lymphocyte-rich component (22%) [, ×400]. We conducted immunohistochemical staining for PD-L1 (PD-L1, catalog number: ab205921, Abcam Japan), and overexpression was observed in the tumor cells of the nonlymphocyte-rich component, whereas very weak expression was observed in the lymphocyte-rich component [, ×400 and I, ×400; the lower left of shows the positive control using tonsil tissue samples according to the manufacturer’s instructions, ×400]. We also assayed single-stranded DNA (ssDNA, catalog number: 18731, IBL, Japan) to determine the levels of apoptosis, and overexpression was observed in the lymphocyte-rich component [, ×400; the arrows indicate the apoptotic cells; the lower left of is the positive control using tissue from the germinal center of the lymph follicle according to the manufacturer’s instructions, ×400], whereas very weak expression was observed in the nonlymphocyte-rich component [, ×400]. The opposite immunohistochemical results were observed for Ki67.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) were negative in the tumor cells and positive in a small portion of interstitial lymphocytes (EBER RNA PNA Probe/Fluorescein, catalog number: Y5200, Dako, Japan) [, ×400].
Considering these results, the tumor was diagnosed as T3N2M1 cancer, not medullary carcinoma, with moderately to poorly differentiated carcinoma, PD-L1 overexpression and an LELC histology component inside the tumor.
The patient showed an uneventful recovery, and chemotherapy consisting of mFOLFOX6 was initiated 3 weeks after the operation. Bevacizumab was added to the mFOLFOX6 regimen beginning at the fourth course. After six courses of chemotherapy (three courses with the addition of bevacizumab), the patient underwent follow-up CT, which revealed significantly reduced sizes of the residual lymph nodes. Chemotherapy was continued, and after the patient had an allergic reaction to oxaliplatin in May 2015 (after 14 courses of mFOLFOX6), oxaliplatin was removed from the regimen. In April 2016, after 31 courses of chemotherapy, chemotherapy was discontinued due to prolonged thrombopenia. During this period, increased sizes of the residual lymph nodes were not observed with CT, and the residual lymph nodes ultimately completely disappeared [ and B]. The patient was alive without tumor recurrence 5 years after the operation. The changes in the clinical parameters are shown in .