A 46-year-old Bangladeshi woman presented with a 36-month history of blurred vision with floaters. This proband was otherwise asymptomatic without weight loss and with no relevant past medical history. She had no familial history of amyloidosis. Visual acuity was 7/10 P2 for her right eye and 9/10 P2 for her left eye. Intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes (15 mmHg). No pars plana vitrectomy was performed. A slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed abnormal conjunctival vessels with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. No change of the pupillary shape and no amyloid deposition on the lens surface or at the pupillary border were noted. Light pupillary reflex was normal. Fundoscopy revealed yellowish-white “glass-wool” vitreous opacity in both eyes consistent with amyloid deposits . The macula and the optic disc appeared normal, and no retinal hemorrhages were detected. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed a normal retinal morphology including in the area of the macula . An extensive evaluation, including extensive cardiac investigation, did not reveal other clinical features. Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain was normal, without any leptomeningeal involvement . She did not have carpal tunnel syndrome, and a neurological examination of her peripheral nerve system did not detect abnormalities in her upper and lower limbs. The results of nerve conduction studies were normal, but a distal leg skin biopsy detected loss of intra-epidermal nerve fiber density with a value of 0.29 fiber/millimeter, supporting the diagnosis of small fiber neuropathy . She progressively experienced postural dizziness and vomiting, and gastric emptying scintigraphy confirmed gastroparesis with abnormal gastric retention: for liquids, 30% at 4 hours (N< 10%); and for solids, 77% (N<10%), demonstrating severe autonomic neuropathy . A histological examination of accessory salivary glands revealed Congo-red-positive deposits with an apple-green birefringence under polarized light in the interstitium and basement membranes of the acini. A biopsy of her stomach revealed perivascular amyloid deposits in the submucosa and the muscular circular layer. Direct sequencing of TTR gene revealed that she was heterozygous for a single nucleotide substitution c.259 G>C in exon 3, resulting in replacement of glycine with arginine at position 87 of the mature protein, that is, p.Gly87Arg (Gly67Arg; Fig. ). Conservation analysis of ten vertebrate species indicated that Glycine 87 is highly conserved in the TTR protein. Proteomic analysis performed on the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded salivary gland tissue using laser microdissection followed by tandem mass spectrometry identified TTR as the dominant amyloid protein and identified the mutated TTR peptide (p.Gly87Arg) within the deposits, whereas the corresponding wild-type TTR peptide was not found . TTR was associated with several proteins known to be associated with amyloid deposits such as serum amyloid P-component and apolipoprotein E. In Fig. , the protein sequence coverage shown in bold blue was 45%, and the mutated peptide is shown in bold red.