This is a 59- year-old -male patient without pathological history, followed in the nephrology department of the Mohammed V Military Teaching Hospital for renal insufficiency and anemia syndrome. The history and physical examination revealed stigmata of hemorrhagic syndrome including hemothorax and hemoptysis. The patients was not treat with anticoagulants.
The hemostasis assessment showed an isolated prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) with APTT ratio of 2.0 (normal < 1.2). The prothrombin time (PT) (87%), the bleeding time (2 min and 30 s) and the fibrinogen level (2.88 g/l) were in the range of their physiologic values.
The exploration of prolonged APTT included: the confirmation of the prolongation of the APTT on two successive samples by using two different reagents: STA®-Cephascreen® (Diagnostica Stago) and STA®-PTT® automaton (Diagnostica Stago).The correction of the APTT in the mixing study performed by mixing equal parts of the patient’s plasma with normal pooled plasma, demonstrated the presence of circulating anticoagulants,the index of circulating anticoagulants was 10.7% and 37.2%, respectively, before and after 2 h incubation at 37 °C (normal < 15%), the dilute Russell viper venom time (dRVVT) showed the absence of lupus anticoagulants (LA) antibodies with normalized ratio of 0.99 (normal< 1.20) and the intrinsic pathway factors assay objectified the decrease of the factor XI activity corrected by the addition of the control plasma confirming the presence of anti-factor XI autoantibodies .
Furthermore, the blood count showed bicytopenia with non-regenerative normocytic normochromic anemia (Hemoglobin = 7.1 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume = 83 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin = 28.9 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration = 34.9%, absolute reticulocyte count: 60800 / μl) and thrombocytopenia at 22000/μl. The blood smear demonstrated a plasma cell count of 49%, or 2.842 Giga / l evoking PCL. The bone marrow examination showed marrow invaded up to 90% by dystrophic plasma cells.
The biochemical assessment suggested downstream renal (hypercreatininaemia at 27.7 mg/dl and kidney failure with glomerular filtration rate estimated according to Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) = 2 ml/min/1.73 m2) and electrolyte disturbances from exuberant light chain production with abnormalities including hyperuricemia (15 mg/dl), hypercalcemia (110 mg/l), elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (943UI/l), non nephrotic-range proteinuria (1.26 g/24 h) and high level of C reactive protein (CRP) (13.2 mg/l) .
The serum proteins electrophoresis revealed the presence of monoclonal peak migrating in the beta-1 globulins region amounted to 9.92 g/l with significant hypogammaglobulinemia. The immunofixation showed the presence of monoclonal free lambda light chains.
The radiological assessment did not show bone damage.
The patient was dialyzed, transfused and then treated with velcade, thalidomide and dexamethasone. He died after 2 weeks due to respiratory distress secondary to alveolar hemorrhage.