A 62-year-old male patient underwent right pneumonectomy under open-chest surgery after being diagnosed with poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (central type) 12 years ago. He received 4 preoperative chemotherapy and 2 postoperative chemotherapy.He began to develop anterior chest wall sinus with pus discharge 3 years ago, and the main symptoms were cough and fever. During the illness, the main treatment was dressing changes on the wound surface of the sinus, which resulted in poor efficacy. Chest CT scan shows thickening of the right pleura, enveloping pleural effusion, and a sinus connecting to the abscess cavity can be seen on the right chest wall. Based on the patient’s clinical symptoms and imaging examination, we diagnosed a right chronic empyema with chest wall sinus. We resected the chest wall sinus and the right 5th and 6th rib segments in the first-stage operation to expose the abscess cavity. The necrotic tissue in the abscess cavity was removed and thoroughly debridement was performed. The volume of the abscess cavity was measured to be approximately 200 ml, and no bronchial stump fistula was found during intraoperative bronchoscopy and intrathoracic exploration. Two drainage tubes were left in the thoracic cavity and the incision was sutured. The pathogens identified by postoperative pus culture were Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae. After 16 consecutive days of intrathoracic lavage (2000 ml of normal saline per day), sensitive antibiotic anti-infection, and nutritional support treatment, his symptoms significantly improved.When the patient met the following conditions postoperatively: ① Hemoglobin reached 100 g/L and plasma albumin reached 30 g/L;②The colour of drainage fluid became clear, and the drainage volume was less than 100 ml per day; ③ Re-pathogen culture negative; ④ The infection was initially controlled and the wound granulation was expected to be fresh. We chose radical treatment in second-stage operation. Debridement was first performed again in the second-stage operation. After debridement, the ipsilateral thoracodorsal artery, vein, and nerve were dissected in the right thoracic cavity as recipient vascular pedicles, and a pedicled pectoralis major muscle flap of approximately 12 cm × 8 cm was harvested. Then a free vastus lateralis myocutaneous flap of about 30 cm×10 cm in size was harvested from the patient’s right thigh (preserving the descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral artery (LCFA), vein and nerve), and the size of the skin paddle was about 10 cm ×6 cm.The free vastus lateralis myocutaneous flap was transferred to fill the abscess cavity, and the lateral circumflex femoral artery, vein and nerve were anastomosed with the ipsilateral thoracodorsal vessels and nerve under the microscope with 9-prolene thread . Finally, the skin paddle was sutured with the skin around the chest incision, and the subcutaneous drainage tubes were placed. Intraoperative blood transfusion included 1.5 units of suspended red blood cells and 210 ml of fresh frozen plasma. After operation, anti-infection, antispasm, anticoagulation and other treatments were given. The color of the skin paddle was closely observed and the right upper limb was immobilized .
The patient’s surgery was very smooth, with stable vital signs in the first three days after surgery and no vascular crisis or other complications. On the 4th day after operation, there was sudden dyspnea at night, with orthopnea and cyanosis. The auscultation of the left lung rale was not obvious, and the oxygen saturation under the mask was the lowest at 50%. The blood pressure was 102/60mmHg, and urgent blood related indicators were checked. D-dimer, B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP), and myocardial enzymes were normal or slightly higher. Ultrasound of blood vessels in both lower limbs showed no obvious thrombosis. The bedside chest X-ray indicates an increase in left lung markings. To shorten the rescue time, immediately intubate the bedside trachea and transfer to Emergency Intensive Care Unit (EICU) for further treatment. After the patient ‘s vital signs were stabilized, an urgent chest CT scan should be performed, and the left lung was patchy with increased density and multiple cavities with varying densities. Based on the patient’s symptoms, signs, and imaging examinations, we considered acute respiratory failure caused by aspiration pneumonia. Common respiratory system deteriorations caused by surgery include pneumonia caused by food inhalation and pneumonia caused by bronchopleural fistula (Further inquiry into the patient’s postoperative medical history revealed a small intake of water 3 hours before the condition worsened. The patient has strong ability to move independently, but the existing evidence is insufficient to support that food inhalation causes Pneumonia. Aspiration pneumonia in patients with bronchopleural fistula is often associated with changes in body position, which is a matter of concern). Given treatment such as tracheal intubation, sputum suction under bronchoscopy and intravenous injection of vasoactive drugs, it was still difficult to maintain respiratory and circulatory function. Therefore, we could not choose to have a tracheotomy and used a ventilator to assist breathing. Even worse, due to the prolonged use of vasoconstrictors, the skin paddle experienced necrosis 3 weeks after surgery. We removed the surface necrotic skin scabs and used vacuum-sealing drainage (VSD) devices for flushing and drainage . After treatment such as anti-infection, posture drainage, sedation, and blood transfusion, pulmonary infection had slightly improved compared to before, and there were signs of improvement in inflammation related indicators. However, after the respiratory and circulatory system stabilized, there were signs of worsening pulmonary infection again, and respiratory failure was not significantly controlled. At this point, we had to reflect on whether there was a tracheal stump fistula? Airway nursing with fiberoptic bronchoscope was an important treatment link. When we performed the fifth deep sputum suction operation, we found suspicious small bubbles at the right tracheal stump, and promptly injected sclerosing agent under bronchoscopy to close the fistula. After a series of lengthy treatments mentioned above (lasting 153 days), the patient was ultimately rescued and discharged from the hospital . Follow up for 8 months, chest CT scan showed survival of the right muscle flap, elimination of empyema, and disappearance of left lung infection .