The proband in the pedigree , a 64-year-old man, was admitted to a local hospital with coughing for a week. He was already diagnosed with thymic neuroendocrine tumor since the age of 52 years (in 2006). Therefore, systemic radiological examination was performed at our hospital. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed an anterior superior mediastinal tumor, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the epigastrium found multiple circular cystic masses in the pancreas. The level of serum pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (ProGRP) was 214 pg/ml (reference range: 2–50 pg/ml). No other tumorous lesions were found. Thus, resection of thymic neoplasms was performed in the same year. The postoperative pathology was th-NET. Histologically, the tumor cells show round to oval, hyperchromatic nuclei, the nucleoli of the tumor cells were inconspicuous, and there were a few mitotic figures (7~8/10 HPF). On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were strongly positive for synaptophysin (Syn), chromogranin (CgA) and CD56, and the Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated at 3% . Above all, the pathologists diagnosed the tumor as thymic neuroendocrine tumor, WHO type atypical carcinoid. At the age of 60 years (in 2014), imaging revealed local recurrence of thymoma combined with multiple bone metastases, and then the patient underwent radiotherapy, T5/L3 kyphoplasty and chemotherapy. Until now, the patient is still undergoing Lanreotide therapy.
The proband was diagnosed with parathyroid adenoma in 1980 with a history of parathyroid gland surgery. Presently, color doppler ultrasonography of the thyroid showed bilateral lobectomy and nodules (size: 1.0*0.8 cm) on the dorsal side of the right lobe, diagnosed as parathyroid hyperplasia (PTU: 140 pg/ml; reference range, 15–65 pg/ml). Urological ultrasound showed multiple urinary tract calculi. He was diagnosed as moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (T2N0M0) on March 29, 2017.
The IV-1 in the pedigree , 38 years old, is the proband’s son, who was admitted to the hospital with right chest pain for more than 20 days at the age of 33 years (in 2013). CT of the chest revealed a huge mass in the anterior mediastinum. The results of core needle biopsy suggested a neuroendocrine tumor of the thymic gland, and there were a few mitotic figures (8~10/10 HPF). On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were strongly positive for Syn, CgA, CD56, CK-pan, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and neuron-specific enolase (NSE). Additionally, the Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated at 30% . A pancreatic neoplasm was found by enhanced CT of the abdomen, and the level of serum gastrin was 82.3 pg/ml (reference range: 50–150 pg/ml). MRI of the brain revealed hypophysoma. Endocrine investigation revealed a serum prolactin level of 2642.69 mIU/L (reference range for males: 54.69–384.14 mIU/L). Ultrasound pictures of the thyroid showed a nodule (size, 1.0*0.6 cm) on the right parathyroid gland, and the level of parathyroid hormone was 98 pg/ml (reference range: < 70 pg/ml). Above all, IV-1 was diagnosed with th-NET, gastrinoma, hypophysoma and parathyroid adenoma. IV-1 was diagnosed with unresectable disease and thus received systemic treatment. And he was died on March 19, 2019.
The pedigree of this family is shown in Fig. . Four members (III-4, III-6, IV-1 and V-1) of the family were screened. The proband’s parents are dead without a tumor history. He has an uncle who also has no history of cancer, but the daughter of his uncle (III-1) was diagnosed with lung cancer at 32 years old. The brothers and a sister of the proband are in good health without thymus, parathyroid gland, or pancreatic space-occupying disease, and their blood biochemistry indicates blood calcium levels within the normal range. IV-1, the son of the proband, was diagnosed with th-NET, gastrinoma, hypophysoma and parathyroid adenoma (see above for details).
A frameshift mutation (p.L105Vfs) of MEN1 was detected in the thymic neuroendocrine tumor of the proband. . The frameshift mutation (p.L105Vfs) of MEN1 was detected in the skin metastatic lesion of IV-1 . Germline heterozygous mutation of MEN1 p.L105Vfs was found in the proband, IV-1 and III-6 rather than in V-1by testing their white blood cells. Germline mutation testing was checked by next-generation sequencing.