We report a case of a 42-year-old white male with past medical history of Hepatitis C and IV drug abuse who presented with the Emergency Department (ED) with a 24-h history of severe diffuse abdominal, associated with nausea, weakness, lightheadedness, and one episode of syncope. He denied prior history of cancer, pancreatitis or abdominal trauma. On presentation, vital signs were notable for Heart Rate (HR) 140 bpm, Blood Pressure (BP) 103/76 mmHg, Respiratory Rate (RR) 24 bpm, Temperature 36.6C, and SatO2 100% on room air. BMI 22.77 kg/m2. On physical exam, the patient appeared in acute distress, with a rigid and diffusely tender abdomen associated with rebound tenderness and voluntary guarding, consistent with peritonitis. Initial work-up demonstrated Hgb 13.5 g/dL, WBC 15.2 THOU/mcL, Platelets 212 THOU/mcL, Na 137 mEq/L, K 4.0 mEq/L, Creatinine 1.34 mg/dl, BUN 15 mg/dL, Glucose 244 mg/dL, Lactate 2.9 mmol/L, Lipase 53 U/L, Total Bilirubin 1.2 mg/dL, Direct Bilirubin 1.2 mg/dL, ALT 60 IU/L, and AST 50 IU/L. Blood cultures were obtained. Imaging included Computed Tomography (CT) of the Abdomen and Pelvis with intravenous (IV) contrast that demonstrated hemoperitoneum and active extravasation of contrast from the splenic artery into the splenic hilum, associated with a surrounding hematoma measuring 5.3 × 5.0 cm immediately subjacent to the pancreatic tail, concerning for ruptured SAP . In addition, the spleen was noticed to have a patchy, irregular enhancement . In the ED, two liters of lactated ringers were administered, and patient remained tachycardic with HR 130 bpm and BP 99/69 mmHg. Interventional Radiology was contacted for consideration of emergent embolization of the splenic artery. However, IR deemed that embolization was relatively contraindicated given patient’s clinical condition (persistent tachycardia and hypotension despite fluid resuscitation) and the location of active extravasation involving the splenic hilum extending to the main splenic artery. The decision was made to take the patient emergently for exploratory laparotomy. Once in the abdomen, a large intraperitoneal hematoma was evacuated, and after mobilization of the spleen medially, a ruptured splenic artery pseudoaneurysm was identified and controlled with multiple hemostatic stitches. The tissues surrounding the pseudoaneurysms had areas of thickened and indurated consistency, likely secondary to fibrotic changes, and had other areas with friable edematous tissue, consistent with acute on chronic versus subacute inflammation in the area. No purulent fluid was noticed. The pancreas appeared normal. Next, we proceeded with completion splenectomy and proximal ligation of the splenic artery. The specimens were sent for pathology evaluation. Operative time was 164 min. Estimated Blood Loss was 3.6 L. Patient received 7 units of packed Red Blood Cells (pRBC), 2 units of Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP), 1 unit of platelets, 6 L of Crystalloids, and 1 L Albumin 5% intra-operatively. He did require pressure support briefly. His post-operative course was uneventful, patient recovered well, and he was discharged on post-operative day five. Final pathology demonstrated a 3.0 × 1.3 × 0.3 cm pseudoaneurysm wall and a 14 × 9.5 × 5.5 cm spleen containing multiple necrotizing granulomata, positive for Histoplasmosis species. Additional work-up performed during his hospital stay included a negative HIV test and a normal echocardiogram to evaluate for other risk factors or secondary sources of infection, respectively. Patient received post-splenectomy vaccines and was referred to Infectious Disease for follow-up, where he was prescribed Itraconazole 200 mg twice/day for 12 months. Patient was last seen at 2-month follow-up and was doing well.