A previously healthy 50-year-old Sri Lankan man presented to our hospital with feculent vomiting of 1 week’s duration. This was preceded by worsening constipation, abdominal fullness, and intermittent abdominal pain of 2 months’ duration. He denied passage of fresh or altered blood with stools. Interestingly, the abdominal discomfort and fullness and the sensation of a full rectum were at times relieved by feculent belching. He had significant weight loss over the previous month and associated anorexia. He was a nonsmoker and had not been on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug therapy. He was dehydrated and appeared wasted, with a body mass index of 21 kg/m2. His general and abdominal examinations were otherwise unremarkable.
He had been investigated at his local hospital, where a flexible sigmoidoscopy had not revealed any abnormality in the left colon. Suspecting a malignant gastrocolic fistula, a gastroduodenoscopy was performed, but this did not reveal fecal matter or any mucosal abnormalities in the stomach or duodenum. An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomographic (CT) scan revealed a mid-to-distal transverse colonic tumor with a duodenocolic fistula proximal to the primary lesion . A colonoscopy was not performed, because the patient was generally unwell and was not amenable to drinking 3–4 L of bowel preparation, and also because of the possibility of acute intestinal obstruction and exacerbated feculent vomiting. Furthermore, on the basis of the CT findings, a colonoscopy was unlikely to provide new information that would alter the plan of management. The patient’s basic biochemistry was normal, but his carcinoembryonic antigen levels were elevated. He was scheduled for a laparotomy after a period of nutritional optimization including parenteral nutrition.
At laparotomy, he was found to have an unresectable locally advanced mid-to-distal transverse colonic tumor with possible infiltration of the duodenojejunal (DJ) flexure. A small amount of ascites, diffuse peritoneal and mesenteric deposits with scirrhous contraction of the mesocolon and small bowel mesentery, was noted . An antecolic loop gastrojejunostomy was performed to bypass possible future obstruction at the DJ flexure. The terminal ileum was divided and brought out as an end ileostomy, thereby defunctioning the colon and effectively neutralizing the duodenocolic fistula . Histology from the malignant deposits revealed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. He made a good recovery with relief of symptoms and was discharged on a normal diet 2 weeks after surgery. A postoperative oral contrast study showed good emptying of contrast via the gastroenterostomy and did not show the fistula.
Postoperatively, he received eight cycles of FOLFOX therapy (5-fluorouracil, folinic acid, and oxaliplatin), for which he showed an excellent response and was well and disease-free 10 months after surgery.