A 64-year-old man with a history of arterial hypertension and a previous non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) in 2017, which was treated with PCI involving the left anterior descending and circumflex arteries, presented with chronic stable angina (CCS III). This was the case despite receiving optimal medical therapy, including a RAS inhibitor, a beta-blocker, short-acting nitrates, aspirin, ranolazine, and statins at the highest tolerated dose. A myocardial perfusion imaging test showed 10% reversible ischaemia in the infero-posterior wall, with preserved left ventricular function. The patient underwent coronary angiography using the left radial access, which demonstrated a favourable angiographic outcome in the left system. The right coronary artery showed a mild lesion of the ostial posterolateral (PL) branch followed by severe proximal branch disease (type A lesion). Due to the concordance between the stenosis position and MPI data, pressure wire assessment was not performed. Therefore, the patient underwent a R-PCI of the PL to facilitate precise stent positioning and enhance accuracy.
The right coronary artery (RCA) was the dominant vessel and exhibited proximal tortuosity, along with multiple side branches in the mid-segment. A 6 Fr JR4 guiding catheter was used to engage the RCA, and a balance middleweight (BMW) 0.014″ guidewire (Abbott Vascular, USA) was introduced into the guiding catheter for the PCI procedure. The further advancement of the guidewire was performed robotically using the guidewire joystick.
Subsequently, a 2.0 × 12 mm Euphora balloon (Medtronic, USA) was robotically advanced into the lesion, and pre-dilatation was carried out at 12 atm. The same balloon was used for precise stent length measurement. A 2.5 × 15 mm Resolute Onyx® drug-eluting stent (Medtronic, USA) was then robotically advanced into position and deployed at 14 atm. StentViz (GE Healthcare, USA), enhanced stent visualization system, confirmed optimal stent expansion, while angiography revealed a well-deployed stent with a favourable angiographic outcome.
Following the completion of the procedure, the guidewire was robotically retracted (see ). The entire procedural duration was 35 min, utilizing a contrast volume of 110 mL. The patient was effectively discharged following a single day’s hospitalization, with a recommended six-month regimen of dual antiplatelet therapy. The main steps of R-PCI are depicted in . At a follow-up of 2.5 years, the patient underwent a repeat coronary angiogram due to recurrent angina, which demonstrated satisfactory angiographic results of the previously implanted stents .