The patient, a 21-year old man with stage IV Hodgkin lymphoma, adrenal insufficiency,
gastric ulcerative disease, and history of cerebellar and occipital infarction, was
admitted for neutropenic fever. His hospital course was complicated by an episode of
gastrointestinal bleeding and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage in the setting of
thrombocytopenia. He was also found to also have bilateral lower-extremity DVT.
The patient had initially presented to his local physician 1 year prior to the index
presentation with recurrent episodes of fever and cough. Bone marrow biopsy
demonstrated hypercellular marrow, increased eosinophils mixed with plasma cells,
lymphocytes, and marrow fibrosis. At that time, hydrocortisone and dexamethasone
with hydroxyurea were initiated for the treatment of hypereosinophilic syndrome.
Three months later, he presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated gastric ulcerative disease, and he was
started on sucralfate at that time.
During the index admission with neutropenic fever, the patient suffered hematemesis
resulting in hypovolemic shock necessitating intensive care unit admission and
frequent transfusions to treat coagulopathy. At this time,
esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed lower curvature deep ulcerations as well as
smaller ulcers. The larger ulcers were clipped, and the patient also underwent
empiric embolization of the left gastric artery by the interventional radiology
service. He was subsequently noted to have frank rectal bleeding and underwent
additional embolization. While in the intensive care unit, he was briefly intubated
for diffuse alveolar hemorrhage.
These bleeding episodes ultimately resolved with the administration of vitamin K,
aminocaproic acid, intravenous pantoprazole, and numerous blood products. Upon
transfer to the medical floor, bilateral lower-extremity edema was noted, and
Doppler ultrasound showed new bilateral DVT within the left mid femoral, left
posterior tibial, right common femoral, right posterior tibial, and peroneal veins.
A core posterior mediastinal biopsy demonstrated a mixed lymphohistiocytic
infiltrate suggestive of classic Hodgkin lymphoma.
Consequent to these findings, physical and occupational therapies were temporarily
stopped owing to concern that a thrombus could move to the pulmonary artery,
resulting in a potentially fatal PE. The benign hematology service advised deferring
initiation of chemical anticoagulation in light of the patient’s ongoing
thrombocytopenia and clinical risk for recurrent bleeding episodes. While it was
deemed that placement of an IVC filter would attenuate the patient’s risk of PE and
allow him to initiate physical and occupational therapies, the patient was not a
candidate for IVC filter placement due to his history of recent gastrointestinal
bleeding and thrombocytopenia. The following transfusion parameters were used:
transfuse if hemoglobin is <7.5 g/dL (or if symptomatic) and if platelets are
<50 K/μL (due to plans for inferior vena cava filter placement).
The physical medicine and rehabilitation service was consulted by the oncology team
to assist in a formal evaluation of the patient’s candidacy for acute inpatient
rehabilitation. The physical examination was notable for bilateral upper- and
lower-extremity muscular atrophy and bilateral lower-extremity edema. On manual
muscle strength testing, he had right upper extremity: 3/5 throughout; left upper
extremity: 4/5 throughout, with the exception of 3−/5 for shoulder abduction;
bilateral hip flexors: 3−/5; bilateral knee flexors: 3/5; right knee extensors:
3−/5; left knee extensors: 4/5; bilateral ankle dorsiflexors: 3/5; and bilateral
plantar flexors: 5/5. Functional independence measure (FIM), which has been shown to
be reliable across a wide variety of settings and raters, noted that the patient required total assistance for activities of daily
living and for ambulation of 80 feet. Upon discussion, the patient and his mother
voiced their preference for outpatient rehabilitation services upon discharge. In
order to be safe for hospital discharge, the patient needed to reach a goal of
minimal assistance level on the FIM for bed mobility, transfers, basic activities of
daily living, and household ambulation of 50 feet. The focus was on therapeutic
exercises (including strengthening exercises) and basic activities of daily living.
He did not have any stairs at home to negotiate and thus steps training was not
included. It is routine for the physical and occupational therapist to review the
following as part of the treatment sessions: vital signs and patient-reported
symptoms such as pain, fatigue, and dyspnea level on a numeric rating scale from
0-10.