A 65-year-old female presented with a 3-month history of progressive exertional dyspnoea. The patient’s past medical history was notable for a history of a large pericardial effusion surgically managed with the formation of a pericardial window, Hodgkin’s lymphoma (diagnosed in 1986 and subsequently requiring surgical treatment, high-dose mantle radiation therapy, and chemotherapy), limited scleroderma, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. One year prior to her current presentation, the patient began experiencing symptoms of dyspnoea on exertion and shoulder pain that she initially attributed to deconditioning during the Coronavirus disease of 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic and her long-standing kyphosis. After 3 months of progressive symptoms, she presented to the Emergency Department and was noted to have a large pericardial effusion complicated by cardiac tamponade and underwent a pericardial window. Pericardial fluid studies at that time were negative for malignant cells or infection. Surgical pathology showed acute neutrophilic and chronic lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrates, but no diagnostic evidence of a lymphoproliferative disorder or of malignancy. She developed post-operative atrial fibrillation and was placed on amiodarone. She was prescribed colchicine for pericardial inflammation. She did well until 3 months prior to her current presentation when she had recurrent shortness of breath, lower extremity oedema, and palpitations and presented to our cardiology clinic for a second opinion. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) at an outside institution showed a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 55%, septal wall dyskinesia, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. There was no pericardial effusion. Myocardial perfusion imaging showed no evidence of inducible ischaemia. Holter monitor showed frequent episodes of atrial fibrillation with arrhythmia burden of 26% in 24 h. Physical exam was notable for 1+ bilateral lower extremity oedema. Cardiac ausculation was normal. Lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. Laboratory studies showed normal blood counts, electrolytes, and kidney function. Constrictive pericarditis secondary to prior radiation use was suspected vs. secondary to underlying autoimmune disease.
Transthoracic echocardiography was repeated at our institution and showed normal global left ventricular (LV) function and reduced right ventricular function (by visual estimate). There was septal flattening suggestive of right ventricular overload and a septal bounce in some beats suggestive of constrictive physiology (see and ). There was a small, localized pericardial effusion posterior to the LV and pericardial thickening measuring up to 0.8 cm anterior to the right ventricle (RV). There was also marked respirophasic variability of the transmitral diastolic velocities consistent with constrictive physiology (see ). She also underwent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that showed diffusely thickened pericardium (maximum thickness 0.7–0.8 cm) with pericardial enhancement suggestive of inflammation or pericarditis. There was exaggerated septal motion suggestive of constrictive physiology. Finally, the patient underwent right and left heart catheterization that showed an increase in superior vena cava pressures with deep inspiration (consistent with Kussmaul’s sign), right atrial pressure waveform with W-pattern and prominent x- and y-descents, right ventricular waveform with intermittent dip and plateau during diastole (consistent with square root sign), and on simultaneous LV and RV pressure tracings, evidence of systolic pressure discordance with inspiration (see ). These were all consistent with constrictive physiology.
Patient was seen by Rheumatology and restarted on colchicine given pericardial inflammation noted on MRI and started on prednisone 20 mg daily for recurrent pericarditis. Given concern for an autoimmune component, she was started on mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice a day as a trial of medical therapy. Despite this therapy, the patient had progressively worsening symptoms and soon after required readmission to the hospital. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted, and she underwent pericardial stripping due to persistent symptoms. Pre-operatively, patient underwent computed tomography scan of her chest to assess the degree of pericardial thickening and showed circumferential nodular thickening of the pericardium and a more focal mass-like area within the left superior mediastinum that was thought to represent a component of pericardial thickening or secondary to prior left upper lobe surgery radiation. Haematology/Oncology was consulted regarding whether these findings could be due to a recurrence of her Hodgkin’s lymphoma. They believed this was unlikely in the absence of lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. In the operating room, the anterior pericardium was noted to be thickened with loculated masses on the pericardium. The pericardium was pliable and did not have the fibrous appearance usually associated with pericardial constriction. There were also irregular, lobulated, and firm epicardial masses on the anterior surface of the heart. The mass-like substance on the epicardial surface of the heart was densely adherent and potentially invading the heart itself and could not be completely dissected (see ). Pathology of surgical specimens showed tumour composed of epithelioid cells and high-grade sarcoma positive for vimentin, ERG, and CD34 and negative for calretinin and Wilms' tumor 1 (WT-1). This supported a diagnosis of a high-grade sarcoma with epithelioid features consistent with epithelioid angiosarcoma (see ).
Post-operatively, oncology was consulted and recommended palliative systemic chemotherapy, but decision was made to wait 3 weeks to allow for wound healing following her surgery. She was discharged home on high-dose bumetanide but continued to have volume overload and was readmitted to the hospital for acute decompensated heart failure. Repeat cardiac MRI was obtained and showed significant progression of disease with pericardial thickening that extended throughout the inferior and superior aspects of the pericardium and surrounded the great vessels (see ). Given her persistent and progressive symptoms, constrictive physiology was most likely secondary to encasement of heart in tumour, not pericarditis. Given rapid progression of disease, she was started on inpatient chemotherapy with gemcitabine and docetaxel, but course was complicated by acute gastrointestinal bleeding, atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular rates, and persistent volume overload. Goals of care were discussed with family, and decision was made to transition to comfort measures. The patient passed away comfortably with her family present at the bedside.