A 71-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to Toranomon hospital because of reduced consciousness. She had a history of a mastectomy for right breast cancer. Eight months before admission, she came to our hospital because of partial paralysis of her right hand. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass in the left upper lobe, as well as mediastinal and left hilar lymphadenopathy. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple brain metastases. The patient was diagnosed with EGFR mutation-positive adenocarcinoma using transbronchial lung biopsy. She received 4 cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel chemotherapy, and gamma knife treatment followed by whole brain radiation for brain metastases. Although chemotherapy resulted in a partial response, her state of consciousness rapidly worsened in the 2 weeks before admission. Her level of consciousness on admission was a Glasgow Come Scale (GCS) score of 8. She could not speak or move her extremities. A lumbar puncture was performed and cytological examination of her cerebrospinal fluid revealed adenocarcinoma cells. EGFR mutation analysis of cerebrospinal fluid was positive for L858R, but negative for exon 20 T790 M. Erlotinib at 150 mg/day was dissolved in 15 mL of water, and was administered via a feeding tube because she could not swallow a tablet. At the same time, 8 mg/day dexamethasone and glycerin administration were started via drip infusion. The patient’s state of consciousness gradually improved to a GCS score of 13, and serum levels of CA19–9 decreased from 3031 U/mL to 292 U/mL. As a side effect of erlotinib, diarrhea of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 4.0 grade 2 developed. Three weeks after receiving erlotinib and steroids, the patient started to vomit and suffered from grade 3 diarrhea. At that time, her body temperature, blood pressure, and pulse rate were 36.8 °C, 105/55 mmHg and 92 b.p.m., respectively. There was no abdominal tenderness on her physical examinations. The laboratory test results showed a normal leukocyte count (4700/mL), and a slightly increased C-reactive protein level (2.4 mg/dL). Arterial blood gas analysis showed alkalemia (pH 7.50). An abdominal radiograph showed a dilated colon and the presence of intraluminal air along the wall of the colon . A CT scan of the abdomen demonstrated pneumatosis; there was a thickening of the colon with free air, pneumoretroperitoneum, and pneumomediastinum . There were no signs of bowel ischemia or portal venous air. Erlotinib and steroids were stopped, and the patient was managed conservatively with a combination of antibiotics and inhalation of oxygen. Two weeks later, the CT findings of PI were improved. Erlotinib was re-administered without steroids, and PI relapsed 4 weeks later with diarrhea. After improving PI by discontinuation of erlotinib and conservative therapies, gefitinib was administered safely without PI and diarrhea for 3 month. At that time, the EGFR-TKIs afatinib and osimertinib were available in the Japanese market. The number of cells in the cerebral fluid decreased from 132/μL to 37/μL with erlotinib and gefitinib, although the cytology was still positive for adenocarcinoma. The patient died of worsening brain metastases 8 months after the diagnosis of LM.