An 80-year-old woman with a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, renal failure, angina pectoris, and dementia presented with headache and decline in cognitive function persisting for 3 days. Head computed tomography (CT) at a local hospital disclosed SAH, and she was referred to our hospital at night. On admission, her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 14, and CT demonstrated SAH, with a thick hematoma in the right sylvian cistern [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of right carotid artery revealed severe stenosis and irregular aneurysmal dilatation in the M1 portion of the MCA, and poor perfusion of the MCA territory compared with the anterior and posterior cerebral artery areas [ and ]. In addition, the stenotic anterior temporal artery (ATA) originated from the proximal portion of the lesion, and the inferior trunk and LSA branched off just distal to the lesion. We considered that the right MCA dissection had caused the SAH, and planned surgery to prevent repeated hemorrhage on the next morning.
On the day after admission, CT before surgery identified increased hematoma, indicating repeated hemorrhage, and diffusion-weighted imaging revealed infarctions mainly in the right MCA area [ and ]. We assumed the cause of infarction was embolism originating from the MCA dissection. We planned trapping of the dissection and high-flow bypass using the RAG to the distal MCA, intended to prevent repeated hemorrhage from the dissection, stop thrombus moving off from the lesion, and preclude infarction by maintaining adequate blood flow in the MCA area including perforators from the M1 portion.
Neuroanesthesia was induced under monitoring of somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) of the left extremities and motor evoked potentials (MEPs) of the left upper limb. A curvilinear frontotemporal skin incision was made to expose the right cervical carotid bifurcation, and the superficial temporal artery (STA) was meticulously prepared under the operating microscope. The RAG was harvested concurrently by another neurosurgeon. Frontotemporal craniotomy was performed, and a subzygomatic tunnel was made for the RAG. The sylvian fissure was split under the operating microscope, the hematoma was irrigated and removed carefully, and the M2 and M3 portions of the MCA were exposed. First, a back-up STA-M3 bypass was made distal to the M2 portion for RAG anastomosis. Then, the harvested RAG was gently pulled through the subzygomatic tunnel, that is, between the lateral pterygoid muscle and the temporal muscle from the cranium to the neck through the lateral corridor of the stylohyoid muscle and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle toward the external carotid artery (ECA). The distal end of the RAG was anastomosed to the M2 (superior trunk) of the MCA, and the proximal end was anastomosed to the ECA. The patency of the anastomosis was confirmed with microvascular Doppler flowmetry. After no change in the SSEPs and MEPs was confirmed, the sylvian fissure was split proximally. The internal carotid artery (ICA) was exposed before the M1 portion of the MCA. The M1 portion was exposed carefully from both sides, proximally and distally. The large dissecting aneurysm with a purplish-red wall was identified arising from the M1 trunk, part of the vessel wall was broken, and thrombus had protruded . The dissecting aneurysm of M1 portion was trapped and the arteries arising from both sides of the lesion were preserved, that is the ATA, inferior trunk of the MCA, and LSA. After trapping, microvascular Doppler flowmetry confirmed anterograde flow in the ATA, inferior trunk, and LSA, as well as bypass flow from the STA and RAG. No significant SSEP and MEP changes were observed throughout the procedures .
Postoperative CT detected no increase in hemorrhage. Postoperative magnetic resonance angiography showed good patency of the bypass, and diffusion-weighted imaging revealed a new small infarction in the anterolateral part of the putamen . DSA showed good patency of RAG and no flow to the dissecting lesion 23 days after the operation. The MCA distal to the dissection, including the M2 inferior trunk and LSA, was filled favorably by the high-flow bypass . We could not confirm flow to the ATA originating just proximal to the dissection. The patient underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunting for hydrocephalus, and she is gradually recovering with rehabilitation.