A 56-year-old male patient presented with bloody stools with no obvious predisposing causes, 5 times a day, 300 mL every time. He visited our hospital. The main laboratory findings were normal. Colonoscopy and gastroscopy showed no pathological findings. A computed tomography scan showed an intussusception of ileum and intrahepatic bile duct stones with mild bile duct expansion . Other abdominal organs showed no abnormal findings.
The serum carcinoembryonic antigen level was elevated (15.6 μg/L, reference <5.0 μg/L), whereas serum levels of α-fetoprotein (AFP) (2.6 μg/L, reference <13.4 μg/L) and CA19–9 (9.1 U/mL, reference <37 U/mL) were normal. The patient underwent partial resection of ileum with end-to-end anastomosis and appendectomy. Then he received chemotherapy in a local hospital; the regimen was unknown. He died 9 months after the surgery.
Small intestinal intussusception was 10 cm long, 80 cm from the ileocecal valve, and a solid and gray white mass about 3cm × 2cm × 2 cm was found in the small intestine, which infiltrated the bowel wall to the deep muscularis propria. An enlarged lymph node was found in the mesentery.
Histology examination based on hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining revealed that the tumor infiltrated the bowel wall to the deep muscularis propria, with striking morphologic similarity to hepatocellular carcinoma. The tumor cells arranged in an organoid pattern with solid nests, and trabecular structures of large-to-medium cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and round-to-oval nuclei . Associated with the tumor and at its periphery were pancreatic tissues with ducts and acini; islet cells were absent, diagnosed as Heinrich type II heterotopic pancreas . Residual heterotopic pancreatic tissue was detected just from the submucosal layer to the proper muscular layer. The only lymph node was positive with adenocarcinoma metastasis.
Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were strongly positive for hepatocyte paraffin 1 (HepPar1) and cytokeratin (CK)7, positive for Villin , but were negative for AFP, glypican-3, CK20, caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1), paired box 2 (PAX2), synaptophysin (Syn), and chromogranin A (CgA). Based on the clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical results, the final diagnosis was poorly differentiated HAC with lymph node involvement (pT3N1).
The written informed consent for this case report was obtained from the patient; no autopsy was performed and the consent procedure was approved by the Ethics Committee of Union Hospital.