Patient is a 63-year-old female with a past medical history significant for stage IV invasive ductal carcinoma, positive for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), with osseous metastases to the calvarium and ribs, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, obstructive sleep apnea, unspecified anxiety disorder, and recurrent major depressive disorder. The patient did not have metastases to her brain. She was diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer 11 years prior and has undergone lumpectomy with lymph node dissection and radiation therapy. The patient had been maintained on chemotherapy with anastrozole and trastuzumab without any evidence of disease progression. Patient was admitted to the general medical floor for new onset atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response after experiencing worsening dyspnea in the 2 days preceding hospitalization.
On admission, she was placed on adenosine and diltiazem infusions for her continued tachycardia. Despite these medications, the patient remained in atrial fibrillation. The patient underwent a thorough medical work-up, which was overall unremarkable other than a transthoracic echocardiogram, which showed new left ventricular dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 36–40%. Trastuzumab was subsequently discontinued in context of newly noted reduced left ventricular function. She then underwent successful transesophageal echocardiogram with direct current cardioversion to normal sinus rhythm. During this hospitalization, she did not demonstrate any evidence of altered mentation or psychiatric symptoms. The patient remained in normal sinus rhythm and was placed on amiodarone 200 mg twice daily and dabigatran 150 mg twice daily. No additional medication changes were made prior to discharge from hospital.
Days after hospital discharge, this patient began to experience dizziness and fatigue. In addition, she developed hallucinations about 7 days after having been started on amiodarone. She endorsed two vivid visual hallucinations, which included seeing a man with a gun in her hallway and her sister-in-law crying on the floor. She also endorsed auditory hallucinations of unintelligible conversations and music. She did not have any changes in attention, cognition, or executive function that would indicate signs of delirium. On further psychiatric review of systems, she did not endorse symptoms of anxiety, mood disturbance, or substance use. The patient had no prior history of hallucinations or other psychotic symptoms. Her psychiatric history was significant only for symptoms of depression and anxiety, which initially presented in the context of her cancer diagnosis 12 years prior and had been well managed on duloxetine 60 mg, bupropion extended release 300 mg, and trazodone 50 mg at bedtime. She was subsequently assessed in the emergency department, where a medical evaluation, including comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, thyroid-stimulating hormone, urinalysis, and computed tomography of head, was unrevealing. Given the temporal association of the onset of her hallucinations with the initiation of amiodarone, there was concern that the hallucinations were related to this medication. After discussion between the psychiatry and cardiology teams, amiodarone was discontinued and dronedarone was started. No other medication changes were made at this time. Within 2–3 days of discontinuing the amiodarone, her visual and auditory hallucinations completely resolved. Upon continued and routine psychiatric follow-up approximately 6 months after cessation of amiodarone, the patient continued to present with stability of mood and anxiety symptoms and no further recurrence of hallucinations.