The present case report describes a woman in her early fifties, self-identified as mestizo, from Otavalo, Imbabura-Ecuador. In her familial history, the mother and father did not report any type of cancer, and only one of her brothers, among six, presented thyroid nodules; however, they were categorized as benign. The patient attended to the physician due to a lump in the neck that had been gradually enlarging for about 2 years. She had no symptoms of dysphagia and denied odynophagia or shortness of breath. The patient had no systemic diseases and denied allergies.
Physical examination revealed a thyroid gland enlargement. The ultrasound confirmed the thyroid growth (29 x 17 x 22 mm) and showed a solid nodule located in the left lobule with irregular borders, microcalcifications, highly vascularized. The fine-needle aspiration biopsy indicated a Bethesda VI consistent with papillary thyroid cancer. Based on the results, a total thyroidectomy was chosen as the best option . The subject’s blood tests were normal; therefore, the patient could undergo surgery. The procedure was successful with an excellent recovery. Posterior medical checkups did not show any complication.
Moreover, an ancestral composition analysis was performed, and the results showed 3.1% African, 20.9% European, and 76% Native American. A timeline of the relevant episodes of care is depicted in .
Next-generation sequencing was performed using the TruSight Tumor 15 kit from Illumina ®; this panel includes 15 genes commonly mutated in solid tumors. Among the mutated genes, two had an in silico pathogenic status: BRAF and KIT, as described in the . The BRAF gene suffered a heterozygous mutation, a change from adenine to thymine at position 1799; this caused an amino acid change from Valine to Glutamic acid at position 600 , confirmed with Sanger Sequencing. Similarly, in the KIT gene, a heterozygous mutation led to a thymine change to cytosine at position 2032, which resulted in an amino acid change from Leucine to Phenylalanine at position 678 .