A 53-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to chest pain radiating to the throat. This symptom had developed 1 month previously, and episodes lasted approximately 30 min before temporarily relief was achieved by oral nitroglycerin administration. The patient had been diagnosed with SLE at the age of 33 years and treated with oral corticosteroids (12.5 mg/day prednisone), leflunomide, and hydroxychloroquine thereafter. However, no records of periodic interviews or comprehensive documents were available. She denied a history of smoking or drinking Thirteen years after the diagnosis of SLE, she was diagnosed with hypertension with a blood pressure of 180/90 mmHg and began treatment with oral nitrendipine at a dose of 10 mg/day. Physical examination on the current admission revealed a heart rate of 88 beats per minute, a respiration rate of 18 breaths per minute, and a blood pressure of 118/62 mmHg with regular heart rhythm and no positive signs, suggesting the hypertension was well controlled by the medication. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, right axis deviation, and no ST-T abnormality, but did reveal fractional shortening by 29%, an ejection fraction of 56%, a small amount of pericardial effusion, and a decreased amplitude of the ventricular septum and left ventricular inferior wall, indicating heart dysfunction. Coronary angiography then revealed a giant aneurysm in the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD; Fig. a and b). In the left circumflex artery (LCX), proximal cystic-like dilatation and distal subtotal occlusion with TIMI grade I flow were observed . In addition, varying degrees of dilatation were detected in the middle segment of the right coronary artery (RCA; Fig. c).
Laboratory examination results for creatine kinase-muscle/brain (2.00 ng/ml, normal range 0–4.3 ng/ml) showed that oral nitroglycerin was effective in the early stage. However, elevated serum levels of myoglobin (155.00 ng/ml, normal range 0–107 ng/ml), cardiac troponin I (0.62 ng/ml, normal range 0–0.05 ng/ml), and aspartate aminotransferase (75.4 U/L, normal range 13–35 U/L) indicated irreversible myocardial infraction. In the meantime, the presence of active SLE was verified by the autoimmune profile results, including normal complement C3 (0.82 g/L, normal range 0.7–1.4 g/L) and complement C4 (0.27 g/L, normal range 0.1–0.4 g/L) levels as well as positive detection of anti-dsDNA (IIF) at 1:10, homozygous antinuclear antibodies (ANA) at 1:100, and nuclear membrane type ANA at 1:320 along with a high C-reactive protein concentration (16.20 mg/L, normal range 0–3.5 mg/L) and high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (44 mm/1 h, normal range 0–20 mm/1 h). Two risk factors for both SLE and cardiovascular disease also were identified in this case. First, renal parameters were abnormal with a 1 + positive urine protein, positive urinary nitrite, and elevated levels of urea nitrogen (20.59 mmol/L, normal range 2.6–7.5 mmol/L) and creatinine (167.8 µmol/L, normal range 41–73 µmol/L). Additionally, elevated lipid levels including a cholesterol level of 7.17 mmol/L (normal range 2.6–6.0 mmol/L) and triglyceride level of 2.86 mmol/L (normal range 0.28–1.8 mmol/L) implied dyslipidemia. Finally, The patient had been diagnosed with SLE, CAA,hypertension and acute coronary syndrome.
Surgical treatment of giant aneurysms is considered to be a major trauma, so patients choose interventional therapy.At the same time, surgical treatment is our second option. To prevent thromboembolic complications and further myocardial infarction, anticoagulation (low-molecular-weight calcium heparins, 5,000 U subcutaneously every 12 h) and antiplatelet therapy (oral aspirin 100 mg/day and oral clopidogrel hydrogen sulfate 75 mg/day) were administered. At the same time, one stent was implanted at the distal end of the LCX to effectively limit further expansion of the affected coronary segments . Repeated coronary angiography revealed that the occlusion was recanalized and TIMI grade III flow was restored . Finally, the patient was discharged with resolved chest pain. New oral anticoagulant (rivaroxaban) and dual antiplatelet therapy recommended at discharge. Furthermore patient has ectasia and a significant stenosis in proximal RCA.Coronary angiography was recommended after 1 month, but the patient refused..After 1 month, they were treated with rivaroxaban and aspirin. During 6 months of follow-up, the patient is in good health.