A 20-month-old boy was admitted to our hospital for stage IV neuroblastoma involving the left adrenal gland, left neck lymph nodes, and bone marrow of the right femur. No abnormal lesions were detected on a computed tomography scan of the brain. The patient underwent 5 cycles of chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide (1,200 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 2 days (excluding first cycle; 1 day) ), vincristine (1.5 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 1 day), pirarubicin (40 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 1 day), and cisplatin (20 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 5 days). After the third and fourth cycles of the chemotherapy, peripheral blood stem cells were harvested, and the primary tumor (i.e., the left adrenal gland) was completely resected. After 1 more cycle of chemotherapy, when the patient was 27 months old, autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (auto-PBSCT) was performed. The conditioning regimen consisted of carboplatin (400 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 4 days), etoposide (200 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 4 days), and melphalan (100 mg•m - 2•dose - 1 × 2 days). The patient received an infusion of 1.76 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg of autologous unmanipulated peripheral blood stem cells, and achieved neutrophil engraftment on day 12. Starting on day 49 after auto-PBSCT, the patient received abdominal involved field radiation of 19.8 Gy in 11 fractions. After treatment, the patient vomited 2 or 3 times per week, usually in the morning. The reasons for the vomiting were investigated. An upper gastrointestinal series was performed, and gastroesophageal reflux disease was detected. The patient was administered famotidine, and the vomiting ceased. Subsequently, magnetic resonance imaging on day 99 after auto-PBSCT revealed an intracranial tumor in the left parietal lobe, and the tumor was accompanied by extensive peritumoral edema . The tumor was completely resected. The resected tumor contained a lymphoid infiltrate composed of many large atypical lymphocytes with prominent nuclei. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that the large lymphocytes exhibited a B-cell phenotype, with positive immunoreactivity for CD20, CD79a, and MUM-1, and negative staining for CD3 and CD45RO. Immunohistochemistry showed expression of EBV nuclear antigen-2 , and latent membrane protein 1 in the lymphocytes, and in situ hybridization indicated nuclear expression of EBV-encoded RNA-1 . The pathological diagnosis was diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with latent type III EBV-infection. A final diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with EBV associated PTLD was made. EBV statuses were examined after diagnosis of PTLD. EBV-EA IgG antibody and EBV-VCA IgM were negative, but EBV-VCA IgG and EBV-EBNA IgG were positive. EBV-DNA in blood has not been detected. And, absolute CD4, CD8, and lymphocyte count were 174/μl, 470/μl, and 1,460/μl, respectively (CD4/CD8 ratio; 0.37). The patient has no neurological symptoms and remains free from neuroblastoma and EBV-associated PTLD 3 years after auto-PBSCT.