A 70-year-old man presented to our hospital with exaggerated general malaise and leg edema. His blood pressure on admission was 90/50 mmHg, heart rate was 84 beats/min, body temperature 36.5 °C, and respiratory rate 20/min with 99% oxygen saturation on ambient air. He had pitting edema of the lower legs and he gained about 10 kg weight. Blood tests showed mild renal and hepatic impairment (blood urea nitrogen; 39 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.3 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 52 U/L; alanine transaminase, 53 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transferase, 177 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 296 U/L), and the brain natriuretic peptide level was 317 pg/mL. There was no evidence of neurological abnormality. A plain radiograph of his chest revealed heart dilation and pleural edema. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed mild pericardial effusion, an ejection fraction of 56%, mild tricuspid valve regurgitation (right ventricular systolic pressure, 44 mmHg), and the diameter of inferior vena cava of 22 mm with no respiratory variations. He drank 40 to 80 g of alcohol a day. Because he was diagnosed with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and volume overload, he was treated with infusion of loop diuretics (furosemide 20 mg/day). However diuretics did not work well (urine output, 500 ml/day) and 1 day after starting the diuretic infusion his malaise worsened. His systolic blood pressure suddenly decreased to 50 mmHg. Electrocardiography showed rapid atrial fibrillation (Heart rate, 150 beats/min), low voltage at limb leads, no ST-T change and no prolonged QT interval. TTE showed a little increased pericardial effusion with normal ejection fraction. Cardiac tamponade and atrial fibrillation might lead to his shock status therefore we performed electrical cardioversion and pericardiocentesis, resulting in no response. Fluid resuscitation (1 L) and norepinephrine (1 μg/kg/min) also did not improve his hemodynamic status. Thus we began venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP). Before ECMO and IABP induction, the right heart catheter showed his ScvO2 to be 92%, cardiac index 2.2 L/min/m2, pulmonary artery wedge pressure 28 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure 36 mmHg, and systemic vascular resistance 596 dyne∙s/cm5 on dobutamine 10 μg/kg/min and norepinephrine 1 μg/kg/min. Coronary angiography showed no stenosis and endomyocardial biopsy revealed no significant sings of myocarditis or cardiomyopathy.
As low systemic vascular resistance and high ScvO2 might be caused by thiamine deficiency, we submitted blood sample for thiamine level and started an intravenous infusion of 100 mg thiamine. There was no evidence of infection or adrenal insufficiency. At 24 h after the thiamine administration, his ScvO2 decreased from 92 to 82%, and his lactate level decreased, from 90.9 to 9.0 mg/dL . His blood pressure recovered to the normal range. We thus stopped the catecholamine administration and ECMO. Five days after his recovery from shock, we discovered that his thiamine level at the point of ECMO induction was 14 ng/mL (normal range 24–66 ng/mL). Also, we obtained the additional information on a 1-month history of anorexia. After 2-week thiamine replacement, his malaise and edema disappeared with no other treatments diuretics. His ScvO2 before discharge was 60%. Together all, a diagnosis of cardiac beriberi was confirmed.