A 49-year-old male patient presented to our hospital for examination with colonic space-occupying lesions that had been present for 8 months. The patient had elevated blood pressure before the operation, which was as high as 150/110 mmHg; however, he was unable to remember the time when the elevated blood pressure was identified. After consuming antihypertensive drugs, the name of which the patient was unable to recall, for 3 months, his blood pressure did not decrease. The patient sought medical intervention because of stool irregularities and a colonoscopy revealed ulcerative masses at 20–25 cm from the anal margin and multiple polyps in the rectum. Computed tomography showed irregular thickening and enhancement of the circumferential intestinal wall of the sigmoid colon, with a maximum diameter of approximately 5.9 cm. In addition, there were multiple lymph-node metastases in the mesentery, retroperitoneal, and left iliac vessels, with the largest being approximately 3.0 cm. Pathological analysis of a tumor biopsy specimen indicated that the tumor may be a paraganglioma. The patient underwent surgery for appendicitis and left leg trauma. The patient denied any history of radiation or chemical exposure. The patient had smoked for more than 20 years and drank a small amount of alcohol. All the family members are in good health.
The patient received preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy with tegafur and temozolomide orally for four cycles (specific dose: tegafur 60 mg orally twice a day; temozolomide 300 mg orally once a day). The maximum diameter of tumor and metastatic lymph nodes decreased after neoadjuvant chemotherapy . The patient underwent sigmoid colon resection, omentectomy, abdominal wall nodule resection, and retroperitoneal lymph-node dissection on the sacrum.
The main body of the tumor was located in the muscularis and subserosa of the intestinal wall and had invaded the local serous membrane and lamina propria of the mucosa. Morphologically the tumor resembled a nest-like and organ-like structure. The tumor cells showed abundant cytoplasm, obvious nuclear atypia, and had a mitotic figure of <1 per 10 high-power fields. Mild lymphovascular invasion and nerve invasion were observed. Some tumor cells were slightly degenerative with interstitial hyalinosis, which was consistent with mild post-treatment reaction. In addition, metastatic tumors in lymph nodes (18/33) and tumor nodules could also be visualized . Since no other tumors were seen during the patient's imaging examination and surgery, the primary tumor of the colon was first considered. Immunohistochemical staining results : Epithelial markers, such as AE1/AE3, CK18, and EMA, were negative, indicating that the diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine tumors could be excluded. Neuroendocrine markers, such as CD56, Chromagranin-A, Synaptophysin, SSTR2, and NSE, were diffusely, strongly, and positively expressed, which supported the diagnosis of paraganglioma. Immunostaining for S-100, SOX10, and GFAP highlighted sustentacular cells, which can be found in varying numbers at the periphery of Zellballen or interspersed between tumor cells. HMB-45 was negative and MelanA showed diffuse moderate expression that cannot exclude the diagnosis of clear-cell sarcoma, so molecular testing is needed for further diagnosis. In addition, Desmin, SMA, CD117, and TTF-1 were all negative. Vimentin showed diffuse and strong cytoplasmic positive. GATA3 was diffuse nucleus positive, Inhibin was focal positive, and CD34 was vascular positive. The Ki-67 label index was approximately 5%. SDHB was diffusely negative, representing mutant expression. Reagent information can be found in .
Differential diagnosis: Gastrointestinal clear-cell sarcoma, epithelial gastrointestinal stromal tumor, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, colonic neuroendocrine tumor and composite gangliocytoma/neuroma and neuroendocrine tumor.
Final pathological diagnosis: Colonic paraganglioma with lymph-node metastasis (18/33). According to GAPP score, the tumor was diagnosed as moderate differentiated type.
EWSR1 (22q12) chromosome translocation was negative, as shown through a fluorescence in-situ hybridization test. The result did not support a diagnosis of clear-cell sarcoma.
The DNA from paired tumor and normal formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples was extracted for next-generation sequencing (NGS). The SDHB gene somatic mutation (c.2 T > G, p.M1?) in exon 1 was detected by the NGS . The mutation in exon 26 of the ATRX gene (p.R2028*) was also detected.
The patient recovered well after the surgery and was actively followed-up. The patient’s blood pressure was normal and stable after surgery. Up to now, no recurrence or metastasis has been observed in 17 months after the operation.