A 66-year-old man, stable 3 years after kidney transplantation in our hospital, felt a tingling pain in his right index finger while weeding a field in the evening of late August and confirmed a mamushi nearby. He was admitted to our hospital immediately. Characteristics, such as two parallel fang marks with dark purple bleeding foci under the skin, were found on his right index finger. The redness and swelling were just localized to the right hand. Upon arrival at the hospital, his consciousness was clear, with a blood pressure of 140/70 mmHg, pulse of 70 beats per minute, body temperature of 36.5°C, and SpO2 of 99% under room air. He did not report double vision.
Judging from these situations comprehensively, we diagnosed him as MB grade I. The biochemical analysis results of the blood performed on arrival were as follows: white blood cells 9800/μL, hemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, platelets 21.0 × 104/μL, total protein 6.0 g/dL, glucose 121 mg/dL, AST 12 IU/L, ALT 6 IU/L, blood urea nitrogen 21.9 mg/dL, Cr 2.1 mg/dL, sodium 139 mEq/L, potassium 4.8 mEq/L, chloride 101 mEq/L, CPK 34 IU/L, LDH 245 IU/L.
The administration of lactated Ringer's solution infusion (3000 mL/day), cepharanthin, antibiotics, and TT was initiated according to the dosage stated in the package insert. However, due to his strong allergic reaction to the manufactured mamushi antivenom, it could not be administered. Tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and methylprednisolone, which had been used as immunosuppressive drugs after kidney transplantation, were continued at their prescribed doses.
After admission, the area of redness and swelling continued to expand, and on the third day, these areas extended to the chest and diplopia appeared. We determined that the MB grade worsened to V. Similarly, laboratory data suggested rhabdomyolysis with a high CPK level . The severity grade worsened, but the same treatments were continued. Fortunately, however, urine output and renal function were adequately maintained.
After the fourth hospital day, MB grade and biochemical results of the blood gradually improved. He was discharged on hospital day 14 without any deterioration of renal function or infection or any signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation.