A 46-year-old man was referred for left chronic leg pain. The patient was involved in a plane accident 30 years before sustaining a femoral shaft fracture treated with a reamed Kuntscher nail and a posterior wall acetabulum fracture treated with open reduction and internal fixation with lag screws . The patient came to our outpatient clinic complaining about inguinal pain and chronic leg pain with limitation of activities of daily living, although he was able to walk for more than one hour. On physical examination, the patient had no limitation of the hip range of motion. The ipsilateral knee had full range of motion and the patient did not need any crutches to walk without limping. Neurovascular examination was normal. The PostelMerléd’Aubigné scale was 14 points (4 for pain, 5 for walking and 5 for range of motion). Overall alignment of the extremity was anatomic. As a part of the initial evaluation, a blood test with infection parameters was performed and was negative for infection. Pre-operative radiographs showed a healed femoral fracture in all 4 cortices with an intramedullary Kuntscher nail without locking screws and cortical thickening at the fracture site .
The patient was informed about the incipient arthritis of the hip and the possibility to perform a one-stage or two-stage surgery. The surgical risks were discussed with the patient, including pain after hardware removal and failure to remove the nail, specially this last point because other surgeons had tried to do the same procedure few years before and had failed after many hours of surgery. The patient decided to have two-stage surgery. Firstly, remove the nail at all costs and depending on the outcome of this first surgery he would assess the hip replacement surgery.
The patient was put in a lateral position and a lateral hip approach was done. The first step was to find the proximal tip of the nail which was found seated deep in the great trochanter. The initial device used to remove the nail was the conical extraction tool that was unsuccessful after several attempts. After the overgrowth bone was removed of the proximal part of the nail a hook extraction system was engaged with difficulty. However, the nail did not move after multiple hits with a 1 kg hammer and finally the hook broke itself. At this point, we decided to use the saw to perform a simple unicortical osteotomy in the proximal third of the femur to decompress the endomedullar canal . After this decompression osteotomy we tried to hit the nail from below with an impactor engaged in the proximal hole of the nail. However, the implant remained in the same position.
After trying all these different ways to remove the nail being unsuccessful, we decided to continue the longitudinal osteotomy from proximal to distal in the lateral side of the femur. The nail was found in place with on growth and overgrowth in almost entire length of the nail. A new attempt to hammer the nail from below was performed and the nail started to move gradually until the proximal hole of the nail broke . After so many attempts, we did not give up and proceeded to drill a new hole distally with a diamond drill to finish the nail removal.
Finally, the Kuntscher nail was removed in its entirety without any other complications. Subsequently, several cerclages and a bone allograft was used to close the longitudinal osteotomy .
The patient was admitted to the hospital for pain and bleeding control. On the second day of hospitalization, the patient underwent a blood transfusion as his hemoglobin was reported to be 7.1 g/dl. The patient was discharged on day 4 after antibiotic prophylaxis, deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis with low-weight-molecular heparin and ambulation with crutches without weight bearing. At 8 weeks of follow-up, patient was allowed to walk with gradual weight bearing. The patient was satisfied at 1 year of follow-up with no complications and the X-ray showed complete healing of the longitudinal osteotomy .
At the time of this case report, the patient is free from pain in the leg with only sporadic hip pain, so there is no indication of hip replacement surgery for the time being