A 68-year-old man (height: 169 cm, weight: 68 kg) who was receiving medical treatment for hypertension and diabetes mellitus was diagnosed with stage 1B adenocarcinoma of the lung based on the findings of investigations including computed tomography (CT) after an abnormal shadow was noted in his left upper lung field on a chest radiograph during a medical checkup. He was scheduled for left upper lobectomy via VATS. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia with thoracic epidural analgesia in the right lateral recumbent position. Before induction of general anesthesia, a thoracic epidural catheter was placed in Th4/5, induction was done with propofol and remifentanil, muscle relaxation was obtained with rocuronium, and double-lumen tube was intubated endotracheally to maintain anesthesia with intermittent lidocaine administration into the epidural space and desflurane inhalation. On the first postoperative day, the patient started eating and getting out of bed, but atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 120–150 beats/min appeared. A transdermal patch of bisoprolol 4 mg/day was applied, and the heart rate was maintained at 80–100 beats/min. Patient-controlled epidural analgesia provided good pain control with the Prince Henry Hospital pain scale is less than or equal to 2 and was used until the 4th postoperative day. Although atrial fibrillation persisted, the heart rate was controlled well with bisoprolol, and there were no other complications; therefore, the patient was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. On the 7th postoperative day, the patient experienced light-headedness and dyspnea while walking to the bathroom, but the symptoms quickly improved. On the 8th postoperative day, the patient experienced dyspnea and visited our hospital. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a thrombus (18 mm in diameter) attached to the resected edge of the left pulmonary vein , although no pulmonary edema was observed, blood flow in the pulmonary veins was greatly impeded. The patient was immediately readmitted to the hospital, and an echocardiogram was obtained, which showed no evidence of right heart overload, heart failure, or hypoxemia. Heparin 18,000 units/day was immediately started. However, the activated partial thromboplastin time did not prolong, even after the dose was increased to 25,000 units/day. Therefore, the patient was switched to 60 mg of edoxaban tosilate hydrate. Sinus rhythm was achieved on the 10th postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on the 24th postoperative day because the thrombus was shrinking, and no dyspnea was observed. The thrombus was confirmed to have disappeared on the 66th postoperative day.