A woman in her 50s with polycystic kidney and hepatic disease underwent kidney transplantation on 21 July 2021. She received immunosuppressive therapy with anti-thymocyte globulins, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and corticosteroids. She presented a negative cytomegalovirus (CMV) serology whereas donor serology was positive. Kidney graft function was stabilized at 98 µmol/L of creatinine 3 months after transplantation, but the patient developed post-transplant diabetes, and two episodes of acute graft pyelonephritis in January and February 2022. On 27 February 2022, she was hospitalized for isolated fever while still being treated with ertapenem for her second episode of acute graft pyelonephritis. Levels of the gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) were increased to 109, 243, and 225 IU/L, respectively. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and bilirubin levels were within reference range. There was no sign of hepatocellular deficiency. The patient had no background of alcohol intake or illicit drug use. The abdominal ultrasonography was normal. HEV RNA detection was positive using a real-time reverse transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (qPCR) assay, as previously described , viral load was 6.5 log10IU/mL, and IgM and IgG serologies were negative .
HEV was determined to be of genotype 3c using the Hepatitis E Virus Genotyping Tool v.1.0 and by phylogeny (Supplementary Figure S1). No other infectious agents were identified. We then tried to define the mode and time of infection. Questioning did not find evidence for foodborne transmission of HEV during the 10 previous weeks. There was no history of transfusion.
Retrospective examination of biological data revealed that liver function abnormalities dated from August 2021, i.e. during the first month after kidney transplantation. Indeed, we noticed an increase in the GGT level on 10 August 2021. An increase of ALT was subsequently detected on 7 October 2021. Liver function tests were normal before the graft. Additional retrospective analyses performed on available sera detected HEV RNA by qPCR on 19 August 2021 at a titer of 4.5 log10IU/mL, while qPCR was negative the day of the transplantation . In addition, abnormality of liver tests and the presence of HEV RNA in the serum for more than 6 months led us to conclude that it was a case of chronic hepatitis E. Besides, HEV infection occurrence so close to the transplantation raised suspicion of transmission from the donor.
The donor was a man in his 50s admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for a cardiac arrest following a severe trauma. He died after Maastricht category III circulatory arrest. The two kidneys and tissues, including bones and cardiac valves, were recovered whereas the liver was not because of suspicion of an ischemic cholangitis. Indeed, liver tests were abnormal on admission to the ICU (ALT 52 IU/L, AST 107 IU/L, GGT 84 IU/L, ALP 61 IU/L). The donor received two packed red blood cells and one pack of platelets before organ procurement.
We retrospectively detected HEV RNA by qPCR in the donor’s serum while HEV IgG and IgM were negative. Viral load was 4.9 log10copies/mL. Retrospective qPCR showed that stored health and safety samples of the three blood products received by the organ donor were free of HEV RNA. Based on these findings and their timing, and the 100% identity between HEV sequences obtained from the organ donor and the kidney transplant recipient, in addition to phylogenetic analysis including these sequences (Supplementary Figure S1), we retained the diagnosis of nosocomial HEV transmission through the kidney transplant.
HEV RNA viral load in the transplant recipient was 5.6 log10IU/mL on 3 March 2022 and 5.3 log10IU/mL on 28 March 2022 . She was hospitalized on 28 March 2022 for CMV disease with digestive, pulmonary, and hematological involvement. She was treated with ganciclovir from 29 March to 19 April 2022 associated with the decrease of immunosuppressive therapy (reduction of the mycophenolate mofetil dosage by a factor of 4). On 19 April 2022, HEV RNA load had increased to 6.8 log10IU/mL. CMV PCR was negative. The patient was thus treated with ribavirin at 800 mg/day from 2 May 2022 for 3 months. On 27 June 2022, liver function tests were normal, and HEV qPCR was negative. Although HEV seroconversion was not observed in August 2022 it was apparent in April 2023 for both IgM and IgG anti-HEV antibodies. HEV RNA tested retrospectively using the Altona RT-PCR assay (Altona Diagnostics, Hamburg, Germany) on a stored stool sample collected as on April 2023 was undetectable. Despite seroconversion, she developed new HEV viremia on June 16 2023, 10 months after ribavirin treatment had ended. Phylogenetic analysis indicated that the strain was the same (Supplementary Figure S1). Her liver function test and fibroscan were normal. Because HEV viremia persisted for 3 months, Ribavirin was reintroduced from October 2023 to January 2024, resulting in HEV viremia clearance. HEV qPCR in the stools was negative in January 2024 (Altona RT-PCR assay).
We conducted an investigation to identify other infected recipients from the same donor. The two kidneys and tissues – as bones and cardiac valves – were transplanted. Mild GGT level increase was observed 9 days after the kidney transplant in the other kidney recipient, but not secondary to HEV infection since blood samples retrospectively tested negative for anti-HEV IgM and HEV RNA just before the transplant as well as 3 and 9 months post-transplant. A left knee medial tibia plateau was grafted 2 months after procurement for the repair of a complex knee fracture in a 25-year-old woman. Anti-HEV IgM and IgG were negative 7.5 months post-osseous graft. In conclusion, HEV transmission occurred in only one of two kidney recipients. Recipients of donor tissues appear to have remained free of infection, subject to missing data.