A 73-year-old woman presented to the Department of Ophthalmology of Juntendo University Shizuoka Hospital with a sudden onset of discharge and ophthalmalgia in the left eye. She had a history of type 2 diabetes for 35 years. Hemoglobin (Hb) A1c had ranged between 7.2% and 8.0% in recent years, indicating inadequate glycemic control. Cataract surgery had been performed on both eyes ∼20 years ago. She also had a history of nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy for ∼23 years and had not undergone retinal photocoagulation. Her family history was unremarkable.
At the first visit to our hospital, a corneal ulcer was noted in the left eye with corneal opacity . Further, conjunctival injection and chemosis and/or conjunctivochalasis on the lower part of burbar conjunctiva were observed. Infectious corneal ulcer was then diagnosed. Funduscopy revealed mild retinal punctate hemorrhages in both eyes due to nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. Corrected visual acuity was 14/20 and 16/20 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Topical application of 1.5% levofloxacin (LVFX) antimicrobial eye drops (Cravit® ophthalmic solution 1.5%; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan) four times daily was commenced together with 0.3% ofloxacin ophthalmic ointment (Tarivid® ophthalmic ointment 0.3%; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd) twice daily. Cefdinir capsules (Cefzon; Astellas Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) were also administered orally (100 mg three times daily for 3 days). Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus canis were isolated by culture of corneal scrapings, and both of these bacteria were found to be sensitive to LVFX. At the first hospital visit, HbA1c was 7.3%. Tear secretion was evaluated at 12 mm in the right eye and 11 mm in the left eye by Schirmer’s tear test. Tear breakup time in both eyes was 4 seconds.
At 2 weeks after the start of treatment, there were no signs of infection, the corneal ulcer reduced, and her symptoms of eye discharge and the ophthalmalgia resolved. In contrast, clinically a lesion of corneal epithelial defect ∼1 mm in size was still noted. Even though additional administration of 0.1% hyaluronic ophthalmic suspension (Hyalein® ophthalmic solution 0.1%; Santen Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd) six times daily, the corneal epithelial defect persisted . We diagnosed persistent corneal epithelial defect associated with diabetes as well as corneal hypoesthesia and diabetic keratitis. Vitreous hemorrhage occurred in the left eye ∼2 months after the start of treatment, and visual acuity decreased from 16/20 to 8/20. The patient required vitrectomy, but it could not be done until the corneal epithelial defect healed. Accordingly, she was treated with 2% rebamipide ophthalmic suspension (Mucosta ophthalmic suspension unit dose 2%; Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) four times daily, and the corneal epithelial defect healed after 2 weeks. Vitrectomy was then performed, and administration of this drug was discontinued after vitrectomy, while LVFX eye drops and 0.1% betamethasone ophthalmic suspension were used. After surgery, any corneal epithelial defect did not recur after surgery , and her corrected visual acuity had recovered to 16/20 at 3 months after surgery.