A 72-year-old man, who was a heavy smoker (50 pack-year), underwent treatment for right pleural effusion at a different hospital. He had a history of occupational asbestos exposure as a welder. His past medical history included lung emphysema, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and spinal canal stenosis. Eleven months after the initial onset of pleural effusion, he experienced recurrent effusion and was referred to our hospital. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a moderate amount of right pleural effusion . Thoracoscopically, multiple plaques and pleural effusion (600 mL in volume) were detected, but no visible tumors were identified . A right pleural biopsy assisted by video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) led to the diagnosis of MIS. We continued careful follow-up.
The pleural effusion decreased after 5 months from the first biopsy . However, a solid nodule appeared in the right parietal pleura at 9 months post-biopsy . A second histological examination (CT-guided biopsy) showed spindle cells without any epithelioid atypical cells, with clear invasion. The patient underwent immunotherapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab followed by combination chemotherapy (including carboplatin and pemetrexed). However, the target lesions were clinically evaluated as a progressive disease during treatment. The patient died 33 months after the onset of the first symptoms of pleural effusion (21 months after the first biopsy and 12 months after the second biopsy).
The first pathological examination included right-side pleural fluid cytology and a right-side parietal pleural biopsy with VATS. In the pleural-fluid cytology sample, 1,201 mesothelial cells per cytocentrifuge smear specimen made from 6 mL were found, which was much lower than that evidenced in the overt mesothelioma in our department (over 10,000 cells on average in 3 cases). The mesothelial cells were scattered in the inflammatory cells, with occasional cell-to-cell apposition . The mesothelial cells were mainly mononuclear. Binucleated cells and multinucleated mesothelial cells with 3–5 nuclei were scarce (4.0% and 1.2%, respectively). The nuclear-cytoplasm ratio was low and nuclear atypia was mild. These findings were inconsistent with the typical pathological observations of mesothelioma. However, cell-in-cell engulfment with or without hump-like cytoplasmic processes and/or paired cells were conspicuous in 7.3% of the evaluated cells. The pleural biopsy assisted by VATS was performed from five different sites. Histologically, a single layer of mesothelial cells with atypia spread along the surface of the pleura . The mesothelial cells were positive for mesothelial markers such as calretinin (DAK Calret1, 1:15; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), D2-40 (D2-40, 1:100; Dako), WT-1 (WT49, 1:40; Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany), HEG1 (SKM9-2, prediluted; Nichirei Biosciences, Inc., Tokyo, Japan), and pan-cytokeratin (CAM5.2, 1:10; BD Biosciences, Haryana, India) . The mesothelial cells were negative for carcinoma markers, including Ber-EP4 (Ber-EP4, prediluted; Dako), MOC31 (MOC-31, 1:60; Dako), and Claudin 4 (3E2C1, 1:200; Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). All mesothelial cells retained BAP1 expression (C-4 1:100, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) , while some mesothelial cells lost MTAP expression (2G4, 1:200, Abnova Corporation) . In the areas where MTAP expression was lost, 61.5% (115/187) of the mesothelial cells showed homozygous deletion of CDKN2A on FISH (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) (CDKN2A probe, red label; chromosome 9 centromeric probe, green label) . Based on these findings and multidisciplinary discussion, this pleural lesion was concluded to be MIS.
The second pathology samples included a CT-guided biopsy tissue sample and needle-washing cytology used in the CT-guided biopsy. The needle-washing cytology showed atypical spindle cells in the necrotic debris . Histologically, the tumor was composed of atypical spindle cells arranged in abortive fascicles within the fibrous stroma . The atypical cells were positive for pan-cytokeratin. The cells were weakly or focally positive for WT1 and HEG1 and were negative for calretinin and D2-40. Atypical cells were positive for BAP1 , while most atypical cells lost cytoplasmic MTAP expression . At least 31% (31/100) of mesothelial cells showed homozygous deletion of CDKN2A on FISH . These finding are consistent with sarcomatoid mesothelioma cells. There was a possibility of biphasic mesothelioma, but the absence of epithelioid atypical cells in either needle-washing cytology sample or histological sample highly suggested the possibility of sarcomatoid mesothelioma.