A 76-year-old female, known to be hypertensive on treatment, presented with a 2-day history of colicky abdominal pain, bilious vomiting, and abdominal distension. On examination, she was sick looking and afebrile.
On physical examination, she had a moderately distended abdomen, with a moderately tender swelling in the left anterior abdominal region which according to the patient had been there for over 20 years. The rest of the abdomen was mildly tender but no rebound tenderness, and bowel sounds were of increased frequency and pitch. A digital rectal exam revealed an empty rectum. Notably from the cardiovascular system exam, she was in hypertensive urgency with a blood pressure of 200/100 mmHg.
Investigation results show the following data: full blood count: total white cell count 13.9 g/L, hemoglobin 11.9 g/dL, and platelets 563 g/L; serum electrolytes: chloride 99.9 mmol/L, sodium 134.9 mmol/L, and potassium 5.40 mmol/L generally normal; and abdominal ultrasound scan: bowel loops were distended with contents showing back and forth peristaltic motion. There was also an abdominal wall defect measuring 4.45 cm in diameter with herniated bowel loops in the anterior abdominal region with mild fluid collection in the hernia sac. An erect abdominal X-ray revealed uneven bowel gas distribution mainly in the upper abdomen with dilated bowel loops and significant air fluid levels .
CT scan was requested but not done due to financial constraints. Working impression was intestinal obstruction due to sigmoid volvulus, also querying an obstructed hernia in the left anterior abdominal wall and hypertensive urgency.
Conservative management for intestinal obstruction which included nil per os, nasogastric tube decompression of the stomach, soapy enema, maintenance intravenous fluids, and antibiotic cover was started plus blood pressure management, and 24 hours later, she had improved as the abdominal pain, distension, and vomiting had stopped. She was able to pass stool normally. The blood pressure had also normalized. Decision was made to repair the hernia; and an explanation was given to the patient, and informed consent was obtained.
Intraoperatively, using a Rutherford-Morrison incision in the left anterior abdominal region, the abdomen was opened in layers; a large defect was found (6 × 5 cm) at the Spigelian aponeurosis , with a huge, thick, inflamed sac protruding; the sac was opened; and an inflamed jejunum was found, obstructed with adhesions . The Spigelian hernia was repaired with a mesh under layers (of the rectus sheath), fixing it with Nylon 0, from the lower part of the inguinal ligament and up to the sheath of the muscles; the mesh was covered with the sheath of the rectus and transversus muscle . The mesh was subcutaneously apposed with Vicryl 2/0, and the skin was closed with Vicryl 2/0 . The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the tenth postoperative day. The follow-up was done at 2 months and 6 months, and no sign of recurrence was identified.