We report the case of a 65-year-old Caucasian woman who presented with a subcutaneous inflammatory tumor of the right breast, which had been progressively growing over a period of 10 years . The patient had a past history of a multifocal adenocarcinoma of the right breast, which was resected 23 years earlier. Further treatment included chemotherapy with six cycles of fluorouracil, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide in combination with cobalt radiation with a total dose of 60 Gy, followed by tamoxifen for a total of 12 years. The first local signs were observed seven years after the radiation treatment with the loss of irradiated skin elasticity followed by increasing induration and telangiectasia. Over the 10 years before presentation, the mass had significantly increased in size and become increasingly painful, restricting the patient psychologically and functionally in her daily activities. The patient's other past medical history included high blood pressure and hypercholesterolemia. Her only additional surgery was an appendectomy during childhood.
Diagnostic work-up (bone scintigraphy, abdominal ultrasound, thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan) revealed no local or distant metastases . As there was no suspicion for a progressive malignant disease, we did not perform a pre-operative biopsy. We offered the patient resection of the thoracic wall, reconstruction by a Premilene® mesh and switching of an ipsilateral latissimus dorsi muscle flap. Intra-operatively, we observed multiple retromammarial adhesions without macroscopic tumor infiltration. Pathological fractures of costae 3/4/5 were also observed. The tumor could be removed in its entirety. Reconstruction of the thoracic wall was performed with a double layer polypropylene mesh (Premilene®, Braun, Melsungen), fixed with Ethibond® (Ethicon, Norderstedt) sutures. A flap of the latissimus dorsi muscle was then mobilized and switched to the thoracic wall. The muscle was fixed circularly, subcutaneously and cutaneously. Two thoracic drains were placed . The whole operation time was 210 minutes, and blood loss remained minimal at 50 ml.
The thoracic drains were removed on postoperative days 4 and 8, and the patient left our institution on postoperative day 18. Microscopic examination of the resected specimen showed a wide, almost scarred, radionecrosis and fibrosis of fat, muscle and bone . Also noted were extended dystrophic calcifications corresponding to a radiation-induced vasculopathy. Histologically, there was no evidence of malignancy. Within a follow-up of 14 months, the cosmetic result remained satisfactory without any disturbance in healing.