A 20-year-old woman presented with a 2-week history of the presence of a painless mass on the left side of the thyroid bed, on which a lobectomy was performed 4 years before. In 2014, this patient arrived at a local hospital with a painless mass on the left side of the neck. Ultrasound disclosed that there was a nodule, which was approximately 3 cm*2 cm in size in the left lobe of her thyroid. Serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels were normal. Lobectomy was performed to treat the nodule, which was diagnosed as GCT following pathological examination of the postoperative tissue. Immunohistochemical results showed that the lesion tested positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), S-100 protein and negative for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and thyroglobulin (Tg). The mitotic index was assessed using Ki-67 staining and was found to be below 1%. There were no postoperative complications, such as hoarseness and hypoparathyroidism that were reported after initial surgery. There was no regular follow-up after the surgery was performed.
The patient arrived at our hospital after 4 years, in 2018, for the first time after the initial surgery. This time, ultrasound examination revealed a neoplasm, which was palpable through physical examination, on the left thyroid bed, which was considered as recurrence , and multiple solid hypoechoic components of partially cystic nodules and benign lesions were found on the right side of the thyroid. Neck computed tomography scanning with intravenous contrast showed that the mass had a blurred boundary and was slightly unevenly enhanced . The laryngoscopy indicated that bilateral vocal cord mobility was normal. The bronchoscopy showed that a posterior subglottic mass, with normal overlying mucosa, compressed the fibromuscular membrane from the outside . Moreover, cytology of the fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy together with previous surgical history indicated that the current neoplasm was a recurrent GCT of the thyroid.
To avoid adding an additional superficial scar, the same anterior approach used during the first intervention was used. Intraoperative neuromonitoring was used to identify and protect the recurrent laryngeal nerve (RLN) and the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (EBSLN). Intraoperative exploration showed that the recurrent lesion was about 2 cm in diameter and located next to, and also adhered firmly to the left inferior pharyngeal constrictor muscle (upper side of the thyroid) and to the left RLN at the entrance of the larynx. Using a lancet, the tumor was sharply separated from the left RLN which was completely conserved. The left RLN was not bifurcated before it entered the larynx. The function of the RLN and the vagus nerve (in the cervical sheath) were confirmed to be normal using a threshold (100uV) at the beginning and the end of the operation. The tumor was yellowish in appearance, smooth and rubbery to the touch. Part of the tumor was located behind the fibromuscular membrane and was invasive beyond the midline. This patient accepted surgical dissection along with complete thyroidectomy. After reoperation, this patient did not show signs of postoperative dysphonia and had no clinical evidence of hypoparathyroidism.
Histopathological examination using H&E staining revealed that the tumor was composed of epithelioid cells with an abundance of eosinophilic granular cytoplasm. The arrow showed that the tumor tissue infiltrated into striated muscle tissue . There was no evidence for nerve invasion in H&E staining. The tumor cells were strongly positive for S-100 protein and negative for Desmin . Based on the above findings and the patient’s surgical history, post-operative pathology defined the lesion as recurrent benign GCT of the thyroid. After 6 months of follow-up, no local or distant recurrence was found.