A 14-year-old boy visited the ear, nose, and throat (ENT) outpatient department of our center, with a history of left-sided nasal obstruction gradually progressive over a period of 1 year, with recurrent history of associated rhinorrhea. There was no history of epistaxis or any other ENT complaints, and the patient’s past medical history and family history were insignificant.
On anterior rhinoscopy, a single polypoidal mass was seen filling the left nasal cavity extending up to the vestibule. The mass was firm in consistency, insensitive to touch and pain, and did not bleed upon touch. General and systemic examinations and an examination of the rest of the ENT were all within normal limits. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed a homogenous soft tissue lesion measuring 44×68×12 mm in the left nasal cavity, extending posteriorly into the nasopharynx .
The mass extended superiorly into the left ethmoid air cells up to the cribriform plate with its thinning and breach. The rest of the sinuses was clear. On contrast study, there was heterogeneous enhancement. Based on the CT findings of the anterior skull base breach, gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to rule out intracranial extension, and revealed small sub-centimeter focus posteriorly without any significant intracranial extension .
Rigid endoscopy was carried out and the mass was seen attached to the anterior part of the nasal septum. A punch biopsy was taken, which presented as an inflammatory polyp.
The patient was referred for standard endoscopic sinus surgery under general anesthetic after providing informed consent. The mass was removed endoscopically, and was seen to be extending intracranially but extradurally. Complete resection of the tumor was achieved and while managing the tumor in the region of the cribriform plate, there was an obvious CSF leak. The site of leakage was identified and closed using an underlay technique with septal cartilage, fascia lata, and tissue glue. The intra-operative blood loss was minimal.The post-operative recovery period was uneventful. Histopathology of the excised specimen showed the tumor mass lined by pseudostratified columnar epithelium with squamous metaplasia. The subepithelial tissue was composed of loose myxoid areas with mature adipose tissues and foci of cartilage. Foci of neuroepithelial cells occupying more than four low-power fields were seen. Grade 3 immature teratoma was given as final diagnosis (-).
Adjuvant chemotherapy was started based on the histological grading, with four cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin. A regular follow-up for a period of 2 years showed no signs of recurrence.