A 51-year-old Chinese Tibetan male presented with 3-year low-back pain and 4-month discomfort in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. He had always been in good health without alcohol abuse and underlying diseases. He was living in a rural area and had a history of occasional contact with dogs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine in a local hospital suggested bone destruction in the L1 vertebra, slight swelling and thickening of the paravertebral soft tissue, and slight swelling of the right psoas muscle. He was clinically diagnosed with tuberculosis and was given anti-tuberculosis treatment a month prior to the visit, but the symptoms of low back pain were not relieved. On examination, his vital signs were normal. He has tenderness in the right upper quadrant. The percussion test of the lumbar spine was positive. Laboratory results showed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration (52.4 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (83 mm/h). Both the interferon gamma (IFN-γ) release assay (IGRA) and PPD skin test were positive. The concentration of procalcitonin was 0.04 ng/ml. The complete blood count and concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and lactate dehydrogenase were normal. IgG antibodies to echinococcus and cysticercus were positive. Tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), (1,3)-β-D-glucan (BDG) and galactomannan were negative. Antibody tests for autoimmune hepatitis were negative. Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) revealed a hypodense lesion with uneven enhancement in the right posterior lobe of the liver (6.5 × 4.6 cm) that was suggestive of an abscess or tumor . There were two ring-enhancing cystic lesions in the right abdominal wall , which was connected to the intrahepatic lesion. Enhanced MRI of the lumbar spine showed lesions of mixed density with uneven enhancement in the L1 vertebra and paraspinal tissue, and the lesion spread upward along the right paraspinal to the right side of the T11 vertebra . A brain MRI scan was normal. Chest CT revealed chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and bullae. The pathological results of the liver biopsy showed granulomatous inflammation with necrosis, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining and silver hexamine immunohistochemical staining were positive, acid fast staining and tuberculosis real-time fluorescence quantitative PCR were negative, suggesting a diagnosis of parasitic disease and possibly echinococcosis. mNGS of the puncture fluid of abdominal cysts was performed using an Illumina X10 sequencer with a unilateral read length of 75 bp. After removing human sequences, there were 585 sequence reads matching Echinococcus multilocularis, but no reads matched any other parasites or microorganisms. He was diagnosed with disseminated alveolar echinococcosis. After consultation with a surgeon, it was determined that this case could not be treated surgically. Albendazole (400 mg bid) was administered orally. The patient was in stable condition during follow-up. The timeline of the patient with relevant data of the episodes is presented in .