A 36-year-old Japanese male was referred to our hospital because of persistent chest pain and a subacutely progressive pulmonary nodule. Four weeks prior to his referral to our hospital, he began to experience chest pain that increased in severity on inspiration. He visited a private hospital the following day. He had no family or personal history of nontuberculous or pulmonary disease. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed an irregularly shaped solitary nodule in the periphery of the left lower lobe with microcalcifications and pleural indentation. On CT at a follow-up appointment 2 weeks after the initial consultation, the nodule was enlarged . To diagnose the subacutely progressive pulmonary nodule, a CT-guided lung biopsy was performed in the private hospital. The histological examination of the biopsy specimens revealed granulomatous inflammation with atypical cells of various sizes. One week later, the patient was referred to our hospital. Although we intended to clarify the origin of the atypical cells and rule out malignancy, the specimen volume was insufficient for further investigation.
He reported no history of smoking, foreign travel, eating crab or boar or deer meat, or contact with patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis. The results of his physical examinations, including vital signs and consciousness, were normal. The laboratory data, including lymphocyte count, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, gamma globulin, tumor markers, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-HIV antibody, β-D-glucan, aspergillus antigen, cryptococcus antigen, Interferon-Gamma Release Assay (T-SPOT.TB®), and antibody to Paragonimus westermani or P. miyazaki, were unremarkable. Two weeks after the referral, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed intense FDG uptake in the nodules, with a maximum standard uptake value (SUV) of 13.94 .
Owing to his continuous chest pain and subacutely progressive nodules, which could not be diagnosed using CT-guided lung biopsy, wedge resection via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed in the left lower lobe. The histological examination revealed an epithelioid granuloma, with caseating necrosis and calcification, and pleurisy over the visceral pleurae . Although a smear test of the resected lung tissue was negative, the patient was initially diagnosed with tuberculosis based on the results of the histological examination. Antituberculous therapy was initiated with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide. Because the patient presented with severe skin eruptions and high fever 2 weeks after initiation of the antituberculous therapy, we paused the treatment. One week later, the lung tissue culture was positive for mycobacteria identified as Mycobacterium avium via DNA-DNA hybridization. His chest pain disappeared almost simultaneously. Anti-interferon-γ autoantibodies were negative. We plan to initiate anti-MAC chemotherapy (rifampicin, ethambutol, and clarithromycin) once these adverse effects have abated, for which the patient is being closely monitored.