A 15-year-old male was referred to a third-level Regional Center for Feeding and Eating disorders in developmental age due to severe underweight and a 2-year history of food intake disorder with avoidant restrictive features.
Familial history was positive for non-specified infantile epilepsy and intellectual disability in his father; his mother and his elder brother had no relevant medical history.
A diagnosis of GS was provided at birth. The patient’s phenotype comprises mild left hemifacial microsomia, left aural atresia, aplasia of the external auditory canal, and severe conductive hearing loss (with a 75 dB left auditory threshold). Global developmental delay (particularly affecting language production) and mild intellectual disability (IQ 53) were also reported, with motor clumsiness, toe walking, coordination, and balance impairment. Orthodontists and otolaryngologists highlighted a high-arched palate, class 2 malocclusion, rhinophony, and mild verbal and oral dyspraxia with visceral swallowing, which improved after a speech and myofunctional therapy. No cardiovascular involvement was documented at echocardiography and electrocardiography (ECG).
Ear computed tomography (CT) and high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed medium and outer ear’s abnormal development, with dysmorphic ossicular chain and severely hypoplastic tympanic cavity, but normal inner ear and temporomandibular joint; involvement of VII and VIII cranial nerves was specifically ruled out. Brain and spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal. Genetic evaluation with array-CGH did not yield diagnostic results. Lumbar dextroscoliosis resulted from a spine x-ray.
Feeding issues first occurred at the age of 13, when the patient started to gradually limit his food intake to pasta, tomatoes, apples, pears, and bananas, drinking only fruit juices, tea, or sparkling drinks and almost no water. His relatives described him as a picky eater since childhood; height and weight were consistently at the 10th percentile for age and sex until the age of 13. A year after, during the first national lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient experienced sleep–wake inversion, with complete disruption of the eating routine, worsening of selectivity, and reduced interest in eating. Once the pandemic restrictions eased, he continued to be socially isolated, rarely leaving his bedroom and ultimately withdrawing from school.
When he first came to the Center, the patient was 15 years old; the physical examination highlighted GS aforementioned features, pale skin, disheveled appearance, slumped posture, and thin build. Height was 162 cm (7th percentile for age and sex); weight was 33.4 kg (under the 3rd percentile for age and sex); BMI was 12.7 kg/m2 (58% of median body mass index, under the 3rd percentile for age and sex). Absent fat mass resulted from bioelectrical impedance analysis. The neurologic exam highlighted muscle fatigue with no neurological deficits. During the mental status examination, he showed a cooperative attitude toward the examiner; however, eye contact was mainly avoidant, with several stereotyped activities that gradually diminished on closer acquaintance. He displayed an immature attitude with clingy features toward his mother. His mood was euthymic, with appropriate affect, normal speech volume, and clear and coherent features, but slight underproductivity. No hallucinations were highlighted and thought content appeared normal, with logical thought processes and normal perception. He showed distractibility during calculation tests (i.e., multiplication of two numbers) or working memory tasks (i.e., memorizing a list of written words). The patient showed no desire for weight loss, no eliminatory behaviors, and no fear regarding body weight or shape. He showed partial awareness about his condition and his low body weight, complaining about asthenia and pre-syncopal symptoms, although with absent insight about food selectivity. He was promptly hospitalized to receive medical help for his severe underweight. Blood tests and ECG were unremarkable, apart from high prolactin levels (28.9 ng/ml) and ALP levels (240 U/L). An average energy intake of 800–1000 kcal/day resulted from a food survey. He was supplied with a personalized nutritional program resulting from his own choice of daily meals with the supervision of a dietician, providing a daily energy intake of 1300 kcal/day up to 2100 kcal/day. Psychological support was provided twice a week .
During his stay in the inpatient clinic, the patient showed a tendency to self-isolate and focused interests (he would stay in his room to play with tablets and videogames the whole day); therefore, he experienced several challenges in relating to hospitalized peers (5 girls aged 10–17 years old with anorexia nervosa or bulimia nervosa). He was also only partially compliant with the provided psychological support: he repeatedly displayed discomfort during psychological interviews, manifesting extreme difficulties with projective tests or psychometric testing tools, and was reluctant to take part in therapeutic groups and activities.
Despite these difficulties, several psychometric tests were administered, including the Eating Disorder in Youth Questionnaire (EDY-Q, Table ) , the Nine Item Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake disorder screen (NIAS, Table ) , and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule – Second edition (ADOS-2) . With regards to EDY-Q and NIAS, items related to limited intake (food avoidance emotional disorder) and appetite subscale scored the highest. Neither EDY-Q nor NIAS highlighted significant scores in the field of fear subscale (aversive subtype/functional dysphagia) and peaky eating subscale (limited variety subtype/selective eating). Weight problems (items 4 and 5) and distorted cognitions about weight and shape (items 6 and 7) were reported at least “often” and less than “sometimes”, respectively, at the EDY-Q. Assessment of communication and reciprocal social interaction through ADOS-2 was suggestive of ASD.
In light of the aforementioned data, a diagnosis of ARFID and ASD was made by two child neuropsychiatrists after a multidisciplinary evaluation by a team of physicians, psychologists, and dieticians. The diagnosis was provided according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) criteria, as a result of the aforementioned psychometric evaluations and clinical interviews . By the end of his stay, the patient became gradually compliant with the nutritional program; he reached a body mass index of 14.75 kg/m2. An outpatient multidisciplinary follow-up program was scheduled to provide clinical support ; 6 months after hospital discharge, the BMI was 15.3 kg/m2, and NIAS and EDY-Q showed improvement among limited intake-related scores and appetite subscale, respectively.