A 37-year-old woman with no other medical history presented for evaluation of bilateral lower extremity weakness. She had been experiencing back pain for 3-weeks prior to presentation and was evaluated at an emergency department with initial onset of low back pain; she obtained a roentgenogram of her low back and was then discharged with a diagnosis of muscle strain. Three days after her initial evaluation, the patient began having lower extremity weakness, and presented for re-evaluation a week later; her weakness had progressed significantly. Patient was transferred from an outside emergency department to our institution. Her examination revealed bilateral lower extremity weakness, loss of sensation to the level of her umbilicus, urinary retention and constipation. When queried, she denied recent international travel: she had immigrated from Guatemala 15 years prior and has not returned since. She additionally denied ingestion of undercooked meats and being near livestock. She also denied headaches, seizures, or recent weight loss.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her brain and entire spine demonstrated a ring-enhancing lesion at T8 with significant surrounding edema measuring 1.4 x 1.0 cm (shown in ). A small coma-shaped area of restricted diffusion is present eccentrically within the cyst. At this time, there was concern that this lesion represented an autoimmune demyelinating lesion (multiple sclerosis vs. transverse myelitis), and the patient was started on corticosteroids with moderate improvement in her strength over the course of 2 days. Despite a negative cystericus serum antibody test, there was growing concern that steroids were treating symptoms and not the underlying pathology, and the patient was therefore taken to the operating room for exploration and resection of the lesion.
In the operating room, a midline incision was made. Laminectomies were carried out from T7-T9 until the dura was adequately exposed. A midline durotomy was completed with localization through intraoperative ultrasound. Under high-intensity intraoperative microscopy, the posterior aspect of the spinal cord was observed to be extremely distorted due to the underlying lesion. A sharp incision was performed at the median sulcus and carried distally until a firmer portion of the lesion was encountered. A cystic component was then entered; purulence was noted on gross examination and suctioned away (shown in ). Multiple cultures, as well as portions of the capsule, were sent for pathological examination in both frozen and permanent sections. The preliminary pathological report returned as neurocysticercosis (shown in ). After removal of the capsule and cyst, the spinal cord was noted to be relaxed and pulsatile. A duraplasty was then performed utilizing an artificial dural graft material. The overlying muscle, fascia, subcutaneous tissue, and skin were then sequentially closed in a water-tight manner. The patient was extubated without complication and was admitted to the intensive care unit. Video highlights of the procedure are available in .
In the following days, the patient was noted to have dramatic improvements in her bilateral lower extremity strength. She was started on albendazole (400 mg every 12 h) and dexamethasone (8 mg daily) for 14 days as per recommendations from Infectious Disease consultants. The remainder of her hospital course was uncomplicated. She was ultimately discharged to an Inpatient Rehabilitation Hospital and was noted to have full strength in her bilateral lower extremities and resolved urinary retention just prior to discharge, but remained with paresthesia in lower abdomen and lower extremities. She was then seen in the outpatient clinic 2 months later, where she stated that she had regained the majority of her strength in her lower extremities, and had significant improvements in her sensory complaints as well. An MRI was obtained demonstrating interval decrease in the size of lesion as well as decrease in the surrounding edema within the spinal cord (shown in ).