The key clinical events of this patient are depicted in Table .
The patient was a previously healthy 16-year-old boy with no personal or family history of immunodeficiency. He came to our hospital because of cervical lymph nodes swelling for five months. Five months ago, he was considered for sinusitis, secretory otitis media and mixed hearing loss in March 2020. Subsequent MRI of the nasopharynx showed obvious thickening of the nasopharyngeal cavity sidewall and cervical multiple lymph nodes. Then he underwent a biopsy of the nasal cavity and nasopharynx, which showed EBV-associated lymphoproliferative lesions with B cell proliferation predominance. Immunohistology of his biopsy revealed positive EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER). An assay for gene rearrangement showed clonal rearrangement of B cell receptors, with no clonal rearrangement of T cell receptors. In May 2020, a biopsy of the cervical lymph nodes was performed, which also showed EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorder prone to IM. In August 2020, the patients developed stomach discomfort, and a subsequent gastroscopy showed gastric mass and duodenal lesions. Later pathology demonstrated that gastric mass and duodenal lesions conformed to lymphoid tissue proliferative lesions. After entering our hospital, bone marrow puncture and bone marrow biopsy showed no obvious abnormality of lymphocytes.
On January 6, 2021, the patient was re-admitted to the hospital due to edema of both lower limbs. In addition, the patient developed moderate anemia, lung infection, hypoproteinemia and bilateral middle ear mastoiditis. Ultrasound examination showed hepatosplenomegaly, abdominal effusion and multiple lymphadenopathies on both sides of the neck, axilla and groin. The diagnosis of second electronic gastroscopy was that the esophagus, gastric body, gastric antrum and duodenal bulb had multiple bulges. The peripheral blood (PB) level of EBV-DNA was positive (5.02 × 103 copies/mL), and EBV DNA level in plasma was less than 500 copies/mL. For detecting the phenotypes of the infected cells, we perform a combined analysis of magnetic bead sorting and PCR for EBV DNA, which demonstrated that EBV was detected in B cells (3.373 × 104 copies/2 × 105cells), NK cells (4.912 × 102 copies/2 × 105cells), PBMC cells (1.629 × 104 copies/2 × 105cells), and undetected in T cells. Therefore, B cell was the EBV-predominant cell type in this case.
In order to confirm the diagnosis, the patient underwent a second gastric and duodenal biopsy and further evaluation with immunohistochemical and gene rearrangement studies, which revealed CAEBV-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative diseases (Grade 2–3). The result of the immunohistochemical study was as follows: B cells were positive for CD19, CD20, CD22, PAX5, CD79b, MUM, weakly positive for C-MYC, BCL2, BCL6, κ, λ, and negative for CD10, CyclinD1, CD21, MNDA, LEFl, TdT. The Ki-67 index was about 80%; Background T cells were positive for CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD43 (CD8 (+) > CD4 (+)), weakly positive for EBNA2, and negative for ALK, CD56; Both B cells and T cells were positive for EBER In situ hybridization in the patient’s gastric lesions (diffuse +, about 300 positive cells/HPFs), with B cells predominantly . The flow cytometry showed monoclonal abnormal mature B lymphocyte negative for CD5, CD10, and the Ki-67 index was 21.6% .
After being diagnosed with CAEBV-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative diseases (Grade 2–3), he received two cycles of R-CVP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone), which temporarily controlled the progression of CAEBV and the patient’s symptoms improved.
In February 2021, to exclude underlying genetic disorders, we performed next-generation sequencing (NGS). Whole-exome sequencing (WES) identified three missense mutations in the patient, including PIK3CD (E1021K) with 51.2% mutation abundance, ADA (S85L) with 50.0% mutation abundance and CD3D (Q140K) with 52.2% mutation abundance. The patient and his family members were recommended by doctors for allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Therefore, they were screened for related gene mutations, while no same genetic mutation was detected in his parents and sister. Unfortunately, his infection worsened while waiting for HSCT, he eventually fell into the stage of multiple organ failure and died in July.