A 57-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our renal ward when he was found to have developed NS. Five years earlier, he had been diagnosed with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML-M2) for which he received induction therapy with cytarabine and idarubicin followed by mitoxantrone and VP-16, with complete response. One year later he underwent HCT from his HLA-identical sister at his first relapse. Their compatibility was complete for HLA A1,24, B8,35, CW4,7, BW6, DR11, DRW52, DRB1, DRB2 and the transplant came from peripheral blood stem cells. Busulfan and cyclophosphamide were given as a conditioning regimen and cyclosporin plus methotrexate as a prophylaxis for GVHD. Methotrexate was discontinued at day 30 and cyclosporin was gradually tapered until it was stopped at six months. Despite prophylaxis, he developed extensive cGVHD with widespread skin eruption and elevated liver enzymes eight months after HCT. He was then restarted on cyclosporin for two months and prednisone which was discontinued 12 months later when all signs and symptoms of cGVHD had subsided. After cessation of the immunosuppressants, he gradually developed hypertension, proteinuria (2 g/d), mild creatinine elevation (133 μmol/L) and elevated liver enzymes (SGOT 200 U/L, SGPT 207 U/L, ALP 197 U/L, LDH 479 U/L). Reinstitution of prednisone resulted in a clinical improvement but six months after the cessation of steroids he developed NS with anasarca, proteinuria (4 g/d), hypoalbuminemia (1.7 g/dl), and elevated serum creatinine (150.3 μmol/L). An attempt by the treating physicians to obtain kidney tissue by a biopsy was not successful at this time so he was empirically commenced on furosemide (80 mg/d), enalapril (10 mg/d) and methylprednisolone (48 mg/d) with subsequent improvement of proteinuria and his renal function.
One year later, when steroids had been withdrawn due to a worsening cataract, he presented with pancytopenia, alopecia and a relapse of NS. At this point he was referred to the renal ward of our hospital for the first time. On clinical examination, he was apyrexial with pitting edema in both of his legs, loss of hair in his armpits and on his head, and poikiloderma lesions on his arms and trunk. A laboratory investigation showed the following: hemoglobin 9 g/dl; white blood cell count 4800/μl (28 percent neutrophils, 60 percent lymphocytes, 12 percent monocytes, no blasts); platelets 98000/μl; serum creatinine 212 μmol/L; increased liver enzymes (SGOT 97 U/L, SGPT 51 U/L, ALP 235 U/L, LDH 578 U/L); and nephrotic range proteinuria 4.3 g/d. Urine analysis showed increased erythrocytes (20/HPF, 70 percent dysmorphic), few mixed casts (consisting of white blood cells, tubular epithelial cells and rare erythrocytes), few oval fat bodies and plenty of hyaline casts. Virology tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) were negative. His serum immunoglobulins, C3, C4, rheumatoid factor, anti-mitochondrial antibodies and anti-nuclear cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) were all normal. A direct Coomb's test was negative, anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were positive (1/320 diffuse staining) and anti-dsDNA antibodies were also positive by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (74 IU/ml). However, the crithidia luciliae immunofluorescence test (CLIFT) was negative.
A bone-marrow biopsy did not display any recurrence of the leukemia, while a chimerism analysis showed complete donor-type cells. At this point, a renal biopsy was performed to elucidate the underlying cause of proteinuria. The kidney specimen contained 31 glomeruli. Six of them were globally sclerotic and three had segmental sclerosis. The remaining 22 showed mild thickening of the capillary walls with segmental spike formation. Immunohistochemistry revealed diffuse deposits of IgG and C3 on the outer aspect of his glomerular capillary wall and segmental mesangial IgM deposits. Electron microscopy showed diffuse sub-epithelial deposits and foot processes fusion. These findings were consistent with MN stage I, accompanied by focal sclerotic lesions .
Complete resolution of the NS, improvement of his renal function (serum creatinine 168 μmol/L) and a restoration of pancytopenia were achieved within two months of treatment with cyclosporin (150 mg/d) and methylprednisolone (36 mg/day) with subsequent tapering.
Six months later, he manifested a relapse of acute leukemia. He refused to undergo a second transplant with a reduced intensity preparative regimen, so an attempt was made to achieve remission by chemotherapy alone. Unfortunately he died of sepsis one month later.