A 37-year-old Caucasian male, professional soccer player, presented in our department in December 2008 with a 4-year history of swelling of the anterior aspect of his left ankle, limitation of ROM and painful limitation of everyday, and sport activity (especially running and kicking the ball). He did not report any previous trauma, ankle sprain, or surgery and his medical history was not contributory. Physical examination revealed a hardelastic mass in the anterior aspect of the ankle, painful at palpation, with severe limitation of his ankle dorsiflexion (10°). The patient reported several conservative treatments in the past years (i.e.,physical therapy (PT), drugs, and orthoses) without any benefits. At X-ray examination, no osseous spurs could be found. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed in the anterior aspect of the ankle joint a multinodular cystic-like capsulated mass with a major intra-articular localization, but an extra-articular extension was clearly identifiable with deep relations with the extensor tendons sheath. The mass had low signal intensity on T1 and signal dropout on T2-weighted images suggestive for PVNS ( and ). Under general anesthesia and supine position, we performed an anterior ankle arthroscopy through standard anterior portals. A well-encapsulated rounded mass was found in the anterior aspect of the joint , while the talar and tibial cartilage surface were uninvolved. Distally, the mass was extruding the joint space through a lesion of the articular capsule. Complete mobilization of the mass could not be achieved with an arthroscopic-assisted technique without the risk of damaging the mass capsule and contaminating the joint. The surgery was converted to an open procedure. Just deep to the extensor fingers tendon and partially adherent to their sheath, a brown, encapsulated, lobulated, 5 cm × 2.5cm mass was identified. The neo formation was carefully dissected from soft tissues and tendons sheath and entirely excised . Optical microscope examination revealed mononucleated histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells, foaming histiocytes, and hemosiderin deposits, consistent with diagnosis of PVNS. No intraoperative or post-operative complications occurred. The patient was dismissed from hospital the day after surgery with compression bandaging and allowed to weight-bearing as tolerated. At 2-week post-operative, the patient was incentivated to return to full weight-bearing and a PT program was started. At 6-week post-operative, the patient was allowed to return to sport activity with no limitation. At the final follow-up,10-year post-operative, the patient did not refer any discomfort at his left ankle and no limitation in any sport or daily living activity. Physical examination revealed no pain or swelling on the anterior aspect of the ankle and a complete asymptomatic ROM of the joint. MRI did not show any recurrence of the neoformation.