A 56-year-old man presented with sudden onset of fever and shaking chills. He had experienced a similar, self-limiting episode 1 month ago. His medical history included ocular myasthenia gravis treated with low-dose pyridostigmine. His family history was unremarkable.
In the emergency department, the patient was febrile (39.7°C), tachycardic and normotensive. Physical examination not including a rectal exam was unremarkable. Routine laboratory analyses revealed mild leukocytosis (12.3 × 109/L, norm: 3.5–10) with a neutrophil left shift, whereas renal and liver function tests, C-reactive protein (CRP), urine dipstick and a chest X-ray were unremarkable. The patient was admitted with sepsis of unknown origin and started on ceftriaxone. Blood cultures flagged positive for E. coli overnight, resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and cotrimoxazole.
On the ward, review of systems revealed intermittent episodes of diarrhea and pencil-shaped stools with bright-red blood streaks during the past month and a weight loss of 10 kg. In addition, a rectal exam was significant for a painless mass in the rectal vault with small quantities of fresh blood. An abdominal CT scan demonstrated thickening of the rectal wall with perirectal stranding and reactive lymphadenitis. A pelvic MRI for local staging revealed infiltration of the mesorectal fat tissue without involvement of adjacent structures or lymphatic dissemination . Recto-sigmoidoscopy showed a partially obstructing rectal tumor . Biopsy results demonstrated a tubular adenoma with high-grade dysplasia and focal transition into an invasive adenocarcinoma. After histopathologic examination and additional endosonography, the patient was diagnosed with a rectal adenocarcinoma (Stage IIA, cT3, N0, M0) and the E. coli bacteremia was judged as a consequence of the tissue invasive cancer.
Due to resistance to cotrimoxazole, low bioavailability of oral cephalosporins and the neuromuscular-blocking activity of ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone i.v. was continued for a total of 7 days. The patient was afebrile and clinically stable after 1 day of treatment (peak CRP 40.8 mg/L). Neo-adjuvant combined radio-chemotherapy followed by total mesorectal excision were planned in a curative intent after discussion at the local tumor board.