In July 2010, a 52-year-old premenopausal woman with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease due to smoking underwent lumpectomy+sentinel lymph-node biopsy at the Hospital Clinic of Barcelona (HCB), for an HR+/HER2-neg stage I BC of ductal histology. She subsequently received adjuvant CT, radiotherapy, and ET with tamoxifen, as of January 2011. After 2 years, the woman was switched to the AI letrozole for the development of endometrial polyps. By having transitioned to a postmenopausal status, a GnRH analogue was omitted. After the first 5 years of ET, it was decided to continue letrozole up to 10 years .
In July 2020, a sudden rise in the CA15.3 tumor marker led to a radiologic tumor reassessment. A PET/CT detected multiple lesions with increased FDG uptake in bones and mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes . Since also two hypermetabolic nodules in both thyroid lobules were identified, a thyroid ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy was undertaken, along with a bone biopsy. A tall-cell variant of a papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) was diagnosed in the thyroid, but the bone lesion was a metastasis from BC, with estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) expression levels of 0% and 20%, respectively, and no HER2 amplification/overexpression . Because of the double tumor diagnosis, the patient was then tested for the presence of genomic mutations in hereditary cancer predisposition genes with the assay Illumina TruSight™ Hereditary Cancer Panel . A Prosigna® assay to identify the BC IS (, ) was carried out, as well. IS, namely, Luminal A, Luminal B, HER2-enriched, and Basal-like, are nosological entities characterized by peculiar gene expression patterns with a different natural history of the disease, prognosis, and response to treatments (, ). Prosigna® is the standardized commercially available PAM50 assay, which is capable of detecting IS in patients’ fresh-frozen paraffin-embedded tumor samples, by assessing the expression of 50 genes (–). While TruSight™ could not identify any hereditary genomic alterations, Prosigna® found the tumor to be molecularly HER2-enriched, a subtype which represents 10%–20% of all HR+/HER2-neg MBCs (, ).
After a multidisciplinary discussion, the treatment for the PTC was postponed and the combination of ribociclib+fulvestrant, with denosumab for bone lesions, was prescribed at the end of September 2020. Unfortunately, the patient suddenly developed dyspnea with minimal exertion during the first week of October 2020 and went to the emergency department of the HCB. At the physical examination, the patient presented with bilateral wheezing and right hypophonesis and a reduction in O2 saturation by pulse oximetry with limited physical exertion and high blood levels of NT-proBNP but negative ECG and cardiac ultrasonography. A chest X-ray identified signs of bilateral pleural effusion, and the patient was hospitalized. A subsequent CT angiography detected a subpleural nodule in the left lung compatible with a malignant pleural implant, along with conspicuous bilateral pleural effusions, peribronchovascular and interlobular septal thickening, centrilobular micronodules, and the already-detected mediastinal and hilar adenopathies, all signs suggestive for lymphangitis carcinomatosis . The patient received a thoracocentesis, oxygen therapy, and intravenous corticosteroids. Despite being in a condition compatible with the definition of visceral crisis, namely, a severe potentially rapid life-threatening clinical condition (–), ribociclib and fulvestrant were not halted. Of note, we excluded ribociclib-induced interstitial lung disease (ILD) since this is a very rare side effect reported in 0.3% of cases . After a week, the patient could be discharged, continuing on-demand oxygen therapy at home along with oral corticosteroids, no longer required by the end of the same month. The patient experienced a partial response as best response, according to RECIST 1.1 criteria , with resolution of the lymphangitis and reduction in the number, dimension, and FDG uptake of nodal and bone lesions already at the December 2020 PET/CT (, ). Ribociclib-based treatment was well tolerated, with only mild mucositis, skin dryness, and alopecia as AEs. The patient also underwent total thyroidectomy in January 2021 for her PTC and received I131 in March 2021, during a 1-week suspension of CDKi-based therapy. Liver disease progression was detected in June 2022, after a PFS of 20 months.