A 60-year-old female was referred to the hospital with a three-month history of abdominal pain occasionally. The enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple intrahepatic masses with liver and retroperitoneal lymph node metastasis. Later, she went to the hospital and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans revealed HCC with multiple lymph nodes and bone metastases. Additionally, a liver biopsy was performed and histological considerations suggested poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the liver, and histological pictures are shown in . Immunohistochemical results demonstrated CK7(+), CK19(+), CDX-2(-), GATA-3(-), Villin(-), TTF-1(-), NapsinA(-), and GCDFP-15(-). The patient was the conventional type (CT) of ICC. Besides, the results of next-generation sequencing (NGS) showed the MSI status was stable. The TMB was determined to be 7.1 mutations/Mb which were described as intermediate (6–19 mutations/Mb). KRAS and ATM gene mutations, which were positive immunotherapy efficacy-related variants, were detected in this case. Besides, five HLA subtypes and four TNB were detected. The results also showed three clinically significant mutations, such as KRAS gene p.Gly12Asp.p.Gly138Arg mutation; EGFR exon 20 p.Pro772_His773insVal insertion mutation; PIK3CA gene p.Glu545Lys mutation. Importantly, according to pathohistological analysis, the tumor was found to be positive for EBER. The patient did not have HBV (Hepatitis B Virus) or HCV (Hepatitis C Virus). Based on the patient’s medical history and examination results, the patient was diagnosed with iCCA with multiple lymph nodes and bone metastases, clinically staged as IV which was not qualified for surgery.
The patient received six courses of chemotherapy (intravenous Gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2 per day on day 1 and day 8, and S-1 twice a day from day 1 to day 14) and one course of radiotherapy of L3 centrum. An imaging evaluation suggested stable disease assessed by RECIST 1.1. Then, she received two courses of S-1, and imaging evaluation revealed progressive disease . The patient consequently received four courses of immunotherapy plus targeted therapy (intravenous Pembrolizumab 200 mg three weeks at a time and Lenvatinib 8 mg per day), and imaging evaluation suggested stable disease . After that, she was given LEP once again, and then given Chinese medicine treatment (specifically unknown). However, imaging evaluation suggested progressive disease which might be caused by interruption of treatment . Therefore, she continued receiving radiotherapy combined with LEP, with imaging evaluation suggesting stable disease . The patient could tolerate LEP therapy and did not experience an adverse event. After that, she was given four courses of LEP until imaging evaluation suggested progressive disease with seroperitoneum . The change in alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is shown in . Then, she received one-course Pembrolizumab combined with Abraxane (intravenous Pembrolizumab 200 mg and Abraxane 125 mg/m2 per day on day 1 and day 8 for 3 weeks at a time) but had to be interrupted due to poor performance status. She finally died on December 29, 2021, and her overall survival is about 20 months. A timeline summarizing the main events of this case report is shown in .