A 33-year-old Caucasian woman presented with complaints of episodic burning pain and flushing of her face, ears, upper chest and, occasionally, her upper extremities. She presented with photographs displaying bright erythema from her lower neck extending upwards to her face and head. Her symptoms were precipitated and worsened with lying down or warm temperature exposure, and were abated by cooling measures. She maintained her home air temperature at 60°F. She denied similar symptoms amongst family members, and there was no family history of EM. She was in good health until 2001 when she began to experience these painful burning and flushing episodes.
Over time, the episodes increased in frequency and severity until presentation when she was experiencing multiple daily episodes, each lasting minutes to hours. Her symptoms were disabling and she was forced to leave her job. Physical examinations during multiple visits revealed normal vital signs except for a reduced core body temperature of 94° to 95°F. She had dry skin with a diffuse blanching erythema mainly over her face, and loss of her fingernails. She underwent an extensive evaluation which included a normal comprehensive metabolic panel and complete blood count (CBC) with differential. She did have a low free thyroxine level with a mildly elevated thyroid stimulating hormone level and was started on levothyroxine for primary hypothyroidism, but this did not change her symptoms. Approximately 1 year after the onset of symptoms, she developed oligomenorrhea and this later progressed to amenorrhea. She developed premature ovarian failure based on low estradiol levels and elevated luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). Ovarian ultrasound and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were normal. The autoimmune panel was normal including negative antiperoxidase, anti-adrenal, anti-ovarian, gastric parietal, antinuclear, anti-Smith, and anti-DNA antibodies.
Further testing revealed a mildly elevated serum tryptase level. A skin biopsy was performed, showing nonspecific changes. A normal bone marrow biopsy excluded systemic mastocytosis or myeloproliferative disorders. She was started on antihistamines/mast cell stabilizer, but this did not relieve her symptoms. A trial course of high-dose steroids was ineffective. She was also treated with intense pulsed light therapy without any success. Finally, the diagnosis of erythromelalgia was made based on her clinical history supported by raised temperature in the affected area during an episode, measured by thermography. Genetic testing was available, but it is not a confirmatory laboratory test. The patient was offered genetic testing, but she refused.
Our patient tried several medications including aspirin, Plavix (clopidogrel bisulfate), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), tricyclic antidepressants (TCA), calcium channel blockers (CCB) and gabapentin. None of these medicines relieved her symptoms and only clonidine was temporarily modestly effective. Misoprostol was not significantly effective. Surgical sympathectomy was done, but was similarly ineffective and intravenous gamma globulin was tried without success. Recently, the patient has also tried a course of mexiletine. She started with 100 mg twice a day (BID) and this was increased to 200 mg BID after 2 weeks. She showed no improvement and the dose was increased 4 weeks later to 200 mg three times a day (TID). She noted some nausea but no other side effects. After a month, the dose was further increased to 300 mg TID for 4 weeks. Given the lack of clinical improvement, mexiletine was tapered and discontinued. Keeping her at home and very cool provided palliative relief and reduced the severity and frequency of the episodes. She pre-cools her car with remote starting during the summer and then sprints to the car to reduce her exposure to warm air. To date, she continues to avoid any activity that might precipitate any flushing and burning events.