A 17-month-old boy was admitted to West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, in March of 2022 for the insidious onset of fever, ecchymosis of skin, anhelation, and pancytopenia. On admission, blood routine examination results were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) 2.5 × 109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) 60 g/L, platelet (PLT) 45 × 109/L, and immature granulocytes found in peripheral blood smears. Subsequently, bone marrow morphology, immunophenotyping, cytogenetics, and molecular genetics were carried out. Based on the above testing, the boy was diagnosed with B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL, L2, ETV6-PEX5 fusion gene positive, KRAS A146V and KRAS A146T mutation, IKZF1–8 heterozygous deletion, 45, XY, der (7; 12) (q10; q10)(5)/46, XY (15). Then, according to ALL-low risk (ALL-LR) of the Chinese Children's Cancer Group study ALL 2020 (CCCG-ALL-2020), conventional and continuous therapy was administered. After the remission induction regimen of 4 weeks, complete remission (CR) was reached. Subsequently, the child was supposed to receive consolidation therapy according to CCCG-ALL-2020 with three courses after 4 weeks of achievement of CR.
On October 2022, which was also the interval between the first consolidation treatments, the patient was hospitalized again for a repeated fever of 13 days and coagulopathy after the second cycle of consolidation chemotherapy. Laboratory tests are shown in . Color Doppler ultrasonic examination showed swollen liver and spleen. The above results suggested that the infant had chemotherapy-related bone marrow suppression, infection, and coagulation dysfunction. Vancomycin, imipenem, and voriconazole were used for empirical antibiotic therapy. Fresh frozen plasma, fibrinogen, and prothrombin complex were used for improving coagulation function. Seven days after therapy, the patient still had a fever (38.4–39.4°C), and his liver and spleen were enlarged. CRP and PCT levels were 125.5 mg/L and 3.99 mg/L, respectively . No microorganisms were detected by blood culture.
Then, mNGS was carried out in peripheral blood. After DNA was extracted from 200 μl of peripheral blood, the DNA library was built and sequenced on Nextseq 550 platform (Illumina, USA). All human host DNA was filtered out, and the valuable reads were aligned to Microbial Genome Databases using BWA. Finally, a number of 196123 special reads of L. donovani were detected, and the coverage of the genome and relative abundance of L. donovani was 39.43 and 97.9%, respectively , which was indicative of L. donovani infection. In addition, 1 special read of Klebsiella pneumoniae was detected and defined as a background bacteria. Examination of patients' demographic information revealed the following: ever since birth, he resided in Jiuzhaigou county of Sichuan province, which is known as an endemic leishmaniasis region. Subsequently, microscopy of the bone marrow showed a larger number of Leishmania spp amastigotes, while phagocytic phenomena of histiocytes were found in all smears . All bone marrow smears from confirmed leukemia were reviewed, revealing no Leishmania spp amastigote in microscopy. Furthermore, RK39 antigens were also positive by immunochromatography. Thus, VL was diagnosed, and sodium stibogluconates were used as an anti-leishmanial drug. Nevertheless, after 10 days of anti-leishmanial therapy, 356 special reads of L. donovani were detected in peripheral blood by mNGS , and Leishmania spp amastigotes were also observed in the bone marrow. Subsequently, the anti-leishmanial drug Amphotericin B was used as rescue therapy. After completion of therapy, there was no Leishmania spp amastigote in the bone marrow. Finally, the child was discharged 56 days after admission. He was subsequently referred to the hematological clinic for leukemia and follow-up. On February 2023, he was readmitted to the hospital for chemotherapy, when mNGS test for peripheral blood was performed, and no reads of L. donovani were detected.