A 35-year-old right-handed, medically free female presented to our neurosurgery outpatient clinic complaining of recurrent generalized seizures, chronic facial pain, diffuse dull headache, blurry vision, and dizziness. On physical examination, the patient was confused, scored 14 out of 15 on the Glasgow Coma Scale. She demonstrated a spastic gait, hyperreflexia, and hemiparesis exclusively on her left side. In addition, she scored four out five on the Medical Research Council power scale. Moreover, the patient showed facial asymmetry secondary to a jaw-related pathology, positive Hoffman, Babinski, and Barre’s signs.
Preoperative brain computer tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a cystic lesion at the right middle fossa on base of the skull . Based on these findings, a provisional diagnosis of chordoma versus chondrosarcoma was made. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a right temporal extra-axial cystic lesion attached to the skull base, measuring 7 × 6 cm at maximum diameter .
Patient underwent a two-stage right modified pterional craniotomy, with posterior extension, using a sub-temporal approach. Complete excision was achieved under microscope and navigation guidance. The first stage involved the evacuation of the aforementioned cystic component, which was sent for histopathological examination. Subsequently, a complete tumor excision was achieved in the second stage. Intraoperatively and under microscopic visualization, the third division of the trigeminal nerve was indistinguishable from tumor. Nonetheless, the third division was partially preserved through the operation.
Intraoperative neurophysiologic monitoring (IONM) was not utilized due to a myriad of reasons including but not limited to: lack of a standardized IONM procedures, sensitivity to temperature, demanding anesthetic protocols, and its inability to affect extend of resection.
Histopathological examination of the specimen showed a partially encapsulated tumor, composed of bland looking spindle cells that were arranged in hypocellular and hypercellular areas. Nuclear palisading was present in the hypercellular areas. Minimal nuclear atypia was present but no signs of active mitosis were seen. Moreover, thick walled vessels and evidence of previous hemorrhage were evident. The tumor cells were strongly positive for S100 immunostain (both nuclear and cytoplasmic). Both microscopic and immunohistochemial characteristics of the lesion were consistent with ancient schwannoma .
The patient was followed up for 2 years. On her last follow-up, she demonstrated improved symptoms, no power deficit yet complained of the persistence of the aforementioned right-sided mouth deviation. MRI follow-up showed no signs of tumor recurrence .