A 20-year-old female patient who had suffered a posterolateral SED of her left elbow at the age of 12 was admitted to our service . Initially, she was treated with closed reduction and a cast for 3 weeks. Over the years, she developed an asymptomatic valgus deformity. At the age of 16, she suffered a fall trauma while playing field hockey with a re-dislocation of the elbow. Since then, she presented multiple episodes of subluxation. With this clinical situation, the patient was referred to the senior author with pain on the lateral aspect of the elbow, paresthesia in the fourth and fifth finger, and a feeling of instability . In addition, she was complaining about an aesthetic problem. The range of motion was 135° of flexion and 0° of extension (the same as the contralateral side). Tinel signs at the cubital tunnel and the lateral pivot-shift apprehension tests were positive. Radiographs showed a congruent joint with the growth of bone in the lateral aspect of the metaphysis. For the measurement of the deformity, we used the humerus-elbow-wrist angle in the anteroposterior projection with extended elbow and in full supination. The valgus deformity was 40° versus 20° measured on the contralateral side . The medial prominence index was 46%. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated the elongation of the ulnar lateral collateral ligament (ULCL) . The pain, according to the visual analog scale (VAS), was 5 out of 10. The clinical results were evaluated according to the Mayo elbow performance score (MEPS) and the Quick DASH questionnaire. The scores were 65 and 34, respectively. Under a regional block, a positive Pivot Shift test confirmed the ULCL injury A supracondylar subtractive wedge osteotomy of 20° and double plate osteosynthesis was performed with anterior transposition of the ulnar nerve. Reconstruction of the ULCL was performed with a slice of the triceps tendon. At 16 months post-operative, the patient presented a mobility of 135°–0° with pain of 2, a MEPS of 85, and a DASH of 13. According to the VAS, satisfaction with the procedure was 9 out of 10, and the result was excellent, according to the Oppenheim scale. Radiographs showed the union of the osteotomy with a final valgus of 20° and a medial prominence of 56% (12% of increase over pre-operative) . She was aesthetically satisfied .