A 25-year-old man was transferred to our hospital owing to a clinical suspicion of abdominal aortic aneurysm. The patient reported persistent mild left upper abdominal pain for one month. He also had recurrent oral ulcers for 5 years 7–8 times each year. Four years earlier, he underwent carotid artery stenting due to rupture of a pseudoaneurysm of the right internal carotid artery, followed by pseudoaneurysm formation at the puncture site of the right femoral artery, and bypass surgery with a prosthetic graft was performed. He had genital ulcers along with nodular rash and folliculitis in both lower limbs for one year. A computed tomography angiography (CTA) performed prior to admission to our hospital demonstrated a 58-mm-diameter pseudoaneurysm located in his abdominal aorta at the level of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The proximal portion of the SMA was totally occluded due to compression of the pseudoaneurysm, while the distal runoff of the SMA was patent through collateral circulation from the CT and inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) . As measured by preoperative CTA, the average diameter of the aorta at 20 mm above the CT was 21 mm. At 20 mm below the right renal artery, the average diameter of the aorta was 17 mm .
The patient was diagnosed with vasculo-Behcet’s disease and received immunosuppressive medication for 3 weeks before surgical intervention. Methylprednisolone 40 mg combined with 560 mg of tocilizumab, later replaced by 30 mg of prednisone daily; 1 g of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) twice daily; and 10 mg of methotrexate (MTX) weekly were administered. Laboratory findings showed a high sensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) level of 10.87 mg/l (normal range: 0-8 mg/l) and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 2 mm/h (normal range: 0-15 mm/h) before the operation.
Endovascular repair with physician-modified fenestrated endograft (PMEG) was planned for this patient. In order to prevent puncture site pseudoaneurysm through percutaneous approach in Behcet’s patient, we made surgical exposure of bilateral common femoral artery (CFA) and directly punctured the CFA and introduced the sheath. After a 22–80 mm Ankura cuff endograft (Ankura™, Lifetech, Shenzhen, China; 21Fr) was deployed on a sterile back-table in the operating room, three fenestrations were created according to perioperative planning: 8*8 mm at 15 mm from the proximal top of the endograft and in the 12:00 o’clock direction for the CT; 6*6 mm at 54 mm distal to the “o” mark of the stent graft and in the 9:00 o’clock direction for the right renal artery (RRA); and 6*6 mm at 60 mm distal to the “8” mark of the stent graft and in the 3:00 o’clock direction for the left renal artery (LRA) . Fenestrations were reinforced by suturing metal coils (COOK Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) with CV-6 Gore-Tex suture as radiopaque markers. Finally, the modified stent graft was re-sheathed into its original sheath by using 1 − 0 silk ties and silastic vessel loop to sequentially collapse the Z stents.
Before the procedure, bone and aortic 3D models were reconstructed from the preoperative CTA scan on a workstation (Advantage Workstation; GE Healthcare, USA). These models were then fused with live fluoroscopy . Two Cobra catheters were advanced through the left femoral artery into both renal arteries for protection . The PMEG was deployed from the right femoral artery. Accurate deployment of the PMEG and orientation of the hole towards the CT was guided by a 3D fused image. A 5–40 mm balloon (Powerflex, Cordis, USA) was delivered into the CT to facilitate adjustment of the PMEG for orientation of the holes towards the RAs . After successful cannulation of the two renal arteries from the left brachial artery, the two Cobra catheters were removed, and two 6–25 mm self-expanding covered stents (Viabahn, Gore, USA) were implanted in both renal arteries. The proximal ends of both stents were flared by a 10–40 mm balloon (Advance 35LP, COOK, USA) . Due to the big diameter of fenestration, bridging stent was not placed in CT. The PMEG was completely deployed, and the delivery system was retrieved. Completion angiography demonstrated that the pseudoaneurysm was completely excluded, and no endoleak was observed. The CT and RAs were patent, and perfusion of the distal segment of the SMA through collateral arteries was satisfactory . The total procedure time was 150 min, fluoroscopy time was 32 min, dose-area product (DAP) was 35.6 Gy.cm2, intraoperative bleeding was 100 mL, and the contrast volume used was 80 mL.
After endovascular treatment, the abdominal pain of this patient was obviously relieved. He received immunosuppressive therapy with 40 mg of intravenous methylprednisolone daily perioperatively and changed to 25 mg of oral prednisolone daily after discharge. MMF and MTX treatment was continued with supplementation of calcium and vitamin D. In addition, he was given 10 mg Xarelto for one month and 100 mg aspirin for long term after procedure.
At the 18-month follow-up, CTA demonstrated successful exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm and patent CT and RAs . The distal portion of SMA is patent through collateral circulation as preoperative status. Oral prednisolone was continued and suggested to be reduced by 2.5 mg every 2 weeks. ESR and CRP levels were within the normal ranges.