A 2-year-4-month-old girl was referred to our hospital about 1 month after the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome with relapse had been made: urine protein-creatinine ratio markedly increased (749.1 mg/mg); blood urea nitrogen 11 mg/dL; serum creatinine 0.3 mg/dL; and serum albumin 1.8 g/dL. Proteinuria resolved on treatment with daily prednisolone for 4 weeks at the dose of 45 mg (2 mg/kg)/day) but recurred with taper from 25 mg/day to 10 mg/day (spot proteinuria ≥300 mg/dL protein).
A second relapse occurred near 3 months after the first when the daily dose of prednisolone was decreased and proteinuria resolved with prednisolone at 45 mg/day for nearly a week.
A third relapse occurred 3 months after the second when she had taken 30 mg prednisolone once every 2 days for 3 weeks (spot proteinuria > 500 mg/dL). CsA was added at a daily dose of 50 mg/day (1.7 mg/kg/day). Prednisolone was tapered over 3 months and discontinued after about 1 years of regular use. CsA was prescribed continuously, with the dose of 50 mg/day since no proteinuria was noted. After a year of CsA maintenance without steroid, she developed bilateral leg edema, massive proteinuria, and decreased urine output. The dose of CsA was increased to 75 mg/day (3 mg/kg/day) for 4 months. The proteinuria resolved within 2 weeks under the combination of prednisolone 45 mg/day and CsA 75 mg/day, tapered to 50 mg/day for another 3 months.
The fifth relapse, 9 months from the previous relapse, occurred (spot proteinuria 100 mg/dl) after she had been prednisolone free for nearly 20 days. Since the fifth replace, the prednisolone was held at dose 60 mg/day and cyclosporine was prescribed with dose 100 mg/day.
Before CsA was replaced with mycophenolic acid 720 mg/day (20 mg/kg). The sixth relapse has occurred since daily dose of steroid was discontinued, and the proteinuria was controled by undertake prednisolone 45 mg/day. She has had frequent urinary tract infections during the four-year use of steroids with other steroid-sparing immunosuppressive therapy.
At about 4 years after the diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome was made, reddish flat-topped masses appeared her tongue . Curative wedge resection revealed an exophytic polypoid lesion that was histopathologically diagnosed embryonal RMS. After total excision of the tumor, she was treated according to TPOG-RMS-LR protocol, with vincristine, actinomycin, and cyclophosphamide (VAC). Mycophenolic acid and prednisolone were discontinued since the dose and duration of cyclophosphamide per TPOG protocol was more than the required amount for treatment of nephrotic syndrome. No proteinuria or nephrotic syndrome were noted during the 48-week VAC treatment and 10 months thereafter. The length and cumulative dosage of these immunosuppressive drugs are illustrated as supplemental figure .