A 43-year-old previously healthy man with mildly symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection 7 weeks prior presented with abdominal pain, nausea, and fever to 39.4°C; he was otherwise haemodynamically stable and had an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 90 mm/h (0–20 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP) 275.1 mg/L (<1 mg/L). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed terminal ileitis and ascending colitis. Repeat SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR), multiplex stool pathogen panel, viral hepatitis panel, Clostridioides difficile assay, and blood cultures were negative. Given the improvement in pain, he left against medical advice.
The patient subsequently returned to the emergency department with new-onset dyspnoea and orthopnoea; he was found to be hypotensive to 89/48 mmHg with anterolateral ST-elevations on electrocardiogram . Chest X-ray showed a small right pleural effusion. Labs were significant for alanine aminotransferase 347 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 396 U/L, pro B-type natriuretic peptide (proBNP) 16,618 pg/mL (<125 pg/mL), troponin T 0.07 ng/mL (<0.01 ng/mL), CRP >300 mg/L, and ESR 112 mm/h. A limited point-of-care echocardiogram showed global hypokinesis with a grossly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Aspirin 324 mg was administered and he underwent left heart catheterization (LHC) which showed non-obstructive coronaries . During LHC, he was intubated for rapidly worsening hypoxia and work of breathing; haemodynamic instability prompted the initiation of a norepinephrine infusion and placement of an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). A Swan-Ganz catheter displayed elevated biventricular pressures with mean right atrial pressure 15–20 mmHg, right ventricular pressure 40/20 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure 40/28 mmHg (mean 32 mmHg), mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 25–28 mmHg. A post-procedural transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) confirmed global hypokinesis and a severely depressed LVEF 20-25% (Video 2). He later became febrile to 40.3°C requiring active external cooling and broadening of antibiotics. Labs displayed a rising white blood cell (WBC) count of 14.5 × 1000/µL, creatinine 1.95 mg/dL (prior 1.01 mg/dL) accompanied by oligoanuria despite diuretics, and arterial blood gas with mixed metabolic and respiratory acidoses with pH 7.21, pCO2 53 mmHg, pO2 83 mmHg on 60% fraction of inspired oxygen. Given suspicion for myocarditis, tests for adenovirus, parainfluenza viruses 1–4, rhinovirus, influenza A & B, human metapneumovirus, respiratory syncytial virus A & B, coxsackie B, and enterovirus were sent—all ultimately unremarkable. As vasopressor requirements increased, the decision was made to transfer the patient to our institution for consideration of advanced mechanical support and possible heart transplant evaluation.
Upon arrival at our cardiac intensive care unit, he was started on a dopamine infusion and was given a diuretic challenge which did not yield any urine output. Labs were notable for worsening creatinine 3.08 mg/dL, proBNP >70 000 pg/mL, ferritin 4311 ng/mL (30–400 ng/mL), WBC 18.0 × 1000/µL, D-dimer 2.74 mg/L FEU (≤0.5 mg/L FEU). C-reactive protein and ferritin levels were trended throughout his course , and the cytokine panel showed elevated soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL-2R), IL-6, IL8, and TNF-α . HIV antibody and toxoplasma gondii IgG were negative. Given persistent hypoxaemia and anuric renal failure, continuous veno-venous haemofiltration was initiated with improvements in oxygenation and haemodynamics. IABP was removed on hospital Day 4 and TTE showed recovered LVEF 68% (Video 3). Despite haemodynamic improvement and defervescence, leucocytosis progressed with absolute neutrophilia and lymphopenia. Infectious disease was consulted, and repeat infectious workup, including tracheal aspirate SARS-CoV-2 PCR, was unrevealing; CT abdomen was unchanged and CT chest displayed bilateral infiltrates, but these were not felt to represent infectious processes. Given the constellation of rapid deterioration with profound cardiac dysfunction, gastrointestinal symptoms with signs of enteritis, increased inflammatory markers with absolute neutrophilia and lymphopenia, all in the context of a recent SARS-CoV-2 infection, his presentation was consistent with MIS-A. A joint decision was made to halt antibiotics and proceed with a single dose of 1 mg/kg intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) on hospital Day 5. Dopamine and norepinephrine were weaned off by Day 6, and he was extubated on Day 7. He was subsequently transitioned to intermittent haemodialysis (HD) on Day 8. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on Day 11 showed diffuse myocardial oedema without delayed myocardial enhancement, findings compatible with non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy including myocarditis . Since the patient recovered through supportive therapies alone, an endomyocardial biopsy was deferred. He was transferred to the floor on Day 12 and discharged on Day 22 on intermittent HD. During a follow-up visit 11 days post-discharge, he reported continued weakness and shortness of breath but was gradually recovering.