A 21 year old male presented with a history of 6 months swelling in the right inguinal region. The swelling was noticed by the patient after a trivial fall while playing football. Since then the swelling was gradually increasing in size. The swelling was associated with dull aching pain which was localised to the inguinal region with no radiation of the pain. There was no weight loss.
On physical examination there was a palpable bony hard mass over the right inguinal region which was fixed to the underlying bone. The right femoral and other peripheral pulses were normal. There was no local warmth and erythema. The movement of the hip was free. Power and sensation of the right lower limb was normal.
Plain radiography of the pelvis showed a huge expansile lytic lesion of the right superior pubic ramus . A contrast computed tomography of the pelvis was done which demonstrated an expansile lytic lesion with cavities arising from the right superior pubic ramus. It approximately measured 5cm x 6cm . CT angiography was done which showed compression and displacement of the femoral vessels. Reduced flow was seen in the femoral artery .
Preoperatively several differential diagnosis were kept in mind like primary ABC, ABC secondary to giant cell tumor or a malignant tumor like chondrosarcoma.
With the help of cardiovascular-thoracic surgeons anterior approach was taken to reach the tumor site . The diagnosis of ABC was established by frozen section intraoperatively. Then complete excision of the tumor was done after sectioning the inguinal ligament to get fuller access to the tumor, which was later reconstructed(by suturing with vicryl no.2 and supplemented with rectus sheath as double breasting) The operative specimen consisted of a large osseous structure and many curetted fragments of the soft tissue. The tumor approximately weighed 542gm and size being 11.2cmx 6cm x 5cm. The diagnosis was confirmed by histo-pathology . The patient did well post operatively and till date (2 years since surgery) there is no recurrence (with persistence of bone gap).