A 34-year-old Chinese female, due to lower abdominal pain for 2 + weeks, aggravation for 2 + days, no other abnormal manifestations, gynecological B-ultrasound examination indicated “pelvic cavity mixed giant mass, pelvic cavity effusion”, urine HCG weak positive. During physical examination, a mass about 20 + cm in diameter could be touched in the middle and lower abdomen, the quality was hard, the motion was poor, there was deep tenderness, no rebound pain, and the muscle tension was positive.
Tumor markers: Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): > 100.00 ng/ml, alpha-fetoprotein (AFP): > 1000.0 ng/ml, carbohydrate antigen 125(CA125): > 600.0U/ml, carbohydrate antigen 199(CA199):554.63U/ml. Lactate dehydrogenase(LDH):718.7U/L, α-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase:625.7U/L. Human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG):33.2mIU/ml. Transvaginal color Doppler ultrasonography showed that the metrorectal depression was found to be 8.8cmx4.3 cm free and echoless. A heterogeneous weak echo mass of 17.5cmx8.2cmx25.5 cm was found in the middle and lower abdomen and scattered cystic echoes were found inside. Abdominal CT plain scan + enhancement : huge tumor in the middle and lower abdominal cavity and pelvis. Considering the possibility of left adnexal origin, epithelial-derived mucocarcinoma, other ovarian tumors to be drained, greater omentum and peritoneum involvement, and abdominal fluid accumulation; suspiciously enhanced nodules at lower left, not excepting peritoneal etastases or false peritoneal mucous.
Considering the patient’s tumor biomarkers and CT results, it is highly likely that a large mass in the pelvic and abdominal cavity is a malignant tumor. After improving the preoperative preparation, transabdominal exploration was performed. Intraoperative exploration revealed that there was a huge mass in the pelvic cavity, about 24*22*9 cm in size, originating from the left fimbrium of the fallopian tube. The mass was cystic and carrion, with uneven surface and local laceration. Dark brown ascites can be seen, the amount is moderate; The greater omentum was partially thickened, and miliary nodules were found on the surface of pelvic peritoneum, especially in the fold of vesical peritoneum. The left fallopian tube and the huge mass were removed completely and sent for frozen section, weighing about 2.94 kg. Frozen section showed: (huge mass in pelvis and abdominal cavity) tumor with complex composition, mainly sarcomatoid stromal composition, interspersed with moderate atypical epithelial components, the type is difficult to determine, and the possibility of malignancy is high. During the operation, it was considered that the patient was fallopian tube malignant tumor with complex components and high malignancy degree, and extensive abdominal metastasis was not excluded. Pelvic lymph node dissection + para-aortic lymph node dissection + right ovarian cyst exfoliation + greater omentectomy + multipoint peritoneal biopsy was performed, and follow-up treatment plan was determined after H&E and IHC staining.
Postoperative pathology : (huge pelvic mass) mixed germ cell tumor, the main component was yolk sac tumor, focal immature teratoma; Multiple areas of high-grade sarcoma (rhabdomyosarcoma). A small amount of tumor was found in the peritoneum. (Immunohistochemistry: 7#APF( +); 11#SALL4(-), Otc-4 (epithelium +), pCK(epithelium +), Vimentin (Sarcoma +), SMA (sarcomatoid region +), Desmin (Sarcomatoid region +), Caldesmon (Sarcomatoid region -), MyoD1(sarcomatoid region +), Ki-67 (+ , About 50%); 20 # Pax—8 (-), PLAP ( +), APF ( +), CD30 (-), EMA ( +), pCK ( +), SMA ( +), Otc—4 + (part), Ki—67 (+ , about 50%).
Postoperative diagnosis was clear: left fallopian tube mixed germ cell tumor (yolk cyst tumor + immature teratoma) with high-grade rhabdomyosarcoma stage II B. Considering that the patient had already given birth, and the tumor composition was complex and the malignancy was high, the multidisciplinary team of gynecologic oncology in our hospital decided to follow the treatment plan of malignant germ cell tumor of the ovary and plan to perform a second operation (comprehensive staging operation: total hysterectomy + bilateral oophorectomy + right salpingotomy + suspicious lesion resection). The examination after the second operation revealed that tumor (teratoma component) was found in a small amount of fibrous connective tissue (bladder surface peritoneal tissue). There was no tumor involvement in uterus and cervix, right fallopian tube and bilateral ovaries. Intraperitoneal thermoperfusion was performed with the following schemes: normal saline was injected 1–2 days after surgery, cisplatin was injected on the third day after surgery, and bleomycin + etoposide + cisplatonum (BEP) was started on the seventh day after surgery. A total of three circles of BEP were given. And one course of EP regimen (the last course of bleomycin caused interstitial pneumonia, and bleomycin was discontinued).
The tumor markers of the patient decreased significantly after surgery compared with those before surgery, and further decreased with the smooth progress of the chemotherapy cycle. After the third BEP chemotherapy, the tumor markers decreased to total negative . The patient’s quality of life was still satisfactory after follow-up, and no tumor recurrence was observed.