A 40 year old female patient presented with pain and moderate amount of swelling over lateral aspect of ankle since 2 months. Pain and swelling used to increase on prolonged walking and relieve by rest. She had a past history of twisting injury to the ankle couple of months back. She took conservative treatment as taping and steroid injections for last 2 months to alleviate pain and swelling but they were ineffective. On physical examination retrofibular tenderness on dorsiflexion eversion stress was found. Mild hind foot varus was present There was no evidence of peroneal tendon subluxation. Plain and plantarflexion inversion stress view radiographs were normal. Diagnosis: Histologically, specimen of hypertrophied soft tissue which surrounded the peroneal tendon & extra slip of peroneal tendon fibers examined microscopically reveal degeneration of the tendon fibers. There were areas of fibroblastic proliferation present, with lymphocytes infiltrated into the tendon .
MRI showed significant fluid collection along the peroneal tendon sheath, however split could not be appreciated over the MRI [,]. A classification of peroneus brevis tendon splits has been proposed by Sobel , .
Surgical technique: Surgical treatment of peroneal tendinopathy is indicated after failure of conservative measures. A surgical exploration of the peroneal tendon was performed through the posterior longitudinal incision given behind the fibula. The superior peroneal retinaculum was noted to be uninjured, and there was no subluxation of the tendon. Anatomical abnormalities such as peroneus quartus, low lying peroneus muscle belly, and abnormal shaped fibular groove were not noted. A longitudinal split of the peroneus brevis tendon about 2 cm long was found. Inflamed tendon sheath was excised, with excision of the longitudinal tear and attrited portion of tendon, remaining more than 50% thickness of the tendon was repaired in form of suture-tubulization of tendon with non-absorbable 4-0 nylon sutures . In this 4-0 nylon sutures were applied as inverted sutures so that there smallest size knot remains facing at outer surface of tendon instead of remaining towards the peroneal groove. This will help in gliding the tendon, well in groove as well knot of tendon will not interfere in any function of tendon. The knot is buried in the substance of tendon. The excessive prominence of peroneal tubercle shaped to normal by undermining the base of tubercle, in this way anatomy near the tendon kept normal. We did closed the superior peroneal retinecula loosely over the tendon. After it wound was closed in layers.
Post-operative protocol: Short leg non-walking cast was given for 2 weeks. At the end of 2 weeks removable short leg walking boot for 4 weeks given and the dorsiflexion and planter flexion exercises were begun. At the end of 6 weeks inversion exercises and progressive weight bearing was started. At 8 weeks eversion exercises started and walking boot was removed. At 4 months patient resumed normal activities with no pain.