First case involves a 52-year-old female patient with chief complaint of palpitation at the time of admission to the cardiology department.
Cardiovascular examination revealed a grade III/VI pansystolic murmur at the right lower sternal border and fixed splitting of second heart sound.
Electro­cardiogram showed non-specific ST segment and T wave (ST-T) changes.
Patient’s past medical history included paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia which was recorded in her previous palpitation attack electrocardiography.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed large (26 mm) secundum type atrial septal defect with left to right shunt and all the tricuspid valve leaflets appeared to be connected to a single calcified papillary muscle in right ventricle suggestive of parachute tricuspid valve . Other findings were severe right ventricle and right atrial enlargement and moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation without significant tricuspid stenosis. Measured systolic pulmonary pressure gradient was 47 mmHg.
Three-dimensional transesophageal assessment of right ventricle was also performed and parachute tricuspid valve with single papillary muscle was confirmed .
The patient underwent atrial septal defect device closure. Transthoracic echocardiography follow-up two months later showed mild right ventricular enlargement with mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation, without tricuspid stenosis and residual shunt.
Second case was a 30-year-old female patient referred to the cardiology department for echocardiography prior to her breast cancer chemotherapy.
Cardiovascular examination revealed a grade II/VI pansystolic murmur at the lower right sternal border.
Electro­cardiogram was normal.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a right ventricle with unusual fusion of papillary muscles resulting a single calcified head for attachment of all tricuspid valve leaflets. These findings were suggestive of a parachute-like tricuspid valve. Other data were mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation without any stenosis, normal right ventricle size and function without any associated anomaly . Parachute-like tricuspid valve was confirmed by three dimensional echocardiography .
We recommended follow-up echocardiography.