A 22-year-old man was referred to the Department of Oral Maxillofacial Surgery, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wenzhou Medical University, China. The patient’s primary complaint was spontaneous pain of right upper posterior teeth for 4 days. On the detailed intraoral examination, we found that the patient’s dentition was normal without abnormal occlusion. Furthermore, Teeth 18 and 38 were partly erupted. And tooth 18 had caries, which have already reached the medullary cavity according to clinical examination. There was no abscess or fistula in the buccal or lingual mucosa and no painful reaction with regard to percussion. So deep caries causing irreversible pulpitis may be the reason why the patient felt pain .
Then the patient was asked to take a dental panoramic tomogram to examine the condition of dentition more clearly. The results showed that dental caries has already approached the distopulpal horn and there was no low-density shadow around the apical root, which could determine that irreversible pulpitis caused pain symptom and almost exclude the possibility of periapical disease. In addition, the patient was found to have three ST. Two ST in the maxilla were located at the root tip of the third molar, obstructing the natural eruption of third molar . The position of the third ST was uncommon with its adjacent molar . Moreover, the crown shape of tooth 38 was square and its size was bigger than normal teeth. Meanwhile, this tooth had an extremely short root, and the root divergent position was close to its root apex . Radiographic findings revealed macrodont mandibular third molar with its distinct morphological appearance, characterized by a large crown, and tapering root. It can be inferred that the tooth may be macrodontia .
ST was found all skeletally ambushed. In order to comprehensively detect positions and morphologies of ST, cone-beam CT (CBCT) detection along with Dolphin software analysis was also performed . The bilateral ST was both located at the distal and buccal side of the maxillary third molar . ST and the adjacent third molar in the right mandible were contacted each other by occlusal surfaces while roots were pointed in the opposite direction . It could be diagnosed that the condition was KM according to the previous study .
In order to explore the etiological agent, we collected photos of the patient’s face. Craniofacial development examination showed the patient’s face is symmetrical on frontal view. On the lateral view, the patient showed a straight profile. The lateral X-ray picture showed no frontal sinus, maxillary sinus and papillary dysplasia, cranial suture broadening. It’s indicated that the possibility of cleidocranial dysplasia syndrome was low . Meanwhile, in order to test the genetic possibility, we took dental panoramic tomograms of the patient’s parents and no abnormalities were found. Moreover, family and medical history did not reveal any related positive findings on genetic factors.