A 45-year-old male presented with numbness in his right forearm, hand, and leg of 2 months’ duration. He was found to have sleep apnea (i.e., polysomnography [PSG] showed apnea-hypopnea index [AHI] of 17.1 events/ hour [normal range: <5/h]) and a history of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, asthma, and a lumbar disc herniation. On examination, he had dysesthesias in the right occipital region, the right C5–C7 distributions, the medial right lower leg, and the medial sole of the foot.
The cervical MR imaging (MRI) revealed a heterogeneously enhancing right-sided dorsal intradural/extramedullary mass with pial/subpial invasion most consistent with a spinal hemangioblastoma at the C1 level. It was isointense on T1 MR and moderately hyperintense on T2 MR studies; flow voids surrounded the tumor . There was accompanying syringomyelia and syringobulbia, and there was no enhancement of the cyst/syrinx walls . The right vertebral angiography documented a hypervascular C1 lesion fed by the C1/C2 radicular arteries .
A suboccipital craniotomy, with laminectomy of the atlas, and cephalad laminotomy of C2 (C0-C2) were performed utilizing neurophysiological monitoring. Once the dura was opened, a bright red vascular lesion was identified on the dorsal aspect of the cord. However, the tumor’s ventral component was intramedullary in location. Once the pial feeding vessels were coagulated, the tumor was circumferentially separated and resected en bloc .
Histopathology confirmed that the tumor was a WHO Grade II SFT/HPC (HPC phenotype). It demonstrated round/ spindle cell proliferation and compact chromatin-stained nuclei that were relatively uniform without mitotic figures (i.e., consistent with a benign lesion). Immunohistochemistry was positive for CD34 and CD31 and negative for Bcl-2; the Ki-67 index was 2%. In addition, many small and large blood vessels with characteristic Staghorn vasculature were evident throughout .
Postoperatively, the numbness of the right upper and lower extremities improved. The postoperative PSG showed improvement as his AHI decreased to 0.4 events/h, and his dysphagia disappeared. No further radiation was scheduled due to the complete tumor excision. Eight years later, he has exhibited no tumor recurrence .