Our patient is a 3-year-old boy, third child of Caucasian, non-consanguineous and healthy parents. He was born at 39 weeks of gestation via natural delivery, after an unremarkable pregnancy. At birth he was small for gestational age: weight of 2350 g (<3rd centile), length 47 cm (2nd centile), head circumference (HC) 31 cm (<3rd centile). His Apgar scores were 9 at 1 min and 10 at 5 min. His past medical history was significant for a persistent failure to thrive during his first year of life. Several investigations, including a work-up for metabolic and gastrointestinal disorders, multiple urine tests, cranial ultrasound, echocardiogram and abdominal ultrasound, were normal. Endocrinological assessment showed a normal growth hormone (GH) function, but a moderate hypothyroidism, still treated with levothyroxine. At 8 months of age audiological evaluation was normal, while ophtalmologic exam revealed mild pseudostrabismus.
He was referred to our attention at the age of 10 months. His anthropometric parameters were: weight 5900 g (< − 2 SDS), length 64 cm (< − 2 SDS), head circumference (HC) 43.8 cm (9th – 25th centile). In addition, physical examination showed: triangular facies, closed anterior fontanelle, wide forehead, frontal bossing, deeply set eyes, epicanthus inversus, downslanted palpebral fissures, blue sclerae, narrow chin with slight vertical crease, ears posteriorly rotated with prominent anterior crus of antihelix and underdeveloped tragus and antitragus, syndactyly of 2th/3th finger of the foots, clinodactyly of 5th finger of the hands, low muscle mass, asymmetric lower limbs (left almost 1 cm shorter than right). A neuropsychiatric consult was requested, and then a moderate speech delay was detected. The brain MRI was normal.
At 2 years, the clinical picture appeared unchanged. His weight was 7500 g (<3rd centile), his lenght was 81 cm at the left side and 80 cm at the right (<3rd centile), his HC was 47,3 cm (10rd centile) and his BMI was 11,7 (<3rd centile). During the last check-up at our Center, at the age of 3 years, no significant changes were revealed regarding the clinical presentation and growth parameters. His weight was 9450 g (<3rd centile), his lenght was 88 cm at the left side and 89 cm at the right (3rd centile), and his HC was 48,2 cm (3rd centile) .
Applying the Netchine-Harbison CSS (NHCSS) we got a score of 5/6 (the proband met all the criteria for likely SRS except for relative macrocephaly at birth) .
In accordance with the clinical suspicion of SRS assessed through the NHCSS, we proceeded according to the flow-chart proposed by Azzi et al. and performed the classical genetic test for this syndrome. The Methylation-Specific Multiplex Legation-dependent Probe Amplification (MS-MLPA) at the imprinting region 11p15 did not reveal Loss Of Metilation (LOM) and the study of microsatellite markers of chromosome 7 did not detect UniParental Disomy (UPD). Subsequently, consistently with the aforementioned flow-chart, we proceeded with the research of genome-wide microdeletions or microduplications by Array-CGH (Array-Comparative Genome Hybridization). This analysis showed a de novo partial deletion of the long arm of the chromosome 12, 425 Kb-sized, from position 66,358,287, in which there is the most terminal probe delete on the array (cytogenetic locus 12q14.3) to 66,782,791 (cytogenetic locus 12q14.3) . According with the build UCSC Genome Browser (Hg build 19) several genes lie in this region including the OMIM disease causing genes HMGA2 (OMIM 600698, partially involved), IRAK3 (OMIM 604459) and GRIP1 (OMIM 604597). This microdeletion is not reported in DECIPHER. However, the same database recorded a 1.67 Mb deletion (ID 337828) of unknown significance, encompassing the same genes and maternally inherited, in a female infant with episodic hyperhidrosis, failure to thrive, moderate short stature, facial asymmetry, prominent forehead, proptosis, scoliosis and history of intrauterine growth retardation. A deletion with the same genomic and clinical features (size, genomic coordinates, maternal origin, clinical picture except for the absence of hyperhidrosis) have been previously described by Heldt et al. in a family where it segregated along with Silver-Russell like phenotype. Even if neither Heldt nor the database DECIPHER refer to the case reported by the other, we believe it is reasonably to conclude that the deletions reported in DECIPHER and in Heldt paper are the same [, ].