The proband (IV-3) was a 3-year-old boy referred to the genetic clinic with developmental delay, speech delay and dysmorphic features. He was born at term via Ceasarian section due to fetal distress with a birth weight of 2.5 Kg (<10th centile). Physical examination revealed an aggressive and hyperactive boy. Height at 89.5 cm was at the 3rd centile, while weight and head circumference at 13.6 Kg and 48.5 cm, respectively, were at the 25th centile. Dysmorphic facial features that were recorded included a broad forehead with a widow’s peak, bilateral partial ptosis, blepharophimosis, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, down slanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, short columella, everted lips, low set malformed ears with thickened helix, short philtrum, micrognathia, short neck, and a high arched palate . Nipples were low set bilaterally, and widely spaced. Pectus carinatum with excavatum was noticed, along with brachydactyly, bilateral fifth finger clinodactyly, bilateral partial syndactyly of the second and third toes, interdigital webbing, and single palmar creases . Sleep disturbance was reported. All other investigations were normal, and karyotype analysis revealed a 46, XY karyotype. At follow-up examination at 7 years, he was found to have proportionate borderline short stature (height 100 cm; 2nd-50th centile). He was obese with a Body Mass Index of 21.8 Kg/m2 (98th centile). Developmental delay was noticed in that he was unable to throw a ball or button his clothes, did not know his birthday, and needed help to maintain self-hygiene. He was found to have a left undescended testis, for which orchidopexy was scheduled. He continued to be hyperactive and had poor control on his attention. He was attending normal stream school with acceptable performance.
His younger brother (IV-5) presented at 3 years of age with similar features of short stature, hyperactivity, developmental delay, and dysmorphic features. His weight stayed below the 3rd centile since his birth, and weight was below the 10th centile. Like his brother, he had a broad forehead with a widow’s peak, bilateral partial ptosis, blepharophimosis, telecanthus, hypertelorism, epicanthic folds, down slanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, short nose, anteverted nostrils, short philtrum, malformed ears with thickened helix, and a short neck . Detailed ophthalmologic examination revealed overacting frontalis muscle, bilaterally poor levator muscle function, and poor Bells phenomenon. He was investigated at the ENT clinic for snoring, and found to have mild right eardrum retraction and a long uvula. At the age of 2 ¾ years, he was unable to throw a ball, walk backwards or to the sides, tiptoe, perform a tandem gait, stand on one leg, draw a line, or bead a thread. He could not differentiate between night and day. He was aggressive and hyperactive. His hands were broad and short, with brachydactyly, and bilateral fifth finger clinodactyly . Like his brother, he had low set, widely spaced nipples .
The patients’ parents were first half cousins. The mother has a short stature (HT 152.5 cm) with widow’s peak and hypertelorism. One of the patients’ maternal cousins was a 4-year old with microcephaly and developmental delay, while four of their paternal uncles were reported to have died in their adolescence due to unknown causes. A paternal aunt was reported to have a short stature.
The two brothers were found to harbor the novel FGD1 variant c.53del (p.Pro18Argfs*106) in a hemizygous state while the same variant was detected in heterozygosity in the mother. FGD1 sequencing did not reveal other potential candidates for causality of the abovementioned symptoms in the mother and her sons. The variant was not reported in any of the databases; dbSNP, 1,000-genomes, Leiden Open Variation Database, EVS and ExAC. On the other hand, the variant was not found in the GalaxC™ Allele Frequency Database which contains >2.5 million unique Middle Eastern pathogenic mutations and variants. The mutation c.53del leads to a frameshift that produces “out of frame” translation of 105 erroneous amino acids followed by a premature stop codon at position 106. ExPASy translational tool was used to obtain the above-mentioned translation.