A 50-year-old previously well Sri Lankan woman presented to a local hospital following a bite on her right foot by a snake. The snake was killed and brought to the hospital by members of her family and was confirmed as a hump-nosed viper by the attending doctors. Species identification was not performed. She only had features of local envenoming including pain, local swelling, and blistering. She did not have any bleeding manifestations, maintained good urine output, and there were no neurological deficits. Her full blood count, serum creatinine, and 20-minute whole blood clotting test were normal on the first day. She was given paracetamol, orally administered antibiotics, and observed in the local hospital and was discharged on the second day of admission.
Five days after the snakebite she was readmitted to the local hospital due to worsening swelling and pain of her right foot and leg. She was afebrile on admission and did not complain of any reduction in urine output or bleeding manifestation. However, by the next day her urine output was found to be low and she was transferred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka (NHSL) for further management. On admission to NHSL she was fully conscious and only complained of pain and swelling of right lower limb, reduced urine output, and mild shortness of breath at rest. She was pale, not icteric and there was generalized edema. There was right lower limb cellulitis with hemorrhagic blisters. There was bruising on puncture sites. She was dyspneic with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/minute; her heart rate was 100 beats/minute and blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. Oxygen saturation on air was 96%. Her jugular venous pressure was raised. A precordial examination was normal. A respiratory examination revealed bibasal crackles suggestive of pulmonary edema. An abdominal examination was normal. She had a urethral catheter with no urine.
Laboratory investigations on admission revealed a hemoglobin of 7 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume of (MCV) 82.6 fl, and red cell count of 2.36 × 1012/l. Her white cell count (WCC) was 10.96 × 109/l with 75% neutrophils and 17% lymphocytes. Her platelet count was 92 × 109/l. Her blood picture revealed fragmented red cells suggestive of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA) and toxic neutrophils suggestive of bacterial infection. Her serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 2300 U/L. Her prothrombin time was 12.6 seconds and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 24 seconds. Serum creatinine was 888 μmol/l, while potassium was 7 mmol/l and sodium was 126 mmol/l. Venous blood gas revealed a pH of 7.29 with bicarbonate of 11 mmol/l. A clinical diagnosis of a hump-nosed viper bite leading to cellulitis, acute kidney injury, and TMA was made. Her ECG on admission was normal.
She was started on intravenously administered meropenem and metronidazole and urgent hemodialysis was arranged via a femoral catheter. In the absence of evidence for the benefit of therapeutic plasma exchange or fresh frozen plasma in MAHA following hump-nosed viper bites it was decided to manage her without these therapeutic modalities. She underwent regular hemodialysis with adequate ultrafiltration on the sixth, seventh and ninth days after the snakebite. She remained anuric throughout. Her thrombocytopenia improved within the next 2 days with her platelet count rising to 160 × 109/l and some fragmented red cells remained in the blood picture. She was given two packs of red cell concentrates over the next 2 days.
On day 10 she developed acute onset shortness of breath and retrosternal chest pain with bibasal crackles on lung auscultation despite adequate ultrafiltration the previous night and adherence to a strict fluid restriction. Her oxygen saturation on air was 89% and improved to 97% with 5% oxygen via facemask. An ECG showed T wave inversion in V3 to V6 and aVL leads . Serum troponin I titer was 0.433 ng/ml (normal < 0.03) 12 hours after the onset of chest pain. A diagnosis of non-ST elevation myocardial infarction was made. At that time her hemoglobin was 8 g/dl, platelet count was 205 × 109/l, and serum LDH was 2100 U/l . Her serum electrolytes were within normal range. She was started on subcutaneous enoxaparin 60 mg/day, aspirin 75 mg/day, clopidogrel 75 mg/day, and atorvastatin 20 mg/day. Any existing coagulopathy was excluded by thromboelastography before initiating the antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulation. She was given a few more packed cell transfusions during hemodialysis. An echocardiogram done 3 days later revealed anterior and lateral wall hypokinesia in the left ventricle and her ejection fraction was at 45 to 50%.
On day 15 she developed an upper gastrointestinal bleed confirmed by an esophagogastroduodenoscopy. Antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulation were withheld and she was transfused with blood.
On day 18 she developed worsening shortness of breath associated with reduced oxygen saturation and fever. A repeat ECG did not show any new changes. A chest radiograph revealed bilateral diffuse opacification which persisted even after adequate ultrafiltration. A presumptive diagnosis of hospital-acquired bronchopneumonia was made and her antibiotics were changed to piperacillin-tazobactam and teicoplanin. Subsequently she developed respiratory failure and was intubated and transferred to our Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU) for ventilator support. Bronchoscopy revealed absence of pulmonary hemorrhage and both bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and tracheal aspirate grew coliforms resistant to all available antibiotics in the hospital setting and sensitive only to colistin which was not available. Her stay in MICU was further complicated with a deep vein thrombosis involving her right ileofemoral vein which was treated with unfractionated heparin while maintaining APTT within the therapeutic range. She progressively deteriorated and developed a cardiac arrest and died on day 33 of the snakebite .