A 14-year-old girl consulted our outpatient department to investigate unknown causative food allergens after two previous episodes of anaphylaxis. When she was 12 years old, 1 hour after oral ingestion of shredded chicken with spicy sesame sauce, which is a type of Chinese food purchased at the supermarket, she experienced abdominal pain, cough, facial skin redness, eyelid edema, and urticaria; thereafter, she was diagnosed with anaphylaxis by the emergency hospital physician and required intramuscular adrenaline administration. Although levels of serum-specific IgE antibodies to suspected causative foods were evaluated, all of which were negative. Serum-specific IgE antibody test for jellyfish were not commercially available in Japan. The skin prick test (SPT) for salted jellyfish was not done at that time because jellyfish consumption was not suspected to be the cause. She was prescribed an adrenaline auto-injector in preparation for accidental anaphylaxis and was followed up at an outpatient clinic. At the age of 13, one hour after oral ingestion of Japanese-style chilled noodles purchased at a convenience store, she developed cough, rhinorrhea, dyspnea, cyanosis, abdominal pain, conjunctivitis, and generalized skin erythema. She was diagnosed with anaphylaxis by the emergency hospital physician, and intramuscular adrenaline administration with oxygen inhalation was required.
She had no significant medical history other than allergic rhinitis or conjunctivitis. She had no history of atopic dermatitis, bronchial asthma, or drug allergies. Although there was a case report about the cross-reactivity between edible jellyfish and fermented soybeans , she was able to consume them without any problems. Her family had no history of allergic disease. She used to swim in the ocean once a year; however, she had no experience in marine sports such as surfing or with jellyfish stings. She also had no history of using cosmetics containing jellyfish collagen. She had previously consumed a meal containing edible jellyfish twice when she was approximately 10 years old.
Her diet diaries revealed that edible jellyfish, which she consumed rarely, was common to the meals in the two episodes of anaphylaxis. She had consumed other foods at the time of the reaction without any incident occurring. We contacted each food manufacturer (shredded chicken with spicy sesame sauce and Japanese-style chilled noodles) about the types of jellyfish that contributed to these two episodes, but they could not identify the types. Her blood tests showed a normal blood eosinophil count and elevated serum level of total IgE (498 IU/mL). No positive results were observed for serum-specific IgE antibodies against food-related allergens in either of the two previous episodes of anaphylaxis (egg white, milk, wheat, soybeans, pork, chicken, sesame, and gelatin). To identify the causative food in these two episodes, SPT was performed using five types of commercially available edible jellyfish products (Rhopilema esculentum, Stomolophus meleagris, Rhopilema hisphidum, Nemopilema nomurai, and Lobonema smithi), fermented soybeans, and their mucilage. The same jellyfish that caused anaphylaxis were not available during the winter season at the time. The reaction to Rhopilema hisphidum, Nemopilema nomurai, and Lobonema smithi was positive at 15 min with wheal diameters of 5 × 5, 5 × 5, and 10 × 5 mm, respectively, and the reaction to Rhopilema esculentum, Stomolophus meleagris, fermented soybeans, and mucilage were negative. Histamine hydrochloride (10 mg/mL) and saline were used as positive and negative controls (wheal diameters of 7 × 6 and 0 × 0 mm, respectively).
An oral food challenge test for jellyfish was also conducted with written consent obtained from the patient and her parents. The same Japanese chilled noodles were purchased again in the summer, and edible jellyfish were used for the test. Seventy-five minutes after ingesting a total of 14 g of jellyfish (2 g, 4 g, 8 g every 30 min) dyspnea, cough, wheezing, erythema of the trunk, repetitive vomiting, and drowsiness appeared with hypotension (88/50 mmHg), poor oxygenation (90%), and tachycardia (110/min). Shortly after ingesting the edible jellyfish, the patient had generalized cutaneous erythema, severe respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms, decreased blood pressure, and tachycardia. She was diagnosed with anaphylaxis according to the diagnostic criteria established by the World Allergy Organization guidelines for the assessment and management of anaphylaxis . She was treated with intramuscular adrenaline injection, volume resuscitation, oxygen inhalation, intravenous infusions of corticosteroids and antihistamines, and bronchodilator inhalation. These treatments resulted in improvement of her symptoms without a biphasic reaction. With the elimination of all kinds of edible jellyfish from her diet, she did not experience any further episodes of anaphylaxis during the subsequent 2-year follow-up period.
To support whether her symptoms were caused by an IgE-mediated allergic reaction, the basophil activation test (BAT) was performed at an external facility (Bio Medical Laboratories, Saitama, Japan) to quantify activated basophil CD203c expression by culturing the whole blood of the patient with jellyfish antigens. We prepared four types of edible jellyfish (Rhopilema esculentum, Stomolophus meleagris, Rhopilema hisphidum, and Lobonema smithi) for the stimulation. After crushing each jellyfish in distilled water with an ultrasonic homogenizer, the patient’s peripheral whole blood was incubated with each extracted jellyfish sample, and CD203c-expressing basophils were detected using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. BAT revealed 23.0% CD203c-positive cells in Rhopilema esculentum, 19.0% in Stomolophus meleagris, 59.2% in Rhopilema hisphidum, and 78.0% in Lobonema smithi at 1000 µg/mL . In particular, basophil activation was observed even at a low concentration (100 μg/mL) of Lobonema smithi (27.9%). BAT showed 70.9% and 3.1% CD203c-positive cells in the positive (anti-immunoglobulin E) and negative controls, respectively.
We also evaluated serum IgE reactivity against jellyfish collagen using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). We prepared jellyfish extracts, using acid and pepsin, containing collagen from five types of edible jellyfish (Rhopilema esculentum, Stomolophus meleagris, Rhopilema hisphidum, Nemopilema nomurai, and Lobonema smithi), and a commercially available purified jellyfish collagen solution from Rhopilema esculentum (Jellyfish Research Laboratories, Yokohama, Japan), which can be used for coating well plates in cell culture. Each jellyfish was homogenized in 0.5 M acetic acid with 10% pepsin (1: 10,000, derived from porcine gastric mucosa, FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical, Osaka, Japan), and the mixture was stirred at 4 °C for 72 h. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation. The protein concentration in each extract was adjusted to 100 µg/mL. An acetic acid and a pepsin solution, which was used for extraction, was used as the background. To coat the bottom of wells with the jellyfish-collagen solution, each solution was added to the appropriate wells of a 96-well plate and incubated at room temperature for 1 h, followed by a wash with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The patient’s serum was added and incubated overnight at 4 °C. We collected three sera samples from pediatric patients with food allergies other than jellyfish as control sera. Serum of food allergy patients with no history of jellyfish allergy were used as controls. After washing five times with PBS-Tween® 20 (PBS-T), horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated mouse anti-human IgE Fc receptor monoclonal antibody (1/1000 dilution, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) in 3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) with PBS-T was added, and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h. After washing five times with PBS-T, 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate was added, the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 30 min, and the absorbance at 450 nm was measured after the yellow color change after the addition of hydrochloric acid. As a result, serum IgE reactivity against purified jellyfish collagen and extracts from all types of jellyfish was measured . The levels of IgE reactivity in this patient’s serum were much higher than those in control patients.
To identify the causative component in the jellyfish collagen, we performed immunoblot analysis for serum IgE reactivity using purified collagen solution from Rhopilema esculentum (Jellyfish Research Laboratories, Yokohama, Japan). This jellyfish-collagen solution was more suitable for immunoblot analysis than the salted edible jellyfish because the jellyfish collagen was well solubilized in acid from raw jellyfish. Equal amounts of the acid-soluble jellyfish collagen (15 μg) were separated by sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) under denaturing conditions and blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes. After blocking with 3% BSA in PBS-T, the membrane was incubated overnight with 10% of the patient’s serum. The membranes were then incubated with HRP-conjugated mouse anti-human IgE Fc receptor monoclonal antibody (1/1000 dilution, Abcam), followed by detection with SuperSignal™ West Pico PLUS chemiluminescent substrate system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Immunoblotting analysis showed that the IgE antibodies in the patient’s serum specifically reacted with two protein bands at approximately 40 and 70 kDa of jellyfish collagen unlike those of the control patient’s serum .