A 3-year-old caucasian female with no previous medical history was admitted for surgical repair of an accidental finding of secundum ASD after a year of routine examinations in paediatric outpatient clinic. The patient, weighing 15.2 kg (70 percentile), presented with no clinical symptoms. On cardiovascular examination, a soft systolic murmur was audible along the left lower sternal border. The oxygen saturation in ambient air was 99% at rest. A chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and pulmonary plethora. Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a large defect in the atrial septum (14 × 12 mm) consisting of multiple fenestrations with a significant unidirectional shunt from left to right . The right ventricle (RV) was moderately volume overloaded, but with normal function. No sign of pulmonary artery pressure was noted, and no valve pathology was found. No masses were identified in any of the cardiac chambers. A decision was made to surgically operate the ASD by our Heart Team.
A median sternotomy was performed followed by systemic heparinization and standard aortic-bicaval cannulation. Hypothermic (34° Celsius) cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was commenced. Vacuum was applied to improve the venous drainage. The aorta was cross-clamped, and cold blood-cardioplegia was infused in the aortic root for immediate cardiac arrest. Both venae cavae were snared, and the right atrium (RA) was opened along the atrio-ventricular groove. At this point, air in the inferior vena cava (IVC) cannula was noted. The cannula was quickly clamped, and perfusion flow was simultaneously reduced briefly. The IVC cannula was seen displaced into the RA and was re-positioned into the IVC before full perfusion flow was resumed. No change in the cerebral near-infrared spectroscopy was noted. No venting catheter was inserted in the LA or left ventricle (LV). The remnants of the septum primum were removed to establish a single large atrial defect, which was subsequently closed with a tailored bovine pericardial patch. The RA atriotomy was closed, and the heart de-aired before cross-clamp release. A routine transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) before weaning from the CPB was performed; however, the assessment was inconclusive due to the low filling of the chambers. CPB was then weaned off uneventfully. A standard post-CPB TEE revealed no residual ASD defect. However, there was a well-defined rounded heterogenous mass (2 × 3 cm) arising from the left atrial wall in close proximity to the anterior mitral leaflet (AML) and below the level of pulmonary veins with no evidence of internal flow (. It appeared freely mobile and pendulated into the anterolateral commissure (Video 1). No mitral valve stenosis or regurgitation could be demonstrated. The decision was made to re-arrest the heart and examine the LA. Unexpectedly, the LAA was found inverted into the LA . The appendage was everted to its anatomical position with no further interventions. Repeated post-CPB TEE showed no mass in the LA. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day (POD). The follow-up TTE after 4th and 21st revealed no LA mass, and LAA was seen in its anatomical position .