A 59-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed in 2016 with follicular lymphoma with diffuse large B-cell transformation when he presented with inguinal and cervical lymphadenopathy. He received six cycles of R-CHOP (rituximab plus cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) in September 2016 and remained in clinical remission for 18 months. He had a subclinical relapse of low-grade lymphoma (March 2018) with recurrent cervical lymphadenopathy and therefore received fludarabine and melphalan conditioned allogenic stem cell transplantation (Allo-HCT) from his human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched sibling (July 2019). Five months later, Allo-HCT was complicated by the development of classical multiorgan acute GVHD involving liver, skin, and gut (December 2019). He was then treated successfully with intravenous methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg daily for 3 days and switched to oral prednisolone and cyclosporin after symptoms settled. During ongoing follow-up, his cyclosporin was discontinued and prednisolone was tapered down to 12.5 mg daily, which is when he had an episode of isolated right-foot drop without systemic manifestations of GVHD or systemic vasculitis (April 2020). He was consulted by the neurology team and investigated with MRI lumbar spine and brain, which did not reveal any cerebrospinal pathology. However, this was not further investigated by nerve conduction study or other imaging modalities such as PET scan for the possibilities of systemic vasculitis as a causative factor for foot drop. Over a period of 8–10 weeks, his foot drop resolved spontaneously whilst the prednisolone was discontinued completely.
Three months later (August 2020), he developed recurrence of GVHD involving skin and gastrointestinal tract that manifested as diffuse erythematous rash and diarrhea without abdominal pain, and abdominal examination was unremarkable. Neurological examination was also unremarkable, including normal power in his lower limbs indicating complete resolution of his foot drop. His blood tests showed CRP 52 mg/L, ESR 73 mm/h, and autoimmune screen including ANA and ANCA were essentially unremarkable. Additionally, whole-body FDG CT/PET scan was performed to screen for recurrence of lymphoma, which showed mild increase in tracer activity in the ascending and descending aorta, and similar tracer activity in the subclavian, iliac, femoral, and popliteal arteries bilaterally suggestive of large-vessel vasculitis. There was no uptake or tracer activity on PET scan performed in 2017. For GVHD, he was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg followed by high-dose oral prednisolone and budesonide with steroid tapering plan at the time of discharge.