We report the case of a 2-year-old boy who had been on a well-tolerated long-term therapy of 100 μg inhaled fluticasone-dipropionate daily for frequently recurring episodes of asthmatic exacerbations. He had intermittently received prednisone suppositories (Rectodelt™) for acute bronchopulmonary obstruction with no occurrence of adverse events and had never been given any other glucocorticoid preparations. However, a few weeks before presentation to our department, the patient was admitted to another hospital because of severe bronchospasm. As neither inhalant bronchodilators nor 100 mg of rectally applied prednisone resulted in any significant symptom relief, 50 mg of prednisolone-21-hydrogen succinate (PSH) (Solu-Decortin™) was administered intravenously. Within a few minutes the boy developed generalized urticaria, facial angio-oedema, nausea and severe dyspnoea requiring nasal oxygen supplementation. PSH medication was interrupted and symptoms spontaneously resolved within 30 minutes.
Upon presentation at our department of Paediatric Allergology following a 3-week wash-out period, the boy was in good health and we performed skin prick testing with a panel of commercially available glucocorticoids according to European Academy of Allergology and Clinical Immunology guidelines . Briefly, each drug was prepared according to the manufacturer's recommendations and the respective test reagent was diluted with sterile physiologic saline solution. Epidermal testing was performed with titrated dilutions (1:100 to 1:10) and, if negative, with the pure reagent. As the drug preparation under investigation only contained the active ingredient (PSH) no further skin prick tests with additives or other excipients were initiated.
Testing with PSH at a dilution of 1:10 elicited a positive result (wheal diameter 6 mm), whereas no reactions were observed to prednisone (Rectodelt™), betamethasone (Celestamine N liquidum™) or dexamethasone (Fortecortin™). While fluorescence enzyme immunoassay (FEIA) analysis revealed no specific IgE antibodies against PSH, CD63-based basophil activation testing with PSH induced a significant increase in CD63-positive basophils as compared with controls. In contrast, additional incubation of basophils with prednisone, betamethasone and dexamethasone did not elicit any significant response.
In order to rule out any further clinically relevant hypersensitivity reactions to other GCs and to provide the patient with a safe GC-based emergency medication, we performed an oral provocation test with betamethasone and a titrated intravenous dexamethasone challenge. As both drugs were tolerated without any complications, they were recommended for further treatment.