A 44-year-old female presented to our institution (Jordan University Hospital Outpatient Clinics) with neck pain of four-month duration. The patient stated that her pain was associated with right brachialgia (pain score 2/10) at C5 as well as numbness and paresthesia at C6. Previous surgical history includes a C4/C5 ACDF with cage size 4 in 2017. The patient is a 7-pack year smoker. The patient was not on any medications. Also, the patient has no history of hypertension, atherosclerosis, Marfan disease, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, or vasculitis. However, the patient's family history is significant for her mother who has been diagnosed with hypertension.
On physical examination, the patient demonstrated that she suffered from a spastic gait at both lower limbs. In addition, bilateral Hoffman and Babinski signs were seen. An MRI showed C5-C6 Prolapsed Intervertebral Disc (PID) which prompted an urgent ACDF. It should be noted that the rest of the physical examination including vitals were all within normal limits.
The patient was admitted for surgery and successfully underwent her ACDF procedure done by Dr. Tariq Kanaan. However, it was complicated by sudden severe hypertension of over 200/100 mmhg, followed by multiple episodes of hypotension. Initially within the first four hours post-op, the patient was doing relatively well and had stable vitals. However, the patient suddenly began to experience generalized abdominal pain. This continuous pain was described has heavy and dull and did not radiate anywhere else. The patient stated her pain was not associated with any nausea or vomiting. Blood tests revealed the patient had a troponin level of 1050 ng/L while Electrocardiography (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. A cardiology consult recommended serial troponin measurements, however the patient became hypotensive with a systolic blood pressure of 75 mmHg and a diastolic blood pressure of 50 mmHg. The patient's pulse was 80 bpm. Concurrently, hemoglobin levels were reported to be 6.5 g/dL. An abdominal CTA scan was preformed immediately which revealed internal hemorrhaging and a splenic aneurysm rupture (, , , ). The patient underwent an urgent laparotomy and splenectomy by Dr. Mohammad El Muhtaseb and an abdominal drain was inserted. An emergent exploratory laparotomy was warranted over endovascular coil embolization due to the patient's condition being in hypovolemic shock.
Intra-operation findings during exploratory laparotomy and splenectomy revealed bleeding from the splenic artery, multiple liquified clots (approximately one liter) in addition to pelvic, retro-gastric and splenic flexure hematomas. Evacuation of hematomas and clots was preformed, and ligation of the splenic artery was done. After stabilization, no active bleeding was seen. Subsequently, post-operation the patient was extubated and sent to the intensive care unit with an abdominal drain, foleys catheter and a left radial arterial line.
The macroscopic histopathological examination of the resected specimen from the splenectomy included a spleen measuring 10 × 6.5 × 4 cm with an attached fragment of the hilum measuring 8 × 6 × 3.5 cm and a fragment of the omentum measuring 8 × 6 × 3 cm. The spleen was weighed at 175.7 g. Step sectioning of the omentum revealed black cut surface with multiple yellow foci while step sectioning of the hematoma showed a hemorrhagic black cut surface. The splenic vessels could not be identified with certainty because of the hematoma. Step sectioning of the spleen was unremarkable. Microscopic histopathological examination of splenic tissue sections showed congestion along with fragments of fat necrosis and hematoma. Sections taken from the hematoma revealed splenic artery with blood dissecting through the media, indicating the presence of wall rupture.
The histopathological diagnosis concluded that the resected specimen showed congested splenic tissue with hematoma and that the specimen was negative for malignancy.
Forty-eight hours following surgery, hemoglobin and complete blood count levels began to normalize.