A 28-year-old Ethiopian pregnant (G2, P1) woman presented to our emergency obstetrics department with a complaint of a worsening headache and easy fatigability for 3 days. It was a continuous vague type of global headache that became worse over 24 hours and was associated with easy fatigability, generalized malaise, and nausea. She had undergone an elective cesarean section at our hospital 31 days before her current presentation with an indication of “previous cesarean scar and big baby.” She had a normal pregnancy with an uneventful antenatal follow-up. She had no history of any known chronic medical illness like hypertension, diabetes, cardiac or renal disease, coagulopathy, or any bleeding tendency. She has no history of primary headache, migraine, or any trauma.
For her cesarean delivery, spinal anesthesia was given in a sitting position with a 22-gauge Quincke spinal needle at the L3–L4 interspace using 12.5 mg of 0.5% isobaric bupivacaine. The puncture was successful on the first attempt, and the course of anesthesia was without incident. Her intraoperative vital signs were stable, and the surgery was completed uneventfully. She had a smooth postoperative course and was discharged on the third day. She had no headache at the time of discharge. She was in a relative resting state being cared for by her family and did not return to work. She had no history of trauma or fall accident. About 8 days later, she developed a mild global headache for which she was managing herself with rest and paracetamol per os as needed. The headache increased gradually and became associated with nausea and easy fatigability.
Upon presentation, on the 31st postoperative day, she complained of severe global headache with worsening over 3 days that was not position dependent and was unrelieved with rest and analgesics. On physical examination, there was no vital sign derangement. She was fully conscious and oriented with no mental status change. All meningeal signs were negative, and her motor function was intact bilaterally.
Laboratory data revealed normal complete blood count, prothrombin time (PT), partial prothrombin time (PTT), and international normalized ratio (INR). CT scan of the head revealed a layered hypodense crescent-shaped extra-axial left frontoparietal collection with areas of linear and crescentic hyperdensities (Hounsfield unit of 50). There was a mass effect on the underlying brain resulting in a midline shift of 13 mm. The width of the lesion measured 15 mm at the level of the bodies of the lateral ventricles. The finding was consistent with chronic subdural hematoma with areas of acute bleeds .
After emergent consultation with a neurosurgeon, the patient was admitted to the neurosurgical ward, and hematoma evacuation was achieved using burr-hole placement. She had a smooth immediate postoperative course and was discharged home 3 days later. Follow-up CT showed a crescentic left frontoparietal hyperdense extra-axial collection with a width of 3.8 mm and midline shift of 2.2 mm at the level of the bodies of the lateral ventricle , a finding suggestive of a largely improved left frontoparietal subdural hematoma. Clinically, she had an uneventful recovery with full resolution of her symptoms. On subsequent follow-up at 6 months, the patient had no residual symptoms or neurologic deficit.