A 28-year-old man who worked as a steeplejack was brought to the emergency room with a lumbar burst fracture at the L1 level caused by a fall from a 6-m height. He had no comorbidities except Class II obesity (height, 178 cm; weight, 117 kg; and BMI, 36.9 kg/m2). On arrival, the patient was alert and oriented, but complained of severe back pain, bilateral lower-extremity pain, and numbness. Although accurate neurological evaluation was difficult because of severe back and lower extremity pain, the weakness of the bilateral lower extremities (Medical Research Council grade 3–4) and no sensory decline by the pin-prick test was observed.
Initial radiographic examination including computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging showed burst fracture at the L1 level with spinal cord and cauda equina compression, which was classified as AO type B2 with spinous process fracture at L1 and L2 . In this patient, cranial endplate injury was severe; however, caudal endplate injury was mild . In addition, left pubic fracture, left 12th rib fracture, and left transverse process fractures at the L1, L2, and L3 levels were observed.
The patient was temporarily immobilized with a bedrest and the first surgery was performed 2 days after the trauma. During the surgery, pedicle screws (Universal Spine System II, Depuy Synthes, Zuchwil, Switzerland) were inserted bilaterally to the T12 and L2 levels after partial laminectomy at the T12 and L1 vertebrae for decompression were performed . Intraoperatively, we tried to fill the vacant space inside the fractured vertebra with hydroxyapatite blocks (Pentax, Tokyo, Japan). The angle between the cranial endplate of T12 and the caudal endplate of L2 (local kyphosis angle: LKA) was 18° preoperatively (supine position) and improved to 16° intraoperatively (prone position, ).
Postoperatively, the patient’s back and lower extremity symptoms improved when compared with preoperatively; however, the patient was unable to stand because of severe back pain in the standing position. Eight days after surgery, the patient was able to stand; thus, radiographs of the thoracolumbar spine were taken in the standing position 14 days after the surgery. LKA was 32° in the standing position , while it was 24° in the lateral lying position. Sufficient stability could not be achieved by 1-above 1-below posterior fusion. Therefore, we conducted additional surgery to achieve better stability of the unstable T12-L2 segments.
Twenty-two days after the first surgery, a second surgery was performed. All implants, including pedicle screws inserted at the first surgery, were removed, and pedicle screws of other systems (Expedium Spine System, Depuy Synthes, Zuchwil, Switzerland) were inserted at the T10, T11, T12, L2, L3, and L4 levels. On each side, the pedicle screws from T10 to L4 levels were connected by two rods to reinforce the stability of the screw-rod system . Ten days after the second surgery, the patient could stand and walk by himself with a hard thoracolumbar orthosis in the horizontal bars with mild back pain and slight bilateral foot numbness. The LKA was 22° in the lateral lying position and 27° in the standing position.
Forty-four days after the second surgery, a third surgery was performed. At the third surgery, the left eleventh rib was harvested, and the left lateral aspect of the T12-L1 vertebra was exposed through the retropleural approach. Subsequently, the T12-L1 disc and a part of the injured L1 vertebra were removed, and autologous rib strut grafts were inserted . After the third surgery, the LKA was 22° in the lateral lying position and 29° in the standing position .
The postoperative course after the third surgery was favorable, with no postoperative complications. Back pain gradually decreased postoperatively, and the muscle weakness of the lower extremities returned to normal; however, slight residual back pain and foot numbness remained after the third surgery.
Bony fusion was evaluated on reconstructed sagittal and coronal CT images. The full integration of a bone graft at both adjacent levels was considered as complete bony fusion.[,] Twenty-one months after the third surgery, complete bony fusion at the T12-L1 segment was confirmed by CT images ; thus, 24 months after the third surgery, all posterior implants were surgically removed. The LKA in the standing position was 28° before removal and 30° 11 days after removal . Before implant removal, no correction loss in the LKA in the standing position occurred after the third surgery. However, an increase of 6° in LKA in the lateral lying position was observed after the third surgery; thus, LKA in the lateral lying position was the same as that in the standing position when bony fusion between T12 and L1 was achieved. After implant removal, obvious loss of lordosis at the T12-L2 segments was observed. Six months after the removal, LKA in the standing position was 37°, and increased up to 40° at the final follow-up (27 months after removal, ). Complete bony fusion between the L1 and L2 vertebrae was observed, as well as between T12 and L1. Loss of lordosis occurred both at the T12-L1 segment (6°) and L1-L2 segment (6°), although continuous trabecular bone formation between the T12 and L1 vertebrae was observed before implant removal .
At the final follow-up (27 months after the removal), the patient was able to walk and jog without any support; however, slight back pain and slight left foot numbness were reported. He did not return to work as a steeplejack as he was hesitant to work from heights again; however, his activities of daily life had returned to normal and started work in the construction industry.