On a freezing cold morning, a 71-yr-old male of Han nationality who was retired, but worked as a community volunteer, was brought to the neurology emergency with a history of sudden onset of left-sided weakness and difficulty in speaking while he was performing road patrol. Approximately an hour and a half had elapsed since the onset of symptoms before he was brought to the emergency room.
As for the past medical history, he had undergone a surgical procedure involving left kidney, left ureter and bladder for treatment of transitional cell carcinoma of bladder, approximately 8 months ago. One month after the surgical procedure, the results of laboratory investigations, such as complete blood count, kidney and liver function tests were within normal limits. There was no history of common risk factors of atherosclerosis, such as hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease and smoking.
He was conscious, had pallor, the blood pressure was 150/80 mmHg and the blood sugar level was 6.5 mmol/L. Chest and cardiac examination was unremarkable. The neurological examination demonstrated a left-sided hemiparesis with clumsy speech. The muscle strength of the left limb was grade III and the left Chaddock’s sign was positive. The patient’s upper and lower extremities were very cold, and the finger tip oxygen saturation was 76 %. However, the arterial blood gas analysis revealed the oxygen saturation of 94 % without supplementary oxygen.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain revealed absence of hemorrhage, hence the diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke was highly probable. Routine blood test revealed a haemoglobin of 58 g/L, platelet count of 124 × 109/L,white blood cell count of 7.55 × 109/L, however, the number of red blood cells, hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume could not be measured due to the interference by agglutinated erythrocytes. The low level of hemoglobin combined with presence of pallor suggested severe anemia. On coagulation study, d-dimmer was found to be 19.17 mg/L and fibrin degradation product (FDP) was found to be 101.2 mg/L, indicating secondary fibrinolysis.
Due to the low level of hemoglobin, intravenous thrombolysis was contraindicated and the patient was hospitalized and treated with gastrodin. On the same day, the neurological symptoms of the patient dramatically recovered with the recovery of strength in the left limb (grade V), and the development of relatively clear speech. During this time, the patient was kept in a warm room where the temperature was maintained at 24 °C. However, the patient complained of severe back pain and passage of dark colored urine. Urine examination revealed the presence of hemoglobinuria, on the basis of which we suspected acute intravascular hemolysis.
The direct Coombs test was performed, which was negative for anti-globulin immunoglobulin G, but positive for anti-C3d, indicating the possibility of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. To rule out the possibility of connective tissue disease, tests for antinuclear antibody (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and antibodies to a spectrum of extractable nuclear antigens (ENA), such as smooth muscle (Sm), ribonucleoprotein (RNP), Sjogren's syndrome A (SSA), Sjogren's syndrome B (SSB), DNA topoisomerase I (Scl70), and histidyl-tRNA synthetase (Jo-1) were performed, which were found to be negative. To rule out multiple myeloma, serum and urine protein electrophoresis was performed, which were negative. The cold agglutinins were positive with a titer more than 1:1000. The abdominal enhanced computer tomography (CT) revealed no signs of relapse of bladder cancer. The cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the presence of acute infarction in the area of right basal ganglia and corona radiata .
On magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), we could not demonstrate severe stenosis of intracranial internal carotid artery; however, there was mild to moderate stenosis of the left posterior cerebral artery . The extracranial internal carotid artery was found to be normal on carotid sonography.
Based on the above mentioned findings, a diagnosis of the cold agglutinin disease and ischemic stroke were made. The patient was transfused with 2 units of the washed red blood cells, and received corticosteroids, sodium bicarbonate and intravenous fluid therapy. After one day of corticosteroid therapy the back pain was dramatically relieved. The urine of the patient became progressively less dark. After one week of therapy, the titer of cold agglutinins decreased to < 1: 10 and the patient’s symptoms completely disappeared.