We report on an obese 21 years old male with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 38,2, who presented to our department with Calciphylaxis after phenprocoumon intake in consequence of pulmonary embolism. The target partial thrombin time (pTT) was between 50-60s. In addition the patient lost overtime 100 kg body mass after getting a gastric banding in 2007. Comorbidities were a dilative cardiomyopathy, insulin dependant diabetes, obesity, allergic asthma, hypothyreoidism and lack of anithrombine factor III (AT3).
Calciphylaxis was already diagnosed histologically in the former hospital, where he was treated with Natriumthiosulphate intravenously for about 9 weeks. Initial symptoms were tender and painful lesions with defined edges in the upper and lower thighs and the abdomen, where some showed signs of necrosis. Further histological examinations showed typical signs of microthrombosis and calcification of the arterioles subcutaneously and substantiated the diagnosis of calciphylaxis.
The patient needed high doses of opiates over the whole duration of inpatient treatment. Unfortunately the initial calcifications became necrotic and possible surgical options were evaluated.
A combination of Natriumthiosulphate was administered intravenously, which is a common therapy for calciphylaxis and a specific surgical approach to this complex disease was initiated when the patient arrived at our department. The patient had necrosis on the abdomen and both thighs as well as partially superinfected wounds with oxacillin resistant staphylococcus aureus (Figure
). A bone scintigraphy revealed no increased activity of calcium carbonate in thighs or the abdominal area.
After the patient consented to a surgical treatment we started our surgical approach with extensive debridement of the affected areas on the abdominal wall and both thighs (Figure
). A consecutive VAC therapy for the lesions on the thighs was mandatory to establish a clean environment. At this level, attempt to close the wounds on the abdomen via advancement flaps were unsuccessful.
A main problem to deal with was not only a permanent level of extensive pain which was encountered through our pain specialists in concordance with the WHO – pain schedule with opiates but also the recurrent wound infections with complicated germs, which were treated with different antibiotic patterns. Over time the Calciphylaxis therapy was adjusted and complemented with Pamidronat, a biphosphonate agent to reduce decomposition of osseous structures and Renagel (Sevelamer), a phosphate binder.
Initial skin grafts did not show satisfactory results in the beginning of the surgical treatment; hence another attempt with skin grafts in buried chips technique was preceded 6 months after admission.
From the plastic surgical point of view, the complexity of the wounds demanded a combination of consecutive debridements, jet lavages, repetitive VAC therapies and Buried chip skin grafting (both thighs and abdomen). In addition dressings were changed with an ointment pad and silver coating dressing (Atrauman Ag, Paul Hartmann Ges.m.b.H, Wiener Neudorf – Austria) as well as antiseptic solution (Polyhexanid, Lohmann & Rauscher GmbH & Co. KG, Neuwied – Germany) on a daily basis. The patient could be sufficiently mobilized and had no further signs of infection. Daily sea salt baths and physiotherapy sessions improved the patient’s status until he was able to walk alone on the ward.
Finally, pain medication could be reduced drastically and sedoanalgesia was not further necessary for dressing changes. The laboratory on discharge showed a single slight elevated phosphate of 1.88 (0.84-1.48 mmol/l). Calcium was in normal range (2.10-2.60 mmol/l). Creatinine was 1.5 (0.7-1.2). We could successfully discharge the patient into rehabilitation, where his status was further improved by mobilization, physiotherapy and lymphatic drainage massages.