A 44-year-old Polish Caucasian male, farmer, was admitted to hospital due to 3-month history of high-grade fevers, loss of weight, diarrhoea and joint pain. Physical examination revealed swollen and reddened major joints of upper and lower extremities. Laboratory and imaging examinations excluded rheumatoid arthritis, ulceration and neoplasm. Upper endoscopy revealed non-specific inflammation of duodenum. Biopsy stains were not contributory. In view of signs and symptoms a strong suspicion of Crohn’s disease was made and the patient was commenced on prednisone 30 mg per day with a good result.
Several months later diarrhoea relapsed, malaise and loss of weight was noticeable. Laboratory tests were unremarkable (including creatinine level) except for hemoglobin which was below reference value (10 g/dL). Upper endoscopy was repeated and duodenum biopsy samples were collected. Histochemical stains showed periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive particles in mucosa, which led to a diagnosis of Whipple disease. Trimetoprime-sulfametoxasole in dose of 960 mg twice per day was introduced. The patient was recommended to continue the treatment for at least one year. At that time diarrhoea subsided, test for proteinuria was negative and all other renal parameters were within normal limits.
One and half year later the patient was readmitted to the hospital due to lower limbs oedema, weakness and anorexia. Laboratory tests revealed nephritic proteinuria (4-6 g/day), increased concentration of creatinine (1.2 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (115 mm), iron deficiency anemia, decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (52 ml/min) and normal urea (42 mg/dL). A kidney biopsy was performed which showed secondary amyloidosis . Computed tomography scans revealed enlargement of mesenteric and retroperitoneal lymph nodes with high amount of lipids which was suggestive of Whipple disease.
The patient received 1000 mg of cyclophosphamide, 20 mg of prednisone, and trimetoprime-sulfametoxasole. A month later he received second pulse of cyclophosphamide in dose of 400 mg. At this stage, creatinine concentration was 2.7 mg/dL and urea 170 mg/dL. Within next 3 weeks renal parameters markedly deteriorated and renal replacement therapy was started.
Three months later the patient was hospitalized again due to bloody diarrhoea, bilious vomiting, progressive malnutrition, anemia requiring erythrocyte transfusion and intradialysis hypotension. He denied having fever, abdominal pain or rectal tenesmus. On admission the patient was in poor general condition with orthostatic hypotension of 60/0 mm Hg and blood pressure of 80/50 mm Hg in recumbency. Heart rate was 64/min, body temperature was 36.6°C, BMI was 20. Muscular atrophy and malnutrition were easily seen. At this stage the results of basic laboratory tests were as follows: hemoglobin level 8.5 g/dL, hematocrit 25%, red blood cells counts 2.8 × 106/µL, white blood cells counts 5.67 × 103/µL, lymphocyte counts 16%, serum total protein 3.1 g/dL, albumin 1.6 g/dL, CRP 43 mg/dL and ferritin 1839 ng/mL. Additional biochemical tests revealed CD8 deficiency and abnormal CD4/CD8 ratio, decreased concentration of IgA, IgM and IgG, elevated level of IgE, reduced concentration of FT3 and testosterone, normal value of TSH, cortisol, prolactin and fasting insulin. Urine analysis detected proteinuria of 2.9 g/dL.
Upper endoscopy was performed, which showed sever inflammation of post-bulbar duodenum with diffuse fibrinous erosions. Endoscopic examination also revealed fistula 60 cm from incisors. Histologic staining of collected biopsy samples revealed blood extravasation with large number of PAS-positive macrophages . This pathomorphologic picture was suggestive of Whipple disease. Subsequently, gastrointestinal series were performed which did not confirm the presence of fistula.
On the basis of above findings a diagnosis of severe exacerbation of Whipple disease was established. The patient was started on ceftriaxone (1 × 2.0 g per day) and total parenteral nutrition. Within few days of treatment diarrhoea and hypotension subsided. Repeated gastroscopy showed tremendous improvement of lesions. In view of difficult to manage nephritic proteinuria (daily protein depletion of 10-20 g), we decided to perform pharmacological nephrectomy and increase dehydration during dialysis. The patient made excellent progress and was discharged home 2 weeks later. He was recommended to receive doxycyclin in dose of 2 × 100 mg for 12 months. During the therapy daily diuresis decreased from 2000 ml to 350 ml.
At 12-month follow-up, the patient presented in good general condition with normal appetite and without diarrhoea. He gained 5 kg (BMI increased to 21.8) and his exercise tolerance improved so that he could get back to work. Currently, the patient is on renal replacement therapy 3 times a week with the use of arteriovenous fistula. He receives doxycyclin regularly. Control computed tomography scans showed marked reduction of abdominal lymph nodes (maximum 2 cm in diameter) .