A 5-year-old female patient presented to pediatric emergency in June 2021 with chief complaints of nausea and vomiting for the last 6 hours with a history of consumption of sanitizer orally. According to the history given by her parents, she was drinking liquid from a bottle that was being used for sanitization during the ongoing Coronavirus pandemic. It contained 150 ml of liquid sanitizer consisting of Ethyl alcohol I.P 70% v/v with emollients and moisturizer. She had consumed 50-60 ml according to her parents.
The general condition of the patient was fair. The patient was admitted to the pediatrics department and started intravenous fluids. All routine investigations (hemogram, liver function tests, renal function tests, C reactive protein) were sent to our laboratory and were at normal levels. The patient underwent gastric lavage. The ENT department was consulted for hearing loss developed while discharging the patient after 24 hours.
A detailed history was taken, there was no history of hard of hearing before. Neonatal records of the patient were reviewed showing normal neonatal screening tests. Her speech and language milestones were normal. There was no history of tinnitus or vertigo.
Also, there was no history of any medications other than intravenous fluids during admission to the pediatrics department before hearing loss. There was no past history pertaining to any neurological disorder or developmental abnormality. Otoscopy and other ENT examinations were normal.
The patient underwent pure tone audiometry showing a bilateral sudden sensorineural hearing loss. Pure tone averages of 0.5, 1, 2, 4 kHz for the right and left ears were 55 dB and 52 dB respectively .
Speech Discrimination Score (SDS) was 75% and 78% in the right ear and left ear respectively. Speech Reception Threshold (SRT) was 55 dB and 50 dB in the right ear and left ear respectively. Tympanometry showed Type A curve.
The patient was prescribed oral prednisolone of 1mg/kg/day for 10 days and then tapered. The patient was followed up with alternate-day audiogram, hearing improvement was around 15 dB comparing 1st and 11th day audiograms. On the 11th day, Pure tone averages of 0.5, 1, 2, 4 kHz for the right and left ears were 40 dB and 36 dB .
SDS was 85% & 90% and SRT was 40 dB & 35dB in the right and left ear respectively on the 11th day. The patient was prescribed bilateral conventional hearing aids. The patient was followed up after 6 months and 18 months, audiometric results were approximately the same as on 11th day.
However, the major limitation of this case report is that we couldn’t use high frequency for a hearing evaluation. Also, we didn’t evaluate the disability by using any questionnaire.