A 60-year-old white woman, obese (body mass index [BMI] = 31 kg/m2), was referred to a Portuguese tertiary hospital from an African country, with the diagnosis of undifferentiated endometrial carcinoma with endocervical involvement. The diagnosis was established after an endometrial curettage in the context of a single episode of a moderate postmenopausal vaginal bleeding, 4 months before, that did not require transfusion blood support. The patient did not report weight loss or abdominal pain. The hospital where the patient was initially seen was not able to perform endoscopic or imaging techniques, so, according to a health cooperation protocol between Cabo Verde and Portugal, she was referred to Portugal to proceed with the investigation and treatment. In Portugal, the patient's physical observation revealed a good general health status, globous and soft abdomen, external genitals and vagina with moderate atrophy, no blood collected in the vaginal canal, and a cervix flattened and without visible macroscopic lesions. On bimanual palpation, the cervix was increased in consistency, mobile, the uterus was small, and the adnexa were not palpable. On rectal examination, the parametrium was free on both sides. Suspicious adenopathies were not evident.
A pathological review of the slides of the biopsies previously performed confirmed the presence of fragments of the endometrium, myometrium, and endocervical mucosa with infiltration by malignant neoplasia tissue with an inconclusive histological type.
The patient underwent a transvaginal ultrasound that revealed a normal-sized uterus with an endometrial thickness of 5.5 mm and no adnexal findings.
The hysteroscopy showed an endometrium white and smooth compatible with atrophy, without macroscopic lesions, and there was no need to perform additional biopsies.
Based on these contradictory findings, we proceeded with our investigation performing a co-testing of the cervix, which revealed a high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion and human papillomavirus (HPV) 16. Tumor markers (CEA, CA-125, and SCC) were negative. We performed a colposcopy, which was unsatisfactory because of a transformation zone type 3, followed by loop electrosurgical cervical excision procedure (LEEP). The pathological examination of the excised part of the cervix revealed the presence of invasive endocervical adenocarcinoma in the upper segment of the specimen, with positive surgical margins. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging and toraco-abdominal tomography showed a cervical mass measuring 13 × 11 × 7 mm with stromal invasion and no signs of parametrial or lymphatic invasion.
The patient underwent a nerve-sparing radical hysterectomy with dissection of the parametrium to the medial aspect of the internal iliac artery and vein and a vaginal margin of 22 mm (type C of Querleu-Morrow classification), bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic lymphadenectomy. No invasion or adhesions to adjacent organs were grossly apparent.
The pathology observation showed a tumor with 15 × 12.5 × 7 mm, deep stromal invasion of 6 mm, extensive angiolymphatic invasion, and a distance from the invasive carcinoma to the radial (circumferential) margin of less than 4 mm. The parametria, the vaginal cuff margin, and the 28 lymph nodes excised were tumor-free.
The microscopic examination of the tumor described infiltrating tubular structures, lined by cuboidal epithelium exhibiting mild-to-moderate nuclear atypia and containing luminal eosinophilic and hyaline secretion . The proliferation of mesonephric tubules and ducts arranged in lobules was seen adjacent to the primary tumor. The tumor was positive for CK8-18, p16, CEA, and calretinin but negative for CK5/6, CK14, vimentin, CK5-6, inhibin, and both estrogen and progesterone receptors. Based on these findings, the diagnosis of mesonephric adenocarcinoma arising in mesonephric hyperplasia was established, staged at IB1 (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics [FIGO] staging system for cervical cancer 2018).
The patient underwent adjuvant pelvic teletherapy (40 Gray [Gy] of intensity-modulated radiation therapy [IMRT] in 20 fractions of 2 Gy daily), brachytherapy (12 Gy with the dose rate of 2.4Gy/h for a period of 2 days with a 1-week interval) and concurrent chemotherapy (5 weekly treatment sessions of cisplatin at a dose of 35 mg/m
2
) with good tolerance.
The patient maintained clinical surveillance according to national protocols (every 4 months in the 1
st
year, every 6 months in the 2
nd
year and annually from the 3
rd
to the 5
th
year) with annual cytology. No further diagnostic tests were necessary. She has remained disease-free up until the 60-month follow-up visit.