A 3-month-old girl with Fitzpatrick Skin Type V, of African and European ethnicity, was referred to our tertiary hospital for further workup of newly diagnosed LCH. History was obtained from her mother, who reported the appearance of erythematous, crusted papules, and nodules that began on the right upper extremity, 1 month prior to presentation . The eruption subsequently spread to the scalp, face, upper and lower extremities, trunk, inguinal folds, and toe web-spaces.
There was no improvement with emollients or topical hydrocortisone acetate 0.1% cream. At the referring facility, a 3 mm punch biopsy was performed from a lesion on the left upper arm. The biopsy was significant for a lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with abundant eosinophils. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the infiltrate was positive for CD1a, CD68, CD20, CD3, and Langerin (CD207). A diagnosis of LCH was made, and the patient was referred to our tertiary care center to determine the extent of the disease. She underwent laboratory investigations such as a complete blood count and basic metabolic panel, a skeletal survey, and abdominal ultrasound, which were all unremarkable. The pathology slides were requested for a confirmatory reading as well as genetic studies to determine the presence of BRAF-V600E/MEK aberrations. As these somatic mutations are the most common genetic abnormality associated with LCH, and often associated with multisystem involvement, and poor prognosis . A second reading of the biopsy slides was performed at our facility, which confirmed the presence of cells co-expressing CD1a and S100 (a).
However, in deeper sections, a burrow containing the edge of a mite was noted in the stratum corneum, suggesting scabies rather than LCH (b). Further inquiry revealed that the patient’s family members experienced nocturnal pruritus, which they attributed to moving to a new home. We advised that the patient and her family members receive two treatments with permethrin 5% cream, 1 week apart, as well as decontamination of clothing, bedding, and household items. Six weeks later, the patient demonstrated significant improvement, with complete resolution of inflammatory skin lesions. However, she developed new erythematous nodules on the upper extremities. These nodules were erythematous, firm, non-tender, and lacked scales . She was retreated with the same regimen of anti-scabietic therapy; however, these nodules persisted, making them consistent with post-scabietic nodule [, ] lesions that are not reflective of active mite infestation.