A 37-year-old Arabian woman was referred to our endocrinology clinic with 12 months of progressive weight gain of 30 kg, hirsutism, acne, alopecia, lethargy, amenorrhea and marked anxiety. An examination revealed features of Cushing's syndrome with rounded face, buffalo hump, abdominal striae and proximal muscle weakness. Investigations confirmed excess cortisol production. Her 24-hour urinary free cortisol excretion was 1870 nmol/day (normal range 40-450 nmol/day), her midnight salivary cortisol level was 121 nmol/L (normal range < 9 nmol/L) and after a 1 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test her serum cortisol level was 597 nmol/L (expected value < 50 nmol/L). Her serum ACTH level was elevated at 55.8 and 55.1 ng/L on two separate occasions (normal range 7-63.2 ng/L), consistent with a diagnosis of ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her pituitary gland did not reveal the presence of an adenoma.
Localizing the source of excess ACTH secretion was challenging. Inferior petrosal sinus (IPS) sampling was difficult due to a left petrosal sinus anatomical variation. However, it demonstrated a central to peripheral ACTH gradient of less than three, consistent with ectopic ACTH secretion. This diagnosis was supported by failure of cortisol suppression (472 nmol/L) after an 8 mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test. Computed tomography (CT) of her chest, abdomen and pelvis only revealed a well circumscribed 7 mm left inferior basal lung segment lesion. This was reported to most likely represent a benign granuloma or a small lymph node .
Due to the wide range in sensitivity and specificity of the high dose dexamethasone suppression test (59-92% and 67-100%, respectively) and the inability to successfully catheterize her left IPS, further dynamic biochemical tests were performed . A five-hour intravenous dexamethasone test suppressed her serum cortisol level at five hours to less than 70% of basal values and a peripheral corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) test showed a 58% increase in ACTH levels from baseline. Contrary to preceding results, these findings could be interpreted to suggest the presence of a pituitary source for her excess ACTH secretion. However, PET scanning using 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and gallium-68-DOTATOC failed to show increased metabolic activity in the lung lesion or in her pituitary gland.
Serial CT scanning of her chest, abdomen and pelvis over 18 months failed to definitively localize a source of ectopic ACTH production. The well circumscribed 7 mm left inferior basal lung segment lesion was reported as stable in size over this time. A repeat MRI of her pituitary gland once again did not reveal the presence of an adenoma.
Given the failure of biochemical or imaging techniques to localize the site of excess ACTH secretion, medical therapy was initiated with ketoconazole. However, combination treatment with metyrapone was required after eight months due to rising 24-hour urinary free cortisol levels and progressive symptoms of weight gain, lethargy, depression and anxiety. Despite combination medical therapy there was still a progressive rise in 24-hour urinary free cortisol levels . As a result, our patient again developed florid symptoms of weakness, depression and anxiety which limited her daily activities and interpersonal relationships.
Given the failure of medical therapy to control her symptoms, other potential treatment options were discussed with our patient. These included progressing to bilateral adrenalectomy or resection of the lung lesion, which was the only possible anatomical site of ectopic ACTH secretion located so far. Unfortunately, the lung lesion was reported to be lying adjacent to the pericardium which negated a minimally invasive surgical approach to remove it. Despite this our patient still strongly favored proceeding to resection of the lung lesion even though this would require an open procedure. Hence, an open thoracotomy to remove the lung lesion was performed 18 months after her initial presentation.
Histological examination of the resected nodule showed a 9 mm well circumscribed tumor surrounding a bronchus, with features consistent with a carcinoid tumor. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor stained strongly positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin and ACTH. Postoperative recovery was uneventful and perioperative corticosteroid replacement was progressively weaned. Clinically, her symptoms of Cushing's syndrome slowly abated. She achieved a normal 24-hour urinary free cortisol excretion off all treatment four months after surgery. Our patient remains well with no clinical or biochemical evidence of cortisol excess seven months after her surgery.