A 55-year-old man with a left GTVA was referred to our institution for possible surgical treatment. On admission, neurological examinations revealed right hemiparesis (manual muscle testing 4/5) represented by hand clumsiness and gait disturbance, in addition to severe left-sided dysesthesia. These symptoms had progressively worsening over the previous month.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a GTVA at the left V4 portion (maximum diameter of 30 mm) that severely compressed the medulla oblongata contralaterally. The GTVA also demonstrated a heterogenic signal intensity suggesting different stages of thrombus formation inside the aneurysm . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed serpentine intraluminal opacification of the left GTVA, with a normal-appearing distal V4 segment that was pushed up distally, and thus bent toward the internal auditory canal. The PICA was possibly incorporated into the GTVA segment, and thus occluded at its origin. As such, the distal portion of the corresponding PICA was retrogradely opacified through the ipsilateral superior cerebellar artery (SCA) and its pial anastomosis .
After a thorough discussion, trapping of the GTVA and intraluminal thrombectomy, followed by V3-RAG-V4 bypass reconstruction, in conjunction with possible OA-PICA bypass, was indicated .
The surgical procedure was performed with motor evoked potentials, somatosensory evoked potentials, and auditory brainstem response monitoring. The patient placed in a park bench position with the left side up, and his head was slightly rotated contralaterally to subluxate the craniocervical joint so that the left condylar fossa was well exposed for far lateral drilling. An L-shape skin incision was performed, and the skin flap was reflected medially . The suboccipital muscles were dissected and reflected layer-by- layer, and the OA was simultaneously harvested from the exit of the digastric groove to the entry to the skin, in the layer between the splenius capitis and semispinalis capitis muscles . The superior oblique muscle was reflected in the attachment on the C1 lateral mass, and the horizontal segment (V3) of the VA was exposed in the suboccipital triangle . A lateral suboccipital craniotomy was made, followed by drilling of the ipsilateral magnum and condylar fossa, and exposure of the sigmoid sinus. This provided a maximum surgical field through the triangle made by the medulla, the spinal root of the 11th nerve, and the lower cranial nerves (LCNs) complex . The cerebellomedullary cistern was opened along the spinal root of the 11th nerve, and the cerebellar hemisphere was retracted gently. The GTVA was so large that the medulla oblongata and the spinal root of the 11th nerve were deviated medially . A relatively robust perforator was confirmed approximately 20 mm distal from the aneurysm. Therefore, we trapped the aneurysm between the V3 portion and just distal to the dilated segment , and then incised the aneurysmal wall and removed the intraluminal laminated thrombus through the space lateral to the 11th nerve . After thorough intraluminal thrombectomy and decompression, the medial wall adhering to the brainstem was left to avoid injury. Subsequently, the distal V4 was cut distal to the dilated segment and pulled down below the LCNs. The stump of the V4 was made fish mouth-like, and end-to-end anastomosis with RAG was performed through the triangular corridor, lateral to the medially-deviated 11th nerve/medulla, inferior to the LCNs, and medial to the sigmoid sinus . Another end of the RAG was anastomosed to the V3 portion in an end-to-side method, and the V3-RAG-V4 bypass was completed . In the cerebellomedullary fissure, the PICA was found with the origin from the GTVA, which was occluded. However, in preoperative DSA, retrograde blood flow was observed through the pial collateral through the ipsilateral SCA. Therefore, we added an OA-PICA anastomosis in an end-to- side method . Finally, we confirmed good patency of each bypass and disappearance of the aneurysm using indocyanine green video angiography and microvascular Doppler sonography. The actual surgical procedure can be found in online supplementary resources .
Postoperative MRI and DSA demonstrated the disappearance of the aneurysm, improvement of brainstem compression, and good patency of each bypass [ and ]. Slight dysesthesia remained, while all other symptoms improved completely after rehabilitation. The patient was discharged with a modified Rankin Scale score of 1.