A 21-year-old Caucasian man with histologically proven (renal biopsy) Goodpasture's disease since spring 2006 was admitted to our hospital after two generalized tonic-clonic seizures with preceding neuropsychological symptoms of decreased alertness and slowed executive functions. The patient was found to be somnolent, with elevated blood pressure of 180/90 mmHg and a second generalized seizure. Aspiration during the seizure required intubation and mechanical ventilation until the third day after admission.
Regarding his past medical history, the patient was first treated for a rapid progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) in another hospital when Goodpasture's disease was diagnosed histologically through renal biopsy (linear deposition of immunoglobulins along the basement membrane) and detection of anti-GBM antibodies in the plasma. A cyclophosphamide pulse therapy was administered, but renal disease progressed and hemodialysis became necessary and the cyclophosphamide therapy was terminated. One month later, renal replacement therapy was switched to continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. Four months later, the patient was readmitted because of a pulmonary complication with anemia due to tracheal suffusions and microbleeds in combination with a gastrointestinal reflux disease. Cyclophosphamide therapy was reintroduced with monthly administration of 1 g as a bolus, initially. Immunosuppressive treatment yielded good elimination of anti-GBM antibodies. However, a consequent immunosuppressive therapy of at least 6 months duration had never been maintained. In summary, the patient received three therapy cycles before admission to our hospital with the central nervous system symptoms, but neither cyclophosphamide nor steroids had been given on a regular basis.
Routine laboratory tests showed an elevation of creatinine (1107 μmol/l, normal value: 72-127 μmol/l) and serum urea (16.4 mmol/l, normal value: 3.0-9.2 mmol/l), while blood cell count, electrolytes, blood gas analysis and liver enzymes were normal. A chest X-ray was consistent with pneumonia after aspiration. Cranial computed tomography was normal. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple T2- and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)-hyperintense lesions subcortically, predominantly located in the posterior dorsal and lateral white matter as well as in the cerebellar white matter, consistent with cerebral edema . The lesions did not enhance contrast media nor did they match a pattern of ischemic infarctions. The time-of-flight angiography did not detect vasculitic stenosis.
After extubation, the patient presented a mild psycho-syndrome with cognitive slowing and deficits in mnestic function. Apart from a positive Babinski sign on the left, his neurological state was normal. Due to the initial presentation with pneumonia, high-dose steroid therapy was not administered. Since anti-GBM antibodies were elevated (200 U/mL, normal value: <10 U/mL), plasmapheresis was started, alternating with continuous veno-venous hemofiltration. During this therapy, the psycho-syndrome resolved and the MR-morphological alterations almost diminished in parallel . Anti-GBM antibodies scaled down to 21 U/mL after five cycles of plasmapheresis initiated at day 6 (substitution of 4 litre albumin at each session) and one pulse of 1 g cyclophosphamide at day 13 . Antinuclear antibodies were negative at all times. The patient was dismissed in a neurologically and neuropsychologically healthy condition under continued oral cyclophosphamide therapy.