A 70-year-old asymptomatic man underwent a colonoscopy after a positive fecal immunochemical test that was performed within the national colorectal cancer (CRC) screening program. The patients’ medical history consisted of a malignant teratoma with intermediate differentiation of the right testis and a positive lymphography at the age of 31 years. He was treated with hemicastration and external beam radiotherapy (8 megavolt (MV) photons, opposed fields, one field per day) on both lungs (20 Gray (Gy)), all retroperitoneal lymph nodes (40 Gy in 24 fractions) and a surdosage on para-aortic lymph nodes (10 Gy in 5 fractions). Nine months after diagnosis, jugular lymph node and lung metastases were detected and treated with additional chemotherapy (vincristine and actinomycin, followed by vinblastine injections, which were continued for 2 years). In addition, the patient suffered from two myocardial infarctions at the age of 51. The patient was a non-smoker, drank 5 units of alcohol per week and his body mass index (BMI) was 26.1.
At colonoscopy, more than 30 adenomatous polyps with a maximum size up to 20 mm were detected, mostly located in the right colon . Several of these polyps were removed and histopathology demonstrated tubular and tubulovillous adenomas with low-grade and high-grade dysplasia. As these large flat colonic polyps were numerous and difficult to detect and delineate, surveillance was considered suboptimal and a subtotal colectomy with ileosigmoidal anastomosis was advised. However, as the patient declined surgery, continuous colonoscopy surveillance is scheduled.
As polyposis patients also have an increased risk for duodenal polyps and cancer, a screening gastro-duodenoscopy was performed. No duodenal polyps were identified. However, an erosive pangastritis was seen with a poorly circumscribed, slightly elevated erythematous region of approximately 4 cm, located in the greater curvature of the antrum. This region was biopsied and histopathology demonstrated adenomatous tissue with high-grade dysplasia. Endoscopic submucosal dissection of the gastric lesion was performed, and histopathology demonstrated a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with invasion into the muscularis mucosae (pT1m3NxMx) in the background of low- and high-grade dysplasia. No additional oncologic treatment was indicated as this T1 lesion was radically resected. During this procedure, a second irregularly shaped and slightly elevated lesion of 3 mm was detected in the stomach and removed, which appeared an adenoma with low-grade dysplasia.
For further analysis of the intestinal polyposis, the patient was referred to a clinical geneticist. His father and father’s brother were both diagnosed with colorectal cancer at the age of 65 and 86 years, respectively. No germline mutation was detected in the CDH1, APC or MYH genes and the gastric adenocarcinoma was microsatellite stable with normal expression of the mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2). A multigene custom panel containing polyposis-associated genes did not reveal any additional germline mutations in ACVRL1, AXIN2, BMPR1A, ENG, EPCAM, GREM1, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, NTHL1, PMS2, POLD1, POLE, PTEN, SMAD4, STK11, TSC1 and TSC2 (SeqCap Ez choice, Nimblegen).