A 52-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 10-year history of focal seizures, progressive cognitive decline and motor impairment. A written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Neurological examination revealed ataxic gait, bilateral telekinetic and postural tremor, brisk reflexes, left extensor plantar response and hypoesthesia to the right side of body. Cranial and peripheral nerves were intact, and no systemic manifestations were detectable. Laboratory results were not suggestive of any inflammatory or infectious disease. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis indicated high levels of proteins and presence of oligoclonal bands. Chest imaging, including a high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT), resulted completely normal during previous years. Brain 3T-magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a leukoencephalopathy with multifocal nodular lesions hyperintense on T2/fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) weighted images involving basal ganglia, periventricular and deep white matter (A,B). To better understand the nature of these nodules, single-voxel 1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS), contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET)/3T-MRI were performed. The parenchymal multifocal lesions exhibited slight N-acetyl-aspartate/creatine reduction without abnormal peaks on 1H-MRS (C,D), enhancement after the administration of contrast agent (iopromide) on CT (E) and hypermetabolism on 18F-FDG-PET/3T-MRI (F). Furthermore, no leptomeningeal enhancement was detected. All these findings excluded primary neoplasms, metastasis, neurotuberculosis, neurocysticercosis and brain abscess, strongly suggesting a diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis . Therefore, a whole-body 18F-FDG-PET/CT was performed in order to identify subclinical extraneural sarcoidosis localizations . Then, a hypermetabolic peribronchovascular nodule of the left lung upper lobe was found (A). Whole-body 18F-FDG-PET/CT was performed 65 minutes after the injection of 370 MBq of 18F-FDG by using three minutes/bed 2D scan. The patient was fasted for six hours. Brain 18F-FDG-PET/3T-MRI was acquired 45 minutes after 185 MBq of 18F-FDG injection. The patient was placed in a quiet room 20 minutes before injection and instructed to not to speak and read. The 10 minutes PET scan of the brain was corrected for movement by using a contemporary blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) sequence. Given that the patient has always refused brain sampling, pulmonary biopsy (B,C) documented the presence of systemic sarcoidosis, supporting a diagnosis of probable neurosarcoidosis according to established diagnostic criteria .
Hence, the patient was promptly treated with prednisone 75 mg/day. Because of the lack of response after three months, methotrexate 12.5 mg/week was added, reducing prednisone’s posology at 50 mg/day. At three months follow-up, his motor impairment improved. Furthermore, seizures were controlled with carbamazepine 800 mg/day and phenobarbital 50 mg/day.