The patient was an 18-month-old boy, 8.4 kg (2.4 SD lower than peers), who presented with paroxysmal abdominal pain with low-grade fever and diarrhea for 9 days. Physical examination revealed that the patient had a slightly distended abdomen with scattered pressure pain throughout the abdomen, especially in the right lower abdomen. It has a mass with a diameter of 6 cm located in his lower right abdomen. By inquiring about the family medical history, it was known that the grandfather of the patient died due to TB one year ago, and the patient lived with his grandfather. Following, comprehensive laboratory tests had been conducted which included the following index: white blood cell count 18.15 (×10^9/L) ↑, hemoglobin 76 (g/L) ↓, lymphocyte percentage 30.1 (%) ↓, C-reactive protein 30.89 (mg/L) ↑; IL-8 55.84 (pg/mL) ↑; HIV negative; urine routine: red blood cells 48 (pcs/µL) ↑, white blood cells 724 (pcs/µL) ↑, Pus cell mass 39(pcs/µL) ↑; stool routine: leukocytes 3–6(pcs/HP) ↑, positive occult blood test. Abdominal ultrasound suggested a fluid-containing lesion in the right lower abdomen with a viscous composition. Chest X-ray: No obvious abnormality; abdominal X-ray suggested scattered inflation of the small intestine, mainly in the left abdomen. Abdominal CT indicated abnormal images of the right lower abdomen and pelvis; the intestinal wall was observed more thickened with enhancement. There was the possibility of infectious lesions and abscess formation. The admission diagnosis was considered a peri appendiceal abscess. After admission, the patient was given suspended erythrocytes 0.25U to correct anemia. Symptomatic treatment had been done by employing ceftizoxime and metronidazole for anti-infection and correction of water-electrolyte disturbance, respectively. On day 7 after admission, the patient showed a “fecal-like substance” in his urine. Laboratory tests included: urine routine: bilirubin 17(µmol/L) ↑, protein 0.15(g/L) ↑, erythrocytes 241(g/µL) ↑, leukocytes 709(g/µL) ↑. The urine culture was negative; Gram-positive cocci were found on the urine smear; the urine smear did not show acid-fast bacilli. On day 10, the patient had redness and swelling in the umbilicus with visible secretions. Ultrasound images of the abdomen and umbilicus showed that mucus composition was observed in the right abdomen, with slow intestinal peristalsis. The partial intestinal dilatation was still visible on the right side of the abdomen; a fluid-containing inflammatory lesion with mucous composition can be seen in the umbilicus, which extended deeper and was seen to be connected to an abscess in the abdominal cavity. On day 14, the patient’s umbilicus was ruptured with visible purulent secretions, and there were still many fecal-like substances in the urine. Retrograde urographic findings showed that the contrast agent entered the intestinal cavity from the bladder, suggesting the bladder was connected to the intestine, furthermore, ureteral reflux was seen on the left side of the bladder.
Abdominal CECT: The upper arrow indicates suspicious lesions of the bowel and the lower arrow indicates small mesangial nodules. Umbilical ultrasound: a liquid inflammatory lesion in the umbilical cord, with a thick component, the lesion extends deeply, and it can be seen to communicate with the intra-abdominal abscess. Urography: Bladder filling and round-like translucent shadows were observed; The upper arrow indicates contrast is seen in the right abdominal part of the bowel tube, indicating that the bladder may communicate with the intestine; The lower arrow indicates signs of bladder-left ureteral reflux.
On the 15th day of hospitalization, the patient underwent surgical intervention . Under anesthesia, cystoscopy revealed the presence of a fistula at the base of the bladder, prompting further exploration using laparoscopy. Extensive intra-abdominal adhesions were encountered, posing challenges to the surgical dissection, necessitating conversion to open surgery. In the lower right abdomen, a pelvic abscess and miliary granulations were observed. The abscess cavity was meticulously debrided, uncovering an ileal perforation with an associated bladder fistula. To establish bladder diversion, an inflatable catheter was placed in the anterior bladder wall, followed by repair of the bladder defect. Following adhesiolysis, necrotic and partially stenotic segments of the distal ileum were identified, warranting the performance of an ileostomy. Resection of the non-viable bowel segments was performed, and the distal ileum was securely anastomosed. Additionally, an appendectomy was carried out. Thorough irrigation of the abdominal cavity was performed, and a drainage tube was placed for effective drainage. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for postoperative management.
Bladder wall necrosis is seen, and arrows indicate caseous tissue in the bladder. The arrow indicates the perforation of the ileum. Diffuse distribution of white miliary-like particles on the serous membrane is visible.
Based on the above findings, it was suggested that the possibility of abdominal tuberculosis in this patient. Thus, further tests were performed including tuberculosis interferon test, gastric fluid and sputum antacid bacillus smear, gastric fluid and sputum tuberculosis culture, and sputum x-pert all with positive results. Subsequently, pathological findings confirmed abdominal tuberculosis infection by H&E stain . The patient was then transferred to the infection unit to receive continuous anti-tuberculosis (isoniazid 100 mg qd, rifampicin 125 mg qd, linezolid 85 mg tid), intravenous nutrition, and other symptomatic treatments, the patient’s condition was stabilized, and he was successfully discharged from the hospital on the 11th-day post-anti-tuberculosis treatment.
Image of small nodules of the ileal mucosa. Image of a granuloma of the mucosa (100-fold). Image of a granuloma of the mucosa (200-fold).
We explained the very rare pathophysiology of intestinal tuberculosis with intestinal perforation complicated by umbilical intestinal fistula and bladder ileal fistula to the patient’s guardian and obtained informed consent for the case to be published in a medical journal.