A 49-year-old male was transferred to our hospital for treatment of COVID-19 infection. The patient had been diagnosed with COVID-19 by PCR test (Roche Cobas 6800 SARS-CoV-2 test, Roche Molecular Systems, Branchburg, NJ) for a fever that persisted for 4 days and then was hospitalized for new-onset dyspnoea, and the finding of pneumonia by chest X-ray and pericardial and pleural effusions by CT. He needed oxygen administration by nasal cannula. A blood test revealed an elevated CPR of 7.51 mg/dL [reference range (RR): <0.14 mg/dL]. He was treated with dexamethasone 6.6 mg, remdesivir 200 mg, tocilizumab 640 mg, and heparin 1 day before being transferred to our hospital. However, the day after transfer, the patient complained of orthopnoea and needed use of a reservoir mask to maintain oxygen saturation. A chest X-ray revealed congestion of the lungs and the C-reactive protein (CRP) worsened to 10.5 mg/dL. His systolic blood pressure eventually dropped below 100 mmHg, and norepinephrine was required to maintain the blood pressure (Timeline).
Shortly after arrival at our emergency department, the patient went into circulatory collapse and subsequent cardiac arrest with pulseless electrical activity. Point-of-care echocardiography showed cardiac tamponade with a moderate amount (1.5–2.0 cm) of pericardial effusion . Cardiopulmonary resuscitation failed to achieve return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC), but pericardiocentesis did . Serosanguinous fluid of 350 mL was drained by pericardiocentesis. However, because his haemodynamic and respiratory status remained severely unstable, he was put on veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (V-A ECMO) and mechanical ventilation.
Physical examination demonstrated bilateral coarse crackles, no heart murmur, and no leg oedema.
Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia, low voltage in limb leads, and ST elevation in all leads except aVR . Blood tests showed elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (3132 ng/L; RR: <70 ng/L) and N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide (16 860 pg/mL; RR: <125 pg/mL). Blood and pericardial effusion test results are shown in .
Echocardiography revealed an increased left ventricle (LV) wall thickness (21 mm) in all segments, diffused hypokinetic LV wall motion [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) = 32% by modified Simpson method] and decreased right ventricle (RV) function [fractional area change (FAC) = 11%] ( and , and see , ).
For drug therapy, a steroid pulse of 500 mg of methylprednisolone was used on the day of admission to our hospital. Starting the next day, the patient received treatment with intravenous prednisolone of 80 mg/day for 7 days and then at 40 mg/day for 7 days. After these 15 days of intravenous administration, prednisolone was switched to oral form, initial dose 40 mg/day, and decreased by 5 mg/day, every 2 weeks for a total of 16 weeks. In addition to the steroid pulse, heparin was continued until Day 16, and a single dose of casirivimab/imdevimab was given on Day 8. Persistent anuria after admission necessitated renal replacement therapy (RRT) with continuous haemodiafiltration.
Serial transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated gradual improvement of LV systolic function (LVEF = 45%), LV wall thickness, RV function (FAC = 26%), and reduction of pericardial fluid ( and , and see , ). After 3 days, V-A ECMO was discontinued, and the patient was extubated 4 days later. Serum CRP was near normal on Day 18 (0.31 mg/dL). Exacerbation of pneumonia was not observed after admission. Renal replacement therapy was switched to haemodialysis on Day 16 and discontinued on Day 40. The patient was discharged on Day 46 of onset of symptoms with normal LVEF according to echocardiographic assessment. One year after hospital discharge, no cardiovascular events have been observed.
Cardiac magnetic resonance was performed on Day 19 [cine MRI and T2-WI short-tau inversion recovery black blood (T2-WI STIR BB)], Day 53 (cine MRI, T2-WI STIR, and native T1 mapping), and Day 145 [cine MRI, T2-WI STIR, native T1 mapping, late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), and extracellular volume (ECV)] to evaluate the myocardium. Contrast agent MRI was not used for the first two MRI because of renal impairment. T2-WI SITR BB image demonstrated myocardial oedema on Day 19 and improvement after 34 days. Native T1 value was still high on Day 53 but recovered to normal range on Day 145. Subepicardial LGE was observed inferoseptally in the LV . The ECV mapping displayed mildly raised values but was difficult to interpret in isolation. According to the cine MRI, LVEF was 60% on Day 145. These findings met the Lake Louise Criteria on MRI for diagnosis of myocarditis.
Chest CT was performed on Days 4, 7, and 18. Amount of pericardial inflammatory adipose tissue was highest, and its CT value was lowest 4 days before admission to our hospital .