In this case report, we describe the case of a 46 year old man, with no significant personal, nor familial history, who consulted for persistent abdominal pain. Initial ultrasound and CT-scan showed no apparent lesion. During the follow up, an abdominal MRI and CT-scan were performed after 4 years of symptomatology and showed a 10 cm-heterogeneous splenic mass, which was strongly hypermetabolic on the PET-scan (SUVmax = 16.9) .
A diagnostic splenectomy was collegially decided due to the high probability of a neoplastic etiology.
The splenectomy specimen weighted 588 g and measured 15 × 11 × 9 cm. Dissection revealed a unique peri-hilar 12 cm tumour, which was multilobulated, well delimited and of yellowish appearance. Splenic capsule was preserved and the excision was complete .
Microscopically, the tumour presented a uniform pseudo-alveolar architecture, made of closely packed-nests of tumour cells and separated by fibrous and highly vascularised septa. The nest centers showed discohesive cells, explaining the pseudo-alveolar pattern. Tumour cells were large, with ovoid nuclei containing a vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleoli. Tumour cell cytoplasms were large, eosinophilic and granulous .
PAS-diastase coloration revealed agglomerated rod-like intracytoplasmic structures .
Rare signs of vascular invasion were observed but excision was complete.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a diffuse nuclear staining of tumour cells with TFE3 antibody . Of note, we observed a heterogeneous staining of tumour cells with Desmin and Smooth-muscle Actin (SMA) . Other muscle markers such as Caldesmon (smooth muscle), Myogenin (striated muscle) or MyoD1 (myoblastic marker) were all negative (not shown). Interestingly, vascular markers CD31 , CD34 and ERG highlighted a dense capillar network between tumour nests, without staining of tumour cells, which ruled out an endothelial origin such as angiosarcoma or littoral cell angioma. Other markers, such as PS100, MelanA, HMB45, SOX10, Chromogranin, Synaptophysin, CD56, PAX8 and a large panel of cytokeratins (CK7, CK20, panCK, MNF116), were all negative (not shown), eliminating melanoma, PEComa and carcinoma (notably renal cell carcinoma). Proliferation index reflected by Ki67 staining was low and estimated at 10% (not shown).
The combination of morphological analysis and immunohistochemical profile was suggestive of ASPS. However, due to the unusual splenic localization, a molecular confirmation by NGS-targeted LD-RT-PCR was performed, allowing the detection of ASPSCR1 Exon 7::TFE3 Exon 6 fusion transcript. TFE3 rearrangement was also confirmed by FISH, which showed a split signal in the majority of tumour cells .
Of note, anti-PDL1 staining showed a weak to moderate diffuse staining (TPS score > 90% and CPS at 95) .
Whole body extension check-up, comprising PET-CT and cerebral MRI, were negative and did not show any sign of extra-splenic secondary lesions.