A 15-year-old girl was admitted to the Department of Paediatric Haematology, Oncology and Transplantology, Medical University of Lublin, Poland, because of petechiae and bruising on the lower extremities and a pale complexion. There were no comorbidities, such as obesity, diabetes, or bronchial asthma as well as no significant findings in the patient’s family history. The child was diagnosed with common B-cell precursor ALL, and chemotherapy was started in August 2015, according to the ALL IC-BFM 2009 protocol (ALL Intercontinental-BFM 2009). She was classified as being in the intermediate risk group (age > 6 years, white blood cells < 20,000/μl; a good response to steroids: on day 8 blast count in peripheral blood < 1000/μl; myelogram on day 15: 5% blasts; and minimal residual disease (MRD): > 0.1 < 10%). No central nervous system involvement was observed. According to the ALL IC-BFM 2009 protocol, GTG band staining and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) tests were performed with the use of molecular probes BCR/ABL1, KMT2A and ETV6/RUNX1 (Vysis, Abbot Molecular, Illinois, USA) at the time of diagnosis. The arrangement of signals from the probes used indicated the lack of chromosomal aberrations . The induction phase of therapy was complicated by post-steroid diabetes and intestinal perforation (a stoma was necessary). This caused a month-long break in chemotherapy. Before continuation of the therapy, the myelogram presented 2% blasts. The consolidation and reinduction phases of therapy were tolerated well enough. Intensive chemotherapy was completed in June 2016. Maintenance treatment was started in July 2016. The surgery to close the stoma was performed at the same time.
The patient was readmitted to the clinic in August 2016 due to numerous petechiae, bruising and thrombocytopenia. The bone marrow aspirate smear revealed very early relapse of ALL. Treatment was initiated, according to the IntReALL 2010 HR protocol. Genetic tests were performed again using classical cytogenetics and FISH, and the presence of chromosomal aberrations was again not found, with the exception of an additional signal from chromosome 22 . The HIA treatment course applied in weeks 1–4 included dexamethasone, vincristine, methotrexate, PEG-asparaginase, cytarabine, and intrathecal methotrexate. The HIA treatment was complicated by pancreatitis and bradycardia. The myelogram presented 75% blasts on day 28. The patient received the HIB treatment course (including dexamethasone, clofarabine, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, intrathecal methotrexate, cytarabine, and prednisolone), but the treatment was unsuccessful. The patient died due to disease progression. Additional analyses of the patient’s genetic material are a routine procedure used in patients with the short survival in whom a very aggressive disease course and resistance to treatment were observed. Following the data discussing cases of the patients with a similar course of the disease, we used probes for the TCF3-HLF. Retrospective genetic examinations included additional genetic testing (FISH and microarray) of material collected at the time of diagnosis, which showed the presence of the TCF3-HLF (Cytocell, Cytocell Ltd., Oxford Gene Technology, Cambridge, United Kingdom) fusion in 89% of blasts . Additionally, tests were performed using a CytoScan HD microarray (Applied Biosystems, part of Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) for copy number variation (CNV) analysis, which showed additional changes in the form of a deletion of a fragment of the long arm of chromosome 13 (13q12.2-q21.1) containing the RB1 gene, intragenic deletions within the PAX5 (exons 1–6) gene and NOTCH1 intragenic duplication (exons 3–34). The 13q, PAX5, and NOTCH1 alterations and the TCF3-HLF fusion were present in the same cell clones. The absence of aberrations of 13q in the karyotype analysis indicates that only cells with a normal karyotype have grown in the cell culture. Deletion of 13q was confirmed in interphase cells by FISH (CCP13/CCP21 FISH Probe Kit, CytoTest). Blasts with 13q deletion accounted for 86.4% of the myelogram at initial treatment. Despite molecular studies that revealed a partial 13q deletion, this aberration was not found in the karyotype analysis . Unfortunately, the number of protected samples from the patient was not enough for further tests, including RT-PCR.
Additionally, all the tests mentioned above (GTG band staining, FISH, and microarray) were performed on samples from relapse. The results obtained in samples from relapse suggest the clonal evolution of cancer cells because no 13q deletion was found, while the myelogram presented 77% blasts with the TCF3-HLF fusion . Moreover, the microarray test revealed deletion of the CDKN2A and CDKN2B genes .
The detected translocation t(17;19) is included in the new treatment protocol (AIEOP BFM ALL 2017) as qualifying the patient for the high risk group and for experimental therapy.