The proband is a 19-year-old male born from non-consanguineous parents of Caucasian origin, after a normal pregnancy at 40 weeks of gestation with normal birth measurements (weight 4150 kg, length 52 cm, and cranial circumference 36 cm). Both parents and the 18- year-old brother are healthy .
Nystagmus, convergent strabismus, and mild lower spasticity appeared at 7 months of age as the first symptoms of the disease, and subsequently, developmental psychomotor regression was observed. In particular, the child at 14 months lost the ability to walk alone, presenting ataxic signs, and at 16 months chorea of the arms and dystonia of the trunk appeared.
We performed the first MRI showing the typical pattern of Leigh Syndrome with the presence of bilaterally hyperintense signals in the basal ganglia and thalami and of periventricular white matter ; proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) showed a lactate peak at 1.33 ppm.
The metabolic pattern was characterized by increased levels of plasma lactate, alanine, and valine and reduced levels of citrulline; an increase in 3 methylglutaconic acid was observed in urinary organic acids. Electroencephalogram (EEG) did not show epileptic discharges. A muscle biopsy performed at 18 months showed signs of a mild myopathic process with non-specific abnormalities of oxidative reactions. Respiratory chain activities revealed a slight reduction of complexes II and III.
At 26 months the child presented a dyskinetic tetraparesis associated with hyposthenia of the trunk and limbs. No cardiac, endocrine, gastrointestinal nor renal involvement was observed. The Griffiths scale, which examines the cognitive profile, showed a moderate intellectual disability. The clinical condition remained stable up to 9 years of life, when he presented drug resistance and generalized tonic clonic and myoclonic seizures. Spastic tetraparesis worsened and neurological changes, such as dysarthria/dysphagia, loss of eye contact, and axial and limb dystonia were occurring during acute viral infections. Cognitive deterioration was progressively evident in association with a regression of language skills.
In order to treat the severe spasticity and associated dystonia, an intratecal baclofen pump was implanted, and at 10 years the child was continuously fed by parenteral gastrostomy (PEG). During this period, he also presented constant rhythmic jerky movements of the right arm and of the soft palate, which were indicative of palatal myoclonus status. EEG recording over time showed recurrent focal seizures clinically associated with motor manifestations and during palatal myoclonus, suggesting an ongoing non-convulsive status epilepticus, treated with carbamazepine and benzodiazepine in combination with phenytoin, already administered. No adverse effects were observed, and remission of the seizures was completely obtained; subsequently, phenytoin was gradually reduced and stopped.
At 11 years and 8 months of age, the spastic tetraparesis associated with dystonic movement disorders was complicated by severe scoliosis. The boy also presented a severe intellectual disability, an epileptic encephalopathy, and cerebral visual impairment. Bilateral optic atrophy and sensorineuronal deafness were discovered at 13 years: flash visual evoked potential was not identifiable, whereas brainstem acoustic evoked potential was altered with pons and mesencephalon wave involvement. At around 12 years of age, a second MRI was performed, which showed marked progression of basal ganglia involvement with enlargement of lateral and third ventricles, evident signs of global cerebral atrophy . A mild double peak of lactate was evident on 1H MRS. A new analysis of muscle tissue and oxidative-phosphorylation enzymes was performed at the age of 13 years, and despite the severe clinical picture, only mild changes in the reduction of complexes II and III were confirmed. Over the course of the disease, limb spasticity with stable elbow and knee contractures were evident, but dystonic movements diminished, and no spontaneous movements were visible. Cardiac and renal function remained unchanged. Constipation was observed.
A tracheostomy was performed at 17 years when he had a bronchopneumonic infection, and his respiratory condition worsened. At 19 years, the patient showed a persistent vegetative state with partial symptomatic drug-resistant epilepsy, pendular nystagmus as seen in blind patients, spastic tetraparesis with hip dislocation, valgus pronatus deformation of the feet, severe scoliosis, and stable flexion of the right arms.
WES analysis was performed on the proband and the asymptomatic father’s and mother’s DNA. After filtering criteria (described in detail in Additional file ) were applied, only four missense mutations were left. None of the missense variants were exclusive of the affected individual except one in the ECHS1 gene: the c.713C > T/p.Ala238Val mutation was present in the proband in an apparent homozygous state, whereas the father was found to be heterozygous. This mutation, present in the ExAC Browser (/; MAF = 0.000016), is predictably damaging when examined in silico using Polyphen2 and has already been reported in the compound heterozygous form in a family presenting with LS .
Manual inspection of bam files by Integrative Genome Viewer (IGV) as well as Sanger sequencing of the flanking region revealed the lack of this mutation in the mother . To further investigate the chromosomal region containing ECHS1, we used CeQer, a software program able to detect copy number variation from exome data. We detected a deletion in an extended region of chromosome 10 (from 135,120,573 to 135,187,238) involving five genes: ZNF511, CALY, PRAP1, FUOM, and ECHS1. This deletion was present in the proband and in his mother but not in the father (Additional file : Figure S1).
The array CGH identified in the proband a microdeletion of at least 35 kb in 10q26.3 (Additional file : Figure S2). This deletion was also detected in the mother. The maternal grandmother was negative; therefore, it is likely that this deletion was inherited from the grandfather (sample not available). In order to confirm whether the deletion led to a loss of copy number of the five included genes, a real-time PCR assay was performed. The results showed that the patient and his mother had a decreased copy number in all genes compared with that of the father . The Additional file describes all the methods used in this paper and the additional file figures not shown in the text.