Approval and written informed consent for publication of this report were obtained from the patient.
A 76-year-old female (height, 155 cm; weight, 59.6 kg) had chronic heart failure with severe mitral regurgitation (MR), mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR), and chronical atrial fibrillation. Her comorbidities included hypertension and old cerebral infarction at the right medulla oblongata. A preoperative transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 62% and no left ventricular wall asynergy. Mitral valve repair, tricuspid annuloplasty, maze procedure, and left atrial appendage closure were scheduled. The surgical risk calculated by the Society of Thoracic Surgeons score (STS score) was 2.23% and that calculated by the European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation (EURO score) was 2.52%.
On arrival at the operating room, we inserted an arterial line into the right radial artery to monitor hemodynamics. And we also monitored bilateral regional cerebral oxygen saturation (rSO2) by using INVOSTM and the bispectal index (BIS) value to assess the patient’s depth of sedation. Anesthesia was induced using remimazolam at 6 mg/kg/h, remifentanil at 0.25 μg/kg/min, and rocuronium at 0.85 mg/kg. The patient did not complain of pain at the infusion site during administration of remimazolam. Remimazolam was adjusted by 1 mg/kg/h after loss of consciousness (LoC). The time from administration of remimazolam to LoC was 130 s. We inserted central venous and pulmonary artery catheters from the right internal jugular vein as well as a probe for monitoring transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) after intubation. During induction, the patient’s mean blood pressure (BP) decreased by more than 50%, from 137 to 54 mmHg, and 5 mg of ephedrine was administered three times to maintain mean BP over 65 mmHg. rSO2 was decreased within 10% from the baseline value regardless of hypotension during induction. The BIS value ranged from 31 to 42 in the period of induction . Remimazolam was adjusted by 0.6–1.0 mg/kg/h according to the BIS value until the end of the surgery, and the depth of sedation was stable when the BIS value ranged from 30 to 50, even in the period of undergoing CPB. We did not induce hypothermia, and body temperature was maintained at 35–36 °C during CPB.
Surgical procedures were completed successfully. While left ventricular function was preserved after CPB, oxygenation status deteriorated after CPB. PaO2/FiO2 ratio (P/F ratio) decreased to 104 mmHg from 250 mmHg before CPB. Although we repeated sputum suction and recruitment maneuvers, P/F ratio was not improved (136 mmHg) at discharge from the operating room. TEE showed trivial MR remaining after mitral valve repair and systolic function was preserved. At the end of the surgery, the intraoperative dose of fentanyl was 17 μg/kg. Intraoperative infusion volume was 1300 ml and we transfused 280 ml of red blood cells and 720 ml of fresh frozen plasma. Bleeding volume was 360 ml, and water balance was + 1570 ml in total. Total operation time was 365 min, total anesthesia time was 474 min, and CPB time was 252 min.
We transferred the patient from the operating room to the intensive care unit (ICU). Administration of remimazolam was stopped after arriving at the ICU. A chest X-ray and ultrasonography showed mild pleural effusion and atelectasis in the right lung field. We did not antagonize remimazolam with flumazenil because of the poor oxygenation. Dexmedetomidine was administered until her oxygenation improved sufficiently for extubation. The patient showed a nodding response about 90 min after arriving at the ICU. The tracheal tube was removed 220 min later when the P/F ratio was 248 mmHg. We confirmed that there was no intraoperative awareness or recall and that there were no serious complications associated with the use of remimazolam throughout the perioperative period. The patient was moved to the general ward on postoperative day (POD) 1. The patient had disorientation and delirium on POD 6, but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no new lesion of cerebral infarction. The patient showed a motor and sensory disorder in her left lower limb on POD 10 and she was diagnosed with right cerebral infarction. She was discharged on POD 41 and transferred to another hospital to continue rehabilitation.