A 73-year-old White male was referred to our institution for the treatment of metastatic malignant acrospiroma. He initially presented in 2009 with a nodular lesion on the dorsal aspect of the left great toe. An excisional biopsy of the lesion showed subcutaneous tissue containing multilobular and ill-defined tumor. The pathologic diagnosis was consistent with acrospiroma; margins were involved . Wide surgical excision was subsequently performed to clear the margins and the patient was followed by clinical surveillance. Six months later, the patient developed local recurrence and the pathological findings were similar to the original biopsy. At this time, he was treated with radiation therapy (received 40 Gray) followed by clinical surveillance again.
Three years later, he presented with left groin mass. A positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan showed uptake in the left inguinal lymph nodes and multiple hepatic lesions. A biopsy from the hepatic lesion was consistent with metastatic acrospiroma . His laboratory studies were within normal limits, except for an elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 206.1 ng/mL (normal is less than 5.1 ng/mL). Patient was subsequently started on systemic chemotherapy. He was initially treated with capecitabine. After 2 months of therapy, however, disease progressed and treatment was discontinued. The second line of chemotherapy utilized carboplatin. He completed a total of 6 cycles on this combination until disease progression. On progression, he was referred to our institution for consideration of experimental therapy. Tissue from hepatic metastasis was sent for genomic profiling using next generation sequencing Knight diagnostic gene panel. Unfortunately, no actionable genomic alterations were identified. Genes tested included EGFR, ALK, BRAF, JAK2, NOTCH1, NRAS, or PTEN , and the sequencing coverage ranged from 92.4 to 100%. Our patient was then placed on a phase I trial utilizing a PI3 kinase AkT mTOR inhibitor and ultimately progressed and succumbed to his disease.