We present a case of a 33-year-old Caucasian woman diagnosed 31 years ago with a plexiform-type ameloblastoma of the left mandible and treated by surgical resection (R0). Relapse was diagnosed 11 years after surgery. The patient had multiple (> 30) bilateral lung metastases. The diagnosis of ameloblastoma lung metastasis was confirmed by thoracotomy biopsy. Clinically, the patient was asymptomatic with a World Health Organization score of 0. Partial response (PR) to standard systemic chemotherapy has been reported previously . However, several patients also have an indolent evolution of their disease and do not benefit from any specific active treatment. Given the absence of clinical symptoms and the patient’s reluctance to receive treatment with possible adverse effects, systemic chemotherapy was not prescribed. However, close surveillance was initiated. The iterative thoracic computed tomographic (CT) scans showed a very gradual increase in size of some of the pulmonary lesions, but with no new lesion identified.
Fourteen years after her diagnosis of metastasis, the patient experienced dyspnea. Functional respiratory exploration (FRE) identified a restrictive syndrome (forced vital capacity at 74% of the theoretical value) and an obstructive syndrome (with 63% expired flows of the theoretical value).
Rebiopsy of the upper lung lobe by thoracoscopy confirmed the pulmonary metastasis of the ameloblastoma, without ameloblastic carcinomatous transformation. Because the patient remained clinically stable, medical follow-up was continued.
Three years ago, the patient’s effort dyspnea worsened, and thoracic CT scans showed a slow and homogeneous tumor progression with increases in the number and size of the bilateral pulmonary nodules. FREs showed an increased ventilatory restriction (forced vital capacity at 62% of the theoretical value) and bronchial obstruction (expired flows at 48% of the theoretical value).
The patient’s tumor sample was found to be BRAF V600E mutated without other mutation (KRAS, EGFR [epidermal growth factor receptor], ALK, c-Kit). The patient was included in the AcSé clinical trial on 6 December 2016 after her informed consent was obtained. Treatment with vemurafenib was started.
Initially, vemurafenib was administered at a dose of 960 mg twice daily. During the initial 12 months of treatment, following the occurrence of grade 1–2 arthralgia, nausea, and rash that which led to a transient interruption, the dose was reduced to 720 mg twice daily and finally to 480 mg twice daily with acceptable tolerance.
A CT scan after 3.5 months of treatment showed a PR according to Response Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) version 1.1 and after proofreading by an expert radiologist, with a 30% decrease in the sum of the diameter of the lung target lesions compared with the reference scanner. The response was persistent and was still present at the patient’s last evaluation after 26 months of follow-up . In addition, the patient has reported a marked improvement in respiratory function with a decreased dyspnea and normal FREs .