A 51-year-old female patient in a good general state of health presented to our shoulder department because of recurrent pain of the left shoulder, after reported trauma 2 years ago where she fell on her outstretched arm and sustained a wrist fracture.
Clinical examination revealed tenderness and pain above the acromial region with a positive impingement sign according to Neer . Active and passive range of motion could be performed without any restrictions. Conventional radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging depicted an os acromiale indicated by a 2.5 cm long fragment in connection with the acromioclavicular joint and additional inflammation of the subacromial bursa .
Due to failed conservative management, including local corticoid injections for more than 6 months, the patient consented to undergo surgery.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a beach chair position and the affected left shoulder was sterilely prepared. A standard diagnostic arthroscopy was performed via a posterior viewing portal and no intraarticular lesions were detected.
Hereafter, the subacromial bursitis was verified followed by a partial bursectomy. The nonunion side of the os acromiale was confirmed and the two fragmented surfaces were debrided to achieve optimal healing conditions . Two 2.0 mm k-wires were placed parallel from posterior to anterior through the acromion close to the osseous gap under radiographic control. A bone reduction forceps was applied to accomplish high compression to completely close the separation . The k-wires were finally advanced into the anterior fragment.
Since the osseous structure of the os acromiale turned out fairly soft and may compromise the stability of screw fixation, we decided upon cortical stabilization instead of a transosseous compression, using a double-button fixation system. Guided by the lateral k-wire, the posterior cortex of the acromion was monocortically overdrilled with a 5.1 mm drill to place the pilot hole for insertion of the low-profile button. A 3.5 mm cannulated drill bit was used to complete tunnel placement for the low-profile TightRope® device (Arthrex, Naples, FL). Guided by a nitinol wire that was placed via the cannulated drill bit, the sutures of the TightRope® device were pulled through the acromion in an anterior direction. A Dog Bone™ button (Arthrex, Naples, FL) was placed on the ventral surface of the acromial edge and shuttled in reverse into its final position. The top head button was adjusted in the posterior part of the drill hole by tensioning the free suture limbs. High compression of the two fragmented surfaces was accomplished using a suture tensioner with 80–100 N. To ensure a maximum of consolidation, an additional suture cerclage was attached to provide backup fixation. Therefore, the second 2.0 mm k-wire was exchanged by a 1.25 mm k-wire and overdrilled with a 2.7 mm cannulated drill. A replacing nitinol wire attached with the FiberTape® (Arthrex, Naples, FL) was pulled through the acromion and tightened by the suture tensioner after being subcutaneously shuttled backwards. The sutures were knotted and shortened at the level of the low-profile button to avoid knot stack.
Postoperative rehabilitation involved initial shoulder immobilization in a Donjoy® Ultrasling® (DJO Global) for 8 weeks accompanied by physiotherapy and analgesia. One year after surgery, the persisting consolidation of the os acromiale and the proper position of the implant were confirmed by radiographs and computer tomography imaging . The patient remained pain free and the hardware was not palpable. No noticeable discomfort around the implants was experienced. The assessment of the subjective shoulder value (SSV) showed 90%. The shoulder range of motion improved to 180° flexion, 170° abduction and 50° external rotation.