A 75-year-old male patient presented to the Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute in September 2017, with symptoms of cough, dyspnea and intermittent chest pain. The patient had been a heavy smoker for 40 years, having smoked 40 cigarettes per day. CT revealed a lesion with the longest diameter of 5.6 cm in the right inferior lobe, enlarged lymph nodes in the right hilum and multiple metastatic lesions in the right pleura. Pathologic examination of the lung lesion biopsy indicated stage IV (T3N1M1) sarcomatoid carcinoma, possibly transformed from adenocarcinoma. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of the lung biopsy specimen indicated a MET exon 14 skipping mutation (NM_000245:c.3028+3A>G), with a variant allele frequency (VAF) of 73.9%, which could potentially cause alternative splicing of the MET protein. Furthermore, NGS showed MET amplification, TP53 (V173M) mutation, FBXW7 (G459R) mutation, but no EGFR, KRAS, ALK or ROS1 gene alterations were detected. The patient refused to receive chemotherapy.
After signing a written informed consent, the patient was enrolled in a Phase II clinical trial of savolitinib treating patients with unresectable or metastatic PSC or other NSCLC harboring MET exon 14 skipping mutation (NCT02897479), which had been approved by the ethical committee of the hospital. In November 2017, the patient started treatment with savolitinib, 600 mg orally, once daily. After 6 weeks of treatment, the first tumor evaluation showed a partial response (target lesion shrunk from 5.6 cm at baseline to 3 cm) , based on the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors version 1.1 and the patient’s Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status, which improved from 1 to 0. This partial response was confirmed in the next tumor evaluation at week 12. All reported treatment-related adverse events (AEs) were grade 1, including white blood cell count decrease, nausea, diarrhea and rash. The severity of AEs was between grade 1 and grade 2, as per the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 4.03. The patient had a dose interruption of 5 days due to pyrexia (unrelated to treatment). No dose reduction occurred. After 36 weeks of treatment, the patient had disease progression with target lesion increasing to 3.8 cm, which led to treatment discontinuation. The progression-free survival with savolitinib treatment for this patient was 36 weeks.
The patient consented to participate in the biomarker exploration of this study. The plasma circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) samples were serially obtained from baseline until disease progression and tumor biopsy sample was collected at disease progression. An NGS panel targeting 422 cancer-relevant genes was used to investigate the DNA alterations in the tumor biopsy and plasma samples
At baseline, prior to savolitinib treatment, the patient’s ctDNA showed a low level of MET exon 14 mutation (c.3028+3A>G) with VAF of 0.6%. After 6 weeks of treatment, with the tumor size reduction, the VAF of MET mutation dropped to below the limit of detection and remained undetected in subsequent cycles at weeks 18, 24, 30 and even at time of progression (week 36) . Except for MET exon 14 mutation, no other somatic mutation was found in ctDNA samples. The tumor biopsy performed at disease progression showed the same mutation sites in MET, TP53 and FBXW7 genes found prior to savolitinib treatment. In addition, moderate levels of gene copy numbers of EGFR (GCN =5.7), FGFR1 (GCN =5.8) and KRAS (GCN =4.5) were newly identified by NGS at disease progression and were further confirmed using fluorescence in situ hybridization technology . This result suggests that the acquired gene amplification might be associated with resistance to savolitinib. Interestingly, MET amplification was not detected by NGS in tumor biopsy specimen at disease progression ( and ).
In September 2018, after discontinuation of savolitinib, crizotinib 250 mg, orally, twice daily was initiated, as second-line treatment. After 8 weeks of treatment, the patient experienced disease progression with an increase in the primary lung lesion, significant increase in pleural effusion and new lesions in adrenal glands, identified in December 2018. He suffered from decreased appetite, fatigue and hypoalbuminemia. In January 2019, the patient died of cachexia.