The wounded Ukrainian man 48 years old received a fragmentation mine-explosive wound from a cluster munition after artillery shelling on the battlefield area near Kyiv (i.e., the capital of Ukraine) on March 15, 2022.
The management of the patient was performed according to the medical military doctrine of Ukraine, which included 5 levels of medical care as described previously . In the first few hours after the injury, the patient was diagnosed with a combined gunshot shrapnel wound of the soft tissues of the left thigh and penis, and hemorrhagic shock stage II and received the first medical aid at level I of medical care. The first medical aid was provided by stopping the bleeding and applying aseptic pressure bandages to the wounds after the application of local anesthesia.
At level II of medical care (i.e., specialized surgical care), the patient’s condition was assessed as moderate to severe due to the nature of the injury, blood loss, pain syndrome, and psychotrauma.
Local examination showed a gunshot wound to the left inguinal region with a massive soft-tissue defect, a section of the head and body of the penis with a defect of 1/3 of the circumference with partial damage to the albuginea of the cavernous bodies, and a complete rupture of the urethra.
The wound entry site was on the anterior surface of the upper third of the left thigh, 4×6 cm in size, with jagged edges, and bled venously. The wound channel was presented from top to bottom, from front to back of the penis. The opening on the posterior surface of the lower third of the left thigh was 6×8 cm in size, bled by capillary action. The bottom of the wound was represented by the muscles of the medial group of the left thigh. Neither rectal nor prostate pathology was detected.
Several hours after the injury, the patient underwent primary surgical debridement of the left thigh, ligation of the great saphenous vein of the thigh, primary sutures on the penile urethra and navicular fossa, suturing of the rupture of the head and penis, drainage of the wound, catheterization of the bladder, and epicystostomy . In order to control the integrity of the corpora cavernosa, an artificial erection was performed intraoperatively.
To improve wound healing, a hermetic vacuum dressing was applied to the wound of the left thigh using a vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) device and creating a negative pressure of 100 mm Hg.
To prevent wound complications (infections, seromas, hematomas, etc.), a polyurethane sponge was fixed to the skin of the penis along the line of skin sutures with attachment to the VAC system and a negative pressure of 125 mm Hg.
At level IV of medical care (i.e., specialized surgical care), the following treatment was applied: antimicrobial therapy with ceftriaxone 2 mg, painkillers (Dexalgin, Ketonal), and an antitetanus serum (3000 IU). At the further stages of surgical treatment 2 days after the injury (March 17–19, 2022), the patient was undergone for repeated surgical debridement of the femoral wound followed by the application of the “pulsed lavage” system and installation of the VAC system (installed on March 19, removed on March 22). The healing wound of the penis occurred by primary intention , and the removal of drains was performed on the 5th day after the injury. The Doppler ultrasound and uroflowmetry were performed to control the blood supply. Restoration of the spontaneous erection was observed on the 18th day after injury. The urethral catheter was removed 3 weeks after urethral suturing (May 4, 2022). The epicystostomy was removed 5 months after the injury (August 4, 2022) and 2 days after the restoration of spontaneous urination.
According to the Doppler ultrasonography of the vessels of the penis, the peak systolic blood flow velocity was 16–24 ml/s , indicating a normal parameter; antegrade diastolic blood flow was not determined; and resistance index was 0.83, which is normal. According to the results of pericatheter urethrography, the urethra was passable, and extravasation of the contrast medium was not detected . According to the results of uroflowmetry, the maximum urination rate Qmax was 12.9 ml/s, which is normal. At the follow-up in November 2022 (7 months after the injury), the patient has normal urination with minor urinary dribbling, sufficient erection, and ejaculation.