A 24-year-old female presented with a 3-month history of worsening dyspnoea and stridor. She was unable to climb one flight of stairs or walk more than 50 meters on a flat surface, requiring domiciliary oxygen therapy. She also had significant loss of appetite and loss of weight. Her past medical history included acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear-positive PTB in 2007 and laryngeal TB in 2013 for which she completed 6 months of standard anti-tuberculous (anti-TB) regimen on both occasions.
Respiratory examination revealed tracheal deviation to the left, decreased chest expansion, reduced vocal fremitus and dullness to percussion of the left lung. Oxygen saturation on room air was 95 %.
On this presentation, sputum smear examination for AFB was negative. Flow volume (FV) loop was consistent with fixed airway obstruction with her best functional vital capacity (FVC) of 2.03 litres (58 % predicted). Chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) scan of thorax showed total left lung collapse. The CT thorax also revealed 1-cm segment of tracheal stenosis and left main bronchus (LMB) stenosis with mediastinal shift to the left .
Flexible bronchoscopy revealed a web-like 90 % tracheal stenosis and the visualisation of airways distally from this point was not possible. A clinical judgement of PTB reactivation was made based on the bronchoscopic appearance and the presence of constitutional symptoms. The standard four anti-TB regimen was therefore commenced. Patient was then referred to an interventional pulmonology centre for bronchoscopic intervention.
The first intervention performed was sequential tracheal dilatation to 10 mm via controlled radial expansion CRE® balloon (Boston Scientifics, USA) and mechanical dilatation with rigid bronchoscopy followed by mitomycin-C application (0.4 mg/ml) with a total contact time of 8 min. The first intervention was successful, as bronchoscopic surveillance performed at 3, 8 and 16 weeks showed no recurrence of tracheal stenosis with a tracheal diameter of 10 mm. The airway distal to the tracheal stenosis became accessible which subsequently revealed the LMB stenosis with a pinpoint opening as previously reported in the CT thorax. We then proceeded with dilatation of the LMB.
The second intervention was performed at 20 weeks and the stenosed LMB was dilated using a CRE® balloon at 8, 9 and 10 mm. At 26 weeks, the balloon dilatation was repeated with the adjuvant treatment of topical mitomycin-C application (0.4 mg/mls) with the same contact time of 8 min. These procedures were repeated again at 36 weeks to re-examine further the LMB stenosis. There were no immediate complications.
Following these interventions, the patient showed significant and sustained improvement. The FV loop illustrated improvement in both inspiratory and expiratory limbs and the FVC increased to 2.91 litres (83 % predicted). Chest radiograph and CT thorax showed re-expansion of the left lung , tracheal patency and the mediastinum back to its original position .
The patient is currently able to climb more than four flights of stairs and walk more than 1 kilometre without dyspnoea. She had completed a total 9 months of anti-TB therapy. She no longer requires oxygen and is back to her usual daily activities.