On August 22, 2020, a 49 years old Chinese male patient presented with moderate pain at the right temporal apex without any inducement during work. The next day, severe headaches recurred with repeated vomiting several times. The patient then visited the local hospital. The patient had hypertension and hyperthyroidism for more than 2 years, and he had no travel or head injury history for the preceding 2 years.
In the local hospital, the patient had a computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain, and the results showed subarachnoid hemorrhage. Then the patient transferred to Chengde Medical College for treatment. On August 24, he underwent clipping of multiple intracranial aneurysms (middle cerebral artery and anterior communicating artery aneurysm) under general anesthesia. On the third day after the operation, the CT scan of the brain showed that there was a new hematoma in the operation area, and the temporal lobe intracerebral hematoma removal surgery through original incision was performed in an emergency. Subsequently, the patient was hospitalized for about 3 weeks. On September 20, the patient was discharged to the local rehabilitation hospital for hyperbaric oxygen therapy. In the early morning of October 10, the patient had intolerable, persistent, and severe head pain with a body temperature of 39.5 °C and non-jet vomiting for 3 to 4 times in the rehabilitation hospital. Three hours later, the patient developed limb twitch and exhalation refractory condition, lasting for 2 to 3 minutes, then the attack was terminated automatically. After the attack, the patient’s consciousness was blurred, and then recovered after about 5-6 hours. After waking up, he complained of a headache as before.
Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the Affiliated Hospital of Chengde Medical College. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed pressure 200 mm H2O, WBC 4980 × 106/L, neutrophil 98%, glucose < 1.11 mmol/L, and protein > 3 g/L. The next day, the patient was transferred to our emergency department. At that time, the patient was conscious and had a sharp headache, and intermittently appeared to talk to himself with the vague language content, accompanied by hallucinations. The diagnosis was considered purulent meningitis. A therapy of mannitol (125 mL/8 hours) and ceftriaxone sodium (2 g/day) was started. On October 13, the CSF examination showed that: pressure 240 mm H2O, WBC 75 × 106/L, mononuclear cell 87%, glucose 42.30 mmol/L, protein 63 mg/dL, chlorine 123 mmol/L, IgA 1.06 mg/dL, IgM 0.4 mg/dL, and IgG 9.37 mg/dL. And the serum glucose was 2.2 mmol/L. The results of blood gas analysis, blood routine, serum immunoglobulin, myocardial enzymes, electrolytes, liver, and kidney function were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid smear examination results showed that no bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, and fungi were found; Cryptococcus neoformans (C neoformans) was not found by ink staining; the detection of cryptococcus neoformans membrane antigen was also negative.
On October 14, he was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU) of the neurology department for treatment. The results of the physical examination on admission were as follows: increased language, inattention, decreased memory, orientation and calculation ability, neck obstruction, chin four transverse fingers, positive Kirschner’s sign. The Padua score was 4 points, and the GCS score was 15 points. The location diagnosis was as follows: the positive headache and meningeal irritation signs located in the meninges; the mental disorders, cognitive decline, and seizures located in the cerebral cortex. The qualitative diagnosis of the patient was as follows: purulent meningoencephalitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage recovery period, hypertension, symptomatic epilepsy, bacterial pneumonia: diagnosis combined with chest CT, bilateral pulmonary nodules: diagnosis combined with chest CT, and history of hyperthyroidism. The diagnosis of tuberculous meningoencephalitis and viral meningoencephalitis was excluded according to the patient’s history and CSF examination results.
Since October 14, vancomycin (1 g/12 hours) and ceftazidime (2 g/8 hours) were used for anti-infective treatment, mannitol dehydration (125 mL, every 8 hours) was used to reduce intracranial pressure, and sodium valproate (0.4 g tid) was used for antiepileptic treatment. On October 15, the relevant detection results were as follows: serum-free triiodothyronine 2.29 pg/mL, vitamin b1 2563.00 pg/mL, folic acid 6.68 ng/mL, C-reactive protein 19.80 mg/L. All tumor items, B-type natriuretic peptide, and PCT were normal. On October 17, vancomycin in serum was 10.52 ug/mL, and the patient reported that the headache weakened and the condition improved. On October 20, the patient was with low blood sodium and high intracranial pressure, then received a sodium supplement (100 mL, 10% sodium chloride), and then the situation improved. On October 21, an enhanced CT scan showed a small amount of subcutaneous effusion, subdural effusion , hydrocephalus and interstitial brain edema around bilateral lateral ventricles, and the CSF examination showed that: pressure 160 mm H2O, WBC 50 × 106/L, mononuclear cell 96%, fluid protein 35 mg/dL, chlorine 129 mmol/L, IgA 0.54 mg/dL. And the serum glucose was 2.52 mmol/L. The examination of cerebrospinal fluid smear, cryptococcus neoformans, and Cryptococcus neoformans membrane antigen were negative. Then the CSF sample of the patient was used for the mNGS, and the sequencing results showed that: human herpesvirus type 4 (EBV), Corynebacterium Corynebacterium, Achromobacter xylose oxidation, and Acinetobacter baumannii (A. baumannii) were mapped with different proportions. Corynebacterium striatum and A. baumannii were more consistent with the clinical symptoms. Then, we used the modified method-ptNGS to detect CSF samples.
Firstly, the nucleic acid of all samples was extracted by using the Zymo BIOMICS DNA/RNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo R2002). Secondly, the high-throughput sequencing library was constructed by using the Pathogeno One Pan-infectious Pathogen High-throughput Sequencing Library Construction Kit (Shanghai Pathogeno Medical Technology Co., Ltd. Cat ID Pathogeno 090118). In this process, two rounds of PCR were carried out. First, 500 microbial specific primers with clinical significance were added to the sample nucleic acid template to enrich the pathogenic target sequences; secondly, these products were purified then amplified with primers with sequencing adapter and different barcodes. Thirdly, the sequencing library was sequenced by Illumina MiSeq Reagent Nano Kit (average 0.05 M reads per library, sequencing read length = PE60). After the quality control of the data, the two-terminal alignment reading was compared with the pathogen database to determine the number of sequences (reads) in each sample.
The ptNGS results showed that the sequences detected were A. pittii and Staphylococcus epidermidis. S. epidermidis might come from skin colonization during lumbar puncture, so it was excluded from the etiological diagnosis. Therefore, we highly suspected that A. pittii was the pathogen in this case.
Five days later, the liver function test results were as follows: alanine aminotransferase 9 IU/L, total protein 61.40 g/L, albumin (bromocresol green method) 32.26 g/L, globulin 29.14 g/L, prealbumin 211 mg/L, aspartate aminotransferase 10 IU/L, creatinine (enzymatic method) 57 umol/L, urea 7.05 mmol/L, uric acid 227 umol/L, potassium 3.46 mmol/L, sodium 140.0 mmol/L, chlorine 102.0 mmol/L. The results of HBsAb, HBeAg, and HBcAg were positive.
On October 29, the CT scan showed that the right temporal subcutaneous effusion and subdural effusion were less than that before . On November 2, the CSF examination showed that: pressure 145 mm H2O, the total number of cells 16 × 106/L, cerebrospinal fluid glucose 42.48 mg/dL, cerebrospinal fluid chlorine 127 mmol/L, IgA 0.43 mg/dL. And the serum glucose was 2.36 mmol/L. Cerebrospinal fluid smear examination results showed that no bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, and fungi were found; C. neoformans was not found by ink staining; the detection of C. neoformans membrane antigen was also negative.
The results of autoimmune encephalitis related antibodies in CSF and serum samples showed that anti-NMDA receptor antibody, anti NMDA receptor antibody, or other autoimmune encephalitis related antibody were all negative. The results of cerebrospinal fluid virus-related antibodies examination showed that IgG and IgM antibodies against Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus type I and II were negative. The results of the blood routine test and blood biochemical test were normal.
On November 4, the patient’s headache symptoms almost disappeared. The results of the physical examination showed that the patients were clear in spirit and speech, indifferent in expression, inattentive in attention, decreased in memory, orientation, and calculation, negative in bilateral pathological signs, 3 transverse fingers in cervical resistance, and positive in Kirschner sign. The patient’s intracranial infection has been alleviated. He stopped the intravenous drip of antibiotics and continued anti-infection treatment with oral cefixime capsules. The patient was then discharged from the hospital .