A 24-year-old pregnant woman presented to a local private clinic with severe intermittent headache. She was at the 17th week of her first single fetus pregnancy. On physical examination, the patient had systolic blood pressure at 220-240mmHg and diastolic blood pressure at 140mmHg. No other abnormalities were noted. With diagnosis of pregnancy-induced hypertension (PIH), antihypertensive treatment was begun and patient was referred to an obstetrics clinic. Gynecologist refused the diagnosis of PIH, because, PIH develops after 20 weeks of gestation. Past medical history revealed a history of palpitation and sweating for about 1 year and she has not undergone any medical workup. During pregnancy, her blood pressure ranged from 125/75mmHg to 145/85mmHg. Despite the maximal dose of antihypertensive treatment, BP persisted uncontrolled. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a mass measuring 31×33mm medial to left renal hilum. The results of laboratory studies, including blood cells count, blood chemistry, urine analysis, urinary albumin and blood electrolytes, were within normal limits. Hormonal examination showed markedly elevated 24-hour urinary excretion of metanephrines and normetanephrines. The other hormonal assessment including adrenocorticotropic hormone, cortisol, aldosterone and plasma renin activities were in normal range. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of abdomen showed a round soft tissue mass measuring 3×3.5cm medial to left renal hilum, anterior to renal artery and vein . This tumor was compatible with extra adrenal pheochromocytoma (paraganglioma).
Alpha-adrenergic blockade with phenoxybenzamine was performed for 10 days and blood pressure was maintained under 140/90mmHg. At 19 weeks of gestation, she underwent laparoscopic tumor removal. Laparoscopy was done by the transperitoneal approach in left flank position, as it best exposes the tumor and renal vessels. We used the Hasson technique to create pneumoperitoneum and the operation was done by four working trocars. It was necessary to mobilize the colon and tail of the pancreas. The tumor was located very adjacent to the major blood vessels of the left kidney . The tumor was excised effectively without any renal vascular damage. The operation was uneventful and the patient blood pressure was controlled without medications. She was discharged after 5 days with a blood pressure of 140/75mmHg and a heart rate of 86 beats per minute. Microscopic histopathology revealed extra adrenal pheochromocytoma (paraganglioma). The patient had a normal vaginal delivery of a healthy baby at 39 weeks of gestation.