A 60-year-old female Thai farmer was scheduled for pre-chemotherapy echocardiography after undergoing a right partial colectomy and being diagnosed with stage IV diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Echocardiography revealed diminished left ventricular systolic function, calculated at 45% by Simpson’s method. She had type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and dyslipidemia, all of which were adequately controlled. Her medication prior to diagnostic catheterization included aspirin 81 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day for upfront medication in case of intervention needed; metformin 2000 mg/day and glipizide 10 mg/day for glycemic control; gemfibrozil 600 mg/day and atorvastatin 40 mg/day for lipid control; and enalapril 5 mg/day for antihypertensive. She never smokes but does occasionally consume alcohol. She is the mother of two children without a history of miscarriage. Her other past history was otherwise unremarkable. On her admission date, her blood pressure was 119/57 mmHg and her pulse rate was 86 beats per minute. Blood tests showed the following: fasting blood glucose, 138 mg/dL; glycated hemoglobin, 5.7%; total cholesterol, 84 mg/dL; and low-density lipoprotein, 28 mg/dL. Coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries, leading to a diagnosis of non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. After the procedure, she immediately experienced dizziness and diplopia. Her physical examination immediately after the procedure showed blood pressure of 140/69 mmHg and pulse rate of 86 beats per minute. Her neurological examination during the right lateral gaze showed impaired adduction of the left eye and horizontal nystagmus of the right eye. A diagnosis of left INO was made by a neurologist .
Immediate non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed no signs of bleeding. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on the fifth day after clinical onset revealed a tiny area exhibiting characteristics of an acute infarct in the left paramedian midbrain, including the left medial longitudinal fasciculus, consistent with the clinical diagnosis of INO . An additional region of restricted diffusion indicating an acute infarct was detected in the right inferior cerebellar hemisphere . The presence of multiple brain infarcts in this patient supported the etiology of embolic stroke from the catheterization procedure. Magnetic resonance angiography revealed no significant cerebral artery disease . The patient was treated in the stroke unit for 5 days according to stroke protocol, with medications including intravenous hydration of 1.5 mL/kg/hour for 2 days, dual antiplatelets, and statin, and 6 weeks after symptom onset, the patient achieved full neurological recovery. She received complete treatment for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which consisted of six cycles of the R-CEOP regimen to reduce the risk of further cardiac function deterioration and intrathecal methotrexate for high central nervous system (CNS) involvement risk, which was accompanied by clopidogrel withholding. She finally achieved a complete molecular response and remained uneventful after 6 months of treatment.