In 2009, a 15-year-old girl with altered consciousness, drowsiness and abnormality in gait motor and sensation of left side extremities (with no signs of pulmonary infection) was referred to the emergency room of Sajad Hospital. She was the first child of acouple with no family relationship. She was studying in a high school with low level of sociocultural state in North of Iran. Her family did not have any symptoms of tuberculosis. There was a history of general weakness in the recent six months with internal work up and progression to neurological deficit. She could not move her right side of the body but she responded to questions on and off and obeyed the orders. She could respond to medical interrogation. She was oriented in time, place and person. Paresthesia of left extremities and neck problem was found. Cranial nerves, sensory and motor-systems were normal with no signs of meningeal irritation. Skull X-ray revealed normal.
Paraclinical and physical examinations such as Chest X-ray, brain Computerized Tomography (CT) Scan, abdomino pelvic CT scan and brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) were applied. Microscopic examination (direct examination) of a biopsy specimen was also performed. The primary diagnosis was herpes with differential diagnosis due to involvement of parieto-temporal lobe in her CT scan. She received acyclovir and was admitted in infectious disease ward. The patient did not respond to the treatment. Multislice helical CT scan of chest, with and without contrast media, showed extensive cavitary consolidation at left upper lobe. Peribroncho vascular nodular infiltration with tree-in-bud appearance was noted at posterior and apical segments of upper and lower lobes. Pleural effusion was not observed. Mediastinal adenopathies were present in prevascular, paratracheal and azygoesophageal recess distributions. Multislicehelical CT-scan of abdominopelvic with and without contrast media found mild ascites around the liver and pelvic cavity. Multiple hypodense lesions in favor of adenopathies were noted at portahepatis celiac chain, retrocaval and precaval levels. Mild dilatation was visualized at both pelvicalyceal systems.
Histological studies demonstrated no primary focus in the lungs. Cavitation and tree-in-bud were observed in CT scan of lungs. Axial CT scan of the brain demonstrated large hypodensity area and ring-enhancing lesion in right middle cerebral artery territory with some hemorrhagic area. Edema in right hemisphere and compression on right lateral ventricle and some midline shift to left were noted. Hypodensity area in left cerebellum was observed too. All of the symptoms were compatible with those of ischemic hemorrhage or metastatic hemorrhage. The grate cerebral vein and the venous sinuses had normal caliber in Magnetic Resonance Venography (MRV). Other Organs such as liver, spleen, kidneys, gallbladder and uterus were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the brain was performed with intravenous contrast, and utilizing axial T1-weighted sequences. There were multiple T1 low signal masses in the right fronot-parie to-temporal region and also left cerebellar hemisphere showing foci of hemorrhage with surrounding edema and mass effect and irregularity ring enhancement. No other abnormalities were observed .
brain MRI with and without gadolinium (GD) injection determined post-op changes with mass effect and hemorrhage in the right-fronto-parietal and left cerebellar hemisphere. No abnormal enhancement was reported after contrast injection. Air fluid level was observed in the right maxillary sinus. No other abnormalities were observed . In the physical exam, ill-defined borders were pale.
Microscopic examination: The most sensitive tests, acid fast bacilli smear (AFB) and culture of a biopsy specimen, were performed. Puncturing viscous fluid material was taken, smears were made and stained with acid-fast stain and a number of acid-fast bacilli were observed (4+).
Treatment and drugs: Antibiotics: ciprofloxacin (500-750ng), ethambotol (800 ng), isoniazid (300 ng) and omeprazole (20 mg) were prescribed.
Surgery: For patients with neurological deficits, surgical intervention is recommended (, ). The patient underwent the brain surgery. Multiple sections were taken and studied in detail histologically. Pathological right frontal lesion specimen of the brain showed extensive areas of caseating like necrosis suggesting histological diagnosis of tuberculomas.