A five-year-old girl was admitted to a tertiary pediatric center in Tehran, Iran for the reconstruction of foot deformity. The child was born of consanguineous parents and full term at birth. Her parents seemed healthy with no prior medical history. She had undergone uncomplicated anesthesia for orthopedic hand surgery and lingual frenectomy three times. Her development had been delayed. Her mother mentioned that she suffered from obstructive sleep apnea. Lab data including Complete Blood Cell Count with leukocyte differentials, Blood Urea Nitrogen, Creatinine, PT, PTT, and INR levels were all within normal limits. Echocardiography showed no cardiac anomaly. She presented with typical features of OFDS type II , which included mouth cavity and facial deformities, tongue nodules, missing central incisors, high arch palate, broad nose, midline lip cleft, hypertelorism, as well as low-set ears , and limb deformities. Bilateral polydactyly of hands that was corrected in previous surgeries and bilateral pre and postaxial polydactyly of feet were among her list of anomalies. She was scheduled for surgery to correct the foot deformity . After performing electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, and non-invasive monitoring of blood pressure, lidocaine 1.5 mg/kg and fentanyl 1 μg/kg were injected. Anesthesia induction was performed with propofol 2 mg/kg without any muscle relaxants. Direct laryngoscopy with Miller blade was done and uncuffed endotracheal tube was inserted. Laryngoscopic grade was II and dorsal port of vocal cords and bifida uvula were observed. Mirror foot deformity of right foot was corrected through a 94-min surgery. During the operation, the surgeon excised pre and postaxial rays in order to create a suitable foot for wearing shoes. Serial casting after the surgery was performed in order to stretch soft tissue contractures. At the end of surgery, the patient was extubated and after recovery, she was transferred to the surgical ward. She was stable without experiencing any complications during the anesthesia and recovery time.