In 2017, a 63-year-old woman with no underlying medical conditions was hospitalized with postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. A CT scan showed a cystic and solid mass in the posterior wall of the uterus , suggesting the possibility of malignancy. On the advice of a gynaecologist, she underwent a total hysterectomy and double adnexectomy. Gross pathology showed that the uterine cavity was filled with a cauliflower-like tumour measuring approximately 10 cm × 10 cm. The cut surface was grey and white with necrosis. The mass invaded the full thickness of the uterine muscle wall but did not break through the serosal layer, and the surgical margins were negative. The pelvic and common iliac arterial lymph nodes were not invaded. Histological sections showed aggressive tumour growth . Tumour cells were epithelioid cells with clear or eosinophilic cytoplasm , and they tended to aggregate around blood vessels . Immunohistochemical staining showed that the melanocyte marker HMB45 was positive, and Melan-A was negative ; the smooth muscle marker desmin was weakly positive, and SMA was negative . In addition, ER and vimentin were positive, and S-100, PR, Syn, HER-2, actin, CD10, and CD56 were all negative. Due to risk factors such as tumour size larger than 5 cm, aggressive growth, and necrosis, the lesion was classified as a malignant PEComa according to the classification of Folpe et al. .
For the next 3 years, the patient’s condition was stable. Then, in September 2020, when the patient was re-examined with CT, a tumour of approximately 8 cm × 4 cm was found in the pelvis . Considering the high possibility of recurrence, the patient underwent pelvic tumour resection and left ureteral double J-tube placement again. Postoperative pathological diagnosis was still malignant PEComa. The detection of PD-L1 in the tumour showed a tumour proportion score (TPS) of 2% and combined positive score (CPS) of 5 . However, the patient was not on antitumor therapy. Unfortunately, in March 2022, the patient developed symptoms such as vaginal bleeding, abdominal distension, and oliguria. After a repeat CT scan, a large mass in the pelvis was found again . At the same time, multiple metastases appeared around the lungs and spine.
Treatment guidelines for PEComa were lacking and still are. However, the patient had severe local symptoms and positive tumour PD-L1 expression. After discussion with a multidisciplinary committee, we formulated a triple therapy regimen of anti-PD-1, GM-CSF, and SBRT for the patient . Considering the large mass in the patient’s pelvis, to protect the surrounding organs as much as possible, the SBRT target volume was made slightly smaller than the actual tumour . The patient started SBRT on March 14 at a dose of 30 Gy/6 Fx. GM-CSF was started at the same time as radiotherapy at 200 μg per day for 7 consecutive days. Tislelizumab (200 mg) was administered on Day 8. On April 7 and May 2, GM-CSF 200 μg daily was subcutaneously injected and continued for 7 days, and tislelizumab 200 mg was injected on the 8th day. Before the third use of tislelizumab, abdominal distension was significantly reduced, vaginal bleeding was completely controlled, and urine output had returned to normal. However, starting in May, the patient developed low back pain that gradually worsened. Combined with imaging, we believe that the pain is caused by a paraspinal tumour. We treated this tumour on June 6 with a triple therapy that included SBRT . GM-CSF was administered continuously for 7 days at 200 μg daily. SBRT was started from Day 3 of GM-CSF use. The target area of SBRT included paraspinal tumour and tumour invading into the spinal cavity . The radiation dose was 24 Gy/4 Fx. Tislelizumab (200 mg) was administered on Day 8. Shortly after the end of radiotherapy, the patient’s symptoms of low back pain were significantly relieved. In July, the patient developed oedema of the extremities, which was considered to be related to immune-related hypothyroidism. At the same time, the patient was reluctant to continue treatment due to economic reasons.
The patient’s systemic tumour was evaluated in June, and we found that the mass in the pelvis was significantly smaller than it had been in March , and the two nonirradiated metastases in the lungs had transformed into thin-walled cavities . There were no significant changes in other metastases. At the most recent imaging evaluation (July 22), the patient’s lumbar paravertebral tumour had not shrunk significantly . However, we were pleasantly surprised to find a cavity in one of the larger metastases in the left lung . Another pulmonary metastasis had shrunk by 30% in its largest diameter since treatment in March . The patient is currently in a stable condition and is being treated with thyroid hormone replacement.
During treatment, the main adverse reactions were fever, myalgia, generalized oedema and immune-related hypothyroidism. According to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (version 5.0), fever and myalgia were grade 1 adverse reactions. Fever and myalgia were believed to originate from the use of GM-CSF. After subcutaneous injection of GM-CSF, oral ibuprofen sustained-release capsules were helpful in significantly relieving fever and myalgia. Generalized oedema and immune-related hypothyroidism were grade 2 adverse reactions. The patient’s thyroid function was checked in June; thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) was found to be slightly elevated, and serum free triiodothyronine (fT3) and free thyroxine (fT4) were found to be reduced. We considered that this could have been an immune-related adverse event. However, the patient did not have symptoms such as fatigue, chills or oedema. Therefore, we continued to use triple therapy, including PD-1 inhibitors. However, in July, the patient developed generalized oedema, and TSH increased more than in June. Although there were no symptoms of fatigue or chills, the patient was still given thyroxine replacement therapy. Afterwards, the patient no longer had systemic oedema, and TSH returned to normal.