A previously healthy 16.8-year-old caucasian girl presented to our institution with an adolescent idiopathic thoracolumbar scoliosis. Her past medical history was non-contributory in regard to operations, medication, or allergies. In admission, her body weight was 56.6 kg and her body height was 164 cm, which were both at the 50th percentile for sex- and age-matched normal population. Her BMI was 21 kg/cm/cm, which was also at the 50th percentile for her age and gender. There was no family history of scoliosis or gastrointestinal pathology.
Our patient developed a flexible left thoracolumbar curve extending from T10 to L2 and measuring 50° . This was producing a moderate deformity due to listing of the trunk and thoracic translocation to the left and a significant waistline asymmetry. The preoperative blood screening revealed no pathological findings. Albumin, white blood cell, and lymphocyte counts were all within normal limits. She underwent an anterior spinal arthrodesis extending from T10 to L2 with the use of third generation instrumentation [AO-Universal Spine System (USS) II, Stratec Medical, Oberdorf] applying a spinal derotational effect and autologous rib bone graft performed through a left thoracoabdominal retroperitoneal approach to the spine. This achieved a very satisfactory correction of her scoliosis to 7° and a well-balanced spine in both the coronal and the sagittal planes. Intraoperative blood loss was 200 mls.
The patient's immediate postoperative course was uncomplicated and she was started on oral feedings at postoperative day 1. The chest drain was removed on postoperative day 3 and the patient was fitted with a thoracolumbar plaster jacket to provide additional support to the spine and mobilise out of her bed as per routine procedure in our institution. Eight days following surgery she had no complaints of her spine, was mobilising satisfactorily and had a body weight of 52 kg (20th percentile). She was subsequently discharged and was prescribed dietary supplements high in calories to achieve gradual increase in her body weight to preoperative values. Follow-up in the out-patient clinic was arranged at 3 weeks post-discharge.
The patient failed to attend her clinical appointment and was readmitted acutely at the hospital 45 days after spinal fusion due to the development of severe nausea and persistent vomiting. At the time of admission, she was markedly dehydrated with associated oliguria and severe electrolyte disorders including hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis. Her body weight had dropped further to 45.2 kg, which was at the 3rd percentile for gender- and age-matched normal population. This indicated a total loss of 11.4 kg post-surgery, which corresponded to 20% of her preoperative body weight. Her BMI was reduced to 16.8 kg/cm/cm, which was also below the 3rd percentile for her age and gender. The spinal jacket was removed and on clinical examination her abdomen was found to be considerably distended but soft and non-tender, with normal bowel sounds. A barium contrast study was obtained and confirmed the clinical diagnosis of SMA syndrome .
A nasogastric (NG) tube was placed for drainage of the bilious gastric contents and a nasojejunal (NJ) tube under fluoroscopic guidance for feedings. Attention was drawn to correct electrolyte deficiencies through the administration of intravenous fluids. The nasogastric aspirates decreased gradually over the following 10 days. The patient received enteral feedings for a total period of 2 weeks. She was discharged 62 days post-surgery. Dietary supplements (calorific drinks) were prescribed for an additional period of 3 weeks. At the latest follow-up, 3.5 years after scoliosis correction, the patient was free of symptoms, had increased her body weight and BMI to the preoperative value of 50th percentile of normal and her spine was fused without evidence of residual or recurrent deformity.