The proband is a 10-year-old boy who was conceived through in vitro fertilization with a donor's oocyte and father's sperm. The pregnancy was uncomplicated. Delivery proceeded at term via the cesarean section because of failure to progress. The infant did not require resuscitation and was discharged home soon after birth.
At the age of 5 months, he developed a febrile illness associated with a sudden onset of bilateral continuous involuntary hyperkinetic movements involving his extremities, tilting his head to the right, horizontal nystagmus, and difficulty latching on (during breastfeeding) along with repetitive tongue thrusting. The patient's symptoms improved transiently for 2 days, followed by the reemergence of ocular nystagmoid movements along with involuntary movements involving the left hemibody with reduced tone on the right side. Examination confirmed the presence of dyskinetic movements involving the limbs along with nystagmoid eye movements and orolingual dyskinesis.
Prior to hospitalization, the infant met all age-appropriate milestones, including smiling, babbling, reaching, and sitting with support. However, during the acute illness, developmental regression with loss of motor skills was noted. Consanguinity status remained unknown, with no history of developmental delay, regression, or metabolic or neurological conditions on the paternal side.
MRI resonance imaging of the brain revealed the presence of asymmetrical high-intensity signal associated with diffusion restriction in the bilateral globus pallidus, suggesting metabolic stroke (, ). MR spectroscopy confirmed the presence of lactate peak in the left globus pallidus. These findings suggested an initial clinical diagnosis of Leigh syndrome .
The CSF amino acid evaluation showed slightly elevated alanine levels; however, the rest of the metabolic workup, including plasma amino acids, acylcarnitine profile, and urine organic acids, was normal. The results of the pyruvate dehydrogenase and pyruvate carboxylase assays were normal. Respiratory chain studies revealed reduced activity of complex II as well as very scant ragged red fibers in the muscle biopsy. These findings were again suggestive of a mitochondrial disorder. The patient was discharged from hospital with an empirical mitochondrial cocktail containing carnitine, biotin, thiamine, riboflavin, and ubiquinone. Upon discharge, the patient's involuntary movements were in remission with good feeding skills but with reduced right-sided spontaneous movement and strength.
Genetic testing of the mitochondrial genome and full mitochondrial nuclear gene panel yielded negative results. Selective sequencing of AARS2 and SDHA yielded normal results. Whole-exome sequencing detected compound heterozygous mutations in MOCS1 gene. The variant p. R378P (c. 1133 G>C) was inherited from the father. The second variant, p.R73W (c.217C>T), was likely inherited from the biological mother (oocyte donor); this variant has been previously reported in individuals with MoCD . This variant was observed in 9/25,778 (0.035%) non-Finnish European individuals. A missense variant at the same residue (R73Q) was reported in individuals with MoCD; this supports the functional importance of this protein region. Both variants were interpreted as variants of unknown significance due to the lack or insufficiency of data in a large population cohort. However, both variants encode non-conserved amino acid substitutions that are likely to impact the secondary protein structure because these residues differ in polarity, charge, and size. In silico analyses of both variants, including protein predictors and evolutionary conservation, indicate a deleterious effect. Biochemical testing for MoCD detected a low uric acid level of 80 (111–282 μmol/L) and a low cystine level of 0 (3–49) and 4 (7–40) umols per liter, which remained low throughout the entire course, ranging between 5 and 9 (normal 17–43 umol/L). On the other hand, CSF amino acids were done once, and the cystine in the CSF was below detectable limits. Moreover, the urine S-sulfocysteine was high at 116 (0–15) mmol/mol creatinine and 163 (0–50) mmol/mol creatinine on two separate occasions. These findings on biochemical testing were consistent with the diagnosis of molybdenum cofactor deficiency.
The child was started on X-Met X-Cys Maxamaid, a methionine- and cystine-free formula; however, he was unable to tolerate the total prescribed amount and remained otherwise on protein-restricted diet. At 9 years of age, his weight remains low at 25.7 kg (9th centile), height at 130 cm (10th centile), and BMI at 21st centile. During follow-up, parents reported neurological decompensation during inter-current illnesses. He developed signs of dystonic posturing superimposed right spastic hemiparesis, along with significant dysarthria. It was observed that his dystonia worsened with movement, walking, and running. He could not fully extend his arm and hand, which were held in flexion and the hand in a fisted position, while his leg was held in extension with plantarflexion and inversion at the ankles. He was evaluated at the pediatric movement disorders clinic, and levodopa/carbidopa 100/25 mg was begun and gradually increased to 100 mg/25 mg three times daily for his dystonia. Due to intermittent GI discomfort, further dose increments were not pursued, and subsequently, amantadine was added as an adjunct to L-dopa. The two medications together have helped him to loosen up his dystonic posturing and his speech improved.
The child remains globally delayed in gross motor, fine motor, and speech although he continues to maintain slow progress. He is presently able to walk independently with a right hemiparetic, hemidystonic gait. He also enjoys horseback riding, where he can maintain his balance perfectly. Fine motor skills have been challenging although he is able to handle playing with Lego parts. His expressive language abilities are improving, and he is presently able to put words together to make grammatical sentences, but speech remains slurred and not intelligible to strangers. By next fall, the patient will be in grade 5, attending a special school where accommodations have been tailored to his neurodevelopmental disabilities, cognitive impairments, and dietary restrictions.
His current medications include levodopa/carbidopa 100/25 one tablet TID, amantadine 25 mg q a.m., CoQ10 hundred 50 mg BID, riboflavin 100 mg BID, carnitine 150 mg TID, and thiamine 150 mg BID.