A 66-year-old obese woman was diagnosed with incisional hernia approximately 4 years previously, but was not treated. She had received Cesarean section with a median lower abdominal incision 40 years previously. For 2 weeks, she had experienced worsening abdominal pain and exudate from her abdominal skin. Consequently, she was admitted to our hospital.
Her general appearance was sick. A physical examination revealed the following: respiratory rate, 28 breaths/min; oxygen saturation, 100%; blood pressure, 97/72 mmHg; heart rate, 112 b.p.m.; and body temperature, 38.9°C. She presented with severe pain in the localized lower abdomen. She had a body mass index of 40.1 kg/m2. Her abdomen showed severe distention, erythema with sharp margins, swelling, bullae, and necrotic skin and dishwater-gray exudate around the operative scar. Palpation of the lesion revealed heat, tenderness, and an unusual crackling sensation, such as crepitus.
A blood test showed the following: white blood cell count, 29,500/μL; hemoglobin, 13.6 g/dL; and platelet count, 20,200/μL. Laboratory tests revealed the following: total bilirubin, 1.8 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.05 mg/dL; prothrombin time, 59.7%; activated partial thromboplastin time, 30.3 s; fibrinogen, 636 mg/dL; and fibrin degradation product, 37.1 μg/mL. A blood gas analysis revealed pH of 7.531 and lactate level of 2.4 mmol/mL. Abdominal computed tomography showed incisional hernia of the small bowel content with subcutaneous fluid and gas collection. Small bowel necrosis of the hernia content was suspected, but no small bowel obstruction was observed. The hernia defect measured 6 cm (length) × 3.8 cm (width) .
Emergency radical surgery was performed for a life-threatening incisional hernia with NSTI, which was considered difficult to treat with damage control surgery (e.g., drainage alone). A skin incision was made along the demarcation line. The injured areas of skin, soft tissue, and hernia contents of the small bowel were resected en bloc. No intra-abdominal contamination or peritonitis was observed. The small bowel was reconstructed using end-to-end and layer-to-layer hand-sewn anastomosis. The abdominal fascia was directly sutured by interrupted 0-coated Vicryl (ETHICON, polyglactin 910) suture without mesh repair or component separation, because the fascia could be closed with less tension than expected. The injured wound defect of the skin and subcutaneous tissue was treated with NPWT . The total operation time was 178 min, the bleeding volume was 285 mL, and the transfusion volume was 0 mL.
A surgical specimen culture showed Klebsiella pneumonia and Enterococcus faecalis. Negative pressure wound therapy was performed for 4 weeks postoperatively, and conservative wound management was successful . The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on hospital day 53. At 1 year postoperatively, she was in good health without recurrence.
The patient provided her informed consent to participate in the study, which was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee.