A 64-year-old male with an 11-day history of fever, sore throat, malaise, nausea, and non-pruritic rash was admitted to our emergency department on June 4, 2013. Prior to admission, he was treated with cephalosporins and ibuprofen at a local hospital. On the sixth day of the illness, his condition worsened with the development of severe fever, leukocytosis, thrombocytopenia, and lymphadenopathy. He lived in an urban area and was previously healthy. The patient reported that he had visited a hilly region of Jilin Province adjacent to Eastern Liaoning Province 2 weeks prior, where he was bitten by a tick.
Upon admission, his general status was moderate; a physical examination revealed a high fever (axillary temperature of 39.5 °C), throat congestion, exudative tonsillitis, and lymphadenopathy with maculopapular rashes and no eschar. The initial laboratory studies revealed a white blood cell count of 24,460 cells/μL with 25% atypical lymphocytes and 20% mononucleosis, thrombocytopenia, and increased immunoglobulin (Ig) G . Ultrasonography and computed tomography revealed severe lymphadenopathy in the neck, groin, abdomen, and mediastinum. Serum samples were collected on day 12 of the illness to perform a serological differential diagnosis .
Paired sera on the 11th and 18th day of onset were test for cytomegalovirus (CMV), human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), herpes simplex virus-1 and 2, Brucella, and the protozoan Toxoplasma gondii were positive only for IgG antibodies to CMV. Antibodies specific for Hantaan virus, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), and various respiratory viruses (adenovirus, respiratory syncytial viruses A and B, influenza viruses A and B, and parainfluenza virus types 1, 2, and 3) in paired sera were negative. The samples were positive for Epstein-Barr viral capsid IgG and EBV nuclear antigen IgG antibodies. The results of the heterophile agglutination test were negative. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses were negative for typhus, scrub typhus, EBV, CMV, HHV-6, human granulocytic anaplasmosis, Leptospira, and CCHFV. Human immunodeficiency virus- and hepatitis virus-specific antibodies were negative at the time of admission. The test results for antinuclear antibodies, circulating immune complexes and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were also negative. The stool, blood, and urine samples were negative for routine bacterial cultures; however, the throat cultures were negative. A bone marrow biopsy performed on day 13 of disease onset was unremarkable.
The patient was diagnosed with MLIs; however, the specific pathogen remained unidentified. Liaoning Province is the only SFTSV-endemic area in Northeast China . The patient visited a hilly area adjacent to east Liaoning Province prior to symptom onset and reported being bitten by a tick. Although the patient’s presentation was not typical SFTS, the serum samples collected on day 13 of the illness were sent to the diagnostic laboratory of infectious diseases of the Centers of Disease Control in Liaoning Province for SFTSV analysis. These samples were positive for SFTSV by real-time PCR, with RNA loads of 2.5 × 106 copies/mL. The test result was positive for SFTSV-specific IgM antibody, but negative for SFTSV-specific IgG antibody. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with MLIs attributed to SFTSV infection.
The patient received nutritional support therapy and fluid supplementation upon admission. On hospitalization day 3, intravenous Ig was initiated at a dose of 30 g/day for 5 days. The patient’s condition did not improve. SFTS is characterized by fever, thrombocytopenia, leukocytopenia, and lymphadenopathy; however, the patient presented with MLIs, which was not consistent with the typical clinical manifestations of an SFTSV infection. Since ticks can carry multiple pathogens, including emerging tick-associated agents in mainland China , SFTSV co-infection with other tick-borne agents (e.g., SFGR and B burgdorferi sensulato) was under consideration. However, the test for SFGR was not available in our laboratory at the time. Since doxycycline is the recommended therapeutic regimen for rickettsia, anaplasma, ehrlichia, and Borrelia burgdorferi sensulato infections, we prescribed doxycycline at a dosage of 0.1 mg (twice daily) to cover other tick-borne pathogens. The body temperature returned to normal within 12 h following the administration of doxycycline, and continued for 2 weeks after the body temperature returned to normal. The leukocyte count returned to normal levels, and the patient was discharged on day 7 post-admission. At the 6-month follow-up, recovery was complete.
In 2016, co-infection with SFTS and SFGR was reported in SFTS endemic area in Central China . In 2019, we retrospectively investigated SFGR infection among SFTS patients whose blood samples on admission were stored at − 80ºC since 2010. Real-time PCR and an ELISA (Spotted fever rickettsia IgM Antibody Kit, FULLER) were performed. The patient’s serum collected on the eleventh day of onset 6 years prior, was positive for SFGR-specific IgM antibody and negative for SFGR-specific IgG antibody. The PCR test for B burgdorferi sensulato was negative. The patient was finally retrospectively diagnosed with SFTSV co-infection with SFGR 6 years after disease onset.