A 40-year-old gentleman presented with low backache of 5 years duration. He was evaluated clinically and radiologically. A diagnosis of PDB was made. Bone scan revealed multiple site involvement (skull, sternum, dorsal and lumbar, pelvis, ribs, femur, and tibia) (, , , ). Bone biopsy from the iliac region revealed numerous multinucleated giant cells with the haphazard new bone formation and diagnosis of polyostotic Paget’s disease was confirmed. The patient was treated with intravenous (IV) bisphosphonate every 3 weeks (pamidronate 60 mg IV infusion) with vitamin D and calcium supplement at another institution. He was apparently alright for 3 years when he noticed a lump in the right gluteal region. It was associated with dull aching localized pain. Radiographs revealed a lytic lesion in right posterior ilium and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis showed a large lesion with an extraosseous soft tissue component involving the iliac bone and adjacent sacral ala. Blood investigations showed an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase. Computed tomography-guided trucut biopsy from gluteal mass was diagnosed as GCT. Serial angioembolizations were attempted with intent to control the disease without surgery owing to the complex anatomy and associated morbidity of surgery, but the mass progressed in size. A decision for surgical excision was taken. Excision of soft tissue mass with curettage and cementation of the right sacroiliac component of the lesion was done. The final histopathology report confirmed GCT in case of PDB. 2 years after the surgery, he presented with a large local recurrence involving the posterior ilium and sacral ala. The recurrence was confirmed with a repeat biopsy. He was started on denosumab, a monoclonal RANK ligand inhibitor in an attempt to downstage the lesion and thus reduce the morbidity of surgery. Denosumab was administered at a dose of 120 mg subcutaneously at monthly intervals with loading doses at day 1, 8, and 15. A repeat MRI evaluation, after 6 injections of denosumab, revealed a good response with shrinkage of the soft tissue mass. He then underwent partial Type-1 internal hemipelvectomy and curettage of the sacral lesion (, , , , ). At a 15 months follow-up, the patient is asymptomatic and disease-free.