An 81 year-old man presented with subacute disorientation, mild left-side weakness, impaired balance, apraxia and unilateral spatial neglect in May 2015. His past medical history included arterial hypertension and a stable course of PCV, diagnosed at the age of 66, treated with hydroxyurea (HU), low dose acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and occasional phlebotomy. Upon admission in May 2015 a brain CT scan revealed a hypodense area in the right temporal lobe initially interpreted as a subacute infarction. Mild anemia was found and HU was discontinued. The patient was referred to a rehabilitation clinic, but his condition deteriorated rapidly in the following days. On readmission left-side weakness, marked contralateral limb ataxia, dysdiadochokinesia, bradykinesia, dysarthria, left homonymous hemianopia and left-sided hemianesthesia were evident. Brain MRI performed at this point displayed multifocal and punctate slightly expansive white matter non-contrast enhanced juxta- and subcortical lesions, predominantly in the right hemisphere. These lesions were more confluent around the right trigonum and within the right temporal lobe and brainstem. There was involvement of the right cerebral peduncle, anterior pons on the right side, right middle cerebellar peduncle and the cerebellum around the dentate nucleus. On diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) lesions were hyperintense but without restricted diffusion as the apparent diffusion coefficients (ADC) were not decreased in the area . EEG-recording revealed non-epileptiform abnormalities such as slow wave activities over right hemisphere and maximum over right temporal region.
A lumbar puncture was performed and yielded normal cell count and protein content in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Enterovirus, herpes simplex 1 and 2, varicella zoster and CMV, were ruled out in the CSF by means of PCR and ELISA analysis. Serology for Lyme’s disease and syphilis in the CSF was also negative. Onconeural antibodies were not detected in blood. A centrifugated CSF sample was analyzed with fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) which identified only few T-cells. Neurofilament light protein (NfL) was markedly elevated (16500 ng/L; reference interval <1850). Analysis for JC-virus yielded 7 400 copies/mL and tests for BK-virus, HIV, and HTLV-1 tests were negative. A second MRI of the brain three weeks after admission displayed an increased number of widespread supra- and infratentorial lesions . Additional laboratory investigation at this point revealed mild lymphopenia with decreased amounts of all lymphocyte fractions but not NK-cells. A flow-cytometric assay of specific cell-mediated immune response in activated whole blood (FASCIA) analysis revealed poor response to mitogens and specific antigens as shown in table .
Different therapeutic options for PML were considered , but due to the rapid clinical deterioration treatment was withheld. The patient developed manifest left-sided hemiplegia, horizontal nystagmus, and verbal unresponsiveness. At this point his condition had worsened and the subject became unable to swallow, he contracted recurrent pneumonias and required a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. During the later course of disease he remained in an unresponsive state until he died of pneumonia. Total disease duration in this case was two months. Post mortem studies of the bone marrow demonstrated a picture consistent with PCV but no signs of leukemic transformation. Histopathological analysis of the brain confirmed progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) .