A 25 years old gravida 3, and para 2 (both are alive) mother presented with the complaint of advanced labor pain of 18 h duration. She came by ambulance transport from a 35 km distant rural health center to Bele Primary Hospital, Wolaita Zone, Southern Ethiopia. The mother did not remember her last normal menstrual period but claims to be amenorrheic for the last 9 months. During the current pregnancy; she had no antenatal care visit, no history of vaginal bleeding, no abdominal pain, and no other danger signs of pregnancy. She has no previous history of pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), and pelvic surgery. She has also no history of contraceptive use. Both her last deliveries were at home with no complications. During the physical examination, her vital signs were in the normal range. Pink conjunctiva and non-icteric sclera. On abdominal examination, 38 weeks sized uterus, fetal heart beat was 148 bpm, cephalic presentation, longitudinal lie, multiple fetal poles were not appreciated, there was 3 uterine contractions in 10 min with moderate strength and bladder was not distended. On the genito-urinary examination (per vagina), cervix was fully dilated, vertex presentation, fetal head visible at vulva, normal position, no sign of caput or molding, the membrane was ruptured with clean amniotic fluid.
Basic laboratory investigations were done, her hematocrit level was 35%, and her blood group was “O positive”. Other serologic tests were also done for HIV, Hepatitis, and syphilis and all were negative and urine analysis was also negative for microscope exam.
Vaginal delivery summary, this mother gave birth to alive female neonate weighing 3300gm with an Apgar score of 8 and 9 in the 1st and 5th minutes respectively by spontaneous vaginal delivery and 3rd stage of labor managed actively.
But after the delivery of the neonate, her abdomen shows three tumor features i.e. contracted 20 weeks sized uterus and palpable masses at both left and right upper quadrants. The mass was non-tender and slightly hard and smooth at the left side posterior to the uterus and irregular at the right side . Bimanual exploration of the uterus was made to look for after coming 2nd twin and speculum examination also performed to explore the presence of additional cervical canal and double uterus, but only one cervical opening was appreciated. The posterior fornix was bulged.
On ultrasound examination, a fetus was seen in an intact amniotic sac with scanty fluid posterior to the empty uterus. The fetus was in a transverse lie, the head and placenta were at the left upper quadrant below the spleen and its abdomen and extremities were towards the right upper quadrant of her abdomen. The fetal heartbeat was normal and no gross congenital anomaly was identified.
Referral was planned for the impression of 2nd twin in a separate horn of the bicornuate uterus and to rule out abdominal pregnancy. But due to economic reason, the patient refused referral. Then after getting informed, written consent, and preparing two units of cross-matched whole blood, the patient was taken to OR. Abdomen was entered through a midline vertical skin incision.
The intra-Op findings were: A fetus in a transverse lie was found, in its intact amniotic sac posterior to the uterus, in the pouch of Douglas . The sac was attached with the left broad ligament, left ovary, small bowel mesentery, and posterior wall of the uterus . The head and placenta were in the left iliac fossa with engorged and tortious vessels which start to rupture spontaneously during manipulation . Then the intact amniotic sac was opened to deliver alive female neonate with left club foot weighing 1600gm with Apgar score of 7and 8 in the 1st and 5th minutes respectively. The placenta was delivered spontaneously without resistance from its site of attachment. Small bleeders from the placenta detachment site were controlled by multiple ligations. The normal anatomy of the left adnexa was distorted and it was difficult to identify the ovary . But the right tube and ovary were normal. Fresh edges of the sac sutured and left in place, hemostasis was secured and the abdomen was closed in layers. The patient was transferred to post anesthesia care unit with the post-operative diagnosis of spontaneous full-term heterotopic pregnancy. Her post-Op hematocrit (HCT) level was 29% and the post-operative course was uneventful. Unfortunately, on the 7th post-Op day, the very low birth weight baby died while she was on treatment at the neonatal care unit of our hospital. The patient was discharged home on the 8thpost-operative day. She returned on her 45th day for post-natal care follow up and both the mother and her baby were in good condition.