A 45-year-old woman presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a chief complaint of persistent abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding for 7 days. A physical examination after admission revealed a marked abdominal tenderness with positive rebound tenderness. Blood tests showed WBC 27 × 109/L, N 87.4%, Hb 52 g/L, and Plt 371 × 109/L. Abdominal color Doppler ultrasound showed ascites, a slightly dilated lower abdominal bowel, and multiple hypoechoic myometria, following which the possibility of the presence of fibroids was considered. Whole abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed that the left middle and upper abdomen were partially empty, the ileal wall was thickened and swollen, and the thickest part was approximately 2.0 cm. Small bubble density shadows were seen in a part of the intestinal wall, and the corresponding bowel enhancement was not obvious on enhanced scanning. The main portal vein and its branches and the superior mesenteric vein and its branches could be seen with filling defects in the lumen. A small amount of fluid accumulation was seen around the liver, spleen, and intestine. This was considered congestive enteropathy with the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein thrombosis. The uterine shadow enlarged, its inner density was uneven, multiple lumpy and patchy areas of reduced density could be seen, and the enhancement scan was uneven. The presence of multiple uterine fibroids was considered. Many effusion shadows were observed in the pelvic cavity, and no obvious enlarged lymph nodes were found in the retroperitoneum and pelvic cavity. A few patchy cord shadows were seen in the ingested double lower lungs. The boundary was not clear . An upright abdominal radiograph showed a slightly dilated bowel in the abdomen . Since multiple uterine fibroids caused abnormal vaginal bleeding, DSA uterine angiography showed that the left and right uterine arteries were thickened and disordered, with an enlarged uterus in the parenchyma stage. Repeated angiography after embolization revealed that most of the left and right uterine arteries were blocked . Low-molecular-weight heparin and warfarin were administered for 7 days postoperatively, and the international normalized ratio was maintained at 2.0–3.0. A repeat enhanced CT showed that the main portal vein, the right posterior branch of the liver, the main mesenteric trunk, and some branches were thrombosed and slightly absorbed compared with the previous ones. The proximal branch of the mesentery was painful. In the mid-abdominal region, the wall of the small intestine was thickened and swollen, with surrounding mesentery exudation—multiple uterine fibroids with bleeding and gas. The patient was discharged from the hospital with relief from abdominal pain.
One month later, the patient was readmitted with occasional dull pain in the left lower quadrant and a long brown discharge . An electronic colonoscopy revealed avascular necrosis and tissue exfoliation of the intestinal mucosa. Blood work showed WBC 4.5 × 109/L, N 67.6%, Hb 88 g/L, and Plt 384 × 109/L, coagulation function showed PT 45.8 s, APTT 43.1, INR 4.45, FDP2 5.4 ug/ml, and D-dimer 1.35 mg/L. A whole abdominal CT showed that, while compared with the portal venous phase, eccentric filling defects were seen in the main portal vein, the superior mesenteric vein, and some branch lumens, and the range was significantly smaller than before. The original right posterior thrombus was absorbed, and some proximal mesenteric branch veins were unobstructed, which showed improvement compared with the previous thrombus. In the mid-abdominal region, the segmental small bowel wall was still thickened and swollen, which was reduced compared with the previous one, and the enhancement was obvious. Scattered exudation and a small amount of fluid in the pelvic and abdominal cavities were absorbed earlier . Digital gastrointestinal angiography was used to observe the small intestine of each group over time; the formation of a thick, cord-shaped suspicious fistula in the jejunum of the second group was observed at 4 min, with a range of approximately 10.7 × 1.8 cm. The inner end was inclined to the level of the left vertebral body of T5, and the outer edge was smooth. It was in the fixed state of the left middle and lower abdomen, and its lower edge communicated with the proximal jejunum at the lower end. The lower part of the mucosal folds of the small intestine in Group 4 was limited and slightly expanded in a spring-like fashion. Under the pathological microscope of the discharge, a large area of degeneration and necrosis was observed, a red-stained muscle bundle–like structure was observed, and no nuclei were observed . The patient’s abdominal pain resolved after continuation of warfarin therapy.
After 5 months, the patient developed persistent abdominal pain again, aggravated after eating, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and difficulty in defecation. It was necessary to use a “glycerol enema” to assist in expelling 4–5 times/day. A physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 75/49 mm Hg. Digital total gastrointestinal angiography showed that the descending and transverse parts of the duodenum were dilated, and antiperistalsis could be seen. The small intestines of each group were observed at different times, equivalent to the formation of a cord-shaped suspicious fistula at the proximal end of the jejunum in the second group. The jejunum above it was dilated, and the contrast agent passed through intermittently. Considering the duodenal stasis sign, it was equivalent to the second fistula that could have formed in the proximal small intestine of the group. A whole abdominal CT showed a filling defect in the lumen at the origin of the superior mesenteric vein, which was considered a thrombosis at the origin of the superior mesenteric vein. After myomectomy and bilateral uterine artery embolization, lump-like shadows with abnormal density were seen on the posterior wall of the uterus, and the enhancement showed uneven and obvious enhancement, with a size of about 5.2 × 3.9 × 4.3 cm . The maximal intensity projection (MIP) image showed that the local lumen of the superior mesenteric vein was slightly widened, and a longitudinal linear hypodense filling defect was observed . The upright abdominal radiograph showed multiple gas-liquid levels in the middle and lower abdomen, and the elastic ring sign was seen in a part of the dilated bowel . The current diagnosis was incomplete intestinal obstruction with the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein thromboses. Therefore, an exploratory laparotomy was performed, and partial jejunal resection and gastrointestinal bypass anastomosis were performed during the operation . A postoperative pathological examination showed a chronic inflammation of the jejunal mucosa with ulceration, partial mucosal necrosis and exfoliation, pus on the surface of the intestinal mucosa, infiltration of many lymphocytes and plasma cells, and a small number of neutrophils and eosinophils in the full thickness of the intestinal wall. Vascular hyperplasia, dilation and congestion with hemorrhage, and fibrinoid necrosis were observed in some blood vessels . There were 26 lymph nodes around the jejunum, indicating reactive hyperplasia. A postoperative re-examination CT showed some changes after small bowel resection. The anastomotic stoma was unobstructed, multiple gases and fluid levels in the original abdomen had disappeared before the operation, and no signs of intestinal obstruction were found. A small punctate filling defect in the superior mesenteric vein was absorbed earlier . The upright abdominal radiograph showed that the multiple gas–liquid levels in the original abdomen had disappeared before surgery . The abdominal pain disappeared after the operation, warfarin was continued after discharge, and the symptoms have not recurred since.