A 43-year-old man with pituitary gigantism from the age of 16 secondary to a GH-functional PA. He underwent microsurgical trans sphenoidal surgery for resection of a PA in 1990 and adjuvant radiotherapy given in 2011 (radiotherapy scheme, original radiology and pathology unavailable). In 2016, almost 27 years after the initial surgery, he presented progressive decrease in vision on the left eye for six months. He also complained of excessive perspiration and sweating and had a past history of carpal tunnel syndrome. He was found to have gigantism features as extreme physical size (2.07 mts height) and pigmentation around eyes, neck and flexures.
In ophtalmologic examination, a left ptosis with both exophthalmos and upward/inward limitation on left eye movements was achieved, and in the Goldmann’s test perimeter an ipsilateral amaurosis and right hemianopia (Octopus 900 Haag Streit Inc., Bern, Switzerland) .
Random serum GH level was 0.071 ng/ml (0.003–0.97 ng/mL) with a normal GH concentration during the Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT) with a GH-nadir of 0.13 ng/ml (the gold standard for diagnosis is that GH excess fails to suppress serum GH level to less than 1 ng/ml after OGTT). The Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 (IGF-1) 84.3 ng/ml (64–210 ng/mL); the rest of hormones are listed and shown in .
On brain Magnetic Resonance-Imaging (MRI) (Siemens 3.0 T magnetic resonance scanner and a 32-channel head coil) revealed a large policystic selar lesion with extensive osteophytic reaction and invasion of the ipsilateral orbital apex associated with fibrous dysplasia (see A and B) with a T2-weighted hypointense and enhancing selar mass lesion with Calcium intensity on the Gradient echo sequences (GRE) (C). Also the skull CT-scan (Siemens SOMATOM Sensation 64-slices) revealed an osteolytic lesion on the right orbital apex with thickness of the diploe (E) and pituitary gland with a calcified rim around the tumor (D, F and G). There was no personal or family history of prior endocrine disease.
A second surgical resection was performed in 2016 by a left orbitozygomatic approach for tumor removal with no acute complications (A–C). Three days after the resection, the patient presented sudden unresponsiveness with an asymmetrically larger left pupil and rostrocaudal deterioration due to an ischemic stroke on left Anterior Cerebral Artery (ACA) and Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA), performing an urgent ipsilateral decompressive craniectomy. Unfortunately after surgery the patient continued unresponsive, leading to his death.
After the informant consent was obtained, brain autopsy was performed. Neuropathologic examination of the pituitary lesion removed in 2016 (first neuropathology report was unavailable) was characterized macroscopically by a 40 × 40 mm mass with grayish outer surface and inner yellowish-irregular zones thickened by “sand-like” calcifications (A and B). Histologically micro-hemorrhage with ossification areas within a thick pseudocapsule and multiple calcifications with a diffuse desmoplastic stromal component even within blood vessels were observed (C and D). Immunohistochemistry stains were positive for Growth Hormone and osteoconine (F–G). Brain autopsy showed perivascular granular-dystrophic calcifications in thalamus, hypothalamus and basal ganglia (D, H–J).