A 46-year-old Japanese man was transferred to our hospital for the evaluation of fever. He had a history of hypertension and no history of mental illness. There was no family history of malignancy or hematological disease. He had a 20 pack-year smoking history. He had been working as an engineer at an electronics company before he was hospitalized. The patient had developed fever 8 weeks prior to being admitted to our hospital. At that time, he was anorexic, but denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, bloody stool, or weight loss. He was first admitted to another hospital for the evaluation of persistent fever 5 weeks prior where he was initially treated with antibiotics (sulbactam/ampicillin, followed by ceftriaxone) based on the suspicion of a bacterial infection. However, the antibiotics were discontinued because no bacteria grew on the blood, sputum, and urine culture. During this period, he experienced a sudden onset of paralysis and numbness in his both legs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an epidural mass at the level of the eleventh thoracic vertebra (Th11) , and the patient underwent a laminectomy at the levels of Th1012. Epidural abscess and vertebral osteomyelitis were suspected based on the intraoperative visual findings, even though the bacterial cultures of intraoperative specimens were negative. No tissue was sent for histopathological examination. Antimicrobial treatment (meropenem and vancomycin) was restarted; however, his fever persisted, and he was then transferred to our hospital.
At the time of admission to our hospital, his Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status was 4. The patient reported fecal and urinary incontinence, but denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, bloody stool, or weight loss. His vital signs included a temperature of 38.2, blood pressure of 119/62 mmHg, heart rate of 109 bpm, respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation at 90% on ambient air. There was no tenderness on the back. Paraplegia and numbness were detected below the level of the first lumbar vertebra (L1). The laboratory test results showed normocytic anemia and elevated aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase, C-reactive protein, and ferritin levels. The level of prostate-specific antigen was within the normal range. There was no evidence of paraproteinemia. Chest, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed diffusely distributed osteolytic lesions and a left adrenal adenoma, but no other abnormal findings were detected. There was no abnormal wall thickening of the colon. A thoracic and lumbar spine MRI showed high-intensity lesions in the diffusion-weighted image, and short-time inversion recovery imaging and low-intensity lesions on T1 weighted from second cervical vertebra (C2) to L5.
Based on the presence of multiple osteolytic lesions, differential diagnoses at this time included hematological malignancies (lymphoma, leukemia, and multiple myeloma), metastatic carcinoma, Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection, primary hyperparathyroidism, and primary amyloidosis. A specific type of lymphoma, which was characterized by the absence of enlarged lymph nodes, such as intravascular lymphoma, remained a diagnostic possibility. Based on the laboratory and imaging findings, multiple myeloma, primary amyloidosis, leukemia, and hyperparathyroidism were unlikely. Given that the patient did not have an apparent history of exposure and his blood and spinal fluid mycobacterial cultures and interferon-gamma release assays were negative, tuberculosis also seemed to be less likely. Therefore, the physicians considered intravascular lymphoma and metastatic carcinoma as the most likely differential diagnoses. In particular, intravascular lymphoma was suspected based on the fever of unknown origin with the poor general condition, high lactate dehydrogenase level, and osteolytic lesions throughout the body with no identifiable mass lesions or lymphadenopathy.
A random skin biopsy revealed no abnormalities, and a bone marrow biopsy from the left iliac bone revealed no contributory findings. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed high FDG accumulation in multiple discrete bone structures, including the left iliac bone, and mild accumulation in the left adrenal gland, which was likely due to the adrenal adenoma; however, no significant accumulation was observed in solid organs, intestines, or lymph nodes . A CT-guided bone biopsy taken from the left iliac bone, where FDG had accumulated the most, confirmed the evidence of metastatic adenocarcinoma based on immunohistochemistry . Colorectal cancer was suspected based on the results that the fecal occult blood test was positive and the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) submitted later was high at 2260 ng/mL. Alpha-fetoprotein and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) levels were normal. A subsequent colonoscopy showed a Borrmann type II tumor with a diameter of more than 20 mm in the sigmoid colon , which was confirmed by histopathology to be a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The immunohistochemistry pattern of the tumor was the same as that of the bone lesion . The patient was finally diagnosed with advanced colorectal carcinoma with multiple bone metastases. It took 1month from admission to our hospital to the definitive diagnosis. His fever persisted during the investigation, but resolved with naproxen. After a shared decision-making, the patient chose palliative care without chemotherapy.He returned to the previous hospital, where he received palliative care, and died 4 weeks later.