Female, 30 years old.
Chills, febrile sensation, muscle pain.
There was nothing significant to report. No one in her family had ever had dengue fever.
None of her coworkers showed similar symptoms or were diagnosed with dengue fever. In the region where she lives, there was no report of any dengue fever case. She had not been recently bitten by any mosquito because it was winter at the time.
A year before she was injured by the syringe needle, she had visited Hong Kong for a short period. She had no other travel history.
The laboratory where she worked was a biosafety level 2 research facility. When she was injured by the syringe needle, she was in charge of infecting cultured mosquito cells with dengue virus type 2 (DENV-2). During that procedure, she transferred dengue virus solution in a 50 mL conical tube (hereafter referred to as “the tube”) into a 10 mL syringe (hereafter referred to as “the syringe”). Then, she connected the syringe to a disposable filter in order to filter the virus solution . While she was suctioning the virus solution with the syringe, she removed the needle attached to the syringe. At that moment, the needle cap was not stripped away. However, as she repeated that procedure, the amount of the virus solution contained in the tube decreased. She, therefore, reattached the needle to the syringe and stripped away the cap in order to suction the rest of the virus solution. When she tried to recap the needle to remove it, she was injured .
The patient washed the wound in running water for 10 min according to laboratory biosafety accident countermeasures and first aid guidelines immediately after she was wounded. She, however, could not disinfect the wound because the necessary materials were not on hand. She went to a nearby hospital, got the wound disinfected, and went home. She kept working in that laboratory unit after the accident. She conducted daily self-tests using the SD BIOLINE Dengue NS1 Ag Rapid Test (Standard Diagnostics Inc., Yongin, South Korea), which is a rapid diagnostic test for dengue virus nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) antigen (Ag). Ten days after she was wounded, a positive test result was confirmed . Symptoms had started one day before the positive reaction was confirmed. Muscle pains began first. Then, vomiting, chills, and a febrile sensation followed. Two days later, a rash started around both knees . As symptoms appeared and a positive reaction was confirmed from a diagnostic kit, she went to a university hospital in the city of Gwangju on the third day of the symptoms. However, she did not receive any special examination or treatment. On the next day, the symptoms continued, and she was hospitalized in a community hospital near her home for symptomatic treatment.
When she was admitted to the hospital, the patient’s blood pressure, pulse, and respiration rate were all within a normal range. Her body temperature measured in the axillary region was 37.3 C, indicating a mild fever. There was a rash around both knees, but physical examination revealed no other abnormalities such as edema or ascites.
The patient’s blood test results when admitted were as follows: complete blood cell count results showed leukocytes of 3,390/mm3, hemoglobin of 13.3 g/dL, platelets of 300,000/mm3, and hematocrit of 41.0 %, showing slight leukopenia. The blood chemistry examination showed aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 33 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 26 IU/L, total protein of 7.7 g/dL, and albumin of 4.3 g/dL, which were within a normal range. Urine examination results were normal. On her sixth day of hospitalization, her blood sample was sent to the Korea National Institutes of Health (KNIH) for confirmatory tests. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) was measured twice using the DENV Detect™ IgM Capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (InBios International, Inc., Seattle, WA, USA) and Panbio® Dengue IgM Capture ELISA (Panbio Diagnostics, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia) once each. Both tests were positive. However, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was negative [, ].
During hospitalization, she complained of symptoms such as muscle pains, chills, mild fever, nausea, vomiting, and skin rashes accompanied by itchiness. In order to relieve her symptoms, she was treated with acetaminophen, antihistamines, and so on. On the third day of hospitalization, in spite of the ongoing treatments, the muscle pain expanded to her entire body, and the rash kept spreading to other parts of her body. However, on the fifth day of hospitalization, her major symptoms disappeared, except the rash. The rash continuously expanded to her entire body, including her arms, legs, and face. Then, on the seventh day of hospitalization, the rash began to improve.
Blood tests on the third day of hospitalization showed leukocytes of 2,410/mm3, showing that leukopenia had worsened. AST and ALT increased to 66 IU/L and 48 IU/L, respectively. On the sixth day of hospitalization, leukocytes were 6,390/mm3, showing no leukopenia. However, AST was 235 IU/L and ALT was 269 IU/L, both increasing further. Then she was treated with hepatotonics. On the eighth day of hospitalization, when she was discharged, AST and ALT decreased to 46 IU/L and 145 IU/L, respectively . She had neither residual symptoms nor blood parameter abnormalities when she underwent follow-up two weeks later.