Our patient was a 15-year-old Han Chinese boy who presented with fever, weakness, pallor, edema, dyspnea, and gradually increasing abdominal girth for 2 weeks. His parents denied consanguineous marriage. His medical history was not significant. His one older sister and two younger sisters were all healthy. He was delivered after full-term normal pregnancy. His growth and development were markedly slow after birth, but his school records were excellent. His spleen was resected due to unexplained enlargement at the age of 9. He had a history of multiple prolonged hospital admissions for pyrexia of unknown origin, without reaching a clear diagnosis.
The results of an initial assessment on admission were: he looked unwell, height 135 cm, weight 30 kg, and no sign of secondary sex characters. He had fever with a temperature fluctuating between 37.2 and 39.7 °C, pallor, wakefulness, distress, and clarity of mind. There was no jaundice, petechiae, or fresh rash on skin. Superficial lymph nodes were palpable in inguinal region. His eyelids were swollen, no cyanosis, pharynx without congestion, and bilateral tonsils III° large. There was no thyroid enlargement. Trachea in midline. There were audible harsh breath sounds and crackles bilaterally. His heart beat was 114/minute with normal rhythm, no murmur was heard. He had a distended abdomen with hepatomegaly; liver palpable 10 cm below costal margin with firm consistency and free from tenderness. He had a huge scar located in the left upper quadrant . Murphy sign (−); shifting dullness sign (+). There was marked pitting edema in his lower extremities. A neurological assessment was normal. The results of other systemic examinations were essentially normal.
Initial and subsequent laboratory tests and imaging revealed the following results:On routine blood tests conducted over several days, white blood cell (WBC) count was more than 20 × 109/L with normal classification, whereas hemoglobin (Hb) and platelets (PLT) decreased continuously . Liver enzymes and bilirubin were increased slightly to moderately with hypoproteinemia: lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 301 U/L, aspartate transaminase (AST) 45 U/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 218 U/L, total bilirubin (TBIL) 72.9umol/L, albumin (ALB) 29 g/L, but a kidney function test and urine analysis were unremarkable. Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) were prolonged slightly; D-Dimer increased moderately. Other positive indicators were: procalcitonin (PCT) fluctuated around 0.2 ng/ml; antistreptolysin (ASO) was 259 IU/mL; Widal’s test TH 1:160, TO 1:320; tumor marker CA-25 was 384.0 U/mL, CA724 was 38.78 U/mL; ferritin was 550.58 ng/mL; hepatitis E virus antibody IgG(+); and Legionella pneumophila serum antibody IgM(±). The tests of thyroid function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), CD64 index, T-lymphocyte subsets, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) were normal. Coombs test, interferon-γ release assay, antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), hepatitis A virus (HAV)\hepatitis B virus (HBV)\hepatitis C virus (HCV)\human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test, and herpes simplex virus (HSV)\cytomegalovirus (CMV)\Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) test were negative. Blood and fungal cultures were negative. Bone marrow smear showed infectious bone marrow image and occasional atypical lymphocytes. Ultrasound revealed grossly enlarged liver (right oblique diameter 164 mm) with normal echotexture, gallbladder wall swelling, left renal calculi, massive peritoneal effusion, but portal vein and common bile duct had normal diameters. There was slight pericardial effusion with normal pulmonary arterial pressure. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed severe pulmonary interstitial fibrosis with infection, multiple lymph node display, liver shape irregularity, and no obvious abnormality in abdominal angiography .
After receiving therapies including anti-infection, anti-virus, atomization inhalation, diuresis to eliminate swelling, liver-preserving and gallbladder protection, human serum ALB, immunoglobulin and blood transfusion, the symptoms of our patient improved, and his peak body temperature decreased . However, it was difficult to explain the illness with “one etiology”; it was assumed that it was probably a kind of rare genetic metabolic disease associated with infection. To confirm the diagnosis, pathological sections of the spleen were borrowed from another hospital, where the boy underwent splenectomy 6 years previously.
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining of the spleen sections showed that red pulp was occupied by a large number of Gaucher cells, splenic trabecula disappeared, and some splenic nodules remained. The results of specific stains were: Rf (+) and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) (−). The results of immunohistochemical stains were: CD68 (+), Lyso (+), Vim (+), KI-67 (+<5%), Pan-CK (−), EMA (−), HHF35 (−), CD31 (−), CD34 (−), LCA (−), and S-100 (−) . Final diagnosis was GD (type 1). However, our patient’s family declined to test beta-glucosidase levels, gene mutation site, or purchase imiglucerase (enzyme replacement therapy). Finally, he was discharged from hospital after his temperature had declined to normal.
During a subsequent 6-month telephone follow-up, he said that he was able to continue with his school life, and do some mild physical activities; he no longer had a fever. A routine blood examination at a local hospital showed mild anemia, and a CT scan showed no significant progress of pulmonary infection. After raising enough money, his family would consider using imiglucerase.