A 38-year-old Sinhalese man presented to Teaching Hospital Kurunegala in Sri Lanka complaining of a 3-week history of fever, lethargy, and fatigability. He had not had any significant clinical conditions prior to this. He did not have any food or drug allergies while he was on regular anti-worm and anti-filarial prophylaxis. On clinical examination, he was febrile (39.4 °C), pale, and found to have a pansystolic murmur over the apex of his heart. He had leukocytosis (12.4 mm3) with predominant neutrocytosis (81%). His hemoglobin was 11.2 g/dL, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 231 mg/l, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 100 mm/first hour. Transthoracic two-dimensional echocardiography (echo) revealed grade II mitral regurgitation, myxomatous, prolapsed mitral valve with 7 × 13 mm vegetation over the posterior mitral valve. Three sets of blood cultures were obtained within 1 hour from three different venipuncture sites; intravenously administered ceftriaxone was started empirically.
The following day, the three blood cultures became positive and were subsequently identified as Staphylococcus aureus. Intravenously administered cloxacillin 3 g 6 hourly was initiated while ceftriaxone was omitted. The (72 hours following initial culture) clearance blood cultures revealed Staphylococcus aureus and repeated clearance cultures following 72 hours remained negative. From that day onwards, for duration of 42 days, intravenously administered cloxacillin therapy was determined while clinical response was monitored with quarter hourly temperature, transthoracic two-dimensional echo, white blood cell/differential counts (WBC/DC), CRP, and ESR . Further, he was on acetaminophen and chlorpheniramine malate as required.
Following day 24 of intravenously administered cloxacillin, our patient developed high spike fever (39.6 °C) and his full blood count showed: WBC 990/mm3 with 34% of neutrophils and 22% eosinophils. His hemoglobin concentration was 9.5 g/dL, platelet count (202 × 106/mm3), D-dimer (320 ng/mL fibrinogen equivalent units), and both prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) remained normal. His CRP was 78 mg/l, ESR was 95 mm/first hour, and he was otherwise comfortable, showing no signs of sepsis beside the high grade fever. His vital signs (blood pressure and pulse) were normal. Repeat transthoracic two-dimensional echo was normal thus no vegetations were detected. Mild elevation of liver enzymes was observed and an ultrasound of his abdomen revealed no hepatomegaly: gamma-glutamyl transferase 192 IU/ml, alanine transaminase (ALT) 15 IU/ml, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 136 IU/ml. We omitted intravenously administered cloxacillin and kept him without antimicrobials while arranging a septic screening with a close observation of clinical parameters, WBC/DC, and inflammatory markers. His blood picture showed leukopenia with profound neutropenia and he had eosinophilia. Red blood cells and platelets were normal. He was clinically well and on day 6 after stopping cloxacillin, white blood cells (WBC) became normal with 44% neutrophils and 18% eosinophils. Liver function tests also returned to normal after cloxacillin discontinuation. He was treated with anti-pyretic as required. Subsequently, his septic screening became negative and transthoracic two-dimensional echo showed complete healing with no vegetations.
His serum was negative for filarial and Toxoplasma antibodies while stool was negative for oocytes and amoebic cysts. Further, his serum was negative for Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and hepatitis B antibodies. Subsequently his CRP and ESR became normal, and there was no further plan for cardiothoracic intervention or administration of antimicrobials. He was discharged from hospital and remained well 6 months later.