The patient is a 20-year-old, non-smoker, non-diabetic, active male with a body mass index of 24 who sustained a scaphoid fracture secondary to falling off his bike. This injury occurred in his non-dominant hand. The patient was initially treated conservatively and then referred by his primary care physician for a consult with the subspecialized hand orthopedic surgeon.
The patient sustained the injury approximately 4 months before the consultation. He went on to develop a symptomatic non-union of the scaphoid with carpal collapse. Initial consultation radiographs were obtained, demonstrated in . The standard scaphoid view of the wrist demonstrates a volar flexed fracture of the middle third of the scaphoid bone with displacement.
The patient described the pain as 5 out of 10 for severity, and “sharp” in nature. He had point tenderness over the anatomic snuffbox. There was no surrounding erythema or ecchymosis of note. The working diagnosis was a closed left displaced non-union of the middle third of the scaphoid and carpal collapse of the left wrist. The tentative plan was to obtain a computed tomography (CT) of the left wrist to further evaluate and preoperatively plan.
Standard CT with 1 mm cuts was obtained, and different slices are demonstrated here in . The axial slice demonstrates the severity of the displacement. The results were thoroughly discussed with the patient, and the collective plan was determined to proceed with surgery.
The patient was placed in the supine position, and the operative extremity was prepped and draped in an orthopedic sterile fashion. We proceeded with the standard volar approach to the scaphoid. The incision was centered over the flexor carpi radialis (FCR) tendon, beginning 4 cm proximal to the wrist crease. At the wrist crease, the incision was angled radially towards the scapho-trapezial joint. After sharp dissection was carried out and hemostasis was obtained, the tendon sheath of the FCR was sharply dissected and the tendon was retracted radially. The deep fascia of the sheath was then exposed, and sharp dissection was carried out to split the fibers. A bump was used to extend and ulnarly deviate the wrist to fully expose the scaphoid. The capsule was then sharply dissected obliquely in line longitudinally with the bone.
After the fracture was visualized, a 0.062 K-wire was placed perpendicularly to the long access of the scaphoid into the proximal and distal fragments of the scaphoid. The Hintermann™ Distractor was then utilized to distract the fracture site at this point. Curettage was then performed on both the proximal and distal aspects of the fracture to remove any fibrous tissue down to the bleeding subchondral bone. The autologous corticocancellous bone graft from the distal radius was then fashioned at the fracture site. The Hintermann™ Distractor was then utilized to compress the fracture after an adequate autologous bone graft was placed in the fracture site. This foot and ankle device very efficiently distracted, compressed, and maintained reduction for this unique fracture. Standard views were obtained using the intra-operative fluoroscopic machine. The lateral is depicted in , demonstrating near anatomic alignment.
Then a 0.045 K-wire was placed longitudinally across the fracture site, drilled in standard fashion, and measured. The appropriately sized headless compression was placed across the fracture site. Multiple fluoroscopic views were obtained to confirm maintained reduction and no extrusion of hardware. The wound was irrigated and closed, and the patient was placed in a short thumb spica splint until follow-up.
The patient presented 7 days after surgery for the first post-operative visit. New radiographs were obtained to assess fixation as shown in . The scaphoid views demonstrate maintained reduction and no signs of hardware failure.
The patient now described the pain as 2 out of 10 for severity, with only mild irritation around suture sites. The patient was otherwise distally neurovascularly intact on an exam. The patient demonstrated disabilities of the arm, shoulder, and hand (QuickDASH) score of 35.25 on this visit. The patient was transitioned to a removable thumb spica brace, and a follow-up appointment was scheduled for 3 months later.