A 27-year-old G3P22002 female presented at 19 weeks and 1 day of gestation by last menstrual period for scheduled prenatal visit. Ultrasound study was performed and revealed a single fetus and adequate amniotic fluid with limited fetal measurements consistent with estimated gestational age of 17 weeks, that is, an age 2 weeks less than the estimated gestational age. Diffuse subcutaneous edema was seen, with possible multiloculated nuchal cystic hygroma. Fetal heart tones could not be detected and a three-vessel umbilical cord could not be documented.
The maternal history included 2 previous uncomplicated term vaginal births of children with no anomalies. Age at menarche was 13 years. The mother is a nonsmoker and she was taking supplemental vitamins. She reported no alcohol, caffeine, or illicit drug intake. She is sexually active with a single partner. Most recent cervical pap smear was approximately 4 years ago, with normal results. Prior to this pregnancy, her periods were regular and heavy. Her IgG for rubella was positive approximately at 8 weeks' gestation. The patient denied any significant family history for congenital conditions.
Because of fetal demise, labor was induced with misoprostol and resulted in a spontaneous vaginal delivery of a stillborn female fetus followed by spontaneous delivery of the placenta. The fetus and placenta were transferred to our institution for autopsy and placental examination.
At autopsy, a slightly growth-restricted previable, immature female fetus with grade 1-2 maceration and moderate-to-marked hydrops was examined. The posterior nuchal fluid accumulation was prominent. The ears were low-set and posteriorly rotated. The fingers were short bilaterally , and the right foot showed absence of the second and third digits . The pulmonary artery was slightly narrow, with no other cardiovascular findings. Microscopic examination showed desquamated epidermis and nuchal edema. Evaluation of the organs showed predominantly marked autolysis consistent with retained stillbirth.
Placental examination revealed membrane laminar necrosis, consistent with acute hypoxic injury. The undersurface of the chorionic plate showed focal pseudovillous papilliform cytotrophoblastic proliferation . This was highlighted by double immunohistochemical stain for E-cadherin/CD34 . The chorionic villi were large and cellular, with convoluted outlines and presence of both trophoblastic pseudoinclusions , secondary to villous scalloping, and focal robust ferrugination of the basal lamina , highlighted by iron stain . Rare clusters of villous cytotrophoblasts were seen, with normal villous vascularity , highlighted by E-cadherin/CD34 immunostain . The number of cell islands was increased. The chorion laeve showed an uneven distribution of perpendicularly oriented and elongated clusters of sclerotic chorionic villi .
G-banded karyotyping of placental tissue revealed a 48,XXX,+18 karyotype . Due to maceration, karyotype of fetal tissue was not obtained. Fluorescence in situ hybridization testing for chromosomes X and 18 was performed on relatively well-preserved thymic tissue and highlighted double trisomy of these chromosomes , which rules out an isolated placental mosaicism.