A 77-year-old woman was transferred to our hospital from a local hospital for loss of consciousness and disorientation. She had experienced a fall 2 weeks before admission to our hospital. Plain spine radiography had revealed a spine compression fracture. Two days earlier, she was admitted to a local hospital for relief from back pain. However, during her stay at the hospital, she developed low grade fever, aphasia, and disorientation.
She was then transferred to our hospital for further evaluation of her symptoms that were suggestive of cerebral infarction. She denied any history of smoking, alcohol consumption, or intravenous drug use. She neither had cardiovascular disease nor exhibited any of the risk factors for it. Mild aphasia and hemianopsia were noted at neurological examination. Physical examination revealed a diastolic murmur at the mitral valve area.
The clinical manifestations were suggestive of mitral stenosis and cerebral infarction associated with emboli, which was considered the preliminary diagnosis. Echocardiography revealed mitral stenosis with a mobile 10-mm sized mobile mass . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed subacute and chronic infarction in both the cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum . On day 2 of hospitalization, fever above 38°C was noted; therefore, blood culture test was performed. She was administered ceftriaxone (2 g/d) and gentamicin (3 mg·kg-1.day-1) as an empirical treatment for infective endocarditis.
Despite the empirical antimicrobial treatment, intermittent low-grade fever was noted. Her blood culture was positive for Burkholderia cepacia, and antimicrobial susceptibility test yielded positive results for cefepime, ceftazidime, piperacillin, ciprofloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (day 7 of hospitalization). Therefore, we changed the antimicrobial treatment to ceftazidime (6 g/d) from day 7.
Fever resolved completely from day 9, and blood culture was negative for Burkholderia cepacia. After 6 weeks of ceftazidime treatment, oral ciprofloxacin was prescribed for 2 weeks as an outpatient treatment.
After the antimicrobial treatment course was completed, infective endocarditis resolved completely; no relapse was noted during the follow-up period for 2 years.