56 years old male, obese, smoker since 20 years, without occupation, admitted in our structure for epigastric and right hypochondrium pain progressing since one week with a 5 days of sub occlusive syndrome. The initial clinical examination showed epigastric and right hypochondrium sensibility associated with a fever reaching 38.5°.
Biology revealed hyperleukocytosis at 13,000 elements/mm3 associated with a raised C reactive protein at 57 mg/l.
An emergency abdominal ultrasound examination was performed and revealed a left supra-umbilical pseudo-mass, containing multiple partitions with significant fat and infiltration all around .
The patient had an abdominal CT scan with contrast injection, which showed a rounded formation at the expense of the large supra-umbilical omentum slightly lateralized on the left, under the transverse colon, which had a low-density, with thin septas inside, a regular wall and peripheral contrast enhancement. It is associated with a significant local infiltration. The appendix had a normal morphology: there was no intestinal occlusion .
The surgeons indicated an exploration by midline laparotomy, and not radiological drainage, considering the clinical peritonitis and also the suspicion of ulcer perforation due to the patient's smoking history, even without pneumoperitoneum, its revealed an inflammatory epiploic mass, associated with a single microbial abscess, without any abnormalities of the gastrointestinal wall, so surgical excision of the mass was performed, and then the surgical piece was sent for anatomo-pathological study. The post-operative status was normal without immediate or late complications; the patient received antibiotic therapy with good clinical evolution.
One week after his hospitalization, the biological results improved with a hemoglobin level from 10.3 to 12 g/dl, leukocytes from 13,000 elements/mm3 to 11,000 elements/mm3 without significant variation in other parameters.
The microbiological results of the collection revealed that it was a sterile abscess, with no isolated germ.
The anatomopathological study of the pseudo-mass showed a macroscopic appearance of a fibrinoleukocyte layer . The microscopic study showed altered fibrin and polynuclear tissue around the fat .