Here we report a 33-year-old Caucasian man with GSD Ib presented at our emergency room complaining of abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Onset of symptoms was acute. The patient reported not to know similar conditions before except diffuse pain due to hypoglycemia, which he described differently. The patient had an irregular heterozygous compound gene mutation (c.[1108_1109delCT1189 + 1G > C]; protein level: p.[Leuc370Valfs*53]; in exons 10), suggestive to be disease relevant. No other family member suffered from GSD. He reported regular defecation of mushy consistency without blood three times a day. Physical examination revealed in spite of pronounced hepatomegaly and cachexia, normal oral and anal mucosa as well as normal height and intelligence (occupation: sales representative in the IT industry). Despite regular cornstarch ingestion of 90 g/every 4 h, the glucose concentration at first presentation was 34 mg/dl, lactate concentration was 134 mg/dl (ULN = 20 mg/dl), and C-reactive protein was 13.5 mg/l (ULN = 5 mg/l). Even though the patient was on continuous granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) therapy (48 million IU/every other day) leukopenia prevailed (leukocytes 0.93/nl, neutrophils 0.76/nl, hemoglobin 10.0 g/dl, thrombocytes 125/nl). Initially intravenous glucose infusion improved his abdominal symptoms. A diagnostic CT-scan to exclude ischemia demonstrated hepatosplenomegaly, a feature of GSD Ib, and a short thickening of the intestinal wall at the transverse colon . Ultrasound examination of the abdomen confirmed the stenosis. At the location of the stenosis the entire intestinal wall was 6 mm in diameter. There was no intestinal wall vascularization, consistent with grade I of IBD according to the Limberg classification . A colonoscopy again revealed a short stenosis in the transverse colon which could not be passed with a 12.8 mm colonoscope . The stenosis appeared scarred with some inflammatory changes. Histopathological examination of the biopsy showed hyperplastic and polypoid mucosa. Gastroscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract was without pathologies. Due to the severe leukopenia/neutropenia, immunosuppressive medication, such as steroids or TNF-alpha antibodies, was not considered a treatment option. Instead, we increased the dosage of G-CSF to 30 million IU/d in order to reach a higher leukocyte count and thus, to control the mucosal inflammation. The decision was based on evidence for a beneficial effect of G-CSF in glycogenosis-associated IBD-like disease as well as a previous randomized controlled trial in patients with Crohn’s disease showing that GM-CSF was able to decrease disease activity and to improve quality of life .
After five weeks on high-dose G-CSF abdominal pain had receded, yet defecation was still mushy. Leucocytes had normalized (5-7/nl), while anemia and thrombocytopenia persisted (hemoglobin: 11.8 g/dl (LLN = 13.5 g/dl); thrombocytes: 84/nl (LLN = 150/nl)). C-reactive protein (0.7 mg/l) was normal as was calprotectin (<50 mg/kg). However, colonoscopy revealed a progressive, predominantly scarring stenosis with approximately 4 mm in diameter . Thus, surgical therapy was decided upon. A laparoscopic segmental resection of the transverse colon with end-to-end-anastomosis was performed. The instantaneous section showed chronic, florid ulcerous inflammation, hypertrophic muscular layer and massive fibrosis consistent with a scarring stenosis. No signs of malignancy were observed . Surgery was complicated by insufficiency of the anastomosis resulting in an intra-abdominal abscess and subsequent surgery. Eighteen days after the second surgery the patient could be discharged from the hospital on his former G-CSF schedule.