A 59-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the ophthalmology clinic of West China Hospital of Sichuan University on 13 July 2020 due to a gradual loss of visual acuity in the right eye over the previous 5 years. His left eye had undergone numerous surgical interventions due to postoperative complications, including IOL decentration, IOL dislocations, and retinal detachment (see ). Other than that, the patient reported no history of hypertension, diabetes, trauma, or familial-hereditary diseases.
Upon admission to our hospital, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye only allowed counting fingers. The BCVA of the left eye was 20/25, and refraction was +3 DS/-5 DC × 165°. Horizontal corneal diameters were enlarged in both eyes and exceeded 13 mm as measured using the IOLMaster700 (Zeiss, Jena, Germany). The main biometric measures are summarized in .
Slit lamp examination revealed unremarkable conjunctiva, an enlarged and clear cornea, a deepened anterior chamber in both eyes , normal iris in the right eye but dispersion of iris pigment in the left eye, and an opaque lens in the right eye . The artificial lens in the left eye was slightly off-center. Ultrasound biomicroscopy showed that the anterior chamber of the right eye was deep, and the zonular fiber of the right eye was stretched . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed no obvious abnormality in the fundus of either eye. The patient was diagnosed with a cataract in the right eye and anterior megalophthalmos in both eyes.
Given the unusual anatomy of our patient’s right eye, we decided to calculate IOL power using the Haigis formula, which has been reported as accurate regardless of axial length and has been recommended for patients with anterior megalophthalmos . During the calculation of IOL power, we retained myopia to prevent hyperopic drift.
On 18 July 2020 , an experienced surgeon (F.W.) performed a temporal clear corneal incision of 2.75 mm long with the patient under topical anesthesia, then instilled a viscoelastic agent (DisCoVisc, Alcon) to maintain normal anterior chamber depth. The surgeon performed continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis, hydrodissecti on and hydrodelineation, followed by phacoemulsification (Stellaris, Bausch and Lomb, Rochester, NY, United States). A 3-piece hydrophobic acrylic foldable IOL (+14.5 D, targeting −1.97 D; Sensar AR40, AMO, Santa Ana, CA, United States) was implanted into the capsular bag with the technique of “double fixation,” i.e., the haptics in the capsular bag but the optical part of the IOL captured in front of the anterior capsule opening, which could make IOL more stable in the eye with a large and loose bag. The residual viscoelastic agent was aspirated, then the incision was hydrated with a balanced salt solution and checked for water tightness. During surgery, the height of the infusion bottle was lowered in light of the eye’s zonular weakness and deep anterior chamber. After surgery, the patient was given eye drops containing tobramycin and dexamethasone and eye drops containing 0.1% sodium diclofenac for 1 month.
At 1 year after surgery , the uncorrected visual acuity was 20/25 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye, while intraocular pressure was 11.3 mmHg in the right eye and 14.6 mmHg in the left. Refraction was −1.50 DC × 160° in the right eye and +1.50 DS/−2.50 DC × 170° in the left. Both eyes showed no obvious signs of inflammatory reaction and appeared to be stable, with best-corrected distance vision of 20/20.
In the right eye, the IOL was properly positioned and stable , although the anterior chamber was 5.92 mm deep based on ultrasound biomicroscopy . Using the iTrace system (Tracey Technologies, Houston, TX, United States), berrometry indicated good visual quality in the right eye: the average height from the modulation transfer function curve was 0.720, and the Strehl ratio from the point spread function was 0.88970 . The left eye appeared stable , though it gave worse visual quality than the right eye based on aberrometry . Overall, cataract surgery maintained an adequate vision for daily living, and the patient felt satisfied.
Given that our patient still showed some farsightedness drift despite our retaining some myopia during the calculation of the IOL power, we compared various formulas for their ability to estimate IOL power. Our goal was to identify the most accurate formula that would lead to the smallest postoperative refractive error for the challenging case of anterior megalophthalmos. We found that the Kane, Holladay II with AL adjustment, and Barrett Universal II formulas gave the minimal postoperative refraction error .