A 9-year-old Asian boy was brought to the emergency department with generalised tonic-clonic seizures 1 hour ago. The patient experienced both urinary and faecal incontinence, followed by loss of consciousness. The patient had headaches after awakening. There was no history of trauma, fever, brain surgery or vomiting. Other neurological problems include the inability to maintain posture in a sitting position that appeared at 3 years of age and difficulty swallowing from 4 years of age, which progressed gradually to the extent that the patient had to be put on a nasogastric feeding tube. In addition, the patient’s mother also mentioned that the patient has learning disabilities, including dyslexia and dyscalculia, which started when he was 7 years old. At this age, he was diagnosed with cerebral palsy and was treated accordingly with symptomatic management. The boy was delivered via a normal spontaneous vaginal delivery. The patient has no significant family history of medical problems and has a sister with no medical problems. In addition, the patient has no drug abuse history or prior medical treatment history.
General physical examination was insignificant except for central nervous system findings. The patient was alert and oriented in time and space but with scanned speech. The power was 3/4 in all extremities, and mild hypotonia was noted. The neurological examination was done 1 hour after the presentation when the patient was postictal. His reflexes were brisk, with a positive ankle clonus and positive Babinski sign. Mini-Mental State Examination was mildly affected and was 23/30.
The patient underwent laboratory testing, including a complete blood count, liver function test, renal function tests and urine toxicology. Radiological imaging included CT and MRI scans, both of which were normal. A psychiatric evaluation was also done. On electroencephalogram (EEG), generalised 10 Hz polyspikes were seen during the tonic phase, followed by a 1 Hz spike-wave pattern reflecting the clonic phase of the patient’s generalised tonic-clonic seizures .
At this stage, the differentials included inherited metabolic and genetic syndromes like Zellweger Syndrome, mitochondrial diseases, lysosomal storage diseases and neuropsychiatric conditions like Rett Syndrome. We suspected a genetic or metabolic condition based on neurological symptoms, EEG findings and the disease’s progressive nature. Before this presentation, the patient was having other neurological problems, which were attributed to cerebral palsy. But when evaluated comprehensively, we decided to go for a genetic evaluation. The patient was referred for genetic testing based on extensive neuropsychiatric disorder history. Genetic testing revealed an autosomal dominant loss of function mutation, denoting in DNA as NM_0 24 496 c.911 C>T, which results in premature protein termination (p.Glu494). Based on ACMG criteria, the mutation was pathogenic and de novo. There was no artefact or deletion in the alternate allele. No additional variants were identified that could be the reason for neurological presentation.
Symptomatic multidisciplinary management was started that included antiseizure medication (sodium valproate 250 mg) and multivitamin supplementation. He responded well to this medication regimen. The patient was also provided speech and language therapy, and genetic counselling was provided to the child’s parents.