A 24-year-old unmarried woman was admitted to the inpatient psychiatric ward at a teaching hospital because of an insidious onset of auditory hallucinations, blunted affect, alogia, abulia, and negativism that had begun approximately 1 month previously. She had no personal or family history of psychiatric illness, and this was her first psychotic deterioration. The diagnosis of schizophreniform disorder was established according to the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, supported by normal laboratory test results, including electroencephalography and brain magnetic resonance imaging. On the first day after admission, pharmacotherapy with aripiprazole was initiated at a dose of 10 mg/day, which was increased to 30 mg/day over 9 days. Quetiapine was administered at a dose of 100–200 mg/day at the same time for alleviation of insomnia. This treatment was well tolerated and maintained for the next 3 days; however, the patient’s psychotic symptoms persisted without any changes. Based on clinical judgment, aripiprazole was discontinued over 2 days. Simultaneously, amisulpride was started at a dose of 100 mg/day and increased to 1000 mg/day along with quetiapine (200 mg/day) for 10 days. During the titration of amisulpride, benztropine (1 mg/day) was added because the patient complained of subjective discomfort in her right lower extremities. From the 22nd day of admission, her psychotic symptoms improved, as verified by a significant reduction in the scores of objective symptom rating scales . However, her serum prolactin level had markedly increased to above 200 ng/mL on the 22nd day, compared to 5.66 ng/mL on the 9th day of admission, before she had been administered amisulpride, indicating the development of amisulpride-induced hyperprolactinemia. On the 25th day of admission, the patient was discharged.
Eight days after discharge, the patient visited an outpatient clinic and reported that she was fine except that her auditory hallucinations sometimes worsened. Thus, amisulpride was increased to 1200 mg/day, which was maintained with quetiapine (100–200 mg/day) and benztropine (1 mg/day) for 13 weeks. This treatment was effective and safe and her auditory hallucinations nearly disappeared. Although the patient did not experience any hyperprolactinemia-related symptoms, such as amenorrhea, the hyperprolactinemia was highly likely to persist owing to the higher dose of amisulpride than that used during admission. Given the potential complications with long-term amisulpride use, including osteoporosis and cardiovascular diseases, the dose was reduced to 800 mg/day directly. Concurrently, benztropine was discontinued, and quetiapine (100 mg/day) was maintained. After 4 weeks, she reported the development of severe restlessness over the previous 3 weeks, which made her want to walk around her room. In the outpatient clinic, she complained of a severe compulsion to move and an inability to sit and continued to walk from side to side during the interview. Her Barnes Akathisia Rating Scale score was 6. The prior regimen was changed to aripiprazole (10 mg/day) with propranolol (40 mg/day) without a period of overlap. Since then, the patient’s restlessness greatly improved over 2 weeks. After withdrawal, the akathisia disappeared, propranolol was discontinued, and aripiprazole monotherapy (10 mg/day) was maintained. The patient has remained stable without any signs of extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) or psychotic episodes for 6 months and her prolactin level has normalized (4.55 ng/mL).