A 63-year-old woman presented with ptosis of the right eye at the ophthalmology department of our hospital. She was suspected to have a CSDAVF on brain magnetic resonance imaging and was referred to our department. On neurological examination, she displayed palsy of the oculomotor and abducens nerves. She had no history of trauma or surgery. Cerebral angiography showed a CSDAVF fed from the left accessory meningeal artery, left artery of foramen rotundum, right meningohypophyseal trunk, and right ascending pharyngeal artery. These feeding arteries converged at the posteromedial compartment of the right CS, formed a shunted pouch, and drained into the right IPS . The CSDAVF was symptomatic, although not accompanied by cortical venous reflux. Therefore, endovascular treatment was performed. Because the patient had severe asthma, she was sedated and analgesized with dexmedetomidine and pentazocine rather than general anesthesia. The transfemoral venous approach was attempted through the right IPS. The microcatheter was navigated to the right CS, and the shunted pouch was embolized with a coil. During the procedure, the patient complained of pain and was unable to rest. Approximately 5 h after the start of treatment, a small amount of arteriovenous shunt remained , but she remained unable to rest. We decided to discontinue the endovascular treatment. After the operation, the right oculomotor nerve palsy improved but the abducens nerve palsy did not improve.
After 6 weeks from the operation, the patient developed exophthalmos and conjunctival congestion of the right eye and palsy of the oculomotor and abducens nerves worsened. Cerebral angiography showed recurrence of the CSDAVF. The feeder was the right meningohypophyseal trunk, and the shunted pouch was identified as the anterolateral compartment of the right CS. The right superior ophthalmic vein (SOV), the main drainer, drained into the STV . Exophthalmos, conjunctival congestion, and exacerbation of oculomotor and abducens nerve palsy were observed because venous reflux from the right CS to the SOV occurred. As a treatment route, the right IPS flow was occluded, and it was considered difficult to access the anterolateral compartment of the right CS through the right IPS. Therefore, the access route from the right STV to the right SOV was selected and TVE of the anterolateral compartment of the right CS was planned.
The patient was sedated with dexmedetomidine and was given pentazocine during endovascular treatment. The transfemoral venous approach with systemic heparinization was performed. For intraprocedural angiography, a 4-F catheter was positioned at the right internal carotid artery. A 5-F Slim Guide guiding catheter 93 cm (Medikit Co., Tokyo, Japan) was positioned at the right external jugular vein. Through the 5-F guiding catheter, a 3.4-F TACTICS 130 cm (Technocrat Corporation, Aichi, Japan), which was used as a distal access catheter, and a CHIKAI black 18 (Asahi Intecc Co., Aichi, Japan), which was a 0.018" guidewire, were navigated into the right STV from the right retromandibular vein. Subsequently, from the TACTICS, a 1.9-F Carnelian MARVEL nontaper microcatheter 160 cm (Tokai Medical Products Inc., Aichi, Japan) and a Transend 10 microwire (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) were used to attempt to advance to the right CS by guiding these through the right STV and the right SOV. The route from the STV to the SOV was tortuous and abruptly angulated. The 5-F guiding catheter was guided to the distal retromandibular vein and the TACTICS was guided as far as possible to distal STV to increase the support of the microcatheter, and the navigation of MARVEL to the right CS was attempted. However, the STV and the SOV were looping, and the right CS was inaccessible. Although various microcatheters and microwires were used and manually stretching the looped STV was attempted, the microcatheter could not be navigated into the right CS. Finally, a 0.014" ATHLETERUBY PT SUPPORT (Japan Lifeline Co., Tokyo, Japan), a CTO-dedicated guidewire, was inserted into the microcatheter, being careful not to allow the tip of the guidewire come out of the microcatheter, and the STV was linearized . After the TACTICS and the 5-F guiding catheter were guided farther distally, the microcatheter could be easily navigated into the right CS and complete occlusion of the CSDAVF was achieved by coil embolization . With the continuous infusion of dexmedetomidine at 0.4 μg/kg/h and administration of pentazocine (15 mg) at the start of treatment and 4 h later, the patient was well sedated with no complaints of pain during the endovascular treatment.
After the second operation, exophthalmos and conjunctival congestion and the palsy of oculomotor and abducens nerves disappeared. There was no recurrence during the 3 years of observation.