A 49-year-old white British man presented to his General Practitioner and afterwards a Urologist with spontaneously resolving haematospermia, normal prostate specific antigen (PSA) and normal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the prostate. His past medical history was remarkable for stage I NSGCT which was treated with orchidectomy 21 years previously. He took no regular medication. A year after resolution of the haematospermia he developed nocturia, poor urinary flow, and a feeling of pressure on his rectum. This was associated with severe back pain, for which he had started simple analgesia. Examination and ultrasound investigation of the remaining testis was normal. His PSA level was in the normal range at 1.11 microg/L but his AFP level at that stage was grossly elevated at 7787 ng/mL (normal range <10 ng/mL) with an lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 486 U/L (normal range 0–250 U/L). HCG and free beta HCG levels were normal at less than 2 and less than 0.2 U/L, respectively. CT at that point demonstrated a pelvic mass with associated enlarged pelvic lymph nodes, mild left hydronephrosis, and multiple pulmonary metastases up to a diameter of 1.7 cm. An MRI was subsequently performed to better define the local anatomy prior to surgery. MRI demonstrated an extensive prostatic tumour extending into bladder , seminal vesicles, rectum and left ureter causing hydronephrosis. The total volume of the prostate was elevated at 113 mL. Histopathology from bladder biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of an undifferentiated malignant tumour that from its immunoprofile (AFP, PLAP and CD117 positive, CD30 and OCT 3/4 negative), was diagnosed as metastatic yolk sac tumour . Due to the non-pulmonary visceral metastases in the prostate his disease fell into the high risk category and treatment with four cycles of bleomycin, etoposide, cisplatin (BEP) chemotherapy was initiated. He received a nephrostomy for decompression of the hydronephrosis and completed the first two cycles of BEP chemotherapy, but then developed evidence of bleomycin-related lung changes on chest radiography and CT. His treatment was changed to etoposide, ifosfamide, and cisplatin (VIP) chemotherapy and he completed another two cycles for a total of four cycles of chemotherapy. He did not have any long term effects from the bleomycin.
All tumour markers were within the normal range after completion of chemotherapy. A CT 3 months into follow up, however, showed a residual mass of 2.7 cm in the base of the prostate, the trigone and the left distal ureter which was surgically resected. The excision specimen showed necrotic tissue and small amounts of normal prostate tissue and fibrosis, but no evidence of tumour cells. The tumour markers at this point had completely normalised. The patient is now in follow up at 36 months after treatment with no evidence of residual disease on CT. His AFP, beta HCG and LDH levels are normal.