A 38-year-old Caucasian man, with chronic kidney disease (CKD) due to IgA nephropathy under systemic glucocorticoid therapy (glomerular filtration rate of 30 mL/min/1.72 m2), was admitted to the Cardiology Department with right heart failure (HF) symptoms. The patient reported a few months of history of progressive worsening effort-related breathlessness and fatigue (New York Heart Association class II). There was no history of consumptive symptoms, such as weight loss, fever, or night sweating. On admission, he was haemodynamically stable (arterial pressure 116/89 mmHg), had sinus tachycardia (102 b.p.m.), and had a peripheral oxygen saturation of 99% on room air.
Transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiograms were compatible with three hyperechogenic left atrial (LA) masses, the largest one (42 × 29 × 26 mm) protruding to the left ventricle in diastole, causing severe mitral stenosis, moderate mitral regurgitation, and a high probability of pulmonary hypertension with right ventricular (RV) dysfunction (estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 67 mmHg) (; , and ). N-terminal pro b-type natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) was 22 397 ng/L. Due to the clinical presentation and imaging characteristics, there was a very high suspicion of obstructive atrial myxoma, and in addition to intravenous furosemide, the patient was urgently referred to surgical resection of the masses without performing any further imaging methods.
Surgery was performed through a right anterior mini-thoracotomy and histopathology of the retrieved masses revealed a predominantly hypercellular neoplasm full of spindle, ovoid, and epithelioid cells in a myxoid stroma, as well as nuclear pleomorphism and images of necrosis. There was a high mitotic count with up to 20 mitosis/10 high magnetic fields. Immunohistochemistry and fluorescent in situ hybridization detected the MDM2 gene amplification in 77% of the analysed nuclei and were negative for other histological sarcoma types (CKAE1/AE2, CDK4, S100, CD34, smooth muscle actin, desmin, myogenin, caldesmon, ERG, Fli-1, CD31, and CD99). Tumour infiltrated the myocardium and margins were not evaluated due to sample fragmentation. Considering these features, the patient was diagnosed with a primary intra-cardiac intimal sarcoma, pT1G3 according to FNCLCC (Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer)—pT1 (tumour size—organ confined), G3 (histological Grade 3 according to total differentiation, high mitotic count, and extent of necrosis).
Following the diagnosis of a primary cardiac tumour, the patient was referred to the Medical Oncology Department. Early local recurrence with a large LA mass with mitral valve, LA appendage, and pulmonary veins infiltration was diagnosed only 2 months after surgery on echocardiogram, positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT)-18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (18F-FDG), cardiac CT, and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) ( and ). Staging with thoraco-abdominal-pelvic CT excluded metastatic disease, although PET/CT-18F-FDG showed a hypercaptant site in the right fifth rib.
Despite remaining asymptomatic and with an ECOG performance status 1, the patient was deemed inoperable due to local structures’ invasion and was proposed to first-line palliative treatment. Due to CKD and previous HF, chemotherapy with pazopanib was preferred over ifosfamide and doxorubicin. The patient was started on pazopanib 800 mg/day, with good clinical tolerance and stable disease for 13 months (cardiac mass stabilization and reduced captation in follow-up PET/CT). He died 18 months after the diagnosis.