A 28-year-old male presented at the accident & emergency (A&E) department of Baqiyatallah hospital in Tehran (Iran) with fever and productive cough for the past 3 weeks. Oral antibiotics (cefixime 400 mg/daily) had not been effective to treat his symptoms and the patient had progressively developed fatigue, arthralgia, hematuria, nausea, vomiting, dyspnea, hemoptysis, weight loss, oliguria and then anuria.
There was no relevant medical or family history for pulmonary disease (including TB) and the patient had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
At clinical examination blood pressure was 160/100 mmHg, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute (BPM), heart rate 90 beats per minute (bpm), body temperature 38 °C and oxygen (O2) saturation was 93% in room air.
At admission White Blood Cells (WBC) were 19,300/μL, polymorphonuclears (PMN) 70%, Haemoglobin (Hb) 12 g/dl, MCV 85, platelets (PLT) 426 × 103/μL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 114, C reactive protein (CRP) 91 mg/L, Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN) 29 mg/dl, plasma creatine 2/2 mg/dl (rapidly increasing up to 6 mg/dl), plasma Na + 135 mEq/L and plasma K + 4.5 mEq/L.
During the oliguric stage, at urine analysis WBC were 3–5 × 103/μL, proteins + 3 and no bacterial growth could be detected following 48 h urine culture. Furthermore, at serologic examination no antinuclear antibodies (ANA), no anti-double strand DNA (ds-DNA) nor anti-glomerular basal membrane (GBM) antibodies could be detected. Whilst serum levels of perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA), C3, C4, CH50 were all negative, c-ANCA were 2.2 U/ml (positivity threshold > 0.05 U/ml).
24-h urine proteins were 1,021 mg/day, anti-streptolysin O (ASO) titer was < 200 IU/ml and the level of angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) was 11.5/µL.
Chest X-ray (CXR) revealed opacity lesions and spiral chest computerized tomography (CT) showed nodules in the right lung parenchyma . At ultrasonography (US), the echogenicity of the renal parenchyma was enhanced, with no signs of kidney stones or hydronephrosis.
An abnormal CXR, an abnormal urinary sediment and an indicative kidney biopsy were therefore reliable criteria to diagnose GPA in our patient, as recommended by the American College of Rheumatology [, ].
Although no endobronchial lesions could be observed at bronchoscopy and the purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test was negative, broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) smear turned up positive for acid-fast bacilli, with TB being subsequently confirmed at PCR and (after 40 days) culture.
Since GPA and TB were diagnosed simultaneously and a crescentic glomerulonephritis is a life-threatening condition, a combined treatment against TB as well as GPA was promptly started at the same time, to avoid potential deterioration of patient’s health.
Treatment of GPA is divided into two stages :Induction stage; and Remission maintenance stage.
The goal of induction therapy is to promptly inhibit the inflammation to control the disease and reduce a permanent tissue injury. In the remission maintenance stage, lower-dose immunosuppression is used to prevent relapses. Of course, achieving these goals should be pursued at minimal risk of toxicity.
Adjusted doses of intravenous cyclophosplamide combined with high-doses of intravenous steroids for first-line induction were started, as recommended for the severe forms of GPA . Steroid therapy was continued with methylprednisolone (500 mg/daily i.v. pulse) for up to 3 days and maintained with 2 mg/kg/day oral prednisolone from day 4 onward, tapered to 15 mg/day prednisolone after 12 weeks and then gradually reduced to 5 mg/day. Cyclophosphamide (500 mg I.V. pulse) was administered every 2 weeks for 3 months, subsequently switched to azathioprine, which is less toxic as maintenance therapy once remission is achieved.
ANCA levels and other inflammatory markers such as ESR and CRP were monitored to assess the clinical condition of the patient and his response to therapy .
Standard therapeutic regimen of TB in renal disease was administered according to Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines for patients on hemodialysis (creatinine clearance < 10 ml/min), adjusting the dose of pyrazinamide (25–35 mg/Kg, three times weekly after dialysis sessions). Dosage adjustment is mandatory for ethambutol, whose prolonged half-time in renal failure significantly increases the risk of retrobulbar optic neuritis [, ]. The dose of ethambutol was therefore adjusted (15–20 mg/Kg, three times weekly after dialysis sessions), but after several days had to be discontinued as our patient developed a blurred vision. Rifampicin (600 mg daily) and isoniazid (300 mg daily) were instead administered without renal dose adjustment, as recommended by CDC .
Following 3 months of combined treatment for both TB and GPA, a novel onset of severe generalized headache non-responsive to analgesics and vomiting occurred and the patient developed seizures without fever over the course of 6 h. However, Magnetic Resonance Venography (MRV) revealed a CVT of the sinus transverse and sigmoid in the left side of the brain . Protein S, protein C, antithrombin 3, Factor V Leiden, anticardiolipin antibodies, Beta-2 glycoprotein 1 antibody and lupus anticoagulant test were all within normal range.
Any form of infection (bacterial, fungal or viral) was excluded at smear, culture and PCR of the cerebrospinal fluid following lumbar puncture (LP).
After LP anti-coagulation with heparin and anticonvulsants was administered and all symptoms (including seizures and headache refractory to analgesics) dramatically improved. The patient was eventually discharged with a treatment scheme of oral warfarin. The goal of treatment was to achieve an international normalized ratio (INR) between 2.0 and 3.0 for at least 6 months. Neuro-imaging and CT were repeated at 6 months after presentation of thrombosis, which eventually resolved (as can be seen from Fig. ).
Kidney biopsy showed peri-glomerular and peri-vascular inflammation, degeneration and necrosis of tubules with red blood cell casts . Moreover, a distorted glomerular histology, with fibrin deposition in the capillary loops, segmental breaks of the glomerular basal membrane (GBM), disruption of Bowman's capsular membrane and a severe peri-glomerular inflammatory response could be observed . In addition, the affected glomeruli presented crescent formation of proliferated parietal epithelial cells with fibrin between them and a crescent obliterating Bowman's space and compressing the glomerular capillary tuft . Moreover, other histopathology findings indicated large congested glomeruli with fibrin thrombi and fibrin deposition in Bowman's space as well as damage of the GBM and rupture of Bowman's capsule .
Once renal function resumed the patient was referred to hemodialysis. While still on hemodialysis three times weekly, following a 6 month combined therapy with prednisolone, azathioprine and warfarin, pulmonary symptoms, CXR and MRV abnormalities resolved and the patient was placed on a waiting list for kidney transplantation.