A 41-year-old non-smoker obese female patient was examined at the Department of Neurology and the Center for rehabilitation. Relevant history of the patient is summarized on a timeline in Fig. . She showed an onset of neuromuscular disorders during early childhood with a delay in motor and written language development. She had a hard time to complete physical exercise at school and always finished last. There was nothing really alarming in terms of muscle disorder until her first pregnancy at the age of 33 during which she experienced shortness of breath (dyspnea) at the 7 months of gestation and showed signs of weakness of lower limbs afterwards. At the age of 34 she showed worsening of breath symptoms, suffered from sleep apnea and started using a mechanical ventilation machine. Alarming symptoms of skeletal muscle disorders occurred immediately after delivery with progressive but rapidly incapacitating weakness of lower limbs. This worsened during the 3 following years, a period during which she first started being unable to get up by herself and then was unable to climb stairs. At the age of 37, she started to use a cane, then a walker for her daily walking needs. At the age of 39, she started using a wheelchair to move outdoors. Despite these signs of progressive muscle weakness, she never had a thorough neuromuscular investigation. It was wrongly thought that her health problems, in general, was mainly related to being overweight. At the age of 41, she had four episodes of lower limb paralysis during which she was completely unable to move her legs and support her weight. She did not seek medical consultation for the first three episodes. For the fourth, she was admitted to the emergency room (ER) and first referred to the Department of Neurology and then to the Center for Rehabilitation.
The family history showed that her mother died at the age of 66 from a heart attack associated with non-compaction cardiomyopathy. There is nothing remarkable in terms of muscle disorders in her father, brother, and sister. However, her only daughter, now at the age of 11, shows signs of muscle disorders with congenital muscular torticollis, excessive growing pains as well as underdeveloped muscles in half of the body.
Physical examinations conducted following her admission to the ER at the age of 41 showed normal tone/bulk of the arm muscles. However, muscles in shoulders and upper and lower limbs showed bilateral weakness. Deltoids, biceps and triceps showed moderate weakness with MRC scale of 3/5. Fine finger movements were intact. There was no pronator drift. In the lower limbs, all muscles examined showed the same severity of weakness (2/5) except quadriceps which showed mild weakness (4/5). Hip flexors were extremely weak (1/5); hip abductors and adductors were mildly weak (4/5). Knee extensors and flexors were moderately weak (3/5). Dorsiflexion of feet was severely weak (2/5). Plantar flexors were severely weak (2/5). Deep tendon reflexes were 2+ in the arms, absent in the patella and Achilles. The toes were down-going. No sensory deficit was observed. No sign of dysphagia or involvement of ocular muscles was observed.
Additional physical examination conducted during the 2-year follow-up (at the age of 43) showed no worsening of muscle strength. However, this brought new information about the weakness of other muscles, notably in the shoulders, with extremely weak abductors and flexors (1/5). The patient showed decreased perception of vibration in the lower limbs. She reported that she experienced occasional dysphagia.
Electrophysiological exams showed normal nerve conduction velocities for upper and lower limbs, with all SNAP and CMAP amplitudes in the range of normal values. However, needle EMG revealed a tendency of myotonic potentials, generated by needle insertion. Right deltoids, biceps and ulnar-innerved first dorsal interosseus muscles showed myotonic potentials as well. The right tibialis anterior showed 2+ polyphasic motor unit potentials with myotonic potentials. The right medial gastrocnemius, vastus medialis and vastus lateralis showed myotonic tendencies as well.
Examination of muscle biopsy of left quadriceps showed features of an end-stage process, consistent with a severe, chronic myopathy. There are scattered clusters of viable muscle fibers which showed myopathic features in the form of a marked variation in fiber size and numerous internal nuclei. In addition, there are scattered fibers with abundant intrasarcoplasmic vacuoles . Given we could not clearly observe the presence of hyaline bodies on H&E staining we decided to proceed with p62 immunostaining, a well-known technique for revealing the presence of inclusion bodies . Immuno-histochemical detection of p62 was performed on a Leica Bond III automated stainer. Following digestion in a low pH citrate solution, sections were incubated in a primary mouse monoclonal anti-p62 antibody, diluted 1:50 (BD Transduction Laboratories Catalog Number 610833). Detection of bound antibody was achieved using the Leica Bond Polymer Refine Detection kit, comprising the secondary antibody, the substrate chromogen DAB (3,3′-Diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride hydrate) and the Hematoxylin counterstaining solutions. Immunostaining for p62 revealed, in a proportion of the surviving muscle fibers, diffusely distributed, small intermyofibrillar dots or, more commonly, larger central or eccentric sarcoplasmic inclusion bodies . Examination of heart function using Holter ECG monitor carried out following her admission to the ER showed no clinically significant implication of cardiac involvement. However, the patient complained about repeated episodes of oppressive chest pain during the following years. Additional examination conducted during the 2-year follow-up showed signs of cardiac involvement with bradycardia of 58 beats per minute.
Regarding respiratory involvement, the patient suffered from dyspnea since the age of 34. Examination of lung function conducted following her admission to ER and during the follow-ups showed worsening of her respiratory condition. Spirometry test conducted at the age of 44 showed a very weak pulmonary function, with forced vital capacity (FVC) of 27% and forced expiratory volume in a second (FEV1) of 29% of normal values.
The blood samples were collected for whole-exome sequencing (WES) to detect mutations potentially involved in the phenotype of neuromuscular disorders observed for this patient. The genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood and subsequently subjected to whole-exome DNA library construction using the Ion AmpliSeqTM Exome RDY panel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) essentially as described in the manufacturer’s protocol, with barcode incorporation. For the sequencing, samples were loaded on an Ion HI-Q PI Chip v3 and placed onto the Ion Proton instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) together with an Ion PI HI-Q sequencing 200 Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and sequenced for 520 cycles according to the manual (See Additional file : Table S1 for parameters). All candidate mutations found by WES were validated by direct Sanger sequencing (See Additional file : Figure S1 for the filtering process). DNA sequences were obtained from the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) Genome Browser. Predesigned primers were directly purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (See Additional file : Tables S2 for details). Amplicons were sent to Genewiz for Sanger sequencing.
Whole exome sequencing showed that a novel variant NM_000257.3: c.1370 T > G (p.Ile457Arg) in the MYH7 gene is a missense single nucleotide variant possibly linked to the clinical findings, found in the DNA of the patient as heterozygous . The novel variant has been submitted to ClinVar database; with the assigned accession number SCV000804311. Two other candidate mutations were identified in the DNA of this patient, namely NM_003085.4:c.368C > A (p.Pro123His) in the SNCB gene and NM_001001557.3:c.746C > A (p.Ala249Glu) in the GDF6 gene (Additional file : Table S3). However, both mutations were discarded after filtering only genes involved in neuromuscular functions that potentially cause clinical features of muscle myopathy observed in this patient (Additional file : Figure S1). Regarding the novel variant NM_000257.3: c.1370 T > G (p.Ile457Arg), bioinformatics analyses showed that nucleotide T coding at the position 1370 of the MYH7 gene is highly conserved across 44 vertebrate species (PhyloP at 1.76). Amino acid substitution from Isoleucine (I) to Arginine (R) at the position 457 of MyHCI suggested a high impact on protein structure (Grantham at 97). Results of analyses obtained from VarSome suggested a classification of Likely pathogenic for this variant, with evidence of Pathogenic computational results coming from 8 various prediction software including DANN, GERP, dbNSFP.FATHMM, MetaLR, MetaSVM, MutationAssessor, MutationTaster and PROVEAN (vs no benign predictions). Also, the results of analyses using the recommendation of the ACMG and the AMP suggested the same classification of Likely pathogenic for this variant, with combined criteria of 2 moderate (PM1 and PM2) and 2 supporting (PP2 and PP3) .