A 63 year old woman was presented with severe headache and psychomotor slowing that had recurred for some weeks. Her medical history revealed a mild arterial hypertension and a slight depressive episode with sleep disturbances. To treat the depressive episode the patient self-medicated with hypericin (St. John's wort, hypericum perforatum) with a dosage of 900 mg per day, probably for several months before she was transferred to our department. No vision disorders were found. MRI revealed a contrast-enhanced 4.6 × 3.8 × 3.1 cm lesion in her right temporal lobe, with no observable compression of the optic nerves or optic chiasm . A glioblastoma multiforme was suspected and confirmed histologically after open surgery with a resection of more than 90% of tumor tissue. After surgery, concurrent photon radiation (involved field, two co-axial isocentric fields, fractionated, once daily; cumulative dose 60 Gy, fraction size 2 Gy) and chemotherapy with temozolomide (75 mg/m2 body surface, total dose of 5040 mg) were implemented for a duration of 6 weeks. Target volumes and organs at risk, such as chiasm, were delineated on MRI . The maximum doses to the optic nerves and chiasm were obtained from dose-volume histograms (DVHs) . The maximal cumulative radiation dose of 56 Gy (maximal single dose 1.8 Gy) was delivered to less than 20% of the optic chiasm. Residual parts of the optic decussation were irradiated with a median cumulative dose of 46 Gy. Maximal cumulative dose to the right and left optic nerves were 57 Gy and 24 Gy. After starting radiation, the patient described a headache that also affected the right eye, with symptoms occurring daily and increasing during the course of the day. Karnofsky performance status remained stable at about 70%. Six weeks after completion of the initial course of treatment (concomitant radiochemotherapy), 4 additional cycles of chemotherapy with temozolomide (150-200 mg/m2 body surface, total dose of 6000 mg) were performed.
A progressive visual loss due to bilateral amaurosis occurred 5 months after cessation of radiation. This symptom was accompanied by visual hallucinations. Ophthalmological examination revealed bilateral amaurotic fixed pupils and a slightly pale optic disc. Vision loss from other causes, such as optic nerve or chiasm compression by tumor progression (MRI [Figure ] and single photon emission computed tomography [SPECT] were performed), retinal disorders, cataract, or bilateral giant cell arteritis, were carefully excluded. Detected visual acuity was 0/100 in both eyes. No visual evoked potentials could be generated by either monocular or binocular excitation with flashing lights and contrast inversions. Except for a slight elevation of protein concentration, there were no indications of infectious disease or other pathological findings in the patient's cerebrospinal fluid. Four months after RION appeared the visual loss persisted; Karnofsky performance status declined to 40%.