A 52-year-old Japanese-Brazilian woman without a history of smoking was referred to our hospital for evaluation of severe left back pain and a left hilar mass observed on a chest radiograph. Computed tomography of the chest revealed a solitary tumor in the left lower lobe with direct invasion to the seventh thoracic vertebra and rib. The patient also had mediastinal lymphadenopathy, left adrenal metastasis, and multiple bone metastases . Pathological examination of the transbronchial needle aspiration biopsy specimen revealed undifferentiated cancer with a mild tendency of cornification (hematoxylin and eosin staining, Fig. ). Upon immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis, the tumor cells exhibited strong positive staining for p40 and cytokeratin 5/6, but were negative for thyroid transcription factor-1 . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with Stage IV lung SqCC and was treated with palliative radiotherapy and first-line systemic chemotherapy with cisplatin plus vinorelbine. After 2 cycles of chemotherapy, there was no evidence of a response. Second-line chemotherapy was thus indicated. Despite a diagnosis of SqCC, the patient underwent ALK testing, as she was a non-smoker diagnosed with lung cancer harboring the wild-type EGFR gene. IHC analysis indicated that the tumor cells were positive (2+ staining) for the ALK antibody (Histofine ALK iAEP Detection Kit; Nichirei Bioscience Inc., Tokyo, Japan). ALK break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (Vysis ALK Break Apart FISH Probe Kit; Abbott Molecular, Inc., Des Plaines, IL, USA) confirmed the presence of an ALK gene rearrangement with a rearrangement-positive cell rate of 46.0% . The patient was subsequently treated with alectinib, a selective ALK inhibitor. After 2 weeks of treatment, the symptoms gradually improved. After 3 months, a follow-up computed tomography scan revealed a remarkable response in the primary lesion and significant shrinkage of the left adrenal gland metastasis . At the latest follow-up, 11 months after commencing alectinib treatment, there was no evidence of progression or any remarkable toxicity.