A 63-Year-old male, a heavy smoker, with no other co-morbidities, was referred to urology clinic for evaluation and management of a lesion on the left bladder wall that was incidentally detected on a CT scan. He did not have any urinary symptoms on initial presentation.
Cystourethroscopy revealed 2 papillary growths on the left lateral bladder wall, which were resected completely and smoothly by a resectoscope using a monopolar energy. Complete resection of the tumor was achieved without any intra-operative complication or perforation. Hemostasis was secured, and a urethral catheter was inserted.
In accordance of the EAU guidelines, the patient received an intravesical instillation of 50 ml of doxorubicin diluted in 100 cc of saline 6 hours after the TURBT. During the instillation, his vital signs were stable and he had neither hematuria nor abdominal pain. One hour after the instillation, the catheter was unclamped and was attached to continuous bladder irrigation.
Two days after the surgery and in the absence of hematuria, the indwelling catheter was removed, and the patient was discharged home the next day.
When seen in the clinic 1 week later the patient was fine with no alarming symptoms. The pathology report showed a low-grade Ta Papillary urothelial carcinoma. Based on the pathological diagnosis and according to the EAU guidelines, adjuvant chemotherapy instillations were planned.
Two weeks later, the patient presented with, dysuria, frequency, urgency, as well as pelvic and perineal pain. Physical examination was unremarkable. Urine analysis showed numerous WBC’s, RBC’s, and bacteria. An empirical antibiotics course was commenced.
In view of the worsening symptoms and the past history of anal fistula, a contrast enhanced pelvic MRI was performed. It showed a diffusely thickened urinary bladder wall, with evidence of a focal wall defect at its left aspect (the site of the resected tumor). The active urine leak into the perivesical space confirmed the diagnosis of retroperitoneal bladder perforation .
The patient was managed conservatively with antibiotics and an indwelling catheter for 3 weeks.
A follow-up retrograde CT cystogram showed no improvement and a gross contrast leak from the same site was identified. The catheter was kept for 6 more weeks and the CT cystogram was repeated showing the same results with no evidence of improvement. The patient refused to keep the catheter for a longer period so the option of open surgical repair was discussed with him.
Extraperitoneal laparotomy was performed, a perivesical small abscess was drained and cultured, necrotic tissues were debrided, and the bladder wall defect was rimed and closed in 3 layers. Tissue biopsies from the pelvic wall and bladder wall were harvested. A urethral catheter and pelvic drain were kept in place. The postoperative course was uneventful, the drain was removed on the third-day postoperatively, and the patient was discharged home with the urethral catheter in.
Histopathological evaluation of the pelvic wall and the bladder biopsies verified acute and chronic inflammation as well as granulation tissue formation. However, both were negative for malignancy. The urinary bladder biopsy also showed extensive foci of dystrophic calcification while the pelvic wall biopsy revealed fat necrosis ( and ).
A follow up CT cystogram was done 3 weeks after the bladder repair. Although it showed a considerable regression in the size of the bladder defect, interestingly it also showed persistent extra-peritoneal contrast leak from the bladder along it’s left lateral aspect .
Due to this slow healing, the catheter was kept in. Six weeks later, a follow up CT cystogram showed healing with no extraperitoneal contrast leak . And hence the catheter was removed.
Two follow up cystoscopies and bladder biopsy (from an erythematous area on the left lateral wall) with 3 months intervals showed good healing of the bladder wall and no recurrence of the tumor.