We report on a 51-year-old woman who was treated for oestrogen receptor (ER)-negative, progesterone receptor (PR)-negative and HER2 positive breast cancer. She was diagnosed with supraclavicular lymph metastasis for which she initially received a combination of docetaxel, carboplatin, trastuzumab and pertuzumab. After mastectomy, she continued with trastuzumab in combination with radiotherapy. Unfortunately, progression of disease with leptomeningeal metastasis was shown on MRI, and oral treatment with lapatinib and capecitabine was initiated. The patient discontinued oral treatment because of further progression and was switched to trastuzumab-emtansine infusions. Trastuzumab-emtansine was administered on day one of a 21-day cycle, as intravenous infusions via peripheral access. The weight-based dosage of 3.6 mg/kg was diluted with 250 mL of normal saline.
At the end of the infusion of the second cycle, extravasation of trastuzumab-emtansine was noticed by the oncology nurse while disconnecting the infusion line. As the infusion access was covered by the patient's clothes, the patient had not noticed the extravasation during infusion. At the time of discovery, the patient had a slightly erythematous, painless swelling. According to the size of the swelling, it was assumed that the total infusion volume had been administered subcutaneously. According to local protocol, the oncologist and hospital pharmacist were consulted to discuss whether supportive treatment was indicated.
It was decided to choose an observational approach, substantiated by statements in the product label about relatively mild reactions and a lack of (known) specific treatment strategies after trastuzumab-emtansine extravasations. However, one case of delayed epidermal necrosis after extravasation was reported, but no treatment strategies were provided. Therefore, the patient was instructed to elevate the affected arm in order to prevent further swelling, was informed about a possible delayed response and was instructed to contact her oncologist as soon as cutaneous symptoms (swelling, erythema and pain) worsened.
The next day, the patient experienced an increase in pain and erythema at the site of extravasation. There was no increase in swelling or skin temperature. Pain could be sufficiently managed with acetaminophen. We contacted the patient every other day to monitor the extravasation. After a week, the patient attended our oncology outpatient clinic. The erythema was expanded to a larger area. After consulting plastic surgery, watchful waiting was continued as the skin was intact and the extravasation was too long ago to consider other treatments (eg local hyaluronidase injection or liposuction). Four days later, the patient developed blisters and the skin turned somewhat darker. The blisters were removed, and the affected area was treated with silver sulphadiazine to prevent infection. The darker discoloration did not progress to full-thickness necrosis. Six weeks after the event, the lesion healed with residual hyperpigmentation of skin. The development of cutaneous symptoms over time is presented in Figure .