A 56-year-old male patient presented with low back pain with numbness and fatigue in both lower extremities for 5 months. Chest and back showed intermittent acid pain. The patient had radiating pain in both lower extremities. The patient’s visual analog scale (VAS) for back pain was as high as 9 points. The Oswestry disability index (ODI) of patient quality of life was 78 points. The patient’s neurological status was diagnosed as grade C on the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) scale. The patient had not a history of constitutional symptoms, such as loss of appetite, night sweats, fever, or weight loss. In addition, the patient had no history of pulmonary tuberculosis and AIDS. The patient’s spinal tuberculosis was initially diagnosed through clinical symptoms, imaging examinations and anti-tuberculosis treatment. The patient agreed to be admitted for further treatment to undergo surgery. Patient was routinely prescribed anti-tuberculosis therapy with drugs including isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide for 3–4 weeks prior to surgery. The patient underwent electrocardiogram and echocardiography to assess cardiac function, and lung function was assessed according to lung CT and pulmonary function tests.
The physiological curvature of the cervical spine was straightened. Thoracic vertebra presents kyphosis deformity, with the 10th thoracic spinous process as the apex of backward deformity, local tenderness, and local percussion pain. The physiological curvature of the lumbar spine disappeared and the lumbar spine presented kyphosis deformity, with tenderness and percussion pain in lumbar 2,3,4 spinous processes. The patient had no sensory impairment. The muscle strength of the left lower limb was grade III, and the muscle strength of the right lower limb was normal. There was no abnormality in the examination of extremities muscle tension. The right knee reflex is hyperactive and the left is normal. The left Achilles tendon reflex was weakened and the right side was normal. Tomas’s sign was positive. Hoffmann sign was negative, as well as Babinsky sign, Chaddock sign, Oppenheim sign, Gordon sign, patellar clonus, and condyle clonus.
A blood test was performed after admission . Blood routine: white blood cells 5.84*109/L, hemoglobin 145.8 g/L, platelet count 244.9*109/L. Inflammatory markers were examined, C-reactive protein <10.00 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 8 mm. Liver function examination showed aspartate aminotransferase 48 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 47 U/L, albumin 42.1 g/L. Renal function examination showed urea 5.66 mmol/L, creatinine 73 µmol/L, and uric acid 294 µmol/L. Tumor markers test results showed CA199 18.08 U/ml, CA193 19.75 U/ml, CA125 9.87 U/ml, AFP 1.68 ng/ml and CEA 1.5 ng/ml.
All the imaging data of the patients were taken in our hospital. Preoperative Cobb angle could not be measured from the X-ray coronal sequence due to interference with calcified abscesses . The kyphosis angle was measured at 117.3° from the X-ray sagittal sequence . Pelvic parameters were measured as follows, SS 38.7°, PT32.8°, PI71.5° . Chest radiographs showed no obvious lung abnormalities . Pathological examination results showed caseous necrosis and inflammatory fibrous tissue (,E). Combined with clinical data, it was consistent with spinal tuberculosis. CT scan revealed calcification of the abscess and destruction of the vertebral body in various locations (–Q). MRI showed many calcified abscesses in the sagittal plane, coronal plane, and cross-section .
After successful anesthesia, the patient was placed in the prone position, with routine skin disinfection and towel laying. The posterior median longitudinal incision was made with the lumbar spinous process as the center. The skin, subcutaneous fascia, and ligaments were cut layer by layer, The paravertebral muscles were removed along the spinous process and the lamina. A hemilamina retractor was placed to retract the muscles. After full exposure of the operating field, the spinous process of the lumbar 2–3 vertebral body and simultaneous lumbar 2–3 level laminectomy was performed. The ligament flavum and the dura mater were incised to expose the caseous abscess in the spinal canal, and the caseous necrotic tissue was completely removed. Spinal cord compression and nerve root adhesion were relieved during the operation. After the wound was thoroughly rinsed and no active bleeding was detected, streptomycin powder was placed around the lesion. After placing the drainage tube, the incision was sutured layer by layer, and the operation was finished.