A 25-year-old male presented with dark stools for 9 days. Ulcerated nodules were seen on the roof of the mouth, and black nodules were seen in the eyes and corners of the mouth , which gradually increased over the past 6 months. Neck lymph nodes, axillary lymph nodes, and inguinal lymph nodes were enlargement. Laboratory examination in anti - HIV antibody positive, CD4 T lymphocyte count 2 / mL, HIV RNA - 6.81 * 105 IU/mL. Pulmonary Computed Tomography (CT) showed many small patches, nodules, and patchy high-density shadows, with blurred boundaries and uneven density . Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no obvious abnormalities. One week after admission to the hospital, the patient’s orbital skin biopsy showed CD34(+) CDX2(-) D2-40(+) HHV8(+) Ki-67(50%+), positive HHV-8 in skin lesions is the gold standard for identification, which was made a definite diagnosis of Kaposi sarcoma . The patient was treated with Liposomal Doxorubicin (20 mg/m2 IV every three weeks) for Kaposi sarcoma by guidelines. Antiviral therapy with tenofovir, lamivudine, and dolutegravir was initiated at the same time.
After receiving 8 cycles of chemotherapy treatments, the patient’s lung condition and mouth ulcerative nodules improved slowly. CD4 T lymphocyte count increased to 82/mL, HIVRNA <100 IU/mL. However, A new growing neoplasm was seen in the little toe of the left foot. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left foot revealed the joint and component bone morphology and signal were as usual, and no changes were observed in the joint space. The morphology and signal intensity of peripheral ligaments, muscle groups, tendons, and tendon sheaths were not changed. There was no obvious abnormality in the arch morphology. The lateral soft tissue of the left foot was swollen. The left foot skin biopsy immunohistochemical showed CD34(+), EBV(-), ERG(+), and HHV8(+), which was taken to suggest Kaposi sarcoma. Considering that the patient was an allergy sufferer, we changed the chemotherapy regimen to albumin-bound paclitaxel (260mg/m2, every three weeks). Up to now, after 3 cycles of chemotherapy, the patient’s new neoplasm of the left foot regressed almost completely. The CD4 T lymphocyte cell counts slowly increased to 188/mL, and viral loads remained below the detectable level. The entire diagnosis and treatment of this case is presented on the timeline .