A 25-year-old male patient presented with complete flaccid paralysis and numbness of right upper limb. One day earlier, he had been electrocuted while holding a telephone pole with his right hand during the lightning. Immediately, following this he developed complete paralysis of right side upper limb with loss of sensation. There was no loss of consciousness, disturbance of speech, or seizure. The right side upper limb was normal on general examination with no entry burn points, bluish coloration, and all the peripheral pulses were normal. On neurologic examination, there was complete loss of all movements with power around all joints being grade 0 in right upper limb . All modalities of sensation were absent in the same limb, excepting a very small patch in the uppermost part of right arm where it was reduced to 20% of that on left side. Nerve conduction study done on 5th day after the lightning injury, showed grossly diminished conduction velocity and increased distal latencies in all the major nerves of right upper limb without any decrease in amplitude. Electromyography showed no fibrillations. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) neck showed normal brachial plexus with no avulsion or pseudomeningocele formation . Patient was put on steroid therapy (20 mg prednisolone thrice daily for 2 weeks) followed by tapering doses for a total of 6 weeks. An arm sling was given to support the paralysed limb. On follow-up, 1 week after starting the steroid therapy, power in right hand had improved; he could open and close his fist, write with bad hand writing (with support from left hand). However, there was no recovery of muscle function in forearm and arm muscles. There was restoration of sensations in right side upper limb to 30% of normal. On completion of 2nd follow-up week, power in right hand grossly improved with ability to write properly and do routine activities. Patient was able to raise his forearm against gravity (Grade 3 power). Abduction at shoulder joint was possible to only 30° . Sensation improved to 75% of normal. Twenty days after starting the steroid therapy, power in forearm muscles improved to grade 5, abduction at shoulder increased to 70–80°. There was complete recovery of sensation in right upper limb. At the end of 4th week course of steroid therapy, patient had regained complete power of muscles and sensations in right upper limbs. Now he could raise his right arm to full extent, do normal routine activities with his hand, forearm, and arm . Nerve conduction study done at the end of 5th week showed 80% recovery in conduction velocity and distal latencies.