A 47-year-old man was hospitalized because of jaundice and rashes. He developed jaundice 2 weeks prior to admission. He had no fever, fatigue, anorexia, abdominal pain, or waist pain. The laboratory examinations in local hospital revealed an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 359 U/L, an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 161 U/L, an alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 580 U/L, a gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) of 883 U/L and a total bilirubin (TBIL) of 75.1 umol/L. He received a liver protective medication (diammonium glycyrrhizinate), but jaundice did not improve. On the third day of diammonium glycyrrhizinate treatment, multiple non-itchy rashes appeared all over his body, which remained after the withdrawal of diammonium glycyrrhizinate and the application of anti-allergic agents. In addition, his ALP and GGT increased to 853 and 1012 U/L in the fifth day. He was then transferred to our hospital. He denied any chronic diseases, drug administration, alcohol consumption or venereal exposure. Physical examination showed the temperature of 36.0 °C, the blood pressure of 108/75 mmHg, the heart rate of 77 times/min and the breath rate of 18 times/min. His skin and sclera were mildly yellowish. No hepatomegaly, splenomegaly or ascites was found. Non-itchy macular rashes measuring 0.5 to 2 cm were observed all over his body, including some on the soles and palms . No genital or buccal lesions were found. Biochemical examinations in our hospital revealed a weakly positive in hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg). His hepatitis B surface antibody, hepatitis B extracellular antigen (HBeAg) were both negative and his hepatitis B virus DNA was undetectable (< 500 IU/ml). The other laboratory tests including Hepatitis A virus, Hepatitis C virus, Hepatitis E virus, human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and other autoantibodies were all negative. Abdominal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed the normal biliary tract, liver, and spleen. He underwent liver biopsy and the results revealed granulomatous hepatitis with stage 2 inflammation and stage 1 fibrosis . Mild hepatic lobule inflammation and plasma cells infiltrating were found in the portal area. In addition, micro-granulomas with coagulation necrosis were noticed in the portal area. Immunohistochemistry examination showed a weakly staining of HBsAg and HBcAg. He received a following test of syphilis. The rapid plasma reagin test (RPR) was positive (1,32 titer), and the Treponema pallidum particle assay (TPPA) test was 1:38, which confirmed the diagnosis of syphilis. The patient was then given intramuscular benzathine penicillin treatment at a dose of 2.4 million units per week for successive 2 months. No anti-HBV drug was given. The liver enzymes decreased rapidly after penicillin treatment and finally returned to normal level after 2 months of treatment. The follow-up showed that the liver function kept normal and HBV DNA was still undetected after 1-year.