A 21-year-old male without any notable past medical history presented to our hospital with numbness in the left upper extremity. Symptoms emerged a few months before the patient presented at our hospital and had been gradually deteriorating. Upon admission, a neurological examination revealed bilateral abducent palsy with partial impairment of adduction in the right eye when the patient looked to the left (one and a half syndrome), dysphagia, and left-sided hemiparesis, dysesthesia, and ataxia. His family history, including schwannomas and meningiomas, was unremarkable. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 4-cm mass in the dorsal pontomedullary area adjacent to the fourth ventricle . The contrast-enhanced mass was accompanied by a large cyst behind the solid component. No contrast enhancement was observed on the cyst wall. There were no other lesions such as vestibular schwannoma or spinal schwannoma in this patient. With 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography, uptake in the lesion was non-significant, indicating minimal or no malignancy. A thorough survey of malignancy in the trunk did not reveal any lesions. Preoperative diagnostic angiography did not show tumor staining, which suggested a differential diagnosis of pilocytic astrocytoma. The fourth ventricle partially collapsed due to the mass effect, and signs of intracranial hypertension caused by obstructive hydrocephalus gradually emerged; thus, urgent tumor resection was planned.
The location of the motor and sensory tracts was confirmed by tractography with diffusion tensor imaging and Q-ball imaging prior to surgery. The motor and sensory tract was anteriorly and laterally compressed by the tumor, respectively. An approach from the posterior side was planned, based on the results of tractography .
A midline suboccipital craniotomy with a transcerebellomedullary fissure approach was performed. Immediately after the craniotomy, an external ventricular drain was inserted. The posterior wall of the cystic component was visible along the midline of bilateral facial colliculi . After suction of the yellowish liquid from the cyst, the anterior solid component of the tumor was identified.
Bradycardia and hypotension occurred during removal of the ventrocaudal component of the tumor, which might have been due to stimulation of the dorsal nucleus of the vagus nerve. Thus, the procedure was terminated, resulting in incomplete removal of the tumor.
A tracheotomy was performed immediately after tumor removal to prevent postoperative respiratory adverse events. Obstructive hydrocephalus resolved after tumor resection, and external ventricular drainage was removed on postoperative day (POD) 10. The ventrocaudal residual mass was followed up with gadolinium-enhanced MRI . The image on POD 29 showed slight enlargement of the contrast-enhanced area. The radiographical change was initially regarded as a postoperative inflammatory reaction, but MRI performed on POD 43 showed apparent growth of the solid component . Local fractionated irradiation was initiated at 50 Gy/25 Fr from POD 50. Subsequent follow-up MRI demonstrated no tumor regrowth. Three months after surgery, the tracheostomy was closed, and the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation facility. Left-sided facial paralysis and abducent palsy persisted even after discharge from the facility, but left-sided hemiparesis improved. Currently, no tumor regrowth has been observed 4 years after surgery .