A 50-year-old female self-presenting to the medical outpatient clinic, with known HIV positive status on Tenofovir 300 mg, Lamivudine 300 mg, and Dolutegravir 50 mg regimen and on her fifth month of treatment for sputum positive pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) presented with a 2-month history of left inguinal swelling of gradual onset, increasing in size, painful which was radiating to the left flank, associated with low grade fevers, night sweats, general body malaise and weight loss. No history of change in bowel habit, urinary symptoms nor gastrointestinal symptoms. She otherwise had no drug allergies, no significant family history of disease, and does not smoke or drink alcohol. She had 2 prior lower segment cesarean sections. During the course of the illness had been treated with multiple antibiotic regimens which she could not recall at different centers without identification of foci of infection with no relief.
On examination she was alert, oriented, mildly pale, febrile low grade (37.8 °C), multiple hyperpigmented non-itching plaques all over her skin with stable vitals. Her abdominal examination revealed a left inguinal fluctuant swelling, 6 × 10 cm, tender, warm, not increasing in size with Valsalva maneuver with associated nearby inguinal lymphadenopathy. Rest of abdominal examination revealed no obvious mass nor hepatosplenomegaly and rest of systemic examinations were normal.
The initial workup of the patient revealed a neutrophilia, microcytic hypochromic anemia with a raised inflammatory marker C-reactive protein of 147 mg/l (normal range 0.5–5 mg/l) with a normal stool and urinalysis. In investigating for the source of infection and cause of inguinal swelling a CT scan of the chest and abdomen revealed large, well-defined multiloculated lesion of fluid attenuation in the left retroperitoneum involving the left psoas and iliac muscles with a continuous rim enhancement in continuity with left iliopsoas muscle up to inguinal region consistent with left iliopsoas abscess, along with left necrotic inguinal lymph nodes . The chest scan revealed two small non-enhancing lobulated masses, located in the left upper zone posterolateral aspect, without cavitation suggestive of an infective pulmonary granuloma suspected to be tuberculous in origin .
In view of the diagnosis of psoas abscess, the patient was reviewed by a senior general surgeon and consultant radiologist and admitted for intravenous pain and antipyretic management with IV paracetamol 1 g 8 hourly and scheduled for a percutaneous ultrasound guided drainage of the abscess. Following the informed consent patient was prepared and draped under aseptic technique and a size 10 French pigtail catheter was inserted under ultrasound guidance through the left inguinal swelling which drained thick viscous pus .
Post procedure patient initiated on antibiotic (IV cefepime 1 g12 hourly), pain management (IV paracetamol 1 g 8 hourly and intramuscular diclofenac 75 mg as per need basis), to continue with her antiretrovirals (TLD once daily) and antituberculosis medication (rifampicin 300 mg and isoniazid 150 mg) and for daily drain flushing with warm normal saline. Pus fluid analysis via polymerase chain reaction GENE XPERT revealed Mycobacterium tuberculosis without rifampicin resistance and culture and sensitivity revealed no other bacterial or fungal growth . Consultation with a physician with infectious medicine background recommended to change antituberculosis regimen to rifampicin 150 mg, isoniazid 75 mg, pyrazinamide 400 mg and ethambutol 275 mg for 3 months initial phase followed by rifampicin 300 mg and isoniazid 150 mg for 6 months continuous phase.
Initially 900 ml drained over 24 h followed by 250 ml on day 2 and 200 ml on day 3 of same color and viscosity. Day 3 and 4 drained 50 ml and 40 ml respectively with the pus fluid becoming less viscous. At discharge on day 4 post pigtail insertion the patient's neutrophilia had normalized and CRP had dropped to 65 mg/l with pain controlled and resolution of fevers and general body malaise. Pigtail catheter was left in situ to allow for continuous drainage with daily flushing to continue as outpatient and was discharged on her antiretrovirals and antituberculosis medication with counselling on drain care. At 10 days post procedure drainage over 24 h was less than 10 ml of serous like fluid and CRP had almost normalized hence CT of the abdomen was performed revealing remarkable reduction in size of left iliopsoas abscess with surgical draining tube in situ, thus the drainage tube was removed . On last follow up at outpatient surgical clinic 3 months later she was progressing well with no significant complaints, complete resolution of fevers, night sweats while gaining appetite and weight adequately with adherence towards her antiretrovirals and antituberculosis medication.