In April 2011, a 50-year-old woman was referred to our outpatient Rheumatology Clinic in Firouzgar General Hospital, Tehran, Iran, with 10 years history of progressive neck and back inflammatory pain suggestive of undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy. She had a history of surgical thyroidectomy at the age of fifteen, an episode of seizure at the age of sixteen, and bilateral cataracts extraction at forty. On physical examination, she had typical ankylosing spondylitis posture with decreased spinal mobility, limited neck rotation, and restricted internal hip rotation but near normal chest expansion. Result of modified Schober's test was 13 cm and Fabere test result was positive. Results of Trousseaus and Chvostek's signs were both negative. Laboratory findings revealed elevated ESR (65 mm/h) and CRP (219 nmol/L). Results of complete blood count, blood glucose, urea, creatinine, and liver and thyroid function tests were within normal limits. Results of anti-nuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti-CCP, and HLA-B27 tests were negative. In skeletal survey, pelvic radiography showed ossification of iliolumbar ligaments at lateral margin of acetabulum and capsular calcification around hip joints. Enthesopathic changes were seen at muscular insertions of both trochanters, ischial tuberosities, and iliac crests. Computed tomography (CT) of Pelvic revealed normal sacroiliac joints but osteophytes at inferior margins of the joint . Using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) method, a calibrated Norland bone densitometer (Model XR 600, Norland, Wisconsin, USA) showed elevated bone mineral density at lumbar spine and total femur regions with T scores of +4.8 and +1.4, respectively. A plain CT scan of brain showed bilateral symmetric basal ganglia calcifications .
Raised inflammatory markers (ESR and CRP) concomitant with chronic inflammatory back pain were suggestive of an atypical spondyloarthropathy, which is more common in women. Indometacin and sulfasalazine were started but she did not achieve favorable response. Low-dose oral prednisolone was intermittently used for treating inflammatory attacks. Supplemental calcium and vitamin D were concomitantly used. Two years later, she developed blurred vision, which was diagnosed as anterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION) by the consultant ophthalmologist. High-dose oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg) led no improvement; therefore, infliximab (5 mg/kg) was added to steroid therapy and led to dramatic response after two courses, two weeks apart. On admission for receiving infliximab, biochemical assessment revealed severe hypocalcemia (1.38 mmol/L), hyperphosphatemia (2.26 mmol/L), undetectable PTH (< 4 ng/L), but normal serum 25-hydroxy vitamin D (80 nmol/L), albumin, alanine transaminase, and aspartate transaminase. Elevated creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were reported (34 and 20.04 μkat/L, respectively). Electromyography and echocardiography findings were normal. Classic treatment of hypoparathyroidism with elemental calcium (2 g/day) and calcitriol (1 µg/day) led to clinical and laboratory improvement.