A 78-year-old male patient had been undergoing PD for 3 years and 8 months because of end-stage kidney disease due to diabetic nephropathy. He had a history of PD-associated peritonitis caused by Streptococcus Gordonii and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, resulting in the removal and reinsertion of his PD catheter. Subsequently, his treatment regimen was changed to six sessions of continuous ambulatory PDs and one session of HD per week owing to fluid overload. The patient presented to the hospital with complaints of diarrhea and turbid effluent. Upon examination, he had a temperature of 36.7°C, heart rate of 68 beats/min, blood pressure of 147/61 mm Hg, body weight of 61.7 kg, and body mass index of 22.8 kg/m2. The patient’s abdomen was tender; however, bowel sounds were normal and no guarding or rebound tenderness was present. No obvious redness or exudate at the exit site was observed. Laboratory data showed a peripheral white blood cell count of 8,100 cells/μL and C-reactive protein of 1.13 mg/dL. The white blood cell count in the peritoneal fluid was 253 cells/μL (neutrophils 59%).
The clinical course is shown in . The patient was diagnosed with PD-associated peritonitis, and we initiated treatment with intraperitoneal administration of ceftazidime and vancomycin as our initial treatment protocol. The culture of the PD fluid revealed the presence of Kocuria rhizophila, and antibiotic therapy was changed to penicillin G for 2 weeks; the patient was discharged after the treatment for a total of 3 weeks. However, 1 week after discharge, the patient’s effluent again became turbid, and the culture of the PD fluid again revealed the presence of Kocuria rhizophila.
Once the bacteria grew on agar media, we used the matrix-assisted laser desorption time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOD MS) to identify the bacteria. This method allows us to quantify how accurately we can evaluate the bacteria. If the accuracy is low or the name of the bacteria cannot be determined with MALDI, 16S rRNA is used to identify the bacteria. In this case, Kocuria rhizophila was detected using MALDI-TOF MS.
We attributed the short-period recurrence of peritonitis to the formation of biofilm in the catheter. Therefore, we ultimately elected to remove the patient’s PD catheter and transition from PD to HD.