A 61-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with sudden chest pain for 5 h. Four years prior, the patient was diagnosed with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) of the inferior wall of the right ventricle on electrocardiography (ECG). He underwent emergency PCI and took oral medications for secondary prevention of coronary heart disease for a long time after the PCI procedure.
On admission, the patient was confused. Breathing sounds from both lungs were coarse, and dry and moist rales were audible. The patient’s heart rate was 132 beats/min, but pendulum heart rhythms and pathological murmur were not heard over each heart valve. ECG revealed convex upward-sloping ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF, indicating acute inferior wall STEMI . Routine blood tests revealed a white blood cell count of 15.18 × 109/L, a neutrophil count of 9.4 × 109/L, and a hemoglobin concentration of 151 g/L. Other blood parameters were within normal ranges. Cardiac enzyme tests revealed a creatine kinase concentration of 210 U/L, a creatine kinase isoenzyme concentration of 34 U/L, a lactate dehydrogenase concentration of 220 U/L, a myoglobin concentration of > 1200 μg/L, and a troponin I concentration of 0.016 μg/L.
After entering the hospital, the patient lost consciousness and developed ventricular fibrillation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, intubation, mechanical ventilation, and repeated electrical defibrillation were performed immediately, but ventricular fibrillation persisted. Then, 100 mg lidocaine, 2 mg metoprolol (four times), and 150 mg amiodarone were administered intravenously, followed by intravenous infusion of 300 mg amiodarone (1.5 mg/min). However, ventricular fibrillation still persisted, and the patient’s blood pressure was still 0 mmHg after 10 biphasic direct current defibrillation attempts. Emergency ECG showed cardiac arrest (with ongoing chest compressions) without pericardial effusion.
After 40 min of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient was considered to have electrical storm of sustained malignant ventricular fibrillation, cardiogenic shock, and cardiac arrest due to AMI, which are indications for extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation. As the patient was comatose and experienced cardiac arrest, the use of an intra-aortic balloon pump was not considered. However, extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed at the bedside. An arterial cannula (17 Fr) and a venous cannula (21 Fr) were placed in the peripheral femoral artery and femoral vein, respectively, using the Seldinger technique, allowing for drainage from the femoral vein and return to the femoral artery. The extracorporeal circulation was successfully established, and the patient was successfully connected to the ECMO machine. The ratio of blood flow to gas flow was 1:1 at a speed of 3000 rpm and a flow rate of 2.5–3.0 L. After the patient was placed on ECMO support, sinus rhythm returned, and the heart rate gradually returned to normal. The patient regained consciousness; therefore, we decided to perform revascularization under the condition of successful establishment of veno-arterial ECMO (VA-ECMO).
When the patient entered the interventional room, ECG again showed sustained ventricular fibrillation. Eight electrical defibrillation shocks were applied, and the patient was administered 150 mg amiodarone and 4 mg metoprolol via continuous intravenous infusion. However, ECG still showed sustained ventricular fibrillation. Thus, we decided to perform revascularization. Intraoperative angiography showed that the proximal segment of the right coronary artery was totally occluded, with a heavy thrombus burden at the distal segment. A stent shadow was visible in the middle segment of the right coronary artery, with a Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction flow grade of 0 . During surgery, repeated thrombus aspiration was performed, and many thrombi were aspirated. After right coronary artery balloon dilation, blood flow was restored, and the patient’s heart rhythm reverted to a spontaneous heart rhythm. ECG showed ventricular escape beats and a slow heart rate of 49 beats/min. However, sustained ventricular fibrillation occurred again after the heart rate increased to 112 beats/min after intravenous injection of 0.5 mg atropine. The heart rhythm returned to sinus rhythm after delivering one electric defibrillation shock, and ventricular fibrillation did not occur. Then, one HELIOS stent (3.0 × 19 mm) was successfully implanted at the stenotic lesion in the distal right coronary artery and partially overlapped with the original stent. A GuReater stent (3.5 × 24 mm) was implanted in the proximal right coronary artery lesion and partially overlapped with the original stent . The operation went smoothly.
After admission to the intensive care unit, the patient was ventilated and supported with VA-ECMO. The patient underwent continuous renal replacement therapy due to the presence of oliguria with acute renal failure. Therapies for brain protection, stress ulcer prophylaxis, glycemic control, airway care, and nutritional support, as well as therapies to reduce the systemic inflammatory response, prevent deep vein thrombosis, and maintain a stable internal environment, were provided. Thereafter, the patient’s cardiac function gradually recovered, and VA-ECMO support was withdrawn. After 7 days of treatment, echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 54%. Segmental left ventricular wall motion was slightly weakened, but left ventricular systolic function was normal. After 10 days of treatment, the patient was transferred from the intensive care unit to the general ward for further treatment. After 20 days of treatment, the patient’s condition and vital signs were stable, and he was discharged. The patient was followed up once a week after hospital discharge, and he did not experience any discomfort, his condition was stable, and he continued to take medication after discharge.