A 73-year-old Caucasian male was evaluated for a transient ischemic attack (TIA) in May 2015. Computed tomography (CT) imaging incidentally showed multiple poorly circumscribed pulmonary nodules with a maximum diameter of 1.7 cm restricted to the upper lobe of the right lung, suggestive of malignancy. A positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) showed intense uptake of 2-deoxy-2-(18 F)fluoro-D-glucose (18 F-FDG) in the pulmonary nodules. A diagnostic thoracoscopy with wedge resection of one nodule was carried out. Frozen section revealed a poorly differentiated neoplasia with epithelioid and spindle cell morphology of unclear etiology. Based on the differential diagnosis of a primary tumor of the lung, a lobectomy of the right upper lobe and mediastinal lymphadenectomy was performed.
The formalin fixed and paraffin embedded material showed focal areas of pigment accumulation, and the tumor cells stained positive for S100, melan-A and HMB-45, consistent with malignant melanoma. Molecular testing revealed no BRAF, NRAS or c-KIT mutations. A dermatological consultation did not show an indication of a primary cutaneous melanoma. The patient was diagnosed with stage IV melanoma of unknown primary. Subsequent magnetic resonance and PET/CT imaging 2 months after lobectomy revealed a hepatic metastasis in segment II and progression of the pulmonary lesions. The patient was treated with four cycles of ipilimumab (Yervoy®), administered at a dose of 3 mg/kg body weight every 3 weeks .
Three weeks after the second infusion of ipilimumab, the patient presented with a sudden eruption of a papulovesicular polymorphic exanthema on the trunk and proximal extremities, associated with a generalized and severe pruritus. On physical examination, he had multiple erythematous, 2- to 7-mm scaly papules and fragile vesicles on his chest, abdomen, back, shoulders and proximal limbs, which quickly formed crusts and keratotic erosions . A skin biopsy was performed. The predominant histological pattern was suprabasal acantholysis of keratinocytes with scattered dyskeratotic cells at various levels of the epidermis, suggestive of a Darier-like form of Grover’s disease. In addition, histological examination of the skin biopsy revealed a mild interface dermatitis and perivascular, lymphohistiocytic infiltrates with scattered eosinophils in the superficial dermis . Immunohistochemically, the infiltrate was composed of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells with frequent but weak PD-1 expression and intermingled CD68+ macrophages (data not shown). No epidermal infiltrates were noted. Direct immunofluorescence studies for immune complex deposition were negative.
The pruritus and the rash were assessed as grade 2 toxicity, and the treatment with ipilimumab was continued according to the schedule. Of note, the patient had no recent medical history of fever, infectious conditions or abundant sweating. He also had no history of autoimmune diseases or a previous episode of Grover’s disease. The acantholytic rash and the itching were responsive to topical treatment with hydrocortisone butyrate 0.1 % lotion with menthol 1 %. However, the skin lesions persisted for more than 2 months after the end of the ipilimumab treatment. No other iplilimumab-related adverse events were noted in this patient.
After 4 cycles of treatment of ipilimumab the patient showed stable disease (RECIST 1.1 ) based on CT examination of the thorax and abdomen, and symptomatically experienced relief of his disease-related chronic cough, dyspnea and fatigue. In March 2016, 4 months after termination of therapy, the patient presented with stable disease on CT-scan and all skin lesions had healed. At the end of April 2016, there was appearance of new brain metastasis with epileptic seizures and aphasia. Treatment with full brain radiation and steroid infusions was initiated. There was no re-appearance of the skin lesions.