A 73-year-old female complained of diplopia on right gaze 3 months before referral to us. She was consulted with a neurosurgeon at another hospital, who suspected right 6th cranial nerve palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a right orbital mass. The doctor followed-up her for 1 month, but the restriction of abduction deteriorated and there was development of proptosis on the right side. She did not have any history of ocular or systemic disease, or family history.
On the first examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 1.0 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye. She did not have any field of binocular single vision in all directions of gaze, and the Hess chart showed severe restriction of adduction and abduction. There was no palpable periocular mass. The Hertel exophthalmometric examination demonstrated measurements of 20.5 mm on the right side and 15.5 mm on the left side (base, 102.5 mm) .
Computed tomographic (CT) images showed a mass in the right orbit involving the lateral rectus muscle without bony erosion . MRI revealed a mass involving the lateral rectus muscle with iso-intensity to the gray matter on T1-weighted image and heterogenous iso-to-high intensity to the gray matter on T2-weighted image. Enhanced T1-weighted MRI showed strong enhancement, especially in the peripheral part of the mass .
An excisional biopsy of the mass was performed under general anesthesia by two of the authors (YT and AV). The results of pathological examination corresponded to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma , but the primary site was undetermined.
Systemic CT showed enlargement of the pancreatic tail with pancreatic duct dilation and small nodules in the mesenteric membrane , suspecting pancreatic carcinoma with peritoneal metastasis. The patient was consulted with a gastrointestinal physician for further examination. Blood tests demonstrated elevated carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9; 1141 U/mL; normal limit, < 37 U/mL), Span-1 (130 U/mL; normal limit, < 30 U/mL), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 5.4 ng/mL; normal range, 0.1–5.0 ng/mL), and immunoglobulin G4 (681 mg/mL; normal limit, < 135 mg/mL). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrated an enlargement of the pancreatic tail. The pancreatic duct was not depicted in the tail of pancreas but was dilated in the pancreatic body. Fine needle aspiration biopsy of the pancreatic lesion pathologically revealed the same findings to the orbital tumor.
After induction chemotherapy using FOLFIRINOX regimen at our hospital, the patient was transferred to another hospital to continue chemotherapy.