The patient was an 84-year-old woman who experienced intermittent claudication in her left lower extremity after walking for approximately 5 minutes (Rutherford classification stage 3). She had no cold sensation or ulcers in her lower extremities. The left popliteal artery was easy to palpate, but the dorsalis pedis artery was difficult to palpate. She had hypertension and a history of aortic valve replacement owing to severe aortic valve stenosis. A systolic murmur was heard in the left anterior thoracic region. She had no jugular venous dilatation or leg oedema. Moreover, she had adequate cardiac function and no indication of ischaemic heart disease. The ABI after exercise-stress was within the normal range: 1.05 for the right extremity and 0.98 for the left extremity. Ultrasonography revealed severe stenosis with calcification in the left common femoral artery (CFA), and the PSV was 230 cm/s. Although there was no decrease in the ABI, she had lower extremity symptoms, and ultrasonography indicated severe stenosis and an increased PSV. Therefore, we decided to perform endovascular angiography and PG evaluation.
We punctured the right CFA and placed the catheter in the left external iliac artery. Angiography revealed severe calcification in the left CFA and 90% stenosis without flow limitation . We used 40 mg of papaverine and 1 μg of alprostadil to induce maximal hyperaemia, and we examined the pFFR using a pressure guidewire (OmniWire, 0.014 inch, Philips, USA). We equalized the proximal pressure to the left external iliac artery. At rest, the systolic PG was 13 mmHg, and the mean PG was 7 mmHg. In hyperaemia, the systolic PG was 23 mmHg, mean PG was 11 mmHg, and pFFR was 0.86 ( and ).
First, a guidewire (Jupiter FC3, 300 cm, 0.014 inch, Boston, MA, USA) was advanced to the popliteal artery passing beside the calcification. Subsequently, we discovered that intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) could not pass through the lesion. An attempt to pass the intra-calcification using heavier guidewires and a microcatheter was unsuccessful. Next, we punctured the calcified lesion directly using a 20-G needle (105 mm, Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) and succeeded in passing through the lesion. The guidewire was inserted through the needle that passed through the calcified lesion and pulled through the guide catheter. Calcification was debulked using the CROSSER (Bard Peripheral Vascular Inc., Tempe, AZ, USA), which is a novel penetrating catheter for peripheral chronic total occlusion by using high-frequency mechanical vibration to break through obstructive plaque. Angiography revealed expansion of the lesion. Balloon expansion was performed using a JADE 3.5/80 mm (OrbusNeich, Tokyo, Japan) and a peripheral cutting balloon (6.0/20 mm; Boston, MA, USA). We then performed drug-coated balloon (DCB) expansion using a Ranger 7.0/60 mm (Boston, MA, USA) . We observed expansion in the lesion without major dissection on angiography and IVUS .
After endovascular therapy (EVT), we re-examined the PG and pFFR. At rest, the systolic PG was 3 mmHg, and the mean PG was 2 mmHg. In hyperaemia, the systolic PG was 2 mmHg, mean PG was 1 mmHg, and pFFR was 0.99. After treatment, the patient’s lower extremity symptoms improved to a Rutherford classification grade of 0, without recurrence 3 months later.