A right-handed Japanese man in his fifties was taken to hospital in an ambulance after experiencing numbness in his right upper extremity and difficulty in standing up. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed immediately after the onset of the symptoms, and the diffusion-weighted images showed a left internal hindfoot perforating branch infarction due to lenticulostriate artery (LSA) occlusion . The patient had a history of hypertension but no other medical conditions. After receiving treatment at an acute care hospital, the patient was admitted to our rehabilitation hospital on day 15 after the onset of the symptoms. His Fugl–Meyer Assessment score for the upper extremities (FMA–UE) was 4/66 (shoulder/elbow/forearm 4/66 points, hand joint 0/10 points, fingers 0/14 points, coordination/speed 0/6 points); the score for the lower extremities was 7/34 points. He had severe upper and lower limb paralysis, decreased muscle tone around the shoulder joint (Modified Ashworth Scale score 0), subluxation in the scapulohumeral joint (2.0 cm between the acromion and greater tubercle of the humerus), and pain around the shoulder joint (numeric rating scale [NRS] 5). The patient’s Motor Activity Log (MAL) scores for both the amount of use (AOU) and quality of movement (QOM) were 0, and there were no daily situations in which the paralyzed hand was used. His cognitive function was 29/30 on the Mini-Mental State Test, and he had no significant higher brain dysfunction. He required assistance for all daily activities (Functional Independence Measure of Motor subscale 52 points) and moved around in a wheelchair with assistance. Based on the above evaluation, the rehabilitation of the patient included ADL practice, robotic therapy to improve voluntary control of the paralyzed hand’s proximal joints, and bilateral hand movement practice (wiping and sanding) involving the healthy upper limb, and active touch tasks with blocks to improve hand function.
As a result of the intervention, the patient’s FMA–UE score on day 100 was 19 points (shoulder/elbow/forearm 18; manual joint 0; hand 1; coordination/speed 0), but the subluxation remained (1.0 cm between the acromion and greater tubercle of the humerus). In the FMA–UE for hand items, only a few flexor joint movements appeared, and the MAL was unchanged from the time of admission. Therefore, tDCS was added to the intensive training for hand function.
We used a DC stimulator (NeuroConn, Germany) as the tDCS device, and tDCS was conducted via surface sponge electrodes measuring 5 × 7 cm (35 cm2). The anode was placed directly above the primary motor cortex of the injured hemisphere (C3 in the 10–20 system), and the cathode was placed directly above the primary motor cortex of the uninjured hemisphere (C4). Each electrode was immersed in water and fixed with a band. The intensity of the stimulation was 2.0 mA, and each session lasted 20 minutes. tDCS was performed five times a week for 6 weeks. These parameters have been previously reported safe and sufficient to produce motor evoked potentials [, ].
During each 20-minute session of tDCS, upper extremity functional training was conducted (see Fig. ). The ADL practice included wheelchair operation, toilet operation, and dressing practice according to the patient’s level of independence in ADL.
The upper limb paralysis after stroke was assessed using the FMA-UE . The frequency of use of the paralyzed hand was evaluated by calculating the MAL scores for AOU (MAL-A) and QOM (MAL-Q) . Both FMA and MAL have been translated into Japanese, and the reliability and validity of the assessment methods have been verified. For the subluxation in the scapulohumeral joint, the distance from the acromion to the greater tubercle of the humerus was measured (in cm) and recorded . The degree of pain was assessed using NRS . These evaluations were conducted three times: immediately before, 3 weeks after, and after the tDCS intervention.
Upper limb function improved following the intervention (see Fig. ). The patient was able to flex and extend his fingers and was able to grasp and move objects during task-oriented exercises and ADL. In addition, the patient was able to perform ADLs independently using a wheelchair.