A 32-year-old woman was referred to the endocrinology clinic for further assessment of recurrent severe hypoglycemia. Menarche occurred at 15 years of age. She reported secondary amenorrhea accompanied by headache and spontaneous galactorrhea from the age of 20. Diagnosis of prolactinoma was confirmed based on high blood prolactin level, and MRI of the pituitary gland and 0.5 mg cabergoline, a dopamine agonist, twice a week was initiated. She became pregnant at age 27 using ovulation induction by Clomiphene, and gave birth to a healthy baby without any complications. Two years after delivery, due to persistent amenorrhea and galactorrhea, a pituitary MRI was performed and showed a large (21*17*14 mm) mass with a leftward deviation of the pituitary stalk. Optic chiasm was intact. During the past year, the patient had several admissions in ED following episodes of severe headache, fatigue, weakness which were reportedly relieved with intravenous dextrose (unfortunately, the data on electrolytes and glucose level were not available). There were no symptoms of hyperandrogenism, weight change, hypertension, and diarrhea.
The physical examination of the patient was unremarkable. With suspicion to insulinoma and MEN-1, several blood tests were ordered, which are presented in Table . Decreased level of blood sugar and increased level of insulin and C-peptide indicated insulinoma. A raised calcium and PTH level suggested primary hyperparathyroidism Abdominal ultrasound and CT scan were also performed. Ultrasonography revealed two hypoechoic mass-like lesions measuring 27*20 and 10*7 mm near together adjacent to the tail of pancreas, and spiral abdominal CT scan disclosed two enhancing well-defined masses 27*20 mm and 37*30 mm in the tail and body of the pancreases, respectively, calcified areas in larger mass, and a 36*15 mm mass in the left adrenal gland (seven Hounsfield units) . Results of the blood and urine examinations on second admission are presented in Table . By considering MEN1, plasma cortisol after overnight dexamethasone suppression test and urinary free cortisol were requested, which were increased. Also, ACTH level was measured which wasdecreased, indicating primary hypercortisolism. Dynamic pituitary MRI was revealed a partial empty sella . Bone mineral density (BMD) was performed, which is presented in Table . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed 21*22 mm hypoechoic round lesion with well-defined border in pancreatic body, it was hyper vascular in Doppler and its elastic ratio was 7. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) using EUS from the pancreas masses was performed and an expert pathologist reported neoplastic process with neuroendocrine feature with KI-67 < 2%. Hence, in the patient with the diagnosis of MEN-1 with components of primary hyperparathyroidism, prolactinoma, insulinoma, and CS due to possible adrenal adenoma a spleen-preserving distal pancreatectomy and a left adrenalectomy was performed by a hepatobiliary surgeon. The whole left adrenal gland was enormously enlarged, measuring 100 × 60 × 20 mm. On sectioning, an adrenal tissue with nodular appearance was observed, the maximum of the nodule reached to 60 × 10 mm, which indicated macronodular hyperplasia (H&E,X400, Nikon microscope, Eclipse E100) |. In addition, two nodular masses 30 × 30 mm and 20 × 20 mm in the head and tail of pancreas were detected, respectively (H&E, X100, Nikon microscope, Eclipse E100) . Tumors were confined to pancreas and all margins were free of tumor. Lymphovascular and perineural invasion were not identified and the tumors stages were T2 NO Mx. After transient hyperglycemia during four days following the surgery that managed with insulin, the level of BS was returned to within reference range. The results of the cortisol and urine free cortisol following the surgery are shown in Table . Considering the high level of prolactin at the time of discharge from the hospital (466 ng/ml), low bone mass, the presence of empty sella, and the long duration of amenorrhea, the patient was recommended for 1 mg per week Cabergoline and hormone replacement therapy. Finally, parathyroidectomy was considered for the patients as well.
DNA was extracted from blood cells using salting out method. PCR was used to amplify for 10 coding exons as well as 20 bases of flanking non-coding sequences of MEN1 gene [NM-000244.3]. After cleaning of the PCR products, cycle sequencing was carried out using the ABI Big Dye Terminator v.3.0 kit. Products were resolved by electrophoresis on an ABI 3130 capillary sequencer. Sequencing was performed separately in both the forward and reverse directions. Alignment followed by comparing the individual’s sequences with the reference sequences was performed, respectively. The results indicated that she is heterozygote for pathogenic variant chr11;645,773,330-64577333AGAC, c.249-252delGTCT, p. (11e85Serfs Ter33) in exon 2 of MEN1 gene. This variant has been reported as a pathogenic change in and and OSMIC. The above variant has been previously observed in MEN1 patients [, ]. Bioinformatics prediction program (Mutation Taster) states that protein features might be affected due to this deletion. Also, according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) standards and guidelines, this variant is classified as pathogenic .
There was no remarkable family history except her father had a history of renal stones and lithotripsy; however, his PTH and serum calcium were normal. MEN1 mutations were assessed for her 5-year-old daughter, and the result of the test came back positive (similar mutation to her mother).