A 42-year-old male with sudden left upper extremity dysfunction was diagnosed with cerebral infarction by MRI and cerebral angiography. Intracerebral hemorrhage occurred after intravenous thrombolysis. One month later, a CT scan of the pulmonary artery was performed because the patient complained of left chest pain, shortness of breath and lower extremity edema, which indicated extensive thrombosis of the bilateral pulmonary arteries. Ultrasound of bilateral lower extremity veins showed left femoral vein, superficial femoral vein, and popliteal vein thrombosis. To prevent massive pulmonary embolism, anticoagulation therapy (rivaroxaban 20 mg/d) and inferior vena cava filter implantation were performed. Antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, tumor markers, antiphospholipid antibodies, autoantibodies were all negative. Because the patient has successively experienced embolism of the arterial system and venous system without risk factors, such as hypertension, diabetes, smoking and so on, paradoxical embolism cannot be excluded. TEE examination revealed a large PFO with an ASA . After multidisciplinary diagnosis, transcatheter PFO closure is recommended.
Preoperative TTE examination showed a PFO with an ASA, and contrast transthoracic echocardiography (cTTE) showed substantial right-to-left shunting (RLS) at rest and Valsalva maneuver . The CT examination of the lower extremity veins showed implantation of the inferior vena cava filter, inferior vena cava and bilateral external iliac vein thrombosis, and bilateral internal iliac vein thrombosis .
Due to the conventional approach of bilateral external iliac veins, internal iliac veins and inferior vena cava all have thrombi, the superior vena cava and jugular venous systems appeared normal; therefore, a right jugular venous approach was planned. A 6 Fr sheath was placed in the right jugular vein using the Seldinger technique. Initial attempts to probe the PFO utilized multiple catheters (6Fr TERUMO Radial TIG catheter, Medtronic LAUNCHER 6Fr AL catheter, Cordis 6Fr JR4 catheter), and probing with a straight 0.035 inch guidewire was unsuccessful. A Medtronic LAUNCHER 6Fr EBU 3.5 mm guiding catheter was then advanced to the right atrium, initially positioned below the atrial septum at the level of the tricuspid valve, and then withdrawn superiorly, allowing it to engage and pass through the PFO into the left atrium and left superior pulmonary vein . Due to insufficient support, when the guiding catheter was passed through the PFO, the guiding catheter and guidewire were slid into the inferior vena cava simultaneously . Under the guidance of the guidewire, the EBU3.5 mm guiding catheter was sent to the fossa ovalis again, and a 180 cm 0.025” stainless steel guidewire with coiled floppy tip was exchanged. The guiding catheter passed through the PFO smoothly and the stainless steel guidewire was looped into the left atrium . The position of the guidewire was confirmed by TTE, and there was no pericardial effusion. Withdrawing the guiding catheter, as per the classic femoral venous approach, a 9Fr Abbott TorqVue 180° delivery sheath was advanced over the wire into the left atrium, and an Amplatzer 30 mm PFO occluder (St. Jude Medical, Golden Valley, MN) was successfully deployed with good apposition as assessed by fluoroscopy and TTE . Following device deployment, there was no evidence of residual shunt on TTE Doppler, which also showed a negative bubble study result. Recovery was uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged the next day.