A 57-year-old Caucasian man with no family history of neoplastic diseases and no comorbidities, after severe weight loss and abdominal pain, was examined by his general practitioner for tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)=4448 and cancer antigen (CA)19.9=4728). His fecal occult blood test was positive and the biopsies obtained during a colonoscopy were positive for infiltrating and ulcerated poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (G3) of the sigmoid colon.
An immunohistochemistry analysis revealed epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) positivity and molecular analysis showed that both KRAS and BRAF were not mutated.
A staging computed tomography (CT) scan showed liver, lung, and spleen metastases and the presence of peritoneal carcinomatosis. Because of the advanced stage of disease, no indication was given for surgical treatment. The patient underwent 10 cycles of chemotherapy according to the FOLFOX6 regimen (oxaliplatin 100mg/mq; leucovorin 400mg/mq; 5-fluorouracil 400mg/mq bolus followed by 5-fluorouracil 2400mg/mq by continuous infusion over 46 hours every two weeks) with markers reduction (CEA=681 and CA19.9=330), improved performance status and weight gain. His chemotherapy treatment was continued with capecitabine, 1000mg/mq twice a day, as a maintenance therapy for two additional months. After this treatment, a CT scan showed progression of the disease in the lungs and liver, and laboratory examinations showed an increase in the tumor markers (CEA=820 and CA19.9=507).
The patient started a second-line chemotherapy with cetuximab, 400mg/mq loading dose, and irinotecan 200mg/mq. On the eighth day of the second cycle the patient developed fever (39°C), diarrhea, and confusion and the neurological examination by the emergency service revealed severe opisthotonus and retroversion of the eyes. A brain CT scan was negative for ischemic events or secondary lesions and his electroencephalogram (EEG) was normal.
In the afternoon, the patient was admitted to the medical oncology unit, where he was diagnosed with severe sepsis with clinical involvement of the meningoencephalic system and grade IV pancyopenia (hemoglobin (Hb)=8.5g/dL, red blood cells (RBC)=2.8×10^6/mL, platelets (PLT)=31000mL, white blood cells (WBC)=300mL, neutrophils=100mL).
While waiting for blood culture results, he started empiric antibiotic therapy with 500mg levofloxacin administered intravenously every 12 hours and 200mg intravenous fluconazole once a day in association with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). After five days, the pancytopenia resolved but the neurological disorder persisted.
In the meantime, Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp gallolyticus was isolated in the blood cultures. Echocardiography showed a moderate aortic valve insufficiency due to an endocardial vegetation stack on the right coronary cusp (about 10mm in diameter) protruding in the outflow tract of the left ventricle . A cerebrospinal fluid sample was not taken due to the very low platelet count (5000/mL on the second day after admission).
Ampicillin and sulbactam (3g intravenous every six hours) were added to the antibiotic treatment.
On the fourteenth day, the patient’s neurological status improved and he exhibited only residual mild opisthotonus with no cognitive deficit.
A total body CT scan was performed on the third week after admission, which showed progressive disease, thus antineoplastic therapy was ceased.