A 78-year-old man with a 2-year history of class III heart failure and a 10-year history of Parkinson's disease presented to his cardiologist’s office with weakness, dizziness, presyncope, fatigue, and inability to stand. He had experienced cardiac cachexia within the past 2 years, with his weight decreasing from 146 lbs to as low as 109 lbs. Additionally, his cardiac history included a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%, long-standing persistent AF, anemia, and coronary heart disease. The patient also had a history of Hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukemia, which had been treated 8 years earlier using chemotherapy and radiation; the radiation exposure resulted in restrictive lung disease.
The patient’s medications included carvedilol (6.25 mg twice daily [BID]), enalapril (2.5 mg BID), digoxin (0.125 mgpo QD), furosemide (20 mg, as needed), and warfarin (2.5 mg once daily [QD]) for cardiac symptoms, as well as levodopa/ carbidopa (25/100 mg four times daily) for Parkinson's disease symptoms and sertraline (50 mg QD) for mood regulation. He was also taking tolvaptan (15 mg QD) to treat recurrent symptomatic hyponatremia.
Physical examination revealed a seated BP of 120/70 mmHg that decreased to 60/40 mmHg upon standing, meeting the diagnostic criteria for orthostatic hypotension. His heart rate increased only slightly, from 70 beats per minute (bpm) seated to 74 bpm upon standing; this increase (< 15 bpm) is consistent with a diagnosis of nOH. A full review of his medications indicated that several medications, including carvedilol, enalapril, and furosemide, could be contributing to his orthostatic symptoms; however, they were at the minimum effective doses and were indicated for treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. Consequently, no washout period of the patient’s cardiac medications was conducted to assess for any effects on orthostatic hypotension symptoms. His serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen were normal, and there was no evidence of acute or chronic kidney disease throughout the course of his illness. The hemoglobin, total serum iron, iron saturation, and ferritin values revealed anemia but no iron deficiency. Evaluations of 24-h ambulatory BP and Holter monitor measurements were not performed. The combination of his heart failure, restrictive lung disease, and overall cachexia were so severe that he was deemed not to be a candidate for an implantable cardio-defibrillator or advanced mechanical circulatory support. Over time, he developed symptoms of class IV heart failure.
The patient was prescribed 200 mg droxidopa (three times daily [TID]) to treat his orthostatic symptoms. The dose was increased to 600 mg TID for better control of nOH symptoms. Droxidopa, a norepinephrine prodrug, is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration to treat symptomatic nOH in adults . The patient reported feeling better and less likely to fall when standing. During an office visit, his BP changed from 124/82 mmHg supine to 110/76 mmHg upon standing with assistance. There were no changes in his rate-controlled AF or symptoms of class IV heart failure, and his weight remained low but stable. The patient was deceased at the time of case study preparation, and informed consent was obtained from his next of kin.