A 26-year-old woman presented to the Neurology Department of Mianyang Central Hospital on March 6, 2020 with sudden-onset left-sided limb weakness that had been worsening over 3 d. She reported similar episodes in the past that had been recurring over the previous 10 years.
The symptoms began approximately 10 years ago without any apparent triggers. The patient reported difficulty in holding objects in her left hand and required assistance with walking. Previous episodes lasted for approximately 30 min before resolving spontaneously. The patient did not attach much significance to these symptoms. Approximately 3 d prior to admission, she experienced another episode of left-sided limb weakness, which progressed to complete immobility. This time, the weakness was accompanied by dizziness, headache, nausea, and vomiting. She initially sought medical attention at a local county hospital. After she exhibited seizures accompanied by loss of consciousness and urinary incontinence, she was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
On February 28, 2020, the patient underwent a Cesarean section. During her hospitalization, she continued to experience lochia discharge. She reported experiencing elevated blood pressure throughout the pregnancy but specific details were not provided. She also reported having scattered red vascular-like lesions on her face and forehead and reticulated purpura on her trunk and limbs, mainly the lower extremities. These markings were more pronounced when standing or in cold weather, and tended to improve with warmer temperature, immersion in warm water, and lying down. She had never sought medical attention for the skin lesions. The patient denied a history of diabetes, hypertension, coronary heart disease, and renal insufficiency. She also denied a history of infectious disease such as hepatitis or tuberculosis, as well as smoking, alcohol consumption, and substance abuse.
The patient denied any family history of genetic disease or tumors. The patient denied any history of mental illness. And she had one daughter without any history of miscarriages.
The patient's vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.7°C; pulse rate, 72 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 20 breaths per minute; and blood pressure, 124/91 mmHg. She was well-developed with good nutritional status. Extensive bluish-purple reticulated purpura was observed on the face, trunk, and limbs. The purpura was particularly pronounced on the extremities (especially the hands and right lower limb) and had irregular edges in shades of light red and blue, with some areas appearing darker than others. The lesions did not fade when manual pressure was applied . Neurologically, she was alert with a symmetric face and normal facial muscle strength. Muscle strength of the right upper and lower limbs was normal. Manual muscle testing of the proximal and distal left upper limb was assessed as grade 3, respectively; left lower limb muscle strength was grade 4. Proprioception, sensory perception, and vibratory sense were normal. Deep tendon reflexes of the biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, patellar tendon, and Achilles tendon were normal bilaterally. The Babinski sign was positive on the left. Left finger-to-nose and left heel-to-shin testing were unstable. She was unable to walk in a straight line.
Hematological parameters, liver and kidney function, electrolytes, thyroid function, urinalysis, coagulation function, comprehensive immunological assessment, cardiac phospholipid antibodies testing, tumor markers, and infectious disease screening all showed no significant abnormalities.
On magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, both frontal lobes showed a few punctate dot-like hyperintensities on T2-weighted imaging and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences, with corresponding signal changes on T1-weighted and diffusion-weighted imaging. High signal intensity and swelling were seen in the right parieto-occipital cortex on T2-weighted imaging and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences. Multiple tortuous small vessels were observed superficially on the cortex of both hemispheres. The ventricular system was symmetrically dilated and cerebral sulci and fissures appeared widened; the gyri were mildly diminished. Midline structures were not displaced.
Susceptibility-weighted imaging also showed multiple tortuous vessels on the cortical surface of both hemispheres which were of low signal intensity. An area of decreased signal was observed in the anterior part of the falx cerebri. No abnormal signal was detected elsewhere.
Digital subtraction angiography showed slender middle cerebral and anterior cerebral arteries bilaterally. No significant arterial narrowing or aneurysms were noted along either internal carotid artery. The right vertebral artery appeared thin and the V3 segment was not visualized distally. The left vertebral artery, basilar artery, and both posterior cerebral arteries showed no significant stenosis or aneurysms. The parenchymal phase appeared unremarkable. In the venous phase, extensive dilation of tortuous cortical veins was evident bilaterally. The superior sagittal sinus, inferior sagittal sinus, and straight sinus exhibited faint opacification. Both transverse sinuses were tortuous . Chest computed tomography showed pneumonia.