An eighty-three-year-old male patient with a medical history of a coronary artery bypass had been complaining for one year of dysphagia, regurgitations and general status loss. The patient was only able to swallow small quantities of liquid. The physical examination was not relevant. He was initially explored by an esophagogastroduodenoscopy. It revealed a dilated esophagus with a liquid stasis, cardia incompetence and inflammation of the esophageal mucosa. No tumor, external compression to the esophageal lumen, or even benign polyps existed. A manometry was then performed which revealed an esophageal aperistaltism with high pressure of the lower sphincter at 47 mmHg and an absence of relaxation. The deglutition was not transmitted in 100 % of the attempts. There was also a high gradient pressure between the esophagus and the stomach estimated at 15 mmHg which naturally should be negative. The diagnosis of achalasia stage II, according to the Chicago classification, was made. A barium swallow was performed. It showed a sigmoid sharpening of the esophagus confirming the end-stage achalasia . The case was discussed in a multi-disciplinary meeting between healthcare staff. Opinions were divided between defenders of esophagectomy and those who were for conservative treatment, which is LHD. In concentration with the patient and considering the medical history, the age of the patient, and the anesthesia risk, we opted for LHD. Before surgery, the patient was put on proton pump inhibitors for esophagitis with good clinical and endoscopic outcomes. The surgical procedure was performed by laparoscopy : The esophagogastric junction is exposed for 6 to 8 cm proximally, and we did longitudinal myotomy in the anterior esophageal axis using the harmonic scalpel. There was bleeding during the dissection due to esophagitis. The postoperative follow-up was uneventful. After a one-year survey, the patient was seen in the outpatient department. Symptoms were reduced, Eckardt score decreased from 7 to 1, and the patient was satisfied as he could again eat solid food without thoracic pain or regurgitation.