A 28-year-old African woman (72kg, 166cm) with anti-Cromer Tc(a) and anti-Jka antibodies was admitted to the obstetric emergency department at our University Hospital at 31+4 weeks’ gestation for heavy vaginal bleeding. She had a history of two prior at-term cesarean deliveries (in 2006 and 2010) and two voluntary abortions. She had a positive indirect Coombs test near the beginning of pregnancy. Low-titer anti-Tc(a) antibodies had been identified and closely monitored.
A month before admission to our department (at 27+3 weeks’ gestation), she had been hospitalized for cervical shortening (23mm). Ultrasonography at that time had revealed full placenta previa and a high risk for placenta accreta. In accordance with the guidelines of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists , the ultrasound report was as follows: “… in grey-scale, a thinning of the hyperechoic serosa–bladder interface and abnormal placental lacunae were found. Moreover, the placental tissue on the left side of the uterus appeared to reach the serosa.” During the initial hospitalization, two injections of betamethasone (12mg) were administered to prevent fetal respiratory distress, and a consulting hematologist requested further immunohematological testing.
Because of the rarity of antibodies of the Cromer blood group system and the high risk of heavy bleeding associated with placenta accreta, it was necessary to establish specific policies for the planned delivery by cesarean section. In preparation, parenteral iron supplementation was administered twice weekly beginning in the 28th week to raise hemoglobin (Hb) values above 12g/dL from an initial Hb of 10.5g/dL. Meanwhile, the Transfusion Medicine Department consultant planned two autologous blood donations because no compatible blood was found in a search of the United States Blood Bank network or the network of European blood banks (World Health Organization International Rare Donor Panel). Unfortunately, the autologous blood could not be collected because of sudden worsening of the patient’s clinical condition.
At her readmission to our Obstetrical Emergency Department, serial ultrasound examinations and fetal monitoring with cardiotocography were performed. Because vaginal bleeding stopped within a few hours in response to tocolytic therapy, the attending physicians decided to maintain a conservative strategy. Elective cesarean delivery was scheduled with multidisciplinary team cooperation because of the extreme complexity of the case. The cesarean section was performed 3 days later, after a long and detailed discussion among anesthesiologists, obstetricians, radiologists, hematologists and intensivists. Her preoperative Hb was 10.2g/dL.
Before cesarean section, the patient provided written informed consent and was brought to the angiography suite (Philips Medical Systems, Best, Netherlands). We placed two 14-gauge and one 16-gauge peripheral venous catheters and performed radial artery cannulation to monitor intra-arterial pressure throughout the procedures. After local anesthesia of her groin bilaterally, her femoral arteries were punctured with Seldinger technique and 4-Fr sheaths (Terumo, Leuven, Belgium) were placed to allow bilateral cross catheterization of her hypogastric arteries with a C1 “Cobra” catheter (Terumo Leuven, Belgium). Using a 0.035 inch 150cm Amplatz guidewire (Cordis, Fremont, CA, USA), the 4-Fr sheaths were exchanged with two 45cm 5-Fr Brite Tip® sheaths (Cordis, Fremont, CA, USA), with the distal tips in the anterior branches of both hypogastric arteries. This allowed placement of two Fogarty 80cm 4-Fr balloons over the distal tips of the 5-Fr sheaths, within her uterine arteries. Proper positioning of the Fogarty balloons and the effectiveness of vascular occlusion were confirmed with fluoroscopy . Maternal and fetal monitoring were conducted throughout the procedure, without complications.
She was transferred from the angiography suite to the obstetric operating room. A single fluoroscopic image was made with a moveable C-arm to confirm that the Fogarty balloons remained in the proper position. While she underwent the angiographic procedure, the operating room was set up with an intraoperative blood salvage system (Cell Saver®; Haemonetics Corp., Braintree, MA, USA), a rapid infusion system (Haemonetics Corp., Braintree, MA, USA), fluid warmers (Level 1 H-1200; Smiths Medical, Kent, UK) and forced air warming systems (Bair-Hugger™, 3M, St. Paul, MN, USA). Before anesthetic induction, she received premedication with hydrocortisone (200mg) as recommended by the hematologist in case of emergent need to transfuse incompatible blood. She also received antibiotic prophylaxis and intravenous tranexamic acid (750mg) to prevent peripartum hemorrhage . Anesthesia was induced with 200mg propofol, 200mcg fentanyl and 40mg rocuronium and was maintained with sevoflurane gas. A low transverse skin incision through her previous cesarean scars and a lower uterine segment incision were performed, avoiding the upper margin of the anterior placenta. Immediately after delivery of the fetus and umbilical cord clamping, the uterine artery balloons were inflated. As per the obstetrician’s request, the uterine arteries were embolized with Gelfoam® sponge (Jinling Pharmaceutical Company, Nanjing, China) to stop bleeding. Because the placenta could not be completely removed as a result of its strong adhesion to the posterior wall of the uterus, and because of the risk of postoperative hemorrhage, the surgeons decided to perform a total hysterectomy, as recommended by Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists guidelines . When adequate hemostatic control was achieved, the balloons were deflated. After the uterine lumen and abdominal cavity were closed and no vaginal bleeding was confirmed, the Fogarty balloons were removed. The 5-Fr sheaths were maintained for 24 hours in case further embolization was necessary. The total intraoperative blood loss was 1000mL and the surgery lasted approximately 150 minutes. During the cesarean section, 150mL of blood was reinfused through the cell salvage technology and limited crystalloid fluid therapy was administered (1L of lactated Ringer’s solution). Her temperature was maintained at approximately 37°C throughout the procedure and serial blood gas analyses were performed to monitor for metabolic acidosis and electrolyte abnormalities. Further details of our hemorrhage management protocol have been reported previously .
After surgery, she was admitted to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU) for close monitoring of bleeding and coagulation profiles. Immediately after ICU admission, ventilation was optimized, adequate analgesia was provided and she was awakened and extubated. Because no further bleeding was recorded from the abdominal drain, the angiographic 5-Fr sheaths were removed the day after surgery and she was transferred to the obstetric ward with a Hb of 8.9g/dL.
Four days after cesarean section, she was discharged from our hospital with a prescription for oral iron therapy for at least 30 days and plans for blood count recheck 15 days after discharge.