The patient was a 69-year-old man. He had no history of psychiatric disorder before the age of 47. He had a depressive episode at the age of 47, and fully recovered and maintained remission. At the age of 66, he became more talkative than usual and suddenly thought about starting an electronic enterprise while in an elevated mood, alongside increased activity and a decreased need for sleep. After his first hypomanic episode, he gradually became anxious and regretted his behavior in the hypomanic state. He finally developed delusions associated with a depressive mood, and was admitted to our department. He was diagnosed with bipolar depression with mood-congruent psychotic features. While he developed catatonia after the admission, an ECT was not performed due to the comorbidity of deep-vein thrombosis. He was treated with a combination therapy of various antipsychotics and antidepressants; however, he developed refractory depression, failing to respond to pharmacotherapy. It took considerable time for remission and he was discharged after 8 months of hospitalization. At the age of 69, he became depressive with delusions after the second hypomanic episode, and was admitted to our department again. He had a depressed mood, insomnia, appetite loss, psychomotor retardation, and inappropriate guilt, which was delusional. He was initially treated with olanzapine up to 17.5 mg/day (increasing 2.5–5.0 mg/day per 2 weeks), and given lithium up to 800 mg/day (increasing 100–200 mg/day per 2 weeks) for the treatment of bipolar depression with psychotic features. He partially responded to the combination therapy of lithium and olanzapine for about 2 months and psychomotor retardation and delusion of guilt disappeared; however, he developed psychomotor agitation and delusion of persecution, which was a mood-incongruent psychotic feature. Increasing the dosage of olanzapine to 17.5 mg/day caused over sedation, and was not effective for his mood-incongruent psychotic depression. Finally, lamotrigine was started, and psychomotor agitation and delusion of persecution gradually disappeared by increasing the dose up to 200 mg/day (increasing 25–50 mg/day per 2 weeks). He fully recovered taking lithium and lamotrigine for about 1 month, and had no experience of relapse after discontinuation of olanzapine.