A 74-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with a history of several days of jaundice. She had no past medical history and no family history. On examination, her skin was jaundiced, and her abdomen was flat and soft. Her laboratory data revealed obstructive jaundice and cholangitis, and tumor marker levels were elevated with carcinoembryonic antigen at 3.6 and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 at 4573.9. Computed tomography (CT) revealed an enhancing mass in the biliary duct hilum and dilation of the intrahepatic bile ducts, and there was no evidence of lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed a luminal filling defect in the biliary hilum . We diagnosed the tumor as a Bismuth type 1 cholangiocarcinoma, and performed endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage. Biopsies of the tumor revealed adenocarcinoma. The estimated volume of the postoperative liver remnant was less than 35%. Therefore, percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization (PTPE) of the right branch of her portal vein was performed . Twenty-one days later, the volume of the left lobe of her liver increased, and we performed right hepatectomy, caudate lobectomy, extrahepatic bile duct resection, and lymph node dissection. Node dissection included resection of hilar and pericholedochal nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament, common hepatic artery nodes, and those at the celiac trunk, and posterior and anterior pancreaticoduodenal nodes.
Histological examination of the tumor showed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma without regional lymph node metastasis, a pathological stage II tumor according to the Union for International Cancer Control classification of malignant tumors, 7th edition . Postoperative blood laboratory tests showed that liver enzymes were slightly elevated, but that total bilirubin was within normal limits. Resumption of diet started on postoperative day (POD) 3. Although the fluid in the abdominal drain had been serous until POD 4, the appearance of the fluid became milky on POD 5, and the amount of the drainage increased up to 1 L/day. CT showed a large amount of ascites with a small right pleural effusion. We placed our patient on total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and the ascites gradually decreased and became serous again. The abdominal drain was removed on POD 27, and an oral diet was restarted. She experienced sudden dyspnea on POD 42, and CT showed a massive right pleural effusion and a small amount of ascites . We performed a thoracentesis and placed a chest tube. One liter of chylous effusion was drained, and the triglyceride concentration of the pleural fluid was 1026 mg/dL. With a diagnosis of chylothorax, she was started again on TPN and given subcutaneous octreotide injections. Although the chest drained approximately 2 L/day for several days, both the output and the pleural effusion decreased on chest X-ray. On POD 46, the pleural effusion nearly completely resolved and the chest tube was removed. From then on the octreotide was stopped. Her oral diet was resumed on POD 57, and subsequent CT revealed recurrence of the massive right pleural effusion and a small amount of ascites, leading us once again to make our patient take nil by mouth .
Given that conservative management was ineffective in definitively treating the chyle leak, we performed lymphangiography through the inguinal lymph nodes with Lipiodol (ethiodized oil) on POD 62 to identify the location of the chyle leak and to develop a therapeutic strategy. Lymphangiography and post-procedure CT revealed that there was extravasation of the Lipiodol (ethiodized oil) near the right mediodorsal pleural space along the diaphragm, with an accumulation of Lipiodol (ethiodized oil) located near the staple line of the stump of the right hepatic vein; the exact location of the leak was not identified . CT also showed that there was neither obstruction nor dilation of the thoracic duct . An abdominal source of the chyle leak was not demonstrated. A chest tube was placed after the lymphangiography. The tube drained less than 500 mL/day for a week, and the pleural effusion resolved 10 days after the lymphangiography. She was discharged on POD 72. Two and a half years after the original surgery, she is doing well without evidence of recurrence of either chylothorax or cancer.