A 20-year-old woman went to local hospital due to nocturia, fatigue, and nausea. It was previously found that her creatinine level was about 600 mmol/L. Then, she was diagnosed with end-stage CRF and had undergone regular peritoneal dialysis since August 2014. Her aetiology of CRF was not clear. She regularly took calcium acetate tablets, vitamin D drops, recombinant human thrombopoietin injection, and calcitriol soft capsules during that time. However, her anemia was difficult to cure mainly because of malnutrition caused by anorexia. Ten months previously, she developed progressive facial deformity with difficultly chewing and swallowing and dyspnoea to some extent. Her facial deformity presented as asymmetric hyperplasia of the maxillary and maxillary bones, bimaxillary protrusion, nasal dorsum collapse, nostril valgus, and zygomatic collapse . She also had a 10-cm shortening of height and severe leg pain when walking. She had no visual, hearing impairment or psychological problems.
The patient denied any history of past diseases.
The patient had no family history of CRF or hyperparathyroidism.
Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) was 2815.07 pg/mL (normal range: 9.09-90.09 pg/mL), serum total calcium was 2.31 mmol/L (normal range: 2.25-2.75 mmol/L), serum phosphate was 2.08 mmol/L (normal range: 0.97-1.61 mmol/L), haemoglobin was 48 g/L (normal range: 120-160 g/L), and alkaline phosphatase was 2350 U/L (normal range: 50-135 U/L).
Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scans showed thickening of the skull bone plates and diffuse mixed sclerotic and lytic changes in the mandible, maxilla, and calvaria. A distinct overgrowth of the maxillofacial bone indicated bone abnormalities and swelling, and the density of the bone marrow cavity was increased with a ground glass appearance . A neck CT scan showed a benign nodule on the right side of the thyroid with bilateral soft tissue signals behind the bilateral thyroid. A pelvic CT scan did not show any abnormal structures.
99mTc-methylene diphosphonate bone scintigraphy indicated increased radiotracer in the bilateral parietal, maxilla, and mandible. The signal on the right side of the mandible was the strongest .
99mTc-sestamibi single-photon emission CT/CT showed only one hyperplastic parathyroid gland on the left side . Ultrasound showed a 0.5 cm nodule on the left side of the thyroid [thyroid imaging reporting and data system (TI-RADS) 4A], a 1.0 cm nodule on the right side of the thyroid (TI-RADS 3), and one suspected parathyroid adenoma on the left side. Fine needle aspiration showed a left papillary thyroid carcinoma and right thyroid adenoma.