A 67-year-old Chinese woman presented to our hospital with recurrent chest tightness and chest pain.
The patient who presented with recurrent chest tightness and chest pain persisting for more than 15 d was admitted to our hospital. The clinical symptoms were characterized as primary distension pain near the xiphoid process without obvious cause. The patient demonstrated no panting, coughing, hemoptysis, hematemesis, or weight loss. The patient could take food normally.
The patient’s past medical history included hyperlipidaemia and coronary heart disease for more than 10 years.
The patient did not have a history of smoking or consuming alcohol, and the patient's family medical history was negative.
Physical examination revealed normal cognition and reflexes, and the patient was cooperative in the examination. No abnormal pigmentation of the skin or sclerae, enlarged superficial lymph nodes, or head deformities were observed. The patient’s heart and lungs were normal; the liver and spleen were not palpable.
A laboratory examination indicated that the levels of the tumor markers CA19-9, CA-153, CA-125, carcinoembryonic antigen, and alpha-fetoprotein were in the normal range. Blood tests for liver and kidney function and electrolyte levels, sternum compression test, and liver, gallbladder, and spleen ultrasound all demonstrated normal results.
The patient underwent digital GI radiography, CT, and MRI examinations during hospitalization. Digital GI radiography indicated a 3.8 cm × 3.8 cm circular shadow in the gastric cardia and fundus . A thickened rigid gastric wall with no peristalsis was detected. Thus, radiography data suggested that the tumor was a malignant gastric tumor. CT revealed an iso-or slight low-density tumor in plain scanning . The tumor had heterogeneous enhancement in the arterial phase but persistent enhancement in the portal venous phase . Enlarged lymph nodes in the lesser curvature of the stomach were detected. MRI revealed a 4.0 cm × 4.0 cm mass in the gastric cardia. The mass exhibited heterogeneous hyperintensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and hypointensity on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) , and the lesions displayed hyperintense signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) when a b-value of 800 s/mm2 was used. There was slightly uneven enhancement during the arterial phase and continuous enhancement on delayed scans . Based on these results, the presence of melanin was suspected. Therefore, the tumor was suspected to be melanoma. Endoscopic images demonstrated growth of hyperpigmented lesions affecting the cardia and gastric mucosa, causing swelling and congestion. Endoscopic gastric biopsy confirmed the presence of melanoma in the gastric cardia.