A 33-year-old white woman (G2P2), with previously repaired sinus venosus atrial septal defect (ASD), underwent emergency coronary angiography for an ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) 3 weeks postpartum. She had no traditional risk factors for coronary artery disease, both her pregnancies were uneventful, and there was no significant family history or past medical history aside from the aforementioned ASD. She endorsed a 1 to 2-week history of intermittent nonexertional chest, back, and neck pain, neck stiffness, and headaches. On the day of admission, she presented to another hospital with severe persistent chest and back pain. Her presenting electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with anterior and inferior ST-segment elevation and reciprocal ST-segment depression in the lateral leads.
Her creatine kinase was 1018 U/L and high-sensitivity troponin T was 1828 ng/L. Upon arrival at our cardiac catheterization laboratory, her chest discomfort was resolving, and a repeat ECG showed slight persistence of ST elevation inferiorly, and T wave inversions across the precordial leads .
She was noted to be hypertensive at 145/99 (equal in both arms). Immediate bedside echocardiography demonstrated normal aortic root dimensions, and absence of ascending aortic dissection or aortic insufficiency. Her overall left ventricular (LV) function was preserved. Coronary angiography revealed normal right coronary and left main arteries. There was abrupt tapering with significant stenosis noted in her mid-left anterior descending (LAD) artery and the second obtuse marginal branch (OM2) of her left circumflex artery consistent with SCADs .
Because Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) grade 3 flow was present in all vessels, coronary intervention was deferred and our patient was managed conservatively.
At 24 hours, echocardiography revealed grade 3 LV systolic function with severe hypokinesis of the inferior, posterior, and apical regions, without LV thrombus. Cerebral computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed bilateral sub-acute VADs .
Follow-up thoracic and abdominal CTA, to assess for fibromuscular dysplasia, connective tissue disease-related aortopathy or vasculitis, demonstrated normal renal arteries without aortopathy. However, dissections of her celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery, and inferior mesenteric artery were noted . Screening serologies including C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA), cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA), C3, and C4 levels were negative. Testing for a panel of genes associated with familial aortic aneurysms and dissections was negative. She remained clinically stable throughout her hospitalization without evidence of new ischemic symptoms. She was discharged on aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin, metoprolol, ramipril, amlodipine, and transdermal nitroglycerin.
At 3 months follow-up, contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography demonstrated resolution of her VADs and no residual luminal irregularities. Furthermore, at 15 months, an abdominal CTA did not reveal any dissections within her major aortic branches and coronary angiography revealed complete healing of her LAD and OM2 without residual stenosis. Selective renal angiography at the time of coronary angiography demonstrated mild beading of her right renal artery, and a normal left renal artery. Despite the non-diagnostic abdominal CTA, the changes noted on renal angiography were suggestive of an underlying diagnosis of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) with her clinical events possibly linked to the postpartum period. Clopidogrel was discontinued at 15 months with no further dissection events by 18 months of follow-up.