A 50-year-old male patient who underwent a TAPP procedure for symptomatic bilateral inguinal hernia presented with repeated pain in the right lower abdomen around the surgical site for 3 mo and worsened on the day before admission .
The patient experienced repeated pain in the operation area of the right lower abdomen within 3 mo after TAPP repair of bilateral inguinal hernia. He had no nausea/vomiting, chills, or fever. His anal exsufflation and defecation were smooth. The abdominal pain was relieved after symptomatic treatment with antispasmodics and analgesics. One day before his admission, the patient suddenly felt severe pain in the right lower abdomen, with no nausea/vomiting, chills, or fever; his anal exsufflation remained unobstructed.
The patient denied any history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes, coronary heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, or hepatitis. He underwent a Lichtenstein hernia repair for the right inguinal hernia 7 years ago, and there was no history of other abdominal surgeries. Three months ago, the right inguinal hernia recurred, and a left inguinal hernia was also found. A diagnosis of bilateral inguinal hernia was made after clinical physical examinations and color Doppler ultrasonography. The patient voluntarily requested surgical treatment. He signed the informed consent form and then underwent TAPP using the surgical method described in the literature. Briefly, the peritoneum was opened, the bilateral inguinal hernia sacs were reduced into the peritoneal cavity, and the mesh was placed. The peritoneum was then closed with a V-Loc™ 180 continuous suture, and a return suture was placed to prevent suture loosening. Postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged 1 day after surgery.
His family history was not remarkable.
Physical examination found a body temperature of 36.3 ℃, heart rate of 80 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and a blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg. No yellowing of the eyes or skin was present. The abdomen was flat, without varicose veins on the abdominal wall. No peristaltic waves were recorded. His abdomen was soft except for the pain in the right lower abdomen when pressed, and there was no rebound tenderness or abdominal rigidity. Murphy's sign was negative. The liver and kidney areas were not sensitive to percussion. He had no shifting dullness, and the bowel sounds were about 4 times/min. No high-pitched bowel sound or gurgling sound was heard.
All laboratory results were within the normal ranges. The white blood cell count was 4.4 × 109/L, the percentage of neutrophils was 55.7%, the percentage of lymphocytes was 34.3%, the blood amylase level was 42 U/L, and the lipase level was 62 U/L.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed the whirlpool sign of the mesentery, dilated bowel, and normal bowel migration on the right side of the middle and lower abdomen , suggesting the possibility of small bowel volvulus.