We report of a 58-years old male, with medical history of end-stage HF for dilatative cardiomyopathy who has received a LVAD as bridge-to-transplant indication. The patient agreed with presentation of this unique case in this scientific journal. After recovery for LVAD implantation the patient complained about recurrent fever episodes, abnormal fatigue and elevated infection parameters as well as kidney retention measures in laboratory tests, but no focus of infection could be identified, and the patient received empiric intravenous antibiotic therapy with Ampicillin/Sulbactam. For persistence of the infection the antibiotic therapy was switched to Ciprofloxacin and later to Fosfomycin to extent the targeted germ spectrum, but without effect before the patient was transferred to our center. We identified the focus of infection and listing for HTX became urgently necessary with positron emission tomography (PET-CT) proving an anterior intrapericardial inflammation process that also embraced the outflow graft of the LVAD as well as caudal parts of the patient’s pacemaker lead.
Immediate HTX listing workup in our center revealed blood cultures positive for Staphylococcus aureus so we adapted antibiotic therapy for Flucloxacillin appropriately to the available antibiogram. In the course of this treatment the patient developed new episodes of fever (38.9 °C /102 °F) in addition to a mental state of confusion and the patient complained of visual constraints, including “dots and stars” in his field of vision. Neurological examination divulged left homonymous hemianopsia, but no other comprehensible pathology.
Cerebral computed tomography (CCT) constituted spheres of atypical bleeding in both hemispheres and extra-axial blood formations in the left hemisphere with no dynamics in repeated CCT after six hours. Finally, contrast CCT found two hypointense parietal and occipital areas with scalloped microvascular blood impurities, with an hyperintense 2.5 cm ring enhancement with poorly definable circumvent at the right upper parietooccipital region including a surrounding edema .
This diagnosis of BA precluded the patient from prompt HTX, which was urgently indicated for the LVAD system infection. With antibiotic therapy of Rifampicin and Ceftriaxone the patient experienced relief of his visual symptoms as well as general condition and clinical presentation improved. Ceftriaxone was administered in dosage of 4 g daily to facilitate Ceftriaxone to pass hemato-encephalic barrier to reach BA. Contrast CCT after one week of treatment in our center showed slightly diminished lesions (19 × 18 × 20 mm) with an additional slight regression of the surrounding edema encouraging us to pursue the antibiotic regime to achieve HTX listing for this patient .
Follow-up contrast CCT after seven weeks revealed marked BA and perifocal edema reduction. Antibiotic therapy was further continued to realize total resolution of the BA to enable HTX in this patient with PET-CT proven LVAD system infection and finally after thirteen weeks of antibiotic treatment CCT in conclusion publicized complete resolution of the BA .
For optimal preparation for HTX the extent of the LVAD system infection was reassessed in PET-CT but surprisingly after thirteen weeks of broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy no LVAD system infection was traceable in PET-CT anymore and the patient has not experienced clinical significant infection recurrence afterwards.