A 39-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented with a two-week history of nausea, vomiting, severe headache, progressive drowsiness associated with high-grade intermittent fever, and confusion. SLE had been diagnosed five years before. At that time, she had had signs and symptoms of arthralgia, malar rash, alopecia, and anti-nuclear antibody and anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibody positivity on serum. Hypertension was diagnosed at the same time and was later treated as essential hypertension. The initial presentation of SLE was treated with high-dose prednisolone and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF). The prednisolone dose had been tapered off over the years, but MMF had been continued at high doses (1 g/day). Our patient had been poorly compliant to follow-up and had self-medicated at times with repeat prescriptions of steroids. Although the SLE activity was in remission, she was on inappropriately high doses of immunosuppressants (the indication to start MMF was unclear in the records). Apart from hypertension, her medical history was unremarkable, and she was not on any other immunosuppressants. No relevant sexual history, recent travel history, or contact with animals was reported.
On admission, she was drowsy, febrile, and confused. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 12 out of 15. She had no neck stiffness. The results of a cranial nerve examination, including funduscopy, were normal. Bilateral exaggerated tendon reflexes in her limbs and bilateral extensor plantar responses were noted during a neurological examination. She had no lymphadenopathy or peripheral manifestations of active SLE. Her cardiovascular system was normal apart from a blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg. She had a non-tender, firm hepatomegaly extending 3 cm below her costal margin. The results of the rest of the abdominal examination and the respiratory system were normal. Her hemoglobin level was 9.8 mg/dL, her total leukocyte count was 21.5×109/L with 88% neutrophils, her platelet count was 324×109/L, and her blood picture showed a normochromic normocytic anemia with a left shift of leukocytes. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 90 mm/hour, and her C-reactive protein was 46 mg/L (the reference value was less than 6), but her serum complement levels were within normal limits. Her blood and urine cultures were sterile, and her chest X-ray was normal. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms were normal. An ultrasound scan of her abdomen did not show focal lesions in her liver, which was enlarged, or any other foci of sepsis. Her serum electrolytes, including calcium and magnesium levels, blood glucose, and liver and renal function tests, were also within normal limits.
Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain showed multiple ring-enhancing lesions that were of varying sizes, up to 1 cm in diameter, and that were surrounded by marked perilesional edema involving her cortex, basal ganglia, brain stem, and cerebellum . There was meningeal enhancement as well.
A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed lymphocytic pleocytosis, an elevated protein level of 108 mg/dL, and a low CSF-to-serum glucose ratio of 1.8:5.8. There were no atypical cells on CSF cytology, and bacterial, fungal, and tuberculous cultures of CSF were negative. The toxoplasma antibody titers were negative for immunoglobulin M but positive for immunoglobulin G (1:150). The fungal cultures were sterile. The results of the human immunodeficiency virus antibody test were negative. The serum lactate dehydrogenase level was normal. Our patient was initially treated with broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics with both aerobic and anaerobic cover (meropenem and metronidazole) combined with steroids – dexamethasone 4 mg three times a day (t.i.d.) – to reduce perilesional edema. Owing to the minute size of the lesions, a biopsy for histology was not possible. However, given the poor response to antibiotics and given the likelihood of central nervous system (CNS) tuberculosis (TB) as evidenced by the clinical presentation and context, MRI characteristics, CSF analysis, and elevated inflammatory markers, anti-tuberculous chemotherapy (ATT) was empirically commenced and the steroids (dexamethasone 4 mg t.i.d.) were continued. The treatment doses of ATT were isoniazid 300 mg daily, rifampicin 450 mg daily, ethambutol 800 mg daily, and pyrazinamide 1.5 g daily for the first two months and then isoniazid and rifampicin were continued at the same doses for the rest of the duration. Antibiotics were omitted. The high-grade intermittent fever gradually subsided, but after one month of ATT, our patient became increasingly drowsy with pressure headaches and intractable vomiting, which corresponded to an increase in the size of the brain lesions and perilesional edema seen on MRI (paradoxical reaction). The dose of steroids was increased (dexamethasone 8 mg t.i.d.), and ATT was continued. From the third month of ATT, our patient showed steady improvement in clinical status, including improvement of level of consciousness with resolution of pressure headaches and intractable vomiting, improved appetite, and independent ambulation. A follow-up MRI at the end of the third month showed a significant (approximately 60%) reduction in the number of lesions . The dexamethasone dose was reduced (by reducing both dose and frequency and by titrating dose according to symptoms) and later converted to prednisolone. Our patient was discharged on ATT to be continued for 18 months. At discharge, she was also on 20 mg of prednisolone and 75 mg of azathioprine. On review six months later, she had further improved and was independent in most activities of daily living without any remission of SLE. She was off steroids by this time.