An 87-year-old male patient with a chief complaint of chronic constipation and diffuse lower extremity edema was referred to the gastroenterology department at Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital. A review of the patient’s past medical history revealed chronic hepatitis B infection and liver cirrhosis for 3 years, as well as depressive-anxiety neurosis and sequelae of a cerebral infarction 70 years prior. Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed a well-defined low-density solid mass measuring approximately 15.0 × 13.0 cm in the right liver lobe surrounded by multiple nodules . Chest X-rays and CT scans detected multiple nodules in both lungs . The patient was clinically diagnosed with advanced primary liver cancer and multiple intrahepatic and lung metastases. Laboratory tests revealed anemia (hemoglobin 83 g/L), hypoproteinemia (albumin 27.7 g/L), hyponatremia (Na+ 125.8 mmol/L), and hyperammonemia (ammonia 65.0 µmol/L). Elevated serum levels of creatine (Cr, 105.1 µmol/L), total bilirubin (TBIL, 25.3 µmol/L), and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT, 379 U/L), as well as impaired blood clotting function [International normalized ratio (INR), 1.22; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 46.8 s] were reported. A significantly elevated level of carbohydrate antigen-125 (CA-125, 163.8 U/L) was also disclosed; however, the serum level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) was within the normal range.
Oral examinations discovered a reddish soft tissue swelling measuring 2.5 × 2.5 × 2.0 cm with a well-defined border on the gingiva adjacent to the lower left mandible. The mass was bleeding slightly. The mass was provisionally diagnosed as a primary gingival tumor. Considering his poor organ function that prohibited active treatment, such as partial hepatectomy or chemoembolization, the patient decided, with his guardians, to receive palliative treatment for the primary liver cancer. Regarding the treatment for the gingival mass, a stomatologist was consulted; his advice was that the tumor could be resected to relieve any trouble with chewing or eating resulting from the existence of the mass as an oral obstacle. Considering the patient’s poor condition, however, the patient and his guardians decided that he would receive palliative treatment. One episode of profuse bleeding from the root of the gingival lesion occurred and was staunched by local compression. The disease remained relatively stable until considerable progression was observed approximately 1 month after the patient was discharged from the hospital. When the patient was once again admitted to our hospital 2 months later, the mass size had rapidly doubled to 5 × 5 × 4 cm . Obstructed by the lump, the patient was only able to receive a fluid diet. Unfortunately, with progressed unconsciousness from the sequelae of cerebral infarction, the patient bit the mass open by chance, and profuse bleeding occurred at the residual lesion. Despite pressing continuously to staunch the bleeding and transfusing blood to improve subsequent anemia, the patient’s condition worsened, and he eventually died of multiple organ failure 2 days later.
A tissue biopsy from the gingival mass was performed. Histologic examination revealed a squamous epithelium-coated neoplasm dotted with cells that had grown in an invasive trabecular pattern surrounded by a sinusoid network. Largely resembling hepatocytes, the tumor cells with abundant cytoplasm displayed moderate nuclear atypia with some nuclei discernible . This microscopic appearance was compatible with the diagnosis of HCC. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) tests demonstrated that the tissue showed strong positive reactions to antibodies against hepatocytes , CAM5.2 , and CD10 and low affinity to antibodies against glypican-3, arginase-1, thyroid transcription factor-1, and cytokeratin-7. Ultimately, the gingival mass was definitively diagnosed as a metastasis from HCC.