A 77-year-old woman presented with chest pain and a fever noted since the day before. She had stage G3 chronic kidney disease (CKD) and received edoxaban for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with a CHADs score of 3. She had no history of trauma or respiratory symptoms.
A chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass with surrounding opacity in the right lower lobe and a pleural effusion . Alveolar bleeding with a hemothorax due to a rupture of a pulmonary artery aneurysm was suspected. Conservative treatment was chosen because of the stable vital signs and her respiratory condition with an oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 94% on room air upon arrival.
However, the SpO2 dropped to 90% 7 h later with progressive anemia (hemoglobin level from 12.9 to 10.7 mg/dL). A repeated chest CT also showed a worsening pulmonary opacity and a pleural effusion .
Interventional radiology was not applicable because of the lack of any active contrast extravasation on the CT, and therefore an emergency surgery was indicated.
After evacuating the bloody pleural fluid via aright posterolateral thoracotomy, the pleural surface of the lower lobe was found to be torn and overlaid with blood clots . She underwent a right lower lobectomy successfully with an improvement in her oxygenation. The operation time was 120 min and the total amount of bleeding was 500 g including the pre-existing pleural fluid. The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the third postoperative day.
The cut surface of the specimen revealed a subpleural expansive blood clot from the focally dilated bronchiole distal to the normal bore branch . A chest CT a year prior had revealed a steep caliber change in the bronchiole between the subpleural focal bronchiectasis and proximal normal branch . The histopathological findings showed that the focally dilated bronchiole wall was accompanied by neutrophil infiltration, suggesting that the preceding infection had developed and involved the surrounding bronchial arteries and caused the bleeding .