A 19-year-old, right-handed, Division I NCAA female lacrosse midfielder with 10 years of playing experience suffered a full thickness mid-substance anterior cruciate ligament rupture and a vertical posterior horn tear of the lateral meniscus near the intercondylar notch of the right knee. Clinical evaluation revealed moderate capsular swelling and a dysfunctional limb with pain during gait. Joint laxity following a Lachman’s anterior drawer, pivot shift, valgus, and varus stability tests revealed excessive anterior tibial translation and a grade 1 MCL and LCL sprain. The injury occurred on 01/24/2022, and findings were confirmed the same day via MRI. An arthroscopy with anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction using hamstring tendon autograft and a 5% lateral meniscectomy was performed on 01/28/2022. The subject volunteered to take part in the case study and signed an informed consent regarding patient confidentiality and the protection offered by the U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). This project received no outside funding and the research was completed by the University of Cincinnati Sport Science Research Team.
During the course of the rehabilitation program, the patient’s central nervous system, brain performance and musculoskeletal function were monitored longitudinally at three separate time points: twenty-four hours post ACL rupture, one month following ACLR surgery and ten months following ACLR surgery. Brain wave activity was observed using a CGX EEG head set at each time point. Congruently, the athlete participated in a contemporary evidence-based ACL rehabilitation protocol throughout all time points as outlined in Appendix A: Rehabilitation Summary Outline. The expected limitations in functional mobility early in the rehabilitation progression restricted some physical testing during the early testing dates; however, normal rehabilitative functional parameters were implemented to assure return to play status over time.
Brain activity-dependent variables were measured using the CGX EEG head set. Cognitive workload metric, cognitive attention metric, sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) asymmetry, galvanic skin response (GSR), and three-dimensional cortex connectivity were derived to account for the central nervous system and brain precision and efficiency. Cognitive workload metric represents the depletion of mental resources of the brain due to higher levels of cognitive or sensory demands placed on the brain. GSR measures sympathetic conductance and electrical activity via a skin electrode which offers insight into the emotional state, or arousal, of a subject under specific experimental conditions. CNS arousal is typically directed by the thalamus with an emphasis on processing sensory inputs from the vision and hearing centers of the brain. Brain attention refers to a person’s ability to attain, remember, understand, and apply information. Heart rate (HR), heart rate variability (HRV), respiration rate (RR), peripheral body temperature, and superficial trapezius EMG activity were measured. Increases in HR, RR, and trapezius EMG activity are associated with elevated levels of central nervous system stress or increased GSR, whereas, HRV decreases with higher levels of stress.
Neurocognitive and physical psychometric measures consisted of the Stroop test, visual reaction, a reaction time test, musculoskeletal range of motion, strength, a functional movement assessment consisting of balance-mobility-gait tasks, and force plate outputs for jump and landing mechanics on a ForceDecks (VALD Performance, Charlotte NC) force plates. The Stroop test is a neuropsychological test used to assess the speed or ability to process cognitive interference, inhibition, and selective attention capacity relative to simultaneous stimuli. The visual reaction was measured using the Dynavision D2, (Cincinnati, OH) A*-Proactive assessment which requires the individual to react and strike lights as they illuminate as quick as possible when presented in a random, computer-selected algorithm. In a similar fashion, the decision reaction time tests measured the response speed of the left and right hand and left-to-right brain activity precision prompted by visual stimuli. The functional movement and force plate assessments were used to measure bilateral functional asymmetries and relative ground reaction force upon walking gait, balance, landing, and jumping activities. Specifically, the force plate offers insight to force acceleration/decelerations, reactions, and bilateral imbalances. Overall, each measure provides an initial marker for longitudinal progressions that offer insight to assist in monitoring changes in functional performance and left-to-right symmetries of the limbs and brain function. The data was analyzed using CLR Neurosthenics, Inc neuroanalytics provided by Intheon Labs (San Deigo, CA).
The initial qEEG assessment was performed twenty-four hours following injury while the athlete was being monitored and treated to manage the acute stage swelling and pain. Non-weight bearing/crutch ambulation, ice, compression, elevation, and linear mobility exercises were initiated to promote improvement in passive and active ROM with reductions in pain and swelling. The state of the acute injury limited the ability to perform extensive functional and physical assessments. Immediately following injury, the reduction in the motor neuron network demonstrates a potentially altered signal from the peripheral receptors. Therefore, the initial tests used to monitor neurophysiological status using qEEG were the physiological regulatory measures, the Stroop test, decision reaction time, attention, workload, and SMR metrics. There was no pre-injury baseline.
One month post-surgical reconstruction, the athlete was progressing through a best-practice rehabilitation program previously reported to have sustainable, valid, and reliable techniques ideal for athletic populations and return-to-play progressions. Throughout the rehabilitation protocol the athlete progressed with improvements noted in pain, swelling, ROM, function, and functional joint stability.
Heart rate, heart rate variability, respiration, and brain attention levels yielded high-stress Determinants in the acute stages of injury were associated with brain dysregulation, hemispheric asymmetries and musculoskeletal functional asymmetries. Traditional objective measures of knee joint laxity, range of motion, swelling, strength, and patient-reported outcomes were collected throughout the rehabilitation progression and are outlined in Tables , , and . Central nervous system, brain performance, and musculoskeletal functional biomarkers were monitored longitudinally at three separate time points following anterior cruciate injury: twenty-four hours post ACL rupture, one month, and nine months which was the time period for her return to competition following ACLR surgery. Brain and musculoskeletal dysfunction longitudinally reveal a neurophysiological acute compensation and recovering accommodation from time points one to three. In addition, biological responses to stress, neuroanalytics of brain workload, arousal, and attention all advanced to more commonly regulated function during the progression of the rehabilitation. The neurophysiological development following acute ACL rupture demonstrates significant dysfunction in asymmetrical functions both neurocognitively and physiologically.