A 10-year-old boy was referred to Affiliated Children’s Hospital of Capital Institute of Pediatrics due to complaints of short stature and micropenis. His mother and father had normal karyotypes. No family history of sterility or abortion was reported. The mother's and the father's height were 171 cm and 175 cm, respectively.
The patient underwent a C-section at 37 weeks because of fetal distress. His birth weight and height were 2960 g and 49 cm respectively. He was diagnosed as hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) at birth, and showed borderline developmental delay since he was six months old. He suffered from epilepsy at age of 11 months. He was diagnosed as hypospadias, unilateral cryptorchidism and underwent left radical orchiectomy and urethroplasty when he was 13 months old. The biopsy of the left testicular didn’t show normal structure of seminiferous tubules. Instead, a number of fibrous connective tissue and new blood vessel presented . In addition, no mature structure of epididymal duct was seen in the left epididymidis with the full of immature mesenchymal cells .
The growth velocity was 3-4 cm per year since he was 5 years old. Physical examination at age of 10 showed a height of 129 cm (-2 SDS) and weight of 12 kg (-1.5 SDS) with proportional short stature. Genitourinary checkup revealed Prader class 5 genitalia, with approximately 4 cm-size penis. No palpable gonad was detected bilaterally in the scrotum. Ultrasound of the gonads showed right testis in the groin area, with a size of 1.39 × 0.63 cm. The baseline level of anti-mullerian hormone and inhibin B indicated dysfunction of sertoli cells . Also, the level of testosterone concentration was relatively low. Further examination of these hormones after HCG and GnRHa stimulation demonstrated normal pituitary reaction and poor function of leydig cell, respectively .
The phenotypes including “short stature”, “micropenis”, “hypospadias” and “epilepsy” were used to filter the related genetic variant, and no pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants was detected from WES according to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines. To identify copy number variations (CNVs), CNV-Seq library was constructed using KAPA Library Preparation Kit. An in-house pipeline was applied to map and call CNVs using CNV-kit , a health male with normal karyotype was used as control sample. The CNV-Seq showed duplication of whole Y chromosome with the ratio between 2 to 4, and no other pathogenic/likely pathogenic CNVs in autosomes or X chromosome identified .
High-resolution G-banding (550–650 bands) and FISH using standard techniques were performed to reveal the precise structural arrangement of Y chromosome and mosaics proportion. Chromosomal analysis of peripheral lymphocytes revealed the presence of two cell lines. In 7 of 50 (14%) cells analyzed metaphases, a numerically abnormal karyotype was observed: 45,X . In 43 of 50 (86%) metaphases cells, a suspected dicentric Y chromosome was seen: 46,X,psu dic(Y)(q12) . In addition, absence of Yq12 heterochromatin was shown in Q-banding , with suspected breakpoint in Yq12. Therefore, the karyotype was preliminarily determined as mos 45,X[7]/46,X,psu dic(Y)(q12)[43]. FISH was performed with probes specific for the following regions: Yq12 heterochromatin [DYZ1 (Vysis; Abbott Molecular, Inc., Des Plaines, IL, USA)], Y centromere [DYZ3 (Vysis)], sex region of the Y (Yp11.31) and X centromere [SRY/DXZ1 (Vysis)]. In the karyotype of 46,X,psu idic(Y), FISH analyses revealed two signals of SRY and DYZ3, but a small signal of DYZ1 which confirmed the breakpoint in Yq12 and deletion of most part of Yq12. Combining with the cytogenetic and FISH analysis, we demonstrating final karyotype with 45,X[8]/46,X,psu idic(Y).ish psu idic(Y)(q12)(SRY + + ,DYZ3 + + ,DYZ1 +)[32]. The schematic diagram of isodicentric Y chromosome idic(Y)(q12) was illuminated in Fig. J, K.