A 16-year-old male presented with complaints of pain in his right knee and difficulty in bearing weight for the past 20 days following a twisting injury of the knee, with an outward dislocation of the patella. The patient had a history of recurrent patellar dislocation, with three episodes in the past year. The first episode was due to sudden stop and twist movement of the knee followed by spontaneous relocation of the patella. The second episode occurred after 9 months while running. After both episodes, the patient could bear weight. However, the patient could not bear weight on his right leg after the last episode.
On examination, there was mild wasting of the right quadriceps and tenderness over medial and lateral joint lines. Flexion was mildly restricted compared to the contralateral side. Patellar effusion and patellar tap were negative. The patellar apprehension test was positive without any evidence of hyperlaxity syndrome.
Radiograph revealed patella alta with a high Insall-Salvati index and Caton-Deschamps index. An intra-articular osteochondral axial split fracture of the LFC was seen. Computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the OCF, which was minimally displaced. On CT, the TT-TG distance was 14.4 mm, which was suggestive of an optimal position of the tibial tuberosity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an MPFL tear with evidence of LFC split fracture .
The patient was planned for MPFL reconstruction with the fixation of the intra-articular split fracture.
The fracture was approached with the lateral parapatellar incision. The fracture was anatomically reduced and fixed with a guide wire in its position and then fixed with 3 headless threaded screws. Semi-tendinosus graft was harvested, and the double-looped graft was noted to be 6 mm, and the medial patellar facet was identified and exposed. Two tunnels were prepared on the medial aspect of the patella using a 4.5 mm drill bit over a 2 mm guide wire, and the graft was looped. On the lateral view under fluoroscopic guidance, Schöttle’s point was identified, and the guide wire was passed. The point of isometry was confirmed through the knee range. This was followed by drilling it with a 4.5 mm drill bit and a 6 mm reamer, and the graft was shuttled through this tunnel and fixed at an adequate tension with a bioabsorbable interference screw . Wounds were closed, and post-operative radiographs were obtained showing adequately fixed OCF .
The patient was kept on non-weight-bearing mobilization on a walking frame, and isometric quadriceps training and closed chain knee range of motion exercises were started immediately. Postoperatively, the surgical wounds healed without any complications, and he was allowed partial weight-bearing beyond 6 weeks with open chain exercises and strength training. He started to fully weight bear without any support at post-operative 3 months. Final follow-up at 2 years showed an increase in Lysholm-Tegner score from 68 to 94, and IKDC score from 60 to 92, suggesting higher functional and post-surgery excellent clinical outcomes. The radiograph obtained at the final follow-up was satisfactory .