A 56 year old male presented to our clinic, complaining of storage LUTS (mainly frequency and urgency) since two years. Two years earlier, he underwent uncomplicated monopolar TURP for LUTS owing to benign prostatic hyperplasia. The pathology of resected prostatic chips showed no inflammatory changes. The patient has occasional straining and intermittent urine. No history of hematuria. The patient was not smoker. No relevant drug history, family history including any relevant genetic information, and psychosocial history.
Upon examination, the patient's abdomen was soft and lax, without palpable masses. Digital rectal examination showed small prostate. Anal tone and Bulbocavernosal reflex were intact. His laboratory blood tests, urinalysis and culture were normal. Ultrasonography of the urinary tract showed normal kidneys, but the urinary bladder showed a 3.2 × 2.8 cm vesical stone. CT showed a large vesical stone extending into the prostatic fossa measuring 51.5 mm × 67.0 mm .
The patient was counseled about the possible surgical management and the different complications of each. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient. Preoperative urine culture was negative for organisms.
The author who is a consultant and lecturer of urology in a tertiary healthcare center, by the aid of a 17 F cystoscope, showed a normal distal urethra. Just after passing the verumontanum, the stone become visible inside the prostatic fossa with intact rhabdosphincter . The fossa is occupied by the stone, despite the scope can pass near the stone to enter the bladder with visualization of the bladder neck . The bladder mucosa showed mild trabeculation without masses or stones .
The patient was repositioned for suprapubic cystolitholapaxy. Midline suprpubic incision with dissection of the bladder experitoneally helped extraction of the stone . Eventually, closure of the wound in layers.
Two weeks later, the patient has no urgency, frequency, and the urine flow was adequate with 15 ml post void residual on pelvic US. After 3 months, the patient is doing fine with no storage or voiding symptoms. Stone analysis showed mixed crystal materials.