A 14-year-old Thai girl presented at a provincial hospital with fever, oral ulcers, disseminated papular lesions and multiple joint pain for 4 weeks. Twelve weeks before this admission, she was diagnosed as a case of perinatal HIV infection after presenting with disseminated herpes zoster infection and Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP). At that time, her CD4+ cell count was 7.2% or 39 cells/mm3. Plasma HIV-RNA level was not obtained. She was started on GPOvirS30® (a fixed drug combination of stavudine 30 mg, lamivudine 150 mg and nevirapine 200 mg) 1 tablet twice daily and PJP prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. Eight weeks after starting ART she developed fever, multiple oral ulcers, disseminated papular lesions over the face, body, and extremities, and severe pain in many joints. The symptoms did not respond to many kinds of oral antibiotics and she was referred to Chiang Mai University (CMU) Hospital.
Upon admission to CMU Hospital, the physical examination revealed high-grade fever. Multiple painful ulcerated lesions were found on the lip and oral mucosa. Generalized non-pruritic erythrematous papules and nodules with central umbilication were found over the face, body, and extremities . Marked swelling, warmth, and tenderness of many joints, including right shoulder, wrist, metacarpophalangeal, knee, and ankle joints were also noticed. Neither lymphadenopathy nor hepatosplenomegaly were found. Her laboratory results are shown in Table . CD4+ cell count was 11% or 51 cells/mm3. Plasma HIV-RNA level was < 50 copies/mL. Chest roentgenogram was normal. Roentgenograms of both wrists and ankles showed multiple round radiolucent defects of the bones . Skin biopsy showed necrotizing histiocytic granuloma formation with neutrophilic infiltration in the upper and reticular dermis. Tissue sections from skin biopsy stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), and Grocott methenamine silver (GMS) stain revealed numerous intracellular and extracellular, round to oval, elongated, thin-walled yeast cells with central septation . No organism was observed in the bone marrow aspirate specimen. The hemoculture, bone marrow culture, and skin culture revealed no evidence of P. marneffei or other fungus. Blood was also sent for mycobacterial culture with negative results. Serum cryptococcal antigen was negative. The diagnosis of disseminated P. marneffei infection from unmasking IRIS was made.
The patient was treated with intravenous amphotericin B at a dosage of 0.7 mg/kg for 2 weeks along with paracetamol and ibuprofen, followed by oral itraconazole at a dosage of 5 mg/kg twice daily orally. She responded well to treatment. Her fever, skin lesions, and joints pain gradually resolved. She was discharged with a plan to complete a 10-week course of oral itraconazole therapy followed by the maintenance therapy with oral itraconazole at a reduced dosage of 5 mg/kg daily. Her skin lesions and joints pain resolved after 4 weeks of antifungal treatment, and itraconazole was discontinued after 4 months of maintenance treatment. After 1 year of therapy, she had gained 4 kg weight without recurrence of P. marneffei infection. Her repeated CD4+ cell count had risen to 21.1% or 269 cells/mm3. Her plasma HIV RNA level was undetectable (< 50 copies/mL).