An 8-month-old male infant was brought to the emergency room with a history of abdominal pain and vomiting for <24 h. The last evacuation of normally formed greenish stools was 24 h prior to the patient's presentation. The patient was born full-term (40 + 2 weeks gestational age) and healthy, via spontaneous vaginal delivery and the medical history was unremarkable with no previous surgeries or hospitalization. On physical examination, the patient appeared restless and was observed to have a circumferential mass of hard consistency, of approximately 4 cm in diameter, in the epigastric region. Upon admission, laboratory results showed a C-reactive protein level of 0.4 mg/dl, LDH level of 351 U/L, mild leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 12 × 103 /µl, and 67% neutrophils. The remaining lab values showed no abnormalities, with electrolyte levels within normal range. A physical exam was significant for abdominal distention, hyperresonance in percussion, and a palpable painful epigastric mass, which is an infrequent finding, being encountered in 7.5%–40% of children with intussusception . An abdominal ultrasound revealed the presence of a long, presumably ileal loop convoluted upon itself for several turns in the central abdominal quadrants. The loop had thickened and had hypoperistaltic walls, with no vascularity detected on colour Doppler. It also showed evident free intra-abdominal fluid. Plain abdominal radiography confirmed the absence of intestinal meteorism, likely due to the ileal tangle. There was no air in the rectal ampulla and no definitive signs of free air. In consideration of the patient's clinical condition and the radiological suspicion of an acute abdomen due to a probable volvulus in the setting of possible ileoileal intussusception, urgent surgical exploration was recommended. An exploratory laparotomy was carried out, with a medial hyper infraumbilical incision and access to the abdominal cavity. The findings of the operation included a dilated and threatened intestinal loop, approximately 25 cm from the ileocecal valve, twisted upon itself for three turns. After de-rotation, an extensive occluding ileo-ileal invagination with an ischemic intestinal loop was identified, and approximately 55–60 cm of the distal ileum, including the ischemic segment, were resected . An intramural 8 mm lymph node was also found in close proximity to the invaginated loop and was excised. The rest of the bowel up until the ligament of Treitz showed no malrotation nor sign of hypoperfusion. An end-to-end ileo-ileal anastomosis was performed hand-sewn and an abdominal drainage was placed in the right iliac fossa. Postoperative recovery of the patient was uneventful and the patient showed progressive recovery of physiological functions with the return of regular bowel function on the third postoperative day. The resumption of normal oral feeding took place on the fifth postoperative day and was well tolerated. The medical team discharged the patient on the seventh postoperative day, subject to the removal of the abdominal drain. Thus far, the patient has had no relapses and no symptoms related to intestinal occlusion.