A 67-year-old man was admitted to the neurosurgery department of our hospital with a 1-month history of right upper limb weakness. He had no other medical history other than hypertension. Cranial computed tomography showed a circular focus of low density beside the left lateral ventricle. The lesion appeared hypointense on T1-weighted imaging and hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging, and rim enhancement was seen on postcontrast T1-weighted imaging .
A further systemic evaluation revealed a pulmonary lesion, and transbronchial lung biopsy pathology indicated lung squamous cell carcinoma. The patient was transferred to the oncology department for chemotherapy treatment with paclitaxel plus carboplatin.
After two cycles of chemotherapy, his right muscle strength gradually decreased. Cranial computed tomography demonstrated that the intracranial cystic metastasis had progressed compared with the previous case.
The patient underwent cyst aspiration and OR implantation under neuronavigation. A total of 13 ml of yellow viscous liquid was drawn during the operation. Postoperative computed tomography showed that the lesion had almost disappeared, and his right muscle strength had recovered.
The cyst immediately returned, with a progressive decline in contralateral limb muscle strength. We promptly implemented cystic fluid aspiration , and the patient’s symptoms were relieved. Our hospital is not equipped to carry out Gamma Knife therapy. Therefore, we performed stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) after aspiration to prevent a recurrence. Cystic lesions can still recur and become enlarged under such combined treatment. Repeated cystic fluid reaccumulation and exacerbation of symptoms occurred during treatment. We performed repeated aspirations via the OR to help the patient cope with such a situation. We performed SBRT again approximately half a year later . However, we were unable to draw out the cyst fluid due to blockage of the OR before the last radiosurgery. Throughout the treatment, we received a total of five aspirations. The patient’s last radiographic follow-up was 14 months after onset . The intracranial tumor was effectively and satisfactorily controlled. Due to the loss of follow-up, the patient’s current survival status is unknown.