A 30-year-old white man was admitted to his local hospital after he was found unconscious in his home. His past medical history included a history of drug abuse, bipolar disorder and chronic hepatitis C. He had no history of headaches. The family reported that he was last seen when he returned home the same morning about 5 hours prior to admission. Before he went to bed, he had told them that he was assaulted on his way home, and had been beaten and kicked several times to the head. There was no reported loss of consciousness. His only complaint before he went to bed was of a mild headache. Five hours later a family member called for an ambulance, as he was not responding adequately to speech or other stimuli.
In the emergency department he had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 8 and anisocoria with a slight right-sided pupillary dilatation. He had bruises on his face and thorax, as well as a periorbital swelling. There were no signs of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhoea or otorrhoea. He was otherwise clinically stable with normal vital parameters (blood pressure 125/60mmHg, regular heart rate/pulse 75/minute, oxygen saturation 100 %). The initial examination performed by a trauma team included X-ray imaging of his thorax and pelvis, that were found normal, as well as ultrasound of his abdomen, which showed no sign of free fluid. Imaging with computed tomography (CT) of his head revealed a 10cm×4cm expansive epidural lesion in the right temporoparietal region causing significant anteromedial compression of the right lateral ventricle and a midline shift of 7mm . The lesion had the attenuation values of air (−1000 Hounsfield units), and there were no signs of intracranial bleeding. There were no signs of herniation. CT also demonstrated a communication between the right mastoid sinus and the epidural space, and a fracture was suspected . He was immediately intubated and transported by helicopter at sea level to the nearest neurosurgical department, located approximately 180km away, where an emergency burr hole evacuation was performed to equalize the pressure. He experienced immediate recovery and was extubated the same day. In the evening he had a full GCS score of 15. On examination there were no neurological deficits. A postoperative control CT the first postoperative day showed a small epidural bleed in the compartment that previously was filled with air, but the majority of the epidural air was removed and the midline was normalized .
The following days he deteriorated and consecutive CT scans demonstrated increasing air entrapment. An indication for more invasive surgery was found, and a craniotomy with cranialization and sealing of the mastoid sinus with autologous musculature, an absorbable fibrin patch (Tachosil®) and fibrin glue (Tisseel®) was performed, to prevent further air entrapment. The dura was intact, and there was no leakage of cerebrospinal fluid. During the procedure several bony defects were found in his mastoid bone, and a mucosal membrane arising from the mastoid sinus found adherent to his skull and dura mater (that is, a mucocele) was removed.
He recovered quickly from this procedure, and postoperative CT scans were satisfactory, with re-expansion of the dura, resolution of the midline shift, and only minor residuals of the epidural air. He was discharged from the hospital 15 days after admission.
Unfortunately, 4 weeks later he deteriorated again, and complained of increasing headaches and diplopia. Renewed CT scans revealed increasing entrapment of the residual air, and a second surgery was performed. The same procedure was repeated, and a recanalization of the defect in the bone was found. Again, thorough sealing was obtained with bone wax, a fibrin patch and fibrin glue, and this time it ultimately turned out to be successful. The latest follow-up CT scan performed 4 months later was still found to be satisfactory.