A 75-year-old female was admitted to the emergency room with recurrent, unexplained bruises and leukocytopenia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia in mid-2021 . Plasma coagulation was normal (INR 1.25, normal 0.9–1.25; aPTT 29.1, normal 25–38 s). She was referred to the hematology-oncology department for further assessment and diagnosis. Evaluation of a bone marrow biopsy established the diagnosis of an acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) with characteristic Faggot cells and abnormal promyelocytes in the blood and bone marrow (Additional file : Fig. S1B). Cytogenetic and PCR analysis confirmed presence of a disease-defining, chromosomal 15;17-translocation. All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) was initiated, and, subsequently, arsenic trioxide (ATO) was combined as part of the standard treatment for low-risk APL (Additional file : Fig. S1A) .
Patients with APL can develop differentiation syndrome (DS), a potentially fatal complication of treatment with differentiation-inducing agents, such as ATRA and ATO, through promoting the differentiation of leukemic cells (i.e. atypical promyelocytes) . Therefore, 30 mg/kg/day oral prednisolone was started as prophylaxis . Due to pyrexia of 38.8 °C on day 2 of admission , blood and urine cultures and chest X-ray were performed to exclude infection . SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR testing of nasal and throat swabs on admission was negative , and cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) PCR tests on blood samples were also negative (Additional file : Table S2). Empiric antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam was initiated due to her immunosuppression (Additional file : Fig. S1A).
After ten days of ATRA/ATO, the patient’s CRP increased but she remained subfebrile (37.5–38 °C; Fig. B and D). Her blood counts showed increasing neutrophils, but unaltered lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia (Additional file : Fig. S1C). There were no chest X-ray changes from admission (Additional file : Fig. S2), repeat microbiological and SARS-CoV-2 testing remained negative, and procalcitonin levels were normal . Due to persistent unexplained fever and increased CRP in the absence of a documented infection, DS was suspected . However, there was no respiratory distress, weight gain, pleural effusion, or pulmonary infiltrates, which are typical DS characteristics (Additional file : Fig. S2). Nevertheless, ATRO and ATO were stopped and hydroxycarbamide (2 g/day) was started on day 8 to prevent hyperleukocytosis together with dexamethasone (20 mg/day) to treat the suspected DS. Also, the empiric piperacillin/tazobactam was reinitiated after a brief pause. An ECG prompted by sustained tachycardia showed atrial fibrillation, thus bisoprolol was initiated on day 14 after admission.
During the routine SARS-CoV-2 testing of inpatients, our patient tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on day 14 after admission (after the three previous negative tests on days 0, 6, and 10), but typical COVID-19 symptoms were absent . She was transferred to the infectious disease unit, where her vital signs were oxygen saturation 99% on room air; respiratory rate 24 breaths per minute; blood pressure 130/80 mmHg; heart rate 130 beats per minute; and temperature 37.8 °C. The CRP remained elevated and interleukin-6 (IL-6) was 60.1 ng/mL (normal < 7 ng/mL); procalcitonin 0.19 µg/mL (normal < 0.5 µg/ml); while the elevated neutrophil count, lymphocytopenia and thrombocytopenia persisted .
Due to disease- and therapy-related immunosuppression and advanced age conferring a high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19, casirivimab and imdevimab were administered as a preemptive approach done according to the recommendation of emergency use authorization of REGEN-COV [, ]. Casirivimab and imdevimab (1200 mg each) were administered together as a single intravenous infusion over 90 min within 24 h of positive SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR without any immediate adverse reactions. However, three hours after the infusion, the patient developed severe respiratory distress with an oxygen saturation dropping to 76% on room air; the respiratory rate increased to 42 breaths per minute; blood pressure 135/80 mmHg; heart rate 130 beats per minute; and temperature 39.2 °C . The respiratory insufficiency was not accompanied by any signs of a hypersensitivity reaction, and she was transferred to the intensive care unit where she received high-flow oxygen therapy. Inflammatory markers including ferritin and procalcitonin suddenly increased, and her D-dimers were also elevated . Due to the rapid clinical deterioration, antibody-mediated CRS was suspected and serum cytokines were evaluated. These were indeed elevated within six hours of casirivimab and imdevimab infusion, with IL-6 levels peaking at 8768 ng/mL (normal < 7 ng/mL) and elevated TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-8, and IL-10 . Within eight hours of ICU admission, she developed cardiac arrest and was resuscitated for two minutes until return of spontaneous circulation and intubated for mechanical ventilation .
Cytokine storm is an umbrella term encompassing several disorders of immune dysregulation characterized by systemic inflammation and multiorgan dysfunction . To differentiate pathogen-induced from antibody-mediated CRS, further laboratory and radiological assessments were performed. Chest radiographs revealed radiographic opacities and a subsequent CT scan showed severe atypical infiltrations resembling typical interstitial COVID-19 pneumonia, with no nidus of infection in the abdomen and pelvis or pulmonary artery embolism . No antiviral therapy was initiated because of SARS-CoV2 infection because none were approved at the time. A full microbiological screen was performed (Additional file : Table S1) and empiric antibiotic and antifungal therapy with vancomycin, meropenem, and liposomal amphotericin B were initiated. However, all repeat microbiological tests over a two-week period during the ICU stay remained negative (Additional file : Table S1). Comprehensive microbiological analyses of bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were negative except for SARS-CoV-2 (Additional file : Tables S1 and S2). Having excluded systemic bacterial, fungal, and viral infections other than SARS-CoV-2, the diagnosis of antibody-mediated disease enhancement (ADE) and CRS became more likely, so continuous veno-venous hemodialysis with hemoadsorption (CytoSorb, CytoSorbents, USA) was commenced for 6.5 days together with intravenous 20 mg dexamethasone daily. After initial pronounced catecholamine requirement (norepinephrine 0.6 µg/kg/min), volume therapy, and several repetitions of the prone positioning therapy, the respiratory insufficiency improved significantly, so that the patient was extubated. Due to progressive hyperleukocytosis and thrombocytopenia as well as coexisting circulating promyelocytes in the blood, continuous cytarabine (100 mg/m2) was given for six days to treat a possible concurrent DS. After clinical stabilization and leucocyte decline, ATRA and ATO were reinitiated. Further assessment of the immune cell compartment during this treatment showed decreasing leukocytosis and granulocytosis, and the CD4/CD8 T cell ratio disclosed a relative increase in CD4+ T cells and decrease in CD8+ T cells (Additional file : Fig. S3B, C). The patient was discharged after 41 days from the ICU. At discharge, nasopharyngeal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 turned negative, her inflammatory markers had decreased (CRP 76.3 mg/L; LDH 229 U/L, PCT 0.21 µg/L) and a bone marrow examination confirmed complete morphologic remission of her APL.