We report a case of a 37-year-old male who was diagnosed with left-sided colon cancer in 2015 and underwent resection of the primary cancer with a protective loop ileostomy in another hospital followed by a stoma reversion in January 2016. Primary tumor pathology showed a 5 cm moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma (T3N1bMx, KRAS wild type, MSS/MSI-L intact protein) in the splenic flexure. Staging computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis (CAP) was performed and showed 3 liver lesions with elevated blood levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 8 ng/ml. Therefore, the patient underwent chemotherapy and was started on oxaliplatin, capecitabine, and bevacizumab. The CT CAP was repeated after completing the course of treatment and showed that he had some response to chemotherapy. The patient was then kept on maintenance chemotherapy (bevacizumab & Xeloda) and referred to our hospital for possible further management after completing a total of 12 cycles of therapy.
In our hospital, the patient was re-evaluated with a CT CAP and hepatic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The liver MRI showed a lesion in segment 7 posteriorly, measuring 1.5 × 2.1 cm, a lesion in segment 6, measuring 3 × 3 cm, and another suspicious small lesion in segment 4A. These lesions were slightly larger than the lesions on previous images, and a positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan confirmed the marginal progression of the disease in the liver . In October 2017, a multidisciplinary decision was made to proceed with the parenchyma-preserving wedge resection with the possibility for a major resection if necessary. Preoperative CT of the abdomen with volumetry showed an estimated volume of the possible future liver remnant (left liver lobe) of approximately 51% . Unfortunately, an intraoperative ultrasound showed the largest lesion with close proximity to the main right portal vein.
Knowing that the preoperative liver function test was normal and the future liver remnant by the CT volumetry was more than 50%, to avoid having a positive margin by preserving the right portal vein, the decision was made to proceed with the right hepatectomy.
The lesion in segment 4A was tiny, very close to segment 8 and away from the middle hepatic vein . Therefore, it was included in the resection of the right hepatic lobe without concern of compromising the blood supply or drainage of the left hepatic lobe, and the parenchymal resection of the segment 4A was limited.
The quality of the remnant liver was grossly marginal, possibly due to extensive preoperative chemotherapy. Intraoperative ultrasound showed good perfusion of the remaining left lobe, with the normal flow in the left hepatic artery, left hepatic vein, middle hepatic vein, and left portal vein. Pathology of the resected right lobe showed 3 metastatic nodules ranging between 1.2 and 4 cm, with negative resection margins of at least 1.5 cm. The background liver of the resected right lobe was normal .
Postoperatively, the patient was acidotic with a high lactate level of 13 and an international normalized ratio (INR) of 3. He was kept intubated with inotropic support. Liver Doppler ultrasound was performed again and showed adequate blood flow in the remnant liver. However, the patient’s liver function continued to deteriorate, and he became more encephalopathic but with repeatedly normal liver Doppler ultrasound demonstrating the patency of the vasculature on days 1, 2, and 6 postoperatively.
The case was discussed with the transplant team to consider liver transplantation at this stage. Given that this patient was young, we decided to proceed with the salvage LT. The patient underwent deceased donor orthotopic liver transplantation in November 2017. The pathology of the explanted liver showed extensive necrosis . The patient received induction immunosuppression (IS) therapy with methylprednisolone and then maintenance IS with steroids, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate. Mycophenolate was replaced by sirolimus two months post-transplantation for its anti-proliferative effect. The patient recovered well and was discharged home one month after the transplantation in good general condition. He had 2 episodes of mild acute cellular rejection, and the last episode was more than 12 months ago, both of which resolved completely with low-dose pulse steroids. His most recent follow-up (40 months after the transplantation) showed normal liver function, normal CEA of 1.6 ng/ml and the CT CAP showed no evidence of recurrence or metastasis.