A 46-year-old right-handed male presented with a 2-year history of masses on the palmar and dorsal aspect of his right wrist. The masses were firm and did not move with the tendons. The patient reported normal sensation of the hand and denied numbness, tingling and weakness. Physical examination findings are listed in [Table 1]. An MRI of the right wrist was conducted and showed multiple nodules throughout the radiocarpal, intercarpal, distal radioulnar, and CMC joints and the ulnar and carpal tunnels .
The patient underwent operative excision of the masses using volar and dorsal incisions. There were large lobules of a yellow brown mass resected throughout the wrist. A synovectomy and debridement of the radiocarpal, intercarpal, distal radioulnar, and CMC joints were performed. One large tumor on the floor of the carpal tunnel was resected. All specimens were diagnosed as PVNS. The patient resumed activities after a brief period of immobilization and had an otherwise uneventful recovery.
Three years after the initial surgical excision of PVNS, the patient returned with recurrent nodularity in his wrist and had developed weakness without numbness in his hand. Physical exam findings consisted of intrinsic muscle weakness in the hypothenar and interossei muscles, but intact small finger abduction . An MRI was completed and revealed nodules in the carpal tunnel and Guyon’s canal . Electrodiagnostic testing demonstrated a right ulnar nerve mononeuropathy with sparing of the digital branch to the 5th digit.
The patient underwent repeat surgical excision and debridement. Volar and dorsal incisions were used for excision and debulking and intra-operative pathology was again consistent with PVNS . Tumor was identified and removed from the radiocarpal joint, distal radioulnar joint, the pisotriqueteral joint, multiple intercarpal joints, and within the carpal tunnel. Guyon’s canal was explored and revealed a tumor within zone 2 of the ulnar nerve, pressing the nerve against the fibrous arch of the hypothenar muscles . All visible tumor was resected and the deep motor branch of the ulnar nerve was decompressed. The patient had an uneventful recovery but with improvement in interosseous strength at his recent 3 and 9-month visit .