A 45-year-old man was referred to hospital complaining of fatigue and extensive body pain. His medical history included stress-induced headaches that had been present for almost the entire previous year, for which he began using diclofenac at 50 mg/day as the frequency of headaches had increased during the prior month. He was referred to a physician for pyrosis, 1 week prior to presenting at the hospital, and was prescribed pantoprazole at 40 mg/day. He continued using diclofenac for the ongoing headaches. He started to experience pain in his leg muscles on the fourth day of the diclofenac and pantoprazole combination regimen and used two 50-mg doses of diclofenac to control the pain. The muscle pain became more widespread on the fifth day, and the patient also developed fatigue.
An examination revealed a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg and a pulse of 76 bpm, full and rhythmic. Cardiac sounds were normal and the patient had no specific chest pain. Muscular strength was good; however, the patient complained of muscle tenderness upon palpation. Neurological and general system examinations were normal; no abnormal findings were seen in an electrocardiogram; and an abdomen ultrasound revealed no pathology, aside from an abdominal gas distention. A laboratory analysis revealed high levels of muscle destruction products, the foremost of which was creatinine kinase . Glucose, urea, creatinine, cholesterol levels, amylase, direct and indirect bilirubin, electrolytes, anti-streptolysin O, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, and thyroid hormones were all within their normal ranges.
A cardiac pathology was excluded because the electrocardiographic assessments and cardiac sounds were normal, and because the patient did not describe any pain that would indicate an infarct, and test results and findings were stable on the following days. Liver and biliary tract pathologies were excluded by ultrasound. AR was considered as a pre-diagnosis, as there was a chronologic alignment between the patient’s clinical representation and the medications he used, and this was supported by the laboratory parameters. Both medications were discontinued and the patient was followed up for 1 week, during which no medical interventions were carried out, aside from a recommendation of general hydration. The AR diagnosis was confirmed because his complaints disappeared, with his laboratory values returning to the normal range, a stable electrocardiogram, and other systemic examinations being found within normal ranges.