A 60-year-old female patient presented at our pain clinics in June 2023, complaining of intermittent burning pain related to the left head, face, and upper and lower limbs for three and a half years caused by thalamic haemorrhage of the right hemisphere. The magnetic resonance imaging of the brain confirmed the stroke lesion .
This patient initially experienced mild and occasional pain, however, suffering a persistent deficiency of functional use of the left side of the body. Functional improvement was then achieved with a following rehabilitation program for several months that she was able to walk with crutches by herself. Unfortunately, pain severity has become worsen in the last 1 year, regarding episodic duration, frequency, as well as pain intensity (8/10, numerical rating scale), ongoing stabbing, burning pain that mainly affects the left upper extremity. Previous medication included non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and gabapentin (0.5 g, Tid) with limited relief of pain. The only way to achieve temporal pain relief was to keep the left side upper extremity in an extension position back and forth. In addition to symptomatic pain, this case presented with decreased muscle strength (grade III) and enhanced muscle tone on the left side of the body.
Due to unsatisfactory control of pain, the patient was recommended and consented to the neuromodulation therapy of short-term SCS implantation. The patient was placed in a prone position with necessary sedative administration. An eight-contact cylindrical lead (NO.3873, Medtronic Inc) was percutaneously inserted into the epidural space at T5–6 level, and gradually advanced cephalically under fluoroscopic guidance. We aimed to place the top of the stimulation lead approaching the C1 level according to the preoperative assessment of painful regions, which should be optimally covered by SCS and confirmed with intraoperative sensory testing. This case reported a sensation of paraesthesia covering the left side of the upper and lower extremity at a frequency of 40 Hz (pulse width: 450 μs).
The stimulation programming was adjusted at least twice a day according to the patient-reported pain sensation that was performed by an experienced technician. Postoperative stimulation protocol was set at a 40 Hz frequency with a pulse width ranging between 450 and 500 μs. The initial stimulation voltage was set 2.4 volts and gradually lowered to 0.8 volts before the removal of lead. After SCS implantation, about 75% reduction of pain severity was reported in this case in relation to the upper and lower limbs compared with baseline. However, the patient still suffered moderate to severe craniofacial pain, which cannot be covered by the cervical spinal cord stimulation. As a result, the patient underwent once trigeminal pulsed radiofrequency for the control of craniofacial pain, which achieved significant relief from trigeminal suffering, and only mild and tolerable pain remained. We did not observe any obvious complications in this case. At the last follow-up, the patient still reported significant pain relief in the craniofacial and upper extremities 5 months after discharge. Unfortunately, recurrent and aggressive lower limb pain was reported in the last 2 weeks, and we recommended further rehabilitation and pain management therapy if necessary. Changes in pain severity were assessed with the numerical rating scale (numerical rating scale, shown in Fig. ). In general, the patient reported satisfactory control of pain symptoms, as well as functional improvement.