An 84-year-old male patient was diagnosed with gastric cancer on a screening esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) performed at his local hospital. The EGD revealed a type 2 tumor extending from the middle to the upper third of the stomach . The histopathological examination of the biopsied specimens, including immunohistochemistry, revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with an HER2 score of 3+. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed enlarged lymph nodes at station 3 along the lesser curvature and a single liver tumor in segment 2 (S2) . Therefore, the patient was clinically diagnosed with stage IV HER2-positive gastric cancer (cT3N2M1). The patient received T-mab in combination with S-1 and oxaliplatin (SOX) as a first-line chemotherapy. This regimen consisted of a 3-week course of S-1 (80 mg/m2/day) orally on days 1–14, with oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2) and T-mab (8 mg/kg on the first course, followed by 6 mg/kg) intravenously on day 1. After eight courses of SOX plus T-mab, an EGD showed that the tumor had disappeared and had turned into a scar . Moreover, CT and MRI revealed shrinkage of the enlarged lymph nodes and liver tumor . The liver tumor’s reduction rate was 65%, indicating a partial response (PR), as determined by the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. Therefore, the patient was referred to our hospital for CS, considering the clinical indications. Body weight before CS was 56.9 kg. His serum levels of total protein and albumin before CS were 6.7 g/dL and 3.6 g/dL, respectively. As the distance from the esophagogastric junction to the tumor scar was approximately 4 cm, the patient underwent sTG with a small remnant stomach and D2 lymphadenectomy plus partial hepatectomy of S2. In the sTG, the transection line was selected to ensure a proximal margin of 3 cm from the tumor scar using intraoperative EGD. Furthermore, tumor-free involvement of the transection line was confirmed by intraoperative histopathological evaluation. The operative time was 364 min, with a blood loss of 359 ml. Macroscopically, a scar of the primary gastric tumor and a white liver tumor in S2 were identified . The histopathological examination revealed no residual tumors in the resected stomach or liver . Moreover, no tumor cells were observed in the dissected lymph nodes. These findings indicated a histopathologically complete response (CR), whereas the histological response of the primary tumor was classified as grade 3. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the eighth postoperative day. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1, although the Postgastrectomy Syndrome Assessment Scale (PGSAS)-45 showed that the postoperative QOL was maintained . Body weight and serum level of total protein were 58.0 kg and 7.4 g/dL at postoperative 6 months. The patient was alive 16 months after chemotherapy with no signs of disease recurrence 8 months postoperatively.