We report the case of a 2 months old female, presented for consultation due to the presence of a lump on her left thigh, with progressive and constant growth after birth. The lesion was first described on the prenatal ultrasound at 30 weeks of gestation as a pre-femoral soft tissue mass of 20/7 mm . The patient was delivered by cesarean section due to fetal distress but was otherwise normal at birth. Development was normal, and there was no relevant family history. On clinical examination, there was a 25/10 mm nodule on the antero-intern side of the left thigh that was firm, mobile and within the deep layers. The overlying skin was normal. There were no other lesions elsewhere on the patient’s body.
The initial X-ray and ultrasound (US) showed a pre-femoral soft tissue mass that measured approximately 30/13 mm, with nonhomogeneous structure, hypoechoic areas, calcifications, and weak Doppler signal, being located anteriorly to the vascular elements of the thigh (A). Abdominal ultrasound was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass of 19.33/15.19/34 mm, with a nonspecific vascular involvement (B). In T1-weighted images, the MRI appearance consisted of a low signal. In T2-weighted fat-saturated images, a high signal intensity of the lesion was shown with nonhomogeneous contrast setting after intravascular contrast was administered, but with late homogenization, located on the antero-internal part of the left thigh with an important mass effect on the left vastus intermedius muscle. The lesion was considered to be probably a schwanoma of the left saphenous nerve.
Elective surgery was scheduled. An italic S-shaped incision on the antero-internal face of the left thigh was performed, from the crural arch distally extended for about 6 cm. A mass of approximately 4 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm was revealed, which included the entire thickness of the sartorius muscle (A,B). In the 1/3 medial part of the tumor, dissection was performed, isolating it from the femoral vasculo-nervous package without opening the sheath of the vasculo-nervous canal. The sartorius muscle was resected at a distance of about 2 cm distal and proximal to the tumor, with complete tumor resection (C). Hemostasis was performed and adjacent tissue approximated. The excised mass was sent for pathological analysis. The patient had a favorable surgical outcome and was discharged 3 days postoperatively. At one year after surgery follow up, the child had no recurrence.
Histologically, the mass in the sartorius muscle was noted as a proliferation of tapered cells arranged in an irregular spiral pattern and crossed by thin-walled vessels. In the central region, biphasic proliferation consisting of nodules with necrosis and central calcifications was observed, and between the nodules, fusiform cell proliferates arranged in small intersecting bundles (A,B). Occasional micronuclei were evident. A pseudocapsule formed by a thin layer of connective tissue <1 mm covered the mass. Neoplastic proliferation encompassed residual skeletal muscle fibers in the center of the lesion. Extracapsular and peripheral scarce mature adipose tissue were seen with isolated large-caliber blood vessels. Immunostaining revealed the following results: vimentin positive, smooth muscle actin positive in nodules with necrosis and calcifications (miotic nodules), desmin focal positive, Ki67 low (about 5 positive cells per 100 tumor cells, suggesting low cell kinetics) (D–F).
Diagnosis of IM of left sartorius muscle was made.