A 69-year-old man presented with swelling of his left cheek and discharge of pus from the skin of his cheek. He also a had persistent nasal obstruction and purulent rhinorrhea. A papillary mass was noted in the left maxillary and ethmoid sinuses on nasal endoscopy . The mass protruded to the oral cavity through the hard palate. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a tumor of the left maxillary sinus extending to the left nasal cavity, ethmoid sinus, and orbital floor, measuring about 90 × 50 mm . Biopsy was performed from the maxillary sinus.
Microscopically, the tumor was composed of an exophytic, papillary growth of multilayered epithelium . Some areas showed inverted, anastomosing ribbons with pushing borders. A palisading pattern of columnar cells with reverse polarity was observed in the basal layer . The tumor cells were composed of uniformly round and polygonal cells with abundant, eosinophilic cytoplasm and monomorphic round nuclei with fine chromatin and occasional small nucleoli. Discontinuous flattened cells were found in the outermost layer of multilayered epithelium . Neutrophilic infiltrates were focally present in both tumor nests and stroma. A focal peculiar acantholytic change was seen. A few scattered mucous cells were found in the middle layer. There was focal ciliated epithelium from residual respiratory mucosa , while no dysplasia-carcinoma sequence was observed. There was no overt stromal invasion, lymphovascular invasion, or perineural invasion. Keratinization and necrosis were not found through the lesion. The mitotic rate was relatively low, although increased mitotic activity (up to 38/10 high-power fields) was observed focally.
By immunohistochemistry, the tumor was diffusely and strongly positive for CK5/6 and high molecular weight cytokeratin. p63 was mainly positive in the basal layer, and EMA was predominantly expressed in the outermost cell layer . CK7 and p16 were negative in tumor cells. p53 was strongly positive in almost all tumor cells . The Ki67 labeling index was about 90% . Based on the radiological and pathological findings, a diagnosis of LGPSC was rendered.
DEK::AFF2 fusion was analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) as described previously and confirmed the absence of DEK::AFF2 fusion transcripts (data not shown). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a DEK break-apart FISH probe (CytoTest, Rockville, MD, USA) revealed no DEK::AFF2 fusion . DNA-based targeted sequencing was performed using Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer Hotspot Panel v2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), targeting mutation hotspots of 50 cancer-related genes. The sequencing confirmed TP53 R175H mutation (69.1% variant allele frequency, with sequencing depth ~ 1000 ×). There were no hotspot mutations in EGFR, KRAS, and CDKN2A genes.
Because the primary tumor was not surgically resectable, he underwent radiotherapy with 66 Gy in 33 fractions and concomitant intra-arterial chemotherapy. Twelve months after the initiation of treatment, no residual tumor was observed by positron emission tomography.