We present the case of a 38-year-old male athlete who experienced right shoulder pain following a high energy trauma (motor vehicle accident (MVA)), involving an adducted arm with axial load to superior AC joint. Upon admission to the emergency ward, he reported severe pain and an inability to move the affected shoulder. The patient has no significant past surgical or medical history. Clinical examination revealed normal vital signs, and evaluation of the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and spine showed no abnormalities. Local physical examination and neurological assessment revealed normal findings. However, there was observable skin abrasion on the right proximal humerus. Tenderness was noted in the right AC joint, and further examination indicated limited range of motion in the right shoulder. The patient was unable to internally and externally rotate and elevate the right shoulder due to pain.
Radiographic evaluations (X-ray and computerized tomography (CT) scan) revealed a displaced fracture at the base of the acromion and AC dislocation (, ). The patient was scheduled for surgery the day after.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, with the patient in a semi-sitting position. A direct longitudinal incision with a superior posterior distal approach of the clavicle, extending to the lateral side, was made. After exploring the AC joint and the fracture site of the acromion, the fracture was refreshed. The acromion base fracture was fixed with a 4-hole reconstruction plate . The clavicle was stabilized to the coracoid using the Tight-Rope technique with mersilene thread and 2-hole reconstruction plate in order to prevent bone failure. Mersilene wire was utilized and fixed by wrapping it around the tip of the coracoid. The Tight-Rope technique involves twisting the Mersilene thread around the clavicle and passing it through tunnels inside the clavicle, then tying it to a 2-hole reconstruction plate. Instead of utilizing an endobutton, we used a 2-hole reconstruction plate. The stability of the superior and inferior aspects was checked, and it was deemed stable. Subsequently, the AC ligament was repaired with vicryl thread, and the anterior and posterior stability of the clavicle was verified. The platysma muscle was sewn, ensuring appropriate closure. Finally, the patient was transferred to the recovery room for post-operative monitoring and care.
A systematic rehabilitation plan tailored to address injuries of this type was implemented. The protocol included initiating active shoulder motion exercises after a two-week period, and six weeks later, the patient was able to resume nearly full activity without experiencing pain or discomfort. Radiographs conducted three months postoperatively indicated successful healing of the acromial fracture, with the AC joint maintaining congruency and a well-reduced state. By the six-weeks follow-up assessment, the patient had successfully returned to work, demonstrating normal shoulder function without any reported pain. Written informed consent for publication was obtained from the patient. This case report was has been reported in line with the Surgical CAse REport (SCARE) criteria .