A 36-year-old male was referred to our foot and ankle clinic by his general practitioner with a 2-year history of pain over the dorsum of his left foot. He described the pain as a dull ache which was made worse on prolonged standing or walking. The patient could not recall any previous injury, and despite simple analgesics and a change of shoes, he continued to have significant pain. His medical history was unremarkable and he was in excellent general health.
On initial presentation, we noted an obvious antalgic gait, while examination of the foot showed no skin changes or swelling. Our only positive physical finding was mild tenderness over the dorsum along the second and third metatarsals; otherwise, there was a full range of movement at all joints and a normal neurovascular examination.
Several radiographs taken over the prior 2 years were regarded as normal. We requested a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan, which revealed diffuse high T2 and low T1 signals in the first and second dorsal interossei muscles without a discrete mass. The appearance was reported as being consistent with a vascular malformation but could not exclude a liposarcoma or synovial sarcoma . A biopsy was recommended, but with the possibility that this was a vascular malformation, we decided that exploration and complete excision would be the most appropriate treatment method.
In the operating theatre, we made a 5 cm longitudinal incision over the dorsum of the foot in line with the second metatarsal. The first and second dorsal interosseous spaces were readily visualized and the muscle appeared edematous and inflamed. We retracted the muscle fibers of the second dorsal interosseous space to reveal an underlying mass of highly vascular tissue. Although there was no distinct capsule, we easily separated the mass from the surrounding muscle. No single feeding vessel was identified, but there were many vascular channels that required hemostasis. We excised the lesion en bloc and sent the specimen to pathology. Exploration of the adjacent interosseous space revealed no gross abnormalities, and after meticulous hemostasis was achieved, we closed the tissues in layers.
The histopathology report stated that the specimen consisted of fragments of skeletal muscle, adipose tissue and haphazardly arranged, dilated, and thick-walled branching blood vessels in continuity with the muscle fibers. Few inflammatory cells were found within the muscle, and the vascular plexi were associated with hemosiderin pigment material. The report indicated that the lesion was completely excised, and the findings were highly suggestive of an intramuscular AVM .
Two weeks after surgery, we reviewed the patient in our clinic. His incision was well healed, and we allowed him to return to work without any restrictions . At his annual follow-up appointment, the patient confirmed that he was pain-free with only mild discomfort after prolonged standing or walking. Physical examination was unremarkable, with no signs of recurrence.