A 59-year-old Caucasian man presented to his doctor with gastric complaints. Gastroscopy showed an ulcer with a diameter of 5cm along the lesser curvature in the prepyloric antrum. A biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma of the stomach. The patient underwent a Billroth II resection of the stomach, omentectomy and D2 lymph node dissection. An anatomical preparation showed an exulcerated and infiltrative tumor invading all layers of the stomach . Histopathologic evaluation revealed well-differentiated exulcerated adenocarcinoma with highly desmoplastic stroma and malignant cells arranged in solid nests and glands with mucin production at TNM stage III, pT3, pN2. Eight out of 18 removed perigastric lymph nodes showed metastatic foci. Lymphatic vessel involvement was observed. According to Lauren's classification, this tumor was an intestinal type with low proliferative fraction, in World Health Organization (WHO) classification, it was tubular adenocarcinoma. Only 2 to 3% of tumor cells were molecular immunology Borstel-1 (MIB1)+, which justified its slow runoff. Abdominal and chest computed tomography (CT) scans did not show distant metastasis. The patient was treated with six cycles of cisplatin and VePesid® (etoposide) chemotherapy after surgery. We did not observe any sign of local recurrence or distant metastasis during follow-up. Our patient was admitted again with low abdominal pain and discomfort 10 years after the gastric tumor diagnosis. Ultrasound showed a 2x4cm unidentified mass on the left posterior wall of the bladder. A CT scan detected a tumor-like mass on the left side of the bladder. Cystoscopy revealed mucosal hyperemia and a tumor close to the left ureteric orifice. We did not detect any other malignancies neither in the thorax, nor in other parts of the abdomen. A transurethral resection of the left-sided bladder tumor was performed. A pathologic examination described mucosal inflammation, intact epithelium, local diffuse muscle invasion (especially in the outer muscular layers), a connective tissue-rich stroma and atypical glandular proliferation with atypical simple columnar-cuboidal epithelium .
Immunohistochemical staining of tumor cells detected epithelial membrane antigen (EMA)+, cytokeratin (CK)7+, CA19.9 +, CK20-, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)+, while prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was irrelevant. Because of its EMA positivity and CK20 negativity this urinary bladder tumor turned out to be secondary to a gastric neoplasm. Endoscopic control of the primary gastric tumor was performed after a pathologic examination, and a biopsy from the scar showed no sign of local recurrence. Positron emission tomography - computed tomography (PET-CT) presented residual malignancy in the bladder. Cystoscopy showed mucosal hyperemia and edema on the left lower part of the posterior wall and necrosis on its surface. The patient received five cycles of epirubicin, cisplatin and capecitabine (ECX) chemotherapy. He responded well to treatment and control PET and CT scans were negative. He became asymptomatic. One year later, a colonoscopy detected a 4cm sessile polyp in the ascending colon. A histopathologic evaluation revealed adenoma with high-grade dysplasia. An exploratory laparotomy was performed and, surprisingly, peritoneal dissemination was found. A histopathological examination proved metastases of the primary gastric neoplasm for a second time . The tumor was CK7+ and CEA+, CK20-, CA19.9 +, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor (CDX)-2-, thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1-. The surgical specimens were formalin-fixed. Paraffin-embedded sections (5μm) were used for conventional light microscopy. Silane-coated glass slides and 4μm thick sections were used for immunohistochemistry with antigen retrieval. The following commercially available antibodies were used, according to the manufacturers’ recommendations.
Antibodies: CK7: (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark, OV-TL-12/30, 1:100), Ki67: (Dako, MIB-1, 1:100), EMA: (Dako, E29, 1:100), CEA: (Dako, II-7, 1:50), CK20: (Dako, KS20.8; 1:50), CDX-2: (Novocastra, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany, AMT28, 1:50), CA19.9: (Novocastra, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany, C241, 1:100), TTF-1: (Dako, 8G7G3/1, 1:50), PSA: (Dako, polyclonal, 1:1000).