A 33-year-old, healthy, gravida 3, and para 2 woman underwent routine examination by transabdominal ultrasound at 35 weeks and 5 days during a seemingly uneventful pregnancy. Ultrasonography revealed an intracranial cyst in the baby. Prenatal half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin-echo sequence (HASTE) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed at 37 weeks and 2 days showed a large cyst measuring 70 mm in maximal length in the right parieto-occipital region .
A boy weighing 3204 g was delivered transvaginally at 38 weeks and 6 days gestation. The patient had Apgar scores of 8 and 9, respectively. The tension in the fontanel was soft. The head circumference was 34 cm (+0.62SD). The patient showed no neurological deficits. At birth, the initial MRI, including 3D-heavily T2-weighted MRI (3D-hT2WI), demonstrated multiple cysts with smooth and rounded borders and a nonenhancing wall in the right parieto-occipital region. The cyst contents were nearly isointense to the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) but varied in intensity in each lesion . The size of the cyst increased rapidly, measuring 90 mm in maximum length, resulting in a mild midline shift. The cysts were not connected to the subarachnoid or right lateral ventricle. Another remarkable finding was that the posterior part of the corpus callosum was partially absent. On the day of birth, Ommaya CSF reservoir was placed into the largest outer cyst. The cyst contained clear CSF-like fluid. The patient was discharged on postoperative day (POD) 17 and he underwent intermittent CSF drainage through the reservoir. However, he experienced occasional vomiting, and the tension of his fontanel gradually worsened 44 days after the first surgery. 3D-hT2WI at 2 months revealed that the cyst remained large with a mild midline shift even with intermittent drainage . We decided on surgical intervention. The patient underwent surgery at 57 days of age. After removing the Ommaya CSF reservoir, the endoscope was inserted into the largest outer cyst wall through the small hole created during the first surgery. The GECs consisted of a thin translucent membrane and veins were observed running over the cyst surface . We performed cyst wall fenestration of the largest outer and inner cysts . CSF-like clear fluid was found in the inner cyst. Finally, a CP shunt was placed into the large cyst.
Postoperatively, the tension in his fontanel became soft, and vomiting disappeared. 3D-hT2WI performed 4 days after the second surgery revealed that the size of the cyst had decreased . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on POD 15. At the 2-year follow-up, there was no cyst recurrence , his neurological findings did not deteriorate, and his development was normal.
Pathological examination revealed that the cyst wall was mainly composed of fibroconnective tissue and was partially lined by cuboidal or columnar epithelial cells. A ciliated epithelium was also observed, but goblet cells were not observed. The lining cells were immunopositive for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and podoplanin . In conjunction with radiological findings of multiple intracerebral cysts and partial defects of the corpus callosum, the pathological diagnosis was GEC.