A Brazilian 27-year-old man presented with a 4-year history of progressive bilateral vision loss caused by serious keratoconus. A neuro-ophthalmological evaluation revealed near-total left-eye amaurosis and moderate right-eye vision loss. The patient subsequently underwent bilateral corneal transplantation, although his condition progressed to left amaurosis and right temporal hemianopsia during the following 2 months. Thus, he underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which revealed a 79-cm3 bulky solid expansive lesion that involved the sellar and suprasellar compartments. The lesion had well-defined lobulated margins and a heterogeneous appearance without cystic or calcified components. There was no edema in the adjacent brain parenchyma. The imaging also revealed invasion of the sellar floor, lateral displacement of both internal carotid arteries, medial obliteration of the cavernous sinus, and extrinsic compression of the optic chiasm, hypothalamus, and third ventricle . Injection of a paramagnetic agent revealed diffuse and heterogeneous enhancement in the lesion. The preliminary diagnosis was a pituitary adenoma, and endocrinological evaluation revealed complete loss of pituitary function. Thus, the patient was referred to our department for evaluation and treatment.
We initially selected the endoscopic endonasal approach, which revealed that the tumor was unexpectedly firm. We then sent a specimen for intraoperative pathological analysis. The results were inconclusive for macroadenoma, and we chose to stop the surgery until we received a conclusive result (approximately 60% of the tumor had been removed at that point). The patient did not experience any postoperative deficits during the 8 days until we received conclusive pathological diagnosis of CN without signs of malignancy. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive synaptophysin expression, a Ki-67 index of 0.8%, and negative AE1/AE3 expression . Based on these results, we performed a second surgery through the right cranio-orbital zygomatic approach, which resulted in successful microsurgical total resection of the tumor.
The patient was successfully treated for postoperative insipidus diabetes during a 1-week stay in the intensive care unit. He was subsequently discharged at 3 weeks after his admission to our department without any new neurological deficits and with improvement of the right-eye hemianopsia. Computed tomography (CT) at 1 week after the surgery revealed gross total resection of the tumor and mild ventricular dilation, without any manifestations of hypertensive hydrocephalus that required further treatment . Close outpatient follow-up was performed for 18 months, and the endocrinological workup revealed no improvement of pituitary function, although the patient did not experience any motor, sensory, or autonomic deficits. He continues to receive hormone replacement using testosterone, thyroid hormones, cortisol (prednisone), and exogenous vasopressin (desmopressin). The MRI scans from the 4-month and 18-month follow-ups revealed a hyperintense central sellar mass, which was compatible with an autologous fat graft that was used during the surgery to prevent fistula. These scans also revealed sellar contrast enhancement in both approaches, which was probably related to fibrosis . Thus, if any residual tumor was present, it did not grow during the last year of follow-up.