A 53-year-old woman underwent radical surgery and postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy due to immature teratoma of the right ovary at the age of 28. She remained well during a 25-year follow-up period after surgery. Multiple asymptomatic solid masses were found in the liver on ultrasonography a month ago and she was then hospitalized in the Hangzhou First People's Hospital.
The patient was accidentally found to have multiple asymptomatic solid masses in the liver during an ultrasound examination at a local community clinic a month ago, and a palpable mass in the abdomen, but no tenderness. She visited our hospital for relevant examinations and further treatment. The patient underwent pathological examination of liver tumor guided by B-ultrasound before operation, which suggested mature teratoma. Finally, the patient decided to undergo surgery.
The patient underwent bilateral appendage + total hysterectomy + omentectomy + appendectomy + lymph node dissection 25 years ago due to immature solid teratoma of the right ovary. Postoperative pathological diagnosis was immature solid teratoma of the right ovary, involving the omentum and appendix, with lymph node metastasis (4/21). From the 3rd day after surgery, she received intraperitoneal chemotherapy of cisplatin 6 times. The patient had no history of hepatitis and gastrointestinal malignancies.
The patient did not smoke or drink, and had no relevant family history.
A non-tender hard mass on the right upper abdomen with clear boundary and smooth surface, about 7 cm × 6 cm in size, was noted. In the middle and lower abdomen, incision scar was observed.
Carbohydrate antigen (CA) 242 was 23.7 ku/L and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was 93.6 ku/L. Alpha-fetoprotein and lactate dehydrogenase were within the normal range.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple masses in the abdominal cavity. The largest one was located in the posterior peritoneum next to the sixth segment of the right liver, about 7.9 cm × 7.5 cm in size, with uneven internal density, calcification and adipose tissue. Three masses were present inside the liver, the largest was about 3 cm × 2 cm, and one mass was in the right pelvic floor, which was about 2 cm × 2 cm .