Here we report on a case of low plasmatic concentration of ARV drugs, with persistent detectable viral load despite regimen intensification, in a pregnant 26-year-old Brazilian woman with HIV-1 infection.
The first diagnosis of HIV was made in August 2016; at diagnosis, her CD4 count was 60 cells/mm3 and plasmatic viral load was 7,060,000 copies/mL. No drug resistance was reported at the baseline test. She did not report any alcohol or drug addiction, neither was she under any medical treatment. She was hence immediately started on ARV therapy. In accordance with the national Italian guidelines , a cART with abacavir/lamivudine/dolutegravir (DTG) (600/300/50 mg) once daily was introduced, which seemed to be well tolerated. Despite a significant reduction in the viral load (1650, 143, 58 copies/mL after 1, 2, and 4 months respectively), she never achieved plasmatic undetectability (HIV-ribonucliec acid (RNA) < 50 copies/mL) at follow-up. When asked, she reported poor adherence to the therapeutic regimen in spite of good tolerability.
In February 2017 she got pregnant. She was married and had adequate social and familial support and thus decided to go through with her pregnancy. The viral load at the beginning of pregnancy was 77 copies/mL with a CD4 count of 219 cells/mm3. After 1 month, the viral load was lower but still detectable (53 copies/mL). It was thus decided to implement the ongoing therapy with darunavir (DRV)-ritonavir (800/100 mg) once daily. Two months later, plasmatic HIV-RNA was 11,400 copies/mL in a context of reported good adherence. Furthermore, our patient did not report any flu-like illness or alterations of her general status which could have contributed to the increase in the viral load. Anticipating that bioavailability of DTG would be further reduced in the second and third trimesters, an additional dose of DTG (50 mg) was therefore included in the regimen. At the following control, 4 weeks later, plasmatic HIV-RNA was 252 copies/mL.
In order to maximize our patient’s adherence to the ARV therapy, the frequency of controls was increased to a monthly basis; when interviewed, she appeared motivated to adhere to the treatment and to follow any medical advice in order to preserve her health and the baby’s health. The actual intake of the pills was assessed by an electronic monitoring system of withdrawn drug boxes. In addition, at 23 weeks of gestation we collected a blood sample to determine the effective plasmatic concentration of DTG and DRV and to consequently better document plasmatic levels of ARV drugs. Trough plasma concentration (Ctrough) was measured by validated liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). For both drugs, analysis revealed a Ctrough of 379 ng/mL (DTG) and 152 ng/mL (DRV), which were lower than expected in non-pregnant adults .
Along with controls at our HIV clinic, our patient underwent regular gynecologic follow-up. In addition to HIV infection, the physiology of her pregnancy was considered. The fetus showed normal growth and no major abnormalities were detected at ultrasound examinations.
At 34 weeks of gestation, the viral load dropped again to 81 copies/mL with a CD4 count of 177 cells/mm3; in accordance with the Italian guidelines , a cesarean section was thus recommended. Two weeks later, our patient delivered a healthy baby; there were no subsequent obstetric complications.
On review at 8 weeks, mother and baby were well; the baby’s T and B cell numbers were normal, and HIV-RNA was undetectable. She is thus far uninfected.
Ten weeks after delivery, DTG and DRV concentrations in maternal blood were again examined. The Ctroughs were 3042 ng/mL (DTG) and 1748 ng/mL (DRV), showing a normal level of bioavailability for a non-pregnant adult . Our patient’s regimen was then de-intensified to abacavir/lamivudine/DTG (600/300/50 mg) once daily. Her viral load declined to 38 copies/mL with a CD4 count of 248 cells/mm3 1 month after treatment modification. After another 2 months, her CD4 cell count rose to 398 cells/mm3 and HIV-RNA was < 20 copies/ml.