A 59-year-old and overweight man (weight = 87 kg, BMI = 29.75) who suffered from a sleep apnea syndrome, was diagnosed with a stage III mantle cell lymphoma in December 2014. On admission, he presented systemic lymphadenopathy without any bone marrow involvement. Laboratory tests showed normal liver enzymes levels as well as negative hepatitis B and C serological profiles.
An oxaliplatin-based polychemotherapy followed by high-dose therapy and autologous stem cell transplantation was proposed. First-line chemotherapy with four cycles of R-DHAX regimen, including rituximab, dexamethasone, cytarabine and oxaliplatin was administered. After three courses, PET-CT (positron emission tomography) response assessment indicated a complete metabolic response. The patient then received conditioning regimen with BEAM 400, consisting of bicnu (300 mg/m2) for 1 day, etoposide (400 mg/m2) combined to cytarabine (400 mg/m2) for 4 days and melphalan (140 mg/m2) for 1 day prior to autologous HSCT. Anti-infective prophylaxis included valacyclovir and fluconazole, starting on Day −7. On March 16th, 2015 (Day 0), 9.8 × 106 cells CD34+/kg were infused. During this procedure, laboratory data did not display any abnormality, especially hepatic enzymes levels that were within the normal range. Despite antimicrobial therapy with Piperacillin–Tazobactam, the patient had persistent fever over the ensuing 72 h, requiring an empiric antifungal treatment with Voriconazole. No signs of invasive aspergillosis were detected (normal CT-scan) and aspergillus antigenemia were negative. Voriconazole was then replaced by Caspofungin on Day +6. On Day +8, oligoanuria was observed and physical examination revealed hepatomegaly, fluid retention, ascites and weight gain < 5% (i.e. 90 kg, +2 kg/48 h). Additionally, thrombocytopenia refractory to platelet transfusion was noted. On Day +9, the serum transaminase concentration increased in an explosive manner from 75 to 2914 UI/L in the morning and 5046 UI/L in the evening for aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and from 45 to 1216 UI/L for alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Similarly, the bilirubin level had reached 67 µmol/L (N < 21) accompanied with elevated creatinine level shifting from normal value to 230 µmol/L within 24 h . Alkaline phosphatase levels were initially normal and progressively increased along with SOS/VOD syndrome (2× ULN). The patient developed coagulation disorders as revealed by a progressive increase of INR whereas the Factor V remained normal . An elevated level of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) was also noted with a value of 51 UA/mL (N < 16). An abdominal ultrasound was performed and confirmed hepatomegaly, ascites and decreased velocity in the portal venous flow. The subject whose weight increased more than 5% (i.e. 92 kg) was therefore diagnosed with hepatic VOD and was admitted to the Intensive Care unit. A treatment with Defibrotide at a dose of 25 mg/kg/day was immediately initiated.
Because of the atypical major increase in transaminases levels, a transvenous liver biopsy was performed on Day +10 and showed a patchy perivenular sinusoidal dilatation and congestion with hepatocyte plate disruption . A second abdominal ultrasound further supported the diagnosis of SOS/VOD with a worsening of doppler parameters, then harboring a reversed hepatic venous flow. Moreover, differential diagnoses such as fulminant viral hepatitis (hepatitis A, B, C and E, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus) were excluded. Despite symptomatic measures along with the maintenance of an adequate fluid balance and ascites removal with albumin infusion, renal failure could not be controlled. Because of anuria, hemodialysis was thus implemented on Day +9.
Neutrophils recovery was achieved on Day +11 and liver dysfunction gradually improved from Day +13 to Day +15 with decreased transaminases levels ([AST] 408 UI/L; [ALT] 494 UI/L) . Although his overall condition was progressively recovering, the patient presented a sudden hemodynamic instability with an acute respiratory distress syndrome requiring mechanic ventilation, on Day +16. A fulminant liver failure with uncontrolled lactic acidosis was observed. An abdominal CT scan was performed and showed an acute mesenteric ischemia with hepatic and renal ischemic injury. The patient died a few hours later of a multi-organ-system failure.