A 34-year-old female presented with a 3 year history of a palpable swelling and mild pain in the left gluteal region. There was no history of preceding trauma or accident. Two years after initiation of symptoms without clinical progress, the patient became pregnant and noted a local growth of the mass. After giving birth to a healthy child, the patient consulted an orthopedic surgeon. A radiographic image of the pelvis revealed a large osteolytic lesion in the left iliac wing, sharply contoured with sclerotic margins, indicating a slow growth pattern . MR-imaging of the pelvis showed a mass originating from the os ilium with a large extra- and intrapelvic soft-tissue component . Open biopsy was performed that lead to the diagnosis of BFH.
After reference to the literature on BFH, surgical en bloc resection was considered to be the appropriate treatment modality [,,,]. In accordance to the imaging results, the iliac crest could be preserved, while the linea terminalis of the left side had to be resected . Figure shows the resected tumor specimen. Histological study of the resected specimen confirmed the diagnosis of BFH . The surgical margins were found to be free of tumor confirming complete tumor resection.
The pelvic ring was then stabilized in a second operation using a non-vascularized fibular autograft that was impacted and stabilized with screws and a Kirschner-wire reconstructing the linea terminalis of the left pelvic ring . Post operatively she developed neurapraxia of the left lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, which resolved spontaneously within 6 months after surgery. Following two weeks of bed rest and limited restriction of movement up to 70° flexion of the hip joint, the patient was mobilized with partial weight bearing for three months.
Radiographic and MRI controls at 3, 6 and 12 months postoperatively showed no evidence of local recurrence or secondary dislocation of the reconstruction . A diastasis of the symphysis was noted, which we ascribe to the pregnancy one year prior to surgery. After 18 months of surgery the patient is free of disease and ambulates with full weight bearing.