On September 24, 2021, a 20-year-old woman presented to our department with polygonal, purpuric, flat-topped papules over her right arm, right leg, and right side of trunk and waist since the last 5 mo.
In January 2021, the patient noted asymptomatic deformation of her left middle finger nail with no obvious cause along with splitting of the distal nail plate. In April 2021, due to exposure to cherry blossom, she developed red miliary size papules on the inner aspect of right upper arm with severe itching, and was diagnosed with allergic dermatitis at a local hospital. Her symptoms improved after treatment with loratadine and topical compound dexamethasone acetate cream. In May 2021, she had symptoms of hyperhidrosis followed by development of a red polygonal flat papule (size: 5 mm) with pruritus in her right lower limb. Her symptoms were not relieved after topical application of desonide cream. One week later, a similar lesion appeared on the right side of waist. In June, her symptoms were alleviated, and she had black discoloration of some lesions. In July, the patient had recurrence of pruritus on the same site with no obvious triggering factor. After scratching, the eruption on the right upper extremity and right lower extremity spread to distal sites along the longitudinal axis, which brought the patient to our department.
Her past history was unremarkable.
There was no family history of similar disease.
Systemic examination revealed no obvious abnormalities. Cutaneous examination showed violaceous, erythematous macules and maculopapules sized 1-5 mm on the right upper and lower limbs and on the right side of chest, back and waist. Some of the lesions had coalesced into flaky plaques with no obvious scale formation. The lesions were distributed unilaterally without crossing the midline, along the Blaschko’s lines . There was no abnormality in oral mucosa. Splitting in the distal plate of the left middle finger was present and nail pit was also seen .
Due to the financial constraints of the patient, relevant laboratory examinations were not conducted.
Dermoscopy examination showed linear and punctate blood vessels in the lesions. The vascular structure was radially arranged, and white reticular stripes were seen . Histopathological examination showed reticular hyperkeratosis of the stratum corneum, wedge-shaped thickening of the granular layer, irregular thickening of spinous layer, basal cell vacuolization and liquefaction, compact bandlike lymphocytic infiltration in superficial dermis, and sporadic infiltration of chromatophilic cells. These were typical features of LP .