A 6-year-old girl presented with intermittent abdominal pain and vomiting for 10 d.
Symptoms started 10 d before presentation with persistent dull pain around the umbilicus and upper abdomen, and non-ejective vomiting (gastric contents) 7-8 times a day with no coffee-like or bloody substances. There were no known sick contacts and no recent travel. The patient was seen at the local hospital and given hydrocortisone, 5 mg/kg/d and cefotaxime, 300 mg/kg/d for 6 d with no obvious remission. Gastroscopy on day 7 revealed chronic non-atrophic gastritis, hyperemia, and edema in the descending mucosa of the duodenum .
Her past medical history was unremarkable.
Family history for gastrointestinal diseases or HSP was negative.
On physical examination there was periumbilical tenderness, but no other abnormalities were found. There was no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly; Blumberg and Murphy signs were negative. There was no skin rash at admission.
Blood tests showed increased inflammation indicators and platelets [white blood cells (WBC) 25.6 × 109/L, neutrophils (N) 81.7%, lymphocytes (L) 11.7%, C-reactive protein (CRP) 38 mg/L, platelets (PLT) 648 × 109/L]. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, procalcitonin, transaminases, total and direct bilirubin, amylase, lipase, coagulation profile were within normal range. Stool culture, testing for rotavirus, adenovirus, aerobic bacteria, clostridium difficilis toxin and antigen were negative. Hemoccult was negative on three stools specimens. Urinalysis showed increased 24-h urine protein quantification (0.37 g/24 h) and α1- macroglobulin (6.01 mg/dL) Anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, were performed in the workout for inflammatory bowel diseases and resulted negative. Anti-nuclear antibody profile (anti-ds-DNA antibody, anti-SS-A antibody, anti-Ro52 antibody, anti-SS-B antibody, etc.) was negative to differentiate from systemic lupus erythematosus. On the other hand, in the immunological laboratory tests (IgG, IgA, IgM levels, IgG subclasses, and lymphocyte subpopulations), the level of IgA is elevated, while the other levels are normal.
An abdominal ultrasound scan showed no intussusception or appendiceal swelling. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed obvious swelling in the wall of the segmental small intestine, peritonitis, and abdominal pelvic effusion.