An 86-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 3-day history of acute abdominal pain. The patient had no previous medical history. A physical examination revealed marked right upper quadrant pain with normal bowel sounds. Murphy’s sign was positive. His vital signs were within the normal range. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed an enlarged gallbladder with surrounding fatty tissue inflammation. The blood biochemistry was essentially normal, including C-reactive protein (1.9 mg/dL) and total bilirubin (1.4 mg/dL) levels. An enhanced computed tomography examination revealed an enlarged gallbladder and incarcerated gallstone. Gallbladder wall enhancement was discontinued, and the fundus of the gallbladder was located centrally beyond the round ligament . The round ligament was attached to the right umbilical portion, which was associated with the anomaly of the intrahepatic portal vein system . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrated the root of the cystic duct, while the middle portion of the cystic duct was unclear .
With the preoperative diagnosis of grade II acute gangrenous cholecystitis according to the 2018 Tokyo guidelines or gallbladder torsion, LC was planned. The first port was inserted into the umbilicus, and an enlarged and reddish gallbladder was observed. The gallbladder was swollen; however, torsion was not detected intraoperatively. The second port was placed in the epigastric area, while others were at the right hypochondriac and right lumbar regions. The gallbladder was attached to the left side of the hepatic round ligament . The cystic duct and the cystic artery were located in the normal positions. Severe inflammation and the narrow working space between the epigastric port and the gallbladder made it difficult to dissect Calot’s triangle; however, the cystic duct and the cystic artery were resected after the critical view of safety was confirmed. Due to the severe inflammation, a subtotal cholecystectomy was finally performed. The operative time was 178 min, and intraoperative blood loss was 50 mL. The pathological diagnosis was acute cholecystitis with a mucosal ulcer. The patient was discharged on the fifth day after surgery without postoperative complications.