The included case concerned a 64-year-old man who presented with a medical history of diarrhea and intermittent low-grade fever for 2 months. The patient received repeated, inadequate antibiotic treatments at other medical institutions prior to admittance to our Department of Cardiovascular Disease. The patient arrived at our Department of Cardiovascular Disease for further diagnostics because of the worsened symptoms, including dyspnea following light exertion, asthenia, and more frequent bouts of fever in the last few days.
During physical examination, the patient was conscious and responded well, in addition to having an anemic appearance and a fever of 37.5°C. A Levine's grading scale II/VI systolic blowing murmur was auscultated in the apex area. Additionally, a diastolic murmur could be heard in the second auscultation area of aortic valve. Breath sounds in both lungs were rough. In addition, the patient's heart rate was 80 beats/min, blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 18 breaths/min. Laboratory tests illustrated an increase in the white blood cell count (12.90 × 103/μL), B-type natriuretic peptide (1,367.38 pg/mL), C reactive protein (99 mg/L), and procalcitonin (0.155 mg/dL). The patient was mildly anemic with a hemoglobin level of 90 g/L. Moreover, the levels of antistreptolysin O and rheumatoid factors were both normal. Biochemical tests for antinuclear antibodies and functional tests for the thyroid were negative. Interestingly, three consecutive sets of blood cultures were all found to be negative. The thoraco-abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of bilateral pleural effusion, bilateral pulmonary inflammation, cardiac enlargement, and splenic infarction. Furthermore, the electrocardiogram revealed the presence of sinus rhythm and non-specific T-wave changes.
As the diagnosis of IE was suspected, the patient was followed-up with an ultrasonic examination. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (2D-TTE) was then performed on an EPIQ CVx cardiac ultrasound system (Epiq CVX, Philips Medical Systems, Andover, MA, United States) with a S9-2 (2–9 MHz) probe. The results illustrated a large aneurysm with the sac-like structure in the left frontal aortic root and communicated with it . However, the number of aortic cusps could not be confirmed in the short-axis view, as it was highly calcified and scattered with vegetations, leading to mild stenosis (peak systolic velocity: 2.9 m/s) . In addition, we identified a local prolapse and perforation of the aortic valve with a moderate regurgitation by multibeam . Meanwhile, there was little pericardial effusion. In addition, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter (64 mm) and left ventricular end-systolic diameter (41 mm) revealed dilatation of the left ventricle. The left ventricular ejection fraction was calculated to be 48%. Moreover, tricuspid regurgitation was mild with a pressure gradient of 43 mmHg across the tricuspid valve. There were no other valvular pathologies or other anomalies.
The three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (3D-TTE) was performed using an X5-1 (1–5 MHz) probe because the 2D-TTE cannot provide sufficient information. Based on the traditional 3DE imaging technology , we launched the new TrueVue imaging mode. The virtual light source was introduced and placed inside the aneurysm, which transmitted light from the inside out, improving the border definition . Next, we initiated the Glass mode to obtain a transparent rendering effect for further evaluation . In this mode, we can obtain a 360° display of aneurysmal morphology and deformation in the cardiac cycle with a click, as well as its neck. In addition, we can also cut off the aneurysm to observe its contour. As a whole, the dimensions of the aneurysm and neck were measured to be 3.62 cm × 2.37 cm × 2.60 cm and 0.22 cm2 in size, respectively, without obvious deformation or evidence of rupture. In addition, when the light source was strategically placed behind the aortic valve, the TrueVue imaging mode vividly revealed a bicuspid aortic valve with two leaflets in the left anterior and the right posterior directions, and a straight-line aortic valve closure shape . The left anterior leaflet prolapsed with a perforation of 0.24 cm2 .
In summary, the diagnosis of aortic valve endocarditis was suspected on the basis of characteristic echocardiographic evidence and overall clinical presentation, leading to aortic valve perforation, and prolapse, and aortic root pseudoaneurysm. Antibiotic therapy was initiated immediately with the combined use of vancomycin and gentamycin. Unfortunately, the patient's family refused to provide consent documentation for additional surgery. Despite the active medical treatment modalities, the patient eventually suffered from a sudden, unexpected death 5 days later. Given the lack of family consent, we did not perform an autopsy.