A 17-year-old Maldivian female domiciled in Sri Lanka presented with bilateral partial ptosis, fatigable proximal muscle weakness and slurring of speech noted since the age of 2 years. She recalls having difficulty in swallowing and being unable to run and play with her friends during her childhood and as she was growing up, requiring assistance to perform normal physical activities which her friends were able to do with ease, such as negotiating stairs. She particularly recalls being easily fatigued. She had been diagnosed with early childhood ‘autoimmune myasthenia gravis’ at the age of 4 years and commenced on pyridostigmine, which she had increased by herself over the years to her current regimen of 60 mg, five times a day as she had been experiencing greater fatigue with less frequent dosing. Her mother was uncertain of any definitive tests done, including acetylcholine receptor antibody status. The pyridostigmine provides her with symptomatic benefit but not completely, hence restricting her from activities that require rigorous effort. She cannot run, has difficulty negotiating stairs and rising from a seated position, and fatigues if she continues to speak at length. At times, particularly after a physically exhaustive day, she would experience blurring of vision and dysphagia, while even smiling would take much effort. Inter-current illnesses worsen her disabilities making her bed-bound and often requiring hospitalisation for specific and supportive treatment. Furthermore, she recalls that she takes longer than her friends to recover from similar illnesses. However, she has adapted within her limitations and remains independent in activities of daily living and has been able to continue with her aspired educational pathway, currently studying for a degree in forensic psychology. Her birth and past medical histories were otherwise unremarkable. There is no parental consanguinity or family history of muscle disorders .
On examination, she had a BMI of 18 kg/m2, bilateral fatigable partial ptosis, complete external ophthalmoplegia and fatigable proximal muscle weakness (MRC grade 4/5). Deep tendon reflexes were normal and there were no sensory deficits. Apart from spinal scoliosis, other systems examination was normal.
Haematological and biochemical investigations including full blood count, inflammatory markers, glucose, renal and liver function tests were normal. Serum lactate level was normal. Thyroid functions were within normal limits. Acetylcholine receptor antibodies and muscle specific kinase antibodies were not detected in serum. A decrement of >30 % was noted on repetitive nerve stimulation of facial nerves (right 2.61 to 1.39 mV and left 2.57 to 1.64 mV) and of radial nerves (right 0.55 to 0.36 mV and left 0.40 to 0.27 mV), which were done at the age of 17 years. Her DNA sequencing revealed an apparent duplication of nucleotide residues 183–187 within exon 2 of the AChR epsilon (ε) subunit gene (c.183_187dupCTCAC) .