A 26-year-old man was referred to our clinic for blurred vision and black spots in his left eye starting 3 days prior to referral. He was a healthy man with a history of allergic rhinitis and contact with cats. He reported a flu-like syndrome 2 weeks before the onset of visual symptoms which had regressed spontaneously. There were no signs of CNS involvement.
At presentation, visual acuity was 20/20, the anterior segment was unremarkable, intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal, and the vitreous cavity was clear in both eyes. Multiple deep gray-white placoid lesions in the posterior pole of both eyes were observed on fundus examination , some of which were partially pigmented.
Goldmann visual field revealed multiple small paracentral scotoma in both eyes sparing the fovea. Fluorescein angiography disclosed early hyperfluorescent lesions at the posterior pole with late staining, without macular edema or papillitis ( and ). This appearance was compatible with old lesions together with mild active inflammation. ICGA demonstrated multiple hypofluorescent lesions during the whole sequence disclosing more lesions than apparent on fundus examination and fluorescein angiography . OCT showed hyper-reflectivity and alterations at the level of the photoreceptors and RPE . The multifocal electroretinogram was normal.
Ancillary tests revealed elevated serum levels of angiotensin converting enzyme (1.5 times normal) and lysozyme (1.8 times normal). Complete blood cell count, C-reactive protein, liver and renal function tests were normal. Tuberculin skin test was positive with an induration of 10 mm, however the patient had previous BCG (bacille Calmette-Guerin) vaccination and the QuantiFERON-TB Gold test was negative. Furthermore, Syphilis, Lyme and HIV serology, antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) were all negative. Chest CT scan showed moderate hilar lymph node calcifications without adenomegaly and abdominal CT scan was normal.
Bronchoalveolar lavage disclosed an inflammatory mucosa and macrophage alveolitis, compatible with smoking. Bronchial biopsies were normal. Accessory salivary gland biopsy disclosed an epithelioid and gigantocellular granulomatous reaction without caseum confirming the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
Twelve days after referral, the patient presented with the same symptoms in the fellow eye. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, and the anterior segments and IOP were also normal. Mild bilateral vitritis was noted and fundus examination revealed stable lesions which were more pigmented on the left side. Visual field had improved in the left eye and was normal in the right eye.
The patient was monitored every 2 weeks. Symptoms were decreasing and visual field defects were improving but the patient still complained of visual discomfort. Echocardiography disclosed severe cardiac involvement explaining his dyspnea. Based on cardiac alterations and after multidisplinary consultation, cyclophosphamide was initiated together with high dose systemic corticosteroids followed by slow tapering after stabilization. Visual discomfort decreased and visual acuity remained stable within two years of follow- up, with no further ocular relapses.