A 28-year-old Caucasian sailor man, born and living in Cachoeiras de Macacu, RJ, was in a recreational camp with a group of friends when he spotted a snake on the ground. A biologist present on the camp captured the animal with his bare hands believing it was a false coral snake . The snake was photographed and imprudently manipulated by many people in the camp, including the patient, who was bitten on the back of the right hand, between the thumb and index finger around 1:00 p.m.
A few minutes later, the patient complained of mild local pain. During the afternoon, due to the beginning of visual disturbances, the friends of the victim took him to the city hospital, 20 km away from the camp. On admission, 6 h after the accident, he received 1000 mL of 0.9% NaCl saline solution and 500 mg hydrocortisone intravenously. Since the health unit did not have antielapidic serum (AES), the patient was transferred to the Hospital das Clínicas Constantino Ottaviano, in the city of Teresópolis, RJ, where he arrived around 8 h following the accident.
At that moment, the patient was presenting neurotoxic manifestations such as bilateral palpebral ptosis, diplopia, dysphagia and tongue paresthesia, in addition to low back pain. Vital signs were all within normal range (body temperature 36.7 °C, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse 78 bpm, and breathing rate 16 bpm). On the bite site , there were no signs of local damage, such as edema or hyperemia. The patient received 100 mL of AES, divided into two doses of 50 mL each. Five vials (10 mL each) were sent from the Sul Fluminense University Hospital, Vassouras, RJ (140 km away) and the other five vials were from the Oswaldo Cruz Foundation, FioCruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ (95 km away).
The two steps of serum therapy were diluted in 0.9% NaCl saline solution and infused intravenously in 40 min without any adverse reactions. The patient was then admitted at the intensive care unit for 1 day for close cardiovascular and respiratory monitoring, and two more days in in-patient care unit, where he evolved with clinical improvement. Laboratory tests were performed during 3 days of hospitalization , and showed no major or specific alterations, except for a small unspecific rise in plasma creatine kinase (CK) activity. The patient remained asymptomatic and was discharged on the fourth day of hospitalization.