A 52-year-old male with hypertension and diabetes mellitus visited the Department of Cardiology complaining of chest pain. The pain started one month prior and was worsening, with the patient reporting 8 points on the numeric rating scale (NRS, 0 = no pain, 10 = maximum pain). Coronary angiography (CAG) revealed 90% stenosis of the distal right coronary artery (dRCA). PCI was successfully performed on the dRCA, resulting in pain improvement.
However, despite the treatment, the patient revisited the hospital several times because of recurrent chest pain. As a result, CAGs were performed up to seven times over the following three years. Nevertheless, none of the CAG showed any significant interval changes. Moreover, none of the medications that had been administered thus far, including aspirin, clopidogrel, ticagrelor, trimetazidine, nicorandil, candesartan, bisoprolol, nebivolol, ezetimibe, and rosuvastatin, were effective. Thus, the cardiologist concluded that the pain was no longer of cardiac origin.
The patient was then referred to the Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine. The pain was continuous, tightening, and dull, mainly in the left chest area, and radiated to the left shoulder (NSR, 3–4). However, he also had an irregular, intermittent episode of severe pain that lasted for 4–10 h, approximately twice a week (NRS, 10). No aggravating or alleviating factors were identified.
Despite administering painkillers, including acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, tramadol, opioids, gabapentin, buprenorphine, and two stellate ganglion blocks, the pain did not subside. Thus, the pain was considered refractory to any treatment modality, including pharmacological medications, PCI, and nerve blocks. Therefore, we planned for SCS as a viable therapeutic alternative.
For trial stimulation, a 14-G epidural needle was inserted at the thoracic vertebra (T) 6–7 level under fluoroscopic guidance, through which an octa-lead was advanced until the electrode reached the T1–2 level . The electrode was then connected to an external impulse generator, and the stimulus of the tonic waveform was applied to provoke symptoms at the pain site.
In the 14-day trial program, both tonic (frequency of 20 or 30 Hz, pulse width of 500 µs, and amplitude of 1.0–2.0 mA) and burst stimulation (five pulses at 500 Hz, 40 bursts/s, and amplitude of 0.3 mA) were tested. Although the patient reported similar reduction in background pain with both waveforms (NRS, 2–3), only the tonic waveform effectively alleviated the two episodes of breakthrough chest pain (NRS, 7–8). Therefore, he was more satisfied with the immediate response to the severe breakthrough chest pain.
Therefore, permanent implantation was performed. A permanent pulse generator (Proclaim XR, Abbott) was implanted subcutaneously into the left lower quadrant of the abdomen .
However, the patient complained of a persistent tingling sensation. Thus, we decided to use the burst waveform for background pain and switch to the tonic waveform in the event of sudden severe pain (the patient was instructed to change the waveform on his own). The results of this treatment approach were successful.
In contrast, when the amplitude of tonic stimulation was increased from 1.0–2.0 mA to 2.0–3.0 mA, breakthrough pain diminished substantially without notable side effects. However, when the amplitude of burst stimulation was increased from 0.3 mA to 0.4 mA, background pain decreased to near zero, but headache occurred. Therefore, with the amplitude of tonic stimulation increased to 2.0–3.0 mA and the amplitude of burst stimulation maintained at 0.3 mA, the patient’s pain could be managed effectively.
Three months after discharge, the two modes (tonic and burst) were appropriately applied as required, and both background and breakthrough pain were well controlled. The patient also reported that the incidence of sudden severe pain had decreased from approximately twice per week to approximately twice per month. In addition, even when the pain occurred, he reported that the intensity decreased to NRS 7–8 from the previous NRS 10. Even in this case, when tonic waveform was applied, the pain quickly disappeared; therefore, the patient did not require painkillers and did not revisit the emergency room after the treatment.