A 41-year-old male, who had clinical T4NxM0 intermediate to highly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the mid-thoracic esophagus, was managed by a multidisciplinary team consisting of surgeons, oncologists, radiologists, and dietitians. Patient underwent a combined thoracoscopic-laparoscopic esophagectomy with cervical anastomosis at Peking Union Medical College Hospital. Patient had no other comorbidities. According to the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) scale, his performance status was rated as 1. The preoperative nutritional assessment showed a body mass index of 23.2 kg/m², and a serum albumin level of 37 g/L, suggestive of an adequate nutritional status. The operation involved a 3-stage approach under general anesthesia. A single-lumen endotracheal tube was utilized, and a bronchial blocker was deployed for lung isolation. The thoracic stage of the surgical procedure involved thoracoscopic mobilization of the esophagus and regional lymphadenectomy (right recurrent laryngeal nerve nodes, left recurrent laryngeal nerve nodes, upper thoracic paraesophageal lymph nodes, and subcarinal lymph nodes). Notably, thoracic duct ligation was not performed. During the abdominal stage, the gastric mobilization and tubularization were performed through laparoscopic surgery. Lymph node dissection was conducted along the celiac and gastric vessels. A jejunostomy catheter was inserted to facilitate postoperative enteral feeding. The cervical stage involved the mobilization of the cervical esophagus and the creation of an esophagogastric anastomosis. The anastomosis was routinely performed using a circular stapler (Panther Healthcare, Beijing, China). Cervical lymphadenectomy was also performed. Vital signs were stable intraoperatively. Histopathology revealed ypT3N0M0. R0 resection was successfully achieved. Patient was transferred to the intensive care unit postoperatively.
On postoperative day (POD) 1, about 19-hour after the surgery, patient experienced a sudden onset of hemodynamic instability. In retrospect, subtle signs such as a slight decline of blood pressure and increase of heart rate were observed in the early postoperative period, which might have signified the beginning of the complication. However, these symptoms were initially attributed to the normal postoperative course. Echocardiography revealed a large pericardial effusion, necessitating prompt intervention to address cardiac tamponade. Thus, preparations were made for acute pericardiocentesis and central venous catheter insertion. Unfortunately, patient deteriorated rapidly and went into cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was promptly initiated, and the patient was resuscitated to sinus rhythm after 2 min of intensive CPR, with a palpable carotid artery beat. Emergency pericardiocentesis was then performed using the ultrasound-guided Seldinger technique via an apical approach. About 200 ml of sanguineous fluid was successfully drained from the pericardial space. Analysis of the pericardial fluid showed a white blood cell count of 13.56 × 109/L with 2.25 × 109/L lymphocytes. Both cultures and cytology were negative.
The pericardial drain was left for continuous drainage of the pericardial effusion. The drainage was initially serous, with an approximate volume of 1500 ml daily. On POD 3, patient was commenced on glucose administration via the jejunostomy catheter. On POD 5, a significant change of the drain was observed following the administration of enteral nutritional emulsion (TP). The fluid became milky in consistency. Upon further examination of the pericardial effusion, the triglyceride level was found to be 5.65 mmol/L and the total cholesterol level was 1.04 mmol/L, yielding a cholesterol to triglyceride ratio of less than 1. The presence of fat globules was reviewed through the Sudan III staining. These results confirmed the diagnosis of chylopericardium. Patient was subsequently kept nil by mouth. Intravenous fluids and electrolyte replacement were commenced.
Over the next 3 days, patient remained to have high-volume output in the pericardial drainage, ranging from 1050 ml to 1710 ml per day. On POD8, patient returned to operating theatre for a right-sided thoracoscopic thoracic duct ligation. The thoracic duct was dissected at the level of the inferior pulmonary vein, between the odd vein and the descending aorta. It was then double ligated with Hem-O-lock (Teleflex, Limerick, USA) in a low position. Pericardial fenestration was not performed because of the existence of a pericardial drainage tube.
Following the thoracic catheter ligation, patient’s pericardial drainage showed a significant reduction, with the daily amount decreasing to less than 100 ml. On POD 3 following the second surgery, the drainage tube was safely removed. Patient’s postoperative progression following the second operation was unremarkable, without the recurrence of cardiac tamponade or chyle leakage after resuming a regular diet. Patient was kept under observation for an extended period to monitor recovery, as well as receiving ongoing review by allied health including physiotherapists and dietitians. Patient was discharged home on POD31 of the first surgery.
Patient was followed up for a period of 2 years and 7 months post-surgery, during which he successfully managed his recovery at home, tolerating a full oral diet. The comprehensive follow-up protocol, which considered both physical and psychological aspects, included clinical evaluations every 3 months for the first year, then every 6 months thereafter. In addition to assessing cardiac function, nutritional status, and signs of recurrence of chylopericardium or malignancy through regular echocardiography, blood tests, and necessary imaging studies, psychological wellbeing was also monitored. This was particularly important due to the unexpected, life-threatening complications that initially led to episodes of anxiety and distress for the patient. However, with consistent psychological support from the healthcare team, including counseling and reassurance, patient gradually improved from the psychological perspective. Approximately 1-year post-surgery, the patient’s physical and mental states had essentially returned to baseline levels. Throughout the entire follow-up period, no signs of recurrent chylopericardium, cardiac tamponade, or cancer relapse were observed.