A 37-year-old Asian housewife was brought to the emergency about one and half an hour after drinking of one bottle (60 ml) of organophosphate insecticide in a suicidal attempt. She had previous psychiatric illness manifested as depression and occasional phobia following unemployment and since delivery of an autistic child. She had presented to us with vomiting, excessive retching and diarrhoea. She had miosis, hypersalivation and bilateral crepitation on chest. Gastric lavage was given immediately after admission. 2.4 mg (4 ampoules) atropine was started and the dose was doubled every 10 minutes until full atropinization. A total 60 ampoules (36 mg) atropine was required for atropinization and then patient was kept under maintenance dose of atropine in intravenous (IV) drip. Injectable Pralidoxime was also given for the first 24 hours. On third (3rd) day again the cholinergic symptoms re-appeared and re-atropinization with bolus dose was required. Complete blood count (CBC), electro cardiogram (ECG) and serum electrolyte on 3rd day were normal. On fifth (5th) day of maintaining atropine therapy the patient complained of generalized weakness, inability to control the neck and to sit or stand without support. But there was no respiratory muscle involvement and all deep tendon reflexes were normal. On the same day the patient was also complaining of severe upper abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. There was marked tenderness around the epigastrium, but the abdomen was soft with normal bowel sounds. Investigations at that time revealed (Table ) white blood cell (WBC) count 30,000/cu mm with neutrophil count 86%, serum lipase 770 unit/Liter (U/L), serum alanine transaminase (ALT) 379 U/L and serum potassium 3.0 mmol/L. ECG and serum creatinine were normal. Ultra-sonogram of the hepato-billiary system (HBS) revealed swollen pancreas.
On the basis of above mentioned clinical, biochemical and radiological findings the diagnosis of OP induced acute pancreatitis with intermediate syndrome was made. The patient was managed with I/V antibiotic, adequate analgesics and nasogastric feeding. A total 10 days of atropine therapy was required. After consultation with department of Physical Medicine, appropriate physiotherapy was started. We also consulted with psychiatry department and antidepressant drugs along with psychotherapy were given. The patient was discharged from hospital with good general condition and is now on regular follow-up with complete recovery of weakness.