A 60-year-old female patient presented to our emergency department on June 12th, 2023 with a complaint of upper abdominal pain persisting for the past two weeks. Abdominal ultrasound in an external hospital revealed cholecystitis with sandy gallbladder stones. The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension and had been managing her asthma for more than 4 years with appropriate treatment. Additionally, the patient had experienced a rash-like allergic reaction when previously using omeprazole and rabeprazole injection solutions.
In the emergency room, the patient was treated with fluids. After the first dose of intravenous infusion of flurbiprofen ester was completed, the patient developed symptoms including cold sweats, chest tightness, shortness of breath, fatigue, red rashes on the trunk, accompanied by itching, mainly on the lower extremities. This was followed by prolonged chest pain, described as dull, and approximately 15 min later, then the patient experienced confusion and collapsed to the ground. She was immediately transferred to the resuscitation room for treatment. Upon arrival in the resuscitation room, the patient was conscious with a blood pressure of 75/49 mmHg, a heart rate of 58 bpm, peripheral oxygen saturation around 80%, and tenderness in the umbilical area. The patient was treated with intravenous administration of diluted methylprednisolone 40 mg, intravenous administration of dexamethasone 5 mg, subcutaneous injection of epinephrine 0.5 mg, and intravenous drip of metaraminol bitartrate injection.
An electrocardiogram showed ST segment elevation of 0.2–0.3 mV in leads II, III, and aVF, and depression of 0.1–0.2 mV in leads I and aVL . Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.39, a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 38.0 mmHg, a partial pressure of oxygen of 42.0 mmHg, an oxygen saturation of 72.1%, and a lactate level of 1.7 mmol/L. The white blood cell count was 6.0 × 109/L (normal range: 3.5–9.5 × 109/L), lymphocyte count was 2.5 × 109/L (normal range: 1.1–3.2 × 109/L), eosinophil count was 0.39 × 109/L (normal range: 0.02–0.52 × 109/L), and eosinophil percentage was 6.5% (normal range: 0.4%–8.0%). Creatine kinase isoenzyme was 1.88 ng/ml (normal range: <3.77 ng/ml), myoglobin was 25 ng/ml (normal range: 25–58 ng/ml), troponin T was 4 pg/ml (normal range: <30 pg/ml), and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was 174 pg/ml (normal range: <300 pg/ml). Liver and kidney function tests and coagulation tests were normal. Acute myocardial infarction was suspected, and the patient was treated with subcutaneous injection of heparin 3,000 units, oral ticagrelor tablets 180 mg, and oral aspirin tablets 300 mg. Emergency coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis or thrombus in the coronary arteries . Thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) blood flow grade III was observed. After coronary angiography, the patients' heart rate was maintained at around 80 bpm and blood pressure around 100/60 mmHg. Post-angiography electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm, and the ST segment elevation in the inferior leads decreased . A bedside echocardiogram indicated no obvious segmental wall motion abnormalities in the left ventricle.
Based on the patient's medical history, physical symptoms, and relevant laboratory findings, coronary spasm due to flurbiprofen ester allergy (Kounis syndrome) was considered. Post-angiography, the patient was treated with cetirizine 10 mg once daily for 3 days, as well as specific treatments such as hepatobiliary drugs, anti-infection therapy, and myocardial nutrition therapy. On the third day, the patient's NT-proBNP levels significantly increased , and furosemide was administered for diuresis while controlling fluid replacement. Then the patient's condition improved, and she was discharged on the 7th day. The follow-up echocardiogram before discharge showed good motion of all segments of the left ventricular wall, with a left ventricular end-diastolic diameter of 42 mm and an ejection fraction of 65%. At the 2-month follow-up, the patient reported no recurrence of chest tightness or chest pain and expressed satisfaction with the treatment.