A male 65-year-old resident of Brasília, Federal District, Brazil, presented with an erythematous plaque on his nose one month after fishing in the state of Amazonas, Brazil . Samples from the lesion aspirate were inoculated and cultured in McNeal, Novy & Nicolle medium, and smears from the skin biopsies were positive for Leishmania. Total DNA from isolated parasites in the culture was purified for molecular analysis using the ITS1 PCR amplification and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) procedures with the HaeIII restriction enzyme , which identified the species as L. (L.) amazonensis. The Leishmania skin test (LST) and indirect immunofluorescence results were negative. Microscopic analysis of biopsy showed vacuolated macrophages filled with amastigote forms. All diagnostic procedures are described elsewhere (, ). HIV serology was negative.
The patient was initially treated with NMG (20 mg SbV/kg/day) for 20 days; however, no improvement was observed . The treatment was continued with the administration of 26.775 g that did not result in any improvement. After one month of not undergoing treatment, the patient resumed treatment with 20 mg SbV/kg/day NMG combined with allopurinol (1,200 mg/day). The NMG treatment was stopped after the administration of a 44.625 g dose due to intense myalgia. However, the patient resumed treatment one week later until the total dose reached 53.55 g. We submitted this report 14 months after the administration of the first dose of NMG. The patient was still using allopurinol at that time. To determine the possible causes of this antigen-specific immune dysfunction, we performed ex vivo and in vitro flow cytometric analysis of the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of this patient. In this way, after the patient has undergone 11 months of treatment, being only administered allopurinol and presented with no lesion, we collected peripheral blood for immunological analysis. PBMCs were obtained through Ficoll gradient purification and analyzed ex vivo and in vitro after 48 h of stimulation with soluble L. (L.) amazonensis antigen (SLA). In ex vivo and in vitro experiments, the cells were stained with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies to analyze the surface molecules [CD14, CD40, CD44, CD80, programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1), HLA-DR, CD86, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD45RO, CD45RA, and CD25]. For the in vitro experiment, positive control cells were stimulated with concanavalin A (conA). Cellular viability was assessed using Annexin V and propidium iodide (PI) labeling, acquired by flow cytometry (Verse/BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and analyzed using FlowJo software (FlowJo, Ashland, OR, USA). To evaluate the production of intracellular molecules (IFN-γ and granzyme B), Brefeldin A was added to stop protein secretion 4 h before the staining and observation by flow cytometry. The ex vivo (SLA unstimulated) experiments showed that the monocytes expressed higher percentages of CD14, CD40, CD44, HLA-DR, and CD86 and lower percentages of CD80 and PD-L1 . The in vitro experiments showed that the cells were viable, and no differences in the cell death markers were found between the SLA-treated cells and negative controls (unstimulated) . We observed an increase in the expression of the inhibitory molecule PD-L1 in the monocytes restimulated in vitro with SLA (approximately 65%), whereas the negative controls were 35% positive for PD-L1 . Additionally, 8.32% of the negative control cells were CD4+IFN-γ+, but this percentage decreased to 1.7% after SLA stimulation. Analysis of the negative controls showed that 14% of the cells were CD8+IFN-γ+, but this percentage decreased to 1% after SLA restimulation. We also observed a relevant decrease in granzyme B expression in CD8+ T cells, from 31% in the negative controls to 5% after SLA restimulation .