A 45-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with acute chest pain and difficulty in breathing for 2 h. Her past medical history was notable for an orthopedic surgical procedure and a confirmed pulmonary embolism, which was managed with thrombolytic therapy in the acute phase and oral anticoagulation treatment (rivaroxaban 15 mg bid for 1 month; 20 mg qd thereafter). Physical examination showed normal BP (110/64 mmHg) and rales in the lungs. On admission, she underwent an ECG , which showed ST elevation in the inferior wall leads. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated inferior wall hypokinesis and mildly increased pulmonary artery pressure (35 mmHg), with normal cardiac function (EF, 63%). Cardiac injury biomarkers were as follows: cardiac troponin I (cTnI) 0.06 ng/ml ↑, myoglobin 12.0 ug/ml ↑. Other tests showed elevated D-dimers level (2910 ng/mL ↑), and blood gas test showed decreased PO2 (55 mmHg) and normal PCO2 (26 mmHg). An emergency cardioangiogram (CAG) revealed acute occlusion of the posterolateral artery (PL) , and CTA of the pulmonary arteries revealed acute pulmonary embolism .
Based on the symptoms, past medical history, CAG, and pulmonary CTA findings, the patient was diagnosed with acute inferior wall STEMI, Killip class I, acute pulmonary embolism (intermediate-risk group), and type I respiratory failure.
In consideration of the need for coronary intervention, after embolus aspiration, coronary flow returned to TIMI grade 3, and no residual stenosis or plaque remained . Intracoronary imaging was recommended to confirm the cause of the acute occlusion, but it was declined by the patient. No balloon dilation or stent implantation was performed.
The relationship between AMI and PE in this patient is unknown. On lower extremity vascular ultrasound, rheumatic disease-related embolism and tumor-related emboli were ruled out. Because of the concern engendered by the increase in pulmonary artery pressure, a bubble study was not recommended (owing to the risk of further increase in pulmonary artery pressure) by the echocardiologist, and paradoxical embolism could not be ruled out.
Triple antithrombotic therapy was recommended (aspirin, clopidogrel, and factor Xa inhibitor for one month; clopidogrel and factor Xa inhibitor until one year; factor Xa inhibitor lifelong). At the one-month follow-up, pulmonary CTA showed no residual embolism . Echocardiography revealed normal pulmonary artery pressure. A bubble study showed > 10 bubbles crossing into the LA in one cardiac cycle , which was considered an echocardiographic feature of paradoxical embolism . Paradoxical embolism via the interatrial channel was considered the etiology of the chest pain, and patent foramen ovale (PFO) closure was performed for this patient . Additionally, the antithrombotic strategy was changed to an anticoagulant (factor Xa inhibitor) only. Three-month and 6-month telephone follow-ups showed good recovery.