A 23-year-old woman with no known past medical history was found in pulseless ventricular fibrillation arrest and received cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), two defibrillations, and intravenous lidocaine by emergency responders. Upon hospital arrival, her QTc was 554 ms with a cove-like ST-elevation pattern . Toxicology studies were negative.
The patient underwent targeted temperature management (TTM) to preserve neurologic function. An echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 10–15% with diffuse hypokinesis and a hypercontractile apex, most consistent with a stress-induced cardiomyopathy, and she was initiated on dobutamine. After completion of TTM and extubation, she experienced recurrent torsades de pointes (TdP) (QTc 613 ms) requiring three electrical cardioversions .
Following these cardioversions, she developed worsening hypotension and was determined by the transferring facility to be in cardiogenic shock [blood pressure (BP) 84/34 mmHg, heart rate 109 b.p.m.]. Cardiogenic shock was felt to be secondary to recurrent, pulseless, electrical instability from TdP. A bedside echocardiogram demonstrated worsening left ventricular hypokinesis with an LVEF of 5–10%, likely related to worsening stress-induced cardiomyopathy. She was intolerant of increased inotropes due to recurrent arrhythmias, which persisted despite lidocaine administration. Amiodarone was avoided given concerns of further QTc-prolongation.
Given the clinical impression of cardiogenic shock and recurrent pulseless arrhythmias, the transferring facility placed an Impella® 2.5 mechanical circulatory support device via the right femoral artery. She was then transferred to University of North Carolina Medical Center (UNCMC) for further management. In transfer, new information obtained by interviewing the patient’s significant other indicated she had acutely ingested high doses of loperamide, in addition to previous chronic loperamide ingestion.
Upon arrival to UNCMC, persistent episodes of TdP were managed with intravenous magnesium boluses and increased lidocaine infusion rates. Overdrive pacing with a temporary pacemaker was considered at this time, but her rhythm subsequently stabilized. Her QTc shortened over the subsequent days, and her BP normalized as she remained free of arrhythmias. Her mechanical circulatory support and lidocaine infusion were subsequently weaned.
Following removal of the Impella®, she experienced two spontaneous haemorrhages at the right femoral arteriotomy site. The second episode was managed by balloon tamponade. After apparent haemostasis and angiographic resolution of her bleed, she developed worsening hypotension. Her haemoglobin acutely decreased to a nadir of 4.1 g/dL. A computed tomography scan demonstrated a large subcapsular liver haematoma and a right common iliac vein deep vein thrombosis (DVT). She was subsequently noted to have bilateral radial artery thrombosis. Argatrobran was started due to concern for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia with thrombosis (HITT). Her platelet factor 4 antibody was positive, and a ventilation/perfusion scan found multiple small pulmonary embolisms (PEs).
Her oxygen requirement and thrombocytopenia improved with argatroban. After extubation, she admitted to taking up to 80 tablets of loperamide 2 mg (160 mg total) at a time in pursuit of intoxication. She had been practicing this behaviour for years after discovering it on the Internet and was unaware of potential complications. She was discharged on dabigatran for multiple PEs and DVT in the context of HITT.
In follow-up, the patient appeared well and had normalization of laboratory values, electrocardiogram, and LVEF .