Following a traffic accident as a vehicle passenger, a 50-year old female patient with a 10-year history of diabetes mellitus was monitored for 10 days in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) with a diagnosis of multiple rib fractures, minimal pleural fluid, bilateral clavicular, right sacrum and left superior pubis arm fractures and haemorrhagic contusion in the left temporal area. According to AO classification the clavicular fractures were type 15-B2.3 on the right side and type 15-B1.3 on the left side . With a diagnosis of fragmented fracture in the mid third section of both clavicles, open reduction under general anaesthesia and fixation with anatomic locking clavicular plate (TST, Kurtkoy, Istanbul) (a and b) was applied to the patient on the 13th day after post-trauma. 30 min preoperatively, 1 gr cefazolin iv was administered to the patient. Postoperatively, cefazol 1 gr 3 × 1 iv was continued for 2 days. On postoperative Day 3 the patient was discharged with the recommendation of bedrest.
After discharge, the patient was followed up in the polyclinic and sutures were removed 3 weeks postoperatively. The patient did not attend further follow-ups and at the 6th month postoperatively she presented at the polyclinic with complaints, which had started first in the left and 2 days later in the right clavicle, of swelling, redness, skin heat and high temperature. Physical examination determined a temperature of 38 °C, sensitivity, increased heat and limited shoulder movement in both clavicles. Serological test results showed sedimentation 95, CRP 147, WBC 18,000, nitrite positivity in the urine test, and abundant leukocytes. In the urine culture taken from the patient, 100,000 colonies Escherichia coli reproduction was seen. On the MRI taken of both shoulders, abscess formation and appearance compatible with osteomyelitis were seen . During the operation, cultures were taken from soft tissue and the clavicles and the clavicular plates were removed. 2.7 mm drilling was made with forage on the osteomyelitis skip foci determined on the preoperative MRI, and cleaning was made with curettes and plentiful saline solution. Postoperatively, cefazol 1 gr 3 × 1 and genta 160 mg 1 × 1 iv were started. As E. coli and Pseudomonas reproduction was determined in the cultures taken intraoperatively, Targocid 400 mg 1 × 1 and Meronem 1 gr 3 × 1 iv were started from the 5th day conforming with the Infectious Diseases Dept. antibiogram. On the 20th day of antibiotherapy, the patient was again admitted for surgery due to discharge in the wound areas, which was more pronounced on the left side.
As the mid-third of the left clavicle was seen to be sclerotic and infected, a piece approximately 20 mm in size was excised as far as bleeding bone (paprika sign) from the left clavicle and washed with plentiful saline . The wounds were closed by placing collagen with gentamycin wrapped around both clavicles. Reproduction of E. coli and Pseudomonas was seen in the cultures of the material taken intraoperatively. After consultation with the Infectious Diseases Department, the patient was admitted to the relevant clinic for planned treatment. A 45-day period of Tazocin 4.5 2 × 1 iv was started. Antibiotherapy was terminated when the wound sites were clinically problem-free and laboratory findings returned to normal values after the parenteral antibiotherapy. The patient was discharged with follow-up appointments at the polyclinic. At the follow-up 26 weeks after the trauma, there were no findings of infection. The movements of both shoulders were normal and the DASH score was measured at 40 (a–c).