Five month old boy born to second degree consanguineous parents was brought for evaluation of global developmental delay since birth, and remittent fever, recurrent seizures and vomiting since three months of age. The pregnancy had been unplanned. Though the antenatal period was uncomplicated child had a low birth weight- 2.2 kg (<− 3SD) and had evidence of symmetrical intrauterine growth retardation (OFC - 33 cm/ <5th centile, length – 46 cm/ (− 2) - (− 3) SD). He had recurrent vomiting since two months of age associated with poor weight gain. The clinical course was complicated with recurrent seizures since three months and the child had developmental regression with poor visual fixation and loss of social smile. He had remittent fever for several months with repeatedly negative septic screen following which a central cause for irregularities in thermoregulation was suspected. Later in the clinical course, he developed marked dystonia and dyskinetic movements suggesting extrapyramidal nervous system involvement. His elder sibling who had developmental regression and epileptic encephalopathy, died at 1 ½ years of age following aspiration pneumonia whilst being evaluated for a neuro-metabolic disorder.
Clinical examination at five months revealed severe growth retardation: weight – 5 kg (<−3SD), length – 59 cm (<−3SD), OFC- 39 cm (<5th centile). He had four limb spasticity and exaggerated reflexes. Electroencephalography revealed encephalopathy. Brain MRI showed multiple areas of increased T2 signal intensity with diffusion restriction involving brain stem, basal ganglia and white matter tracts and suggested widespread demyelination. Urine FeCl3 test was positive for phenylketonuria. Plasma amino acid profile revealed elevated Phenylalanine – 1245.71 μM (range 25–120 μM). Plasma Phenylalanine/ Tyrosine ratio was 21.87 (range 0.4–2.2). Blood Neopterin levels were very low – 0.01 nmol/g Hb (range: 0.19–2.93 nmol/g Hb, Haemoglobin – 9.8 g/dl) and Biopterin were not detectable (range: 0.08–1.20 nmol/g Hb, Haemoglobin – 9.8 g/dl). Dihydro Pteridine reductase activity was normal – 2 mU/mg Hb (range - > 1.1 mU/mg Hb). Plasma acylcarnitine profile and screening for other metabolic disorders were negative. Genetic studies were not performed due to lack of facilities and as the biochemical tests were sufficient enough to make the diagnosis of GTPCH 1 deficiency .
Child was commenced on Phenylalanine restricted diet with supplementation of other essential amino acids by special formula milk. Micronutrients were also supplemented. Breast feeding was continued and complementary feeds were commenced with a carbohydrate rich and phenylalanine restricted diet. L-Dopa was commenced after detection of BH4 deficiency and Tetrahydrobiopterin and 5-hydroxytryptophan were requested as they were not available. Multidisciplinary care was arranged with involvement of paediatrician, nutritionist, metabolic specialist, neurologist and geneticist. Since parents wished for a third child they were offered genetic counseling. Plasma Phenylalanine levels were monitored monthly to assess biochemical improvement. Plasma Phenylalanine level and Phenylalanine/ Tyrosine ratio at 9 months were 18.6 μM and 0.35 respectively.