A 38-year-old Caucasian woman was diagnosed with a left-sided neck nodule six months after undergoing RYGB to treat obesity. She recalled palpating a vague mass on the cervical site before her RYGB, but this mass became more pronounced only after she lost 33kg. (Her body mass index (BMI) had changed from 43.5kg/m2 to 30.5kg/m2). She reported a past history (prior to her RYGB) of a right lobectomy of the thyroid to treat a benign nodule, as well as hypertension and obstructive sleep apnea. Before undergoing the second thyroid surgery and during her first visit at our clinic, she brought laboratory results showing normal levels of calcium, phosphorus, 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D), PTH and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH).
To investigate the cervical mass, a thyroid ultrasound was performed. The scan showed a 3.1×2.2×2.0cm hypoechoic nodule on the left lobe. Subsequently an aspirative biopsy was obtained. Cytopathology suggested a Hurthle cell lesion. Total thyroidectomy was indicated and hence carried out, and the diagnosis of Hurthle cell adenoma was confirmed. Immediately after surgery, the patient had hypocalcemia and required an intravenous calcium gluconate infusion to stabilize her calcemia. All of the laboratory data obtained during clinical management are provided in Table .
Two months after her total thyroidectomy, she was referred to our unit’s care center by the surgeons because of difficulties in the clinical management of hypoparathyroidism. Meanwhile, she was admitted several times to an emergency room to reverse hypocalcemia with intravenous calcium infusions. During her visit at our unit, she reported paresthesias, muscle cramps and tingling in the mouth. A physical examination revealed that she had positive Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s signs. Her serum calcium and phosphorus levels were 5.9mg/dl and 7.1mg/dl, respectively. Her TSH level was 16.6μUI/ml. She was being treated with levothyroxine 100μg/day, calcium carbonate 7.5g/day, oral calcitriol 2.0μg twice daily and a multivitamin tablet. Doses of levothyroxine and calcium carbonate were increased to 150μg/day and 12g/day, respectively, and magnesium oxide 400mg tablet three times per day was added. Strict instructions about sunlight exposure (20min/day) and diet were given. All these measures improved her calcium homeostasis and avoided any further hospitalization. At her three-month follow-up examination, it was discovered that her calcium level had increased and her phosphorus level had decreased (see Table ). She had a low PTH level and a normal TSH level. Her magnesium and albumin levels and renal and hepatic function were within normal ranges (NRs). We decided to change calcium carbonate to citrate (12g/day) and to add cholecalciferol (12,000IU/day).
One month later, her symptoms were partially improved, and she reported that our advice about sunlight exposure was not being completely followed. Minimal changes in laboratory data were noticed, and her urinary calcium/creatinine ratio was 0.09 (NR<0.20). Because of the large amount of tablets/pills needed for daily intake at that time, we speculated that she could be a candidate for surgical reversal of the bariatric procedure; however, she definitively rejected it, fearing weight regain. Facing this challenge, and without financial resources to cope with synthetic PTH hormone treatment, we hypothesized that the use of pancrelipase could improve fat absorption at the alimentary tract with possible positive effects on vitamin D absorption and subsequently on calcium homeostasis. To test our hypothesis, pancrelipase was added at mealtime (three times per day) (compound capsule containing 10,000 USP units of lipase, 37,500 USP units of protease and 33,200 USP units of amylase). After continuous use of pancrelipase without side effects, her symptoms gradually improved until she became totally asymptomatic. Two months later, she had serum calcium and phosphorus levels of 7.2mg/dl and 5.0mg/dl, respectively. We increased her calcium citrate dosage to 14g/day. After two months, her levels of calcium, phosphorus and 25(OH)D were 7.8mg/dl, 5.2mg/dl and 67.9μg/L, respectively. At that time, her calciuria was 62.6mg/24h (NR, 50mg/24h to 250mg/24h), and her phosphaturia was 405mg/24h (NR, 340mg/24h to 1300mg/24h). Calcitriol was subsequently reduced to 1.5μg three times daily.
Her symptoms had completely remitted at 10 months after thyroidectomy. Her levels of calcium were within, and eventually slightly below, the NR. She became pregnant, and, during the second trimester, although asymptomatic, she had hypocalcemia with normal levels of phosphorus and 25(OH)D . Calcium citrate was increased to 18g/day, which stabilized calcium homeostasis from the sixth month of pregnancy until delivery. She gave birth to a healthy newborn at term and breastfed her baby during the first six months. At present, her symptoms have remitted and her calcium, phosphorus and 25(OH)D levels are within NR. However, she still ingests an excessive daily number of tablets and/or pills (a total of 45/day). She has not regained weight (65kg; BMI, 25.7kg/m2).