A 16-month old boy with a 7-day history of fever was admitted to the pediatric ward for fever work up. Three days prior to his admission, he had suffered from bilateral bulbar, nonpurulent conjunctivitis. Prior to his admission, the patient had also been treated with two courses of oral antibiotics, azithromycin and amoxicillin with clavulanic acid. On examination, there were no signs of coryza or upper respiratory tract infection. The oral and pharyngeal mucosa were erythematous and there was unilateral cervical lymphadenopathy (measuring 1 × 1.5 cm). Abdominal exam was unremarkable. Abdominal ultrasound revealed normal liver, biliary system and spleen, and echocardiogram was normal. Blood and urine test results are summarized in Table .
Constellations of prolonged fever (more than 7 days), bilateral bulbar, nonpurulent conjunctivitis, unilateral cervical lymphadenopathy, erythematous oral and pharyngeal mucosa, erythrocyte sedimentation rate = 60, c-reactive protein = 45, anemia (Hg = 9.8), thrombocytosis (PLT = 519,000), leukocytosis (WBC = 15,100), negative urine and blood culture and history of complete vaccination (measles, mumps, and rubella [MMR] at the end of age 1) fulfilled the diagnosis of incomplete KD according to the American Heart Association (AHA) guidelines.
Once the diagnosis of atypical KD was made, the patient was commenced on intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy. Treatment protocol was 2 g/kg of IVIG over 12 h and 35 mg/kg of aspirin divided q6h for 48 h. According to the standard protocol, high-dose aspirin (80–100 mg/kg) should reduce to 30–40 mg/kg in patients with elevated liver enzymes. After 36 h, the patient’s fever subsided. Aspirin dose reduced to 3 mg/kg once daily orally until 6 wk. after illness onset. An echocardiogram was repeated in 2 weeks, which revealed normal results. In a follow-up visit, lab data showed normal blood parameters, except for a persistent AST elevation. The patient was subsequently referred to a hepatologist and a hematologist for further investigations .
The patient was seen by the hepatologist after 3 months. The patient was in good general health. The full physical examination was within normal limits and there were no signs or symptoms of liver disease. Further follow-up lab data and serial follow up tests were obtained in three to nine-month intervals. The results are summarized in Table .
Following 3 years of observation, the final investigation was performed by the polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation method. Using this test, we can differentiate macro-AST from other conditions with elevated AST. This is the best screening test for macro-AST detection . The best concentration of PEG solution is 25% (m/v) (5). In this method, we added 0.2 ml of patient’s serum to an equal volume of PEG 6000 (Merck ART 807491). After 5 min at room temperature, the serum was centrifuged for 30 min at 3000 rpm, and the clear supernatant was sent for measuring AST. The same process was performed for two control samples. Baseline AST level and post-PEG effects are shown in Table . PEG perceptible activity (%PPA) is calculated as 100x [(AST activity – AST activity +PEG)/AST activity] [, ]. The results are shown in Table . According to the literature, a threshold of 73% for PPA is standard for the diagnosis of macro-AST, and in our patient %PPA was 80% [, , ].