A 67-year-old woman (gravida-3, para-2, menopause at age 50) was referred to our hospital due to a suspicion of an endometrial cancer detected at regular follow-up. She had neither typical complications nor a family history for the disease. She exhibited no indicative symptoms, including uterine bleeding, pelvic pain, night sweats, weight loss, or fever. She did have a medical history of a cervical spine injury 2 years prior.
Pelvic ultrasound showed a mass, 5.6 cm × 3.8 cm in size, in the uterine corpus, without an adnexal mass. Endometrial biopsy revealed a grade 1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma. MRI showed invasion of the tumor into the outer half of the myometrium . Abdominal CT showed para-aortic and atypical mesentery lymphadenopathy, which was suspected to be either a metastasis of the endometrial cancer or a malignant lymphoma. PET-CT showed intense focal FDG uptake in the endometrium and multiple massive lymphadenopathies involving the mesentery and para-aortic region . Serum tumor markers were as follows: CA125 371.7 U/ml (≦ 35 U/ml) and CA19-9 98.5 U/ml (≦ 37 U/ml).
An abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, partial omentectomy, and a mesentery lymph node biopsy for endometrial cancer were performed. Frozen section of the uterus was performed. It showed a G1 endometrioid carcinoma with an invasion of under one-half of the myometrium.
We performed a pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, as we could not rule out the involvement of a metastasis of the endometrial cancer. Because we strongly suspected a synchronous malignancy to be responsible for the mesentery lymphadenopathy, we performed a selective biopsy of the mesenteric lymph nodes . The mesentery and para-aortic lymph nodes that were sent for frozen section analysis showed no metastasis of the endometrial cancer. As the preoperative imaging had indicated that the multiple mesenteric lymphadenopathy was unusual, we had previously discussed with our hematologists whether they could perform intra-operative flow cytometric analysis, which they usually performed in a post-operative clinical scenario. This procedure, including tissue dissection, antibody reaction, and flow cytometry, was expected to take approximately 60 min, so it was reasonable to attempt to perform it during surgery. Thus, in collaboration with our department of hematology, we conducted an intraoperative emergent four-color flow cytometry of the mesenteric lymphadenopathy tissue. Intraoperative flow cytometry analysis of the mesenteric lymph nodes indicated an abnormal κ/λ ratio of 0.17, resembling a B cell lymphoma. We diagnosed the patient as having an atypical mesentery adenopathy. Because, intraoperatively, we could find this mesenteric lymphadenopathy was derived from lymphoma, we avoided doing an unnecessary intestinal resection. The final pathological diagnosis was of an endometrioid carcinoma (G1, pT1aN0M0, FIGO2014: IA, ly0, v0), with a class IV peritoneal cytology from a synchronous follicular lymphoma (G1) .
The mesentery lymph node showed diffuse back to back follicles. The follicles were composed of predominantly small- to medium-sized lymphoid cells with no tingible body macrophages. Immunohistochemical studies of the lymphoma were positive for CD20, Bcl-2, and CD10 and negative for CD3 and cyclinD1. The cytogenetic study of the mesentery lymph node showed a t(14;18)(q32;q21) chromosome translocation. The beta-2 microglobulin level at diagnosis was 2.0 mg/dl (0.8–1.8 mg/dl). A bone marrow biopsy specimen showed no evidence of overt involvement from the follicular lymphoma. Because of the lymphoma’s initial indolent clinical features, the patient was followed conservatively, without additional therapy. Three months after the operation, a CT scan showed a progression of the residual lymphadenopathy , so rituximab monotherapy, with eight weekly infusions, was administrated. As of 18 months after surgery, the patient has shown no other evidence of recurrent disease.