Patient is a 60-year-old woman without past medical history. She began to experience difficulty swallowing. The dysphagia was mild initially and did not affect her life, but as time passed, it worsened, first with solids and then with liquids. Due to this, she went to several physicians. Nonetheless, all endoscopies done at that time were normal; she grew tired of the doctors, and little by little, she changed her diet, she only ate liquids, and at one point, she couldn’t even swallow her own saliva.
As a result, she suffered weight loss and was brought to a community hospital by her family.
On clinical evaluation, an underweight patient (BMI 18.5) was encountered; she had mild epigastric pain; however, no tenderness was discovered; also, no masses or lymph nodes were found at that time.
Esophageal malignancy and pseudoachalasia were included in the differential, and complementary exams were needed.
A new upper endoscopy was done; nonetheless, it didn’t reveal any pathology; therefore, a contrast-enhanced computed tomography was requested, revealing a 7,9 × 9,5 × 7,1 cm subcarinal mediastinal mass with multiple heterogeneous densities; the mass had round and regular edges, shifting the esophagus and trachea, and heart towards the left. As a result, a cardiothoracic assessment was needed, and the patient was transferred to our hospital. . With these findings, benign and malignant tumors were among the differential, including; teratoma, bronchogenic cyst, and duplication cyst. Therefore, surgery was decided.
After intubation, a bronchoscopy revealed a 30% extrinsic compression in the upper segment of the right lower pulmonary lobe , since endoscopic ultrasound wasn’t available at the time a right posterolateral thoracotomy was done. After retraction of the right lung, adequate exposure of the mediastinal mass was achieved. The mass had a thick whitish outer layer and was firmly attached to the carina, esophageal wall, and right lung. The mass was drained, obtaining 250 ml of whitish liquid, and was carefully dissected from surrounding structures.
Another endoscopy was completed prior to closure to ensure the integrity of the esophageal wall as the mass was attached to it. Two chest tubes were placed, and the procedure was completed without complications.
Pathology reported a 6.5 × 5 × 2.5 cm mass; its wall had a thickness of 0.3 cm and was enveloped by two muscular layers. A pseudostratified columnar epithelium lined it without signs of malignancy. The final diagnosis was non-communicating esophageal duplication cyst. The culture of the fluid was negative, as no bacteria were found.
Her postoperative course was uneventful, the chest tubes were removed on the third postoperative day, and she was discharged on the seventh postoperative day without complications. On follow-ups underwent full recovery; she resumed her regular diet and 6 months after surgery she regained her normal weight.