A 51-year-old South Asian (Indian) male patient presented to a peripheral hospital with right scrotal swelling of 1 year duration. The swelling has been increasing in size for 6–7 months. There is no relevant family, psychosocial, or surgical history. Past medical history is significant for diabetes mellitus for 5 years, controlled with medication (Metformin 400 mg), and negative for urinary incontinence, sexual disturbances, or hypertension. The patient does not smoke cigarettes or consume alcohol. On physical examination, a firm painless mass was palpable in the right scrotum suggestive of hydrocele with no palpable lymphadenopathy or inguinal hernias. Left testes and scrotum normal. Ultrasound findings showed features of chronic epididymitis, associated with an ill-defined heterogeneous area adjacent to the epididymis with no significant vascularity as seen in Fig. . Following this, CT abdomen was reported as peripherally enhancing fluid collection of size 2.9 × 2.2 cm in the right scrotum, by USG correlation, thick-walled septated collection in the right scrotum and right external iliac lymph node of size 1. I × 0.8 cm. Multiple calculi were seen in both kidneys, the largest measuring 6 mm on the right side and 8.2 mm on the left side. A 3.2 mm cyst was seen in the lower pole of the left kidney. There was no significant para-aortic lymphadenopathy and normal CT appearance of the liver, gall bladder, spleen, pancreas, adrenal glands, and urinary bladder was seen. There was no focal lesion to suggest metastasis. The pre-operative LDH, AFP, and beta-HCG levels were normal as seen in Table . These findings were suggestive of hydrocele and the patient underwent a right hydrocelectomy because of the rapid change in the size of the mass. Post-operative USG is seen in Fig. . During the surgery, a growth was found adhering to tunica vaginalis, and the same was excised along with the hydrocele sac. The growth was histologically confirmed as a neoplasm ) and therefore high inguinal orchidectomy was done subsequently at our center. The specimen measured 7.5 × 5.5 × 4 cm with an attached spermatic cord measuring 11 cm in length ). The cut section showed a residual grey-white tumour in the Para testicular soft tissue at the hilum, measuring 1.3 × 0.9 × 0.8 cm in size. Sections from the hydrocele sac showed a fibromuscular wall lined by atypical cells with papillary tufting , inset) along with fragments of a poorly differentiated tumour arranged in solid nests and papillary pattern. Microscopically, the tumour contained papillary structures with confluent sheets and nests of tumour cells and necrotic areas. The tumour cells are crowded with indistinct cell borders, having clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm and vesicular pleomorphic nuclei with prominent nucleoli. Brisk mitosis was present and (V, VI)). Immunohistochemistry was done to elucidate the nature of the tumour ). A PET CT was done to rule out distant spread, suggesting the possibility of residual disease. Testis and epididymis were uninvolved.
Immunohistochemical studies showed positive staining of the tumour cells for CK, CK7 ), Calretinin ) and WT1 ). CK20, Inhibin, CD30, and Glypican 3 were negative. The pathology report indicated malignant mesothelioma of the right tunica vaginalis, a poorly differentiated variant as seen in Figs. and . Although, the lymphovascular invasion was present, epididymis, testes, and spermatic cord showed no infiltrates. The patient was given 6 cycles of pemetrexed and carboplatin once in 3 weeks. Reassessment imaging studies showed a complete treatment response. Therefore, we have been following up with the patient in our OPD to date as seen in Table . All follow-up visits have shown no clinical symptoms of tumour growth, and no indication is seen on radiological investigations.