A 64-year-old-male with a history of type II diabetes mellitus and surgical lumbar decompression in 2013 presented to the emergency department (ED) for left leg swelling. His lumbar decompression was complicated by a methicillin resistant S aureus infection requiring multiple surgical washouts and intravenous antibiotics. After surgical washouts in 2013, he was transitioned to suppressive doxycycline until 2019. Shortly after stopping the doxycycline the patient developed a new paraspinal abscess requiring interventional radiology drainage and further antibiotics in 2019. He was placed back on suppressive doxycycline and did well until 2022.
Beginning in late 2022 the patient began to have recurrent fevers and lumbar back pain. He was subsequently diagnosed with a small lumbar paraspinal abscess and was treated with six weeks of vancomycin and gentamicin via a percutaneous indwelling central catheter (PICC). However, his symptoms persisted, and he developed new-onset, isolated left lower extremity edema. This new symptom prompted an ED presentation. This department had no access to the patient’s previous imaging or records except for one computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis in the picture archiving and communication system. The patient had reported a possible “groin aneurysm,” but these images were formally reviewed and showed no evidence of aneurysm.
On presentation, the patient reported subjective dyspnea but appeared comfortable in bed. Vital signs showed mild hypertension but no other abnormalities. Exam was remarkable for isolated, non-pitting edema of the left leg from mid-thigh to foot. The left lower extremity was warm, had normal pulses, and no motor or sensory abnormalities.
Initial work-up for deep venous thrombosis (DVT) with Doppler ultrasound was negative. Labs showed no leukocytosis, mild anemia with a hemoglobin 11.5 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 13.5–17.0 g/dL) and a C-reactive protein elevated at 68.44 milligrams per liter (mg/L) (0.00–10.90 mg/L). Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed moderate left hydronephrosis with mid-ureter obstruction within a prevertebral fluid collection spanning the third lumbar to first sacral vertebra with possible ureter leak. This fluid collection partially encircled the inferior vena cava (IVC) and bilateral common iliac veins and contacted the posterior wall of the infrarenal aorta. It also extended to contact the posterior wall of the rectum where there was concern for possible fistulous connection .
Considering these findings, both urology and the orthopedic spine team were consulted. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging of the spine did not show evidence of an acute process, and no surgical interventions were recommended. Computed tomography cystogram showed no evidence of ureter leak. The urologist felt the obstruction was likely a partial stricture, and the urology team followed the patient during his hospital stay. The patient did not require any urologic intervention.
Due to the complexity of the patient and imaging findings, the images were reviewed with the attending radiologist on call who noted possible evidence of left common iliac DVT and possible common iliac arterial wall abnormalities. The decision was made to obtain a dedicated CT angiogram (CTA) of the pelvis. The CTA was concerning for a left common iliac artery mycotic pseudoaneurysm (MPA) within a prevertebral lumbosacral abscess .
The patient was taken to the operating room with vascular surgery where he underwent placement of a left common iliac artery stent as well as left femoral artery cutdown and repair. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis with rectal contrast showed no evidence of fistulous connection to the rectosigmoid wall. Definitive repair was completed four days later with right common femoral artery to left superficial femoral artery bypass, IVC filter placement, sartorius myoplasty, and left common iliac artery embolization.
His blood cultures were positive for P mirabilis, which was thought to be the culprit of the MPA. His treatment included a prolonged course of vancomycin and ceftriaxone. The patient had a remote history of S aureus infection associated with his spinal hardware, but the prevertebral infection was not directly sampled during this presentation.
He was discharged six weeks after presentation with prescriptions for continued home intravenous (IV) antibiotics via PICC. Review of his three-month follow-up appointment revealed the patient was continuing to do well.