A 51-year-old Caucasian Greek woman had a routine liver ultrasound examination following a history of large-bowel polypectomies. Multiple hypoechoic liver lesions were found, the largest of which, on segment VI, measured 2.2 cm. The patient was asymptomatic, and her physical examination was unremarkable. Routine laboratory examinations showed no abnormal findings. Apart from her history of large-bowel polypectomies, she only had a history of appendectomy 35 years ago and bilateral saphenectomy 23 years ago. To avoid exposing the patient to ionizing radiation, the referring physician decided to further evaluate the lesions with MRI of the abdomen, which demonstrated a total of eight liver lesions in both lobes. The lesions had reduced signaling on T1-weighted sequences and increased signaling on T2-weighted sequences. They did not show enhancement in the arterial phase and had reduced enhancement compared to the normal liver parenchyma in the portal venous phase. On the basis of these features, metastatic liver disease was considered as the first-line diagnosis. MRI did not show any other abnormal findings.
To reveal the primary lesion, the patient was further investigated with gastroscopy, colonoscopy, and computed tomography (CT) of the head, lung, and abdomen, all of which were unremarkable. Fine-needle aspiration under CT guidance was performed on the lesion in segment VI. The cytology was positive for malignancy, the type of which, though, could not be defined. Diagnostic laparoscopy was then performed, and the anterior superficial lesion in segment II was resected. The biopsy specimen submitted for pathological examination showed metastatic cancer with features of primary disease from a cystic adenoid carcinoma of the salivary gland. Neck CT was performed, which revealed a 1.5 cm hypodense area on the left submandibular gland , thus confirming the diagnosis.
The left submandibular gland was removed with clear surgical margins, and the patient was started on chemotherapy treatment with cisplatin, doxorubicin, and epirubicin. Three months later a new liver MRI scan showed disease progression, and the chemotherapy was switched to a combination of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), cisplatin, and cyclophosphamide. After 3 more months, MRI demonstrated further enlargement of the liver lesions, with the diameter of the biggest of them measuring 10 cm .
At that time, chemoembolization with DC beads loaded with doxorubicin was considered the best therapeutic option. Two sessions were performed two months apart, and 150 mg of doxorubicin, loaded into DC beads 300 mm to 500 mm and 500 mm to 700 mm in diameter were injected each time. Because of the size of the lesions and their bilateral location, the chemoembolization was performed from the distal part of the right and left hepatic arteries. The patient had post-embolization syndrome, mainly with pain at the right upper quadrant, which was worse after the second embolization and was relieved only with opioid analgesics. No major complications were noted. Partial necrosis of the two larger lesions and complete obliteration of the three smaller ones were noted on CT scans one month after the first chemoembolization, and a further response was demonstrated on CT scans one month after the second chemoembolization .
Taking into consideration the partial response according to the European Association for the Study of the Liver criteria and the left liver lobe hypertrophy in the interim, surgical resection of the right liver and segment IVA was discussed and CT volumetry was performed . The estimated functional liver remnant was calculated as 41.8%, and the decision to perform surgery was made.
An atypical extended right hepatectomy was performed, and the right liver lobe, along with segment IVA of the liver, was resected using a RF-assisted technique to minimize bleeding complications . Intra-operative ultrasound revealed one more lesion on segment II measuring 0.9 cm, which was treated with intra-operative RF ablation. The surgical margins of the removed liver were found to be disease-free according to the pathology report.
The post-operative recovery of the patient was uneventful apart from a small right pleural effusion, which did not require further treatment. There was no liver dysfunction aside from transient elevation of total bilirubin up to 7.8 mg/dL (direct bilirubin 4.7 mg/dL). The patient was discharged 15 days after surgery in good general condition.
Follow-up CT three months after surgery showed a new lesion measuring less than 1 cm on segment III. This was treated with a single session of percutaneous RF ablation. Eight months after surgery CT of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed that the patient was free of disease. At the one-year post-operative follow-up examination, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan and MRI of the abdomen showed that the patient remained free of any metastatic disease.