A 20-year-old Nigerian male, of Ibo ethnic origin presented with a 5 year history of irrational speech, irritability and refusal to do house chores. Three months after the onset of his symptoms, he became very prayerful, expressed grandiose ideas of being a priest with a special call from God and chose to spend a significant part of his weekdays at his local church, alone, reading the bible. Over the next two years he had episodes of social withdrawal, fatuous laughter and 2nd person auditory hallucinations which had completely remitted at the time of his presentation. It was noticed about a year ago that he would remain mute for extended periods of time (mutism), maintain a particular position e.g. standing and gazing upwards for hours (posturing), would perform the opposing action of an instruction or task given by his parents (negativism), repeats questions asked or statements made to him severally (echolalia), and would often perform repetitive apparently goal directed hand-washing and writing movements (mannerisms).
In addition to being managed for febrile convulsions at age 2 and severe malaria (plasmodiases) with anaemia at age 7, he sustained a head injury at a saw mill at age 13 where he worked as a hired hand. The injury involved a plank which fell from an unspecified height with the result that he lost consciousness for about thirty minutes. The resulting scalp laceration was sutured at a primary health care facility. After he regained consciousness, no further investigations were conducted at the time. He had been treated at two traditional/faith-based (religious) centres since the onset of behavioural symptoms with herbal medications and prayers which did not improve his symptomatology. There was no prior psychiatric history.
He suffered pre-natal complications from a pre-term rupture of membranes that required an emergency caesarean section at his delivery, however developmental milestones were within normal limits and his early childhood and education up to junior secondary school were satisfactory. There was a gradual decline in academic performance following the incident (injury to the head) and he stopped schooling altogether five years ago after the onset of symptoms.
Mental status examination revealed an asthenic, fairly groomed young male in appropriate attire with poor eye contact. He was alert and oriented (responded to statements eliciting time, place and person by nodding his head). He remained mute and did not reply verbally to questions or instructions throughout the examination. He was rigid, exhibited posturing, mannerisms and ambitendence.
On physical examination, he was, slightly pale with systemic examination being essentially normal and within normal limits. A neurological examination, showed no evidence of lateralizing signs, muscle tone, power and reflexes were normal.
Laboratory tests, including chemistry (electrolytes and urea) and urinalysis were within normal limits. A complete blood count only revealed a mild anaemia (PCV: 24%). A cranial Computerised Tomography (CT-Scan) was also requested and revealed a frontal bilaterally located, concavo-convex chronic subdural haematoma with associated dilatation of the anterior pole of the lateral ventricles.
In patient admission was declined at the first interview due to financial constraints. For similar reasons a cranial CT scan that was requested could not be performed until the third week after presentation (CT scans on the average costs $200 - $300 in this part of the country). An initial trial of oral lorazepam at 4 mg in two divided doses showed minimal response with only a slight improvement in speech after the first week. A course of 6 sessions of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) subsequently prescribed before the CT-Scan was done, was discontinued after the third session due to poor response and marked post-ECT confusion. Efforts were geared toward performing a cranial CT scan to guide further intervention as an organic aetiology was now highly considered. Following the outcome of the CT scan, a neurosurgical consult was requested and they advised a continuation and/or exploration of conservative management as there were no indications for surgery. Also a re-examination of the CT-scan suggested that areas of white brain matter were visible within the area of the chronic subdural haematoma implying that an active re-absorption of the collected blood was ongoing, moreover the absence of any lateralizing signs suggested that intracranial compensatory mechanisms were likely occurring.
We commenced a trial of low dose risperidone at 1 mg nocte over two weeks, with subsequent 1 mg dosage increase 4 weekly. Two months later, at a dose of 3 mg nocte, the parents noted that they had observed remarkable improvement. They reported that he could now initiate conversations, appeared interested in his environment, requested for meals and maintained a good personal hygiene with little persuasion. However, they also reported that he still had episodes of posturing, though they were reduced in terms of the duration that it occurred. Efforts to repeat the CT scan was unsuccessful as the care givers complained of inability to foot the bill.