A 67-year-old Japanese man with type 2 diabetes visited our hospital with complaints of progressive lower back pain for 2 months. He had sensory impairment in the right leg. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examinations were unremarkable. His laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell count, 13,460 cells/μL; hemoglobin level, 16.6 g/dL; platelet count, 39.6 × 104/μL; C-reactive protein level, 3.53 mg/dL; serum total protein level, 7.5 g/dL; albumin level, 2.9 g/dL; lactate dehydrogenase level, 148 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase level, 29 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase level, 24 IU/L; γ-glutamyltransferase level, 78 IU/L; blood urea nitrogen level, 15 mg/dL; creatinine level, 0.85 mg/dL; and glycated hemoglobin concentration, 7.2%. Magnetic resonance imaging detected low intensity at the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies and L4–L5 disc space in T1-weighted images and hyperintensity in T2-weighted images . Therefore, the patient was suspected to have spondylodiscitis, and blood culture and transcutaneous vertebral biopsy were performed.
On the day of admission, Gram staining of a sample taken directly from the anaerobic blood culture bottle showed the presence of Gram-positive cocci; it had taken 66 h for the sample to become blood culture positive. MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry detected P. micra, and the patient was suspected to have spondylodiscitis due to P. micra. Subsequently, Tm mapping was performed using 1 ml of the remaining needle biopsy sample from the vertebral disk. After DNA was isolated from the pellets using a DNA extraction kit (High Pure PCR Template Preparation Kit, Roche Applied Science, Germany) in accordance with the supplier’s instructions, we conducted nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of DNA, using seven universal bacterial primer sets. The data profile was analyzed using the Roter-GeneQ®, and the Tm values were identified. The seven Tm values were mapped on two dimensions, and by comparing it to the the database, P. micra was identified within 3 h . The minimum inhibitory concentrations of antimicrobial agents for P. micra isolates from blood cultures were as follows: penicillin G, ≤ 0.03 mg/L; amoxicillin, ≤ 0.03 mg/L; clindamycin, 0.25 mg/L; minocycline, ≤ 0.25 mg/L; cefmetazole, ≤ 1.0 mg/L; and meropenem, ≤ 0.25 mg/L. We initiated intravenous drip infusion of ampicillin/sulbactam at a conventional dose of 3 g/h at 6-h intervals. On day 4 of admission, the biopsy specimen culture revealed the presence of P. micra.
Prior to the onset of lower back pain, the patient had refused dental extraction for periodontitis. As this could have been the source of infection, the patient underwent tooth extraction on day 7 of admission. Transthoracic echocardiography did not detect any vascular embolization, indicating the absence of infective endocarditis. After initiating antimicrobial treatment, inflammatory markers including the leukocyte count and serum levels of C-reactive protein gradually improved, and on day 19 of admission, ampicillin/sulbactam administration was replaced by ampicillin (8 g/day) administration. However, because subjective symptoms persisted, the patient underwent L4–S1 decompression and instrumented spinal fusion on day 53 of admission. The patient’s condition improved postoperatively, and we discontinued ampicillin administration on day 72 of admission.