A 65 year-old female was referred to ENT department with complaint of throat pain for one month. There was no history of smoking and alcohol consumption. History of dysphagia or dyspnea was denied but odynophagia was present. The initial treatment with antibiotics was administered by her primary care physician but was not effective. Physical examination revealed an enlarged right palatine tonsil with ulcerating mucosa and fullness of her anterior tonsillar pillar. The left palatine tonsil and other pharyngeal mucosal surfaces were normal. The remainder examination of head and neck was negative. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck showed a 3.5 × 2.8 cm well-circumscribed, enhancing, necrotic appearing mass posterior to the right submandibular gland and increased attenuation within the right tonsil. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was unremarkable. Whole body positron emission tomography – computed tomography (PET-CT) showed a prominent collection of fluorodeoxyglucose within right tonsillar fossa without any evidence of distant metastatic disease. Fine-needle aspiration of the right neck mass performed at an outside hospital was positive for poorly differentiated carcinoma. On endoscopy, a very small exophytic tumor involving the right palatine tonsil was seen. Several biopsies were taken and sent for histology. Histologic examination revealed small round to oval tumor cells arranged in cords or nests, containing hyperchromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm, nuclear molding, numerous mitotic figures and apoptotic bodies (A and B). Immunohistochemical staining showed that tumor cells were strongly positive for neural cell adhesion molecule (CD56), Synaptophysin, Chromogranin, NSE and negative for leukocyte common antigen (LCA) and CD 20 (A and B). The patient was diagnosed with poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (SCC) of the right tonsil. Thus the right palatine tonsil was confirmed as the primary lesion and there was no evidence of distant metastasis. As she refused surgery or radiotherapy, six cycles of Cisplatin combined with Etoposide were given and the mass showed initial complete response at that time. The patient refused any further treatment and was lost to follow-up.