A 23-year-old male pedestrian was struck and crushed between two cars. In the trauma bay he had an intact airway, clear breath sounds, normal mentation, heart rate 99 and systolic blood pressure 118/65 mmHg. Physical exam confirmed diffuse abdominal tenderness, severe pelvic tenderness and right flank and left lower back contusions. He complained of abdominal, back and right groin pain. Admission hemoglobin was 13.4 g/dL (hematocrit 42.8%).
CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis revealed a Grade III liver laceration in the posterior segment of the right hepatic lobe, extending to the right hepatic and portal veins, with associated hemoperitoneum and a pelvic hematoma with active hemorrhage in the space of Retzius and periurethral region . Angiography confirmed segmental extravasation from branches of both right and left internal iliac arteries and bleeding from branches of the right hepatic artery which required selective embolization. An inferior vena cava filter was placed.
Repeat hematocrit following angiography was 15.1% and decreased further to 11.7% (hemoglobin 3.9 g/dL). Coagulation profile was normal. He developed worsening tachycardia and hypotension. Both patient and family declined allogeneic red blood cell (RBC) transfusion. Compassionate use Hemopure (3 units/90 g hemoglobin/250 mL, HBOC-201 bovine Hb glutamer-250, OPK Biotech, Cambridge, MA) was administered via FDA compassionate use program approximately 30 hours after admission. Daily high-dose recombinant erythropoietin and IV iron sucrose were initiated. Additional Hemopure transfusions (4 units) were administered over the next 6 days .
Phlebotomy was minimized with pediatric tube use. When hematocrit was stable (24%) on post-trauma day 12, he underwent surgery for percutaneous pinning of pelvic fractures. He was discharged home the next day with outpatient physical therapy with hemoglobin 7.7 g/dL (hematocrit 25.5%). Renal function was unchanged by Hemopure administration (total 7 units transfused) as serum creatinine did not rise above 1.0 mg/dL throughout his hospital course.