The chief complaints of the patient were systemic edema and epigastric discomfort.
Two months before admission to our institution, a 78-year-old Japanese woman consulted a medical center due to systemic edema and epigastric discomfort. Laboratory analysis showed no abnormalities. Therefore, close clinical follow-up was suggested. However, blood analysis performed two months later revealed a high hemoglobin A1c (5.5%-7.2%) and decreased potassium concentration (2.7 mEq/L). Screening of potential causes of secondary diabetes mellitus showed high levels of cortisol (80.6 μg/dL) and ACTH (177 pg/mL) in the early morning and increased levels of cortisol (56.2 μg/dL) at midnight. The daily urine cortisol level (6550 μg/day) was also increased. A dexamethasone suppressive test (8 mg) showed no suppression of fasting blood cortisol (118 μg/dL) or ACTH (342 pg/mL). These results suggested the diagnosis of ACTH-dependent hypercortisolism . An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 3-cm tumor with poor contrast in the pancreatic tail . Cytological findings of endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration showed cell clusters forming no specific structures with a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, suggesting adenocarcinoma . However, the immunostaining results showed positivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD 56, and ACTH that were compatible with the diagnosis of ACTH-secreting pNE neoplasm. The Ki-67 index was approximately 40% . The patient was then referred to Mie University Hospital for subsequent examinations and treatment.
There was no remarkable past or family history. She had no history of allergy, excessive alcohol consumption, or smoking.
The clinical findings on admission to Mie University Hospital were as follows: height 157.5 cm, body weight 54 kg, blood pressure 135/79 mmHg, and pulse rate 91 bpm. In addition, the patient presented a "moon-face" with bilateral pitting edema on the lower limbs on physical examination.
Laboratory analysis revealed thrombocytopenia with elevated blood levels of D-dimer, fibrinogen/fibrin degradation products, liver enzymes, cortisol and ACTH, and hypokalemia . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no pituitary tumor. Blood culture was negative, but urine culture was positive for Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Esophageal candidiasis was diagnosed by esophagogastroduodenoscopy. The patient was also positive for Cytomegalovirus antigen (C7-HRP, on day 1, 132/82500 cells) associated with increased levels of liver enzymes (AST 121 U/L, ALT 294 U/L on day 1), and thus Cytomegalovirus hepatitis was diagnosed. Additional laboratory analysis on day 7 revealed an increased level of β-D glucan (48.0 pg/mL), and a chest CT scan on day 9 showed bilateral ground-glass opacity suspicious for Pneumocystis pneumonia.
In addition to laboratory findings of disseminated intravascular coagulation, venous ultrasonography of the lower extremities performed on day 1 revealed deep venous thrombosis in the right popliteal segment of the femoral vein (size not recorded), right soleus vein (5-6 cm), and left posterior tibial vein (4 cm). In addition, pulmonary embolism was pointed out by a radiologist based on a chest CT scan taken on day 9 .