A 49-year-old female presented at the hospital with a one-year history of a vulvar lump with swelling and was admitted to the general surgical department.
The patient found a vulvar lump a year ago with swelling and tenderness, which had recently gradually increased.
There was a past history of cervical conization 8 years ago. There was no history of diabetes or hypertension and no family history.
On physical examination, the lump was tender and was as large as a finger. The patient’s temperature was 36.7 °C, with a pulse rate of 82 beats/min and a respiration rate of 19/min; the patient’s blood pressure was 14.1/9.6 kPa.
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HbsAg; 6.48 S/CO; reference range: < 1.00 S/CO) and hepatitis B core antibody (HbcAb, 15.52 U/L, reference range < 10.00 U/L) results were positive. Blood analysis, biochemical tests, coagulation function, renal function, tumor markers, syphilis, HIV tests, and other tests showed no obvious abnormalities.
An initial imaging evaluation by sonography showed several subcutaneous fluid-filled regions from the left vulva to the pubic symphysis that were multilocular and mobile. The largest lump was 6.11*1.84*2.62 cm, and all of these fluid-filled regions were considered possible fat liquefaction. The lump was further evaluated by a pelvic cavity magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan. This scan revealed a cystic area , which was considered a benign lesion, including lymphangioma.
The resection of the vulvar mass and closed drainage were conducted. Intraoperative observations showed that the mass did not have an obvious capsule, and its boundaries were unclear. The subcutaneous tissue presented as a cavity, and yellow material, similar to bean dregs, came out of the cavity . Histopathology revealed that the tissue was composed of a foreign-body granuloma . She was discharged on first postoperative day. Three weeks postoperatively, the patient was hospitalized as a result of fever and chills, with a peak temperature of 38.7 °C. The wound was healing slowly, and the left lower abdominal wall was swollen, tender, and hot. A blood test showed that high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (84.6 mg/L), neutrophil granulocytes (21.8*109/L) and white blood cells (23.4*109/L) were obviously increased. Additionally, an abdominal CT scan indicated extensive infiltration and effusion from the left hypochondriac region to the vulva, mostly in the left lower abdomen, and postoperative changes were suspected . Subsequently, the patient underwent local drainage with an 8F "pigtail" tube. The drainage fluid seemed similar to that of the last time. The drainage culture showed no bacterial contamination. Then, the patient was discharged with decreasing effusion.
However, she was readmitted to the hospital a month later, reporting the swelling of the bilateral chest wall with fever. The highest temperature was 37.8 °C, and the blood test was similar to that at the last admission, with increased high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (48.5 mg/L), neutrophil granulocytes (9.65*109/L), and white blood cells (11.6*109/L). The sonography of the bilateral hypochondriac area revealed a hypoechoic area on each side shaped like bars . The size of the left region was 21.95*2.32*9.59 cm, and the size of the right region was 12.28*1.30*12.01 cm. Both hypoechoic areas seemed continuous with deep in the breasts. The patient reported that she had hid the fact that she had undergone breast augmentation surgery with PAAG injections 20 years ago until she was repeatedly asked about her past history by an ultrasound doctor.