A 28-year-old nulligravida was referred for consultation and laparoscopic bilateral gonadectomy after diagnosis of complete androgen resistance. The patient complained of primary amenorrhea but she did not have inguinal hernia or labial mass. She had female external genitalia. In the physical examination, development of her breasts was normal (tanner stage IV), but axillary hair was scarce (tanner stage III). Abdominal examination was normal. No inguinal or labial mass was palpated. In gynaecological examination, the vulva and perineum appeared normal. She had a blind-ending vaginal pouch of approximately 6 cm depth and the cervix was invisible. No adnexal masses were palpated.
In pelvic ultrasonography, the uterus was absent and an ovoid heterogenous mass (38 × 23 mm in size) with a 13 mm nodule in the right pelvic sidewall had been reported. Abdominal ultrasonography did not reveal any para-aortic lymphadenopathy. Pelvic ultrasonography failed to identify the left gonad. Blood tests for hormones showed Follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels were 7 mIU/mL and 32 mIU/mL, respectively and serum testosterone was 3.1 ng/mL, all of which were within the normal ranges. Cytogenetic analysis showed a male karyotype (46, XY).
The patient underwent laparoscopic gonadectomy under general anesthesia in the supine position. Visualization of pelvic contents revealed absence of uterus and fallopian tubes. There was not any evidence of abdominal or pelvic lymphadenopathy. Laparoscopic study demonstrated a 4 × 2.5 cm gray-purple colored ovoid mass with 1 cm cystic mass near the right internal inguinal ring. The left gonad (4.5 × 2 cm) was hidden behind the bowels in the left pelvic sidewall. The gonad and the attached structure were retracted medially. The posterior peritoneum and gonadal vessels were incised after coagulation and ligation, and the gonads were removed from the pelvic sidewalls .
Macroscopically, the specimen consist of two ovoid gray mass which one of them contained two well-delineated, homogenous yellow-tan nodules measuring 1.5 and 1 cm on cut surface, respectively. Another mass on cut surface contained one 2.3 cm nodule similar to above description. Histopathological examination of the gonads in non-neoplastic region showed prepubertal immature tubules with lined sertoli cells. Microscopic examination of delineated nodules revealed a luminal-tubular pattern populated by monomorphus cells with dark round to oval nuclei reminiscence of immature sertoli cells. Intervening stroma was scant and focally contained clusters of polygonal cells with abundant eosinophilic or vacuolated cytoplasm and round nucleus with prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity was not prominent and necrosis was not seen . These findings were consistent with bilateral well differentiated sertoli–leydig cell tumor (SLCT). Our patient is being followed up regularly and she has no complain after a year.