A 75-year-old male presented with sudden onset of weakness in his left upper and lower extremities. Medical history confirmed that the patient was a full-term birth without trauma or history of hypoxia. Hemangioma on the right side of the neck was noted after birth. Routine laboratory examinations were unremarkable. Neuropsychological evaluation was normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed multiple posterior fossa anomalies including agenesis of the cerebellar vermis with hydrocephalus and hypoplasia of the right cerebellar vermis. Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with Dandy–Walker malformation . Multiple complex cerebrovascular anomalies were noted as follows: narrowing of supraglenoid portion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA), bending of bilateral vertebral arteries, and narrowing of the basilar artery with calcification. Cerebral aneurysm was seen in the terminal portion of the left ICA . There was a complete absence of the right ICA from the origin with corresponding absence of the left bony carotid canal [ and ].
Anomalous aortic arch anatomy was also seen. The left subclavian artery arose from the medial wall of the aortic arch, more proximal than expected. Bilateral common carotid arteries arose from the distal side of the left subclavian artery. The right subclavian artery had an aberrant course, with its proximal portion making a U-shaped bend .
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) demonstrated reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the border zones between the middle and posterior cerebral artery territories of the right hemisphere . We administered aspirin (100 mg/day) and edaravone (200 mg/day) for 2 weeks. The patient was ultimately referred for a superficial temporal artery to middle cerebral artery anastomosis. CBF of the right hemisphere was improved to normal level . He had an uneventful recovery and recently completed a 2-year follow-up. In subsequent examinations, no additional neurological events were reported.