The patient was a 78-year-old woman (height 147 cm; weight 61 kg) with no history of thrombosis or embolism who was examined per the treatment guidelines of the urology, circulatory internal medicine, vascular surgery, and radiology departments of our institution. Abdominal CT revealed that a previously identified left renal artery aneurysm had expanded to 3 cm in size. No symptoms of renal aneurysm were observed, although the risk of aneurysmal rupture or dissection was high. The patient was determined to face high risks when she is to undergo surgery due to her advanced age and the presence of various conditions complicating her thrombocytopenia (e.g., cirrhosis). Fourteen days prior to the scheduled embolization of the left renal artery trunk, the urologist was asked to insert an epidural catheter for perioperative and postoperative analgesia. As renal artery embolization often results in intense pain, at least some degree of analgesic treatment is necessary during the perioperative period. However, as the patient’s platelet count had shifted to 5–6 × 104/μL over the past several months, the risk of hemorrhaging during the epidural puncture was determined to be high. Therefore, lusutrombopag (Mulpleta®, Shionogi, Osaka, Japan) was administered prior to surgery. Continuous epidural anesthesia was to be administered if the patient’s platelet count increased to 10 × 104/μL or higher on the day before embolization, while alternative analgesic approaches (e.g., intravenous administration of fentanyl (continuous and/or bolus), intravenous and/or oral administration of acetaminophen, and/or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) would be utilized if the platelet count was lower than 10 × 104/μL.
The patient’s comorbidities included asymptomatic cirrhosis type C, postoperative hepatocellular carcinoma, ruptured esophageal varices, and postoperative breast cancer. Internal medications included ursodeoxycholic acid (600 mg × 3), an amino acid preparation for liver failure (12.45 g × 3), an oral nutritional supplement for liver failure (50 g), lactulose jelly (48.15 g × 3), spironolactone (75 mg × 1), amlodipine (5 mg × 1), tolvaptan (7.5 mg × 1), and rabeprazole sodium (10 mg × 1). Laboratory findings at 14 days prior to the scheduled embolization are shown in Table . The patient’s condition was categorized as class B under the Child-Pugh classification system. Abdominal CT revealed splenomegaly, although no evidence of thrombosis was noted.
The patient’s treatment course is depicted in Fig. . Fourteen days prior to the scheduled embolization, she was examined by physicians of the department of hepatic internal medicine, 3 days following which she began use of oral lusutrombopag (3 mg) once daily (day 1). Although the patient’s platelet count prior to administration of lusutrombopag was 5.4 × 104/μL, it increased to 7.4 × 104/μL after 5 days of treatment. Then, oral lusutrombopag was discontinued to avoid the risk of thrombosis due to the increased platelet count. The patient was hospitalized on day 11. As the platelet count at the time of admission to the hospital was 12.6 × 104/μL, an epidural catheter was inserted on day 12 according to the original schedule, with the following characteristics: epidural needle size, 17G; catheter type, Hakko disposable epidural catheter (Hakko, Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) and nylon block copolymer radiopaque catheter; diameter, 1.0 mm; tip, round with lateral holes; level of insertion, T8–9; and insertion length, 5 cm into the epidural space. Subsequently, left renal artery embolization was performed under continuous epidural anesthesia (4 mL/h of 0.2% ropivacaine after bolus administration of 5 mL of 1% mepivacaine; analgesia before embolization from T5 to L1). Continuous epidural analgesia (4 mL/h of 0.2% ropivacaine; analgesia from T6 to T11) was also utilized following surgery, and the patient experienced no pain during the perioperative period. The platelet count on day 13 was 11.0 × 104/μL, and the epidural catheter was removed on day 14. The platelet count peaked on the day before embolization and gradually decreased thereafter. The patient’s platelet counts on days 15 and 18 were 9.8 × 104/μL and 9.6 × 104/μL, respectively. No symptoms of epidural hematoma were observed, and the patient was released on day 19 due to her favorable postoperative course. The patient was subsequently followed-up on an outpatient basis. No symptoms of thrombosis were observed after initiating oral lusutrombopag therapy, and abdominal echo did not reveal portal thrombosis on day 33, when her platelet count was 8.1 × 104/μL.