The patient is a 9-year-old boy diagnosed with CGD after fever and generalized lymphadenopathy at the age of 2 years. He was found to have a non-sense mutation (c.810G>A) in exon 8 of CYBB that introduces a premature stop codon at position 270 (p.Trp270X) of GP91 PHOX. His past history was typical for recurrent pneumonias and adenopathies. He has received daily prophylactic treatment with 5mg/kg trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) and occasional interferon-γ and itraconazole. He presented with fever, vomiting and progressive headache for 3 weeks. Physical examination was remarkable for mild fever and a non-tender bulging over the supero-lateral aspect of left orbit. Funduscopy showed no papilledema. Complete blood count revealed a mild hypochromic anemia. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was elevated at 117 and the C-reactive protein (CRP) was +3 positive. Chest x-ray showed ill-defined opacities over the right middle and lower lung lobes. 99mTc bone scan revealed increased uptake at the involved area indicating an inflammatory process .
The excisional biopsy of the skull mass revealed septated hyphae. Culture was positive for A. fumigatus. Initial antimicrobial therapy consisted of ceftriaxone (70mg/kg) and vancomycin (60mg/kg), but cultures remained positive for A. fumigates. Thereon he received Deoxycholate amphotericin B (1 mg/kg/day), itraconazole (100 mg/day), and interferon-γ (50µg/kg).
Despite 3 weeks of this combination therapy, the fever and headache were not resolved. So, the amphotericin B and itraconazole were discontinued and intravenous voriconazole (8mg/kg/each 12 hours) started. Five days after onset of voriconazole he became afebrile, and the headache resolved over the next 2 weeks. With the suspicion of pyloric stenosis, oral prednisolone (1mg/kg/day) started as the fever abated. After 2 weeks of intravenous therapy, he left to home receiving oral voriconazole and prophylactic TMPSMZ and interferon-γ. The last follow-up visit performed 12 months after the first presentation showed no residual neurologic problems.