A 37-years-old man presented to the cardiology outpatient department with complaints of dyspnoea and palpitations (New York Heart Association Class II–III) for the last 6 months. There was no history of blunt chest trauma or long-standing fever. He did not have any significant past medical history.
On physical examination, the patient was alert, afebrile with mildly elevated jugular venous pulse. He had a normal body habitus. His blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg, while heart rate was 90 b.p.m. Chest examination revealed bilateral normal air entry with no added sounds. Cardiac examination showed apical displacement to the left 6th intercostal space, an ill sustained heave, left ventricle 3rd heart sound (S3) with early diastolic murmur (Grade IV/IV) over the left 2nd intercostal space. Abdominal and neurological examination was normal. Electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with left bundle branch block. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with prominent aortic shadow.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a large mobile sac-like structure with irregular borders bulging and prolapsing into the left ventricular cavity with each cardiac cycle along with severe aortic incompetence. Differential diagnosis of Hydatid cyst of the interventricular septum, unruptured SOV or septal tricuspid valve aneurysm prolapsing into the left ventricle through a partially closed ventricular septal defect was kept. ( and , , Video S1). The left ventricle was moderately dilated with mild impairment in global contractility (ejection fraction 46–48%). The right ventricle and the right atrium were normal in dimensions. Right ventricular systolic pressure was 40 mmHg. On transoesophageal echocardiography, the right coronary cusp showed malcoaptation with deformed aortic sinuses causing severe aortic incompetence. There was no evidence of rupture of the aneurysm. There was also moderate central mitral incompetence and mild left atrial dilatation . Cardiac computed tomography showed sparing of right coronary artery at the origin .
At surgery, through a transaortic approach, the right aortic valve cusp was seen as thin and fibrotic. About 4.0 mm under the right coronary ostium, there was 5.0 × 2.0 cm opening of the aneurysm which led to a trilobulated cavity burrowing into the interventricular septum. The largest cavity measured 6.0 × 4.0 × 3.0 cm. The aortic side of the aneurysm opening was closed with a Dacron patch sutured with 6/0 prolene avoiding the conduction system area and preserving the right coronary ostium. The aneurysm of right SOV was partially resected and a Saint Jude Medical mechanical bileaflet aortic valve (# 23) was sutured to the aortic annulus with interrupted pledgeted sutures. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. The patient was discharged on Nicoumalone 2 mg once daily, Ramipril 2.5 mg once daily, and Metroprolol 12.5 mg twice daily. Follow-up echocardiography after 4 weeks showed well-seated aortic valve prosthesis and the residual SOV aneurysm (SVA). The ejection fraction decreased from 46–48% to 36–38% . The dose of Ramipril was increased to 5 mg once daily and Metoprolol to 25 mg twice daily. Patient did not report any cardiovascular symptoms on follow-up.