A 51-year-old woman, with an established diagnosis of EGPA, presented to our Rheumatology Clinic for a routine follow-up scheduled visit.
Diagnosis was determined in 2014, when she presented with asthma-like tracheobronchitis, for which she underwent high-resolution chest computed tomography (HRCT) revealing bronchial wall thickening and lung consolidations. MPO-ANCA positivity was evidenced. After pneumological examination, she was referred to bronchoscopy. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cell count showed 22% eosinophils, while peripheral eosinophilia was >10% on differential white blood cell count. Since IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) may cause lung manifestations in terms of interstitial pneumonitis, organizing pneumonia, and lymphomatoid granulomatosis, IgG4 was collected in both serum and tissues, and found within normal ranges. Bronchial mucosa histological samples described granulation tissue, neutrophilic and eosinophilic inflammatory infiltration, plurinucleate giant cells, and fibrinoid necrosis. No peripheral neuropathy or renal involvement was observed at the time. No ear–nose–throat manifestations were referred by the patient; however, and ENT specialist still evaluated her, excluding the presence of rhinological, otological, or other manifestations of EGPA. Finally, diagnosis was established following the 1990 ACR diagnostic criteria for EGPA. The patient’s past medical history highlighted arterial hypertension, thyroid nodules with normal thyroid function, diverticulosis of the sigma, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), and incomplete right bundle branch block. She had never smoked. At disease onset, she was treated with high doses of steroid (prednisone 1 mg/kg/day), gradually tapered until suspension after 6 months. During steroid-tapering, at week 12 from disease onset, therapy with azathioprine was introduced at the dosage of 150 mg and 100 mg every other day (because of moderate toxic myelosuppression at higher doses). The patient remained in remission for 8 years, with a Birmingham Vasculitis Activity Score (BVAS) of 0.
During follow-up visits, neither systemic nor localized symptoms emerged, particularly of the respiratory tract. Her asthma control was optimal with beclometasone-formoterol as maintenance and reliever treatment. However, blood tests showed mild leukocytosis and elevated levels of acute-phase proteins. Allergy, stress, injury, surgery, or thyroid problems were all excluded. Complete blood tests repeated in our clinic confirmed neutrophilic leukocytosis (leukocyte count 15.59 × 103 cell/mmc, normal value <11 × 103 cell/mmc; neutrophil 10.84 × 103 cell/mmc, normal value <7.2 × 103 cell/mmc) and elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (3.46 mg/dl, cutoff value < 0.50) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (81 mm/h, cutoff value < 28). No other relevant findings emerged (normal liver and kidney function, electrophoresis, and urine analysis). Eosinophils were normal. ANCA testing proved negative. Free light chains were present at normal ranges in the blood. After hematological consult, lympho-proliferative disease was excluded and laboratory alterations were ascribed to a reactive leukocytosis derived from rheumatological condition.
Because of persistent leukocytosis and elevated inflammatory markers, in the absence of alternative causes, and as the patient's last chest CT scan dated 2 years before, in agreement with the pulmonary specialist, an HRCT examination was scheduled again, highlighting complete bronchiectasis and atelectasis of the middle lobe (ML), on an obstructive basis because of stenosis at the origin of the ML bronchial branch . Moreover, diffuse thickening of the proximal bronchial walls of the inferior ipsilateral lobar branch, the common bronchus of the left lobe, and the origin of the bronchial branches of the lingula were detected. A polypoid-like neoformation of the anterior wall of the left common bronchus was reported as well, measuring approximately 8 × 10 mm . According to a radiologist and pneumologist consultant, these findings appeared worthy of endoscopic investigations to rule out differential diagnosis between granulomas and heterotoplastic tissue.
After fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB), stenosis at the origin of the middle lobar bronchus, associated with architectural stenosis of the distal section of the left main bronchus, was confirmed . At BAL, no hypereosinophilia was detected and microbiological tests were all negative for infections.
Bronchial biopsies showed the prevalence of an infiltrate of plasma cells and neutrophils, with isolated eosinophils, in the absence of granuloma, fibrinoid necrosis, eosinophilic vasculitis, and neoplastic cells . Nonabundant interstitial IgG4 plasma cells by IgG4 immunoperoxidase stain were observed, the Tfh–plasmablast axis was not elevated, and no positive stains to CD138, CD38, MUM1, and CD79a were observed. Based on these features, the pneumologist concluded an MLS diagnosis. Anti-inflammatory therapy was attempted, with prednisone 25 mg daily for 35 days. Because of lack of response to conservative treatment, endoscopic attempt of middle lobar bronchus dilatation (by Fogarty 4 F balloon and tissue removal using flexible biopsy forceps) was scheduled . At follow-up chest CT scan, reventilation of middle lobe was documented . Repeated FOB confirmed improving middle lobar bronchus stenosis . The patient completely recovered from the procedure, without any respiratory symptom. Complete blood count was repeated 20 days after the procedure, documenting a slowly lowering neutrophilic leukocytosis (leukocyte count 14.3 × 103 cell/mmc, normal value <11 × 103 cell/mmc; neutrophil 9.9 × 103 cell/mmc, normal value <7.2 × 103 cell/mmc), as well as CRP (1.71 mg/dl, cutoff value < 0.50) and ESR (72 mm/h, cutoff value < 28).