A 17-year-old woman was first seen in the tertiary Headache Centre at the National Hospital
for Neurology and Neurosurgery, UK, in August 2011 with complaints of a persistent headache
from 14 January 2011 onwards. There were no known precipitants at the onset of the headache.
The headache developed gradually during the day. She described a severe continuous bilateral
headache localised over the forehead, temple and vertex with pressing and sharp qualities.
The headache was associated with photophobia and motion sensitivity, but no other migrainous
symptoms. There were no associated cranial autonomic features. She had one episode of 5 days
with numbness, tingling and pain in her hands and feet, but had no other symptoms suggestive
of aura. The headache had no relation to posture, and there were no features suggestive of
cerebrospinal fluid pressure dysregulation, temporomandibular dysfunction or cervicogenic
headache. Prior to onset of the daily headache, she described long-standing mild and
featureless headaches that lasted 2–3 hours and occurred 5–10 times per year. Neurological
examination was unremarkable and there was no evidence of papilloedema.
She had developed anxiety and depression secondary to the highly disabling headache. She
had recently been diagnosed with hypermobile Ehlers Danlos Syndrome (hEDS). She had
experienced orthostatic disturbances since age 12 and was diagnosed with postural
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS). Her POTS was well controlled on fludrocortisone,
midodrine and octreotide. She was also on olanzapine for her mood disorder. The patient had
a family history of migraine and hypermobility.
Prior to referral, MRI scans of the head (with gadolinium contrast) and cervical spine as
well as magnetic resonance angiography were normal. Previous drug trials initiated by other
health professionals including citalopram, amitriptyline, sertraline, duloxetine,
venlafaxine, metoprolol and pizotifen were ineffective for the headaches. The patient tried
numerous treatments over the next few years including sodium valproate, topiramate,
pregabalin, gabapentin, methysergide, memantine, intravenous dihydroergotamine and
onabotulinumtoxinA, which were all ineffective. Multiple cranial nerve blocks including the
supraorbital, supratrochlear, proximal and distal auriculotemporal, as well as greater and
lesser occipital nerves did not provide any relief. A wide range of triptans and
over-the-counter painkillers were also ineffective. The headaches remained unchanged,
present every day, with 20 days of moderate intensity per month and 10 days of severe
intensity per month, and a substantially disruptive influence on her life. She had an
occipital nerve stimulator (ONS) implanted in September 2016 which worsened the headaches.
Fludrocortisone, midodrine and octreotide were discontinued prior to the ONS implant with no
worsening in POTS symptoms.
From March 2017 the patient developed gradually worsening gastric symptoms. She then
weighed 66 kilograms and her height was 164 centimeters. It was at this point noted that she
had been troubled with diarrhea for the previous 2 years. In June 2017, she was admitted to
her local hospital due to dehydration and malnutrition caused by severe abdominal pain and
intolerance for food intake. A few mouthfuls of food and even intake of water could provoke
abdominal pain lasting for hours. The gastric symptoms were initially interpreted as
EDS-related dysmotility. The symptoms worsened and by August 2017 she had lost 18 kg of
weight, required parenteral nutrition and was wheelchair-bound due to severe cachexia.
Abdominal ultrasonography was performed by the gastroenterologists in August 2017 and
revealed severe Nutcracker syndrome of the left renal vein, May-Thurner constellation (iliac
vein compression), compression of the coeliac trunk, and SMA syndrome. Renal vein velocity
was 208 cm/s (grossly elevated) and there was marked hypoperfusion of the left renal cortex.
An abdominal CT scan and an angiogram of the mesenteric vessels confirmed the diagnoses,
explaining the patient’s gastric symptoms. No direct abdominal venogram was completed. On 28
November 2017, a left renal vein transposition and gastrojejunostomy was performed, giving
prompt improvement in her gastric symptoms. More surprisingly, the patient experienced
dramatic improvement in her headaches and was for the first time in 7 years essentially
headache-free.
Following the operation, the patient reported an immediate and lasting resolution of the
headache characterising her NDPH. However, she did have some residual occipital pain related
to the ONS and reported an episodic bi-frontal, moderate intensity headache often related to
her menstrual cycle and travel. The latter was interpreted as a probable episodic migraine
transformed from the NDPH, occurring two to six times per month. She also reported worsening
of her POTS symptoms after the vascular decompression. Fludrocortisone and midodrine were
reinitiated prior to the vascular decompression surgery, and ivabradine was initiated 2
months later. Ivabradine was beneficial for the POTS symptoms and later allowed tapering of
fludrocortisone and midodrine.
In August 2018 the ONS was explanted, leading to resolution of the occipital pain. However,
1 month after the explant the patient reported an orthostatic headache. She described
moderate intensity bi-occipital headache within 15 minutes of being upright and resolution
within 10 minutes of lying down. Bending over occasionally led to a clear nasal discharge.
Upon careful questioning it did however appear that both the nasal discharge and occipital
orthostatic-type headache had been present since February 2018, possibly earlier. MRI scan
of the head and whole spine (with contrast), magnetic resonance angiography (intracranial
and extracranial) and magnetic resonance venography were normal. There were no radiological
features indicative of a low CSF volume state and no intracranial vascular abnormalities.
Analysis of the nasal discharge was negative for CSF proteins. No formal CSF pressure
measurement was made. The orthostatic headache resolved spontaneously by December 2018.
Since the start of 2019, the patient has had episodic migraine without aura on 5–6 days per
month, which she is able to treat readily with triptans and high dose aspirin.
The patient has consented to patient data being published in this case report.