A 78-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted with lower abdominal pain, diarrhea associated with fever, chills and rigors of three weeks duration. Her past medical history included cerebral vascular accidents, atrial fibrillation, bronchial asthma and hypothyroidism. Relevant drug history included digoxin, aspirin and clopidogrel. She received oral co-amoxiclav (amoxicillin trihydrate 500 mg + clavulanic acid 125 mg three times a day) for five days in the community. On examination, she was pyrexic (38°C) with tachycardia (fast atrial fibrillation: 128/min) and tachypnea (respiratory rate: 22/min). She was morbidly obese with a Body Mass Index of 41 Kg/m2. Abdominal examination showed tenderness in the left iliac fossa. There was no localized peritonism or a palpable mass.
Blood investigations showed raised inflammatory markers [white cell count (WCC): 24.6 × 109/L and C-reactive protein: 253/L]. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a large pelvic abscess measuring 12.5 cm × 6.3 cm associated with sigmoid diverticular disease. The abscess was considered for transrectal drainage as the pelvic collection was not suitable for safe percutaneous transabdominal drainage under CT guidance due to an overlying sigmoid colon. There was no on-call interventional radiologist available to drain the abscess under radiological guidance. Therefore, following detailed assessment of the anatomical location of the abscess, transrectal drainage was performed using a pigtail catheter without radiological guidance.
The patient was taken to theater after adequate resuscitation with intravenous fluids and intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin and tazobactam 4.5 gm and metronidazole 500 mg three times a day). She was placed in the lithotomy position under general anesthetic and a per-rectal examination was performed. The abscess was abutting the anterior wall of the mid rectum on digital examination. A 22G epidural needle attached to a 10 mL syringe was inserted into the pelvic abscess through the rectum. Aspiration of pus confirmed the position of needle. The epidural needle was left in place to mark the direction and depth of the abscess cavity. A 10 Fr Hydrophilic - Coated Nephro (UreSil, IL, USA) catheter with 27 cm working length and a locking pigtail was inserted into the abscess cavity just adjacent to the guiding epidural needle and 200 mL of pus was drained. The abscess cavity was irrigated with 0.9% saline until the aspirates appeared clear. The catheter was secured in place by locking the pigtail.
There was significant improvement in the clinical condition of the patient and the inflammatory markers began to reduce the day after procedure (WCC: 7.3 × 109/L, C-reactive protein: 121 mg/L) and returned to normal within the next 72 h. A drainage catheter was flushed with 30 mL of normal saline twice a day. A repeat CT scan of abdomen and pelvis, performed on day four after the procedure, revealed mild pericolic inflammatory changes in the sigmoid colon. The catheter was within the abscess cavity with no significant residual pelvic collection . It spontaneously dislodged on day five after the procedure. Intravenous antibiotics were continued for nine days and the patient was discharged home 10 days after the procedure. A flexible sigmoidoscopy and barium enema examination performed six weeks later confirmed sigmoid diverticular disease. Due to the considerable risk associated with this patient's medical co-morbidities, an elective sigmoid colectomy was not performed. She remained symptom-free six months later.