A healthy 53 year-old male presented with a 6-month history of non-productive cough. He had no significant past medical or surgical history and was a nonsmoker. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated 7.4 × 5.2-cm right posterior mediastinal mass, abutting the trachea, superior vena cava, ascending aorta, and esophagus, as well as an incidentally noted retroesophageal SCA with a separate right carotid artery originating from the aortic arch (, ). CT-guided percutaneous biopsy revealed high-grade leiomyosaroma. Esophagoscopy did not demonstrate esophageal mucosal involvement. Metastatic workup was negative. After multidisciplinary discussion, four cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with doxorubicin and dacarbazine were given in the hope that the tumor would decrease in size, permitting wider resection margins; however, there was no objective radiographic response.
He was subsequently taken to the operating room for resection and possible esophagectomy with planned substernal reconstruction and possible ligation of the right subclavian artery. Through a fourth intercostal muscle-sparing posterolateral thoracotomy, the large mediastinal mass was noted. Because the tumor was abutting the superior vena cava, ascending aorta, retroesophageal SCA, and trachea, it was not feasible to achieve wide margins without disrupting the vital structures. However, the mass encapsulated and was able to be dissected away from the surrounding vital structures. Extra care was taken not to injure the right subclavian artery, which was skeletonized away from the tumor. The mass was arising from the proximal esophageal muscular layer. Because there was no direct invasion of surrounding tissues, the mass was resected with partial resection of the esophageal muscular layer without violation of the mucosa or tumor capsule. A previously harvested intercostal muscle flap reinforced the exposed but intact mucosal layer of the esophagus.
The postoperative course was complicated by low-volume chyle leak, which resolved with conservative management. Adjuvant radiotherapy was offered, but he declined. The patient remained without evidence of disease for two years, until he was found to have a right 1.5-cm pleural-based metastasis, which was also resected . He has no evidence of disease currently, now 30 months after resection of metastasis.