A 74 years old male was admitted to the internal medicine department due to an acute exacerbation of his chronic back pain following a fall in his bathroom the previous night. He also reported an involuntary weight loss of 15 kg. His past medical history included hepatocellular carcinoma four years ago and an epidermoid carcinoma of the upper oesophagus five years ago. Both types of carcinoma were considered in remission at the time of his admission to hospital. He had been on oral dexamethasone for 2 weeks for his back pain and sorafenib as maintenance chemotherapy for his oesophagus carcinoma.
The patient reported that his back pain had started three months before the current hospitalisation without history of trauma. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed which demonstrated pathologic infiltrations of the 5th and 6th thoracic vertebra without involvement of the intervertebral disc, and associated with a fracture of the upper plate of the 6th thoracic vertebra. Bony metastasis with pathologic fracture was suspected and a transcutaneous vertebroplasty was performed by injecting high-viscosity polymethylmethacrylate cement. The bone biopsy taken prior to this procedure showed signs of acute and chronic osteomyelitis without sign of malignancy. The Gram stain did not reveal the presence of bacteria, and bacteria culture of the biopsy was negative.
On physical examination at admission the patient appeared ill with a temperature of 38.3 °C. Auscultation of the heart and lungs was unremarkable. The 7th thoracic vertebra was painful on palpation. Laboratory tests revealed an increased C-reactive protein level (41 mg/l, normal: <10 mg/l) and an increased leukocyte count (20.3 G/l, normal: 4 to 10 G/l). Blood cultures grew Streptococcus mitis and Gemella morbillorum in 4 out of 6 bottles, both pathogens susceptible to clindamycin (MIC of 0.064 ug/ml for S.mitis and 0.094 ug/ml for G.morbillorum) and moxifloxacin (MIC of 0.25 ug/ml for S.mitis and 0.25 ug/ml for G.morbillorum).
Further information regarding the timeline of symptoms was obtained; his back pain started suddenly a few days after an endoscopic biopsy of the oesophagus had been performed, three months earlier, as follow-up for his oesophagus carcinoma. The oesophageal biopsy was negative. Thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan images obtained one month before his admission showed no radiological signs of malignancy. This new information lead us to suspect of polymicrobial vertebral osteomyelitis by direct inoculation with a secondary bacteriemia due to recent bone sampling. Treatment with intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanate (2.2 g every 8 h) was initiated, and switched 48 h later to intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g once daily).
A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, and did not show any valvular abnormality. A CT scan of the chest revealed thickening of oesophageal wall with oedema, compatible with an oesophageal perforation. Accordingly, an oesophageal endoscopy was performed which demonstrated thickening of posterior oesophageal wall at the same level as the vertebroplasty. An MRI of the spine demonstrated an epidural abcess from the 3rd cervical to the 1st lumbar vertebra with minimal medullary compression .
No surgical procedure was performed given the lack of neurological signs, and antibiotic treatment was continued. Clinical evolution was favourable and an MRI performed three weeks after initiation of antibiotic therapy showed regression of the epidural abscess . Intravenous antibiotics were switched after six weeks to oral moxifloxacin (400 mg once daily), with a planned course of three months. Two days after initiation of oral antibiotic therapy the patient developed weakness of the right lower limb with progressive loss of sensation, extending to the left lower limb within 24 h. A CT of the spine revealed a new epidural abscess at the level of the 8th thoracic vertebra . Intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole were reintroduced and a laminectomy at the 7th and 8th thoracic vertebra was immediately performed. The abscess was cultured and grew Candida albicans. Intravenous caspofungin was added and subsequently replaced by oral fluconazole (400 mg once daily) after two weeks. Metronidazole and ceftriaxone were switched to moxifloxacin after four weeks, and then to clindamycin due to a prolonged QT interval on the electrocardiogram. Therapy with clindamycin was maintained for three months and fluconazole for six months. The patient’s symptoms improved gradually, and an MRI performed twelve weeks after admission to our hospital revealed no residual abscess. At 6 month follow-up he had recovered almost fully, with only slight motor weakness of lower limbs.