A 7-years old female child with developmentally delayed was born of a normal pregnancy, labor, and delivery. There were no maternal infections and other illnesses detected during the pregnancy as well as the perinatal period, respectively. Ocular anomalies (apparent bilateral corneal opacifications) were present at birth. The infant did not show evidence of tearing, blepharospasm, photophobia, drainage, or ocular redness. On ophthalmologic examination, the child had a visual acuity of FC/20 cm in the right eye and that of FC/10 cm in the left one. The intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed bilateral central corneal opacities which covered the iris and pupils . The anterior segments appeared abnormal with corectopia and iris cornea-peripheral anterior synechiae. Horizontal nystagmus and congenital cataract were found in both eyes. The central retina could not be examined clearly because of the severe corneal opacity. High-frequency UBM and AS-OCT both showed a shallow anterior chamber with multiple areas of iridocorneal adhesions and no corneal lenticular touch in each eye. The B-type ultrasound scan performed on the patient revealed no masses, vitreous debris, or retinal detachment in either eye.
Clinically, a pediatric ophthalmologist confirmed the Peters Anomaly diagnosis of the patient, who was then referred to a pediatrician for an examination of associated systemic anomalies. However, none was detected. Under this situation, a penetrating keratoplasty with extra-capsular cataract extraction and IOL implantation was performed by a corneal specialist. The cornea tissue underwent histopathological examination. The patient’s visual acuity improved to 20/100 in the left eye and intraocular pressure was 8 mmHg after the surgical procedures. In addition, the parents of this child were also examined and corneal opacity in the left eye was found in her father.
Histopathologic Procedures were performed on the host corneal button, including Hematoxylin-Eosin stain and Periodic Acid-Schiff stain, to obtain the pathologic features of the cornea sections. All the sections were examined by light microscopy. On gross examination, the cornea (7 mm × 8 mm) was densely opacified centrally. Histological section showed considerable cornea thinning centrally , besides which the defects in the endothelium, Descemet's membrane, cornea stroma and Bowman’s membrane were also observed at the corneal defect. Bowman’s membrane was completely absent in the middle area of the corneal button and no vessels were found in the anterior stroma . The central internal stroma was hypoplastic and the fibers were extremely disarranged. . Most importantly, an abnormal thickness of Descemet’s membrane was present with the “multiple-layer” structure in the peripheral part of the cornea . Pigmented tissues could be discovered inside these “layers” of Descemet’s membrane . Furthermore, the pigmented cells situated within the cornea stroma and inserted anteriorly with adhesion to the posterior part of the cornea . Histopathologic examination also detected a large absence of the Descemet's membrane in the synechiae area and the endothelium membrane was completely absent from the cornea .
Taken together, the major histopathological findings in the patient include “multiple-layer” structure of the Descemet's membrane in the peripheral area, the absence of cornea endothelium, hypoplasia of the cornea stroma, absence of Bowman’s membrane, and the attachment of iris to the cornea.