A 56-year-old female patient presented to our clinic for left hand middle finger edema and pain of 1-year duration. Her medical history was relevant for 15 years of progressive 4th and 5th fingers malformations that were attributed to sarcoidosis, and for which she was treated with anti-inflammatory and low dose steroids therapy; she stated that the malformation started in the form of pain and edema 15 years before achieving this neglected form. One year before presentation, the patient started noticing left middle finger edema and swelling associated with severe pain and a mass-like structure over the 1st phalanx. This was preceded by few days of weakness and fatigue. She sought medical advice at multiple clinics where the new mass was first diagnosed as bone cancer. At our clinic, physical examination was consistent with a swelling at the base of the middle finger associated with tenderness and decreased range of motion. Laboratory tests were within normal limits, except for elevated C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Purified protein derivative test was negative. Radiographs of the hand showed a lytic lesion involving the distal half of the first phalanx, along with blurred limits of the bone surfaces involved . An magnetic resonance imaging was ordered and showed hyper-intense signal of the first phalanx, along with subcutaneous enclosed collections on both sides of the phalanx . The decision was made for surgical debridement and biopsy. The patient was taken to the operating room, and using a dorsal approach to the middle finger, we identified two collections on both sides of the 1st phalanx; these collections were debrided and sent for culture. Then, an osteotomy was done at the distal metaphyseal region of the first phalanx, followed by debridement of the diaphyseal marrow that was sent for pathology. The osteotomy was reduced and fixed using 2 k-wires. Post-operative radiographs are shown in . Pathology results showed caseating granulomas , and culture confirmed the diagnosis of TD. A computed tomography scan of the chest was done postoperatively, where few calcified nodules suggestive of healed TB were noted . The patient had a complete union at 3 months postoperatively , and the wires were removed. She also received a 9-months course of anti-tuberculous drugs. At 9-months follow-up, she was free of symptoms, finger swelling had decreased significantly, and she had full range of motion of the operated finger .