A 64-year-old African-American man with prostate cancer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, presented with four weeks of polyarthralgias of bilateral knees, hands, and neck, which were preceded two weeks previously by a 5 cm annular lesion on his abdomen with central clearing consistent with erythema migrans (EM). The lyme IgM antibody testing was positive and consistent with acute Borrelia burgdoferi infection, while all antibody bands for B. burdorferi IgG were nonreactive. These results were confirmed by western blot, with positive 25 and 41 KD antibody IgM bands, in accordance with Centers for Disease Control's (CDC) diagnostic serologic criteria. Our patient resided in Prince George's county in Maryland, an endemic region for lyme infection in the eastern USA, and it is suspected that infection occurred during frequent outdoor exposures while mowing his lawn near a wooded region. Normal laboratory values included C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, uric acid, rheumatoid factor (RF), antinuclear (ANA) and citrulline antibodies, angiotensin converting enzyme, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody. Following two weeks of doxycycline therapy for lyme infection and steroids for polyarthralgias, he was subsequently admitted with concurrent proximal muscle weakness of lower and then upper extremities, progressive dyspnea, facial and palmar dermatitis, and ten pound weight loss.
Physical examination of our patient revealed an ill appearing, afebrile male, with respirations of 25/minute and heart rate of 130/minute. Abnormal physical findings included bibasilar crackles without wheezing; violaceous skin eruption on the forehead, periorbital, and nasolabial folds; hyperpigmented papular palms with cracked, ulcerated fingertips; and decreased motor strength of 3/5 and 4/5 in the lower and upper extremities, respectively.
Laboratory evaluation included normal chemistry and blood counts, mildly elevated transaminases, ANA 1:40, positive anti JO-1 antibody, and negative cryoglobulins. Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) and aldolase levels were normal, which was suspected from recent corticosteroid therapy versus amyopathic dermatomyositis. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, lumbar spine and extremities were normal. Skin biopsies of the facial and finger lesions revealed advanced superficial and deep perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates, pigmented macrophages and perivascular lymphocytes in the superficial dermis with vacuolar degeneration and dermal mucin. The dermatopathologist felt that the clinicopathological findings most favored a diagnosis of dermatomyositis.
Evaluation for severe dypsnea was unrevealing including normal chest radiograph, nuclear stress testing, and echocardiogram. A working differential diagnosis revolved around the simultaneous occurrences of polyarthralgias and exuberant cutaneous and muscular symptoms, which could be related to his underlying HCV infection, an emerging connective tissue disease, or primary lyme infection itself. A muscle biopsy was contemplated to further evaluate myositis and presence of spirochetes. However, this was not completed due to our patient's severe debility and opinion that such a workup would not directly address the severe dyspnea, which was his most concerning and life-threatening condition at hand.
Repeat chest imaging confirmed bilateral ground glass opacities, diffuse interstitial infiltrates, and no pulmonary emboli on chest computed tomography scan. Our patient underwent aggressive therapy including steroidal, antimicrobial, bronchodilator therapy, and intubation (it was not completely clear the degrees to which his respiratory decompensation was attributable to worsening COPD exacerbation versus an interstitial pneumonitis, or pneumonia). His arterial blood glasses included pH 7.4, pCO 2 40, PO 2 104, CO 2 27 96% on BiPap with 100% FIO2. The patient died one week later, and his family requested that an autopsy not be performed.