A 62-year-old, Chinese male, who was previously in good health but had a 30-year history of smoking and alcohol-drinking, accidently discovered an enlarged right supraclavicular lymph node in December 2010. A biopsy of the supraclavicular lymph node revealed metastatic SCC. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining showed positive for CK5/6 and p63 and negative for NapsinA and TTF-1 . In addition, IHC staining also showed that over 50% tumor cells had membranous staining of PD-L1 . Dako (Monoclonal Mouse Anti-PD-L1, Clone 22C3 antibody) is thought to be a standard antibody for IHC; however, it is not available in China. Therefore, we used Mouse anti-PD-L1/CD274 Monoclonal antibody (catalog number: 66248-1-Ig, Proteintech Group Inc, Chicago, IL) for PD-L1 immunostaining. A full-body positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed a hypermetabolic right lung hilar mass and hypermetabolic right supraclavicular and mediastinal lymphadenopathy . A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was negative for metastatic lesions. He was diagnosed with a stage III B disease (UICC 7th edition) and received chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck and chest after 2 cycles of chemotherapy revealed a stable disease (SD) on both the primary and metastatic lesions. He continued with 2 more cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin, which was followed by radiotherapy administered at a dose of 64.5 Gy in 32 fractions using the intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) technique on both the primary and metastatic lesions. At the end of radiotherapy, the supraclavicular metastases had a clinically complete response as determined by physical examination, and a partial response (PR) on a CT scan. Subsequently, the patient received 2 more cycles of chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin, which was completed in July 2011.
A PET-CT 1 month after the completion of the above-mentioned therapy revealed a complete response (CR) . He was then followed up every 3 months. In September 2014, a follow-up CT scan revealed recurrent disease in the right upper lobe of lung and the left adrenal gland. He received 2 cycles of salvage chemotherapy with docetaxel and cisplatin, but a follow-up CT scan showed disease progression . The patient refused further chemotherapy. In April 2015, the patient received palliative radiotherapy to relieve bone pain. A CT scan revealed that the lesions in the lung and adrenal gland had further increased in size since the last scan. We recommended immunotherapy with nivolumab. Due to economic reasons, the patient received only 2 doses of nivolumab (2 mg/kg, once every 2 weeks) which were given on May 11, 2015 and May 25, 2015. During and after the treatment of nivolumab, he did not experience any significant adverse effects. Three months later, a CT scan revealed that the lesions in the lung and left adrenal gland had decreased in size more than 30%, meeting the response evaluation criteria for a PR . The patient died from brain metastases in December 2015, 2 months after the whole brain irradiation (30 Gy in 10 fractions).
Ethical statement: Ethical approval of this case report was granted by our institutional ethic committee (Hubei Cancer Hospital). Since this is a retrospective case report, patient consent was waived by our institutional ethic committee.