In 2017, a 27-year-old male patient presented to us with complaints of severe paroxysmal and continuous right- sided facial pain. He described his pain as a constant severe burning sensation with intermittent intensive lancinating (sharp) pain in the distribution of all three branches of the trigeminal nerve. This paroxysmal pain could be provoked by a light touch of the skin surface, chewing, and toothbrushing. This burning facial pain with short lasting episode of eyelid ptosis on the right side started in 2014 and later he also started experiencing severe paroxysmal pain that did not respond to oral carbamazepine but improved with pregabalin (75 mg). Over the years, the pain worsened and the medication dose had to be increased. In 2016, a Gamma Knife radiosurgery (90 Gy) was performed in another institution, targeting the right trigeminal nerve root, but no pain improvement was observed during subsequent 15 months. By that time, the patient was taking pregabalin (600 mg) with partial control of the pain. He suffered minor side effects but other anticonvulsants failed to produce any significant pain reduction. His had no history of any head or neck injuries, sinus or dental surgery, cancer, or any facial pain in his family. Neurological examination was normal except for allodynia, dysesthesia, and hyperpathia in the area of pain combined with symmetric slight increase in deep tendon reflexes. There were many paroxysmal pain trigger zones on the skin of the right side of the face. Pain intensity according to the numeric rating scale was 9 (other scalings were: BPI – 103, BNIPS – 5, and DN4 – 6). MRI examination detected an intramedullary lesion located at the upper cervical (C0-C1) level on the right side; there was no evidence of any neurovascular conflict or other relevant findings [-].
After ruling out other possible reasons for trigeminal pain, a decision was made to resect the lesion. In the operating room, C1 posterior arch resection in prone position under general anesthesia with neurophysiologic monitoring was performed by the senior author (JR). Intraoperatively, the tumor was tan in color without clear borders of separation it from the normal tissue . The resection was determined as subtotal . Monitoring initially showed decrease of the somatosensory evoked potentials with complete recovery at the time of dural closure. The pain, dysesthesia, and hyperpathia completely resolved immediately after the surgery. There was only transient mild hypoesthesia on the side of pain as well as in distribution of C1-C2 dermatomes, soreness under the right eye. Immunohistochemical study of the surgical specimen defined the tumor as ganglioglioma, Grade I . Antibodies to GFAP, S100, CD34, NeuN, and chromogranin were seen in the ganglion cells, CD68 was seen on the glial macrophages. IDH1 (R132H) stain was negative and Ki-67 index is 2–3%. The patient was discharged home in a satisfactory condition 5 days later. Twenty-four-month follow-up showed no evidence of tumor persistence or recurrence on MRI and the facial pain did not return. Informed consent was obtained from the patient.