A 78-year-old man was referred in 2008 with mildly elevated right intraocular pressure (IOP) and optic disc damage. Best corrected visual acuities (BCVA) were 6/6–2, N5 bilaterally. His IOPs were 24 mmHg right and 21 mmHg left with cup-to-disc ratios (CDR) of 0.75 right and 0.45 left. He was commenced on g latanoprost nocte initially in the right eye and later switched to g travoprost/timolol nocte in both eyes. Six years later, his BCVAs were 6/6 bilaterally, IOPs were 21 mmHg right and 22 mmHg left and the CDRs were unchanged. In January 2015, he underwent uneventful left cataract surgery. Two months later, he presented with blurred right vision. Right BCVA was 6/60, IOP 52 mmHg and CDR 0.85. Left vision was 6/6 unaided and IOP was 12 mmHg. The right IOP was controlled with oral acetazolamide 250 mg BD in addition to g travoprost/timolol nocte in both eyes. One week later, his right BCVA had improved to 6/18 but he was found to have 3+ cells in the right AC and 1+ cells in the left AC. There was no iris mass and gonioscopy revealed an open drainage angle. There was no vitritis or posterior segment involvement. He was commenced on g prednisolone acetate hourly which was tapered to QID in both eyes within two weeks. Baseline uveitis blood tests and chest Xray were normal.
The left AC inflammation settled quickly but the right eye continued to require g prednisolone acetate QID to keep the AC quiet. The right IOP could not be controlled medically so he underwent right trabeculectomy with mitomycin C five months later. He required four needlings with 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) to maintain the bleb. G prednisolone acetate was tapered and ceased in February 2016. In May 2016, his right BCVA was 6/60 and the left was 6/6 unaided with IOPs of 14 mmHg right and 18 mmHg left on g travoprost/timolol nocte in the left eye. The view of the right posterior pole was hazy due to cataract but there were no AC cells or vitritis. The right AC inflammation recurred in August 2016 and he was recommenced on g prednisolone acetate and required a further two needlings of the bleb with 5-FU. He underwent right cataract surgery in November 2016 and was noted to have vitreous opacities post-operatively with right BCVA of 6/60. In March 2017, his right BCVA dropped to hand movements and he underwent a vitrectomy with a 1 ml undiluted and 5 ml diluted sample, as well as the vitreous cassette, sent to pathology.
The cytospins were highly cellular with numerous plasma cells, some with atypical findings including binucleation, nuclear pleomorphism and conspicuous nucleoli, in addition to small to intermediate sized lymphocytes and eosinophils (shown in Fig. ). Flow cytometry demonstrated a clonal lambda-restricted population of cells with a phenotype largely consistent with plasma cells, except that the lambda positivity was detectable by surface staining (shown in Fig. ), whereas aberrant or monoclonal plasma cells are typically negative for light chains by surface staining. All of the plasma cells had high forward scatter, moderate side scatter and were positive for CD45. The cells were CD38 positive (very bright), CD19 positive (moderately bright), CD22 positive and CD138 positive. CD5, CD10, CD11c, CD20, CD23, CD56 and CD200 were negative. Flow cytometry also demonstrated normal T cells, but there were no normal or lymphomatous B cells. The plasma cells were more abundant in the cytology than in the flow cytometry. It has been well documented in bone marrow aspirates that flow cytometry under-estimates the abundance of plasma cells, but nevertheless is reliable in detecting monoclonal populations . There were no polymorphs or organisms on the Gram Stain of the vitreous sample. No anaerobes or fungi were isolated. Adenovirus and enterovirus ribonucleic acid and herpes simplex virus and varicella zoster virus were negative by polymerase chain reaction.
One-week post vitrectomy, the right IOP was 7 mmHg and there were 3+ cells in the right AC on g prednisolone acetate qid and g brinzolamide/brimonidine tartrate BD in the right eye. Two weeks later, the right IOP was 34 mmHg and the patient was commenced on g bimatoprost/timolol RE and oral acetazolamide 250 mg TDS. There were no choroidal elevations, deposits or pigmentary change on examination. Ocular coherence tomography was normal with a thin choroid (111 μm right eye and 107 μm left eye) on enhanced depth imaging (shown in Fig. ).
The patient was referred to a haematologist. Work-up for systemic disease was unremarkable. The only finding was a very small monoclonal B cell lymphocytosis (MBL) population of lambda positive B cells in the peripheral blood, comprising 0.5% of lymphocytes, with an absolute clone size of 0.01 × 109/L. These cells were positive for CD5, CD19, CD20 and CD23. Serum immunofixation was negative. Serum free light chains were normal. Bone marrow biopsy showed normal morphology and flow cytometry with no evidence of lymphoma or multiple myeloma, and specifically no evidence of the plasma cells found in the vitreous sample. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) imaging of the neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis was unremarkable as was an MRI with contrast of the brain and orbits. Cerebrospinal fluid obtained from a lumbar puncture demonstrated no evidence of lymphoma or myeloma by morphology or flow cytometry, with no evidence of the plasma cells found in the vitreous sample.
Ocular external beam radiotherapy of 20Gy in ten fractions of 2Gy was completed in August 2017. Two years later, his unaided distance acuities were 6/60 right and 6/6 left. The right eye had an IOP of 16 mmHg with advanced cupping (CDR 0.99) and the left had an IOP of 13 mmHg with moderate cupping (CDR 0.75) on g brinzolamide/brimonidine tartrate BD and g brimatoprost/timolol nocte in both eyes and oral acetazolamide 250 mg BD. The AC and vitreous were quiet in both eyes. The most recent correspondence from the patient’s haematologist revealed no evidence of development of multiple myeloma 2.5 years later.