A 70-year old man was diagnosed with gallbladder cancer and received open cholecystectomy with lymphadenectomy of the hepatoduodenal ligament at a local hospital. The final pathology showed that the tumor was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with an invasion depth of the mucosal layer. No lymph node metastases were found, and all of the surgical margins were negative . The patient was discharged from the hospital, but 3 months later, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hilar bile duct stricture with intrahepatic biliary dilatation , probably due to delayed bile duct ischemia caused by lymphadenectomy. Then, biliary drainage was performed with endoscopic biliary stenting . Three months later, the patient experienced cholangitis with septic shock, and percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) into the left intrahepatic bile duct was performed . Unexpectedly, the aspiration bile cytology from the PTBD catheter showed malignant cells . Percutaneous transhepatic cholangioscopy (PTCS) was performed via the sinus tract of PTBD, but the examination failed to detect any malignant lesions in the biliary tree. The patient was referred to our clinic for possible surgical treatment.
After admission, the patient’s cholangiograms were re-evaluated . The right posterior inferior bile duct (B6) was the infraportal type and joined the common hepatic duct. The hilar bile duct stricture was 3 cm in length. Intraductal ultrasonography (IDUS) did not detect any malignant cells in the bile duct around the hilar stricture, and no cancer cells were found in the endoscopic biopsy specimen. MDCT demonstrated a left portal vein obstruction, probably due to the inadvertent puncture of PTBD performed at the local hospital. Overall, no findings that indicated cholangiocarcinoma were observed. However, we determined that surgery was needed to treat this complicated biliary stricture. Left hepatectomy with caudate lobectomy and extrahepatic bile duct resection was performed. Severe adhesion around the hepatoduodenal ligament resulted in a difficult surgery. Intraoperative frozen section examination revealed no malignancy of the resected common bile duct stump and biliary stricture. The stumps of the resected B6 and the right hepatic duct were reconstructed by Roux-en-Y cholangiojejunostomy . The operative time was 591 min, and blood loss was 1745 ml.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. In the final pathology, no malignant cells were observed in the hilar stricture, but flat type in situ carcinoma was found at the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts, which was distant from the stricture . Histologically, the carcinoma was a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma and 1 cm in diameter. No lymph node metastases were found, and all of the surgical margins were negative. There were no BilIN lesions in the background bile duct. The patient is still alive and in good health 54 months after the hepatectomy.