An asymptomatic 48-year-old Hispanic female patient presented with a polypoid mass protruding into the endocervical canal during a gynecological examination in April 2014. The lesion had a cerebroid appearance during biopsy. Microscopic study revealed an epithelial neoplasm with a tubular, ductal, and papillary growth pattern producing intraluminal eosinophilic secretory material, located on a densely hyalinized stroma . The tumor cells were positive for CD10 (luminal pattern), p16INK4a (non-block staining pattern), PAX2 , inhibin, cytokeratin 7, WT-1, wild-type p53 (images not shown), and negative for estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, cytokeratin 20, CEAm, and calretinin (images not shown). The Ki-67 index of the tumor was around 46%. This histological and immunophenotypic picture confirmed the diagnosis of mesonephric adenocarcinoma of the endocervix. With this diagnosis, the patient underwent a total hysterectomy outside the institution. Three years later, the patient presented pulmonary nodules in the lingula and left basal lobe that were resected by thoracotomy. The histological pattern (tubular, ductal, and papillary) and the immunohistochemical profile (CD10, TTF-1, PAX8, Beta-catenin (membrane pattern) , PAX2 and p16 positive) of the pulmonary nodules correlated to those of the endocervical tumor. PAX8 staining was performed in order to document the gynaecological origin of the lung nodules [, ]. These findings confirmed metastasis of the endocervical mesonephric adenocarcinoma. The tumor was subjected to a multiple gene study using next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology (FoundationOneTM) to find therapeutic targets in our patient. Genomic alterations were identified in KRAS (G12C) and CTNNB1 (G34R). Additional findings were absence of microsatellite instability and a low tumor mutation burden with three mutations per megabase (TMB-Low, 3 Muts/Mb). Copy number analysis by CISH using the SPEC 1p36 and SPEC 1q25 Dual color probe (Zytovision) identified gain of chromosome 1q .