In June 2018, a 38-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with anemic uterine bleeding and fever of 38.3 °C . Her personal history was remarkable for diabetes mellitus type I, a combined kidney and pancreas transplantation in 2016 and known uterine myomas, which were the origin of several episodes of hemorrhagic bleeding within the last 2 years. The nulliparous patient was in regular gynecological examination without surgical interventions. She was denied implantation of any levonorgestrel containing intrauterine device because of concerns about elevated risk of foreign-body associated infection in her immunocompromised state (dual immunosuppression with tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil; both with stable drug levels).
Upon admission at our university hospital, the patient complained about fatigue, dizziness and ongoing vaginal bleeding. Several hours before admission, a latex bladder catheter was inserted into her uterus, and she received an intravenous hemostatic treatment with tranexamic acid and fibrinogen in another hospital. On examination, the patient was in a reduced general condition but alert and fully oriented. The temperature was 38.3 °C, the blood pressure 107/45 mmHg, the pulse 90 beats per minute, and the respiratory rate and oxygen saturation were in normal range.
Laboratory examination showed severe anemia (hemoglobin 40 g/L, hematocrit 0.137 L/L, erythrocyte count [1.37 × 1012/L]) but normal leucocyte (4.38 × 109/L) and thrombocyte counts (193 × 109/L). C-reactive protein was in a normal range (3.3 mg/L).
A microbiological diagnostic workup was undertaken. The vaginal smear grew normal flora and Staphylococcus aureus. The cervical smear was PCR-negative for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis. Two out of four blood culture bottles turned positive after 5 h (Bact/Alert® Virtuo, BioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France). However, microscopy with Gram stain showed no microorganisms, and subcultures on different agar media (i.e. Columbia sheep blood agar, colistin-nalidixic acid agar, chocolate agar, MacConkey agar, brucella agar, phenylethyl alcohol agar [all BioMérieux] and a modified Shepard agar medium [A7; ELITech, Puteaux, France] remained without growth. In the effort to identify the cause of the positive growth signal in the blood culture, 5 ml of the blood culture was used for metagenomic sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq platform. In detail, 2 ml erythrocyte lysis buffer (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was added to 5 ml of negative blood culture. It was vortexed at maximum speed for 15 s and afterwards incubated for 5 min at room temperature, followed by addition of 0.1 volume of 10X Turbo DNAse buffer and 3 μl of Turbo DNAse (Thermo Fischer Scientific Inc.). The sample was gently mixed and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. Afterwards, it was centrifuged at maximum speed for 10 min, and the supernatant was removed. The pellet was resuspended in 650 μl of pre-warmed PM1 buffer from the AllPrep® PowerFecal® DNA/RNA Kit (Qiagen). DNA extraction from bacterial cells was performed according to the manufactures’ instructions. Library preparation was done using the Qiagen® QIAseq FX DNA Library Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), according to the producers’ recommendations. Sequencing library quality and size distribution were analyzed on a Fragment analyzer automated CE system (Advanced Analytical Technologies Inc., Heidelberg, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the Fragment Analyzer 474 HS NGS Fragment Kit. Sequencing libraries were paired-end sequenced (2 × 150 bp) on an Illumina MiSeq platform (Illumina®, San Diego CA, USA).
Raw sequencing reads (FASTQ) were filtered and trimmed using TRIMMOMATIC , applying a threshold PHRED score of 25. Phylogenetic analysis was done by using the full length 16S rRNA, rpoB and recA gene sequences of the following Mycoplasma spp.: M. penetrans HF-2 (NCBI accession number: BA000026.2), M. genitalium G37 (NCBI accession number: NC_000908.2), M. pneumoniae M129 (NCBI accession number: NC_000912.1), Mycoplasma fermentans M64 (NCBI accession number: NC_014921.1), Mycoplasma salivarium ATCC_23064 (NCBI accession number: NZ_AXZE01000009.1), M. hominis ATCC_23114 (NCBI accession number: NC_013511.1), and as outlier U. urealyticum serovar 10 ATCC 33699 (NCBI accession number: NC_011374.1) was included in the phylogenetic analysis. Phylogenetic trees were generated with the FastTree MP software (bootstrap 1000 option, maximum likelihood GTR [generalized time-reversible model] option). The metagenomic sequence reads covered 99.2% of the published reference sequence of 1.35862 Mb . In the 16S rRNA gene, two mismatches were found at nucleotide positions C98T and T221C compared to the reference strain sequence. This combined genetic information points towards the presence of M. penetrans in the blood cultures . In order to confirm the phylogenetic analysis, metagenomic sequences of the negative blood culture from the patient with a growth signal in the BacT/ALERT system were classified using Kaiju and yielded 363′851 reads, of which 78% were annotated as M. penetrans (Additional file : Table S1, Additional file : Figure S1). An inoculated blood culture without a growth signal in the BacT/ALERT system and the non-inoculated blood culture growth medium were sequenced as negative controls for the meta-genomic sequencing approach (Additional file : Table S2, Additional file : Table S3). While no M. penetrans reads were identified in both negative controls, the most frequently detected reads assigned to Enterococcus sp., Streptococcus sp. and Staphylococcus sp. (Additional file : Figure S1).
The patient was taken to the operating theatre for diagnostic hysteroscopy and endometrial ablation. She received a preoperative single shot dose of cefazolin (2 g) intravenously. Since the postoperative course was without complications, the patient remained afebrile and the uterine bleeding stopped after the removal of intrauterine catheter. The M. penetrans bacteremia was self-limiting, requiring no further antibiotic treatment, and the patient was discharged in stable general condition.