An 89-year-old man underwent an uneventful phacoemulsification and posterior chamber lens implantation in the left eye. A peribulbar injection consisting of 2 ml of 2% lignocaine hydrochloride and 4 ml of 7.5 mg/ml of Bupivicaine hydrochloride along with 150 units of hyaluronidase was administered. A total of 8.5 ml was injected as a single medial canthus injection using a 25 gauge needle. Skin preparation with 5% povidone iodine was done prior to the block. No complications were noted during or after the peribulbar injection.
The day after the surgery, the patient presented to the eye casualty with a sore, slightly swollen left eye (OS) and a visual acuity of 6/18 right eye (OD) and 4/60 OS. On examination, upper and lower lid edema was noted along with conjunctival injection and corneal stromal edema. Both anterior segments were deep and quiet. The eyeball was minimally tender. There was no proptosis. Full range of eye movements was preserved and pupils were equal and reactive. The intraocular pressure was raised at 28 mmHg. Examination of the left fundus was grossly normal although examination was difficult due to a hazy cornea. A diagnosis of possible allergic reaction to post operative drops was made and the patient was commenced on preservative free (PF) dexamethasone 0.1% and chloramphenicol 0.5% along with 4 mg on chlorpheneramine Three times a day orally.
The following day, the patient re-presented with worsening orbital swelling now involving the left cheek. On further questioning, it was noted that he had a history of sinusitis and had recently suffered from an episode of upper respiratory tract infection. Ocular findings remained unchanged. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed left orbit soft tissue swelling outside the globe along with soft tissue changes consistent with inflammation and a locule of air in the orbital cavity, medial to the medial rectus . There were no signs of sinus infection or periosteal inflammation . C-reactive protein (CRP) was raised at 35. A diagnosis of left orbital and facial cellulitis was made. The patient was admitted and commenced on 2 g of intravenous ceftriaxone once a day and 400 mg of metronidazole three times a day. Blood cultures did not show any organisms. The celluitis responded well to treatment and he was discharged two days later with oral antibiotics. Two weeks later, the patient was reviewed in clinic. His best, corrected visual acuity was 6/12 OD and 6/9 OS.