A 2-year-old spayed female domestic longhair cat was presented for chronic ocular
discharge and occasional vomiting. Since adoption at approximately 8 weeks old, the
cat had lived indoors and eaten wet and dry commercially available feline-formulated
food. Physical examination identified bilateral watery ocular discharge, nasal
planum ulceration, submandibular lymphadenopathy, mildly depressed mentation and
pyrexia (103.0°F) – findings consistent with an upper respiratory infection (URI). A
complete blood count was unremarkable and feline pancreas-specific lipase was within
normal limits; however, serum chemistry revealed increased alanine aminotransferase
(ALT; 996 U/l, 28–109 U/l) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP; 111 U/l, 11–49 U/l)
activities; both were within their respective reference interval before the cat’s
ovariohysterectomy 18 months prior. Ultrasonographic examination of the abdomen
identified diffusely coarse echotexture of the liver and hyperechoic gallbladder
walls. The following tests were all negative: fluorescein for corneal ulceration;
IgG and IgM titers for Toxoplasmosis gondii; PCR for feline
infectious peritonitis (sample: liver tissue); and serologic testing for feline
leukemia virus (FeLV) antigens, feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) antibodies and
heartworm antigens.
After administration of buprenorphine (0.06 mg/kg, SC) and vitamin K (2 mg/kg, SC,
preoperatively; PO, q24h, 30 days postoperatively), anesthesia was induced with
alfaxalone (2 mg/kg, titrated to effect over 30 mins) and maintained with inhalant
isoflurane throughout an ultrasound-guided Tru-Cut biopsy of the left medial liver
lobe. Histopathologic examination of hematoxylin and eosin-stained biopsy sections
identified cytoplasmic copper aggregates in hepatocytes with greatest accumulation
in centrilobular regions . Subsequent copper-specific rhodanine staining permitted digital quantification
of the copper (dry weight copper = 3051 µg/g, normal <400 µg/g, secondary copper
hepatopathy <700 µg/g, primary copper hepatopathy >700 µg/g) and the results
were strongly suggestive of primary copper hepatopathy (PCH). A cytologic re-examination of a modified Wright’s-stained smear of a liver
aspirate identified cytoplasmic blue-green refractile and non-refractile aggregates
in hepatocytes – the former consistent with copper and the latter possibly
lipofuscin or a copper variant .
To treat the liver disease, metronidazole (20 mg/kg, PO, q12h, 7 days; 10 mg/kg, PO,
q12h, 14 days), ursodiol (10 mg/kg, PO, q24h) and Denamarin (18 mg/kg
S-adenosyl-l-methionine and 1.8 mg/kg silybin A+B, PO, q24h)
were prescribed. To reduce nausea and hepatic inflammation, maropitant (1 mg/kg, PO,
q24h) and prednisolone (1 mg/kg, PO, q12h) were also prescribed. The cat refused a
copper-free diet, so commercially available low-copper wet (Salmon and Rice Entrée
in Sauce; Purina Pro Plan) and dry (Urinary Care c/d; Hills) foods were fed instead.
Despite the administration of zinc gluconate (10 mg/kg, PO, q24h) to reduce enteric
copper absorption, liver enzyme activities continued to increase (maximum: ALT
>2000 U/l, ALP = 255 U/l), so the zinc gluconate was replaced with
D-penicillamine (15 mg/kg, PO, q12h), which chelates copper systemically.
To treat the URI, famciclovir (50 mg/kg, PO, q12h, 14 days) and Clavamox (10 mg/kg
amoxicillin trihydrate and 2.5 mg/kg clavulanate potassium, PO, q12h, 5 days) were
prescribed. The ocular discharge persisted with intermittent conjunctivitis
progressing to corneal opacity and ulceration of the right eye, which was
appreciable grossly and highlighted by fluorescein, although corneal cytology was
unremarkable. Erythromycin (1 cm of 5 mg/g ointment, OD, q6h, 5 days) was prescribed
for its dual antibiotic and anti-inflammatory properties. In addition, intermittent nausea/vomiting and inappetence were treated using
fluid therapy (20–40 ml/kg lactated Ringer’s solution (LRS) with 37.5 mg/cat B
Complex 150 and 0.25 mg/cat B12, SC), mirtazapine (0.4 mg/kg, TD, q48h) and
ondansetron (0.2 mg/kg, PO, q12h).
Serial serum and urine chemistries were performed after 1, 3, 11 and 12 months of
chelation therapy; minor abnormalities (hyperalbuminemia, hyperbilirubinemia,
azotemia and proteinuria) were all characteristic of PCH pathogenesis or treatment. After 12 months of chelation therapy, liver enzyme activities had normalized,
and all ocular signs had resolved. Client concerns precluded repeating aspiration or
biopsy of the liver, so serum copper was measured and found to be within reference
limits (Cu = 0.77 ppm, 0.6–1.4 ppm), suggesting copper homeostasis. However, the
lack of a pre-treatment serum copper level for comparison and minimal evidence of
correlation between serum and liver copper levels were limitations of this approach. Considering these indicators of copper
homeostasis, the cat was transitioned from D-penicillamine back to zinc gluconate as
previously prescribed; however, the cat continued to vomit. Decreasing the zinc
gluconate dose (6 mg/kg, PO, q24h) substantially reduced vomiting, and the cat’s
liver enzyme activities have remained within reference limits for almost 3 years,
which suggests that this regimen – in combination with the low-copper diet – will
effectively manage the PCH in the long term. The cat continues to receive Denamarin,
maropitant and ondansetron, as previously prescribed, to support the liver and
manage occasional vomiting. The cat has remained chronically pyrexic (103.0–105.0°F)
in hospital; however, the cat’s temperature cannot be taken at home to rule out
stress.
Other cases of feline PCH have been linked to variations in copper-transporting
ATPase 2, a transmembrane
protein encoded by the ATP7B gene that maintains copper homeostasis
by exporting excess cellular copper. Using previously published methods, genomic DNA extracted from the cat’s whole blood was Sanger sequenced, and
the coding regions of the cat’s ATP7B gene were aligned with a
feline consensus sequence (NCBI: XM_023251165.1) using CLC Sequence Viewer.
Alignment identified 23 single nucleotide variations (SNVs), which included six
missense variations, two of which had not been previously reported in healthy cats
(c.1268c/t and c.3670t/a) . Using the 99 Lives Consortium data set (n = 340 cats),
c.1268c/t was called with an allele frequency of 0.134, whereas c.3670t/a was not
called.
To determine whether these novel SNVs were pathogenic, the consensus amino acid
sequence of the feline ATP7B gene was aligned with seven other
species using previously described methods . Substitutions in functionally important amino acids are more likely to be
pathogenic and therefore purged by natural selection (ie, functionally important
amino acids are highly conserved across species). While the amino acid affected by
the c.1268c/t SNV (p.Thr423Ile) was only conserved across three of the eight species
, the amino
acid affected by the c.3670t/a SNV (p.Trp1224Arg) was conserved across all eight
species , which
suggests that the c.3670t/a SNV and resulting p.Trp1224Arg substitution could be
pathogenic.
The effects of both amino acid substitutions on the function of ATPase
2 were predicted using PolyPhen2, SIFT, PROVEAN and PANTHER, using
previously described methods . Substantial effects were not predicted for p.Thr423Ile but were predicted for
p.Trp1224Arg. The p.Trp1224Arg substitution changes the primary structure of
copper-transporting ATPase 2’s ATP-binding cytoplasmic domain,
which would likely prevent active transport of copper across membranes.
Collectively, these results support conservative characterization of the c.3670t/a
SNV as ‘likely pathogenic’ and a
likely cause of this cat’s PCH despite occurring on only one chromosome (ie, the cat
is heterozygous for this SNV).