A 55-years-old male without any comorbid conditions presented to the orthopedic outpatient department with a mass over right forearm for the past 30 years. The swelling was progressively increasing in size over the years and was not associated with any motor or sensory impairment. He was unable to eat comfortably, as it was causing a mechanical block to the elbow movement dueto its increasing size and atypical location. On examination, it was found that swelling was located over proximal half of forearm extending mainly on the anterolateral aspect. Skin overlying it was normal and non-adherent. The mass was soft in consistency and on supination and flexion of forearm muscles, it partially reduced in size indicating that it was in the submuscular plane, specifically deep to the brachioradialis. His elbow range of motion had a terminal restriction which probably was causing his disability . On admission, all his blood parameters were within normal limits. Conventional radiographs of the forearm revealed spiculated periosteal bone formation at the junction of the proximal and middle one-third junction of the radius. There was an increase in the soft tissue shadow surrounding the lesion along with characteristic radiodensity of fatty tissue. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multilobulated mass with the hypointense signal on T1-weighted images. The dimension of the mass was estimated to be 8 cm × 8cm × 4.5 cm . The mass was explored using elliptical incision and it was found underneath brachioradialis muscle. Enbloc resection of the well-capsulated mass with the stalk was carried out. The tumor weighed approximately 220 g . Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of encapsulated lipoma except for its attachment at the bone. Postoperatively, he had a full range of motion at the elbow (flexion:0–145°, supination:0–85°, and pronation:0–90°) and the wrist. The patient was followed-up for 2 years and was found to have a complete range of motion with no radiological or clinical evidence of recurrence of the tumor .