A 38-year-old male with COPD and bullous pulmonary emphysema was admitted into the phthisiopulmonology department, complaining of a periodic cough with mucopurulent sputum in the morning, whistling in the lungs in horizontal position, shortness of breath during mild exercise, persistent fatigue. The patient had a number of lung health risk factors (such as a work on a mining truck, contact with dust agents of silicates, volatile substances, smoker), with no prior history of lung disease. Physical examination revealed an expiratory wheeze and fine crackles during forced expiration. Radiographically, giant thin-walled bullae were detected in both lungs, characteristic of vanishing lung syndrome [–]. Alpha-1 antitripsin deficiency was excluded (α1- antitrypsin levels were normal). Spirometry showed FEV1/VC ratio to be < 0.7. Surgical treatment was advised with prior patient stabilization. Inhalation of Tiotropium bromidе 5 mcg per day was prescribed. At the same time NYHA class III (2 grade MRC) dyspnea persisted. A chest CT showed centrilobular emphysema and bilater giant emphysematous bullae . Sputum fluorescent microscopy and bacteriological testing did not reveal acid-fast bacilli. Indications for surgical treatment were presented according to ERS/ATS criteria , taking into account respiratory failure progression and negative patient dynamics.
Surgical protocol consisted of a two-stage approach. Primarily, under combined endotracheal anesthesia with separate bronchial intubation, a VATS right upper lobectomy was performed. Surgery duration was 240 min, blood loss was minimal (30 ml). Complete right upper lobe excision allowed for the removal of a giant bulla (25 cm in diameter). Intraoperatively no complications occurred. 26 h after primary surgery the patient presented with acute respiratory distress, upon examination an acute spontaneous pneumothorax on the right with bullae hyperextension on the left was diagnosed. Respiratory failure progression (pCO2 = 37.0 mmHg, pO2 = 58 mmHg) prompted urgent surgery. A revisional surgery on the right and a left lobectomy (S1–2, S3) was planned. During surgery, a type II bulla (7 cm) rupture was revealed in the right lung outside the previous resection line, which caused the pneumothorax, a S6 re-resection was performed with removal of the ruptured bulla. A S1–2, S3 anatomical resection was performed on the left lung with removal of a giant bulla (25 cm in diameter). Surgery duration was 40 min, total blood loss was 40 ml. Postoperatively the patient received respiratory exercise and pharmacological therapy (Olodaterol 5mcg; Tiotropium bromide 5mcg). Due to a large volume of resected lung tissue, slow pulmonary expansion was carried out to reduce the risk of pneumothorax and formation of new bullae. This required lengthy hospitalization with pleural drains removed 30 days after surgery. An artificial pneumoperitoneum aimed on reduction of intrapleural pressure to reduce pneumothorax risk and pulmonary tissue hyperextension.
The patient was discharged in a satisfactory condition 30 days after surgery, pulmonary pneumatization was satisfactory . Wound closure was satisfactory . Bullous emphysema was confirmed histologically. In addition to thin fibrotic bullae, pneumosclerosis and lung congestion was revealed: perivascular lymphoid infiltrates, vascular wall thickening, foci of atelectasis, emphysematous lung tissue, lymphoid tissue inhibition in lymph nodes, sites of fibrosis were identified histologically. Upon discharge, importance of quitting smoking, lung exercise and regular observation were thoroughly discussed with the patient.
At 5 years follow-up past the patient was smoke-free, physically active, overall condition was above satisfactory. I-II NYHA class dyspnea was present, no II tone accent over the pulmonary artery was present. Fine crackles during forced expiration were revealed mostly on the right. ECG and echocardiogram showed no signs of pulmonary hypertension. Radiological examination showed few small bullae in the lungs, no giant bullae formation was observed . No additional adverse events except several small bullae were found. Overall improved spirometry results were stable .