A 57-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the respiratory department at a regional hospital owing to hemoptysis and cough, no obvious cause was identified, and the patient denied having chest pain, fever, shiver, and other concomitant symptoms. The patient’s social history was as follows: 60-pack years and 30 years of significant alcohol intake; however, he had been sober for 10 years. There was no other relevant medical history of note, and the patient revealed no genetic, congenital, or developmental abnormalities. Unfortunately, the family genetic history was not provided. The patient had not received any prior treatment for these symptoms. Physical examination revealed that the superficial lymph nodes of the whole body were not palpable or enlarged. The breathing sounds of both lungs were clear, and no coarse or fine crackles were heard. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an irregular large soft tissue mass in the right hilar region, invading the right main bronchus, narrowing, and truncating with atelectasis. The tumor diameter was 52.85 mm (mediastinal window images were uniformly used for measurement and comparison) with atelectasis . Histological examination of a transbronchial specimen confirmed that the tumor was a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). No lymph node metastases or distant organ metastases were identified. Based on the 8th Edition Lung Cancer Stage Classification, it was diagnosed as right central lung SCC with right upper lobe atelectasis (stage cT3N0M0, IIB) .
As the tumor was close to the carina, a multidisciplinary team (MDT) consultation was undertaken; the team consisted of a medical oncologist, a thoracic surgeon, a radiologist, and a pathologist. As the MDT concluded that the risks associated with the surgical resection of the tumor were very high, it was not considered at the time. A treatment plan was developed for induction chemotherapy with sequential thoracic radiotherapy since the large diameter of the tumor and vascular invasion. Paclitaxel (albumin-bound) 400 mg D1 combined with carboplatin 500 mg D1 on a 21-day cycle was used for induction chemotherapy. The first treatment cycle began on October 16, 2020, and the two-cycle efficacy was evaluated as stable disease .
At the end of the first round of chemotherapy, the patient again presented with cough with hemoptysis in the early morning of the 3rd day; the blood was dark red and of approximately 10-15 ml. Routine blood test revealed that the bleeding was not caused by thrombocytopenia, a common adverse reaction to chemotherapy. Bronchial artery embolization was performed twice during chemotherapy to address the symptoms. The first embolization was performed on October 19, 2020. The interventional doctor injected the contrast medium into the thickened artery— the trunk of the right middle and lower lobe bronchial artery; this helped to clearly stain the tumor, and the staining disappeared after poly vinyl alcohol (PVA) microspheres measuring 300–500 mm in diameter was injected into the arteries. However, the results were unsatisfactory, and the patient’s hemoptysis did not reduce in intensity following the procedure. A second embolization was performed 6 weeks later (December 2, 2020). The PVA microspheres with a diameter of 100-300mm and two coils with diameter 2cm/crimp diameter 2cm (2-2) were injected into the right upper lobe bronchial artery; and four coils with diameter 2cm/crimp diameter 2cm (2-2) were injected into the right middle lobe bronchial artery. The patient’s hemoptysis disappeared; no chemotherapeutic drugs were used in either procedure. The patient tolerated the intervention, and there were no adverse reactions, such as fever, headache, nausea, or vomiting. On the second day after embolization, intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) was initiated at a dose of 60 Gy for 30 fractions. On December 9, 2020, enhanced CT performed during radiotherapy to reposition the patient revealed that the tumor had significantly reduced in size to 21.16 mm . On December 16, 2020, after the 10th radiotherapy fractionation, an enhanced CT scan revealed that the tumor had reduced to 18.11 mm in size. It remained this size for 4 months . Unfortunately, the patient has since developed lymph node metastases (occurred 3 months after radiotherapy) and remains under treatment. The patient provided informed consent for publication of this case report.