A 28-years-old man was admitted to the Emergency Department of our Hospital for the sudden onset of aphasia, right facial numbness and right hemiparesis, while playing football. He was not an athlete and never performed a medical examination for sports fitness.
Nothing of significant emerged in the past medical history. Physical examination confirmed the neurological deficit, blood pressure was 120/80, heart rate 90 bpm, no carotid bruit detected. Blood tests (blood count, kidney and liver function, coagulation and electrolytes) were normal. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. Computer Tomography (CT) of the brain, performed in urgency, was normal. A Magnetic Resonance (MRI) of the brain showed areas of recent ischemia in the left cerebral hemisphere with more extensive involvement of the putamen, globus pallidus and temporal and parietal cortical-subcortical posterior lobes . Smaller areas of similar meaning were detectable always on the left, adjacent parietal-occipital sulcus and on the right in the frontal and cerebellar regions. Some small areas compatible with vascular outcomes were found in the cerebellum. Magnetic Resonance Angiography (MRA) showed thrombosis of the left middle cerebral artery . The patient was hospitalized in Stroke Unit and in accordance with the guidelines was treated with thrombolysis with r-TPA (0.9 mg/kg). Mechanical thrombectomy was not considered as the first choice of treatment since the patient did not have contraindications to thrombolysis; given the good clinical response to thrombolytic treatment, mechanical thrombectomy was not considered as an adjuntive treatment either.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a 10 × 10 mm mass attached to the anterior mitral valve leaflet, fluttering into the cardiac chambers. . There were no evidence of valvular stenosis, regurgitation, or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction and left ventricular function was normal. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) was also performed: it confirmed the presence of a hyper echogenic nodular and mobile mass, attached to the atrial side of A3 scallop of the anterior mitral leaflet; it also allowed to rule out other causes of embolism such as patent foramen oval or cardiac thrombosis . A cardiac MRI confirmed the presence of the lesion, with a maximum size equal to about 1 cm . ECG monitoring during hospitalization in Stroke Unit and the Holter ECG revealed no arrhythmias.
The decision was to perform the excision of the mass. We considered the possibility to remove it in the cardiac catheterization laboratory but the mass was apparently too big and indented to be removed with out risk of embolization. To avoid it we decided to perform an open heart surgical excision. The operation was performed under normothermic cardiopulmonary bypass using ascending aortic and bicaval cannulation. After cardiac arrest with antegrade cardioplegia, left atrium was opened A 1-cm, gelatinous and solid looking mass was found attached to the anterior leaflet of mitral valve near the posteromedial mitral commisure. It was resected with its stalk . Post-operative TEE confirmed normal valvular functions and absence of residual left atrial mass. The histological examination of the tissue revealed a papillary fibroelastoma. The early postoperative period was uncomplicated, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day-10. Actually remains a permanent nuanced right hemisyndrome. A 1-month postoperative echocardiography control showed perfect valve function with no residual mitral regurgitation or stenosis.