An Indonesian male, aged 30 years old, complained of pain, erythema, tenderness, and a swollen left leg 1 month ago. The medical history of the patient showed AIDS, and he consumed antiretroviral (Tenofovir+Lamivudine+Efavirenz). In addition, the patient had pulmonary TB and consumed a first-line anti-TB drug for 3 months. Physical examination found enlarged Colli dextra lymph nodes of ±4 cm and Sinistra ±2 cm, mobile and painless. The left lower extremity showed edema pitting, red skin color, and tenderness . Homans’s sign examination was positive. Laboratory investigation obtained was white blood cells of 6640 µl, hemoglobin of 8.4 g/dl; platelet of 362 000 µl, neutrophils of 73.2%, lymphocytes of 10.5%, monocytes of 10.3%, eosinophils of 5.9%, and basophils of 0.3%. Acid-fast bacilli test (+), GeneXpert Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) (+), and Rifampicin sensitive. Rapid test (+), HIV test 3 methods (+), and absolute CD4 of 77 cells/µl. FNAB dextra Colli nodules showed chronic suppurative inflammation and suspected TB lymphadenitis. Left inferior extremity vascular on Doppler ultrasound showed partial DVT in the common femoral vein, superficial femoral to left popliteal vein. The chest radiography showed minimal left pleural effusion .
The patient was diagnosed with left inferior extremity DVT, AIDS, and pulmonary TB. The patient therapy received fondaparinux 1×5 mg and Warfarin 2 mg/day. On the sixth day, laboratory examination showed plasma prothrombin time (PPT) of 10.3 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 39.4 s, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1, and D-dimer of 2252 ng/ml. The patient continued therapy of Fondaparinux 1×5 mg and increased Warfarin to 1×3 mg. On the ninth day, laboratory examination showed PPT of 10 s, APTT of 34.9 s, and INR: 1. The patient was on continued treatment with Fondaparinux 1×5 mg and Warfarin increased to 1×4 mg. The patient was planned to examine the INR again in 3 days to evaluate and adjust the anticoagulant dose. If the INR was 2–3 within 1×24 h, the Fondaparinux injection could be stopped.
On the 14th day, swelling complaints on the patient’s left leg improved, and the patient had no bleeding complaints. Laboratory examination showed PPT of 10.5 s, APTT of 33 s, INR of 1, and CD4 of 262 cells/µl. The patient insisted on becoming an outpatient because he had no complaints, his swelling had resolved, and there was no accompanying family. He continued control in the outpatient polyclinic, with continued oral warfarin 1×4 mg.