A 55-year old man was hospitalized for congestive heart failure due to combined severe stenosis and regurgitant aortic valve disease. The patient’s medical history included rheumatic heart disease requiring a 23 mm aortic root homograft implantation 21 years earlier. The patient was referred to our center for surgical intervention. Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe aortic valve regurgitation (pressure half time < 200 ms), moderate aortic stenosis (mean gradient 38 mmHg), left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.50 and a moderate mitral regurgitation and stenosis. Coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis, however aortic calcifications were visible and a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to access the ascending aorta. The CT scan showed severe calcifications at the level of the annulus and distal part of the homograft . A transcatheter aortic valve implantation was considered, however, due to the young age of the patient, concomitant mitral valve surgery and a strong preference for mechanical valve prostheses the patient was accepted for surgical correction. The calculated logistic EuroSCORE was 5.6% and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons calculated risk of mortality was 3.2%.
The operation was performed through a median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass was established with cannulation of the proximal aortic arch and bicaval venous cannulation. The body temperature was actively cooled to 33 degrees Celsius. A left ventricular vent was inserted through the right superior pulmonary vein. After clamping the aorta, an oblique aortotomy was made distal of the homograft due to severe aortic calcifications. Custodiol cardioplegia was administered selectively in both coronary ostiae. Sondergaard’s groove was dissected and a rheumatic mitral valve was identified with low likelihood of repair. Therefore, a 31 mm St. Jude Medical Regent mechanical mitral valve prosthesis was implanted (St Jude Medical, Inc., St Paul, Minn, USA). Afterwards, the aortic leaves were excised and extensive decalcification was performed. A conventional mechanical aortic valve replacement was attempted requiring multiple sutures at the annulus. However, due to the extensive degree of calcification these sutures could not be placed. As alternative a colleague skilled with sutureless AVR implantation was consulted. After careful sizing of the aortic annulus a Perceval biological prosthesis of maximal size S was implanted (LivaNova PLC; London, UK) due to circumferential calcifications of the aortic root. Aortic valve placement was performed using three 4–0 Prolene guiding sutures and deployment was successful even with the presence of the mitral valve prosthesis. The aortotomy was closed using a running Prolene 5–0 suture. The cross-clamping time was 190 min and the cardiopulmonary bypass time was 275 min. Intraoperatively transesophageal echocardiogram showed good function of both the aortic and mitral valves with no sign of perivalvular leakage.
The post-operative course was uneventful without the occurrence of any conduction abnormalities. The patient was seen at our outpatient clinic 6 weeks after discharge and recovered well without residual symptoms. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed after 6 and 12 weeks showing moderate aortic stenosis (mean gradient 29 mmHg) with a indexed effective orifice area of 0.72 cm2/m2 without any perivalvular leakage .