A 14-year-old Asian girl had no pain in daily life, but occasionally had a slight pain in her left elbow. She looked normally developed, and was not obese. There was no past medical, surgical, or family history of factors that might contribute to bone disease. She had no tenderness over the elbow. She was not an active athlete, but belonged to a basketball club in school. There was no history of trauma. Plain radiographs showed a well-defined osteolytic lesion with an osteosclerotic rim in the distal humerus. The osteosclerotic rim was absent at the joint periphery, but continued to the subarticular bone. The osteosclerotic rim had no irregularity. Periosteal reaction was not seen. Her right elbow was normal .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the osteolytic lesion was solid, and was next to the surrounding joint cartilage. The lesion had low-signal to iso-signal intensity on T1-weighted images, slightly high-signal intensity on T2-weighted fat suppression images, and high-signal intensity on short tau inversion recovery (STIR) images . Bone marrow edema of low-signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high-signal intensity on T2-weighted images was not seen.
The osteolytic lesion had a differential diagnosis of osteochondrosis dissecans as an osteocartilaginous defect. In the current case, the osteolytic area was rather deep and the osteosclerotic rim was clear. Our patient had no traumatic episode, and a clinical symptom of rocking at the elbow was not observed. No free body was detected in her elbow joint space on MRI. These image and clinical findings did not meet the diagnostic criteria for osteochondrosis dissecans.
A neoplastic lesion was also a differential diagnosis in the current case. Osteolytic bone tumors that involve the epiphysis include chondroblastoma, chondromyxoid fibroma, and giant cell tumor of bone. An osteosclerotic rim is not usually seen in giant cell tumor of bone. Although chondroblastoma and chondromyxoid fibroma may have an osteosclerotic rim, the osteosclerotic rim would not be as clear as that in the current case. Furthermore, the absence of bone marrow edema suggested a lower probability of a neoplastic lesion.
After excluding the possible differential diagnoses of traumatic and neoplastic lesions, a normal variant condition was considered. Biopsy was not performed for the diagnosis. The plain radiograph at follow-up at 2 years had not changed, and pain was not noticed at that time.