A 64-year-old male with a history of well-controlled diabetes mellitus and hypertension presented with 10 days of cough and congestion after attending a regional conference. Despite driving to the meeting, he had multiple interactions with individuals from Italy. He visited his primary care physician, who diagnosed community-acquired pneumonia, and prescribed a 5-day course of levofloxacin 750 mg daily and prednisone 50 mg. Over the next week his symptoms did not improve, and he presented to the emergency room after battling symptoms for 17 days. His vitals on presentation demonstrated a temperature of 36.6°C, heart rate of 102 b.p.m., a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 126/77 mmHg. Cardiovascular exam was reported as normal; however, his lung exam demonstrated scattered rhonchi. His medications on admission were aspirin 81 mg daily, atorvastatin 20 mg daily, metformin 1000 mg b.i.d., linagliptin 5 mg daily, and isinopril 20 mg daily.
Differential diagnosis included SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia, community-acquired pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, acute heart failure exacerbation, acute coronary syndrome, myocarditis, and pericardial disease.
His chest radiogram demonstrated bilateral opacities, left worse than right. He was given ceftriaxone 1 g every 24 h and azithromycin 500 mg once, and was admitted to the general medical ward. He was continued on his home aspirin 81 mg, atorvastatin 20 mg, and lisinopril 20 mg, in addition to being placed on an insulin lispro sliding algorithm and enoxaparin 40 mg subcutaneously daily for deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis. On hospital day 1, an infectious disease consultant recommended SARS-CoV-2 nasal swab PCR testing. The following day, his SARS-CoV-2 test returned positive and 2.5 L of O2 by nasal cannula was required for an oxygen saturation of 80% with ambulation. Azithromycin and ceftriaxone were discontinued, and he was managed with an albuterol metered dose inhaler 2.5 mg every 6 h. On hospital day 3, a persistent sinus tachycardia (110 b.p.m.) was unfortunately only treated with metoprolol tartrate 12.5 mg b.i.d. On hospital day 5, tachycardia worsened with heart rates in the 130s, hypoxia requiring 15 L by non-rebreather mask, and acute kidney injury with creatinine elevation to 1.7 from 1.1 mg/dL (normal range 0.5–1.3 mg/dL). Cardiology consultation recommended an echocardiogram and D-dimer. The echocardiogram demonstrated severe right ventricular dilation (, , Movie 1), right ventricular dysfunction, severe pulmonary hypertension, and extensive clot in transit (; Supplementarty material online, Movie 1) in the right atrium. D-dimer returned at 14 000 ng/mL (normal range <500 ng/mL). Worsening hypoxia and acute kidney injury precluded a CT pulmonary embolism scan. Thrombolytic therapy with tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) followed by a heparin drip was recommended by the Heart Team (Cardiology and Cardiothoracic surgery consultation teams). Oxygenation improved and required only a 2 L nasal cannula within 24 h. On hospital day 6, an echocardiogram demonstrated resolution of the right atrial thrombus (, Supplementarty material online, Movie 2) with improvement in pulmonary artery pressures. On hospital day 9, he was transitioned to apixaban with a planned duration for 3–6 months. The patient was discharged home on 2 L of oxygen on hospital day 11. He followed up with his cardiologist via telephone encounter 5 days after discharge and continues to improve. His last encounter was 1 month after hospitalization with his primary care physician where his dyspnoea has improved and no longer requires oxygen by nasal cannula. He is scheduled to see vascular medicine to discuss the risk/benefit of prolonged anticoagulation.