A 32-year-old female presented with sudden right flank pain for 2 h to the Accidents & Emergency Department without prior history of trauma. Also had nausea and vomiting however no episodes of visible hematuria, fevers, unintentional weight loss, easy fatiguability nor shortness of breath reported. She did not have any significant drug allergies, family history of malignancies, comorbid nor prior history of surgeries. She was nulliparous, on her third day of menstrual cycle, did not smoke nor consume alcohol.
On examination she was alert, afebrile, pale, not cyanotic, tachycardic with pulse rate ranging between 100 and 115 beats per minute and a blood pressure on the lower limit at 95/63 which improved to 105/69 with initial fluid bolus. Per abdominal examination revealed a normal contour, without surgical nor therapeutic scars. She had significant tenderness noted at the right flank without discoloration of overlying skin and positive right renal angle tenderness. Rest of abdomen was soft without palpable organomegaly, tympanic percussion note and normal bowel sounds.
Initial blood work up revealed leukocytosis predominantly neutrophilia with a hemoglobin level of 7.4 g/dL, elevated creatinine level of 102.13 umol/L, negative serum Beta HCG test, and urine analysis significant for 10–25 red blood cells/hpf. A contrasted Computed Tomography scan of the abdomen revealed a sentinel clot sign in proximity to a fat-based lesion of the right kidney and with a perinephric hematoma suggestive of retroperitoneal hematoma secondary to a ruptured renal mass, most likely AML. She was persistently tachycardic and blood pressures dropped after initial response to fluid challenges to 85/60 hence prepared for emergency laparotomy with preparations to mobilise blood products to transfuse.
A midline incision made with dissection into the abdominal cavity and duodenum kocherized to expose retroperitoneal contents. A retroperitoneal hematoma extending into the right paracolic gutter displacing overlying bowel to the left was seen which encased the right renal hilum as well as the inferior vena cava. Encased within the hematoma revealed a right kidney with fungating mass extending from the mid to the upper pole, suspicious of a ruptured AML . The hematoma was opened and drained followed by clamping at the hilum of the right kidney for vascular control and right nephrectomy performed and sent for histopathology.
Post-operative was sent to the intensive care unit for close observation to receive 3 more units of blood, having received 2 units with 6 units of fresh frozen plasma at the emergency department, and fared well with no complications and vitals had normalised. Was transferred out by day 3 and by day 5 discharged home while tolerating regular feeds, ambulating and pain controlled with oral analgesia and a hemoglobin level of 11 g/dL. Follow up in the outpatient department was uneventful.
Histopathology showed benign renal parenchyma with tumor composed of mature adipose tissue, thick-walled dilated blood vessels which are congested and spindle (rhabdoid like) to round to oval cells with some pleomorphism, others with vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleoli. Few scattered mitoses were seen. Hemorrhage and necrosis were present with free ureter and renal hilar vessels. Hence confirming diagnosis of right ruptured renal AML.