A 12-year-old female presented to the outpatient department with pain in the right knee for 1 week and difficulty bearing weight for the past 4 days. The pain was insidious in onset without any preceding trauma and was aggravated with weight-bearing and knee bending. She had no constitutional symptoms. The child’s body mass index was 19.2 kg/m2, height was between the 3rd and 10th centile, and her weight fell in 25–50th centile as per the revised Indian Academy of Pediatrics growth charts . On clinical evaluation, the child was hemodynamically stable and afebrile. There was diffuse swelling over the right knee and local temperature was elevated. Marked tenderness was present over the lateral joint line and lateral tibial plateau. Knee movements were painful and restricted and a flexion deformity of 10 degrees was noted. There was no effusion in the knee joint. Her initial knee radiograph was normal . Laboratory work-up showed a total leukocyte count of 12,700/mm3 with a neutrophilic predominance, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 29 mm3, and C-reactive protein of 5.28. Her serum Vitamin D was 12.3 ng/dl and other blood metabolic parameters such as liver and renal functional tests, serum calcium, phosphate, and alkaline phosphatase were normal. She was seronegative for HIV. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hyperintensities in T2/STIR images in the epiphysis of the proximal tibia, more marked on the lateral aspect. There was a diffuse post-contrast enhancement, suggestive of edema . Otherwise, the knee joint was unremarkable with no effusion or synovial hypertrophy. No local pus collection could be appreciated along the tibia. Ultrasonography-guided biopsy from the lateral tibial epiphysis was done and samples were sent for histopathological and microbiological examinations. Histopathological examination showed dense inflammatory infiltrate comprising neutrophils and lymphocytes, without any atypical or malignant cells. After 48 h of incubation, P. aeruginosa was isolated in the aerobic culture. Diagnosis of pyogenic proximal tibial epiphysitis was made. She was immobilized in an above knee POP slab and started on supportive measures including pain relief and nutritional care. No empirical antibiotic therapy was started. Culture-specific antibiotic treatment was started according to the antibiogram (intravenous ceftazidime 1000 mg thrice daily for 3 weeks followed by oral faropenem 200 mg twice daily for 3 weeks). Inflammatory markers were monitored at regular intervals. After 1 week of initiation of intravenous antibiotics, she improved clinically and inflammatory markers showed a decreasing trend. C-reactive protein was 2.0 and 1.7 at day 7 and 14 of treatment with antibiotics, respectively. She was completely pain free on day 12 and was started on passive knee range of motion, isometric quadriceps strengthening exercises, and partial weight-bearing with support. She attained a full painless range of motion (0–145 degrees) on day 20 and was allowed full weight-bearing without support. At 24 months follow-up, the child was active with knee range of motion 0–140 degrees of flexion and normal plain radiograph . No local growth disturbance was noted.