A 63-year-old Caucasian woman with subcarinal and left hilar lymphadenopathy presented to our hospital for a right thoracoscopic mediastinal lymph node dissection. Our patient had a history of endometrial adenocarcinoma, and lymphadenopathy was noted on a follow-up computed tomography scan. At the time of the initial presentation, three years ago, the carcinoma was treated surgically. The post-surgical course at that time was complicated with deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, which were treated with anticoagulation therapy and the placement of an inferior vena cava filter. Our patient denied any residual shortness of breath or limitation of activity. She was participating in water aerobics and was able to walk up a flight of stairs easily without shortness of breath. Her history was also significant for gastroesophageal reflux disease and dyslipidemia. Our patient's medications included ranitidine and simvastatin. She did not report any allergies. A physical exam was unremarkable except for obesity (weight 119 kg; height 165 cm).
Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) monitors were placed. After a rapid sequence induction (fentanyl 1 μg/kg, lidocaine 1 mg/kg, propofol 2 mg/kg, succinylcholine 1.5 mg/kg) our patient was intubated with a 39 French left-sided double lumen endotracheal tube. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane 5-6%, fentanyl (total intraoperative dose 300 μg), vecuronium 4 mg and fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) at 1.0. Our patient was turned to the left lateral position and the correct position of the endotracheal tube was confirmed with fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Left sided one-lung ventilation was initiated (tidal volume 300cc, respiratory rate 16/min, positive-pressure respiration (PEEP) 4, FiO2 1.0). Incisions were made soon after initiation of one-lung ventilation, and ports were inserted. Vitals signs at the time of incision included saturated oxygen 99-100%, noninvasive blood pressure 150/75 mmHg and pulse 80/min. Her right hemithorax was insufflated with carbon dioxide to a pressure of 10 mmHg at a rate of 25 L/min. At this point in the procedure we noted changes in our patient's hemodynamic status. Her blood pressure dropped to 112/63 and her heart rate precipitously dropped to 35/min for a few seconds. This was followed by asystole. The surgeon was notified, insufflation was stopped and glycopyrrolate 0.4 mg and atropine 0.4 mg were administered. Within 10 seconds of pleural deflation our patient resumed a normal sinus rhythm. Her next blood pressure reading was 125/75. In the absence of further rhythm or hemodynamic abnormalities the surgery was continued. The pleural cavity was slowly insufflated to a pressure of 8 mmHg and the case progressed without any further complications. Our patient had an uncomplicated post-operative course.