A 31-year-old man with no past medical history presented with an extensive ulcerative black lesion on the posterior of the right thigh accompanying with swelling of right groin and right side of the neck. He mentioned the protuberancy behind the right thigh from one year ago, which got ulcerated after eight months and simultaneously inguinal and neck mass appeared. Physical examinations revealed a 15×15 cm black lesion with patchy ulceration on the posterior of the right thigh. Also, there were multiple unremarkable lymph nodes in the right inguinal region (their estimated total size was 15×10 cm) and a 1.5 cm lymph node in the submandibular nodes (level Ib). Other places of skin and lymph node region were evaluated, and no specific clinical finding was detected. The general differential diagnosis a cutaneous lesion with described details were atypical mole (Clark nevus or dysplastic nevus), basal cell carcinoma, blue nevi, cherry hemangioma, halo nevus, keloid and hypertrophic scar, keratoacanthoma, lentigo, melanocytic nevi, nevi of Ota and Ito, seborrheic keratosis, Spitz nevus, vitiligo, squamous cell carcinoma, dermatofibroma, and dermatologic manifestations of metastatic carcinomas, which might be accompanied with lymph nodes involvement. Therefore, the patient underwent an incisional biopsy of thigh lesion.
Histopathologic evaluation showed malignant neoplastic proliferation, partly ulcerated surface of the epidermis as patternless sheets of highly atypical pleomorphic epithelial immature cells with polyhedral shape, irregular vesicular nuclei, enlarged nucleoli, and moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm that were mostly compatible with undifferentiated skin carcinoma or amelanotic MM. Immunohistochemistry staining were performed for CK, LCA, CD117, CD34, S100, and Melan-A, which were labeled only for S100 protein and markers of melanocytic differentiation; Melan-A. Morphologic and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with amelanotic MM.
Following the final diagnosis, the patient underwent contracted thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan confirming metastatic lymphadenopathy of right inguinal region.
The patient received Dartmouth chemotherapy for eight cycles that include cisplatin 40 mg and dacarbazine (DTIC) 40 mg, both on days 1–3, given in three weekly cycles and BCNU 120 mg on day 1 and 80 mg on day 2 of cycles 1, 3, and 6. Also, tamoxifen 20 mg daily was prescribed continuously. The patient had not previously received DTIC chemotherapy. Dose modification and bone marrow support using granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF) were applied because of hematologic toxicity. After 5 cycles of chemotherapy, the patient developed grade I neutropenia; therefore, five ampules of GCSF (300 mg) were added to his regimen. However, after this cycle, the patient developed grade I neutropenia again resulting in a 20% dose reduction. Patient evaluation during chemotherapy cycles showed a dramatic response with a significant size reduction of thigh lesion (size of the lesion after 4 chemotherapy cycles was 2 cm) and disappearance of inguinal and cervical lymph nodes. Then after, the patient received local radiotherapy of thigh lesion (36 Gy in 6 fractions) and inguinal and cervical lymph nodes (50 Gy in 25 fractions). This treatment regimen was tolerated very well. Physical examination at the end of radiotherapy revealed no abnormal findings and thigh lesion was healed completely.
About 15 months later, the patient presented with nasal congestion and CT scan of face revealed an extensive tumoral mass in maxillary, sphenoid, and ethmoid sinuses and, also, a soft tissue lesion in the left frontal sinus with bone destruction on the that biopsy confirmed metastatic MM . Then, he underwent endonasal endoscopic excision of the mass. During operation, surgeon reported a tumor invasion to anterior cranial fossa, dural and right periorbital region and therefore R2 resection was performed. Because of gross tumor remnant in paranasal sinuses, the patient received radiotherapy of the nasal cavity, paranasal sinuses, and base of the skull (50 Gy in 25 fractions).
The patient was followed-up clinically and serial CT scans or MRI periodically until seven years. Follow-up imaging showed a gradual regression of paranasal sinuses tumor, and he is completely clinical disease-free for approximately seven years.