A 77-year-old Japanese man presented to the out-patient department of our hospital (day one) with hematuria (42,000 red blood cells/μL) and a hematoma under the jaw. He had anemia (hemoglobin (Hb) 9.3 g/dL), and a remarkable eosinophilia (2600 cells/μL; 32% of white blood cells) . He had a history of minor bronchial asthma, which had been treated with an inhaled glucocorticoid and an anticholinergic. His medical records also showed a history of hypereosinophilia five years earlier, when he developed femoral artery occlusion. He was prescribed warfarin 2 mg/day after the associated bypass surgery. In spite of this history, vascular risk factors (diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia) were absent. At presentation, renal damage (β2-macroglobulin 9.5 mg/L, normal range 0.9 to 1.9 mg/L) was recognized. High levels of IgG and IgE were also noted. IgA (90 mg/dL) and IgM (36 mg/dL) were within normal ranges. While his platelet count (169,000 cells/μL) and bleeding time (one and a half minutes, normal range one to three minutes) were normal, coagulation times were remarkably prolonged: the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 68 seconds (normal: 25 to 40 seconds) and the prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 1.65 . Since hematuria and hematoma were assumed to be due to this coagulopathy, warfarin was stopped.
We considered bronchial asthma, eosinophilic pneumonia, Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS), malignancies , parasitic infections, adrenal insufficiency, and HES as differential diagnoses to explain this eosinophilia. However, his minor bronchial asthma did not explain the high level of eosinophilia. Since a computed tomography (CT) scan detected no abnormalities in the lungs, eosinophilic pneumonia was excluded. Among six diagnostic criteria for CSS, only asthma and eosinophilia were fulfilled . In addition, tests for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) were negative. Therefore, CSS was unlikely. Tumor markers were measured (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), α-fetoprotein (AFP), and protein induced by vitamin K absence 2 (PIVKA2)) and M-protein findings were all negative. There were no parasitic eggs or larvae in his stool, and results of sera anti-Aspergillus antibody tests were negative. His cortisol level was within the normal range on repeated measurements; hence, adrenal insufficiency was considered unlikely. Based on these results, HES remained as the most likely diagnosis. To categorize the HES, monoclonality in the T cell receptor (TCR) was examined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Mitsubishi Medience, Tokyo, Japan), using peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirate. Subsequently, in both samples, TCR monoclonality was detected in β, γ, and δ chains . This finding supported the diagnosis of L-HES. Consistent with this diagnosis, multiple enlarged lymph nodes near the abdominal aorta were detected on CT scan . In contrast, no chromosome abnormality was detected in the bone marrow aspirates. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of peripheral blood and bone marrow aspirates did not detect 4q12 translocation, the most frequent translocation associated with M-HES. Therefore, M-HES was less likely . Collectively, these findings pointed to a diagnosis of L-HES.
After warfarin was stopped from day one, his PT-INR steadily normalized . However, APTT continued to be prolonged . Although our patient tested positive for anti-hepatitis B core (HBc) and anti-hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibodies, hepatitis B surface (HBs) antigen, hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA and HCV RNA were all undetectable. Transaminases were consistently within the normal range. Ultrasonography, CT, and MRI scans did not detect any abnormality in the liver. Hence, the liver was not the source of the prolonged APTT. Other causes of a coagulation abnormality (such as protein C and/or S deficiencies, systemic lupus erythematosus, and anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome) were excluded (data not shown). Although the possibility of DIC was suggested (fibrin degradation products (FDP) 18 μg/mL, D-dimer 7.4 μg/mL, anti-thrombin III 66%, platelet count 117,000 cells/μL), ultrasonography detected no thrombus in the heart or veins/arteries of the lower limbs. Taken together, the findings suggested the prolonged APTT in our patient most likely originated from his HES.
On day 28, our patient developed a subcutaneous hematoma in his hip, which spread rapidly to the thighs, and he was admitted to our hospital. His APTT was further prolonged (83 seconds; Figure ). Hematomas appeared on his trunk and upper limbs. His oral mucosa and a scar in his ear began to bleed. Although a large amount of fresh frozen plasma and red blood cells were infused between days 31 and 34, his APTT reached a high of 93 seconds on day 36, and the hemoglobin level decreased to 7.9 g/dL . On day 36, prednisolone was started at 60 mg/day . His peripheral eosinophils decreased quickly . The APTT and platelet count gradually normalized , while bleeding, subcutaneous hematomas, hematuria, and anemia subsided steadily . Renal damage improved (β2-macroglobulin decreased to 3.4 mg/L). A CT scan revealed that the lymph nodes around the abdominal aorta had shrunk to a normal size (data not shown). His γ-globulinemia normalized . He was discharged on day 55. Prednisolone was continuously tapered in the out-patient setting .
On day 122, when the dose of prednisolone was down to 3 mg/day, a subcutaneous hematoma developed in his thigh. Although his eosinophil count was normal at 64 cells/μL (0.4% of the total white blood cells), his APTT was again prolonged (76 seconds, Figure ). He was admitted to our hospital again, where prednisolone was raised to 40 mg/day . Since his APTT then normalized and hematoma diminished steadily, he was discharged on day 141. To date, he has been kept on prednisolone at 10 mg/day, with no further relapses of coagulopathy or peripheral hypereosinophilia.
To investigate the prolonged APTT, coagulation factors V to XII were measured. Consequently, the activity of factor VIII was markedly reduced: 4% on day 122 (the day of relapse onset). Other factors were all within normal ranges (data not shown). To examine the pathogenesis of the coagulopathy, we preserved our patient's sera (at -80°C) taken after day 34. Control sera were also obtained from 10 healthy individuals (ages 29 to 59 years old, five men, five women). Written informed consent was obtained from all individuals. The research protocol was approved by the committee for clinical ethics of Yao Tokushukai General Hospital. Circulating anticoagulant against factor VIII was evaluated in the preserved sera by using the Bethesda assay. As a result, our patient's anticoagulant level was found to be elevated during both the initial and relapse episodes: 47 BU/mL on day 36, 4 BU/mL on day 124 , while anticoagulant was not detected in any of the control sera. Furthermore, the result of a cross-mixing test conducted on day 122 was not inconsistent with acquired hemophilia (that is, acquisition of anticoagulant) . Our patient and his parents had no history of bleeding abnormalities, which excluded hereditary hemophilia. Therefore, acquired hemophilia was the most likely diagnosis. Other than anticoagulant against factor VIII, all the autoantibodies examined (including anti-nuclear, anti- Sjögren's syndrome A/B (SS-A/B), anti-thyroglobulin, anti-thyroid peroxidase, and anti-DNA antibodies) showed normal values.
To illustrate the immunological dynamics in our patient, 15 cytokines in the sera were measured by using a Milliplex assay (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) . To examine the possible involvement of IgG4-related disease (IgG4RD), a newly recognized disease entity , we measured IgG4 in the preserved serum. IgG4 showed a disproportionately high value . For example, on day 36, IgG4 was 2070 mg/dL (normal range 4.8 to 105 mg/dL), which constituted 48% of the total IgG (normal value < 7%).