A 65-year-old woman with a past medical history of hyperlipidemia and benign hyperplastic colonic polyps presented to the Neurology specialist outpatient clinic for a 7-month history of left cheek numbness, having been referred by her General Practitioner. Her numbness was a negative sensory symptom, which she described as a sensation of cheek swelling even though it appeared normal in the mirror, accompanied by diminished sensation to touch. There was also occasional tenderness on palpation of her left cheek. There were otherwise no symptoms over her left forehead, left mandible, or any part of the right face. The patient denied having any constitutional symptoms, but she had a family history of breast cancer, with her sister having been diagnosed with left breast invasive ductal carcinoma (estrogen and progesterone receptor positive, c-erb-B2 negative) at the age of 44-years-old. The patient was not taking any medications prior to presentation.
On examination, pin-prick sensation was 20% diminished over the left cheek compared to the right cheek. The area of numbness spanned the skin over the left maxilla, left lower eyelid, and left philtrum. The rest of the neurological examination, including examination of the other cranial nerves and of the long tracts, was normal. No asymmetry of motor power in trigeminal nerve-innervated muscles (pterygoids and masseter) was detected. Attention was paid to the skin and buccal mucosa overlying the area of numbness, but no lesions were seen.
As the symptoms were mild and non-disabling, no medications were prescribed at first presentation. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain and cranial nerves was performed approximately 1 year from onset of symptoms (5 months from presentation), revealing a non-compressive, T2-hyperintense, T1 isotense, gadolinium-enhancing lesion of the left maxillary nerve in the foramen rotundum . The rest of the brain parenchyma was unremarkable.
Blood tests, including a panel of onconeural antibodies, were unremarkable . A lumbar puncture was performed 13 months from onset, showing a normal opening pressure of 16.5cmH2O. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal CSF cell counts (CSF red blood cell count 0/μL, CSF white blood cell count 1/μL), normal CSF protein level (0.29g/L), and a normal CSF-to-serum glucose ratio of 0.6 (CSF glucose 3.5mmol/L, paired serum glucose 5.6mmol/L). A panel of CSF microbiological and cytometric tests were unyielding . CSF cytology did not find any malignant cells. CSF onconeural antibodies were not tested, due to institutional limitations on test availability.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not find any evidence of malignancy or metastasis. Mammography and ultrasound scans of the breasts, performed 14 months after the onset of left numb cheek, showed a 6 × 10 × 6mm area of left breast upper outer quadrant hypoechoic tissue, suspicious for malignancy . With knowledge of the scan findings, a vague left breast nodule was palpable on examination. Core biopsy provided histological confirmation of left breast triple-negative ductal carcinoma with apocrine change (estrogen and progesterone receptor negative, c-erb-B2 equivocal, fluorescence in-situ hybridization negative). A technetium bone scintigraphy scan did not show any evidence of bony metastases.
Following recommendations made at a multi-disciplinary tumor board meeting, the patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy (4 cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide, followed by 4 cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin) over the course of 7 months (17 to 23 months since left numb cheek onset). She then underwent left breast wide excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy 24 months after onset, with histology showing residual ductal carcinoma in-situ 1mm away from the closest resection margin. Two sentinel lymph nodes were negative for malignancy.
Prior to the commencement of chemotherapy, the patient underwent a repeat MRI scan of the brain and cranial nerves (16 months after onset). There were no changes from the original MRI scan (12 months after onset); with persistent enhancement of the left trigeminal nerve at the foramen rotundum noted. After completion of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and surgical resection, a repeat MRI scan (26 months after onset) showed resolution of the left trigeminal nerve enhancement .
Clinically, the patient’s symptom of left numb cheek with occasional tenderness remained persistent throughout the course of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Only after surgical resection did she report a gradual improvement in cheek numbness and pain. At follow-up 5 months after surgical resection, the patient reported only minimal numbness over the left philtrum. Mammography at 4 months (scheduled as part of national cancer screening that the patient was subsequently enrolled in) after surgical resection did not show any evidence of malignancy.