A 33-year-old man visited another hospital due to infertility and was identified by semen analysis as azoospermia, so he was referred to our hospital. The right testis was slightly swollen, with elastic hardness. Ultrasonography revealed a homogeneous internal hypoechoic lesion with decreased blood flow . MRI showed a hypointense lesion on T2-weighted imaging and diffusion-weighted imaging, and poor contrast effects, suggesting testicular infarction and ischemic necrosis . CT revealed mild swelling of the para-aortic lymph nodes that were within the physiological range. Tumor markers, including LDH, AFP, HCG, and soluble interleukin −2 receptor, were all negative. Malignancy could not be ruled out in the right testis, so right high orchiectomy and left microdissection testicular sperm extraction (MD-TESE) were performed. Macroscopically, the right testis was occupied by a homogeneous white-toned mass, and the typical testicular structure, including the seminiferous tubules, was not identified. Histopathological examination of the right testis revealed an absence of most of the seminiferous tubules, with the remaining tubules being highly atrophied. Furthermore, the testicular tissue showed vitrification degeneration and sparse infiltration of inflammatory cells . MD-TESE in the left testis failed to retrieve sperm. Histopathological analysis of the left testis revealed an absence of germ cells, with only Sertoli cells present. No neoplastic lesions were identified in the excised tissue.
One month post-surgery, the patient noticed a mass on the left side of his neck. A hard mass with poor mobility was palpated in the left supraclavicular fossa. Tumor markers, including LDH, AFP, and HCG, were all negative. CT confirmed a 37 × 21 mm mass in the lymph nodes of the left supraclavicular fossa and a 22 × 19 mm mass in the lymph nodes of the para-aorta. A cervical lymph node biopsy was performed, and histopathology revealed large round tumor cells with clear, round nuclei of nucleoli and clear cytoplasm. The tumor cells were OCT3/4 and SALL positive . Therefore, the cervical lymph node tissue was diagnosed as metastatic seminoma. The patient was diagnosed with a regressed germ cell tumor. Systemic chemotherapy (Bleomycin, Etoposide, Cisplatin) was initiated, and a total of three courses were implemented. During chemotherapy, tumor markers, including LDH, AFP, and HCG, were all negative. After systemic chemotherapy, the swollen lymph nodes shrank, and the patient had no recurrence 13 months after chemotherapy.