A 76-year old female with a 10-year history CKD presented with complaints of fatigue and anorexia. She was admitted for salvage of a malfunctioning autologous arteriovenous fistula (AVF) caused by fibro-intimal hyperplasia at the outflow vein. During hospitalization, the patient underwent a color Doppler ultrasound which revealed a thickened, 7 mm edematous gall bladder wall with accumulation of fluid in the gallbladder fossa. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed an increased gall bladder volume and a 1.7*1.8 cm irregular soft tissue density on the neck of the gallbladder with multiple small liver cysts. Few cystic lesions were noted on the head of pancreas. Bilateral renal atrophy along multiple renal calculi was also noted. The right middle lobe and lower lobe of the lung showed interstitial inflammation along with few old lesions on the right lobe. Abdominal ultrasound showed multiple hypoechoic lesions from the head of the pancreas to the hepatic hilum, indicating multiple enlarged lymph-nodes. The patient has a history of controlled hypertension. One year prior to admission, she suffered an episode of cerebral stroke without any sequelae. No family or contact history of TB was reported. The patient had generalized jaundice and scleral icterus. A complete physical examination did not reveal any other positive findings. The patient did not complain of chest tightness, nausea, emesis, dizziness or fever. Upon admission, the laboratory results were consistent with CKD and obstructive jaundice. Additionally, a high neuron specific-enolase (NSE) and Cytokeratin Fragment 2 (CYFRA) were noted, 20.03 ng/mL and 5.25 ng/mL, respectively. Tumor markers CA-19-9 and CA-125 had normal levels. The patient was scheduled for an explorative laparotomy. Upon intra-operative exploration a 3*3 cm hard mass was palpated on the neck of gallbladder with invasion into the common hepatic duct . Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the hepato-duodenal ligament and behind the head of pancreas. . A grayish white nodule on the liver sent for fast frozen section indicated focal necrosis and epithelioid granuloma. Histopathological examination of group 13 lymph node revealed chronic granulomatous inflammation with caseous necrosis and Langhans giant cells. While histopathological examination of the gallbladder mass showed chronic granulomatous inflammation with necrosis and multinucleated giant cells, confirming the diagnosis of gallbladder TB. However, acid-fast staining of the gallbladder mass and resected lymph nodes tested negative for bacillus. The patient underwent a radical cholecystectomy with abdominal lymphadenectomy. Following surgery, the patient was transferred to the ICU for close monitoring. The patient returned to the ward on post-operative day 1 (POD 1). A bed-side hemodialysis was regularly performed. On POD 7 the abdominal drainage tube was removed. She had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on POD 10. Subsequently, the patient was referred to a specialized center to implement an anti-tuberculosis treatment plan.