A 32-year-old woman with a history of paroxysmal palpitation was admitted to our hospital for RF ablation.
In July 2018, a 32-year-old woman with a history of paroxysmal palpitation was admitted to our hospital for RF ablation. Electrocardiography (commonly known as ECG) revealed a narrow QRS complex tachycardia with the same morphology in sinus rhythm. Hotter recordings demonstrated 13093 atrial premature beats in 24 h. Echocardiography showed no structural heart disease.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient’s temperature was 37.7 °C, heart rate was 75 beats per min, respiratory rate was 16 breaths per min, blood pressure was 128/85 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. Clinical physical examination revealed no abnormalities.
The results of routine blood tests, routine urine tests, urinary sediment examination, routine fecal tests, occult blood test, blood biochemistry, immune indexes, and infection indexes were in the normal range. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and arterial blood gas were also normal. Preoperative blood urea nitrogen and serum creatinine value were also normal.
Imaging examination revealed no abnormalities.
EP study was performed later in our EP lab. After successfully puncturing both femoral veins, standard 4-polar electrode catheters were introduced to the His bundle and right ventricular (RV) apex through 7-French sheaths. A steerable decapolar electrode catheter was placed in the coronary sinus with the proximal electrode at the ostium. A 4-mm tip electrode was introduced into the cardiac chamber to map the earliest atrial activation during tachycardia. The basic heart rhythm was sinus rhythm, with an atrial-His interval of 70 ms and His bundle-ventricular (HV) interval of 50 ms. The HV interval in atrial S1S1 340 ms overdrive pacing was the same as that in sinus rhythm, which indicated no overt pre-excitation.
Tachycardia with a cycle length of 360 ms occurred after atrial S1 S2 stimulation, with 1:1 ventriculoarterial conduction . Premature ventricular beats during a His refractory period advanced the following atrial potential . The three-dimensional mapping system revealed the earliest atrial activation in tachycardia at 7 o’clock of the tricuspid annulus.
After successfully ablating this AV accessory pathway, the atrial-His interval was 75 ms, and the HV interval was 45 ms. Another narrow QRS complex tachycardia with ventriculoarterial dissociation was induced by both atrial stimulation and ventricular stimulation, which manifested the same surface ECG QRS waves as tachycardia; subsequently, atrial and ventricular stimulation was performed .
The second episode of tachycardia had many electrophysiologic characteristics: (1) The P wave could be positive or negative during tachycardia; (2) This tachycardia could be induced by both atrial and ventricular stimulation; (3) The HV interval during tachycardia was the same as that during sinus rhythm and during the first episode of tachycardia; and (4) This tachycardia could be terminated by an adenosine triphosphate injection.
The second tachycardia had the same HV interval and surface ECG morphology as the first tachycardia. Both right bundle branch block and left bundle branch block could be detected during tachycardia. The HV interval was prolonged for about 20 ms during left bundle branch block; however, the HV interval remained the same during right bundle branch block as that without branch bundle block, which indicated non-ventricular tachycardia . RV stimulus in the His refractory period advanced the next H wave, and it could be recognized as an accessory pathway .
Another electrophysiologic phenomenon we found was that the ventricular-ventricular interval shortened from about 10 ms to 30 ms when there was an A wave between the two ventricular waves. Regardless of this phenomenon, stimulus to the H interval with an A wave between them was still 20 ms less than the HH interval in tachycardia with the A wave between them and about 50 ms less than the HH interval in tachycardia without the A wave between them. After the His refractory period stimulation, the next A wave always appeared before the next H wave and V wave when AV dissociation existed. Atrial activation mapping showed earliest atrial activation just in front of the coronary sinus ostium, around the area of the slow pathway of the AV node.