A 26-year-old male with a past medical history of depression presented to our emergency department (ED) twice, first in February 2021 and again in March 2021. On his initial visit, his chief concern was leg pain. The patient reported that his symptoms began as bilateral foot and low back pain about three months prior to arrival. While the back pain resolved, his foot pain progressed up his bilateral lower extremities, which had become stiff. Over the prior several weeks, he had begun to have difficulty extending his knees. He additionally noted easy bruising and small red dots all over his extremities. He denied fever, vomiting, diarrhea, abnormal bleeding, weight loss, and prior spinal surgeries. There was no known family history of rheumatologic, immunologic, metabolic, or connective tissue disorders. The patient did not drink alcohol, smoke, or use illicit substances. He did note that he had been eating pizza bagels since April 2020. He drank only water. He did not take any vitamin supplementation. At the time he was not employed and lived with a roommate. He had not been evaluated previously for these concerns.
The patient was afebrile, with a temperature of 98.1° Fahrenheit (F). He had a heart rate of 91 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure 128/89 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), and a respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. His oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. He weighed 61.2 kg. On physical examination, he was pale and thin. He had contractures in the bilateral lower extremities with healing ecchymoses in the flexor surfaces of bilateral thighs and knees. Perifollicular hemorrhages were noted diffusely in the bilateral upper and lower extremities . Petechiae were noted on the bilateral lower extremities. He had full strength in the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and intact sensation in all extremities. He had a normal thyroid exam. There was no gingival bleeding. He had a negative Steinberg sign, also known as the thumb sign. This test is considered positive if the distal phalanx of the adducted thumb extends beyond the ulnar border of the palm when clenching one’s fist (suggestive of Marfan disease).
His initial laboratory evaluation demonstrated a hemoglobin of 11.0 grams per deciliter (g/dL) with a mean corpuscular volume of 88.7 femtoliters (fL), a white blood cell count of 7.7 × 103/milliliters (K/mL), and a platelet count of 321 K/mm3. The creatinine was 0.69 milligrams (mg)/dL), potassium 3.9 millimoles per liter, magnesium 2.3 mg/dL, calcium 8.4 mg/dL, and phosphorus 2.9 mg/dL. The albumin was 3.4 g/dL, and indirect bilirubin was elevated at 1.3 mg/dL . He was discharged with hematology follow-up given the anemia and bruising.
He presented to the hematology clinic in March 2021 and was immediately referred back to the ED. At that time, he was unable to ambulate and instead was moving around by pulling himself with his arms. On the second visit, he had a temperature of 97.3°F, heart rate of 94 bpm, blood pressure 94/57 mm Hg, and respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute. His oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. He weighed 59.9 kg. His physical examination was notable for progressive contractures in his bilateral lower extremities. He had pain and tenderness at tendon and ligament insertions, suggesting enthesitis and preventing knee extension. Additionally, he had contracture of the right elbow. Ecchymoses were also visible on the right upper extremity. He was noted to be apathetic and indifferent to his current physical condition. His repeat laboratory evaluation is noted in the table.
Diagnostic considerations included nutritional disorders, specifically, scurvy and Vitamin D deficiency, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, scleroderma, coagulopathy secondary to factor XIII deficiency, alpha 2-antiplasmin, or plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 deficiency. Scurvy was highest on our differential based on his constellation of signs and symptoms. He was admitted for further evaluation and care.
During his hospital stay, he was treated presumptively for scurvy with ascorbic acid. The vitamin C level later resulted at 0.1 mg/dL (reference range: 0.4–1.7 mg/dL). He was also treated for vitamin D deficiency after his vitamin D level resulted at 9.7 nanograms per milliliter (ng/m) (30–50 ng/mL). He was evaluated by nutrition, physical therapy, physical medicine and rehabilitation, dermatology, and endocrinology. He was ultimately discharged to a skilled nursing facility on ascorbic acid and ergocalciferol.
He completed treatment with ascorbic acid and high-dose ergocalciferol after 12 weeks. His symptoms, contractures, and skin findings resolved, and he was able to resume activities of daily living, including ambulation. He gained 5.4 kg. He continues to follow up with internal medicine and psychiatry. The above outlines the timeline of this case.