A 50-year-old healthy lady, case of bilateral partial mastectomy for high grade ductal carcinoma in situ, presented in 2014 with progressive exertional dyspnea, with minimal dysphagia to solid food, over a period of several years.
An enhanced CT scan of the chest revealed a well-defined soft tissue mass arising from the proximal third of the esophagus, measuring 7.8*5.4*10.5 cm in its maximal transverse, AP, and CC dimensions, respectively, with prominent superior mediastinal lymph nodes, the largest measuring 7 mm . An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy with ultrasound showed an elevated smooth surface lesion at around 20 cm from the incisors, originating from the submucosa, abutting the muscularis mucosa, and covered by a hypervascularized mucosa .
Through a right posterolateral thoracotomy incision, the pathological portion of the esophagus was identified. The proximal portion of the esophagus was dilated due to the chronic partial obstruction caused by the mass.
Enucleation of the mass was impossible as the layer between the mucosa and submucosa could not be developed safely. Taking advantage of a dilated esophageal segment proximally, en bloc excision of the tumor was performed preserving enough width of esophageal wall. The width of the remaining esophagus measured 8 cm uniformly along the 15 cm longitudinal defect caused by the tumor excision. The 8 cm width allowed the reconstruction of the 15 cm longitudinal defect of the esophagus without undue narrowing of the lumen . The esophagus was closed in two layers using a 3-0 vicryl running suture for the mucosa and 3-0 Polydioxanone (PDS) for the muscular layers. .
Grossly, a 9.5*7.0*3.0 cm firm mass, covered with normal mucosa having a focal ulceration, was identified . The mass is tan-white, pale, and homogeneous, with neither necrotic nor hemorrhagic areas. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of compact bundles of spindle-shaped cells, arranged in a fasciculated and disarrayed architecture, and nuclei arranged in a palisading pattern ( A–C). Despite the presence of cytological atypia, no mitotic figures or necrosis were noted. Immunohistochemistry revealed a diffuse positivity for S-100 (D), focally positive SMA, and negative staining for CD34, CD117, and Desmin, respectively. This confirmed the diagnosis of a benign esophageal schwannoma. All lymph nodes in the resected specimen were negative.
Gastrograffin swallow, performed five days later, revealed no evidence of contrast leak. Diet resumed, gradually thereafter, and advanced as tolerated. She was discharged home after a smooth postoperative course. The patient has been followed up for approximately 4 years, without any evidence of recurrence nor complications.