We report the case of a 71-year-old female patient who presented with recurrent upper abdominal pain. CT-scan demonstrated a heterogenous mass in the liver hilum, which infiltrated the main portal vein up to the right branch. The common hepatic artery was displaced to the left but not encased by the tumor. No signs of biliary obstruction were seen .
Liver function tests and hematology parameters as well as the tumor markers α-fetoprotein, CA 19–9, CEA, and chromogranin A were normal. Due to the unclear diagnosis, a percutaneous biopsy was performed which revealed leiomyosarcoma. Since no distant metastases were evident upon staging CT, the patient was referred to our centre for surgical treatment.
In February 2012, surgical exploration was performed, which confirmed the extension of the tumor from the main portal vein into the right portal branch. In contrast to the preoperative staging, the tumor infiltrated both the right hepatic artery and the bile duct. The left branches of the hepatic artery, portal vein and bile duct were not affected by the tumor .
Due to the extent of the tumor, a right hepatectomy was performed with an en-bloc resection of the hilar bile duct bifurcation and lymphadenectomy. Reconstruction of the portal vein was achieved by an end-to-end-anastomosis, and an end-to-side hepatico-jejunostomy was performed for biliary reconstruction .
Postoperatively, the liver function was normal, and serial duplex ultrasound examinations and CT-scans confirmed regular flow in the portal vein. A bile leak from the hepatico-jejunostomy caused an abscess in the liver hilum and required an additional percutaneous drainage and antibiotic therapy. The patient was discharged from hospital 6 weeks postoperatively in good general condition.
Based on the microscopic morphology and immunhistochemic detection of strong expression of Actin and Caldesmon within the tumor cells the diagnosis of a moderately differentiated leiomyosarcoma (G2) with up to 15 mitoses in 10 high power fields was made. Necrotic areas were only found in about 5 % of the tumor volume (FNCLCC-score: 5/8). For the definition of resection status, the specimen was microscopically evaluated for the resection status by sampling of the distal and proximal resection margins of the portal vein, bile duct, right hepatic artery as well as the parenchymal resection margin of the liver. Complete resection (R0) was confirmed .
The patient did not receive adjuvant treatment. A follow-up CT-scan 36 months postoperatively revealed tumor recurrence in the liver hilum . Due an excellent general condition, the patient underwent re-exploration, which unfortunately revealed an unresectable local recurrence in the portal vein. The patient recovered quickly from this re-operation and received palliative radiotherapy with 50.4Gy until June 2015. The first follow-up MR imaging demonstrated a partial response of the tumor.