A 28 year old male presented to the emergency with colicky pain abdomen, distension and bilious vomiting for 3 days, and not passing flatus, motion for last 2 days.
On examination patient had tachycardia, hypotension and features of dehydration.
Abdomen showed the midline scar of previous surgery, was distended and tender.
Patient had a history of total proctocolectomy with ileal pouch anal anastomosis for refractory ulcerative colitis in 2009. There was no history of any other surgical procedure or any known medical comorbidity.
He had several episodes of constipation following the surgery but all were self-relieving.
Abdominal X-ray was suggestive of dilated bowel loops with multiple air fluid levels and a large loop of small bowel reaching up to left dome of diaphragm .
Laboratory examinations revealed hemoglobin of 11.5 gm/dL, total leucocyte count 7200/cu mm. Blood sugar levels, serum urea/creatinine and liver function tests were within normal limits.
A diagnosis of acute post operative obstruction was made. Patient was resuscitated with intravenous fluids and nasogastric aspiration was done. Due to the deteriorating vital parameters of the patient an emergency laparotomy was planned.
Exploratory laparotomy with derotation of volvulus of ileal S-pouch with pouchpexy (anchoring the ascending and descending limbs of the S-pouch by seromuscular non absorbable polypropylene 2-0 sutures to the posterior pelvic wall/presacral fascia) and proximal loop ileostomy was done.
Intraoperative findings were that of massively dilated S-type ileal pouch rotated upon its axis with proximal bowel dilatation, with multiple inter loop and peritoneal adhesions . Upon derotation the pouch was healthy with no signs of ischemia, thus pouch fixation to pelvic side wall was done. Proximal diversion ileostomy for decompression was made.
Patient became normotensive on post-operative day 2 and was discharged on post operative day 8. Gut continuity was restored with ileostomy closure after 2 months. The patient is in regular follow up and is asymptomatic for last 6 months since surgery.