An 8-year-old girl presented to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery with a chief complaint of pain in the right lower front tooth region and upper left back tooth region for 2 months.
There was no relevant medical or dental history. The history of the present illness dates back to 1 year when the patient experienced pain in the left anterior region. The patient then again experienced pain and swelling in the upper left anterior region 2 months back. The swelling extended from the base of the nose to the left cheek region. The patient went to an ear, nose, and throat specialist, and they were referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery.
Extraoral examination revealed no swelling and tenderness . Intraoral examination revealed proximal deep caries in the left maxillary first molar, that is, 64, which is also tender on percussion. There was mobility in the maxillary anterior teeth. The maxillary left lateral incisor showed grade II mobility, while the maxillary right central and lateral incisor showed grade III mobility . Mandible showed no variation than normal . Panoramic radiograph revealed multiple unilocular radiolucencies with thin sclerotic border in relation to 53, 63, 73, and 84. Radiolucency in relation to the apex of the maxillary right canine was unilocular around 1.5 × 1 cm. In relation to the maxillary left canine, unilocular radiolucency with a thin sclerotic border had a size of 1 × 1 cm. Radiolucency with respect to the mandibular left canine was 0.5 × 0.5 cm in size .
The mandibular right deciduous first molar also showed a radiolucency of size 0.5 × 0.5 cm. To rule out syndrome associated with multiple cysts, further investigations were done. A chest X-ray was done, which revealed normal anatomy of clavicles . Complete blood count and thyroid profile showed normal values.
Aspiration cytology (hematoxylin and eosin stained smear from the aspirate) showed the presence of inflammatory cells arranged individually and scattered all over the smear. Inflammatory cells mainly include neutrophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages.
Based on clinical examination and radiograph, a provisional diagnosis of multiple radicular cysts was made. The treatment plan for management was the extraction of the involved teeth, followed by enucleation. Local anesthesia (2% lignocaine with 1:200,000 adrenaline) was administered. Extraction of involved teeth was done . Whitehead's varnish dressing was placed in the extraction socket . Histopathological examination gave a final diagnosis of radicular cysts. A regular follow-up for 3 months was done, showing the absence of radiolucency and eruption of permanent teeth . examination of dentition showed good healing ( and ).