We report a case of a 64-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese man from North Central Province referred to Peradeniya Teaching Hospital with a history of fever of 1 month’s duration. He was a paddy farmer by profession. He had had type 2 diabetes mellitus for 10 years with poor glycemic control and was receiving mixtard insulin.
He complained of generalized malaise and anorexia of 1 month’s duration with daily fever spikes. He was having chills with drenching night sweats. He complained of severe anorexia and had weight loss of 6 kg over the last month. He denied having long-standing cough, urinary symptoms, or alteration of bowel habits. He had no past history or contact history of tuberculosis. He complained of a low-grade headache at the back of the head. He had no photophobia or phonophobia.
On physical examination, he was observed to be wasted and ill-looking. He was moderately pale and not icteric. He did not have features of meningism. He did not have cervical or axillary lymphadenopathy. His pulse rate was 84 beats per minute, and his blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. A precordium examination did not reveal any murmurs. Respiratory and abdominal examinations was unremarkable. The results of a neurological examination were normal with nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy in both fundi. At the back of the scalp, the patient had boggy swelling with dimensions of 3 × 3 cm that was fluctuant and tender on palpation.
The patient’s complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dl with mean corpuscular volume of 80 fl, platelet count of 470 × 103/μl, and white blood cell count of 7.7 × 106/μl. His C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 141 IU/L, and his erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 140 mm in the first hour. His transaminases and fractionated bilirubins were within the normal ranges. His albumin level was 29 g/L. His prothrombin time was 13.6 seconds (normal control 12 seconds). Three sets of blood cultures had no growth up to 72 hours of incubation. The patient’s urine culture was sterile. His cerebrospinal fluid was sterile with no cells. A 2D echocardiogram did not show any vegetations. The result of a chest radiograph was normal. The result of the Mantoux test was negative. The result of an ultrasound scan of the patient’s abdomen was negative for organomegaly, free fluid, or intraabdominal lymphadenopathy. An ultrasound scan of his scalp showed a soft tissue mass lesion measuring 3.7 × 3.5 cm in the subgaleal region and no extension into the skull. Non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the brain performed with the bone window revealed soft tissue density outside the skull without intracranial extension.
Surgical exploration was done with the patient under general anesthesia, and pus collection was noted in the subaponeurotic space of the scalp. The pus was drained, and the wound was kept open. Gram-negative bacilli were seen in the Gram stain with bipolar staining resembling a safety pin appearance . Nonfermenting colonies with a metallic sheen were isolated on blood agar and MacConkey agar . B. pseudomallei was isolated in the culture by the microbiology department of the University of Colombo using the latex agglutination test. The VITEK 2 automated identification system isolated B. pseudomallei with 90% probability. The results of an indirect hemagglutination assay for melioidosis antibodies were highly positive with a titer > 10,240. The results of contrast-enhanced CT of the patient’s chest, abdomen, and pelvis were negative for occult abscess.
A diagnosis of superficial melioidosis infection was made, and the patient was started on intravenous ceftazidime 2 g 6-hourly, which was continued for 14 days. The patient was started on eradication therapy with oral co-trimoxazole 960 mg 12-hourly after the intensive phase and continued for 3 months. He was clinically improving and was fever-free by day 5 of treatment, and he was discharged on day 14 of treatment with ceftazidime. On discharge, the patient’s ESR was 45 mm in the first hour, and his CRP level was 10 u/L. He was followed in the clinic and was completely asymptomatic with normal inflammatory markers at 3 months.