A 50 year old gentleman with a history of allogeneic haemopoietic stem cell transplant for transformed follicular lymphoma was admitted to hospital in July 2012 with pneumonia. He had undergone reduced intensity transplant in January 2008, with modest red cell and platelet support, and had a biopsy-proven high grade relapse in March 2009, treated with rituximab followed by a donor lymphocyte infusion. He had been in metabolic complete remission since then, and had been well, though with occasional respiratory tract infections. In early 2012 these became more frequent. He was found to be hypogammaglobulinemic, presumed to be secondary to rituximab, and was given 1 g/kg of intravenous immunoglobulin (Vigam®).
The patient also disclosed a 3 week history of painful, swollen joints, as well as morning stiffness of 5-6 hours for the several months, primarily affecting the small joints of the hands, right knee and both ankles. He was diagnosed with a seronegative inflammatory polyarthritis, and initially treated in hospital with steroid injection to the right knee, a short course of oral prednisilone and commencement of hydroxychloroquine. He responded well, and following discharge the decision was made to continue long term hydroxychloroquine and to initiate sulfasalazine. Prior to the initiation of this immunosuppressive therapy, routine viral serology was requested including hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV. The hepatitis B serology was reported as indicative of past infection, with positive results for both anti-HBc and anti-HBs antibody, but no detectable HBsAg or HBV DNA (Figure ). His ALT, bilirubin and albumin were in the normal range (22 iU/ml, 6 mcmol/ml and 42 g/L respectively), and his alkaline phosphatase was slightly elevated at 143 IU/L (normal range 40-129 IU/L), but normalized with control of his arthritis and was 107 IU/L the following month.
The abnormal hepatitis B serology was unexpected, as prior to transplant, serology and HBV DNA testing of both donor and recipient were negative, and his sibling donor underwent repeat negative testing when donor lymphocytes were harvested post-transplant. In addition, he had been intensively followed up during the period of profound immunosuppression post-transplant and then the phase of immune reconstitution, with no clinical evidence of a hepatitic illness and normal liver function tests.
In response to these results his prednisolone was weaned and a referral made to the local hepatology team, who recommended commencement of lamivudine, to be continued for the duration of his immunosuppressive therapy.
Discussion of our findings with the patient failed to indicate a probable source of the infection. He denied any illicit drug use or unsafe sexual practice, and the possibility of a sexually transmitted infection led to considerable marital discord. It was also curious that an immunosuppressed patient could contract acute HBV without clinical signs or symptoms, any derangement to his liver function tests, and without the development of a chronic infection.
The case was reported to the local blood centre for consideration of investigation of the 2008 blood components as the source of the HBV infection. At that time, the possibility of the positive HBV markers resulting from the IVIg treatment he received for hypogammaglobulinaemia a few weeks previously was also raised. The patient had received 10 × 10 g vials of Vigam® IVIg (manufacturer: BPL; BioProducts Laboratory ltd) and batch details had been recorded in medical records. A vial remaining from the same batch was tested and found to be both anti-HBc and anti-HBs positive, suggesting the patient could have been the passive recipient of anti-HBc and anti-HBs antibody. This suggestion was supported by ongoing blood monitoring which demonstrated a fall in anti-HBs titre, from 748 mIU/ml initially, to 359 mlU/ml 3 weeks later.
Fortunately the blood products were identified and tested prior to the patient initiating HBV treatment with lamivudine, and the effect of a delay in starting DMARD therapy was inconsequential in light of an excellent response to first-line therapies.