A 43-year-old Japanese female presented with general fatigue and appetite loss due to progressively developed HF and concomitant massive cardiac ascites. At 2 years of age, the patient was diagnosed with a complex congenital heart disease involving tricuspid atresia, a hypoplastic right ventricle (RV), transposition of the great arteries with the aorta arising from the hypoplastic RV and the pulmonary artery arising from the left ventricle, an atrial septal defect, and a ventricular septal defect . The patient had undergone a pulmonary artery banding procedure at another children’s hospital at the age of 9 years due to progressive pulmonary hypertension. Thereafter, since a subsequent Fontan procedure was precluded by pulmonary hypertension, her haemodynamics were controlled with medication, including sildenafil citrate. She performed simple-skilled jobs with minimal physical effort in her 20s. A heart–lung transplant procedure was suggested by the ACHD teams at previous hospitals; however, the patient did not wish for a heart–lung transplant. Refractory atrial fibrillation occurred at the age of 30 years, despite her receiving anti-arrhythmic medication (quinidine and amiodarone), and cardiac ascites gradually developed thereafter. She was referred to our hospital for HF control and palliative therapy at the age of 35 years and had already been taking several medications comprising cardioprotective agents (carvedilol 2.5 mg and losartan 6.25 mg) for chronic HF, warfarin for preventing thrombotic events (CHA2DS2-Vasc and HASBLED scores were 5 and 3, respectively), and multiple diuretics (furosemide 80 mg, azosemide 120 mg, trichlormethiazide 2 mg, eplerenone 100 mg, and tolvaptan 15 mg/day) for cardiac ascites. Anti-coagulant therapy was controlled according to the recommended therapeutic range of a prothrombin time–international normalized ratio of 2.0–3.0. However, at 42 years of age, she had sudden-onset chest pain and was suspected to have acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) based on electrocardiography and transthoracic echocardiography (see , ). Laboratory results showed significantly elevated creatinine kinase (CK)/CK-myocardial band levels at 2004/171 IU/L (reference range, 56–244/<5 IU/L) and D-dimers at 9.8 µg/mL (reference range, <1.0 µg/mL), suggesting STEMI due to cardiogenic thromboembolism. She and her family refused revascularization therapy, including percutaneous coronary intervention, and requested palliative therapy instead. The patient survived; however, worsening of ventricular function with dilatation and reduced ejection fraction were noted. The ejection fraction measured by the modified Simpson method reduced from 51.6% to 38.5%, while single ventricular end-diastolic/end-systolic dimensions, end-diastolic/end-systolic ventricular volume, and left atrium transverse diameter increased from 67.5/46.3 mm to 84.4/76.0 mm, from 157/76 mL to 190/117 mL, and from 76.0 mm to 82.0 mm, respectively. Thereafter, her cardiac ascites accumulation accelerated and resulted in refractory massive cardiac ascites . Although drainage of refractory cardiac ascites with a volume of 6000 mL (ascites albumin concentration of 1.6 g/dL) was effective in improving her symptoms, frequent abdominal paracentesis (three times per month) led to protein loss and hypoproteinaemia (serum albumin level gradually decreased from 4.0 g/dL to 2.8 g/dL during the preceding year) and was expected to cause further malnutrition and renal dysfunction. Therefore, we decided to perform combined therapy of additional CART once per month and abdominal paracentesis once or twice per month for refractory cardiac ascites.
Concentrated ascites reinfusion therapy was performed with one-night hospitalizations under the following protocol: an abdominal paracentesis was performed using an 18-gauge needle under local anaesthesia and administration of acetaminophen as premedication. The amount of collected fluid was approximately 6000–7000 mL per procedure during 3–4 h. The collected fluid was filtered through the AHF®-MOW® columns (Asahi Kasei Medical, Tokyo, Japan) and then concentrated using the AHF®-UP columns (Asahi Kasei Medical, Tokyo, Japan), with a concentration ratio of approximately 1 : 10 . Subsequently, furosemide 20 mg was intravenously administered, and the concentrated cardiac ascitic fluid was intravenously reinfused at a rate of 80 mL/h while avoiding the worsening of HF. After undergoing CART, her symptoms significantly improved, computed tomography revealed a significant reduction of cardiac ascites, and chest radiography showed that her pulmonary blood volume was optimally controlled .
Concentrated ascites reinfusion therapy (once per month) and additional abdominal paracentesis at the outpatient clinic (once or twice per month), according to the degree of retained cardiac ascites, could improve the patient’s quality of life (QOL). The levels of brain natriuretic peptide improved from 1134 pg/mL before CART to 665 pg/mL 1 year after commencing CART. Moreover, the serum albumin and estimated glomerular filtration rate ameliorated from 2.8 g/dL to 3.2 g/dL and from 57.5 mL/min/1.73 m2 to 70.4 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively. Thus, CART, in this case, did not decrease serum albumin levels and prevented renal dysfunction and exacerbation of HF, resulting in the avoidance of HF-related hospitalization. Concentrated ascites reinfusion therapy was performed for 6 years without any complications, such as significant haemodynamic changes and infections. However, she gradually developed liver dysfunction, and the platelet count decreased to 11.2*104/µL. She died from cardiogenic cerebral infarction at the age of 49 years despite appropriate management with anti-thrombotic agents, although the patient had no apparent coagulation disorders, such as a malignancy and autoimmune diseases.