A 65-year-old man was admitted to our department with a complaint of acute-onset epigastric pain and indigestion. He had been diagnosed with follicular thyroid cancer and received a total thyroidectomy 28 years ago. There are no medical records left, including the cancer stage at the time, but judging from the statement that the patient did not receive any treatment after surgery, it is assumed that it was early stage thyroid cancer. Twenty years after surgery, thyroid cancer recurred in the lungs, hilar lymph node, and pleura, and he underwent left lung metastasectomy, followed by three consecutive RAI treatments, from 2010 to 2012. After 5 years of observation, in December 2017, he developed symptoms such as frequent cough and chest pain, caused by aggravated lung metastases , for which he started receiving 24 mg of lenvatinib per day. After 2 weeks of TKI treatment, he developed adverse effects such as grade 2 constipation, grade 3 anorexia, grade 3 mucositis, and grade 2 myalgia; thus, the dose was reduced to 20 mg per day. Twenty days after dose reduction, the patient presented to the emergency room of Kyung Hee University Hospital.
On admission, he complained of acute onset of persistent epigastric pain and indigestion, but had no fever, dyspnea, or diarrhea. On presentation, he had a temperature of 36.4°C, heart rate of 83 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 130/70 mm Hg. The patient had mild abdominal distension with hypoactive bowel sounds, and mid-epigastric tenderness to palpitation was observed during physical examination. Laboratory tests showed the following: serum total bilirubin, 0.45 mg/dL (normal, 0.3–1.2 mg/dL); alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 50 IU/L (normal, <50 U/L); aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 57 IU/L (normal, <50 U/L); amylase, 22 U/L (normal, 28–100 U/L); lipase, 25 U/L (normal, 8–58 U/L); triglyceride, 102 mg/dL (normal, <150 mg/dL); calcium, 7.8 mg/dL (normal, 8.8~10.6 mg/dL); and C-reactive protein, 15.11 mg/dL (normal, <0.5 mg/dL). A computed tomography scan with contrast enhanced presented heterogeneous fluid collection around and fat infiltration into the tail of the pancreas, in addition to splenic subcapsular fluid collection and secondary colitis at the descending colon, without any biliary abnormalities . However, it showed that thyroid cancer burden was mildly improved . Although elevated serum amylase and lipase levels were not detected, acute onset of persistent epigastric pain and characteristic findings on computed tomography scan were consistent with acute pancreatitis. Given the absence of organ failure and systemic complications, the patient was classified as mild acute pancreatitis in accordance with the revised Atlanta classification.
He had no recent history of alcohol consumption and a survey of his current medication list revealed no other remedy capable of inducing acute pancreatitis. Given the sequence of lenvatinib treatment and development of acute pancreatitis without any other usual sources, it was concluded that the patient had lenvatinib-induced acute pancreatitis.
The patient was conservatively treated with lenvatinib cessation, intravenous hydration, and pain control. On admission day 14, he could consume oral food without acute pancreatitis recurrence or aggravation and was later discharged. The patient refused to continue lenvatinib treatment and has only been monitoring symptoms without additional chemotherapy. In June 2020, more than 2 years later, the last imaging follow-up showed relatively indolent thyroid cancer disease course .