A 22-year-old Asian Japanese primipara underwent a Cesarean section for cephalopelvic disproportion at 41 weeks and 2 days of her pregnancy. Although she showed hypertension, the course of her pregnancy had been otherwise uneventful. Her respiratory and hemodynamic conditions were stable during the operation. Three hours after the operation, she developed dyspnea, which was relieved by oxygen inhalation. The next morning, her respiratory condition deteriorated. Her dyspnea and cyanosis worsened rapidly and her SpO2 level decreased by 50% at room air. Although an attending physician first suspected air embolism or pulmonary thromboembolism, the results of her chest CT and ultrasonic cardiogram tests were not compatible with these disorders. Under a suspicion of amniotic fluid embolism, she was transferred to our hospital. The CT findings showed diffuse homogeneous ground-glass opacity in the bilateral peripheral fields and they were spread out up to the visceral pleura .
On admission to our hospital's intensive care unit, her SpO2 level was 50% with a reservoir mask of 15 L/min oxygen and her respiratory rate was 54 breaths/min. Her consciousness was clear, her heart rate was 137 beats/min, her blood pressure was 109/83 mmHg, and her body temperature was 36.3°C. To make a tracheal intubation safe, we first applied noninvasive positive pressure ventilation at the following conditions: spontaneous and timed mode; FIO2 of 1.0; inspiratory positive airway pressure of 14 cmH2O; and expiratory positive airway pressure of 10 cmH2O. When her SpO2 increased to 90%, we performed intubation and found that there were no signs of laryngeal edema or aspiration. Mechanical ventilation was started in assist and control mode, FIO2 of 1.0, pressure control of 15 cmH2O, positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 15 cmH2O, and tidal volume of 350 ml. Arterial blood gas analysis showed the following values: pH 7.06; PaO2 138 mmHg; PaCO2 69 mmHg; base excess -11.9 mmol/L; and lactate 3.0 mmol/L. Chest X-ray demonstrated diffuse infiltration throughout the lungs . There were no abnormal findings in her coagulation, kidney and liver functions. Cultures of tracheal aspirate, urine, and blood proved to be negative.
On the second day of admission, her brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was high (2,194 pg/ml) and her left ventricular ejection fraction was 30% according to ultrasonic cardiogram. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with no signs of ischemia and infarction. On the sixth day, when her PaO2 improved to 112 mmHg at a setting of FIO2 0.25, pressure control 10 cmH2O and PEEP 4 cmH2O, her trachea was extubated. On the seventh day, her left ventricular ejection fraction recovered to 67%. She was discharged from the intensive care unit on the ninth day and from our hospital on the twentieth day after admission.