A 31-year-old woman presented with a posterior mediastinal mass on chest computed tomography (CT) scan during a medical check-up two years prior. She had left shoulder pain presentation to our hospital. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a solitary and non-homogeneous 4-cm mass in the posterior mediastinum invading the left 2nd rib . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that signal inside the mass was equivalent to muscle tissue on the T1-weighted image, and was hyperintense on the T2-weighted image . Contrast-enhanced MRI showed similar signal changes and contrast effects on the second rib dorsal side in contact with the tumor. Bone infiltration was noted . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan with F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose suggested that the mass was associated with increased standardized uptake (max = 2.69) . All laboratory data were within normal ranges. CT-guided percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy was performed, and she was diagnosed with a neurogenic tumor. We planned tumor resection by RATS combined with chest wall resection.
Under general anesthesia, the robot was positioned at the head of the operating table. The patient was intubated with a nerve integrity monitor electromyogram endotracheal tube for intraoperative neuromonitoring and place.
Robotic 8-mm ports were introduced . The da Vinci Xi® system (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was then docked to the patient, and we explore the left pleural cavity . The tumor originated from the posterior mediastinum between the first and fourth rib, invading the posterior chest wall with no invasion of the vessels. The parietal pleura surrounding the tumor was resected with the robotic electrocautery, and both the second and third ribs were exposed proximally and distally. The edge was dissected from the lower edge of the first rib to the upper edge of the fourth rib. As the preoperative CT findings showed, the tumor invaded the second rib. The first and second intercostal muscles were dissected to secure the surgical margin. After that the second rib was cut down through the posterior incision, and the tumor was removed in its entirety, including the chest wall, from the thoracic cavity. After confirming hemostasis, the robot was undocked. A 21-F chest tube was inserted to the thoracic cavity through the camera port at the eighth intercostal space, and the wounds were closed. The postoperative course was uncomplicated. She has had no recurrences of the tumor after surgery.
Grossly, the resected tumor was a tan red-colored, irregular-surfaced and ovoid-shaped mass measuring 4.5 × 3.3 × 2.2 cm . Histologically, the tumor cells formed nests surrounded by a fine vascular network. The tumor cells ranged spindle to polygonal in shape. Their nuclei were spindle shape, and contained fine chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. The cytoplasm was abundant and eosinophilic. Marked atypism was absent . The tumor invaded the bony tissue of the rib included in the specimen . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for chromogranin, and synaptophysin. Anti-S100 protein immunostain highlighted the sustentacular cells in the tumor, . Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as paraganglioma with invasion to the rib. Because urinary adrenaline and metanephrine were within normal ranges, the tumor was considered to be nonfunctional. According to the grading system for adrenal pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma (GAPP) score , histological pattern was zellballen (0 point), cellularity was low (< 150 cells/HPF) (0 point), Ki-labeling index was 1–3% (1 point), and the tumor invaded the rib (2 point) and had non-functional (0 point). The total score was 3. An additional resection was not performed.