We report a case of a 53-year-old Moroccan woman with no family history of cancer. She consulted for a lump in her left breast. The initial physical examination revealed a movable and painless nodule measuring 3 cm between the upper and lower inner quadrants in the left breast. There were no inflammatory signs or any retraction of the nipple. The axillary areas were free. Mammography showed a nodular lesion with irregular contours and peripheral calcification. The lesion was classified as Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) 4 . The ultrasonographic examination confirmed the presence of a hypoechoic nodule. The lesion was about 32 mm in size with irregular polylobed contours and located between the superior and internal-inferior quadrants. An ultrasound-guided biopsy was performed. The histopathological examination revealed spindle cell proliferation with no hemorrhage or necrosis. The immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis showed a positive reaction for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and smooth muscle actin. Ki-67 labeling was 25%, and p63 was positive.
The conclusion of the pathology report was in favor of spindle cell carcinomatous proliferation. After a multidisciplinary assessment, the patient benefited from a radical mastectomy with axillary node dissection. The gross examination of the surgical specimen showed a nodular solid tumor measuring 30 mm between the upper and lower inner quadrants of the left breast . The closest surgical margin was the posterior one, at 0.2 cm from the neoplasm. A histological examination revealed poorly differentiated spindle cell tumor proliferation. Fifteen lymph nodes were explored, and involvement was found zero node-negative/15 node explored (0 N-/15 N). The IHC examination of the surgical specimen showed focal expression of cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and moderate cytoplasmic expression of cytokeratin 14 (CK14). The spindle cells also displayed nuclear expression of p63 and intense nuclear expression (20%) of Ki-67 . There was a lack of expression of CK5/6, CD10, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and BCL2. The tumor was consistently unreactive to estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) and did not express human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2).
The final diagnosis was SCC (variant of metaplastic carcinoma according to the WHO 2012 classification). For the clinical staging, a thoracoabdominal pelvic computed tomographic scan and bone scintigraphy were performed, which did not show distant metastases. The tumor was classified pT2N0M0 according to the classification system of the American Joint Committee on Cancer, seventh edition . Radiation therapy with a total dose of 50 Gy was administered. The patient developed grade 3 radiation dermatitis. No endocrine treatment or chemotherapy was administered. Surveillance consisted of a clinical assessment every 3 months and a mammogram every year. No recurrence was reported after 8 months of follow-up.