Here we present the case of a 14 years-old male patient in Mexico who was referred to our rheumatology department for assessment of an incidental finding of asymptomatic hyperCKemia (26,372 IU/L). There was no history of familial neuromuscular disorder or parental consanguinity or of exposure to myotoxic medications or substances. The patient engaged in 3 h daily of high-performance sports and had not experienced myalgia, cramps, or pigmenturia during or after physical activity. Initially, a neurologist considered that the hyperCKemia was related to exercise, but the patient’s CK serum levels persisted above 20,000 IU/L despite cessation of sports. Neuromuscular and systemic examination was normal, including an electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies. No cardiac or respiratory complications were found. Myositis-specific (Mi2, TIF1g, MDA5, NXP2, SAE1, Jo1, SRP, PL7, PL12, EJ, OJ), myositis-associated (Ku, PM-Scl 75/100, Ro52), and antinuclear antibodies were negative. Thyroid-stimulating hormone level was normal.
Based on the patient’s sex and serum CK levels, an X-linked dystrophinopathy was suspected, but multiplex polymerase chain reaction analysis and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis detected no DMD deletions. Six months later, the patient underwent muscle biopsy from the right quadriceps that showed necrosis along with endomysial and perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates, and no fibrosis or fatty infiltration was seen . A new EMG and nerve conduction studies revealed a myopathic pattern. These findings were felt to be consistent with PM.
He was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) 1 g/day for 3 days and continued with prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day and methotrexate 15 mg/weekly. Despite a decrease in CK serum levels from 28,457 to 21,671 IU/L, the patient began to experience proximal muscle weakness of both lower limbs, which worsened after a second monthly IVMP (500 mg/day for two days), with sparing of the upper limbs. Based on CK serum levels, the onset of proximal lower limb weakness after corticosteroid treatment, and the prominent inflammatory changes seen on muscle biopsy, a LGMD was suspected, and methotrexate and glucocorticoid treatment was suspended. After whole-exome sequencing (WES) (NGS; Illumina HiSeq 2500 sequencer), the diagnosis of LGMDR2 was confirmed based on a compound heterozygous variant of the DYSF gene. The first mutation was c.3851C > T, which causes a Gln →Ter amino acid change at position 1160 (p.Q1160X), leading to a stop codon in exon 32. The other mutation was a c.5979dup in exon 53, which causes a p.Glu1994ArgX3 frame shift. Sanger sequencing confirmed that the mother was a c.3851C > T carrier and that the father had the c.5979dup mutation .