A 30-year-old female presented at our hospital with blurred vision in her left eye for the past year. She had previously undergone glaucoma surgeries in both eyes 13 years ago, and her right eye had been blind (no light perception) for more than 10 years. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/100 in her left eye with -16.0D. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 54 mmHg in the right eye and 49 mmHg in the left eye. On examination, the anterior chamber of the right eye was quite shallow and the retina could not be seen because of evident lens opacity. In the left eye, the anterior chamber was extremely narrow and the iris bulged forward. The optic disc was pale and the cup-to-disc (C/D) ratio was 0.99 in the left eye. Visual field testing with the Humphrey field vision test demonstrated an extremely narrow tubular field of vision in the left eye. Given the patient’s history of glaucoma surgery, high IOP, small cornea, and extremely narrow anterior chamber, malignant glaucoma was highly suspected. The high IOP of 49 mmHg and advanced visual field loss warranted aggressive therapy. A trabeculectomy was performed in the left eye and atropine ointment was administered to dilate the pupil. On postoperative day 1, the IOP of the left eye was 20 mmHg. Surprisingly, the equator of the lens could be visualized through the dilated pupil. The lens appeared small and spherical with a slight upward dislocation . The suspensory ligaments could be seen clearly under high magnification . Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) was performed and revealed a microspherophakic lens with horizontal diameter of approximately 9 mm and anteroposterior diameter of approximately 8 mm . A general physical examination of the patient demonstrated short stature (145 cm) and brachydactyly , thus the diagnosis was modified to WMS. The patient reported no family history of this condition, or of consanguineous marriage, so this likely represented a sporadic case of WMS. Corneal endothelium microscopy of the left eye showed significantly reduced endothelial cells with a cell count of 576 cells/mm2 suggesting the corneal endothelium was severely damaged. To prevent further corneal endothelial damage and decompensation, phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation were performed in the left eye. A +24D intraocular lens was successfully implanted into the lens capsule. At the 1-year follow-up visit, the patient had well-controlled intraocular pressure, transparent cornea, and normal anterior chamber depth, while the intraocular lens remained correctly in place .