A 15-year-old girl (height approximately 150 cm and weight 37 kg, body mass index 16.4 kg/m2, with muscle weakness and wheelchair dependence) was admitted to our dental clinic with chief complaints of multiple dental caries and residual roots. Due to her intellectual disability and poor tolerance to dental examination and invasive treatment, ambulatory dental surgery was scheduled under general anesthesia. The patient presented with symptoms of growth retardation, scoliosis, inability to stand up, and intellectual disability at one year of age and was diagnosed with Rett syndrome in another hospital thereafter. The patient also had epilepsy which was well controlled on valproate and levetiracetam. Preoperative evaluation was performed in the anesthesiology outpatient department. The patient had a difficult airway due to limited movement of the temporomandibular joints. A Mallampati score of IV and limited mouth opening of 1 finger breadth were detected.
The patient was kept nil per os (NPO) for more than 6 h before surgery and received no preoperative sedative. In addition to standard monitoring by the American Society of Anesthesiologists, bispectral index (BIS) monitoring was initiated before anesthesia induction. Sevoflurane 6% in 100% oxygen at 6 L/min was inhaled to facilitate the placement of an intravenous catheter. Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) was conducted after the surgery. No difficult mask ventilation was found during preoperative evaluation and sevoflurane inhalation. Anesthesia was induced with target-controlled infusion (TCI) of propofol and intravenous injection of remifentanil 1 mcg/kg. Neuromuscular blockade (NMBA) was not administered. A cuffed 6.0 mm internal diameter nasal Ring-Adair-Elwyn (RAE) tube was safely and smoothly intubated under the guidance of a fiberoptic bronchoscope. Body temperature was maintained by administering prewarmed intravenous fluid and a forced-air warming blanket, and nasopharyngeal temperature was continuously monitored after the induction of general anesthesia until the end of surgery, increasing from 35.8 ℃ to 36.3 ℃. NMBA-free total intravenous anesthesia with propofol TCI and remifentanil infusion was continuously administered to maintain the BIS value between 50 and 60. Fentanyl was added intermittently according to surgical stimulation, vital signs and BIS monitoring, with a total dosage of 75 mcg.
The dental procedure performed in this case involved the use of gutta-percha and resin for filling cavities, as well as extraction of remaining roots. Local anesthetics were administered for pain relief. The entire procedure lasted 4.5 h, during which 600 ml of fluid was infused without placement of a urinary catheter. Towards the end of the procedure, flurbiprofen 50 mg was administered for postoperative analgesia. Ondansetron 4 mg and dexamethasone 3 mg were given intravenously for the prevention of postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV). Spontaneous breathing recovered within 10 min after discontinuation of propofol and remifentanil infusion. After the safe removal of the RAE tube, the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), where she was accompanied by her parents. She stayed in the PACU for 1 h before being discharged home. The postoperative recovery was uneventful.