Two sets of blood culture collected via venipuncture in BacT/Alert® FA Plus and FN Plus bottles (bioMérieux, Schaarbeek, Belgium) from a 33-year-old woman who presented at the emergency unit with fever and lower abdominal pain showed aerobic and anaerobic growth after approximately 12 h of incubation. Direct microscopic examination and Gram staining showed mobile, Gram-negative rods, which were identified as Salmonella species with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF) MS (Bruker, Kontich, Belgium). The slide agglutination test (Sifin, Berlin, Germany) showed the presence of a nontyphoidal Salmonella. The patient was admitted to the hospital on suspicion of endometritis six days post uterine aspiration in the context of a missed abortion at six weeks gestational age. Culture of a cervical swab only showed moderate growth of normal urogenital flora, including Enterobacterales. The missed abortion was diagnosed during a 6-week trip in Indonesia, 5 weeks prior to the uterine aspiration. Misoprostol was used during that trip, but unsuccessfully.
In search of the focus of the Salmonella bacteremia and to check for possible asymptomatic Salmonella carriage, urine and stool samples were requested. The cervical sample was reexamined specifically for Salmonella species. The urine culture was negative, but the cervical culture showed moderate growth of Salmonella species, and the stool culture was positive for Salmonella species. The patient did not experience gastrointestinal symptoms during her trip to Indonesia, but her partner did. However, she experienced abdominal cramps and diarrhea, which could be attributed to the use of misoprostol for medical treatment of a missed abortion. Unfortunately, the causes of the gastrointestinal symptoms of the partner were never investigated.
Antibiotic sensitivity testing via disk diffusion showed that the Salmonella strain was sensitive to ciprofloxacin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, piperacillin-tazobactam, cefuroxime, ceftriaxone, ceftazidime, cefepime, meropenem, amikacin, and co-trimoxazole. Empiric antibacterial therapy (900 mg Clindamycin/8u iv and 90 mg gentamicin/8u iv, due to penicillin allergy) was switched to 400 mg ciprofloxacin iv, twice a day. After 7 days of ciprofloxacin iv therapy, the patient was discharged in good clinical condition. The follow-up appointment 3 weeks later was reassuring (see for the time course of the case).
The three Salmonella isolates (cervix, blood, and stool) were sent to the Belgian Salmonella Reference Center (Sciensano) for further serotyping. All three isolates were identified as Salmonella enterica serovar Hvittingfoss by slide agglutination. Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) proved that the three isolates were identical. Comparison with isolates available in the international database Enterobase (assessed 23 November 2022) showed similarity with strains from the UK (N = 4), Indonesia (N = 3), and Austria (N = 1) .