A 91-year-old woman presented at our department for a suspected bladder leiomyoma of unspecified duration. The patient had an indwelling urinary catheter due to acute urinary retention with bladder neck obstruction by the suspected mass. Her medical history included urosepsis, cervical polyps, uterine prolapse, low-T3 syndrome, and atrial fibrillation.
Physical examination revealed no flank masses. Abdominal ultrasound raised the suspicion of a bladder lesion. Urinalysis revealed no white cells or bacteria in the stained urinary sediment. A magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis and abdomen revealed a sessile bladder mass (2.8 cm) at the bladder trigone on the right side, without perivesical infiltration or regional lymphadenopathy described as leiomyoma, as shown in . Cystoscopy revealed the suspected bladder leiomyoma and an obstructed anterior bladder neck with a large mass located from a “7 o’clock” to “11 o’clock” area. Typical redness of the tissue was detected because of the indwelling urinary catheter. The photodynamic diagnosis was negative, as shown in b.
Transurethral resection of the mass to the level of the detrusor muscle was performed. Simultaneously, two endocervical polyps were identified and biopsies were performed. Because of the tumor’s location, a cystography was performed on the third postoperative day. The examination showed no contrast media extravasation, but vesicoureteral reflux on the right side was observed. The serum PSA at the third postoperative day (timepoint of diagnosis of the prostatic tissue level) was 0.08 ng/mL. The patient was discharged after 5 days of hospital stay. In follow-up to 17 months, there was no disease recurrence and no need for a urinary catheter.
The 14.5 × 2.5 × 0.5 cm section of the resected specimen revealed pinkish-gray tissue. Microscopic evaluation revealed urothelium and glandular and squamous epithelium without any dysplasia. In addition, massive adenomyomatous hyperplasia of the Skene’s gland was detected. Immunohistochemical staining showed strong PSA and NKX3.1 positivity, and the female karyotype was confirmed by fluorescent in situ hybridization to rule out contamination by male prostatic tissues, as shown in . Moreover, polyp biopsy expressed nondysplastic leukoplakias, acanthosis, and the enlargement of the stratified squamous epithelium with minimal persistent inflammation.