A 75-year-old female presented to ophthalmic outpatient clinic for a routine aflibercept intravitreal injection into her left eye (LE) for choroidal neovascular membrane (CNVM). Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 6/9 − 1 right eye (RE) and 6/9 − 2 LE. The following day she re-presented to ophthalmic emergency with a painful, injected LE, and significantly worse vision. BCVA was 6/9 − 1 RE and hand movement (HM) at 1 m in the LE, with an intraocular pressure (IOP) of 15mmHg RE and 31mmHg LE. Slit lamp examination demonstrated circumferential conjunctival injection, fine corneal keratic precipitates (KPs), a deep anterior chamber (AC) with 3 + cells, fibrin overlying the pupil, and posterior synechiae. No hypopyon was seen and posterior segment examination was obscured due to anterior segment inflammation. Right eye examination was unremarkable.
A diagnosis of LE post-injection endophthalmitis was made and the patient was treated with an intravitreal tap and injection of 0.1mL (2.25 mg) ceftazidime and 0.1mL (1 mg) vancomycin. She was commenced on 1-hourly prednisolone acetate 1% drops to the LE. She was immunocompetent with no significant past medical history and not on any regular medications. Ocular history included cataract surgery in both eyes performed more than ten years earlier.
On review the next day she reported ongoing LE discomfort and poor vision. Left eye BCVA was HM at 1 m and IOP was 34mmHg. Examination revealed persistent conjunctival injection, fibrin deposits on the corneal endothelium, and a deep AC with 4 + cells and early fibrin aggregation. A 1.8 mm hypopyon was noted. Posterior synechiae and fibrin deposits over the pupil were unchanged, and there was no red reflex or posterior segment view. Microscopy and culture of the previous day’s vitreous aspirate showed gram positive cocci; however, no classification or sensitives were available.
She was reviewed again the next day and BCVA in the LE had declined perception of light (PL) without projection, with the patient reporting increasing ocular discomfort. Conjunctival injection was persistent and dense stromal oedema with Descemet’s membrane folds (DMFs) were seen on corneal examination. The hypopyon had increased to 3.0 mm, and free-floating fibrin in the AC was obscuring the intraocular lens (IOL). Vitreous aspirate cultures now showed growth of Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis) and Morganella morganii (M. morganii), and a decision was made to repeat intravitreal injection with the same doses of ceftazidime and vancomycin, and additional 0.1mL (0.4 mg) dexamethasone. She was also commenced on oral ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice daily (BD) and hydrocortisone acetate 1% ointment at night to the LE. Prednisolone acetate drops were reduced to 2-hourly to the LE.
She was reviewed daily over the next two days without any improvement in LE BCVA, and had a persistent 3.0 mm hypopyon with no posterior segment view . RE remained unremarkable. By this stage antimicrobial sensitivities revealed E. faecalis was sensitive to vancomycin and ampicillin, while M. morganii was sensitive to cefepime, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, piperacillin/tazobactam, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, and resistant to ampicillin and amoxicillin/clavulanate. Upon discussion with the patient a decision was made to proceed with pars plana vitrectomy (PPV), as there was no clinical improvement despite multiple intravitreal antibiotics.
Our patient subsequently underwent uncomplicated LE PPV with further intraoperative intravitreal vancomycin 1 mg, ceftazidime 2.25 mg, and dexamethasone 0.4 mg. Thick exudates filling the entire vitreous cavity were noted during surgery . On day one post-PPV our patient had LE BCVA of PL with projection and IOP of 2mmHg . Examination showed diffuse corneal oedema and DMFs, a deep AC with 2 + cells and fibrin, and a present red reflex without fundus view. Her LE pain had almost fully resolved. She was discharged home on day three post-PPV on LE 6 times daily chloramphenicol 0.5% minims and prednisolone sodium phosphate 0.5% minims, hydrocortisone acetate 1% ointment at night, oral ciprofloxacin 750 mg BD (10 days total), and a course of oral prednisolone 30 mg daily weaning by 5 mg each week (total six weeks). No recurrence of endophthalmitis was noted one week later .
At follow up two weeks later, her LE BCVA had improved to 6/300. Examination demonstrated a clear vitreous with a small hemorrhage at the fovea, and an otherwise flat peripheral retina . There were no signs of disease recurrence. Chloramphenicol was ceased, and topical prednisolone minims were reduced to BD for four more weeks before stopping.
At her last outpatient review at 12 weeks post-vitrectomy, her LE BCVA was 6/90 with an IOP of 16mmHg. Examination of the anterior and posterior segments was stable, without any disease recurrence.