A 26-year-old woman presented with progressive shortness of breath. Her past medical history was notable for asthma diagnosed at age 3, hearing loss at age 23 (that was not fully worked up) and hypertension at age 24. Ten months prior to admission, her blood pressure was 143/91 mmHg, and urine dipstick detected large protein and blood, but she was lost to follow up. The family history was significant for asthma and hypertension in her mother, type II diabetes mellitus in her father and asthma in her brother; her sister was healthy.
On admission, she was afebrile, blood pressure was 191/125 mmHg and the physical examination was otherwise unremarkable; fundoscopy was not performed. Urine analysis detected 25–50 non-dysmorphic RBCs/HPF, 5–10 WBCs/HPF,100 mg/dl protein, positive leukocyte esterase, and numerous “muddy brown casts”. Relevant laboratory results were white blood cell count 7.2× 109/L, hemoglobin of 8.9 g/dL, platelet count 73,000/μL, BUN 71 mg/dL, and serum creatinine 10.11 mg/dL. Other studies include AST 34 u/L, ALT 36 u/L, haptoglobin 10 mg/dl (low), and LDH 2331 u/L (very high). Occasional schistocytes were seen on peripheral smear and ADAMTS13 was normal. Serological studies were normal including C3 (138), C4 (37.2), ANA (neg), anti-MPO (< 0.2), anti-PR3 (< 0.2), anti-GBM antibodies (< 0.1), hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV, and serum and urine immunoelectrophoresis. Chest x-ray showed pulmonary congestion and kidneys were echogenic on ultrasound. The patient was started on hemodialysis and a kidney biopsy was performed.
The light microscopy sample had only 2 glomeruli and they had circumferential cellular crescents and compressed capillary loops. Prominent tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis was seen with sparse interstitial inflammation and a few interstitial foam cells. The interlobular arteries and arterioles were mostly well preserved, but one arteriole had endothelial swelling, karryorrhexis and fibrin thrombus . No vasculitis was identified. Immunofluorescence revealed one glomerulus (also with crescent) and segmental granular C3 (1+; scale 0–4). No staining was seen with IgG, IgA, IgM, C1q, κ and λ. Three glomeruli, again with crescents, were available for ultrastructural examination. In addition to the extravasated fibrin and basement membrane rupture, focal endothelial cell damage was apparent with expansion of the subendothelial space by electron lucent material. Several capillary loops had basement membrane irregularities and multi-lamination of lamina densa . No electron dense deposits were identified and podocytes overlying these compressed capillary loops displayed prominent foot process effacement.
The biopsy findings were most compatible with crescentic glomerulonephritis without extrarenal manifestations. Occasional arterioles had histological features of TMA. The glomerular basement membrane changes raised concern for Alport syndrome (AS), but due to the paucity of tissue sample, type IV collagen staining could not be performed. Given the suboptimal sample and concern for systemic TMA and AS, a second biopsy was performed 3 weeks after admission.
Eighteen glomeruli were sampled for light microscopy and three were globally sclerosed. Cellular/fibrocellular crescents were seen in 8 glomeruli with one fibrous crescent. Fibrin thrombi were identified in two glomeruli . Several other glomeruli had ischemic changes and the tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis involved over 80% of the cortex. Clusters of interstitial foam cells were seen throughout the cortex. Several cross sections of interlobular arteries and arterioles had intimal edema, fibrinoid necrosis, and concentric thickening of the wall; no vasculitis was identified . Immunofluorescence was negative. On ultrastructural examination of 3 ischemic glomeruli, extensive endothelial cell injury was seen with subendothelial electron lucent material; prominent mesangiolysis was also present . Lamina densa lamellation was again seen. Additional immunofluorescence was performed for type IV collagen α2, α3 and α5 chains . Alpha2 staining was normal, indicative of good antigen preservation. However, α3 was completely absent in both glomeruli and tubules, and α5 lacked staining along the glomerular basement membranes but had intact staining along Bowman’s capsules and distal tubular basement membranes.
Both kidney biopsies were stained for C4d (rabbit polyclonal, cat. no. 04-B1-RC4D, Biomedica, Austria, 1/20 dilution) and C5b-9 (mouse monoclonal, cat.no. M0777, DAKO, Denmark, 1/10 dilution). Intimal and medial staining was seen with both C4d and C5b-9 in arterioles affected by thrombotic microangiopathy. Glomerular staining was seen in crescents and sclerosed segments, albeit more strongly with C5b-9 . In addition, C5b-9 staining was seen in patchy peritubular capillaries and interstitium.
Both kidney biopsies demonstrate crescentic glomerulonephritis, with increased chronicity on the second biopsy. In addition, there was acute and subacute TMA, better visualized on second biopsy. A sequencing of 12 aHUS-related genes was performed using a database of over 400 aHUS-associated mutations, disease-associated polymorphisms, benign polymorphisms and other known variants of undetermined significance (Machoan Diagnostics, Oakland, CA). Our patient was negative for the large CFHR1-CFHR3 homozygous deletion associated with CFH auto-antibodies. However, she had a heterozygous missense variant (c.1246 A > C, p.lle416Leu) in exon 11 of CFI, reported in aHUS [, ]. A heterozygous missense variant (c.136C > T, p. Pro46Ser) in exon 2 of CFHR5, reported in dense deposit disease was also noted . A heterozygous polymorphism (IVS9–78 G > A) within an intron in MCP/CD46 was present and there were also 5 SNPs near and within MCP/CD46 that comprised a haplotype, also associated with increased risk for aHUS .
The clinical, laboratory and genetic findings indicate a diagnosis of aHUS coexistent with glomerular crescents seen on biopsy. The interstitial foam cells on light microscopy (in the absence of chronic nephrotic proteinuria), basement membrane abnormalities on electron microscopy and abnormal immunofluorescence for α3 and α5 chains of type IV collagen support a diagnosis of AS, that likely contributed to the underlying chronic kidney disease. The immunofluorescence pattern of α3 and α5 staining suggests a α3 gene mutation with autosomal recessive inheritance. A genetic analysis for AS was suggested.
The patient was treated on admission with pulse methylprednisolone followed by oral prednisone. Daily plasmapheresis was initiated, but was discontinued after a few days once the ADAMTS13 levels were found to be normal. Cytoxan was administrated after the first biopsy results. Eculizumab therapy was initiated after the second biopsy and she continued to receive it every 2 weeks at her 8-month follow up. Her kidney function remains poor requiring maintenance hemodialysis.