A 41-year-old man with sarcoidosis was referred to our Interstitial Lung Disease Clinic. The patient was investigated 2.5 years ago due to cough. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed enlarged hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes and bronchoalveolar lavage was lymphocytic (lymphocytes 63% of total cells) with a CD4/CD8 ratio of 3.7. Bronchial biopsy revealed non-caseating granulomas. The patient presented 19,804 episodes of non-sustained monomorphic ventricular arrythmias at continuous cardiac monitoring and was subjected to cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) that showed areas of late gadolinium enhancement consistent with cardiac sarcoidosis according to published guidelines . He received corticosteroids for 6 months with clinical and radiological improvement. Additionally, he presented reduced number (17,751) of ventricular arrhythmias when he received 32 mg of methylprednisolone but there was no other continuous cardiac monitoring performed (other than the two measurements reported) at that point of time.
The patient was referred to our department for further evaluation. At presentation he was asymptomatic with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and was not receiving corticosteroids. His BMI was 29Kg/m2. Due to the history of cardiac involvement, he was subjected to continuous cardiac monitoring that revealed multiple (20,729) episodes of non-sustained monomorphic ventricular arrhythmias. He was advised to start corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 32 mg once daily). We observed reduction in the number of ventricular arrhythmias (14,004) when the patient received 28 mg of methylprednisolone. Despite the initial improvement and while on corticosteroid tapering, (methylpredinosolone 24 mg) continuous cardiac monitoring revealed worsening with 17,500 episodes of ventricular arrhythmias. Repeated cMRI revealed stability of findings with no new areas of scarring. He was further subjected to electrophysiological study and ablation was performed. Pacemaker and intracardial defribillator (ICD) was implanted while the patient was started on antiarrhythmic drugs (atenolol). Although these led to improvement of patients’ arrhythmias, progressive tapering was unsuccessful due to worsening of arrhythmias. Positron Emission tomography and Computed Tomography (PET/CT) was performed due to pacemaker implantation (while the patient was receiving immunosuppressive therapy) with normal findings of the heart, suggesting that the patient had no detectable inflammation due to sarcoidosis. PET/CT was performed with proper pre-imaging preparation and the patient was on a carbohydrate free diet for the previous 24 h before the date of the appointment. Additionally, PET scan did not reveal signs of upper airway and peripheral/respiratory muscle involvement. Assessment of other reasons of cardiac arrhythmias revealed symptoms consistent with OSAHS (i.e. snoring) that he reported to be present before sarcoidosis diagnosis and had not worsened while on corticosteroids. His BMI was stable despite steroid therapy. His Malampati score was 2 and Epworth Sleepiness score was 9. The patient was subjected to polysomnography with severe obstructive sleep apnea (AHI = 50.7). Following CPAP therapy, the patient showed significant improvement of ventricular arrhythmias while methylprednisolone was further tapered. Patient compliance to CPAP was high with 6 h and 15 min of cPAP use 99.2% of time. The residual AHI was 2. The patient is currently receiving 8 mg of methylpredinisolone (2.5 years following his referral to our department) while continuous cardiac monitoring revealed reduced (2790) number of ventricular arrhythmias.