An approximately 1-year-old mixed-breed female dog was presented at the Small Animal Clinic, Warsaw University of Life Sciences, Poland, for routine ovariohysterectomy. The dog had been adopted and dewormed, and had received its first vaccinations a few months before. On physical examination, the dog was in good condition with a body score of 4 and without any clinical signs apart from a small, firm skin nodule on the chest wall close to the right elbow. This subcutaneous lesion turned out to be a pellet encapsulated by the fibrous tissue. Hematological and biochemical profiles were unremarkable. During ovariohysterectomy, multiple up to 1 mm in diameter white, flat foci scattered on the surface of the greater omentum were present as incidental findings. These punctuate lesions had the appearance of finely dispersed powder talc in the omental adipose tissue and were no longer clearly visible after a 24-h fixation in 10% formalin. Samples of the omentum were submitted for histopathological examination, processed routinely, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin-eosin (HE). Moreover, additional histochemical stains were used: periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), alcian blue at pH 2.5 (AB), PAS with and without predigestion with diastase (PASD), as well as Masson trichrome, Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) and Congo red stains. Moreover, a microscopic examination under polarized light was done. Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound were performed but showed no abnormalities. Histopathology of the omental tissue revealed eosinophilic, convoluted, thin hyaline structures scattered multifocally. Particles of foreign material were found between the ring-like structures in some areas and were surrounded by few multinucleated foreign body giant cells lymphocytes and macrophages . Some of these particles had a honeycomb or tubular structures with spiral or pitted thickenings suggesting the components of plant tissue such as phloem and tracheids of the xylem. The areas had fibrosis but calcification and metaplastic bone formation were not observed. The plant materials and hyaline ring structures were positive for PAS, AB (with variation in intensity) and PASD . The sections were negative for Congo red stain (lack of apple-green birefringence under a polarizing microscope) and for acid fast bacilli on ZN staining. The plant materials and hyaline rings were stained very pale green with Masson trichrome compared to deep green staining of collagen fibers in connective tissue around vessels. The plant structures were refractive under polarized light, although the level varied .