A 49-year-old Caucasian man presented with a one-month history of side-locked attacks of excruciatingly severe stabbing and boring right-sided pain located in his orbit. The attacks were associated with nasal obstruction, conjunctival injection, restlessness and migrainous features such as nausea, photophobia and phonophobia. No continuous background pain was identified. The duration of the attacks was about 20 to 30 minutes with a frequency of two to three per 24 hours. The attacks were stereotypical, being exclusively right-sided with severe agitation during the pain. He had no previous history of headache. His medical and family history was otherwise unremarkable. He was not on any medications and used no drugs. His vital signs, a physical examination and a neurological examination were normal. Laboratory testing was normal. His symptoms fulfilled the revised International Classification of Headache Disorders criteria for CH.A diagnosis of CH was made and subcutaneous sumatriptan as well as high-flow oxygen were prescribed. A prophylactic treatment with verapamil was prescribed. He responded to the symptomatic treatment, with relief within 15 minutes. A follow-up was planned. Because the headache attacks continued, the patient was seen again after two weeks. On arrival, a neurological examination was normal. His visual fields were normal. He was taking subcutaneous sumatriptan when required and verapamil 600mg daily. Owing to the relatively late onset of CH, enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was ordered to rule out an underlying lesion. It showed a rather large pituitary tumor (20×21×17mm). No clear cavernous sinus invasion could be demonstrated .
The patient had an operation to resect the tumor. Histopathological examination including immunohistochemistry verified the diagnosis of a non-functioning pituitary adenoma (chromophobe adenoma). Hormonal screening showed no abnormalities: pituitary hormones such as prolactin, insulin-like growth factor 1 and growth hormone, thyroid-stimulating hormone and others were within the normal ranges. His headache attacks resolved totally after surgery. He remained headache-free and had not experienced any headache attacks at follow-up after 17 months. The patient is regularly followed up in our endocrine clinic.