A 54-year-old Caucasian man presented to our facility with a left breast gynecomastia-like nodule. Clinically it was mobile, non-tender and not fixed to the skin or underlying muscles. The results of renal and liver function tests were normal.
Ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass with irregular margins, measuring 4.0 × 3.0cm in size. Doppler ultrasound did not show any significant vascularization.
Since a breast carcinoma was suspected, a tru-cut biopsy was performed. From the biopsy results a diagnosis of FL was formulated. The fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstration of t(14,18) suggested systemic disease. Two weeks later, the nodule was totally removed, as well as the axillary lymph nodes. The histomorphological features confirmed a diagnosis of lymphoma.
Staging procedures showed positron emission tomography (PET)-positive mediastinal and abdominal lymphoadenomegaly and splenomegaly. A bone-marrow trephine did not show lymphoma infiltration.
Six cycles of R-CHOP (rituximab-cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, Oncovin (vincristine), prednisone/prednisolone) chemotherapy for systemic lymphoma were administered.
Two years later, a new nodule in the right breast was observed. The morphology and immunohistochemistry results of a new biopsy were superimposable to the previous samples. After another six cycles of R-CHOP chemotherapy our patient developed acute myeloid leukemia, from which he died some months later.
All tumor samples from our patient were stained with EE (Ematossilin/Eosin) and then immunohistochemical studies were performed.
The tru-cut biopsy showed proliferation of atypical lymphoid cells with a nodular pattern of growth, with small lymphoid cells (centrocyte type) and centroblast-like cells.
The surgical specimen was represented by a wide excision of the central quadrant extending to the subareolar spaces. Macroscopically the tumor was poorly circumscribed with irregular margins, measuring 4.0 × 3.0cm, with a solid, fleshy cut surface. Histologically the neoplastic proliferation showed similar features to the previous biopsy in in the adipose tissue.
On immunohistochemical analysis the atypical cells were positive for CD20, B cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl2), CD10 and Bcl6 and negative for CD5, CD43 and melanoma associated antigen (mutated) 1 (MUM1) protein; the proliferative index evaluated by Ki67 immunostaining was higher than 50%.
In the interfollicular areas there were sheets of CD20+/CD10+ atypical lymphoid cells. Centroblasts numbered more than 15. A final diagnosis of grade 3 FL was made .
Histology results of the right breast relapse sample showed similar features to previous breast samples.
FISH analysis for the t(14;18)(q32;q21) translocation was performed on the tru-cut biopsy of the primary breast nodule using the Vysis LSI IGHSpectrumGreen/LSI BCL2 SpectrumOrange probe set (Vysis, Downers Grove, IL, USA). This probe set uses the dual-color, dual-fusion strategy and consists of a mixture of locus-specific fluorophore-labeled DNA probes containing sequences homologous to the IgH and Bcl2 genes.
FISH analysis again showed the presence of t(14;18) translocation on the surgical sample from the left breast and the biopsy of the right relapse .
Then, after DNA extraction from a paraffin embedded sample, we performed multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for the identification of the rearrangement of heavy chain (IgH) CDR1-CDR3.
DNA purified from the paraffin sample was of good quality as shown by the presence of discrete bands for both FR1, FR2 and FR3 rearrangements, indicative of a B monoclonal pattern .