A 72-year-old man with a prepectoral dual-chamber pacemaker implanted transvenously in 2009 (Zephyr XL DR, St-Jude Medical, St-Paul, MN, USA) for paroxysmal complete atrioventricular (AV) block and a box change in 2017 (Accolade MRI L311, Boston Scientific Corporation, MN, USA) programmed in dual-chamber pacing and sensing system was admitted in May 2020 for recurrent episodes of chills and confusion. The patient was afebrile, non-septic and had compensated heart failure at that time. His chills and confusion episodes developed 3 months prior and he received valproic acid for erroneously suspected epileptic seizures. Two strokes (2000 and 2009) left him with phasic disorder, cognitive impairment, and right hemiparesis. He had no past history of parenteral drug use.
After his hospital admission, blood samples demonstrated cholestasis and blood cultures isolated penicillin-sensitive Streptococcus sanguinis. Serum alkalin phosphatase reached 558 U/L [normal value (NV) < 169], total bilirubin was 2.3 mg/dL (NV < 1.2) with direct bilirubin at 1.6 mg/dL (NV < 0.5), alanine transaminase 51 U/L (NV < 44), absolute neutrophil count 23.840/mm3 (NV 1.500–7.000), and C-reactive protein 89 mg/L (NV < 5). Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple pulmonary embolisms and transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a 41 × 33 × 15 mm mobile vegetation located on the intracardiac portion of the ventricular lead (Zephyr 1948, St-Jude Medical, MN, USA). During his stay, the patient developed signs of biliary sepsis. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed common bile duct lithiasis and hilar bile duct stenosis. Intravenous antibiotics [Cefuroxime 1.500 mg/every 8 h (q8h) plus Metronidazole 500 mg/q8h] and endoscopical stones extraction improved his condition. Brush and forceps biopsies were performed in search for a bile duct malignancy. Lastly, a localized sigmoid cancer was identified on 18Fluorodesoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography–CT (PET/CT) and he underwent sigmoidectomy the following month. Endovascular lead explantation was scheduled after rehabilitation. He was prescribed an oral first-generation cephalosporin (cephalexin 500 mg b.i.d.) as prolonged antibiotic therapy whilst awaiting lead removal.
During the next months, the patient’s condition worsened as he was readmitted for recurrent cholangitis despite repetitive antibiotic therapies and endoscopic biliary drainages. Cholangiocarcinoma was suspected regardless of the negative cytological and histological results. Five months after the endocarditis’ diagnosis, rest electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with normal AV delay, ventricular pacing spike with loss of ventricular capture and ventricular undersensing. Chest X-ray revealed a complete intracardiac ventricular lead fracture, which was absent 40 days prior. Pacemaker interrogation reported ventricular undersensing, loss of capture, and high impedance (>3000 ohms) . A routine pacemaker assessment performed 4 months prior showed normal function and low rate of ventricular pacing (<1%) with a gradual decrease in ventricular pacing impedance . Additionally, another 18F-FDG PET/CT scan demonstrated an increased uptake of 18F-FDG in both the intrathoracic and extrathoracic portions of the pacemaker. Considering the extension of the infectious diseases and the comorbidities of the patient (palliative approach for suspected cholangiocarcinoma, two strokes and cognitive impairment), complete hardware removal was not a reasonable option. Instead, he was discharged home on lifelong antibiotic therapy (cephalexin).
The patient became critically ill after his third hospital stay for cholangitis. With the family’s consent, he was later transferred to a palliative care unit where he passed away due to biliary sepsis.