The patient was a 65-year-old female with hypertension and high-serum CA19-9 levels who visited her general practitioner. She did not have any complaint; however, her general practitioner performed screening examinations. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a mass lesion at the upper pole of the left kidney, and the patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment. Laboratory examination showed that tumor markers were elevated as follows: CA19-9, 56.4 U/mL; DUPAN-2, 230 U/mL. In addition, IgG4 was elevated at 194 mg/dL . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 40-mm mass in the tail of the pancreas, containing a 27-mm oligemic mass (a). The outer border of the tumor was in contact with the transverse colon, suggesting invasion. Endoscopic ultrasonography also showed a hypoechoic tumor of approximately 30 mm in the pancreatic tail (b). The border was indistinct, and the internal echogenicity was heterogeneous. We did not perform preoperative endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) because we were concerned about peritoneal dissemination due to aspiration into the tumor. Colonoscopy showed no evidence of obvious invasion of the mucosal side. She had a history of surgery for left breast cancer at age 47 and uterine fibroids at age 48. As far as her personal history was concerned, she consumed 500 mL of beer a day. Regarding her family history, her father and sister died of PDAC, but no other hereditary diseases were detected. Based on these findings, we performed a distal pancreatectomy with a splenectomy and a partial colectomy of the transverse colon, which led to diagnosis of PDAC located in the tail of the pancreas. The surgery’s duration and blood loss were 105 min and 34 mL, respectively. The resected specimen comprised a milky white mass of 47 × 45 mm with clear borders (a, b). The histopathological findings showed a mass of approximately 27 × 27 mm in the tail of the pancreas and fused and irregularly branched gland ducts. The nuclei of the constituent cells were enlarged and of unequal size. The tumor was classified as invasive ductal carcinoma (T2N0M0, stage IB classification according to the Union for International Cancer Control, 8th edition). This mass was covered with collagenous fibrous growths, and storiform fibrosis and phlebitis obliterans were also observed (a, b). In the area of fibrosis, immunostaining showed many CD38-positive cells and IgG4 expression, the exact number of IgG4-positive cells in magnified view was over 10, and IgG4/IgG-positive cell ratio was 45% (c–e). Based on these findings, a diagnosis was made of PDAC completely capsulized with tumor-forming type 1 AIP. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 15. She underwent postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 for 6 months, and no recurrence was noted for 2 years after operation. The longitudinal course of this case is shown in .
The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).