A 30-year-old man with fever, anemia and slight enlargement of the mediastinal lymph nodes was diagnosed with iMCD via lymph node biopsy. Laboratory tests revealed elevated levels of serum total protein (11.1 g/dL), serum IL-6 (44.5 pg/mL), and immunoglobulin G (IgG) (3870 mg/dL). Since treatment with oral prednisolone (PSL) failed to suppress the symptoms of iMCD, intravenous TCZ (8 mg/kg, every 2 weeks) was administered. Although oral PSL with intravenous TCZ had controlled his iMCD symptoms without the further exacerbation of his lung disease, his respiratory function continued to decline gradually, and he was registered for cadaveric LTx at 46 years of age . He required oxygen therapy at home throughout the day. IL-6 levels remained at 200–350 pg/ml after treatment with intravenous TCZ. At 48 years of age, he underwent right single-LTx from a cadaveric donor. The entire transplant process was uneventful, with slight pleural adhesions and slight enlargement of the hilar lymph nodes. Histological examination of the resected lung revealed iMCD . Postoperative immunosuppression included a usual triple-drug regimen (tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and PSL). TCZ was discontinued once after LTx to prevent overimmunosuppression. The postoperative course was uneventful, and there was no infection or rejection. Serum IL-6 levels were maintained at a relatively low level (80 pg/mL) , and postoperative serum IgG levels had decreased. C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) levels were not significantly elevated in the perioperative period . At the time of the preparation of this report, 32 months after LTx, the patient remained asymptomatic, including pulmonary manifestations, and the allograft function was preserved without evidence of rejection or recurrent iMCD. In addition, laboratory tests did not demonstrate any significant adverse effects of TCZ (such as dyslipidemia or myelosuppression), cytomegalovirus infection events, or development of de novo donor-specific antibody (DSA). As IL-6 levels remained at 60–80 pg/mL , the patient received intravenous TCZ treatment (8 mg/kg, every 2 weeks) under immunosuppression with a triple-drug regimen to preserve the allograft lung.