We present the case of a previously healthy, 11-month-old girl, fully immunized, admitted to our emergency department with 3 days history of high-grade fever (maximum axillary temperature 40.1 °C), vomiting, diarrhea, sudden onset of lethargy, and uncontrolled movements of right leg.
The child was not attending the nursery and she was only taking paracetamol for fever before admission.
She presented in poor general conditions, pale, with flash capillary refill, bulging fontanel, miotic pupils and left convergent squint. During clinical examination in emergency room, she developed generalized tonic-clonic seizure and was treated with IV midazolam with resolution.
Initial laboratory investigations showed elevated white blood cells (WBC) counts of 23,510/μL (77% neutrophils) and high level of inflammatory markers: C-reactive protein (CRP) was 5.76 mg/dL (normal values < 0.46 mg/dL), and procalcitonin (PCT) was 3.45 ng/mL (normal values < 0.5 ng/mL). Electrolytes, renal and hepatic function and blood clotting tests were normal.
An urgent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed restricted diffusion with reduced ADC values at the level of the temporo-parietal regions, without leptomeningeal contrast-enhancement, consistent with seizure-related lesions . Lumbar puncture was performed on the same day and cerebral-spinal fluid (CSF) was clear with neutrophilic pleocytosis (300 cells/μL with prevalence of polymorphonuclear cells), low glucose (8 mg/dl) and elevated protein levels (91 mg/dl). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for viruses (VZV, HSV 1–2, HHV 6, Adenovirus, EBV, CMV) and bacteria (Streptococcus pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis) resulted negative. Nasal and throat swab cultures, were negative. Stool cultures for Salmonella, Campylobacter, Rotavirus and Adenovirus and urine culture were all negative.
With clinical suspicion of meningoencephalitis, the little girl was empirically treated with intravenous ceftriaxone and acyclovir adding levetiracetam for seizures control. On day 2, no clinical improvement was observed as a persistent lethargy with poor response to stimulation, irritability, neck stiffness, lying position, right oral fissure asymmetry and global hypotonia was still present.
CSF staining showed gram positive bacilli. This finding, together with the low CSF glucose concentration, raised up the hypothesis of Listeria monocytogenes meningoencephalitis, confirmed, the following day, by CSF culture.
Ceftriaxone was switched to intravenous ampicillin (300 mg/kg/die in 3 times a die) and gentamicin (5 mg/kg/die). Acyclovir was stopped.
Immunological screening of cellular and humoral immunity, complement and blood iron level were normal. HIV test was negative.
After 4 days the child showed mild clinical improvement. She was afebrile with reduction of WBC count and normalization of inflammatory markers. However, on day 6, the neurological picture worsened again and a new cranio-spinal MRI revealed diffuse cerebrospinal leptomeningeal contrast-enhancement with signs of ventriculitis and severe decompensated communicating hydrocephalus . The seizure-related brain changes were not present anymore.
She was urgently transferred to theatre for an external shunt placement in the right lateral ventricle (trans-frontal) and later admitted to the Neurosurgery Unit for the following management. CSF culture from ventricular draining was negative. Treatment with dexamethasone was started. Her neurological state improved in the following days, with regression of opisthotonus and irritability.
On day 27, a new head computed tomography (CT) scan showed persistence of ventriculomegaly with suspicion of trapped left ventricle that was not confirmed after intraventricular injection of contrast agent, showing no CSF obstruction at the level of left foramen of Monro. A new neurosurgical procedure was performed, introducing a second catheter in the frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle, connecting both catheters to a MIETHKE PaediGAV 4–24 shunt valve (B.Braun, Melsungen, AG) with subsequent peritoneal internalization.
Neurological conditions further improved, with resolution of left VI cranial nerve palsy and improvement of the contralateral palsy. Subsequent brain MRI showed a reduction of ventriculomegaly and almost complete resolution of leptomeningeal enhancement .
The girl was discharged after 40 days of hospital treatment in good general condition with no major neurologic sequelae, except for a mild residual right lateral rectus palsy.
On follow-up visit, 6 months after discharge, she appeared in good condition; the ventriculoperitoneal shunt was normally functioning. Brain MRI revealed complete resolution of the ventricular dilatation and leptomeningeal enhancement, and no brain lesions .
Overall, the child was treated with Ampicillin for 26 days, Gentamicin for 15 days and then switched to Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TPM-SMX) for other 15 days.
The source of infection remains unclear: her parents denied consumption/ingestion of raw meat, cold cuts, precooked foods, unpasteurized milk or undercooked vegetables. Nevertheless, in the days before symptoms onset, we were told that the child was playing in a country setting eating tuft of grass contaminated by goat stools. Probably we may identify the gastrointestinal tract as the point of entry of bacteria.