A 72-year-old hispanic male with a past medical history of pulmonary fibrosis controlled on oral steroids and home oxygen therapy, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and no prior smoking history presented to the emergency department for progressive dyspnea over three weeks. He reported having cough that is productive of yellow sputum with no hemoptysis, associated with fever, night sweats, and six-pound weight loss over one week prior to the admission. In addition, the patient reported having a rapidly growing scalp lesion over two months with accompanying pain but no pruritus or discharge. He denied exposure to smoke or tuberculosis. On physical examination, vital signs indicated a temperature of 96.8°F, blood pressure of 153/87, heart rate of 82, respiratory rate of 22, and oxygen saturation of 86% on room air. On head examination, there was a large, ulcerative, well-circumscribed lesion, measuring 2.5 cm in diameter on the right parietal scalp with no cervical lymphadenopathy. On chest examination, he had fine bilateral diffuse crackles. The remainder of the exam was normal.
Diagnostic laboratory values showed a leukocytosis with a white blood count of 23,200 Cells/mcL, hemoglobin of 12.3 g/dL, platelets of 211,000/mcL, blood urea nitrogen of 17 mg/dL, and creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL.
Arterial blood gas on 21% FiO2 showed pH of 7.44, PO2 of 51, and PCO2 of 39, indicating a gradient of 50 mmHg. A chest X-ray showed bilateral interstitial infiltrates . The patient was admitted to the medical floor, started on intravenous corticosteroids, oxygen, and nebulized treatments with symptomatic improvement. Initial workup included an echocardiogram showing severe pulmonary hypertension and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showing diffuse fibrotic changes bilaterally with multiple densities of different diameters [Figures and ]. For further evaluation, a CT-guided biopsy of the lung revealed a poorly differentiated malignant neoplasm with foci of necrosis; immunohistochemical stains indicated adenocarcinoma [Figures and ]. Genotype testing was negative for epidermal growth factor (EGFR) mutation, RAS mutation, and alk translocation. Excision of the right scalp lesion was performed, and the pathology revealed poorly differentiated malignant neoplasm favoring adenocarcinoma, as confirmed by immunohistochemical stains [Figures and ]. During his hospital stay, the patient developed severe hypoxic respiratory failure requiring intubation and transfer to the intensive care unit. The etiology of his acute decompensation was determined to be septic shock secondary to healthcare associated pneumonia; hence, the patient was started on vasopressors and intravenous antibiotics. With the acute change of clinical status, prognosis was poor; his condition deteriorated and he expired after 2 weeks of hospitalization.