We report the case of a 42-year-old Caucasian wheelchair-bound paraplegic man with spina bifida who had had surgical treatments over the most recent few years for pressure sores on both the ischial and sacral regions. A supra pubic catheter was placed in 2005 and a colostomy was performed to improve the care after he had suffered from a sacral pressure sore. He was admitted to our clinic because of a stage IV pressure ulcer on his left tuber ischiadicum. The microbiological examination of his wound showed a contamination with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. His blood test revealed an elevation of inflammatory parameters (14.17×103/μL leucocytes, CRP [C-reactive protein] 10.04mg/dL) and a slightly low protein level at 6.4g/dL. We decided to do a one-stage surgical procedure of debridement and flap coverage using a V-Y procedure and a rotational flap for wound closure. The operation was performed the day after he was admitted to our hospital. We decided not to treat him with antibiotics at this point.
Three days after the first surgical procedure his wound developed a dehiscence due to his excessive movement. A revision, with debridement and surgical closure of the wound, was performed. There were no signs of infection and the results of his blood test showed that the inflammatory parameters were decreasing. The drains showed minor quantities of clear fluid.
On the eighth day after the second surgery there was a small amount of fluid in his wound dressing, even though the drains were still in place. A new dehiscence of his wound led to a third surgical procedure on day 15 after the first operation. As there was considerable dead space below the flaps we decided, after a debridement and an analysis of his wound situation, to reduce the dead space and hold the flaps in place by using TissuGlu® Surgical Adhesive. This involved the application of a grid pattern of adhesive to the tissue substrate, using a custom applicator device which places measured amounts in a row of three droplets at a time . The tissue flap was then positioned, attempting to avoid smearing of the grid of drops, and sutured in place as normal. The application of the adhesive took no more than two minutes.
There were no further complications with this pressure sore. He was dismissed 17 days after the last procedure. At seven weeks after the last procedure, he was healing well and was allowed to sit in his wheelchair again.