A 51-year-old man initially presented with a 3-week history of progressively worsening headache and left limb weakness, and with a 2-day history of nausea and vomiting. T1-weighted MR images showed a large, lobulated, and ill-defined 7.8 cm × 5.3 cm × 4.0 cm mass with inhomogeneous ring-like enhancement in the right temporal lobe . A craniotomy was performed with tumor resection and the final pathological diagnosis was glioblastoma (WHO IV). Then, he received several cycles of radiotherapy and chemotherapy with temozolomide. Eighteen months after the surgical operation, he was readmitted with complaints of pain on neck for nearly 2 weeks. Follow-up contrasted brain MR imaging and whole-body FDG PET/CT imaging with a separate acquisition of the brain was performed to further evaluate the situation. The following contrasted brain MR imaging and brain FDG PET/CT indicated no signs of tumor recurrence at the resection cavity . However, whole body PET/CT imaging demonstrated a solitary hypermetabolic osteolytic lesion with maximal standard uptake value (SUVmax) of 8.0 in the 4th cervical vertebra associated with compression fracture . FDG PET/CT images also demonstrated intense FDG-uptake in the periphery of the mass with a photopenic center, the so-called “doughnut” sign. .
Despite the patient has a history of glioblastoma, it is a great challenge in making a diagnosis of solitary metastatic glioblastoma because of the rarity and the non-specific FDG PET/CT imaging findings. To narrow the differential diagnosis, laboratory tests including ESR, M-type protein, Bence-Jones protein were performed to help exclude the possibility of plasmacytoma. However, the results were normal. Meanwhile, cervical spine MRI and biopsy were suggested to further evaluate the cervical vertebral lesion. Unfortunately, the patient refused to have further examination because of the sudden worsening situation, especially the intractable neck pain. To alleviate the pain and to prevent progressive compression symptoms, the patient underwent tumor resection. Postoperatively, the pain and compression symptoms were obviously relived and the situation was improved.
The following histopathological findings of H&E staining indicated the presence of characteristic multinucleated giant cells in the tumor , which was suspicious of osteoclastoma. Given the history of glioblastoma, immunohistochemical staining with GFAP was performed to exclude the possibility of metastatic glioblastoma. Interestingly, the immunohistochemical findings of GFAP were positive in bone specimens, which substantiated the diagnosis of ECM from glioblastoma . Based on these results, a final diagnosis of solitary vertebral metastasis from glioblastoma without CNS relapse was confirmed. Then, he received radiotherapy on spine and adjuvant chemotherapy with temozolomide. Two months after cervical surgery, he was readmitted with complaints of 4-day history of progressive pain on neck. Then, he died suddenly due to respiratory insufficiency in only 2 weeks, nearly 21 months after the initial diagnosis.