We present the case of a 41-year-old female with a known history of ADPKD, who presented to our emergency department with epigastric pain radiating to the interscapular area. At the cardiological auscultation, there was no friction rub and the thoracic pain did not worsen with inspiration or supine position. We completed the physical exam with abdominal examination in the context of epigastric pain; Murphy and Blumberg’s signs were negative, and there were no signs of peritonism with normal peristalsis at auscultation. The temperature was always afebrile, as we reported in ; at the time of admission, the body temperature was 36.7°C, the pressure values were 110/88 mmHg, the cardiac frequency was 63 b.p.m., and the SO2 was 99% without oxygen therapy.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) was within normal limits, blood exams revealed a moderate increase in inflammatory markers, while myocardial enzymes were negative (C-reactive protein 30 mg/L, high-sensitive troponin-T 6 ng/L). Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular ejection fraction, no relevant valve disease, but circumferential pericardial effusion of 10 mm. She was put under treatment with colchicine therapy (1 mg b.i.d.) based on a presumptive diagnosis of acute pericarditis with pericardial effusion. Initially, we abstained from introducing non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) due to relative contraindication in the presence of ADPKD.
Two days later, she returned to our attention reporting asthenia, palpitations, and dyspnoea on exertion. She was haemodynamically stable. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with low QRS complex voltages. Lab results were unremarkable. Echocardiography confirmed the presence of pericardial effusion , reaching 3 cm along right ventricle cavities, not haemodynamically relevant, but with an increase in size compared with the previous examination, which necessitated the hospitalization of the patient. We completed the diagnostic work-up ruling out an autoimmune aetiology (antibody panels comprehensive for ANA, ANCA, ENA, anti-DNA, FR, C3, and C4 were negative); SARS-CoV-2 nasopharyngeal swabs were also negative. We performed an initial work-up during the index hospitalization, with viral respiratory polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing, blood cultures, and tubercolosis testing by means of IFN-gamma (QuantiFERON, Ag Tb1 and 2), which were negative. Thyroid function was normal (TSH 3.36 mU/L, fT3 5 pmol/L, fT4 15 pmol/L, PTH 6.5 pmol/L, anti-TPO < 10 U/mL, and anti-thyreoglobulin 12.5 U/mL) so that we could exclude also hypothyroidism as the cause of pericardial effusion. We then proceeded to pericardiocentesis with drainage of 300 mL of serous transudate, without malignant cells or bacterial growth. Due to the symptomatic clinical picture, we introduced an anti-inflammatory therapy with low-dose NSAIDs, for better management of the symptoms. The evolution was then favourable, with a regression in symptoms and a decrease in the size of the pericardial effusion. The patient was discharged home, with the indication to continue colchicine at 0.5 mg once per day for at least 3 months in association with low-dose NSAIDs.
A close follow-up on a monthly basis was planned, during which the patient did not report any episodes of chest pain, although continued to present mild dyspnoea and asthenia. After 1 month, although the patient was stable, given our diagnosis of pericarditis and the ultrasound results with the persistence of pericardial effusion, we further increased the posology of ibuprofen at 600 mg t.i.d. At the 2-month follow-up appointment, a progressive increase in the effusion was observed, the patient reported transient worsening of asthenia, and we therefore introduced corticosteroid therapy (prednisone 25 mg once a day), together with colchicine. We extended the work-up during the follow-up, with an extensive panel of viral serologies taken ∼2 months after the initial symptoms, so that we could exclude false negatives due to very early testing. The microbiological agents tested by serologies included HIV, HBV, HAV, HEV, Coxiella burnetii, Chlamydia trachomatis, Chlamydia pneumoniae, EBV, adenovirus, parvovirus B19, Borrelia burgdorferi, Treponema pallidum, Leptospira, and PCR for enterovirus. On the following follow-up, at 3 months, the clinical picture had improved, and we could start a reduction of prednisone. We also performed a cardiac magnetic reosonance imaing (MRI) (05.01.2023, ), which confirmed a significant circumferential pericardial effusion (maximum 22 mm at diaphragm level), but no signs of haemodynamic compromise. Moreover, there were no signs of ventricular interdependence, and the pericardium had not thickened; there was no pericardial hyper-signal in T2-weighted short-tau inversion recovery sequence and no pericardial contrast in late gadolinium enhancement sequences. At the further follow-ups, we noticed a persistence of pericardial effusion, not haemodynamically relevant, at the level of the right cavities. In subsequent follow-up echocardiograms, there were no relevant signs of constrictive pericarditis, such as septal bounce, higher values of medial e’-wave at tissue Doppler imaging (TDI) compared to lateral e’ (annulus reversus), or significant respiratory variation of mitral or tricuspid E-wave at pulsed wave-Doppler.
The therapy with the corticosteroid was then stopped (total duration of therapy: <2 months), and colchicine was stopped after a total of 6 months. In the meanwhile, the renal function was stable, and we constantly monitored that inflammatory and cardiac biomarkers remained within normal limits (troponin T-hs and NT-pro-BNP). summarizes the clinical and instrumental follow-up carried out. At the last follow-up, the patient was clinically asymptomatic, and we observed a small reduction in the extent of pericardial effusion . However, the long-term evolution of chronic pericardial effusion in patients with ADPKD is presently unknown, especially with respect to the risk of evolution into constrictive pericarditis, and we have therefore planned a regular follow-up with repeated echocardiography and MRI to detect early signs of thickening of pericardium.