A 71-year-old man presented with an over 10-year history of left lower back pain and intermittent claudication accompanied by severe pain radiating to the left buttock. Physical examination confirmed hyperesthesia in the left hip but no apparent motor weakness. On both sides, the straight leg raising test yielded negative results. A plain X-ray scan showed L4–5 assimilated vertebra and junctional scoliosis. Flexion and extension views showed lumbosacral instability with 10° sagittal rotation . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and myelography followed by computed tomographic scan (CT) showed no central spinal stenosis . However, MRI of the coronal section indicated stenosis of the left L5 spinal nerve far outside the L5–S1 foramen . Further, CT following radiculography for the left L5 spinal nerve showed apparent pinching of the left L5 spinal nerve between the L5 transverse process and sacral alar . Selective L5 spinal nerve infiltration relieved pain for only a day. We diagnosed the patient with far-out syndrome based on the abovementioned evidence, specifically, the pinching of the left L5 spinal nerve between the L5 transverse process and sacral alar. We performed transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) surgery to decompress the left L5 spinal nerve and stabilize the lumbosacral junction following Wiltse’s approach . Intraoperative left L5–S1 facetectomy revealed severe compression of the L5 spinal nerve between the transverse process and sacral alar, as expected from the preoperative observations. We decompressed the nerve by cutting off the inferior margin of the transverse process and superior margin of the sacral alar. We then inserted an intervertebral cage filled with autologous bone into the L5–S1 intervertebral space for lumbosacral stabilization and to enlarge the lumbosacral foramen, followed by pedicle screw fixation, which required particular care because of the abnormal anatomy. Preoperative CT and MRI had already shown that the fused L5 vertebral body had two pedicles on its right side: the cranial one originated from the L4 vertebra and the caudal one was an anatomically appropriate L5 pedicle. The right L4 root passed between the two right pedicles of the fused L5 vertebral body, as if it ran through “a bony tunnel” . Moreover even the C-arm imaging system couldn’t precisely show the right root passage in the fused vertebra. Therefore, we took great care while inserting the pedicle screw into the cranial pedicle on the right of the L5 so as not to injure the right L4 root. Although the caudal pedicle on the right of the L5 vertebra was left as is with no screw, the L5 and sacral vertebrae were fixed firmly . Postoperatively, the patient had no symptoms and had a good course up to 1.5 years after the surgery.