A 50-year-old British Caucasian woman presented to her general practitioner with a six-month history of pain in and around the left mastoid process and subjective mild hearing loss. She was referred to the local district general hospital where an ear, nose and throat exam with a pure tone audiogram was normal, except for tenderness over the left temporomandibular joint. Whilst awaiting a head and neck magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI) she presented to her local hospital with subacute onset dizziness, confusion and gait instability leading to recurrent falls. She was subsequently admitted to the regional tertiary neurological centre. On examination, she was confused and disorientated, with a Mini Mental State Examination score of 19 out of 30. She had oscillopsia associated with bilateral, conjugate, involuntary, random eye movements consistent with opsoclonus, mild dysarthria, titubation, upper limb myoclonus, left arm dysmetria and a coarse intention tremor. She was not able to sit upright due to a severe truncal ataxia. Her general and systemic examination was normal. A putative diagnosis of OMS was made, and further investigations were arranged in order to further investigate the cause.
Her full blood counts, C-reactive protein, liver and renal function tests were normal. Blood cultures taken to identify an infective cause were negative. A paraneoplastic antibody screen was negative for the following antibodies: anti-neuronal nuclear antibodies type 1, anti- Hu, Purkinje cell antibodies, anti-neuronal nuclear antibodies type II, anti-Ma, anti-Tr, anti-amphiphysin, collapsin response mediator protein-5, sex determining region Y-box 1 antibodies, N-methyl D-aspartate antibodies, voltage gated potassium channel antibodies, double-stranded DNA antibodies, extractable nuclear antigen antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Tumor markers, including cancer antigens 19–9 and 125, carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha feta protein and human chorionic gonadotropin, were also all unremarkable. A traumatic lumbar puncture tap contained a raised protein level of 0.71 and occasional mononuclear cells. However, no organisms were detected.
An MRI scan of her brain revealed a mass in the left nasopharynx (3.4×2.5×2.6cm) with possible bony erosion of the skull base. There was fluid collection in the left mastoid air cells and local mucosal enhancement consistent with inflammatory disease. Subsequent whole body (18F)-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) did not reveal any other tumors, but confirmed the presence of a nasopharyngeal mass and an ipsilateral hypermetabolic level II lymph node (1.5×1.4cm) .
Following identification of the mass, rigid nasoendoscopy under general anaesthetic was performed, and showed a pale bulky lesion in the post-nasal space blocking the left Eustachian tube. This was biopsied, and histological findings showed fragments of a neoplasm, consisting of interconnecting cords of cells with a biphasic pattern . The outer layer had a basaloid, spindled appearance, whilst the inner cell clusters had more abundant, eosinophilic, squamoid cytoplasm. Globules of pink amyloid-like protein were present in both cell groups. The intervening stroma contained a lymphoplasmacytic stromal infiltrate, which also extended into the epithelium . Immunocytochemistry showed positivity for MNF-116 and CAM5.2 (antibodies against epitopes expressed by different cytokeratins within epithelial cells); the latter also appeared to stain the pink globules. The p63 antibody (a marker of squamous differentiation expressed in basal and parabasal nuclei of nasopharyngeal epithelium) predominantly stained the outer basaloid layers whilst the S100 protein (a marker present in neural, melanocytic and antigen presenting cells) highlighted scattered dendritic cells. These findings were characteristic of a nasopharyngeal carcinoma.
She was treated with a three-day course of 1g methylprednisolone (Pfizer Limited, Tadworth, Surrey, UK) administered intravenously, followed by a tapering 60mg dose of oral prednisolone (Actavis, Barnstaple, Devon, UK) for several weeks for her neurological symptoms. She also received five days of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) at a dose of 0.4g/kg/day (Biotest Pharma GmbH, Landsteinerstr. 5 Dreieich, Germany). Her involuntary movements and ataxia improved considerably, and in a few weeks she was able to walk with a cane. But after one month of receiving steroid treatment she developed a psychotic episode, presumably related to the steroids, that promptly responded to a reduction in steroid doses and haloperidol. Following a referral to oncology she was treated with chemoradiation: 70Gy in 35 fractions over seven weeks, using intensely modulated radiotherapy delivered by VMAC (Volumetric Arc Therapy, RapidArcTM, Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA, USA) and three cycles of concurrent cisplatin chemotherapy at a dose of 80mg/m2 per cycle. Four months from her diagnosis she was able to sit upright without support. She still had rare fragments of opsoclonus, which were asymptomatic. At six months follow-up there were no signs of focal neurological deficit, apart from the inability to tandem walk.