A young male in his early twenties, a university student, presented to the outpatient department with pain over the right knee for the last 9 months. The pain was continuous in nature, throbbing in character, aggravated when walking, and increased in intensity at night. He had no history of trauma, and he denied any contact injures as well. He had visited multiple clinics before, where he was given analgesics for the unrelenting pain but found only temporary relief. The pain had stopped him from participating in any recreational activities over the past few months. On clinical examination, the patient had localized tenderness over the anterior aspect of the patella. The patellar grind test was positive. He had a good range of motion, with a painful arc ranging from 40° to 120° of flexion. There was no swelling around the knee. There was no distal neurovascular deficit. A plain radiograph of the affected knee was obtained. X-rays revealed a lytic lesion of the patella with cortical erosions. The geographic destruction was appreciated with a doubtful pathological fracture line on the lateral view of the knee x-rays . GCT was considered the closest differential due to classical radiologic features and was graded as Campanacci grade 2. A computed Tomography scan was done to see the extent of cortical involvement. Gross cortical erosions were noted on the inferior articular surface, with thinning on certain cuts. The non-articulating superior surface had minor cortical thinning. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was mandatory to rule out any soft tissue involvement . We confirmed our diagnosis with a core needle biopsy, which suggested it to be a GCT. A total patellectomy and extensor repair were done using 5-0 Ethibond non-absorbable sutures in a purse string fashion . Intra-operatively, the articular surface of the patella was soft and friable, with an intact cartilage cover. The patella was sectioned into two and sent for histopathological examination (HPE). HPE revealed a mixed picture of GCT with secondary ABC . Post-operatively, the knee was immobilized in a long knee brace for 2 weeks. Passive range of motion at the knee was started at 3 weeks. Active movements were allowed at 6 weeks, and full weight bearing was given at 8 weeks. The patient was on close follow-up over a span of 12 months. Initial post-operative follow-up was at regular intervals till stitch off. The patient was asked to report at 2-month interval thereafter. On follow-up at 12 months, he had a good range of motion at the knee, movements were pain-free, and he was ambulating without any support . Sequential knee and chest x-rays were recorded every 4 months. At 12 months, an MRI of the knee was done to rule out the recurrence of the tumor.