A 40-year-old obese female homemaker by occupation presented to ED (Emergency department) of our tertiary care center with history of swelling over left lower abdomen for past 6 months. Swelling was associated with dull aching pain which has aggravated in past 10 days. Patient also had recurrent episode of vomiting and fever not relived by antipyretics. She had a history of previous lower segment caesarean section 14 years ago following which she developed incisional hernia after 2 years. Patient underwent intraperitoneal on lay mesh repair (IPOM) a year ago. She was a known case of type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism on regular oral medications. No significant family and psychosocial history. She was hemodynamically stable with a pulse rate of 90 beats per minute, blood pressure 110/70 mm of Hg, Spo2 99% at room air, respiratory rate 22 cycles per minute and temperature of 100 Fahrenheit. Physical examination revealed a soft tender swelling of 5 × 7 cm in the left hypogastric region, skin over the swelling was erythematous with local raise of temperature. Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed a defect of about 3 cm in the anterior abdominal wall on left side of surgical incision through which bowel loop was seen herniating into the subcutaneous plane, few pockets of loculated collections along with septation noted. Contrast enhanced computed tomography revealed a defect of size 4 × 3 cm in the anterior abdomen wall in hypogastric region left to the midline with bowel loops protruding through it . All investigations were within the normal limit except total leucocyte count which was 15.40 × 103 per μl. Urgent exploratory laparotomy was planned by a team consisting of an additional professor of general surgery with a 12-year experience. Intraoperative findings revealed a freely mobile segment of bowel loop with ileocecal junction and small bowel trapped in hernial cavity. Meticulous adhesiolysis and retrieval of the gut segment done along with the fixation of caecum in lateral abdominal wall by caecopexy, large collection of pus found and drained through separate incision, thorough peritoneal toileting done. Post-operative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on day 12. Regular follow up of the patient was done at 1 month, 3 month and 6 months and she was doing well at all visit.