A ten-year-old African-American female presented to the pediatric ophthalmology clinic in referral from her primary care provider for evaluation of bilateral eyelid swelling, tearing and itching for approximately one month. Her past medical history included premature birth, jejunal atresia with resection and jejuno-ileal primary anastomosis, short gut syndrome, asthma, and mild eczema. The patient’s birth history was complicated by Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) positive testing of her mother, but with normal prenatal ultrasounds and negative congenital HIV testing, and was otherwise uncomplicated. Her family history included allergic rhinitis and asthma in her mother, and there was no known family history of sarcoidosis or granulomatous disease. The patient’s asthma was first suspected when she presented at seven months old with wheezing and cough that responded well to albuterol concerning for reactive airway disease. She is now followed by a pediatric pulmonologist for moderate persistent asthma with pulmonary function tests that revealed a moderate obstruction pattern with normal lung volumes and diffusing capacity of lung for carbon monoxide. She is treated with an inhaled corticosteroid for asthma control and albuterol as needed for symptom exacerbation.
Her presenting ophthalmologic exam was notable for bilateral papillary conjunctivitis and mild superficial keratopathy, as well as mild boggy lid edema. She was started on ketotifen fumarate and artificial tears for presumed allergic conjunctivitis. Five months later at her follow-up exam, she had persistent symptoms and exam with giant papillary reaction of the palpebral conjunctiva of both upper eyelids. Upon referral to an allergist, she was found to have normal serum IgE level, and skin testing did not identify a likely allergen exposure. She had been diagnosed with eczema clinically in the past by her primary care provider and was confirmed by allergist. Inflammatory markers were elevated including sedimentation rate 38 mm/hr. (reference range 0–20 mm/hr) and C-reactive protein 4.18 mg/dL (reference range 0–1 mg/dL); however, serum ACE and lysozyme were normal, and chest radiograph did not reveal hilar lymphadenopathy. At this point, the worsening palpebral reaction and overall picture including history of atopic disease were felt to best support a diagnosis of vernal keratoconjunctivitis. She was started on a topical regimen including corticosteroid, olopatadine and tacrolimus ointment with mild improvement in lid swelling.
She was next seen approximately 6 weeks later when she presented to the pediatric emergency department with significant worsening of bilateral upper eyelid swelling . Her exam continued to demonstrate giant papillary reaction temporally in the bilateral superior palpebral conjunctiva. Of note, the upper lid swelling was much more pronounced than at previous visits and the lacrimal glands were palpable bilaterally. She had continued to use topical steroid, tacrolimus, and artificial tears, but had discontinued olopatadine as she had minimal to no itching. Decision was made to pursue tissue diagnosis by obtaining a lacrimal gland biopsy. She was also referred to pediatric rheumatology for evaluation as she complained of joint pains at her emergency department visit. The onset of the joint pain was around the same time as the patient’s swollen eyelids, however there was no joint effusion, limitation, or tenderness on exam. Subsequent radiographs of bilateral ankles and elbows also showed no joint effusion or signs of chronic arthritis. Exam did show bilateral flexible pes planus which likely contributed to patient’s lower extremity pain with high impact weight-bearing activity. She had dry skin on exam without ichthyosiform cutaneous manifestations that can be seen in children with sarcoidosis . There were no discrete lesions or papules, and thus skin biopsy was not pursued. There was also no unexplained fever, weakness, alopecia, sicca symptoms, or oral ulcers by history or exam. Extensive lab evaluation showed normal/negative complete blood count, liver, kidney, and thyroid function, creatine kinase, complement studies (C3, C4, CH50), anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and urinalysis. Sedimentation rate was persistently elevated at 25 mm/hr. Genetic testing for the NOD2 gene mutation associated with Blau syndrome was not performed due to lack of uveitis, rash, and arthritis seen in this disease.
Eight months after initial presentation, biopsy of the right lacrimal gland was performed in an anterior transseptal fashion through the temporal upper lid crease. Histopathologic evaluation of the lacrimal gland specimen demonstrated chronic-appearing inflammatory changes with poorly-formed noncaseating granulomas and widespread destruction of normal acini and gland structures. Staining for CD68 marker for epithelioid cells showed multiple foci of macrophage infiltration at sites of granulomatous inflammation consistent with sarcoidosis . Special stains including Kinyoun stain for acid-fast bacteria and Giemsa stain for fungal organisms were negative.
She was started on treatment with oral prednisone ~ 2 mg/kg/day at the same time of the lacrimal gland biopsy 8 months after initial presentation with gradual improvement in upper eyelid swelling. Subcutaneous methotrexate 15 mg/m2 weekly was added to therapy 6 weeks later as a steroid-sparing agent, and she was able to taper off steroid over the next 2 months. Serial slit lamp exams have demonstrated no evidence of intraocular inflammation, iris nodules, or vascular changes. At the patient’s last visit, 28 months out from initial presentation, she had no other systemic manifestations of sarcoidosis and was doing well on methotrexate.