A 75-year-old woman with metrorrhagia visited a gynecology clinic. Transvaginal ultrasound showed a retroperitoneal tumor. She was referred to our hospital for a detailed examination. The results of the laboratory examinations were as follows: white blood cell count, 5660/mm3 (normal range 4500–9000); red blood cell count, 383 × 104/mm3 (normal range 435–555); hemoglobin level, 12.5 g/dL (normal range 13.6–17.0); platelet count, 26.8 × 104/mm3 (normal range 14.0–36.0); serum blood urea nitrogen level, 18.6 mg/dL (normal range 8–20); serum creatinine level, 0.46 mg/dL (normal range 0.5–1.2); and tumor marker levels were within the normal ranges (carcinoembryonic antigen, 3.9 ng/mL and CA, 19–9 2.0 U/mL). The laboratory data were within normal limits, instead of demonstrating them. She had no history of serious illnesses, operations, or hospitalizations. Computed tomography (CT) showed an enhanced tumor, measuring 5.3 × 4.2 cm, behind the rectum (Rb) . Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected a well-defined tumor with low T1 and high T2 intensities . Colonoscopic examination revealed that a submucosal tumor at the posterior rectal wall, and that the distal tumor margin was 1 cm above the dentate line . Core needle biopsy of the tumor revealed bundles of spindle cells with positive immunohistochemical staining for c-kit and CD34, but negative for S100 proteins. The pathological findings led to the diagnosis of a rectal GIST. Neoadjuvant therapy was initiated with imatinib 400 mg orally daily to reduce the resection range. The therapy was scheduled for 6 months and would be followed by surgical removal of the remaining tumor. CT at 1 month after starting chemotherapy showed that the tumor size had decreased to 4.5 cm. Unfortunately, 4 months after the initiation of neoadjuvant therapy, the patient developed generalized erythematous papules with severe itching. CT examination and colonoscopy revealed that the tumor size had decreased to 3.5 × 3.5 cm . The patient underwent a partial sphincter-saving rectal resection with creation of an ileostomy.
The patient was placed in a prone jackknife position on the operating table, with the legs slightly abducted and the buttocks strapped apart using adhesive tapes from the buttocks to the table . First, the skin flap was made by a cluneal arched skin incision between the subcutaneous fat and lavatory muscle. We then approached the posterior rectal wall through the side of the gluteus maximus muscle and lavatory muscle of the anus. The Waldeyer’s fascia was incised to expose the tumor and the bared rectal wall. The tumor, lifted via digital rectal examination, was extracted with a safety margin . The rectal wall was closed using the Gambee’s method (absorbable suture), with suturing of the muscle layer (3–0 silk) . A 19-Fr. soft silastic tube drain was placed near the suture line, and port site closure was completed. A temporary ileostomy was created via laparoscopic surgery.
Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was located in the muscularis of the rectum, with a negative margin , and had widespread central necrosis via effective response from imatinib . Microscopic examination showed the tumor was consisted of bundle-like proliferations of spindle-shaped cells . The immunohistological findings showed that the tumor cells stained negatively with S100 and SMA and positively with c-kit and CD34; the tumor was diagnosed to be a KIT-positive GIST . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the ileostomy was closed 2 months later. Postoperative anal function was preserved, and the operative scar was fine and inconspicuous . Neither local recurrence nor distant metastasis was noted during the 2-year follow-up without adjuvant therapy.