A 77 year old Caucasian female presented to emergency room on 09/06/2009 with left sided chest pain of three days duration. Her pain was sharp, 8/10 in intensity, nonexertional, radiated to interscapular region, and initially relieved by over the counter medications. She denied any fever, cough, nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, shortness of breath and, palpitation. Other review of systems was unremarkable.
Past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia, obstructive sleep apnea, atrial fibrillation and coronary artery disease. She had bare metal stent placement in left anterior descending artery in 06/09, angioplasty for in stent restenosis in 08/09 and a pacemaker implantation for sick sinus syndrome on 09/01/2009. Her medications included lisinopril, atenolol, simvastatin, aspirin, clopidogrel, warfarin, and dofetilide.
On physical examination she was morbidly obese, was in moderate distress. Her vital signs included temperature of 98.7°F, pulse rate 63/minute, regular in rate and rhythm, blood pressure (BP) 141/62 mmHg, respiratory rate (RR) 18/min SpO2 97%, jugular venous pressure (JVP) was not elevated and there was no pulsus paradoxsus. Auscultation of heart and lungs was unremarkable. Examination of other systems was normal.
Admission electrocardiogram (EKG) revealed new T wave inversions in the lead II, III, AVF and QS complexes and T wave Inversions in V1-V6 as seen in the previous EKG . Admission chest X-ray showed normal cardiac silhouette with presence of pacemaker leads, normal lung fields and mediastinum.
Her initial set of cardiac enzymes, complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic panel (BMP) and urine analysis were normal. She was admitted with diagnosis of unstable angina. Treatment with heparin, eptifibatide and nitroglycerine was begun. Her repeat EKG on 09/07/09 showed ST depressions in the inferior leads, repeat cardiac enzymes were normal, however her chest pain continued to persist. 2D Echocardiogram (ECHO) on 09/07/09 revealed ejection fraction (EF) of 65%, without any pericardial effusion. Chest pain continued to persist, became hypotensive and oliguric, blood pressure medications were with held. Repeat CBC and BMP revealed elevated WBC 15,800/μl and hemoglobin of 9.4 gm/dl. Serum creatinine changed from 1.13 to 3.01 and blood urea nitrogen increased from 29 to 53. Urine analysis revealed 15-20 white blood cells per high power field (HPF), positive leukocyte esterase and nitrite, 5-10 red blood cells per HPF.
In view of leucocytosis, increased renal parameters and pyuria septic shock secondary to urinary tract infection was considered and transferred to Intensive care unit (ICU). After fluid resuscitation, broad spectrum antibiotics were intiated. On 09/09/09 in ICU the patient was in distress and continued to have chest pain. Vital signs were significant for pulse rate 90/min, regular, BP 70 mmHg, RR of 22/min, SpO2 95%. Auscultation of heart and lungs was unremarkable. Central venous pressure was 15 cm of water. Intravenous vasopressor therapy was intiated. As her chest pain continued to persist, a non-contrast computerized tomography (CT) of the chest was done which revealed hemorrhagic pericardial effusion with lead perforation of the right atrium which was subsequently confirmed by 2D ECHO She underwent pericardial window for drainage and evaluation of lead perforation. During surgery the screw in right atrium had gone through the right atrial wall and caused the perforation. Surgeons over sew the atrial wall and drained 200 cc of pericardial fluid. Her post operative recovery was uneventful and discharged home on the fifth day.