We report the case of a 66-year-old Hispanic man with a history of diabetes, psoriasis, smoking, alcoholism, hospitalization in the previous year due to upper gastrointestinal bleeding (UGB), gastric ulcer and bacteremic lower limb cellulitis caused by MSSA, who received intravenous cephalothin for 14 days. The patient had not previously been exposed to glycopeptide antibiotics. At admission, he presented with a febrile syndrome and chills and complained of lumbar pain that had persisted for more than 20 days. On physical examination, the patient was mentally alert and had a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, a heart rate of 70 beats/minute and a respiration frequency of 18 beats/minute. A systolic murmur (grade 4/6) was detected in the aortic and mitral valves. He also had lower limb hypotrophia with no pain when flexing, extending or rotating the hip. A hematological study showed hematocrit levels of 28%, a hemoglobin concentration of 9.6 g/dL, a white blood cell count of 11,600/mm3 with 85% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, a platelet count of 197,000/mm3 and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 130 mm in the first hour.
Blood cultures performed at admittance were positive for MSSA (SA1) in both samples taken after 18 hours. The SA1 strain was susceptible to the following non-beta lactam antibiotics: gentamicin, minocycline, tigecycline, rifampin, cotrimoxazol, vancomycin, teicoplanin, levofloxacin, ciprofloxacin and linezolid. The vancomycin MIC determined by the broth microdilution method was 1 μg/mL. Nuclear MRI of the spine showed spondylodiscitis at the L5-S1 level with left iliopsoas muscle involvement.
The transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) performed 48 hours after admission showed a mass compatible with vegetation and an anterior mitral valve leaflet abscess causing mild mitral failure : this was interpreted as IE with septic emboli involving the lumbosacral spine and the left iliopsoas muscle. Intravenous antibiotic treatment with cephalothin (2 g/6 hours) and gentamicin (240 mg/day) was started. Subsequent echocardiograms performed 15 days after the start of the treatment did not reveal any abscesses or changes in vegetation size. A blood culture performed as a control 10 days after the start of the treatment was negative.
On day 26 of cephalothin administration, our patient developed a rash caused by beta-lactams with eosinophilia and urinary sediment findings that were compatible with interstitial nephritis. For that reason, treatment was switched to intravenous vancomycin (1 g/12 hours) until day 42, when a new TEE was performed, which showed no vegetation. He was discharged due to improvement of his condition. However, a week later, a new blood culture was positive for MSSA (SA2) in both samples after 19.5 hours, showing the same antibiotic susceptibility and a vancomycin MIC of 1 μg/mL. He was readmitted 48 hours after the blood culture was performed. Immediate treatment was started with intravenous vancomycin (1 g/12 hours), gentamicin (240 mg/day) and rifampin (300 mg/6 hours).
A TEE performed 48 hours after hospitalization revealed a mass compatible with recently established aortic valve vegetation producing mild valvular failure. A mass attached to the anterior mitral valve leaflet was also observed, which suggested the presence of previously attached vegetation causing mild mitral failure. Our patient remained hemodynamically stable, afebrile and his physical examination was unremarkable. The treatment was monitored by a time-kill curve and by vancomycin dosage. The serum bactericidal rate showed bactericidal effects after 24 hours. The trough serum vancomycin concentration was 14.1 mg/L. Gentamicin was discontinued after 21 days due to renal failure. A TEE performed 20 days after hospitalization showed remission of the mass. A tomography-guided needle puncture of the lesion in the left iliopsoas muscle showed no microbiological growth.
Our patient completed intravenous treatment with vancomycin (42 days), gentamicin (21 days) and rifampin (36 days). Because the blood culture was negative, he was discharged.
Polymerase chain reaction detection of the mecA gene was negative in both isolates.
The vancomycin MIC for SA1 and SA2 with the standard inoculum (105) was 0.5 and 1 μg/mL, respectively, and the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) was 0.5 and 128 μg/mL, respectively. A higher inoculum (107) increased the MIC to 2 μg/mL and the MBC to 512 μg/mL in both isolates. After stimulation with increasing subinhibitory concentrations of vancomycin (SA3), the MIC and MBC with the standard inoculum were the same, whereas at a higher inoculum (107), the values increased to 4 μg/mL and 512 μg/mL for the MIC and MBC, respectively.
In the population analysis of SA2 and SA3, a development of colonies up to 3 and 4 μg/mL, respectively, was observed, with growth between 1 and 4 μg/mL, which was 2 to 4 logs more than in SA1, which developed up to 2 μg/mL . SA2 and SA3 were identified as heterogeneous vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (hVISA) on the basis of the population analysis profiling-area under the curve (PAP-AUC) ratios, showing PAP-AUC ratios of 1.06 and 1.26, respectively, compared to the AUC of the Mu3 strain, whereas SA1 was identified as vancomycin-susceptible, showing a PAP-AUC ratio of 0.83, compared to the AUC of the Mu3 strain .
Electron microscopy of SA2 showed a thickened cell wall .
The clonal relationship determined by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis showed that both S. aureus isolates displayed indistinguishable electrophoretic patterns.