A 53-year-old man presented with epigastric pain visited our hospital. Result of the blood analysis indicated hyperamylasemia. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed diffuse parenchymal enlargement, and he was diagnosed as having mild pancreatitis according to the modified CT severity index. The CT scan also revealed an anomaly of the CHA arising from the SMA and annular pancreatic duct. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) confirmed that the annular duct formed a loop in the head of the pancreas . There were no pancreaticobiliary maljunction. Neither the common bile duct nor the main pancreatic duct was dilated. Endoscopic ultrasonography was performed to investigate other causes, but the ampulla of Vater could not be observed due to technical difficulty.
One month later, result of the follow-up laboratory test demonstrated obstructive jaundice. The CT scan revealed a dilatation of the common bile duct. An ulcerative tumor was found around the duodenal papilla region by upper esophagogastroduodenoscopy . Biopsy results from the ulcer indicated adenocarcinoma. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERCP) was performed to investigate the biliary or pancreatic duct, but cannulation of the ampulla of Vater could not be performed successfully due to the invasion of the tumor.
Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with dissection of the regional lymph nodes was performed. Laparotomy showed that the pancreatic parenchymal tissue surrounded the descending part of the duodenum. Neither liver metastasis nor peritoneal dissemination was found. The tumor was located in the head of the pancreas. The SMA was exposed first to identify the origin of the CHA (the “artery-first” approach). The CHA arouse from posteriorly to pancreatic head and traveled posteriorly to the portal vein (PV), and then it ran anteriorly to the PV after it branched off the gastroduodenal artery and anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery . The pancreas was transected at the neck directly overlying the PV-SMV-splenic vein confluence.
Cholangiopancreatography of the resected specimen showed that the annular duct was connected to the major papilla . The final pathology revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma without regional lymph node metastasis (International Union Against Cancer TNM classification, 8th edition: T3N0M0, IIA). The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 21 days postoperatively. He is doing well without any evidence of recurrence at the most recent follow-up of 6 months postoperatively.