A 73-year-old man with advanced descending colon carcinoma was referred to our hospital for surgery. The patient had previously undergone a hemithyroidectomy for papillary thyroid carcinoma and an appendectomy for acute appendicitis. He was also receiving medications for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus and the prevention of cerebral infarction. His carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 levels were 4.0 μg/L and 4.7 kU/L, respectively, and were thus each within their normal ranges. Computed tomography (CT) was negative for metastatic lesions. The patient underwent a laparoscopic partial colectomy and regional lymph node dissection. The pathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma that had invaded the subserosa (T3) and was without lymph node metastasis (N0) . The lymph node count was below 12. The patient was considered to have high-risk stage II colorectal cancer but elected not to undergo adjuvant chemotherapy. One month after surgery, he developed an adhesion-related small intestinal obstruction and underwent a partial jejunal resection.
Nine months after the primary surgery, the patient underwent CT, which revealed soft tissue attenuating masses in the left lower abdominal quadrant . The patient did not have any symptoms, and his laboratory data, including his tumor marker levels, were within normal limits (his CEA and CA19–9 levels were 3.1 μg/L and 4.4 kU/L, respectively). The masses increased in size during the ensuing 3 months and displayed increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake, with an SUV max of 2.9 on positron emission tomography (PET scan) . The masses were attributed to peritoneal metastasis; thus, chemotherapy was recommended. However, the patient elected not to undergo chemotherapy because he was unwilling to allow his quality of life to adversely be affected by the therapy. He instead elected to undergo localized tumor excision; thus, a laparotomy was performed. Intraoperatively, the masses were found to be located in the mesentery of the jejunum. Complete excision of these mesenteric masses warranted resection of the affected intestinal segment because the vascular supply to the segment was severely compromised. Grossly, the resected nodules were grayish white, well-demarcated solid masses . Microscopically, the masses displayed collagen fiber and fibroblast proliferation and contained a few inflammatory cells. The fibroblasts had infiltrated and surrounded the peripheral fatty tissue. These findings were consistent with sclerosing mesenteritis .
The patient suffered from postoperative ileus but recovered with conservative treatment and showed no signs of sclerosing mesenteritis or descending colon cancer recurrence after 6 and 18 months of follow-up, respectively.