A 38-year-old male, embroidery worker by occupation, presented with a history of low back ache and stiffness with generalized weakness for the last 6 years. Patient had been treated on and off conservatively in past, several times for back-ache. The pain was insidious in onset and progressive in nature, increased on exertion and relieved with rest. There was no history of pain radiating or pain associated with coughing and sneezing. No history of rest pain or night pains. There was no history suggestive of sero-negative spondylo-arthropathy or rheumatoid arthritis. There was no history of any neurological claudication, tingling or numbness in lower limbs. Upper limbs were normal. Spine examination revealed a flexible scoliosis to the right side in the lumbar spine with restricted lateral flexion on the left side. There was tenderness over lumbar vertebrae, paraspinal muscle spasm with restricted movements. The straight leg raise test and Faber’s test were negative. There were no neurological deficits. Examination of the rest of the spine was normal. The most important history was given to us by patient’s mother mentioning dark colored staining of patient’s undergarments in infancy. Later on further enquiry it was found that patient’s toilet had persistent dark colored stains after several hours post-micturation. The patient was born out of non-consanguineous marriage, full term normal delivery with no developmental delay. Patient had no history of any addictions.
X-rays revealed obliteration of lumbar lordosis, disc space narrowing, prominent osteophytes in the vertebral bodies and a right-sided scoliosis at lumbar level. Prominent degenerative changes were evident in the lumbar spine, and the vacuum phenomenon occurred in almost all the lumbar disc spaces. X-ray of rest of the spine and adjacent joints were normal.
As X-ray revealed prominent bony lesions and patient had no neurological signs or symptoms, a computed tomographic examination showed protrusions, vacuum phenomenon, osteophytes, and Schmorl nodules in the L3-L4, L4-L5, and L50S1 discs. Ophthalmic examination, skin examination, ultrasonography abdo-pelvis and echocardiography were normal confirming no other systemic involvement.
In alkaptonuria patients, plasma levels of homogentisic acid (HGA) are on average 6.6 μg/ml; normally HGA levels are undetectable. Urinary HGA levels are increased 300 fold in alkaptonuria patients, between 0.4 and 12.4 g/day (on average 3.12 mmol HGA/mmol of creatinine) . All laboratory investigation was normal, but for HGA excretion in the urine which was 32.9 mmol/mol creatinine. Plasma level of HGA was 8 μg/ml. Both were more than their normal level.
Following biochemical tests were performed to confirm the diagnosis of alkaptonuria
Urine turned black on exposure to air for many hours due to oxidation Ferric chloride test: transient green color formed Ammoniacal silver nitrate test: black precipitate of silver formed Benedicts test: gave dark supernatant, initial greenish brown precipitate followed by a yellow precipitate of cuprous oxide on standing N-butanol test: Pinkish brown color developed.
Finally, diagnosis of alkaptonuria was concluded. Treatment and follow-up: Patient was treated symptomatically with complete rest, analgesics and physiotherapy vitamin C 500 mg twice daily was given along with vitamin C rich diets. No specific diet restriction of tyrosine or phenylalanine was recommended as patient responded to vitamin C. The patient responded well and returned back to normal day to day activities. The patient is under follow-up now 1 year since commencement of treatment with no recurrence of back-ache nor any ochronotic features. Treatment is still continued.