A 39-year-old Caucasian female presented with acute respiratory distress with a 1-month history of shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain. Past medical history included anxiety, depression, heavy smoking of both cigarettes and cannabinoids, and one successful pregnancy 16 years previously.
In addition to two discrete masses in the right breast, examination revealed a clear chest and upper abdominal tenderness. She was requiring 9 L of oxygen to maintain appropriate saturations.
A chest X-ray displayed multiple opacifications suspicious for metastases and a left pleural effusion. Cross-sectional imaging reported extensive metastatic disease affecting the lung, liver, spleen, kidneys and pancreas, subcutaneous tissue in the right posterolateral chest, left flank and breast . A dominant 12-cm mass in the lingula and evidence of marked emphysema for her age raised the possibility of a lung primary with extensive spread. Reproductive organs were reported as normal. A breast ultrasound revealed a 22 × 8 mm haematoma and a suspicious 12 × 11 mm lesion with increased vascularity, which was subsequently biopsied.
Aside from a microcytic anaemia and a mildly raised alanine aminotransferase, routine blood tests were unremarkable. In view of her age and chest X-ray appearances, a urinary pregnancy test was performed to exclude trophoblastic disease, which was positive, prompting urgent tumour markers .
Initial histological report suggested cohesive sheets of cells showing marked nuclear pleomorphism and moderate amounts of eosinophilia with focally clear cytoplasm. Scattered multinuclear giant cells were noted with large areas of necrosis although the typical biphasic pattern of choriocaricinoma was not prominent.
Immunohistochemistry received on day 5 of admission confirmed a carcinoma with strong expression of pancytokeratin (AE1/3, MNF116), CK7, CD10, P63 and showed focal positivity for human chorionic gonadroptropin (hCG). In addition to this, the tumour was negative for CK 20, CDX-2, S-100, ER, PR, thyroid transcription factor (TTF)-1, GCDFP-1, and PLAP. Differentials included GCC or choriocarinomatous differentiation in a carcinoma, with lung and breast being the most likely primaries. The pathology was sent to Charing Cross for a second opinion where molecular genotyping was requested.
The patient's respiratory function deteriorated significantly during the first 72 h of admission and she was initiated on nasal high-flow ventilation. A repeat chest X-ray at this time suggested disease progression as shown below . On day 7, following notification from Charing Cross that the tumour could be consistent with a choriocarcinoma, chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide was commenced. After continued desaturation despite maximal non-invasive ventilation and increasing agitation, it was decided with the patient and her family to focus on symptom control. She sadly passed away on day 11 of admission. No post-mortem was undertaken.
On day 40 after presentation, molecular genotyping confirmed a non-gestational trophoblastic tumour, with the absence of paternal alleles, resulting from choriocarcinomatous differentiation within a high-grade primary tumour.