A 36-year-old Japanese man with a 14-month history of HIV infection presented with fever, pulsating headache, lumbago, nausea, and vomiting four week prior to his admission. Although highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) had been started (lamivudine, azidothymidine, and lopinavir plus ritonavir) after completion of treatment for pneumocystis pneumonia, which had been the initial clinical manifestation of our patient, his CD4-positive lymphocyte counts in peripheral blood has never recovered to more than 200 cells/mm3. Therefore, three months before admission, abacavir was given instead of azidothymidine, but was also insufficient for increasing CD4-positive lymphocytes. Furthermore, according to the guidelines, prophylaxis against Pneumocystis jirovecii had been started. In our case, atovaquone had been administered, because sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim and pentamidine had caused hepatic and renal insufficiency, respectively. On physical examination, our patient reported headache with neck stiffness. His axillary temperature was 38.2°C. Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) of the brain showed no abnormalities. He was diagnosed as purulent meningitis, initially, because of an increasing of neutrophils count in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Broad-spectrum antimicrobials, however, had no effect on this meningitis. CD4-positive lymphocyte counts 146/μl in peripheral blood. He did not show increasing of immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) fraction of anti-T. gondii antibody (enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay, ELISA). Three weeks after admission, due to worsened headache and lumbago, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and lumbar vertebrae was performed and showed enhanced small nodules at right superior pons and bilateral superior cerebellum, peripheral enhancement at the bilateral superior pons, and enhanced lesions which was parallel to left inner ear. These findings strongly suggested meningitis with granuloma formation, such as tuberculosis. Furthermore, MRI of the lumber vertebrae also suggested the presence of the granulomatous lesion. However, the PCR assay targeting mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. Therefore, bone marrow aspiration biopsy was performed for histopathological examination to elucidate the causative agent of generalized infection. The specimen, bone marrow aspiration clot, was fixed with 10% formalin and embedded in paraffin wax after dehydration which was cut into 3 μm-thick sections, and routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin double stain. Histopathological examination indicated hypocellular bone marrow in which clustered intra-cellular basophilic granuli were present . These were confirmed as microcalcification by Von Kossa's stain. Therefore, the PCR assay with toxoplasma-specific primer was performed using nucleic acid extracted from the formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissue (bone marrow aspiration) section. In the procedure, paraffin-embedded tissue sections (bone marrow aspiration clot) were deparaffinized by xylene and immersed in absolute ethanol. The air-dried pellets of dehydrated section were then resuspended in extraction buffer (Tris-HCl [50 mM, pH 8.5], NaCl [50 mM], EDTA [10 mM], sodium dodecyl sulfate [0.5%], proteinase K [10 mg/mL]) at 95°C. The samples were completely submerged in the extraction buffer and incubated at 56°C for 12 hours. The supernatant was then purified by phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation, and was resuspended in 25 mL of DNase-free buffer (Tris-HCl [10 mM], EDTA [1 mM]), and was stored at 20°C until use for DNA amplification. PCR for B1 gene of T. gondii was carried out following the previous description of Tachikawa et al. . The primers used in the assay are summarized in Additional file . Conditions of nested PCR for T. gondii were 0.5 pmol/L primer, 2.5 mM MgCl2 , 0.2 mM dNTP, and 0.02 U/L Taq DNA polymerase. First PCR was performed in thermal cycler starting with a pre-incubation at 94°C for three minutes, followed by 40 PCR cycles of one minute denaturation at 94°C, one minute annealing at 58°C, one minute elongation at 72°C. The first PCR product was added to a new reaction mixture. Compositions and PCR cycles were same as the first PCR. Second PCR product was electrophoresed on a 3% agarose gel. As a result, the specific PCR product of T. gondii was obtained from the extract from paraffin-embedded tissue sections of the bone marrow biopsy . Anti-T. gondii therapy consisting of pyrimethamine, clindamycin, and leucovorin had been started. After sulfadiazine desensitization, clindamycin was replaced with sulfadiazine. Together with this, although our patient was negative on frequent PCR assay for tuberculosis, anti-tubercular treatment had been continued due to suspected tuberculosis from MRI. According to this, his fever was improved, but other clinical symptoms remained. Finally, anti-T. gondii therapy consisting pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin plus prednisolone had an effect on improving his clinical symptoms and he was referred to other hospital in his home city at his request.