A 52-year-old HIV positive patient presented to the Prosthetics Clinic of the Department of Dentistry at Makerere University College of Health Sciences in March 2017 with a desire to replace her missing teeth and remove the broken ones so that she could look aesthetically pleasing as well as improve her nutrition. She had been taking Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Efavirenz since 2014; and cotrimoxazole prophylaxis since 2004. She was generally in good health with no other chronic systemic illnesses. She reported having lost her first three teeth as a young girl resulting from tooth decay in the early 1980s’. Between that time and 2008, she lost two more teeth as a result of tooth decay. In 2008, she reported suffering from a severe febrile illness that left her bed ridden for two weeks, during which time she was unable to perform proper oral hygiene measures. Upon recovery, she noticed that her gums were bleeding and some of her teeth were loose and a number were lost (See Table below).
Between 2014, when ART was initiated until she presented to our clinic, she reported suffering from extensive tooth decay that caused more loss of teeth leaving her with just four teeth and four retained roots . There is no history of smoking or alcohol consumption and a diet rich in refined sugars. Table shows her CD4 and viral load measurements, as shown in her records at the HIV treatment centre.
Her diet consisted of predominantly high fiber carbohydrates including plantain, cassava, potatoes, rice, maize flour bread (posho) with fish, meat, beans, groundnut paste sauce and vegetables. As regards oral hygiene, she reported brushing twice a day using warm salt rinses.
On general examination, she was in fairly good general health condition without pallor of the mucous membranes, yellowing of the sclera or palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. The face was symmetrical with prominence of the zygomatic bones, sunken cheeks and mandibular prognathism, features associated with tooth loss. Temporomandibular joint (TMJ) examination showed no signs and symptoms of dysfunction.
Intraorally, there were light to moderate plaque deposits on the remaining dentition with diffuse blackish-purple pigmentation on the hard palatal surface and dorsum of the tongue probably secondary to ART or Kaposi’s sarcoma . In the maxillary arch, tooth # 12, 15 and 25 were present with a peculiar type of cervical caries (caries affecting a significant portion of the cervix/neck of the tooth). There were also retained roots of tooth # 11, 13, and 22. In the mandibular arch, only tooth # 34 with the same peculiar cervical caries and retained root of tooth # 35 were present.
A diagnosis of partially edentulous maxillary and mandibular arches, retained roots of tooth # 11, 13, 22 and 35, as well as cervical caries of 12, 15, 25 and 34 was made. Following oral health education and mouth preparation, this patient received a set of removable acrylic full upper and lower dentures, which has significantly improved her feeding abilities and cosmetic concerns. .