A 62-year-old male was admitted to the Vilnius University Hospital Santaros Clinics Rheumatology department presenting with growing symmetric subcutaneous tumors in the area of the parotid and submandibular salivary glands, small soft masses in the occiput, and the upper third of the forearm. The patient also complained about bilateral small hand joint pain and morning stiffness for 6 mo, dryness of the mouth, rash on calves, and nail deformations for several years.
The subcutaneous tumors in the area of the parotid and submandibular salivary glands were present for 2 years and grew more rapidly in the last 7 mo. The patient had a history of moderate alcohol consumption (mostly beer) and was diagnosed with metabolic liver cirrhosis (Child-Turcotte-Pugh [CTP] B class; Model for the End-Stage Liver Disease [MELD] score equal to 9), portal hypertension (splenomegaly, hypersplenism, paraumbilical shunt), and secondary megaloblastic anemia in 2019. Since then, he was followed up by a gastroenterologist. In 2019, the ultrasound examination of the neck and salivary glands’ soft tissues discovered only small, lush adipose tissue around the neck without enlarged lymph nodes. At first, facial changes were associated with phenotypical changes due to alcohol-induced hypercortisolism. However, as the masses continued to grow, the patient was referred for a rheumatologist’s consult. In September 2020, the patient consulted with the rheumatologist and was hospitalized in the Rheumatology department for further diagnosis.
The patient was previously diagnosed with primary arterial hypertension and polyneuropathy, effectively treated with alpha-lipoic acid. No oncological history was reported. Past exposure to chemical substances of unknown origin in a working environment at a fertilizer factory was noted.
The patient had a history of moderate alcohol consumption, but he abstained from consuming alcohol for approximately > 6 mo. He claimed to have no other hazardous habits, and no allergies to food or medicines. There was no history of surgical treatment and congenital or similar disorders in his family.
During the examination, egg-sized hard and painless subcutaneous tumors in the area of the parotid and submandibular salivary glands, soft and small masses in the occiput, hump, the upper third of the forearm. Occipital and neck area masses were difficult to notice without a meticulous inspection. Minor gynecomastia (elastic masses, which could be moved without causing the patient any pain and had no definite margins) was suspected . The palpation of the small joints of both hand was painful. Onychodystrophy, rashes on calves — red patches of skin covered with thick, silvery scales, and dry tongue were observed. The patient was a bit overweight (body mass index 25.5 kg/m2).
Changes in the blood test results showed elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) by 26 mm/h, a high titer of rheumatoid factor (RF) 235.0 U/mL, low levels of complement C4, normal immunoglobulin (Ig) G4 1.26 g/L, and a normal cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody test. Extractable nuclear antigen antibodies and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Schirmer’s test was positive (right eye: 6 mm/5 min, left eye: 5 mm/5 min). Laboratory test results were also compatible with the diagnosis of alcohol-related liver cirrhosis (aspartate aminotransferase > 2× alanine aminotransferase, slightly elevated γ-glutamyl transferase, mild coagulopathy, and megaloblastic anemia). Calculated alcoholic liver disease/nonalcoholic fatty liver disease index was 14.2, meaning 100% probability of alcohol-related liver disease. Viral hepatitis markers were negative. Hyperglycemia and hyperuricemia were also noted .
Ultrasound examination of the soft tissues of the parotid glands and neck area showed fatty solid masses close to parotid glands and thickening of the subcutaneous adipose tissue layer above the chin, right and left part of the neck in II-III vertebrae zone. Face and neck lipomatosis was suspected. However, small vascularity in the parotid gland tumor area was alleged. Figure shows high-resolution ultrasound images (using Canon Aplio i800 14 MHz linear probe with power Doppler [PD] and color superb microvascular imaging [SMI] techniques) of the fatty tumor close to the left parotid gland area. Grayscale ultrasound showed typical superficial lipoma well-circumscribed with parallel linear and thin echogenic lines . Features that suggest malignancy include: the presence of thick septa (> 2 mm), the presence of nodular and/or globular or non-adipose mass-like areas, and decreased percentage of fat composition (< 75% fat). Lipomatous soft tissue lesions with only thin septa that do not enhance at magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can be confidently confirmed as a lipoma. PD detected several small internal dots — more than minimal flow/vascularity . Liposarcoma is characterized mostly by an ill-defined and usually vascularized margin, heterogeneous texture. SMI confirmed several unrelated vascular dots, which caused only weak suspicion of liposarcoma . The random noise during the examination was minimized. Ultrasound examination of the breasts displayed mild bilateral gynecomastia: left 22 mm × 6 mm and right 28 mm × 7 mm. Head and neck MRI showed the significantly thickened subcutaneous fat layer at the damaged areas and confirmed ultrasound diagnosis — it is more likely lipomatosis than liposarcoma .
Other possible comorbidities were excluded: Spirometry for chronic pulmonary disease and electroneuromyography for polyneuropathy were without changes. A small salivary gland biopsy was performed and showed no histological signs of Sjogren’s syndrome or amyloid deposition.
Psoriasis was confirmed by a dermatologist, and high-resolution ultrasound imaging (using Canon Aplio i800 24 MHz linear probe) showed active synovial arthritis in the metacarpophalangeal joints .