A 48-year-old man (height 168 cm, weight 80 kg) with gastric cancer was scheduled for laparoscopic gastrectomy. He was on maintenance dialysis for chronic renal failure. His medical history included coronary artery bypass grafting for angina. Blood tests were done a day before surgery and prior to maintenance hemodialysis showed mild hyperkalemia (serum K+ 5.4 mEq/L). Serum K+ was not rechecked after hemodialysis.
In the operating room, after placing a thoracic epidural catheter, we induced general anesthesia by intravenous administration of propofol 60 mg, fentanyl 100 μg, and rocuronium 70 mg. A central venous catheter was placed via the internal jugular vein. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen (40 to 50%), air and desflurane (4 to 5%); and a continuous infusion of remifentanil (0.1–0.2 μg/kg/min). Bolus 1.5% lidocaine epidural infusion and intravenous fentanyl infusion were added as needed. Circulation was supported by continuous nicorandil infusion and bolus phenylephrine. In addition to standard monitors, continuous arterial pressure was monitored via the radial artery.
Surgery was performed in the reverse Trendelenburg position. An hour into surgery, his arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis showed hyperkalemia serum K+ =6.3 mEq/L . The patient had received K+ free infusion since arriving in the operating room until then. The cause for hyperkalemia was unclear at that point in time. In the surgical field, the liver was enlarged and had been retracted for optimal exposure.
ABG analysis during the third hour of surgery showed a further increase in serum K+ to 7.0 mEq/L . Hence, we initiated an infusion of 50% glucose at 5 mL/h with insulin at 0.2 U/h. As serum K+ remained high, we increased the ratio and volume of the infusion gradually to 50% glucose at 20 mL/h with 2 U/h of insulin. When the K+ level exceeded 7 mEq/L during the fifth hour of surgery, sodium bicarbonate (120 mg) was administered. We reported the hyperkalemia to surgeons and discussed to arrange an emergency postoperative hemodialysis. They did not report any abnormal changes that could be the cause of the hyperkalemia in the surgical field, including color changes to the liver. The K+ level continued to remain high despite remedial measures. From the eighth hour onwards, the lactate level also increased . The total surgical duration was 601 min, and anesthesia time was 743 min.
The patient received a total of 900 mL of normal saline and 500 mL of 5% albumin during the procedure. His estimated blood loss was 350 mL. The patient was hemodynamically stable throughout the operation, with no abnormal findings on electrocardiogram (ECG). After the conclusion of the surgery, the patient was extubated in the operating room and transported to the intensive care unit.
Immediate postoperative blood analysis showed a significant rise in aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) , suggestive of liver damage, most probably due to intraoperative liver retraction. We initiated glycyrrhizin infusion for suspected liver damage. Serum K+ decreased marginally to 6.7 mEq/L because of continuous glucose-insulin infusion, and thus an emergency postoperative hemodialysis was avoided. However, we resumed hemodialysis on the first postoperative day (POD 1). Serum K+ was 7.0 mEq/L despite hemodialysis and so he received continuous hemodiafiltration from POD 1 to POD 4. Serum K+, AST, and ALT peaked on POD 1 and then improved gradually with the above treatment measures . However, the patient developed a high-grade fever (39 °C) on POD 5. Emergent computed tomography (CT) showed a low-density area in the left lobe of the liver , suggestive of hepatic infarction. Treatment with antibiotic agent was initiated for presumed infection of the infarcted liver. The patient responded well to treatment. He was discharged 27 days after surgery.