A 44-year-old Japanese man presented to the Maxillofacial Surgery Clinic at the Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan, with reports of a hard mass and dull pain in the left mandible. His medical history was generally unremarkable, though his mandible had been accidentally smashed against his young son’s head at the age of 40. No fracture was detected at the time, and no treatment was received.
Clinical examination revealed slight swelling in the left lower molar region and swelling of the left mandible. There was no disturbance of sensitivity in the left lower lip or chin, and he could move his lips normally. Radiographic examination showed large, irregular, multilocular radiolucency of the left area of mandible extending to the premolar and molar area, with no evidence of any impacted tooth . A computed tomography (CT) image revealed a 45 × 30 × 30 mm multilocular cystic mass in the mandible . An axial CT image showed thinning or partly resorption site of the buccal cortical plate. The coronal section images of the CT scan showed the mass lesion displacing the mandibular canal downward, near the inferior border. The roots of the adjacent teeth were resorbed, changing their shapes . The location of the teeth was not changed.
The initial clinical impression was an ameloblastoma, myxoma, keratocystic odontogenic tumor or another tumor type lesion.
The lesion was removed surgically with the buccal cortical bone and buccal mucosa in contact with the mass of the tumor. The mass fully excised intraorally under general anesthesia, and the inferior alveolar nerve in contact with the mass was preserved.
The resected specimen of the primary tumor was a soft, fragile, yellowish-white mass. Microscopically, tumor tissues were composed of plexiform or cord-like nests of tumor cells with round to oval nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm in a matrix with prominent myxoid change . On the other hand, the component of solid sheets of tumor cells was limited . In some areas, tumor cells surrounded small blood vessels . Moreover, tumor cells manifested a uniform cell morphology, poor dysplasia, and inconspicuous mitosis.
Immunohistochemical staining was positive for vimentin , muscle-specific actin/HHF35 , and Calponin , a protein responsible for binding the actin-binding protein. A hairline-shaped area of positive staining for type IV collagen surrounding the tumor cells was also observed . VEGF and D2–40 was also focally positive in tumor cells. In contrast, staining for alpha-SMA, cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), cytokeratin (CAM5.2), CK19, CD34, CD68, p63, S-100, Factor VIII, and desmin, CD56, chromogranin A, synaptophysin was all negative in the tumor cells. Moreover, CD31 was also negative, but we observed many blood cells intervened between tumor nests. The Ki-67 labeling index was almost 1%. No necrosis or tumor invasion into the neurovascular channel was observed. The primary tumor was diagnosed as a glomus tumor based on these findings.
The patient remained symptom-free and manifested no signs of recurrence. However, a recurrent tumor was detected in a panoramic radiograph during an 8-year follow-up. The panoramic radiographs taken earlier, after excision of the primary tumor, showed normal healing process, bone regrowth, and increased radiopacity. The follow-up panoramic radiograph 8 years later depicted the recurrence as a radiolucent expansion in the lower area of the mandible. A CT exam showed an expanding lesion exiting the lower site of the mandible and a thinning buccal cortical bone in contact with the tumor . In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the recurrent lesion showed a lower or compatible signal intensity compared to the muscle in T1-weighted images and a low-to-high inhomogeneous signal intensity in T2-weighted images. The apparent diffusion coefficient in the glomus tumor area was 2.0 × 10− 3 mm2/sec, suggesting a low cellular density .
The recurrent tumor mass and related teeth were removed under general anesthesia, and the bone surface was shaved. The recurrent tumor had the same microscopic, morphologic, and immunohistochemical features as the primary tumor . The tumor invaded the medullary cavity of the mandible, involving spongiosa and resorbing compressively the cortex bone around tumor.
The patient has no symptoms of recurrence as of this writing, 2 years after the second operation, and will be followed for the long term to promptly detect any signs of new tumor growth.
The patient is satisfied that the glomus tumor was regulated without resecting the mandibular region. He is pleased that there was no functional deterioration that he was worried about before treatment and there was no aesthetic damage.
Timeline of patient diagnosis and treatment.
1. 4 years before the first visit, the patient had been smashed against his young son’s head.
2. At first visit, the symptom was slight swelling of the left mandible. There was no disturbance of sensitivity. The examinations were performed with X-lay and CT.
3. First surgery was performed and started clinical follow-up after the surgery.
4. 8 years later from first surgery, the recurrence was found by panoramic radiograph. The examinations were performed with CT and MR.
5. Second surgery was performed, and it was passed 2 years with no recurrence from second surgery.