A full-term female infant was born at 39 weeks gestation to a 36-year-old mother (O blood type; Rh-positive) via spontaneous vaginal birth. The antenatal visits and ultrasound scans of the mother were unremarkable, and antenatal serology testing for hepatitis B, rubella, syphilis, and HIV were negative. The neonate cried immediately at birth, and her Apgar scores were normal: 8 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min. Cord complete blood count (CBC) showed low hemoglobin (10.8 mg/L), hematocrit (33.6%), white blood cell count (8.6 × 109), and platelet count (229 × 109). Her blood group was B positive and the direct Coombs test was abnormally positive. At 3 h of age, a repeat investigation showed high total serum bilirubin (TSB; 193 μmol/L). Therefore, the neonate was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for further investigation and treatment.
At the time of admission, the infant was active and stable; her heart rate was 140 beats/min, her respiratory rate 40 breaths/min, and she was breathing normally in normal saturated room air. The infant's weight on admission was 2,300 g (3rd−5th percentile), length 48 cm (25th percentile), and head circumference 33 cm (10th percentile). Cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous system examinations were unremarkable. No dysmorphic features were noted. However, her physical examination revealed scleral icterus and abdominal distension with a palpable mass in the left hypochondrium. The septic screen was negative, and liver and renal function tests were unremarkable.
The patient was treated empirically with antibiotics and placed on maintenance intravenous fluid. Packed red blood transfusion and triple phototherapy were initiated, and she received intravenous immunoglobulin (0.5 g/kg).
An abdominal ultrasound on day 1 revealed moderate ascites and a heterogenous hypoechoic lesion anterolateral to the left kidney that measured 5 × 5.5 × 2.5 cm and extended down to the left iliac fossa, displacing the colon laterally but with no vascularity on Doppler. The mass was intraperitoneal rather than retroperitoneal and suspected to be a hematoma. On day 4, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen showed a well-defined semilunar-shaped structure in the left lumbar region lateral to the descending colon. The left kidney was posterior to the structure and showed no enhancement after intravenous injection of gadolinium except at its hilum. The picture was indicative of an infarcted WS .
A technetium scan at 5 days of life showed an absent/non-visualized, non-functional spleen . Due to the patient's clinical stability, both the medical team and her parents decided to proceed with conservative non-surgical management. The patient was provided supportive care and discharged at 18 days of age with acceptable CBC values. Prophylactic amoxicillin was continued and the child was seen regularly by general pediatrics and pediatric hematology services. A follow-up ultrasound at 3 months of age was consistent with previous ultrasound findings, except that the size of the WS had decreased to 2.7 × 1.2 cm with early calcified foci.
The child gained weight appropriately during the first 2 years of life. She was admitted once to the general pediatric ward with viral bronchiolitis. Lab investigations revealed mild microcytic hypochromic anemia, leukocytosis, and mild thrombocytosis (600–1,000 × 109). Considering her hemogram, the nuclear study was repeated. Static and single-photon emission CT (SPECT-CT) imaging demonstrated two small oval foci of uptake posteriorly in the left hypochondrium, indicative of splenunculi/splenules . A follow-up technetium scan still showed an absent/non-visualized, non-functional spleen . Findings were consistent with asplenia with splenunculi/splenules in the splenic bed.
A 3-year follow-up showed improved blood indices within normal limits. The parents chose to stop her oral penicillin at 3 years of age. The child continued to thrive normally and was subsequently discharged from the pediatric hematology clinic.