A 78-year old Caucasian male patient, without relevant medical history and in good health, presented to the emergency department with severe pain in the right hip after a high energy trauma due to a fall. On clinical examination, the right leg was shortened and externally rotated. There was no neurovascular deficit in the ipsilateral limb. A comminuted intertrochanteric hip fracture was diagnosed on a plain X-ray of the painful hip and pelvis (grade 31-A2 according to the AO classification) . Intravenous pain medication was administered at the emergency department, and the patient was transferred to the operating room five hours after admission.
Closed reduction and internal fixation with a 170 mm 125° intramedullary nail (proximal femoral nail antirotation (PFNA; Synthes®), 11 mm diameter) were performed. The patient was placed supine on a fracture table with traction and the hip in adduction and internal rotation. The nail could be introduced without any particular difficulty. A 115 mm blade and a 38 mm distal locking screw were inserted with the use of the aiming arm. For distal locking, a drill sleeve, a protection sleeve, and a 4.2 mm calibrated drill bit (340 mm) were used. Drilling was guided, however not guarded. There were no intraoperative or immediate postoperative complications. Postoperative radiographs were satisfactory. Postoperatively, three weeks nonweight bearing were instructed because of the high energy impact of the trauma. Also, low molecular weight heparin (Enoxaparin 40, 1 subcutaneous injection per day) was administered for six weeks.
On clinical and radiographic checkup six weeks after surgery, no particular difficulties were noticed. The patient was able to walk with one crutch, there was no obvious swelling of the limb, and radiographs showed a good position of the intramedullary nail .
Eight months postoperatively, the patient presented to polyclinical consultation because of a progressive swelling of the right thigh. There was no recent trauma, episode of fever, or illness. Clinical examination revealed a nontender diffuse swelling over the proximal part of the right thigh without well-defined borders, redness, or fluctuation. Peripheral pulses of the lower limbs were palpable, although stronger in the left limb, and capillary refill was normal. Mobilisation of the hip was painless. Ultrasound revealed a calcified old muscular hematoma localised medial to the femoral diaphysis. Additional X-rays confirmed the presence of a medial mass centred over the distal locking screw with calcification of the peripheral borders, suggestive for an (infected) hematoma. Compression and severe osteolysis of the medial border of the femur were seen . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed, showing an active extravasation in the hematoma which led to the diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm . Laboratory tests showed a haemoglobin value of 11 g/dL and an elevated CRP (42 mg/L). Other laboratory parameters were within normal range. On retrospective analysis of the X-rays six weeks postoperatively, the additional mass could have been already noticed. However, because of the very subtle signs, it was misdiagnosed.
The patient was referred to the department of vascular surgery for open drainage. Preoperative findings showed a PFA lesion facing the distal locking screw which was managed by direct arterial suture. The screw was not visible and therefore left in place. No weight-bearing limits were made within the context of the scalloping of the medial femoral cortex because of patient's compliance and a good consolidation of the fracture. The patient was followed up regularly, and further evolution was uneventful.