A 74-year-old right-handed man visited Nippon Life Hospital with a complaint of slowly progressing difficulty in speaking and recognizing spoken words. He first experienced difficulty in speaking at the age of 71 years. Three years later, he started experiencing difficulty in recognizing spoken words. His medical history was unremarkable, and he was not on any medication. He had 12 years of education. He was fully conscious and oriented at the initial visit. No abnormalities were detected on physical examination, neurological examination, or routine laboratory tests. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed predominantly left-sided atrophy of the anterior and medial temporal lobe and the parietal lobe and enlargement of the left lateral ventricle . There was no evidence of hemorrhage or an ischemic lesion. N-iso-propyl-p-[123I] iodoamphetamine (IMP) single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed predominantly left-sided bilateral hypoperfusion of the temporo-parietal lobes and the posterior cingulate gyrus .
Neuropsychological evaluations were performed within 2 months after the initial visit. He retained awareness of his language impairments. Moreover, his motivation to communicate was well-preserved. On evaluation, his spontaneous speech was characterized by a slow rate and was limited to short utterances with frequent pauses due to significant word-finding difficulty. However, he had no apraxia of speech or agrammatism, and he was able to produce grammatically correct sentences without omission and/or misuse of grammatical morphemes. He exhibited a few phonemic paraphasias and a relatively large number of verbal paraphasias and neologisms. Neologisms in this study were classified as words sharing less than 50% of phonemes with the target words [, ]. Auditory comprehension in the spontaneous speech was mostly preserved, although he showed an inability to comprehend long and complex sentences.
A standard language test for aphasia (SLTA) was performed within 2 months after the initial visit . The SLTA, a comprehensive standardized battery test of language functions for adult Japanese speakers, is most commonly used in Japan. He provided correct responses for 8 out of 10 items in the SLTA sentence comprehension tasks [8/10 (80%) in our patient vs. a mean score of 9.5/10 (95%) in 150 non-aphasic individuals; Fisher’s exact test p-value = 0.5], indicating that his comprehension of short sentences was mostly preserved. In contrast, he provided correct responses for only 3 out of 10 items in the SLTA following-verbal-commands tasks [3/10 (30%) in our patient vs. a mean score of 9.6/10 (96%) in 150 non-aphasic individuals; Fisher’s exact test p-value = 0.003], indicating that his comprehension of long and complex sentences was impaired. He provided correct responses for 14 out of 20 items in the SLTA object naming tasks [14/20 (70%) in our patient vs. a mean score of 19.6/20 (98%) in 150 non-aphasic individuals; Fisher’s exact test p-value = 0.02], indicating that he had anomia. Few errors occurring during the object naming tasks were due to no responses (2/20, 10%) because of word-finding difficulty. During the evaluation, some paraphasias (4/20, 20%) occurred. Paraphasic errors during the SLTA object naming tasks were classified as verbal paraphasias (2/4, 50%), (e.g., “isu” ‘chair’ for “tukue” ‘desk’ and “nemoto” ‘root’ for “torii” ‘Shinto gateway’), and neologisms (2/4, 50%), (e.g., “etoshima” for “enpitsu” ‘pencil’ and “hikoshiki” for “chochin” ‘Japanese lantern’). With respect to neologisms, no responses resulted from the production of a phonemic error in a verbal paraphasia, [e.g., target = tomato and response = banona (phonemic error on banana)]. When he could not retrieve the target words, initial letter cues provided were ineffective.
To assess speech production ability, he was asked to tell a story about a four-frame cartoon in the SLTA explanation-of-picture-story task. A general score (range, 1–6) was generated based on the number of the included key words (“aruku” ‘walk’, “boshi” ‘hat’, “tobu” ‘fly’, and “hirou” ‘pick up’), grammatical errors, and character errors in this story. The obtained scores were defined as follows: 6, perfect sentences including four key words; 5, incomplete or paraphasic sentences including four key words; 4, sentences including three key words; 3, sentences including two key words; 2, sentences including only one key word; and 1, no key word. He scored a 2 in the SLTA explanation-of-picture-story task. Although the score of our patient was numerically considerably lower than the mean score of 150 non-aphasic individuals, the difference was not statistically significant [2/6 in our patient vs. a mean score of 5.8/6 in 150 non-aphasic individuals; Fisher’s exact test p-value = 0.061]. His speech was characterized by a slow rate and was limited to short utterances with frequent pauses due to significant word-finding difficulty. For example, when he was asked to tell a story, he only presented the following sentences: “… kaze ga fuite boshi ga … michi de boshi wo … otoshite ….” ‘… wind (particle) blow hat (particle) … street (particle) hat (particle) … drop ….’ ‘The wind blows the hat in the street. The hat falls.’ He had no apraxia of speech, paraphasia, omission, and/or misuse of grammatical morphemes.
He was only able to repeat two out of five items in the SLTA sentence repetition task. Although the score of our patient was considerably lower than the mean score of 150 non-aphasic individuals, the statistical difference was not significant [2/5 (40%) in our patient vs. a mean score of 4.5/5 (90%) in 150 non-aphasic individuals; Fisher’s exact test p-value = 0.167]. His difficulty in sentence repetition occurred in the latter part of the sentences. For example, when he was asked to repeat “tonari no machi de kaji ga atta” ‘a fire occurred in surrounding town’, he repeated only “tonari no machi de ….” Moreover, when he was asked to repeat “watashi no ie ni inaka kara okina kozutsumi ga todoita” ‘my parents sent a big package to my house’, he repeated only “watashi no … inaka kara ….” In addition, his digit-span performance was reduced (forward 3, backward 2). In contrast, his spatial span performance was normal (forward 6, backward 6). Therefore, these results revealed that our patient had verbal short-term memory impairment and repetition deficit. The scores of the III Reading comprehension, IV Writing, and V Calculation tasks were generally below the values of non-aphasic individuals, revealing deficits in each of these functions.
The Test of Lexical Processing in Aphasia (TLPA) , which is used widely in clinical settings in Japan, was performed within 2 months after the initial visit. The TLPA is the standard language test for individuals who speak Japanese, and a total of 200 items in line-drawing cards are included in the picture-naming task or the auditory word comprehension task. The number of correct responses during the TLPA picture-naming task was significantly low [79/200 (39.5%) in our patient vs. a mean score of 193.4/200 (96.7%) in 54 healthy individuals; chi-square value = 148.0; p < 0.0001]. Many errors occurring during the task were due to no responses [91/200 (45.5%)] because of word-finding difficulty. During the evaluation, various paraphasias [30/200 (15%)] occurred. The paraphasic errors were classified as phonemic paraphasia [1/30 (3%); e.g., “nodabotoke” for “nodobotoke” ‘Adam’s apple’], verbal paraphasias [23/30 (77%); e.g., “daidokoro” ‘kitchen’ for “genkan” ‘entrance’], and neologisms [6/30 (20%); e.g., “gagato” for “koppu” ‘glass’ and “gochihara” for “chiritori” ‘dustpan’]. Regarding neologisms, no response resulted from the production of a phonemic error in a verbal paraphasia. When initial letter cues were provided, only 13 out of 121 (10.7%) error words in the TLPA picture-naming task were converted to the correct words. Therefore, initial letter cues were mostly ineffective.
The auditory word comprehension task was performed using the same line-drawing cards as in the TLPA picture-naming task. In the TLPA auditory comprehension task, after listening to a spoken word, our patient was asked to match 1 of the 10 line-drawing cards. The number of correct responses in the TLPA auditory word comprehension task was slightly decreased [166/200 (83%) in our patient vs. a mean score of 199.4/200 (99.7%) in 53 healthy individuals; chi-square value = 33.2; p < 0.0001], indicating that his single-word comprehension was impaired, although it was mostly preserved in the context of conversational language use. In total, 26 out of 34 (76.5%) wrong words in the auditory word comprehension task could not be properly retrieved in the picture-naming task, indicating two-way anomia, i.e., difficulties in both word finding and word recognition for the same target word, e.g., target = tomato, response = difficulties in naming a “tomato” and auditory comprehension of “tomato” . These findings suggested that the patient had semantic memory impairment.
Moreover, the word-repetition task was performed using the same words as those in the picture-naming and auditory word comprehension tasks in the TLPA. The number of correct responses for the word repetition task was nearly perfect [196/200 (98%); no data in healthy individuals], and there were only four phonemic paraphasias during the repetition task. Therefore, phonemic paraphasia seldom occurred during repetition, and the finding was in accordance with his spontaneous speech and performance in the naming and explanation-of- picture-story tasks.
Although the patient could not be directly evaluated due to aphasia, no prominent amnesia or attentional/executive dysfunctions were observed in his daily life. Because he was able to copy a Necker cube drawing, he had no prominent visuospatial dysfunction. He had no abnormality in praxis and showed excellent capability in imitation, pantomiming, and using tools with either hand. Thus, he exhibited no problems (except for language impairments) when performing activities of daily living.