In February 2007, a 66 year-old woman was diagnosed as having a 2.35 mm cutaneous nodular thoracic melanoma and underwent complete excision with 2 cm margins. In March 2012, routine monitoring with computed tomography (CT) revealed two metastatic pulmonary nodes in the left upper and lower lobes. The subsequent pathological diagnosis (based on analysis of the two wedge-resections) was malignant melanoma. Genetic testing of the patient’s pulmonary metastases identified a p.V600E BRAF mutation, making the patient eligible for a targeted therapy with an oral BRAF inhibitor. In July 2012, the disease had progressed to stage IV with bone, pulmonary, liver and brain metastases, as revealed by lower back pain. The patient was then treated with the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib (960 mg per os, twice daily). After four weeks of treatment, the patient’s general health status had improved and the lower back pain was less intense. Computed tomography imaging revealed stable disease, according to RECIST criteria (with a 25% decrease in the size of the metastases, Figure ). Eight weeks after the initiation of vemurafenib treatment, the patient presented a deterioration in general health status and an elevation of liver transaminases and lactate dehydrogenase levels. The vemurafenib treatment was maintained but the dose was reduced to 720 mg per os twice daily. In view of the disease progression and the emergence of side effects and diffuse bone pain, vemurafenib was withdrawn after 12 weeks of treatment. Palliative care was administered. A month later, the patient died from the progression of metastatic disease.
The initial diagnostic testing for BRAF mutations was performed by primer extension reaction (BRAF mutation analysis reagents, Applied Biosystems, CA, USA). The extension primer specifically targets the second nucleotide in codon 600 of BRAF gene, enabling the detection of p.V600E (GTG > GAG), p.V600G (GTG > GGG) or p.V600A (GTG > GCG) mutations but not mutations that also involve nucleotides at positions 1 or 3 (such as p.V600K (GTG > AAG) and p.V600D (GTG > GAT)). The primer extension products were separated by capillary electrophoresis on a 3500 xL Dx Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) and then underwent fragment analysis using Gene Mapper v4.1 software (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA). As shown in Figure , a peak corresponding to the p.V600E mutation (a thymine to adenine substitution at position 1799 (c.1799 T > A)) was detected in the patient’s tumor cells.
The presence of the p.V600E mutation was confirmed by bidirectional sequencing of BRAF exon 15 using an ABI PRISM Big Dye Termination Cycle Sequencing kit v1.1 (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA), a 3500 xL Dx Genetic Analyzer and Sequencing Analysis software v5.4 (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA).
Surprisingly, sequence analysis revealed that the mutation was more complex than a single nucleotide substitution . The electropherogram showed an overlapping pattern starting at position 1799, which most probably indicates a heterozygous deletion and/or insertion. By comparing the overlapping sequence with the BRAF gene’s reference sequence (NM_004333.4), we found that the mutation corresponds to c.1799_1803delinsAT (p.V600_K601delinsD) when expressing using Human Genome Variation Society-approved nomenclature . At the protein level, this results in substitution of the valine (V) at position 600 by an aspartic acid (D) and the deletion of the lysine (K) at position 601 (BRAF). However, the identification of a dual mutation in genomic DNA extracted from a pool of multiple cells does not necessarily mean that the two mutations are carried by a unique allele; they may correspond to two alleles in a single tumor clone or even to two individual tumor clones. This distinction is important because it would probably result in a significant difference in the therapeutic response to vemurafenib (as summarized in Figure ).
In order to characterize each of the alleles and establish whether the mutation was monoallelic (BRAF) or biallelic (BRAF and BRAF), we applied a TA cloning-based sequencing method. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products from BRAF exon 15 amplification were cloned into a pCR™2.1 vector with the TA Cloning® Kit (Invitrogen, CA, USA) and the inserts were sequenced using the M13 forward and reverse primers.
Comparison of the electropherograms showed that one allele was wild type and that the other was mutated. In the mutant allele, thymine (T) and guanine (G) at positions 1799 and 1800 had been respectively replaced by adenine (A) and thymine (T). The substitutions had been followed by an in-frame deletion of three adenines (AAA). Hence, the mutation was a monoallelic event that resulted in a protein product with a valine to aspartic acid substitution at position 600 and an in-frame deletion of the lysine at position 601, yielding the BRAF mutant protein.
At the time of our analysis, the complex BRAF mutation had not been reported in the literature. Consequently, no information on the potential vemurafenib response for this mutation was available.
To establish whether p.V600_K601delinsD BRAF mutation-positive melanoma might be sensitive to treatment with vemurafenib, we performed a crystal structure analysis of BRAF proteins using Sybyl®-X software (Tripos, MO, USA). The following structures from the PDB database [, ] were used: 4E4X and 3OG7 . The Sybyl®-X software’s Biopolymer module was used to prepare, visualize, superimpose and compare the two crystal structures. Graphics were prepared with the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System (Schrödinger, OR, USA). As illustrated in Figure A and C, the activation segment (in blue) of BRAF kinase domain holds the protein in an inactive conformation through association with the P-loop (in dark green) via predominantly hydrophobic interactions . The V600 and K601 residues are located in the BRAF kinase domain’s activation segment. In the BRAF mutant, the medium-sized hydrophobic amino acid residue valine is replaced by the large, negatively charged glutamic acid residue; this disrupts the interaction between the P-loop and the activation segment . In turn, this destabilizes the inactive conformation and promotes an active conformation with increased kinase activity . In all BRAF kinase domain crystal structures, the atomic coordinates for activation segment region (K601-S614) have not been fully resolved by X-ray diffraction analysis - probably due to increased flexibility or even structural disorder caused by the mutation. The same can be expected of BRAF mutant protein because of the physical-chemical similarity between aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues. This observation is also consistent with in vitro studies showing that (i) both V600E and V600D mutants have similar, elevated levels of kinase activity and (ii) vemurafenib also potently inhibits the proliferation of melanoma cell lines expressing BRAF
.
We next considered the impact of K601 deletion. When comparing the structure of BRAF cocrystallized in the presence of vemurafenib (PDB: 3OG7) with BRAF cocrystallized with another selective inhibitor (T1Q) (PDB: 4E4X), it can be seen that the distance between K601 and the sulfonyl group of both inhibitors is more than 10 Å - suggesting that K601 does not participate in ligand binding. Moreover, the lack of an electron density map for the region including E600 and K601 in the vemurafenib-BRAF complex also suggests that neither of these residues is crucial for protein-ligand interaction. In view of the above arguments, we expected the BRAF mutant protein to be sensitive to inhibition by vemurafenib.