A 73-year-old African American man with a history of ESRD on hemodialysis, coronary artery disease status post-high-risk percutaneous coronary intervention requiring mechanical circulatory support 3 weeks prior, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, hypertension, and diabetes, presented with necrotic lesions on multiple distal digits and the glans penis developing over the past 2 months. The patient denied any new exposures or trauma to the areas of ulceration and had no history of tobacco use. Of note, the lesion on his glans penis was recently treated with a 1-week course of oral amoxicillin–clavulanic acid without improvement.
The patient was afebrile and had a blood pressure of 87/52 mmHg. Physical examination revealed several small, exquisitely tender, necrotic ulcers with overlying black eschars on multiple finger pads; a gangrenous distal left third toe; and a foul-smelling lesion on the glans penis with overlying purulence . The digital lesions were cool to the touch and without surrounding edema or erythema. Examination was otherwise unremarkable except for a systolic ejection murmur that was noted previously.
Laboratory results obtained during admission were notable for a blood urea nitrogen of 40 mg/dL (reference range 7–21 mg/dL), potassium 5.1 mmol/L (3.5–4.7 mmol/L), calcium 9.1 mg/dL (8.5–10.1 mg/dL), phosphorous 1.5 mg/dL (2.5–4.9 mg/dL), parathyroid hormone (PTH) 104 pg/mL (18.4–80.1 pg/mL), albumin 2.9 g/dL (3.4–5.0 g/dL), white cell count 6.8 K/μL (4.0–11.0 K/μL), hemoglobin 7.3 g/dL (13.0–17.0 g/dL), and hemoglobin A1c 6.9% (≤ 5.6%). Upon chart review, his serum calcium and phosphorus were found to be 9.2 mg/dL and 9.0 mg/dL (product = 82.8 mg/dL) when the penile lesion first appeared.
The patient underwent a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis, which revealed extensive intravascular calcification correlating with the ulcerating wound on the glans . These radiographic findings, in a patient ESRD and recently elevated calcium and phosphate levels, yielded a clinical diagnosis of calciphylaxis. Treatment with thrice weekly sodium thiosulfate (25 g) during dialysis was initiated. A confirmatory skin biopsy performed later in his hospital course was inconclusive.
Although the patient tolerated treatment without appreciable side effects, he experienced no improvement in the digital or penile lesions; in fact, he developed several more painful, necrotic ulcers corresponding with finger-stick blood glucose sample points. He was discharged home with plans to continue regular STS during dialysis. On follow-up, his wounds remained painful but showed no further progression; unfortunately, he died 3 months later after another prolonged hospitalization.