A 37-year-old transgender man presented to the emergency department (ED) of an urban, academic medical center in May with a four-month long course of symptoms including intermittent fevers, dysuria, and generalized malaise. He reported seeing his primary care provider (PCP) in January for dysuria and malaise after unprotected sex, tested positive for chlamydia, and was treated with azithromycin. He presented to his PCP again in March for what was now two months of weight loss, dysuria, fatigue, and body aches. Laboratory testing at that time included a complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, and thyroid stimulating hormone that were all within normal limits. A mononucleosis spot test and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test were both negative, and a urinalysis at that time was unrevealing.
In the ED the patient reported continued weakness, headaches, weight loss, and whole-body aches. He also reported intermittent fevers over the prior two weeks, measured at home as high as 101° Fahrenheit (F), coupled with 5–10 days of dysuria and suprapubic discomfort without any vaginal or rectal discharge. He received moderate relief from acetaminophen and ibuprofen at home.
He reported a history of anxiety, depression, type 2 diabetes, hyperlipidemia, polycystic ovarian syndrome, asthma, and prior pulmonary embolism (PE). His prior surgeries included cholecystectomy, hysterectomy, and double mastectomy. He was taking sertraline, trazadone, amitriptyline, metformin, and testosterone. He denied any tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use. He reported being sexually active with male partners and not routinely using barrier protection. He reported an allergy to hydrocodone-acetaminophen.
Vital signs were as follows: temperature 98.5°F, blood pressure 125/76 millimeters of mercury (mmHg), pulse 69 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 99% on room air, and a body mass index of 28.2 kilograms per meter squared. Physical exam revealed an anxious but non-toxic man. Head was normal in appearance and atraumatic. Conjunctivae were normal. Mucus membranes were slightly dry. Neck was supple, with no pain on flexion, and no lymphadenopathy. The heart rate was normal, and the rhythm was regular. There was no murmur. Lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally and breathing was unlabored. The chest wall was notable for post-mastectomy scars. The abdomen was soft and nondistended, but with suprapubic tenderness to palpation. The extremities were warm and well perfused, and not edematous. Cranial nerves II–XII were intact, and gait and strength assessments were unremarkable. Skin was normal in appearance, without any lesions or rashes. Vaginal exam revealed a surgically absent cervix, and no bleeding, discharge, or adnexal tenderness. There were no hemorrhoids or other fluctuant mass palpable on rectal examination, but the patient did report moderate discomfort.
The patient’s laboratory results, summarized in , did not require immediate intervention. He was treated in the ED with intravenous (IV) fluids, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication (NSAID), and was empirically treated with oral azithromycin and intramuscular (IM) ceftriaxone. Approximately one to two hours later a nurse went to discharge the patient but found his vitals to be grossly abnormal, including a temperature of 102.6°F, blood pressure 90/50 mmHg, pulse 135 bpm, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 99% on room air. He now reported significant 8/10 full-body aches and severe headache. On examination he was now diaphoretic, rigoring, and tachycardic. His lungs remained clear to auscultation, while his abdomen remained soft and nondistended but still tender to palpation over the suprapubic region. Blood cultures and a lactate were sent because of this acute change. The patient additionally had an electrocardiogram and chest radiograph . An additional test was sent from the ED, which confirmed the diagnosis.