A 54-year-old female was admitted to the hospital on December 2020 with the complaint of "recurrent cough for 28 years". This patient developed cough symptoms 28 years ago, without chest distress, shortness of breath, dyspnea, blocked or watery nose, sour regurgitation, belching. She visited the department of respiratory medicine for many years and showed positive bronchial challenge test in 2018 in First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, diagnosed as non-severe asthma but the anti-asthmatic treatment had no effect as the patient's symptoms were still repeated. In April 2020 the patient visited the pulmonary specialist clinic in our hospital. She denied tuberculosis, rhinitis, chronic gastritis and gastric ulcer history or hypertension, diabetes but underwent open cholecystectomy 36 years ago and hysteromyomectomy 18 years ago. Physical examination showed no positive signs. Gastroscopy was performed in a local hospital about 1 years ago, and she denied there was some obvious abnormality in the gastroscopy report. In our department, blood tests and allergen were evaluated. The number of Eosinophils and the level of IgE were both normal. Chest CT scan was also ordered in our hospital. The CT scans showed small airway disease in both lungs and fibrous bands in the middle lobe of the right lung. Based on the results of previous and present examinations, the patient was diagnosed with cough variant asthma in April 2020, and treated with montelukast, budesonide formoterol inhaled powder and paracetamol and dihydrocodeine tartrate for about 8 months. The symptoms were relieved but relapsed after drug withdrawal especially of dihydrocodeine tartrate. Because the patient complained of severe coughing and nausea when taking a bus or car and occasional gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and acid reflux, the patient was empirically administered with a proton pump inhibitor and symptoms were improved. Therefore, gastroesophageal reflux was considered and the patient was recommended to receive gastroscopy that revealed a fistula in the duodenal bulb with massive bile outflow, and shallow ulcers can be seen around, no abnormality was observed in the descending duodenum .
Then, she was admitted to gastrointestinal surgery. Abdominal enhanced CT showed gall bladder absence after cholecystectomy and pneumobilia. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography presented gall bladder absent, intra and extrahepatic bile duct dilatation. The common bile duct is locally adjacent to the descending duodenum, and appears to be connected, considering a choledochoduodenal fistula formed . The general surgeon considered the patient with operation indications, and the patient was advised to undergo surgery. After the patient completed the cardiopulmonary function tests, excluded surgical contraindications, she received surgical treatment in December 2020. Choledochoduodenal fistula was verified during the operation, and distal gastrectomy + gastrojejunostomy Roux-en-Y reconstruction was performed. After surgery, the patient's cough symptoms were significantly improved.
Now she has been discharged from the hospital with good recovery and without recurring cough.