A 79-year-old man from Fereydunshahr Town, Isfahan Province, Iran, was referred to the Dermatology Clinic of Al-Zahra Hospital of Isfahan with the bullous lesions on his head. Two months before the development of these lesions, the patient had lesions on his trunk, face, and gingivae. Neither of the common sites in the oral cavity were affected except the gingivae. There was no evidence of tense blisters and itch. There was no history of urticarial lesions. He had no history of using any medication . Intraoral examination showed erosions and desquamation with the erythematous areas on the gingivae, which were not healing. Crusted plaques were also seen on his scalp, face, and trunk ( and ). With the suspicion of PV, the biopsy specimen was taken from pemphigus lesions. Histopathological study of the skin lesion showed a suprabasal bulla containing some acantholytic cells. The basal cells rendered a tombstone appearance. In the dermis, there was a mild, superficial perivascular, lymphocytic infiltrate with a few eosinophils. The direct immunofluorescence (DIF) study also showed the characteristics deposition of IgG in the lace-like pattern. Hence, based on the clinical, histopathological, and immunofluorescence examination findings, the patient was diagnosed with PV . Subsequently, he received systemic therapy with the oral prednisolone at an initial dosage of 70 mg/day (1 mg/kg/day), and azathioprine to reduce the inflammatory response and autoantibody production. He was advised to follow his treatment. Accordingly, the consent form was obtained from the patient and the study protocol conformed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki as reflected in a prior approval by the Institution's Human Research Committee; the patient was followed for four years from October 2008 to October 2012. In October 2012, he was admitted to a local Clinic and the dose of prednisolone was slowly tapered down to 12.5 mg/day (a decrease of 5 mg every two weeks). Following physical examination, interestingly, the past lesions were completely healed and it clearly demonstrated complete remission achieved four years from diagnosis. Accordingly, the skin biopsy was taken from the erythematous back, and the test showed the weak in vivo IgG deposition at the intercellular level in the stratum basale, stratum spinosum, and the basement membrane in the healed area of the skin . The patient remained under the treatment of 10 mg/day and 100 mg/day of prednisolone and azathioprine, respectively. He also received 1000-mg/day calcium and 400-IU/day vitamin D3 for the treatment of osteoporosis for the following two months.