A 47-year-old woman was involved in a motor vehicle accident at the age of 16 and suffered a right femoral neck fracture. Open reduction internal fixation of the fracture was not possible, and the primary therapy for the injury was a total hip arthroplasty (THA). The patient required four revisions of her primary total hip. She presented to our center for consideration for a fifth revision surgery secondary to intractable pain. She was taken to the operating room (OR) and received peri-operative cefazolin as per protocol. Complications arose during the revision procedure. A femoral shaft fracture occurred, and a deep pelvic arterial injury resulted in intra-operative hemodynamic instability, requiring suspension of the procedure and arterial embolization. The patient was subsequently transferred to the intensive care unit and, on day 2 in hospital, returned to the OR for completion of the original procedure which was uneventful. Her postoperative course, however, was complicated by prolonged respiratory failure necessitating a tracheostomy.
On day 12 in hospital, the patient developed increased pain, redness and new drainage from her surgical wound. She underwent surgical exploration, was found to have a hematoma with evidence of defects in the deep fascia, which required debridement down to the hip prosthesis. The hematoma was evacuated, no antibiotic beads were placed, and she was started on vancomycin. Quantitative cultures were not performed; however, tissue cultures grew ampicillin-sensitive Enterococcus species and A. baumannii (sensitive only to amikacin and imipenem). The patient was switched to imipenem 500 mg IV every 6 hours on day 15 in hospital. She was not considered to be a candidate for removal of her prosthesis because of the recent prior surgical complications.
On day 33 in hospital, the patient returned to the OR for debridement because of continued fevers despite imipenem; cultures once again grew MDR A. baumannii, Enterococcus species and coagulase-negative Staphylococci (CNS). The patient improved and was discharged home on day 53 to complete her imipenem therapy at home.
The patient was seen weekly in our Orthopedic Infectious Diseases Clinic for blood tests and clinical examination. Due to persistently elevated inflammatory markers, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), her antibiotic course was extended. Her ESR and CRP improved but never normalized. The antibiotics were stopped after completing a 4-month course of imipenem. The patient was not placed on oral suppressive therapy since no options existed for the MDR A. baumannii.
The patient remained symptom-free for 7 months before noticing pain with walking and swelling at the right hip. She denied having had any new injury or trauma. On exam, she had redness, warmth, swelling and new drainage at the incision site on the right hip, presumed to represent recurrence of her MDR A. baumannii infection. At this time, she underwent surgical debridement and removal of the THA. Intra-operative cultures were obtained but the prosthesis was not sonicated. The operative cultures grew Enterococcus species (sensitive to ampicillin and penicillin), and two types of CNS (resistant to penicillin), which were not thought to be pathogenic. There was no MDR A. baumannii isolated. The patient responded to an 8-week course of therapy directed only toward the Enterococcus species with ampicillin. Twenty-nine months after stopping antibiotics, she remains free of infection at the time of writing.