The patient was a 45-year-old man complaining of epigastric pain. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed by a referral physician, and a submucosal tumor (SMT) was noted on the anterior wall of the stomach antrum; he was, thus, referred to our institute. There were no special notes in the medical history or family history, and the abdomen was flat and soft. Blood biochemical testing was largely normal. During EGD and upper gastrointestinal series, a mass about 8 mm in size covered with normal mucosa with a depression in the center was noted at the antrum of the stomach . Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic region of approximately 10 mm in size, mainly in the second layer and thinning of the third layer of the submucosa. Therefore, deep invasion of the submucosa could not be completely ruled out . A boring biopsy specimen showed proliferation of uniform atypical short spindle or oval cells. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for EMA, BCL-2 protein, TLE-1, and SS18-SSX fusion-specific antibodies but negative for KIT and DOG-1. Molecular genetic analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using an SS18 break-apart probe revealed SS18 rearrangement. These findings are consistent with those of synovial sarcoma. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography was not able to identify the lesion, and no lymph node swelling or metastases to other organs was observed. Positron emission tomography also revealed no accumulation of 18F-FDG in the gastric lesion or other organs. Primary synovial sarcoma of the stomach was diagnosed, and laparoscopic endoscopic cooperative surgery was chosen as the treatment modality to perform a full thickness resection of the gastric wall for complete resection of the tumor. The operation was performed via five ports. As the gastric lesion could not be confirmed from the serosa surface by laparoscopy , and because delle was suspected on endoscopy, we decided to remove it with CLEAN-NET to prevent dissemination (Additional file ). Enoscopically, glycerol was injected locally under the mucosa around the tumor, causing the mucosa to float. The whole tumor circumference was marked on the serosa laparoscopically, and the endoscope was used as a guide around the tumor. The seromuscular layer and the submucosal layer were completely cut, using the mark as a guide . The tumor covered in the mucosa was towed outside the gastric wall, and whole-layer resection was performed using a 60-mm linear stapler to confirm that the tumor was not sandwiched . The operating time was 116 min, and 5 mL of blood was lost. Histopathologically, the single tumor was composed of short spindle cells of the submucosal tissue and lamina propria mucosae . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed the same phenotype as that of the biopsied specimen . The tumor was diagnosed as a synovial sarcoma. The surgically resected margins were tumor-free. During the operation, another SMT < 2 cm was discovered in the lesser curvature of the stomach body by accident and was removed using the classical LECS method. The 116 min of operating time and blood loss of 5 ml were inclusive of this procedure. Histopathological examination revealed the tumor to be a low-risk gastrointestinal stromal tumor. The patient’s postoperative course was good, and he was discharged from the hospital on the 11th postoperative day without any complication. No recurrence was observed 5 months postoperatively.