The patient was a 63-year-old woman with a history of adenomyosis, gout, and essential hypertension. She could previously perform basic activities of daily living (BADL) independently. Insidiously, she became symptomatic with dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca). She initially presented with “pins- and- needles” sensation (paresthesia) over the bilateral palms and feet, which developed simultaneously. These symptoms were followed by progressive weakness in the bilateral arms and legs distally more than proximally. This severely impaired her BADL and caused her to be wheelchair-bound.
After 10 days of progressive weakness in all four limbs, she exhibited poor muscle strength, which rendered her unable to stand and walk. She became completely wheelchair-dependent, which compelled her to visit our neurology clinic. The neurological examination revealed acute progressive weakness/paresthesia in all the four limbs, with generalized hyporeflexia. Nerve conduction study (NCS) of her bilateral upper and lower limbs revealed axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy and severe bilateral distal median neuropathy at the wrists. Acute polyneuropathy was pronounced. We advised her to visit our emergency room (ER) for further examination, but she refused further clinical evaluation due to personal reasons. Her medical history indicated that she had been admitted to our Ophthalmology department from July 17–27, 2020, for the following reasons 1) corneal ulcer with corneal perforation in the right eye status after corneal suture and tissue glue, 2) purulent endophthalmitis in the right eye following intravitreal injection of antibiotics, and 3) superficial punctate keratitis (SPK) in the left eye.
On August 4, 2020, she was sent to our ER due to acute urinary retention and progressive weakness in all limbs. In the ER, the neurological examination revealed clear consciousness, incomplete closure of the left eyelid, no bulbar signs and symptoms, and quadriplegia with muscle strength scores as follows: upper limbs proximal-2, distal-3 and lower limbs proximal-1, distal-2, as per the Medical Research Council Scale (MRC) scale, generalized absence of deep tendon reflexes, and paresthesia/impaired joint position sense with glove-and-stocking distribution. Cervical and thoracic spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed old compression fractures at T6–T7 and mildly hyperintense T2 lesion at the C3–C4 level .
Based on the initial clinical presentation, Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) was suspected. Estimation of the levels of serum tumor markers, autoimmune profile tests, NCS of the bilateral upper and lower limbs, stool culture, orbital MRI with contrast, and lumbar puncture were performed to establish accurate diagnosis and exclude other possibilities, such as transverse myelitis and central nervous system infection.
Serum tumor markers and autoimmune profiles yielded high titers of anti-SSA and anti-SSB autoantibodies . NCS of the bilateral upper and lower limbs revealed severe axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy and severe bilateral distal median neuropathy at the wrists, with a lower amplitude than that in the previous study. Orbital MRI results were negative. Stool culture was negative for Campylobacter. Lumbar puncture consistently revealed albuminocytologic dissociation, compatible with suspected GBS. Based on the clinical manifestations, electrodiagnostic criteria , and cerebrospinal fluid analysis, we tentatively diagnosed the patient with AMSAN-variant GBS.
The patient did not consent to plasma exchange. Therefore, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment was considered. Meanwhile, intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) was prescribed on the third day of admission. The steroid pulse therapy lasted for 5 days, during which the left upper distal limb muscle strength score improved to MRC scale 3. Bilateral feet and right palm paresthesia ameliorated, and the right leg muscle strength score improved to MRC scale 3 over the ensuing days. A rheumatologist was consulted regarding the elevated serum levels of anti-SSA and anti-SSB autoantibodies. According to the 2016 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for pSS , the patient had high titers of anti-SSA antibodies as well as corneal ulcers with severe SPK in the left eye as a surrogate of ocular staining score or van Bijsterveld score. Thus, the rheumatologist was able to diagnose pSS and also classify it.
We administered IVIG after steroid pulse therapy. There was a remarkable improvement in the proximal limb muscle strength on the third day of IVIG administration. Moreover, the patient’s clinical status significantly improved over the next few days. Continuous improvement in muscle power in all four limbs proximally as well as distally was noted. The patient also regained the use of axial muscles. Therefore, the rehabilitation program was upgraded due to her progress; however, she refused further transfer to the rehabilitation department as she wanted to go home early. Finally, the patient was discharged after 37 days of admission with partially-dependent BADL.
During the follow-up at the neurology outpatient clinic 2 weeks after discharge, the patient’s muscle strength progressively improved (upper proximal-3, distal-3, lower proximal-4, distal-3), and the incomplete left eye closure resolved.