A 65-year-old male nonsmoker presented with a painless mass on the right lateral side of his tongue . This lesion developed from 4 to 5 months ago and became increasingly larger in size. The patient had not previously noticed the mass and did not complain of any functional impairment. However, speech was slightly impaired. Physical examination revealed swelling on tongue, but other aspects of the examination were unremarkable. The mucosal covering of the lesion appeared clinically normal. It was doughy in consistency, not tender, and no pulsations were felt on palpation. The patient’s personal and family history was also unremarkable. The preliminary differential diagnosis was determined to be angioedema, neurofibroma, lipoma, fibrolipoma, glandular cell tumor, schwannoma, or dermoid cyst of tongue.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 2 cm × 4 cm well-remarked lesion within the muscles of the tongue. The findings were reported as consistent with lipoma .
First, incisional biopsy was performed and it was diagnosed as lipoma. Then complete resection of the lesion and biopsy were performed under the general anesthesia. For preservation of superficial mucosa and avoid of raw area, the enveloped flap was designed . The surrounding tissues surrounded by membranes, and penetrated the surrounding muscle tissue, and the boundary was not clear. Surgical excision with a surrounding rim of normal tissue was done. The surgical profile of remained tongue was confirmed within normal limits by the intraoperative frozen biopsy. The mass revealed a non-encapsulated, spherical, yellowish, solid, and greasy mass 2 × 4 × 1.5 cm in size .
Microscopic examination revealed multiple lobulated sections of mature, univaculated adipocytes of relatively uniform in size and shape with occasional entrapped skeletal muscle fibers. There was no evidence of hyperchromasia, pleomorphism, or multi-nucleation of adipocytes and no evidence of lipoblasts. The entrapped muscle fibers usually show few changes other than various degrees of muscular atrophy . The histopathology was consistent with the final diagnosis of intramuscular lipoma.
The postoperative period was uneventful. There were no other symptoms such as pain, sensory disturbance, nor movement disorder other than discomfort. The patient’s tongue function and appearance were normal . There was no evidence of recurrence during a 24-month follow-up period.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images (IRB No. 2020-07-022).