A 13-year-old boy, affected with thalassodrepanocytosis (genotype S/β0) and Gilbert's syndrome, presented with cholestatic jaundice. He had no history of obstructive jaundice, and had undergone prophylactic laparoscopic cholecystectomy four years earlier. Liver chemistry tests showed: total/direct reacting bilirubin 69/41 mg/dl, AST 150 U/L (normal: 5-40 U/L), ALT 100 U/L (normal: 10-65 U/L), alkaline phosphatase 165 U/L (normal: 40-134 U/L), and gamma-GT 101 mg/l (normal: 5-85 U/L). A previous ERCP showed choledochal dilation, with an angle in the medium tract, and multiple small intraluminal filling defects, attributable to gallstones. Despite sphincterotomy, gallstone removal and nose-biliary drainage placement, the jaundice worsened and he was referred to our institute.
On admission, the patient was markedly jaundiced, but asymptomatic. He had no history of alcohol intake, viral infections or illicit drug use. His physical examination was remarkable for firm hepatomegaly, and scleral and cutaneous jaundice.
A cholangiogram through the nose-biliary drainage showed a dilated choledocus, with an angle in the medium tract . Drainage was removed, and abundant dense sludge was removed with a Fogarty balloon catheter. Given the extreme density of the bile, the biliary tree was thoroughly washed with a large amount of sterile physiological solution (approximately 700 cc). In order to achieve a better biliary flow, we decided to place a biliary stent. Given the density of the bile, the dilation and the angle of the choledocus, we decided to place a self-expandable metal stent (SEMS), namely a nitinol polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) full-covered flared-type stent, 6 cm in length with 10 mm of diameter, (Niti-S Biliary Covered Stent - Taewoong Medical Co., Korea), and not a plastic one. Compared to plastic stents, metal stents offer the advantage of greater diameter, thus avoiding the risk of migration and stent occlusion, and the additional advantage of radial force, which should correct the angle of the choledocus.
The stent was placed in the choledocus, across the angle , draining a large amount of dense bile . The procedure was uncomplicated.
Over the following days, a rapid decrease of bilirubin was observed, and the patient was discharged home in good general conditions, with laboratory tests showing bilirubin tot/dir 9.29/0.37 mg/dl (0-1.5 mg/dL), AST/ALT 82/68 U/L (normal: 5-40/65 U/L), alkaline phosphates 234 U/L (40-134 U/L), and gamma-GT 19 mg/l (5-85 U/L).
The biliary stent was extracted 2 months later, and a cholangiogram showed no filling defects, and resolution of the biliary angle . The patient had no further episodes of cholestatic jaundice during the one year of follow-up. The indirect-reacting bilirubin level remained high, fluctuating between 7 and 15 mg/dl, with normal direct-reacting fraction, and no evidence of biliary stone recurrence at ultrasonography.