Our patient was a 68-year-old Japanese woman who had no history of major illness. Nine years before her admission, she had been taking daily triazolam prescribed by a local doctor for insomnia, and four years before admission, she attempted to sleep without taking this medication but was unable to. The next day, her conversation was unfocused and she was unable to relax. She was examined at our hospital's neurology department on the same day. Our patient seemed normal in appearance and showed no signs of automatism or convulsions. However, she exhibited marked disorientation and a euphoric mood. Her free tri-iodothyronine and free thyroxine (fT3 and fT4, respectively) levels were normal but her TSH levels were high (10.88 μIU/mL), and she was accordingly admitted to the neurology department with suspected Hashimoto's encephalopathy. However, our patient tested negative for anti-thyroid antibodies (A-TPO: Anti-Thyroid peroxidase, A-TG: Anti-Thyroglobulin, and A-MC: Anti-Microsome), her cerebrospinal fluid appeared normal, and there were no abnormalities on a thyroid ultrasound scan; therefore, her results did not support the diagnosis of Hashimoto's encephalopathy. Her EEG results showed continuous, irregular, generalized 3 Hz spike-and-wave complexes, and our patient was accordingly diagnosed as having NCSE (absence status epilepticus). After administration of 5 mg of diazepam intravenously, the 3 Hz spike-and-wave complexes disappeared. The next day, her orientation improved. She was discharged after 11 days and began taking zonisamide (200 mg/day).
Three years before admission, she experienced depression, which resolved with flunitrazepam alone. One year before admission, because her speech was slightly confused, she was investigated at an internal medicine clinic and was found to have a TSH level of 5.7 μIU/mL and an fT4 level of 1.0 ng/dL. At this time, our patient was diagnosed as having subclinical hypothyroidism and given 25 μg/day of levothyroxine. However, she did not adhere to this medication until 12 days before this admission.
Our patient's husband became concerned because our patient, who was always methodical in her behavior, was forgetting to close gas valves and switch off the lights. Our patient was examined at our facility and reported having circumstantial thinking, but no other neurological symptoms. However, she was unable to remember her behavior from that morning. We suspected that our patient was suffering from a mild deterioration of consciousness and performed an EEG. This showed continuous 3 to 5 Hz polyspike-and-wave complexes , and our patient was hospitalized with NCSE.
On admission, a physical examination revealed no non-pitting edema, or any irregularities in the central nervous system, motor system, sense of balance, reflexes, sensory systems, or in the head, neck, or spine. Her biochemical and hematological findings were unremarkable. Endocrine analysis revealed the following: TSH 11.19 μIU/mL, fT4 1.04 ng/dL, fT3 2.61 pg/mL and prolactin (PRL) 30.74 ng/mL (her TSH and PRL levels were hence considerably elevated). A cranial MRI scan showed no gross lesions, and a pituitary MRI scan revealed no tumors. After admission, we supplemented her medication with a 10 mg/day diazepam suppository and 0.5 mg/day of oral clonazepam. Our patient's level of consciousness had greatly improved by the next day after this admission, and all evidence of paroxysmal discharge had disappeared . Four days after this admission, further endocrine testing results showed normal levels of TSH (3.575 μIU/mL) and her PRL level had fallen (16.18 ng/mL). To determine the cause of the high TSH levels detected on admission, thorough endocrine examinations including thyroid ultrasound and anti-thyroid antibody tests were performed at our Division of Endocrinology, but there was no evidence of thyroid disorder. We therefore decided that in the absence of thyroid disorder, and because of the potential for further NCSE episodes, our patient did not require levothyroxine. Our patient was discharged from our department 12 days after this admission. There have been no further signs of NCSE recurrence to date.