This is a case of a 40-year-old female known HIV/AIDS patient who has been on ART for the last 14 years with good adherence and regular follow-up, and who is now on 3rd line ART medication with TLD+DRR/r (on her 11th month) after being diagnosed with second-line treatment failure.
After 6 months and 1 week of therapy, the viral load (VL) was sent, and the result was undetectable. The CD4 cell count is currently 950 cells/mm3. The patient’s clinical conditions had greatly improved. She was on second line ART with TDF/3TC/LPV/r since 21/8/2019 with good adherence and follow up for one year prior to the current regimen.
She was on AZT/3TC/NVP at the start of ART (since 18/7/2006), with good adherence and regular follow-up. The CD4 and VL baseline levels were 52 cells/mm3 and 129,988 copies/mL, respectively. When she was switched to the second line, her CD4 and VL levels were 15 cells/mm3 and 98,136 copies/mL, respectively. Prior to one year before treatment failure, both were non-revealing, with the lowest CD of 570 cells/mm3 and the highest VL of 270 copies/mL. To put it another way, there have been no problems with treatment failure in the last 12 years, with all virologic and immunologic results falling within acceptable ranges.
She was acute on chronic sick looking when she arrived, and all of her vital signs were within normal ranges. Her height was 160 cm, her weight was 38, and her BMI was 14.8 kg/m2.
The pertinent findings were as follows: CBC=WBC=2.2103 with Neutrophil of 87.1, and Lymphocytes of 3.4, Eosinophil of 0.3 and Basophil of 0.3%, Haemoglobin=7 mg/dl, and Haematocrit=22%, and the Platelet count was 66, 000, and the conclusion is Pancytopenia, and the Stool Examination re Modified Acid Fast Bacilli was also performed, and an oocyte of C. parvum was noticed (treated).
With this, she was managed for medical complications and was linked to an ART clinic, where her regimen was changed to TLD+ DRV/r with the diagnosis of second-line treatment failure and she was seen after two weeks, and she was fine, and she was seen again after a month with strict adherence. She took her medication monthly for the first month, then every three months after that.
Currently on third-line ART with TLD plus ritonavir-boosted darunavir, the VL is undetectable, and the CD4 count is 950 cells/mm3.The complete blood count (CBC) parameters were also checked, and they were all within acceptable bounds.
Clinically, she is doing a lot better than she was before, and she is now a determined and upbeat client who has an appointment at our hospital every three months.
She is the mother of three children, the oldest of whom is 21 years old and the youngest of whom is 8 years old, and all of her children have negative RVI (Retroviral Infection) serostatus. Her husband is also an RVI patient who takes his medication on a regular basis and has a viral load that is undetectable. They work as elementary school teachers and claim that their monthly salary is sufficient to support their family.