A 56-year-old woman with dextrocardia and complex ccTGA was evaluated in the outpatient clinic. She had a history of surgical closure of a ventricular septal defect and correction of a pulmonary valve stenosis, a DDD-pacemaker implantation due to high degree AV-block and subsequent chronic ventricular pacing, tricuspid valve repair with an annuloplasty ring due to severe tricuspid regurgitation of an Ebstein-like valve and an upgrade to a dual-chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (DDD-ICD) due to syncopal ventricular tachycardia (with a new P/S lead implant due to non-physiological oversensing). She also underwent an ablation of a ventricular tachycardia and cavo-mitral isthmus–dependent atrial flutter. A chest X-ray illustrating the anatomy and lead positions is shown in . Over the past few years, she had been admitted multiple times with decompensated congestive heart failure due to severely reduced systolic function [RV end-diastolic diameter (RVEDD) 56 mm, global longitudinal strain −3.5%, fractional area change (FAC) 10.3%] of the dilated sRV, despite maximum tolerated pharmacological therapy with metoprolol, candesartan, spironolactone, and furosemide.
The patient experienced recurrent palpitations due to an atrial tachycardia that could be terminated by atrial burst pacing. Electrocardiogram (ECG) in sinus rhythm with subpulmonary LV pacing showed a broad (210 ms) QRS complex . She underwent successful re-ablation of the cavo-mitral isthmus–dependent atrial flutter and incisional right atrial tachycardia. The broad paced QRS complex and recurrent admissions with decompensated heart failure prompted concomitant invasive haemodynamic evaluation of the intraventricular pressure (Dp/Dt) with a pigtail in the sRV, to assess potential alternative/biventricular pacing modalities . The anatomic subpulmonary LV pacing with a steerable catheter led to a QRS width >200 ms and Dp/Dt of 520 mmHg/s. A second steerable multiple electrode catheter was used for coronary sinus pacing to assess the optimal target site. Several intervals were tested—the optimal biventricular pacing with −80 ms right ventricular offset resulted in QRS narrowing to 157 ms and Dp/Dt increasement to 674 mmHg/s (30%). This suggested that transvenous upgrade to a CRT-system was feasible and was expected to lead to significant haemodynamic improvement.
A second procedure was performed for upgrade to a CRT-system. The coronary sinus was engaged with an extended hook guiding-catheter and an RV target vein was selectively cannulated with a 90-degree inner-catheter. A unipolar 4.5 Fr (1.5 mm) lead with 2.6 Fr (0.87 mm) tip was advanced into the target branch over a wire . The threshold for sRV capture was 2.1 V/1 ms, without phrenic nerve stimulation during high output pacing. This lead position provided a large anatomical separation from the functional RV lead tip and an RV to LV sense interval of >150 ms, confirming good electric separation of the two leads. The postprocedural chest X-ray showed the lead position in relation to the patient’s anatomy and ECG post-implantation showed significant reduction of the QRS width during biventricular capture .
The patient reported evident and continuous improvement in clinical condition at follow-up 6, 12, and 24 weeks after discharge. summarizes clinical parameters at baseline and 24 weeks follow-up. Six-minute walk test and bicycle exercise test (VO2 max) showed consistent improvement from 417 to 522 m, 40 to 80 Watt, and 8.3 to 14.7 mL/min/kg, respectively. Echocardiography showed a slight reduction in RVEDD to 53 mm and FAC improvement to 14.6%. The patient is currently in stable clinical condition and New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II, with only mild dyspnoea on exertion (e.g. walking outside the house), 1 year after CRT procedure, no heart failure-related admissions occurred during this period.