We present the case of a 47-year-old man who was admitted to our hospital for upper gastrointestinal bleeding and anemia (hemoglobin 6.1 g/dl). His hemodynamic status was normal, but physical examination revealed pale conjunctiva and dry oral mucosa. Abdominal exploration without patology. A review of his medical history revealed that he had undergone surgery at 18-year-old for gastric leiomiosarcoma, subtotal gastrectomy performed with gastroenteric anastomosis type Billroth II. After follow-up was discharged. No drug history, no family history including any relevant genetic information, and psychosocial history.
Gastroendoscopic revealed a tumor over greater curvature extending into posterior wall, of about 5 cm of diameter, soft consistency and very friable. Biopsies are reported as gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). A toracoabdominopelvic computerized tomography (CT) showed:Lung nodule located in upper right lobe with calcifications (, ). Gastric tumor of 13.5cm × 7.5cm with soft tissue density, extending into pancreas, without infiltration . Retroperitoneal nodule close to iliac bifurcation.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) was performed showing pathological uptake in stomach with radiological characteristics suggestive of malignancy.
This diagnosis prompted further study with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Imaging evidenced a gastric tumor without clear separation plane with pancreas. Study is completed by arteriography, showing a hypervascular retroperitoneal nodule . The urinary content of metanephrines/catecholamines was negative.
This is a patient with an initial suspicion of a gastric tumor who in the extension study is diagnosed with two tumors at different levels (pulmonary and retroperitoneal), which makes us suspect the possibility of a multisystemic syndrome.
Surgical management was decided after overall clinical condition improved (transfusion and enteral protein supplements). The patient was informed of the risks of the surgery and of the possible sequelae, the patient accepting to the proposed surgical treatment.
The procedure was performed by a surgery specialist in esophagogastric surgery. General anesthesia. Suprainfraumbilical median laparotomy. Abdominal approach revealed a gastric tumor of 15 cm in the gastroenteric anastomosis, liver mass in segment III and a retroperitoneal nodule 4 cm above the inferior cava vein was also observed. The patient underwent total gastrectomy, preserving pancreas and spleen, with a end-lateral esophago-jejune mechanical anastomosis. Retroperitoneal tumor were also excised.
The patient had uneventful recovery. No had postoperative complications. The patient was discharged on the tenth postoperative day with dietary recommendations and control in consultations without presenting complications after discharge. The patient has undergone surgical and oncology controls without showing signs of recurrence.
The pathological result shown: gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), positive for c-kit, CD 34, and negative for vimentin, actin and desmin in inmunohistochemical studies, with low proliferation index. Analysis of the liver specimen showed liver hemangioma and the retroperitoneal tumor was diagnosed of paraganglioma.
After nine years of follow-up it has not been demonstrated tumor recurrence. The pulmonary lesion has not undergone significant changes.