A 75-year-old, right-handed Caucasian man with a history of embolic stroke and atrial fibrillation was admitted on 30 January 2016 to the stroke unit of our primary care hospital for severe aphasia and right-sided hemiparesis with sudden onset of symptoms about 1 h before presentation. He was receiving NOAC therapy with dabigatran 110 mg twice daily. His CHA2DS2-VASc score was 6 points (on scale representing congestive heart failure [or left ventricular systolic dysfunction] 1 point, hypertension [blood pressure consistently above 140/90 mmHg or treated hypertension on medication] 1 point, age ≥75 years 2 points, diabetes mellitus 1 point, prior stroke or transient ischemic attack or thromboembolism 2 points, vascular disease [e.g., peripheral artery disease, myocardial infarction, aortic plaque] 1 point, age 65–74 years 1 point, sex category [female sex] 1 point), and his HAS-BLED score was 3 points (with scale representing hypertension, abnormal renal and liver function, stroke, bleeding, labile international normalized ratio, elderly, drugs or alcohol). Correct dabigatran therapy of 110 mg twice daily could be verified by the accompanying spouse with last intake on the same morning approximately 9.5 h before. Besides cardioembolic stroke, the patient’s medical history consisted of structural epilepsy based on middle cerebral artery ischemia in March 2015 treated with levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily and arterial hypertension treated with amlodipine, metoprolol, and torasemide.
The patient’s impairment of production and comprehension of speech was severe. It was possible for him to communicate, but only to a very limited extent. His hemiparesis was rather mild. His initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 5. No convulsions or lack of consciousness was reported or noticed. According to the patient’s spouse, his symptoms were not comparable to prior seizure symptomatology displayed by sudden loss of consciousness and generalized tonic-clonic convulsions. As a residual of his prior stroke, the patient had a slight outer rotation of his right foot without gait impairment.
Laboratory examinations done upon admission revealed a slight coagulation disorder (international normalized ratio 1.01, activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] 39.0 seconds [upper limit of normal 42 seconds], thrombin time 66.8 seconds [upper limit of normal 22 seconds]). Besides a defect zone arising from ischemic stroke in May 2015, computed tomographic (CT) scans displayed no early signs of acute stroke. Taking into account the patient’s NIHSS score of 5, no CT angiography or perfusion protocol was performed, in accordance with effective stroke guidelines. Except for the existing oral dabigatran anticoagulation therapy, the patient’s history did not reveal any contraindications against systemic thrombolytic therapy. After the patient provided written consent, we applied two doses of 2.5 g idarucizumab according to the current product characteristics and prescribing information within 20 minutes to antagonize dabigatran. Another blood sample showing normalized coagulation parameters preceded immediate weight-adapted intravenous rt-PA therapy. Within 1 h, all symptoms resolved to baseline levels.
A clinical examination done the next day revealed fluent speech with hardly noticeable word-finding difficulties in an aphasia assessment. Detailed conversation was possible again, and the patient reported subjective well-being. Because the patient’s symptoms resolved within 1 h and because of the lack of therapeutic consequences, we abstained from follow-up magnetic resonance imaging scans as part of the stroke workup. The patient’s electroencephalogram was free of any epileptic discharges. Echocardiography revealed no evidence of intracardial thrombotic material, and an ultrasound of the brain-supplying arteries did not reveal relevant stenoses. With the patient’s low-density lipoprotein cholesterol values being elevated (160 mg/dl), we initiated therapy with simvastatin 20 mg. Dabigatran therapy was reestablished after 24 h. However, on the basis of the patient’s age and normal renal function, we chose an increased dose of 150 mg twice daily according to the effective prescribing information. During idarucizumab application and throughout the entire hospital stay, no thrombotic or bleeding complications occurred. The patient’s laboratory examination results remained normal, and he was released to home in good health.