A 44-year-old female presented to the emergency department of an affiliated hospital with symptom of unconsciousness. Two hours prior, she drowned and was trapped 2 m under water in a tributary near Qiantang River. Water temperature was 3 °C. She was rescued within 10 min after drowning by bystanders, without any basic life support (BLS). Then the emergency system was activated after 35 min. Arterial blood gas analysis showed pH < 6.5, lactate > 20 mmol/L, potassium 5.7 mmol/L. Cardiac arrest was immediately noticed, and then cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed with manual chest compressions, orotracheal intubation performed, and epinephrine administered via an intravenous access. Transient return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) with sinus rhythm was obtained after 30 min of advanced life support (ALS). She was thus transferred on an ambulance and transported to our hospital.
At admission, patient was directly transferred to the Emergency Intensive Care Unit (EICU). Her vital signs were unstable, indicating a hypothermia of 28.8 °C and a hypotension of 89/58 mmHg with 1.36 µg/kg/min norepinephrine maintenance. She was stuporous and Glasgow Coma Scale score was 1 + T + 1. Pupils were symmetrically equal with 3 mm diameter, but sluggish light reflex. Large amount of frothy pink sputum was aspirated from airway. Whole-body computed tomography (CT) revealed acute cerebral and pulmonary edema . Volume resuscitation and other supports were quickly performed; however, patient still remained in a multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) state with severe hypoxia, hypotension, metabolic acidosis, hyperlactatemia, gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, anuria for more than 5 h, coagulation disorders, etc. Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II score was 34. Despite maximal optimization of the ventilator settings, including a tidal volume of 480 mL (8 mL/kg), a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) of 100%, a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of at least 15 cm H2O, and a driving pressure of 18 cm H2O, the partial arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2)/FiO2 was still less than 80 mmHg for several hours. Echocardiography showed nearly normal cardiac function with left ventricular ejection fraction > 50%. Based on that, we made a collective decision to use the VV-ECMO and CRRT. VV-ECMO was started at a flow of 4.5L/minutes, an air flow of 4L and a FiO2 of 100%. Once VV-ECMO was set, ventilator parameters were modified, with the tidal volume reduced to 350 mL, FiO2 reduced to 30%, PEEP reduced to 8 cm H2O, and driving pressure reduced to 12 cm H2O. No anticoagulation agent was used during the whole process due to GI bleeding. The hypoxia and acidosis were corrected immediately via the VV-ECMO circuit and CRRT.
Supportive care was then provided in the EICU. The ventilation and oxygenation significantly ameliorated over the first 3 days of VV-ECMO support, and she was weaned from VV-ECMO on day 6 and mechanical ventilation on day 12. She did not experience any complication or neurologic deficit in the EICU and was transferred to a rehabilitation department on day 17. Neurological status progressively improved, reaching a complete recovery after 21 days of hospitalization.