The patient was an 18-year-old woman with mild epigastralgia who was admitted to a nearby hospital. An abdominal CT scan showed a 60-mm mass confined to the upper pole of the spleen; therefore, she was referred to our department for surgical treatment . The tumor showed higher intensity on T1-weighted MRI and lower intensity on T2 imaging than the normal spleen. In dynamic MRI, the contrast was gradually enhanced from the edge toward the inside, with a spoke-wheel pattern, without malignant findings . From such findings, the tumor was suspected to be splenic lymphangioma. It was a benign tumor, but we decided to resect it because of her symptoms. We performed laparoscopic partial splenectomy on the patient with the plan to divide the upper pole branch of the splenic artery and remove only the upper spleen . The patient underwent surgery under general anesthesia in the lithotomy position by a co-axial approach using four ports and a liver retractor . After peeling the tissue around the pancreatic tail and spleen hilum, the upper pole branch of the splenic vessels was clamped . The ischemic side of the tumor was confirmed, and the upper pole branch of the splenic vessels was divided as planned . Using a bipolar electrocoagulation hemostasis device and a vessel sealing system, the spleen was dissected at the ischemic parenchyma approximately 1 cm from the demarcation line. Because the ischemic-side spleen was dissected, there was less bleeding . The excised spleen was retrieved from the umbilical wound and extended several centimeters using a retrieval bag without crushing the specimen. The operation time was 217 min, and bleeding was minimal. The patient was discharged after 8 days without complications. The patient’s symptoms disappeared with no recurrence at 1 year postoperatively. Blood tests and CT scans confirmed no problems with the remaining spleen . The specimen showed a well-defined mass of 60 × 48 mm . Histologically, vascular-like structures were growing, and in the lumen, lightly acidic serous substances and histiocytic cells were stored . Immunohistochemical staining yielded D2-40 weakly positive , CD31-positive, CD34-negative, and CD8-negative results (data not shown); hence, a cavernous type lymphangioma was diagnosed. Ethics committee approval was unnecessary for our case report, and the patient gave informed consent; anonymity was preserved.