A 7-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital due to recurrent episodes of ALF.
The patient was well till age 14 mo, when a fever was treated with the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent nimesulide. Jaundice developed, with elevated transaminase activity. Injury fell short of frank ALF, constituting instead a “liver crisis”. Two episodes of ALF followed at ages of 3 years 6 mo and 6 years 3 mo . Clinical, laboratory, and imaging-study findings between episodes were normal. At the age of 7 years, shortly after his third RALF episode, he was referred to our hospital for etiological diagnosis.
His parents and he denied any history of disease beyond that summarized above.
He was born at term (weight 3 kg) by elective cesarean section after an uncomplicated pregnancy. He is the second child of a Han Chinese couple who deny consanguinity. His sibling, a brother, is well.
Physical examination on admission found no abnormalities.
Blood, urine, and stool routine test results, viral serological markers (hepatotropic viruses, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and human immunodeficiency virus 1), biomarkers of toxoplasma infection, of thyroid function, and of hepatobiliary injury, and values for cholesterol, triglycerides, creatine phosphokinase, glucose, ceruloplasmin, blood lactate, blood ammonia, carbonyldiamide, creatinine, uric acid, urine organic acids, alpha-fetoprotein, and immunoglobulin levels were unremarkable. The value of 25-(OH)D3 was 13.69 ng/mL (normal: 30-100 ng/mL).
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging showed a cyst (90 mm × 30 mm) in the cisterna magna and a relatively small cerebellum. The optic nerves were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography and echocardiography showed no significant abnormalities.
Findings on ophthalmologic evaluation were unremarkable. Liver biopsy found mildly abnormal architecture, without fibrosis, in a pattern suggesting disordered perfusion; no ultrastructural abnormalities were apparent. The Denver developmental screening test, which covers gross motor, language, fine motor-adaptive, and personal-social skills, found a low developmental quotient (< 47, normal > 70) and mental index (63, normal > 70).
With the approval of the ethics committee of the Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University (Jinyi Lunli Keyan-2014-13-01) and after obtaining written informed consent from the parents of the patient, DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples obtained from the proband, his brother, and his parents. Whole-exome sequencing was conducted as described (Genesky Biotechnologies, Shanghai, China). Exomes were captured using a SureSelectXT Human All Exon V6 kit (Agilent Technologies, Foster, CA). Sequencing (250 bp paired-end reads) was performed using the Illumina hiseq2500 platform following the manufacturer’s instructions (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Burrows-Wheeler Aligner software was used for read alignment (hg19; NCBI build 37; February, 2009). Variant calling was performed with Varscan and GATK Haplotype-Caller . Mean coverage of the exome was 140× with 91% of the exome covered at least 10 times and 80% covered at greater than 20×. The proband’s variants were filtered for minor allele frequency < 1% against Thousand Genomes Project , NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project , Exome Aggregation Consortium Server , and Genesky in-house databases. Variants in ALF-associated genes assessed by SIFT , Polyphen-2 , or MutationTaster as pathogenic and present in accord with inheritance modes were considered of interest. Sanger sequencing was used to confirm variants in the proband and to seek them in his parents and brother.
The homozygous mutation c.92_93insGGGCCCT, p.(H32Gfs*20) in exon 1 in SCYL1 (NM_020680) was identified in the proband. His brother did not harbor this mutation. Each of their parents was heterozygous for the mutation, consistent with recessive inheritance. The mutation detected by exome sequencing was again identified on Sanger sequencing . No other variant of interest was identified in any ALF-associated gene. The insertion of GGGCCCT between nucleotides 92 and 93 within exon 1 is predicted to result in the substitution of 19 abnormal amino acid residues (His32-Val50), followed by a stop codon at codon 51. MutationTaster predicts that this results in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The variant is novel; it was not recorded in Exome Aggregation Consortium Server, NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project, Thousand Genomes Project, or Genesky in-house databases.