A 40-year-old Caucasian male presented with a 6-week history of chronic unremitting frontal headaches, followed by left eyelid swelling, blurry vision, and diplopia. He subsequently developed nausea and vomiting. He denied any fever, nasal congestion, night sweats, or weight loss. His past medical history was significant for bipolar disorder with no other relevant findings. The patient was not using any current medications and he denied a history of immunosuppresive drugs. Moreover, his family history was only positive for hypertension, without any mention of autoimmune disease. On examination, the patient was afebrile, pulse was 69 per minute, respirations were 23 per minute, and blood pressure was 150/89 mmHg.
The physical exam was notable for exophthalmos of the left eye as well as a palpable mass on the left eyelid. Neurological exam revealed third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerve palsy in the left eye. The patient also displayed decreased visual acuity in the affected eye with associated early disc edema. The remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable. The patient’s complete and differential blood counts, serum chemistry and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal. Given the findings, the patient was referred for computed tomography (CT) to rule out a mass lesion.
CT of the orbit with contrast revealed two frontal lobe lesions, the largest of which appeared solid measuring 3.6 × 3.8 cm on coronal image. The lesion was seen eroding through the orbital roof, exerting significant mass effect on the superior rectus muscle, and causing deformity of the left globe. An additional ring-enhancing left frontal lesion was seen adjacent to the solid tumor measuring 2.7 × 1.9 × 2.7 cm.
Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with and without contrast revealed a mass arising in the left orbital roof with destruction of the sphenoid bone. Posterior to the mass was a round hyperintense cystic area within the left inferior frontal cortex with surrounding severe vasogenic edema. Mass effect was visualized with midline shift from left to right of the septum pellucidum and subfalcine herniation . The contrast enhanced study showed an extensive lytic mass measuring at least 3.4 × 2.2 cm in size. At the time, the etiology of the lesions was felt to be more likely neoplastic rather than infectious in the absence of any known immunocompromised state. Therefore, blood cultures were not obtained.
The patient consequently underwent a left frontal craniotomy for partial resection of the masses. Upon incision the large left frontal lobe lesion was full of purulent material from which multiple cultures were acquired. At this point, the differential favored intracranial abscess rather than neoplasm. Post-operative MRI noted that the previous ring-enhancing lesions were decreased in size. Additionally, the left retro-orbital hyperdense mass had resolved. The prior midline displacement was improved. Persistent vasogenic edema throughout the left frontal lobe was noted; however, the mass effect had resolved. Preliminary pathology from abscess resection revealed granulomatous inflammation and necrosis with positive acid-fast bacilli (AFB) cultures. Intraoperative bacterial, anaerobic and fungal cultures however were all negative. Routine blood cultures, AFB blood cultures and QuantiFERON® TB Gold test were also negative. The patient’s sputum culture however was positive for AFB. Additionally, the patient was tested for HIV following abscess resection with negative results. Moreover, the patient’s CD4 count was 515 cells/mm3 (32 %). The patient was started on an anti-TB regimen consisting of Rifampin, Isoniazid, Pyrazinamide, and Ethambutol.
CT of the thorax was performed to rule out a concomitant pulmonary infection. The study demonstrated calcified bilateral hilar lymph nodes, as well as multiple calcified mediastinal lymph nodes involving the prevascular, pretracheal, precarinal, right paratracheal, and subcarinal space, reflecting prior granulomatous disease or sarcoidosis. Results from endobronchial biopsy revealed noncaseating granulomas. Final tissue cultures from the brain lesions and sputum revealed MAC. The patient was started on a 12-month MAC treatment regimen consisting of Clarithromycin, Ethambutol, and Rifampin. The patient’s neurological symptoms, exopthalmous, diplopia and mass effect fully resolved over the following 6-months. The blurry vision persisted, but was corrected with glasses. Sputum AFB was negative at 7-months. Furthermore, follow-up MRI at 8-months was negative for intracranial abscess.