An 18-month old Caucasian girl presented to our hospital following a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. On examination she was unresponsive, hypotonic, and mechanically ventilated. She was normotensive and afebrile, and there were no audible bruits on examination. Significant laboratories included the following: white count 32,400/μl, hemoglobin 9.6 g/dl, platelet count 342,000/μl. Normal laboratories included the following: PT, PTT, and complete metabolic panel. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were not drawn. Past medical history was significant for failure to thrive requiring supplemental tube feeding. Family history was notable for an aunt with an asymptomatic cerebral aneurysm. Head CT demonstrated hemorrhage and dilated ventricles. Brain MRI/A demonstrated aneurysms of the right anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and the left internal carotid artery (ICA), confirmed by digital subtraction angiogram (DSA; Fig ). The ACA aneurysm was clipped and a ventriculostomy was placed. Her course was complicated by seizures and vasospasm, causing ischemic strokes in bilateral ACA, subcortical middle cerebral artery (MCA) and posterior cerebral artery (PCA) territories, as documented by MRI.
Three weeks later, she developed vomiting and irritability. Significant laboratories included white count 9,500/μl, hemoglobin 9.7 g/dl, platelet count 737,000/μl, ESR 37 mm/hr, and CRP 2.7 mg/dl. Head CT showed a new hemorrhage, and angiography showed recurrence of the clipped ACA aneurysm. Full body MRA revealed iliac artery aneurysms, aortic narrowing , and gluteal aneurysms. Blood pressure remained normal and there were no audible bruits. At this point, suspicion for a genetic vasculopathy was high and systemic vasculitis was not suspected. Repeat imaging showed progression in the left common iliac artery and narrowing of the renal arteries. A hip effusion was noted. Renal ultrasound and blood pressure were normal. Laboratory studies included a normal chromosomal variant (46, XX, inv(9) (p13q21)), and normal elastin gene and JAG1 locus. Collagen synthesis, sequencing of TGFBR2, urine copper and serum ceruloplasmin were normal. The left iliac artery aneurysm was repaired; pathology showed non-specific changes of elastic lamina disruption and chronic inflammatory infiltrate. At discharge 3 months later, she had spastic quadriparesis but was sitting with assistance. Five months after presentation, the right iliac artery aneurysm was repaired. Pathology demonstrated a transmural vasculitis with intimal thickening, giant cells and elastic lamina disruption . Despite the presence of giant cells, suspicion for a genetic vasculopathy remained high.
Seven months after presentation, she was found vomiting, posturing and unresponsive. Head CT showed new intraventricular hemorrhage, and DSA revealed fusiform aneurysms in the supraclinoid ICA's , right lumbar, and internal maxillary arteries. Brachial artery pulses were not measurable due to line placement; her hands were cyanotic, radial and posterior tibial pulses were undetectable, and her feet were cool. White count was elevated 17,500/μl, hemoglobin was 10.5 g/dl, platelets were 189,000/μl, CRP was elevated (4.7 mg/dl) and ESR was normal (2 mm/hr). Intravascular stent placement and coil embolization of the right cerebral aneurysm were performed. After re-review of the biopsies and imaging, TA was finally suspected and treatment with pulse solumedrol and cyclophosphamide was initiated. Two days later she had a new intraventricular hemorrhage and the left ACA aneurysm was coiled. On imaging, her aorta was narrowed . Despite aggressive management, she had a massive intracerebral hemorrhage . The family agreed to discontinue medical support given her poor prognosis.
Autopsy showed fusiform aneurysms of the descending aorta with thrombosis of 95% of the luminal cavity . The rest of the aorta was grossly unremarkable, although histologic examination showed transmural lymphohistiocytic vasculitis with rare giant cells in the subclavian artery , abdominal aorta (above the aneurysm), and iliac arteries. There was intimal thickening and proliferation in the common carotids and left anterior descending coronary arteries. Cerebral vessels had saccular aneurysms in the right ICA and anterior communicating artery (ACoA; Fig ). There was massive intracerebral hemorrhage with frontal lobe necrosis and intraventricular rupture. Microscopic examination of the cerebral vessels showed chronic inflammation and rare giant cells. The involvement of large and medium arteries, the histology and radiology were distinctive for TA.