A 79-year-old man with mCRPC metastatic to bone and lymph nodes and a history of atrial fibrillation presented with blurred vision and pain and stiffness in the upper back after 8 weeks on a clinical trial with nivolumab (1 mg/kg) and PROSTVAC, both given every 2 weeks. Eye exam was within normal limits, while musculoskeletal exam revealed tenderness in trapezius muscles and decreased motor strength in arms (III/V) and neck (IV/V). The rest of the physical exam was within normal limits, with the exception of an irregular heart rhythm. Laboratory tests were as follows: creatinine kinase (CK) 3200 U/L (normal: 39–308 U/L), CK-MB 65.7 mcg/L (normal: 0–7.6 mcg/L), troponin I 0.209 ng/mL (normal: 0–0.056 ng/mL). Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial fibrillation with QT prolongation (QTc 514 msec) and left anterior fascicular block, all unchanged from baseline three months before. 2D-echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 65% with an enlarged left atrium, a dilated right ventricle and increased pulmonary artery pressure (45 mmHg). ProBNP was elevated at 1463 pg/mL and peaked at 3066 pg/mL one day later after hydration. With a presumed diagnosis of autoimmune myositis and possible myocarditis, the patient was admitted and started on methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day.
The cardiac MRI findings were consistent with myocarditis involving small areas of the myocardium. Left ventricular size and function were normal (ejection fraction 59%) with normal regional wall motion. Patches of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) were seen in the basal and mid inferior wall showing an epicardial pattern compatible with myocarditis. Early gadolinium enhancement was abnormal in a similar distribution to the LGE but more extensive. Myocardial T1 was 1411 ms. in the basal inferoseptum and 1231 ms. in the mid inferior wall (normal native T1 < 1350 ms.). Myocardial T2 was normal in all segments except the mid inferior wall where it was at the borderline between normal and mildly elevated. Extra cellular volume fraction (ECV) was more diffusely abnormal in the basal inferior wall 41.1% (normal 25.5, 95% confidence intervals 20.5–30.5%) in the closest region of interest to the area of abnormal LGE but also diffusely mildly elevated (32–33%) in several basal and mid ventricular segments .
The patient was discharged on a multiple week oral prednisone taper after normalization of cardiac enzymes on day 4. Treatment with PROSTVAC continued for three more months; nivolumab was discontinued. Six months later, patient is doing well, with no residual cardiac damage.