A 62-year-old female was admitted to the hospital due to gradually worsening fatigue, shortness of breath on exertion, and frequent palpitations. Vital signs were normal, and clinical examination did not reveal any significant findings. The patient had a history of perimembranous VSD with a membranous septum aneurysm, arterial hypertension, and occasional premature ventricular contractions. Recent echocardiography revealed that left ventricular end-diastolic and end-systolic diameters had increased compared to prior examinations. The patient had mild aortic and mitral regurgitation, with no aortic cusp prolapse.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) revealed a VSD size of 4–6 mm and a left ventricular ampulla size of 12 mm . The Qp/Qs ratio was 1.5 after complete heart catheterization. Pulmonary vascular resistances were within normal range. In view of the new left ventricular morphology, deteriorating symptoms and TOE findings, a percutaneous VSD closure with the Amplatzer Duct Occluder II was decided .
The operation was performed under general anaesthesia and TOE guidance. Intravenous low molecular weight heparin (7000 IU) was administered, aiming for an activated clotting time >250 s. A single left radial access was performed. Left cardiac ventriculography was performed with a 5 French pigtail catheter and, selectively, with a 6 French JR4 diagnostic catheter to confirm the VSD dimensions. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the VSD was crossed using the JR4 catheter and an angled hydrophilic 0.035 inch, 260 cm glidewire (Terumo, Somerset, NJ). The latter was advanced in the pulmonary artery. The JR4 catheter was then advanced over the wire in the right ventricular outflow tract. A 6/4 mm Amplatzer Duct Occluder II (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, Minnesota Amplatzer) was deployed under angiographic and TOE guidance . The angiography and TOE showed successful device placement and excellent procedural results, with almost complete VSD occlusion (, and ). Pre-device release imaging revealed no disruption of the aortic valve, no aortic regurgitation, and only minimal residual shunt. No heart block or other conduction disturbances were observed. After performing a vigorous stability test (‘tug test’), the device was released . The left radial sheath was removed, and the puncture site was closed uneventfully, without haematomas or other complications. The patient was extubated and fully recovered. Post-procedural TOE revealed a well-seated Amplatzer Duct Occluder II device with excellent alignment to the ventricular septum and no signs of residual shunt, thrombosis, or pericardial fusion . The patient was discharged home the next day after the procedure. The patient did not report any post-procedural complications during the 8-month follow-up. Echocardiographic assessment showed gradual decrease of left ventricular dimensions. Specifically, the end-diastolic LV diameter was 5.9 cm at pre-procedural echocardiographic assessment. At 3 and 8 months after the procedure, the end-diastolic LV diameter was 5.6 and 5.4 cm, respectively. At the 3-month echocardiographic assessment, a small residual leak with a peak gradient of 83 mmHg was reported. At the 8-month assessment, a residual leak was still visible but so small that a flow gradient could not be acquired.