An 85-year-old female with a height of 152 cm and a weight of 52 kg, who presented severe left-sided lower teeth and gum pain, visited our pain clinic. Severe pain started 2 years ago. Her pain showed abrupt onset and termination with an electric shock like sensation. Duration of pain was within 1–2 min. Pain was usually provoked by washing face, brushing teeth, eating and mouth opening. Initially, she was evaluated at a dental clinic because her main symptom was in gum, lower molar teeth and mandibular area. Since, any problem was not found during dental examination, she was referred to the neurology department. She was diagnosed as TN at the neurology department, and medication was started with gabapentin 900 mg/day, celecoxib 200 mg/day and amitriptyline 10 mg/day with minimal responses. Oral intake was very poor due to inadequate pain treatment. Her underlying disease was diabetes mellitus and hypertension.
According to her characteristic pain nature described above, we assessed her as TN. Carbamazepine 200 mg/day was prescribed since she was not taking such medication previously. In addition, ultrasound-guided mental nerve blockade was performed with 0.2% ropivacaine 0.5 ml using a hockey stick probe (Logiq S8, GE Healthcare, USA) . MRI and MRA were ordered to rule out possible secondary TN, and to evaluate any vascular anomaly or vascular compression of the trigeminal nerve.
Mental nerve blockade was performed twice with one week interval and carbamazepine medication was maintained for 16 days. She showed mild pain relief in lower teeth and gum after initiation of medication with mental nerve blockade. However, she demonstrated severe general weakness, dizziness, vertigo and poor oral intake. We assumed such symptoms to be side effects of carbamazepine. When carbamazepine medication was stopped, various symptoms observed after medication disappeared. Although partial pain relief was achieved even after termination of carbamazepine, maintaining normal daily life was impossible due to the reoccurrence of pain.
Gasserian ganglion thermoablation was planned to relieve intractable pain. Her MRI demonstrated mild brain atrophy, but otherwise normal findings. However, MRA showed saccular aneurysm (5.1 mm × 2.4 mm) in the inferior aspect of the anterior communicating artery . Due to the risk of abrupt rupture of the aneurysm during the procedure of gasserian ganglion thermoablation, we recommended delayed thermoablation after performing cerebral angiography or coiling. However, cerebral angiography or coiling was not possible until at least 3 weeks later due to overloaded schedules. Patient’s intractable pain and poor general condition were too severe to wait for 3 weeks.
After explaining of possible rupture of the cerebral aneurysm, gasserian ganglion thermoablation was performed carefully under intravenous sedation anesthesia.
Before the procedure of thermoablation, light sedation was maintained with intravenous midazolam at 0.02 mg/kg and sufentanil 5 μg, so that the patient could respond properly during electrical stimulation. Patient was monitored with electrocardiography, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry. Facial mask was applied to supply oxygen (3 L/min). During thermoablation, we paid special attention to the changes of blood pressure, to minimize the risk of rupture of cerebral aneurysm. Her initial systolic blood pressure and heart rate was 155 mmHg and 76 beats/min, respectively. Patient lay in the supine position with neck slightly extended, and chin up. The C-arm was tilted caudally 30 to 35 degrees, and rotated to the left side 20 to 25 degrees obliquely, to visualize the foramen ovale (FO). Skin entry was done at 2–3 cm lateral to the angle of the mouth. A radiofrequency cannula of 22-gauge, 10-cm, and 2 mm active tip was used. After confirming the clear visualization of the FO, the cannula was inserted in a coaxial manner into the fluoroscopic beam towards the FO.
When the cannula reached just in front of the FO in lateral view, nicardipine 1 mg was injected to prevent abrupt increase of blood pressure. Systolic blood pressure before and after puncture of FO was 145 mmHg and 135 mmHg, respectively.
After puncturing of the FO, the cannula was advanced 2–3 mm further and the location of cannula tip was confirmed. Once the cannula position was verified with C-arm, the electrical stimulation of 0.1 V at 50 Hz frequency was in concordance with the location of the pain. The final position of the cannula tip was modified minutely, according to the effect of the stimulation (, ). After successful concordant electrical stimulation in the mandibular area, radiofrequency was performed at 70℃ for 60 seconds for one time. Just after finishing radiofrequency procedure, vital sign was stable except for the sinus tachycardia (112 beats/min). Patient was observed in the recovery area with vital sign monitoring. After taking a rest for an hour, she was in full awake state with stable vital sign.
She visited our pain clinic 2 weeks later, and her pain had disappeared completely with mild hypoesthesia around the chin.