A 28-year-old female, Muay Thai athlete since 16 years, was first seen in orthopedic clinic for a persistent pain in the metaphyseal lateral part of the right tibia that she was experiencing in the past 6 months. History was negative for other pathologies or familiar tumors.
Clinical examination revealed mild swelling in the region, a feeble bruising, and a pain present on palpation of the distal two-thirds of the posterolateral tibial border. The pain was referred as persistent, with moment of sharpness not always relate with sport activity.
The initial diagnostic approach was conventional radiology of the distal third of the right leg , which showed sign of periosteal reaction and a thickening area, due, probably, to an osteoid osteoma according to the opinion of the radiologist. We concluded the needs of additional analysis such as echotomography and a computed tomography (CT)-scan.
The echotomography highlighted the edema in the contusion area; instead, the CT-scan revealed an area of 28 × 9 mm of augmented density in the central cavity of the bone alongside the lateral cortex and, according to the radiologist, no sign of periosteal reaction. The radiologist suggested additional investigation with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan to discriminate between fibrous dysplasia (FD), adamantinoma, and a fibroma. At the same time, we suggested rest, ice, compression and elevation protocol, a period of rest from sport activities, and an anti-inflammatory therapy for the pain, with good feedback after 2 weeks, while waiting for the MRI. As the patient is a semi-professional athlete, a contralateral isokinetic muscle strengthening program has been implemented to minimize the physical deconditioning without affecting the rest of the impaired limb [, , ].
The MRI with and without contrast was done after a month , revealing oval signal alteration in the cortex of the distal third tibial shaft: Intermediate signal in T1 and long TR, with sclerotic border and no contrast enhancement. Based on the lesion appearance and correlation with the radiographic presentation, we performed a biopsy. The report of the histologic description was: Spindle-shaped fibroblasts arranged in storiform pattern, interspersed with osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells, small cystic changes and areas of hemorrhage, and little inflammatory cells, compatible with non-ossifying fibroma (NOF), involutionary phase.
The patient after 4 months of stop slowly started her Muay Thay training again with no new sign of pain, at 2 years follow-up, there was not any sign of progression of the lesion and or modification at MRI scan, neither a symptomatic resumption.