The patient developed pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen for one month, which exacerbated within a day, along with significant weight loss .
On 16 February 2020, a 49-year-old female with the complaint described above was brought to our emergency department. The patient did not report any abdominal trauma but complained of significant weight loss. According to the computed tomography (CT) scan on 16 February 2020 and other examinations , the diagnosis was non-traumatic splenic rupture and hemorrhage, with the suspected presence of liver cancer. Splenic artery embolization was suggested, which was refused by the patient and her family. Two days later, her abdominal pain was worse, after which, she and her family finally agreed to undergo splenic artery embolization . The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged nine days later. One month later, she was admitted to our hospital again due to abdominal pain. According to the contrast-enhanced CT performed on 6 April 2020, the preliminary diagnosis was splenic angiosarcoma with peripheral and intrahepatic metastasis .
Surgical history included total thyroidectomy two years ago, followed by I131 therapy, hystero-myomectomy performed ten years ago, and pancreatic stone removal. The patient did not present a history of hepatitis or diabetes mellitus.
There was no notable family medical history, such as cancer.
The patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C, and blood pressure was 92/62 mmHg. Her heart rate was 101 bpm, and her respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed a tender abdominal mass in the left upper abdomen and distension of the abdomen. Deep palpation showed diffuse pain, although without clinical signs of peritonitis.
Liver function tests, hematology parameters, as well as tumor markers such as α-fetoprotein (AFP), carbohydrate antigen 199, carcinoembryonic antigen, and chromogranin A, were all normal, except for a white blood cell count of 13.54 × 109/L [normal range: (4.0-10.0) × 109/L] and hemoglobin concentration of 177 g/L (normal range: 120-160 g/L), which were beyond the normal range. The D-dimer level of 35.65 mg/L (normal range: 0.0-0.55 mg/L) indicated high coagulation function, while the remaining parameters were normal. Electrolyte levels, electrocardiogram, and chest X-ray were normal.
Multiple masses were observed in the liver and spleen on abdominal CT and magnetic resonance imaging on 16 February 2020 . Contrast-enhanced CT on 6 April 2020 revealed multiple round shadows of low-density in the spleen and liver .