We present the case of a 41-year-old man who had been diagnosed with type 1 DM in junior high school. He was 168 cm tall and weighed 90.0 kg (body mass index, 31.9 kg/m2). His baseline serum creatinine (sCr) level was 79.6 μmol/L and his urinary protein level was 0.3 g/gCr. His blood pressure was well controlled with an aldosterone receptor blocker. DM control was poor (haemoglobin A1c 9.0–10.0%) under intensive conventional insulin therapy. His diabetic retinopathy was simple type. Pregabalin, duloxetine and mexiletine were also used for diabetic neuropathy. His family history was not significant except cerebral infarction in his grandmother. He initially visited a primary care unit because of general fatigue and high fever and was given oral levofloxacin. However, he later called an urgent care unit because of swelling and pain in his genitals. He was diagnosed with Fournier gangrene and admitted to our hospital . Table showed urinary, blood and culture examination on admission. Inflammatory markers were elevated (white blood cell count 25,700/μL with left shift and C reactive protein 28.8 mg/L). Renal function was slightly abnormal (Blood urine nitrogen 22.0 mg/dL, sCr 91.1 μmol/L) and proteinuria was detected. Blood culture was negative. Escherichia coli and Enterococcus faecalis were detected from wound culture. Free air was noted in his genital area via computed tomography (CT) scan . He underwent debridement and received tazobactam/piperacillin (PIPC/TAZ) 4.5 g every 8 h and intravenous VCM 1.5 g every 12 h. Because his trough VCM level was still low (9.24 μg/mL, 15–20 μg/mL is for complicated infections ) and sCr stable (83.1 μmol/L) on day 3, intravenous VCM increased to 1.5 g every 8 h. Thereafter, he developed pitting pedal edema, weight gain (10 kg), reduced urine volume (100 mL/day), increased sCr (416.4 μmol/L) and trough VCM level (80.48 μg/mL) on day 6, which suggested VCM-induced AKI. Urinary examination results, which included N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase of 32.0 U/L, α1-microgloblin of 25.7 mg/L, and β2-microgloblin of 1800 μg/L, were also consistent with AKI. CT scan showed no signs of hydronephrosis or renal atrophy . Gallium scintigraphy showed significant accumulation in both kidneys .
VCM and PIPC/TAZ were switched to ampicillin/sulbactam (ABPC/SBT), and frequent haemodialysis was performed on days 6–17, a total of seven times over 12 days (seven 4-h sessions with a blood flow rate of 120–150 mL/min and dialysate flow rate of 500 mL/min). Ethylene vinyl alcohol membrane was used on days 6 and 7, whereas polysulfone membrane was used on days 9, 11, 12, 14, and 17. His urine volume began to increase as his plasma VCM levels gradually decreased. A renal biopsy was performed on day 18 to rule out other renal disorders and evaluate for diabetic nephropathy. ABPC/SBT was switched to ciprofloxacin on day 13 because of a rash that developed mainly on his abdomen and back, and clindamycin was added on days 16–22. He was discharged on day 49 without haemodialysis and antibiotics (sCr, 145.0 μmol/L). Eight months later, his sCr was decreased to 109.6 μmol/L.
The specimen included 16 glomeruli with cortex (no medulla). Subcapsular and medullary ray fibrosis was found in 10% of the specimen on Masson staining . Glomeruli showed no sclerotic or inflammatory changes, but mild mesangial expansion without significant depositions of immunoglobulin or complement in immunofluorescence was found. Nodular lesions were not detected . Focal but severe AIN and tubular epithelium injury with nuclear denudation or tubular dilatation (ATN) were detected. Interstitial monocyte infiltration and tubulitis were mainly distributed in the medullary ray lesions . There were no obvious eosinophilic infiltrations or granular lesions in the specimen. Mild intimal fibrosis was found in some of the small interlobular arteries, and mild hyalinosis was also noted in an arteriole. In summary, the kidney biopsy showed that ATN and focal AIN with mild diabetic nephropathy.