An 85-year-old female was admitted to our hospital for severe coronary heart disease and aortic valve stenosis. She was at high risk for cardiac surgery, and the calculation of the Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) score demonstrated the risk of mortality was 16.153%. Pre-procedure computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the annulus diameter was 19.1 mm , the left main (LM) ostium height was 9.0 mm , and the right coronary artery (RCA) ostium height was 13.2 mm .
She had two drug-eluting stents deployed at the ostia of the LM and RCA, with approximately 1/3 of the stents protruding into the sinus of Valsalva . During the same procedure, a 26 mm Venus-A self-expanding valve (Venusmedtech, Hangzhou, China) was implanted. Kissing balloon inflation was not performed because of a lack of post dilatation of the transcatheter heart valve (THV). An aortic angiography demonstrated good perfusion of both coronary arteries . She had no clinical symptoms after the operation, was prescribed aspirin and clopidogrel as a dual antiplatelet therapy for the following 12 months. She was discharged 7 days after the procedure and was asymptomatic at the 3-month follow-up.
Four months later, the patient was admitted to the emergency department for non-ST elevation myocardial infarction. She developed epigastric discomfort for 2 h, and the electrocardiogram showed a transient ST-segment elevation in the avR lead and extensive ST-segment depression in the chest lead, with troponin I up to 16 ng/ml.
An emergency angiogram revealed severe stenosis of the ostium of the LM artery. Compared with the aortic angiography after TAVR, the stenosis of the LM artery had worsened, although a 4.0–15 mm stent had previously been deployed. A Judkins left 4.0 guiding catheter was used via femoral access, and a standard 0.014-inch guidewire was floated into the coronary artery and delivered to the distal left circumflex artery. The ostium of the LM artery and the mesh of the THV were dilated by gradually increasing the balloon size. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) revealed that the stent stenosis was caused by compression of the THV (Additional file ), and no thrombus or in-stent restenosis was observed . Finally, under the support of the Guidezilla extension catheter (Boston Scientific, Boston, MA), a new 4.0–15 mm integrity stent (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, CA) was deployed. After the second chimney stent, the severe stenosis of the ostium of the LM artery disappeared , the IVUS showed this in more detail (Additional file ).