Our patient, a 67-year-old male weighing 66.8 kg and measuring 169.4 cm in height, was scheduled for sutureless aortic valve replacement to treat severe aortic stenosis. He was diagnosed and treated for pulmonary tuberculosis 25 years ago, which resulted in severe sequelae in both lungs, and also underwent surgical resection 14 years prior to treat abdominal liposarcoma. Additionally, our patient was hospitalized for treatment of atrial fibrillation and cardiac insufficiency 7 years ago and diagnosed with hypertension, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 4 years ago. He was prescribed the following medications: rivaroxaban, digoxin, angiotensin receptor blocker, calcium channel blocker, and an oral hypoglycemic agent. However, rivaroxaban was interrupted 3 days before surgery.
The patient exhibited atrial fibrillation, premature ventricular contraction, left anterior fascicular block, and anterior infarction from electrocardiogram (ECG), with an aortic valve blood flow velocity of 4.3 m/s, mean pressure of 46 mmHg, and aortic valve surface area of 0.7 cm2 from echocardiography. The results indicated severe aortic stenosis, overall decrease in cardiac activity, moderate right ventricular dysfunction, moderate resting pulmonary hypertension, in conjunction with bilateral atrial extension, nonvalvular atrial fibrillation and left ventricular systolic dysfunction. The patient also presented a left ventricular ejection fraction of 17%. A normal result was obtained with coronary arteriography, which is used to identify coronary artery disease. A chest radiography showed pleural effusion in the right lung, an atypical pulmonary nodule, lung parenchymal distortion, bilateral upper lobe pleural thickening, and emphysema, while a pulmonary function test revealed FEV1/FVC was 40%, FEV1 was 27%, FVE was 47%, and TLC was 68%, indicating mixed respiratory failure. A blood test showed 18.5 g/dl of hemoglobin and 57.3% of hematocrit , with normal leukocyte and thrombocyte levels. In order to identify the cause of polycythemia, the patient tested negative for janus kinase 2 (JAK2) V617F mutation, and the result of a plasma erythropoietin test was 20.4 IU/L. A bone marrow biopsy was not performed due to patient refusal. However, arterial blood gas analysis during room air breathing was PaO2 of 65.4 mmHg, PCO2 of 50.3 mmHg, and SpO2 of 93% , suggesting that the patient may have experienced a secondary polycythemia induced by hypoxia from underlying disease rather than bone marrow disease, in which elevated hemoglobin level could increase the risk of thromboembolism. Thus, after consultation with a thoracic surgeon, the decision was made for the patient to undergo acute normovolemic hemodilution under anesthesia.
Five-lead ECG, pulse oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry), non-invasive blood pressure, arterial pressure from left ulnar artery, bispectral index, and cerebral oxygen saturation were all measured as part of physiological monitoring in the operating room. The patient had a blood pressure of 144/104 mmHg, heart rate of 110 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 90%. Endotracheal intubation was performed after the patient was anesthetized with administration of 2% lidocaine (60 mg), etomidate (12 mg), rocuronium (100 mg), and fentanyl (150 μg); subsequently, a maintenance dose of midazolam (5 mg), fentanyl (100 μg), and vecuronium bromide (5 mg) were also administered. Arterial pressure was monitored using a left femoral arterial catheter, pulmonary artery catheter (Swan-Ganz catheter, Edward Lifescience, USA), and a central vein catheter, in which the cannulation to the internal jugular vein was conducted using ultrasound guidance. Transesophageal echocardiography was set up for intraoperative assessment of cardiac function and to assess the condition of the heart valves.
Nine hundred and sixty millimeters of blood was drawn from the central vein catheter at a rate of 50 ml/min for 20 min, while injecting 960 ml of 6% hydroxyethyl starch (HES, Volulyte®, Fresenius Kabi Deutchland GmbH, Germany), as the intra-operative arterial blood gas analysis revealed 19.7 g/dl of hemoglobin and 58% of hematocrit. After acute normovolemic hemodilution, the patient’s blood pressure (118/82 mmHg) and heart rate (88 beats/min), as well as hemoglobin (15 g/dl) and hematocrit (44%) were measured. Test results of ROTEM® (Rotational Thromboelastometry, Pentapharm GmbH, Germany) indicated that both EXTEM and FIBTEM were within the normal range . The test to determine the infection, acid-fast bacilli smear microscopy, and a culture test could not be completed before the surgery; a blood collected from the patient was disposed of because pleural effusion was observed only on the right side indicating the possibility of infection.
Extracorporeal circulation was initiated 25 min after the start of the surgery, and was sustained for 75 min, during which the hematocrit was maintained between 25 and 30% . After weaning from extracorporeal circulation, the patient’s vital signs were stable and heart valve locations and function, as well as the overall cardiac function, were normal based on transesophageal echocardiography. The arterial blood gas analysis results were 9.9 g/dl of hemoglobin and 29% of hematocrit; the ROTEM® test resulted in 101 seconds of clotting time (CT) in EXTEM, which was elongated to 104 s in FIBTEM and 41 mm of amplitude 10 min after the start of the assay (A10) in EXTEM, and was reduced to 6 mm in FIBTEM, indicating a minor decrease in the fibrinogen level . Two units of packed red blood cells, 3 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 8 units of platelets were transfused after consulting with the operating surgeon, due to the fact that the patient showed a bleeding tendency after weaning from extracorporeal circulation. Cerebral oxygen saturation during surgery measured 52/51, which was maintained after acute normovolemic hemodilution but reduced to 41/40 during extracorporeal circulation. Cerebral oxygen saturation eventually recovered to 56/54 after weaning from extracorporeal circulation. The patient was transported to the intensive care unit in a sedated state with endotracheal intubation, which was removed 4 days after admission to the intensive care unit and was then transferred to the general ward the following day. The patient was discharged 15 days after the surgery without further complications. Meanwhile, the patient was diagnosed with secondary polycythemia without further testing, as the blood test results acquired over 2 months post-operatively showed hemoglobin and hematocrit to be lower than normal .