Our patient was a seven-year-old white boy who was initially diagnosed with congenital toxoplasmosis. He was the first child of young, healthy and consanguineous parents (fourth-degree relatives), and had a healthy sister of three years of age . The mother had a history of one previous loss of pregnancy. She said that she had not smoked, consumed alcohol or made use of illicit drugs during the pregnancy. The family history was negative for similar cases. The parents had normal head circumferences and intelligence. The child was born from an uneventful pregnancy, by means of cesarean delivery, at eight months of gestational age, weighing 2,740 g (i.e. within the range of the 50-90th percentiles), measuring 47 cm (50-98th percentiles), with head circumference of 32 cm (10-50th percentiles) and Apgar score of 9 at five minutes. Serological tests for congenital infections (toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex and syphilis) were negative. No lymphedema was observed in his hands and feet and the patient also did not present anemia, petechiae, maculopapular rash or jaundice.
He was hospitalized due to pneumonia on four occasions, the first at four months of age. At four years and seven months, his weight was 11 kg (< 3rd percentile), length 101 cm (< 3rd percentile), head circumference 42 cm (< 2nd percentile) and ear length 6.5 cm (> 97th percentile). He had a high arched palate, prominent large ears, pointed chin, spasticity and atrophy of the upper and lower limbs, right-side cryptorchid testis and bilateral overlapping of the second and fourth toes over the third toes . In the neurological evaluation, he was hypertonic, presented little social interaction and had significant neuropsychomotor delay. He was not capable of supporting his head or speaking words, but he did not have seizures. A computed tomography scan of the head showed slight dilation of lateral ventricles and basal cisterns without evidence of calcifications. Electroencephalographic evaluation showed a cerebral pattern with little organization and subcortical paroxysms.
In an eye examination, he did not fix on or follow objects and he was unable to perform the Snellen visual acuity test. He did not have any relative afferent pupillary defect, ocular misalignment or abnormalities in the slit-lamp examination. Significant blepharitis was observed in both eyes. His pupils were isochoric and, in an eye fundus examination, peripapillary retinal atrophy was observed. There was abnormality of the peripheral retinal pigment epithelium, typical of chorioretinopathy, with poorly defined borders and little perilesional pigmentation, along with a minor juxtapapillary lesion occupying the macula and multiple clumps of pigment spread across the retina . Ophthalmological assessments on his parents and sister were normal.
The radiological investigation showed microcephaly and bilateral hip dislocation. High resolution GTG-banded karyotyping was normal (46,XY). He developed chickenpox and died as a result of complications at 11 years of age, and no electroretinography could be performed at that time. No autopsy was performed.