A 35-year-old woman, gravida 4, para 2, was referred to our department with a history of 7-week amenorrhea and a positive pregnancy blood β-hCG assay performed for routine antenatal care. Her obstetric history included a laparoscopic salpingectomy for left tubal pregnancy two years ago.
The patient was completely asymptomatic, with stable hemodynamic parameters. Clinical examination was normal: no vaginal bleeding was found, and no lower abdominal or adnexal pain was perceived at combined vaginal examination along with abdominal palpation. Blood β-hCG assay levels were 29386 mUI/ml and then rose to 45057 mUI/ml three days later, while hemoglobin levels were within the normal limits.
Transvaginal sonography at 7 weeks showed a mass of the right ovary measuring 18 mm. The uterine cavity was free of gestational sac, and no adnexal mass on the left side or fluid in the pouch of Douglas was found.
The clinical, biological, and imaging features thus far led to the suspicion of an ovarian pregnancy, for which a Pfannenstiel laparotomy was performed (lack of laparoscopic equipment). While exploring the pelvic cavity, we found a slightly enlarged and soft uterus with a missing left tube, removed from the isthmus. Both the right adnexa and left ovary were normal with no evidence of lesion or of pelvic adhesion. No fluid was found in the peritoneum. No evidence of ectopic intraperitoneal pregnancy could be found, for which we decided to resume the surgical exploration.
We concluded that the ovary mass was rather a corpus luteum, and there was no pelvic pregnancy.
In the following day, a repeated pelvic ultrasound confirmed the presence of the corpus luteum. Moreover, blood levels of β-hCG continued to rise, reaching 60000 mUI/ml in the third day after surgery.
We were facing the complex situation of an evolutive pregnancy given the β-hCG dynamics, in absence of pelvic pregnancy. We then performed an abdominal ultrasound that revealed a large mass in the left para-aortic region. The mass consisted of a gestational sac with an embryo with positive cardiac activity. We completed with an MRI that showed the gestational sac with the embryo and detailed its tight link with the great vessels alongside .
The patient was then scheduled for an exploratory laparotomy by a multidisciplinary team composed of a gynecologist and an abdominal surgeon. The posterior peritoneum was intact. There was no fluid in the peritoneum and retroperitoneum. The retroperitoneal space was carefully dissected, revealing the oval mass of 6 cm attached to the left side of abdominal aorta that corresponded to a gestational sac with the embryo. The sac was accidentally cracked but could be removed, along with the embryo of 20 mm and its trophoblastic tissue . Minimal blood loss was reported, and hemostasis was ensured by bipolar diathermy.
Histopathology examination revealed the presence of decidual tissue and a normal embryo with gestational sac and chorionic villi.
We decided not to administer systemic methotrexate postoperatively, as removal of the trophoblastic tissue appeared complete. Indeed, levels of blood β-hCG declined steeply postoperatively from 731 mIU/ml at day 1 to 55 mIU/ml at day 7 post surgery, indicating complete removal of trophoblastic tissue.
Postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient left on the 7th day. Blood β-hCG levels were measured weekly and reached the undetectable threshold at the twenty-fifth postoperative day.