A 29-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in July 2014 with liver cancer rupture after intervention over a period of 1 month. She had a treatment history involving L-carnitine drugs proceeded by cesarean section (4 months ago), and no history of hepatitis and hepatocirrhosis. A physical examination revealed the following: the right side of the abdomen was slightly bloated; there was a 10-cm surgical scar on the hypogastrium, and a palpable 5 × 6 cm mass was present in the right upper abdomen; the mass was hard, smooth, and had good texture; and there was no pain when the mass was pressed. Laboratory examination revealed routine hepatic and renal function, and normal levels of serum electrolytes and alpha fetoprotein.
Ultrasound examination of the digestive system demonstrated the following: a heterogeneous hyperechoic mass (15.5 × 9.6 × 14.2 cm) located in the right hepatic lobe; an irregular anechoic area in the mass; a clear boundary; and no obvious blood flow signal in the mass examined using color Doppler flow imaging . A plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a huge abdominal mass below the right segment of the anterior hepatic lobe, an uneven internal density, and high and low mixed density . A dynamic enhanced CT scan of the upper abdomen demonstrated the following: a mixed high- and low-density mass shadow in the right anterior hepatic lobe below segment S5; a clear boundary; a neat outline; significant uneven enhancement; internally, a large area of low-density non-enhanced shadow; multiple enlargement of the surrounding vessels; and a low-density coated edge.
Hepatic arterial enhancement was uneven, but the venous and balance periods strengthened more evenly . A dynamic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the upper abdomen revealed the following: a huge mass in the right anterior hepatic lobe; an uneven internal density; an obvious uneven strengthening; and a visible liquefied necrotic area within the mass . A hepatic adenoma was diagnosed using the imaging data. During surgery, the following was found: the mass was located in the V segment of the liver; its diameter was approximately 10 cm; and the mass exhibited cystic and solid characteristics, and had invaded the gallbladder and part of the hepatic segment VI. Consequently, the patient underwent hepatic V segment excision, partial VI segment excision, and gallbladder excision. Postoperative recovery was good.
Macroscopic examination revealed the following: a liver tissue of size 19 × 14 × 7 cm; the presence of a nodular goiter in the liver after sectioning with an area of 11 × 9 cm; the goiter was grayish red and grayish yellow and had a crisp quality; and there was partial invasion of the local liver capsule.
Microscopic examination revealed the following: the tumor had a high cell density; cells were fusiform or ovoid in shape; in parts of the tumor, the cells were epithelioid; the cytoplasm was weakly acidophilic or bright; small nucleoli and nuclear grooves were visible; mitotic figures were rare; there was a diffuse distribution of tumor cells; the lesion had an obscure boundary; a hemorrhage was present in part of the tumor; necrosis was evident; and a multinucleated giant cell reaction occurred. Liver cell edema associated with mild cholestasis was observed in the surrounding hepatic tissues, together with dilated vessels in the central vein and portal area .
Immunohistochemical analysis of tumor cells indicated the following: HMB-45(+); vimentin(+); smooth muscle actin (SMA)(+); melan-A(+); CK(−); hepatocyte(−); Arg-1(−); GPC-3(−); CK7(−); CK19(−); CK20(−); S-100(−); CD34 blood vessel endothelium(+); and no exact tumor suppository . The pathological diagnosis was a hepatic falciform ligament clear cell myomelanocytic tumor.