A 34-year-old Asian woman presented at our hospital, with a six-year history of persistent right otitis media with effusion. In addition, on presentation, our patient was suffering from tinnitus and a sensation of 'fullness' in her right ear. Our patient underwent unilateral myringotomy through the insertion of a pressure equalization tube, which was kept in place up until a few months ago because the ear symptoms continued to cause our patient problems. Five years previously our patient was operated on at her local hospital for a neoplasm in the right nasopharynx due to a possible choanal polyp; the histological results of the neoplasm could not be obtained. On this occasion, our patient presented to our hospital with right nasal obstruction. Endoscopic examination displayed a well-encapsulated, yellow-colored tumor in the right side of her nasopharynx . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was done, which showed a well-defined, hypodense (relative to the surrounding muscle), non-enhancing lesion involving the right Eustachian tube, measuring 1.6 × 2.4 cm . Examination of our patient revealed a tympanic membrane perforation on the right side, and a T-tube was present in the right tympanic membrane.
The mass was excised under general anesthesia by endoscopy. Good exposure of the tumor was obtained by removal of part of her middle turbinate, and the tumor was subsequently removed completely. The tumor was found to arise from the cartilaginous portion of the Eustachian tube. The excised specimen showed a well-encapsulated, yellow-colored tumor, with a soft consistency and had the gross appearance of adipose tissue. Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of fibrolipoma . Our patient was discharged the day after surgery and received antibiotics for three days.
Two months after this surgery, endoscopic examination showed the nasopharynx with no sign of recurrence of the tumor. The tympanic membrane perforation on the right was healing. Five months later, a contrast-enhanced CT scan showed no residual tumor , and our patient had no tinnitus and no sensation of 'fullness' in her ear.