An eleven month old male child, from northern Morocco, born to unrelated parents was referred to our medical genetics consultation with low level of galactocerebrosidase; molecular analysis was necessary to confirm the diagnosis of Krabbe disease.
The pregnancy had been medically followed, and no complications were reported. Weight at birth was 3300 g; the mother presenting no history of drug ingestion nor phytotherapy. There was no family history of congenital anomalies. The infant was the unique to a 24 years old mother and 41 years old father.
On evaluation, both of parents were found normal. From birth to 4 month, the child had a normal development and normal feeding. From then, his development plateaued and rapidly regressed. Simultaneously, the child presented episodes of fever and pulmonary infection. The parents observed that the infant was very irritable. Medical consultation revealed a generalized hypertonia, increased deep tendon reflexes and arching. Gradually, the patient gradually lost mobility of his members. Since then, he presents a generalized hypotonia. Hearing appeared normal, and vision was lost. This symptomatology prompted the pediatric neurologist to require galactocerebrosidase level. The result revealed a subnormal level 0,3 nmol/mg protein per h, with normal values being > 0.7 nmol/mg protein per h. These findings suggested a molecular analysis of GALC gene. Genomic DNA for the 3 family members was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes with a Qiagen kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (QIAGEN, Germany). The quality and quantity of the DNA were checked by A260/A280 using a Nanodrop spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies).
The clinical data collection and genomic analysis was approved by the institutional ethics committee, and the two parents provided their written informed consent.
The general condition of our patient worsened increasingly. A gastrostomy tube was placed due to feeding problems. The child became progressively unable to manage his oral secretions and succumbed to aspiration pneumonia at 14 months of age.