A 35-year-old right-handed male with Type II diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, polysubstance abuse, posttraumatic stress disorder, and bipolar disorder presented to the emergency department (ED) with a 3-week history of progressive headaches, visual decline, and bilateral hand numbness. He admitted to using IV methamphetamines 3 weeks prior and to smoking cannabis nightly as a sleep aid. His vital signs and examination were noted to be normal except for the ED physician’s report that he “would not participate in visual fields examination.” His urine drug screen was positive only for cannabinoids. He underwent noncontrasted computed tomography (CT) as well as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrating no abnormality, and he was subsequently discharged.
The patient represented to the ED 2 ½ weeks later with complaints of worsening headaches and visual loss along with nausea and photophobia. His vital signs were again noted to be normal and he was again noted to be uncooperative with a visual examination. CT on this occasion demonstrated bilateral occipital lobe hypodensities, and subsequent MRI imaging demonstrated bilateral occipital fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) changes with patchy diffusion restriction .
A consensus of the likely diagnosis of PRES was entertained. He was managed with headache control and repletion of mild hypomagnesemia. He was never found to have hypertension or require antihypertensive treatment. He continued to have difficult to control headaches, although he did report marginal subjective improvement in visual acuity. Given uncertainty regarding the etiology of his condition, digital subtraction angiography was performed and demonstrated no evidence of vasculitis or other cerebrovascular pathology. Ophthalmologic evaluation demonstrated no evidence of papilledema and visual acuity of 20/800 bilaterally. He underwent a lumbar puncture (LP) with an opening pressure of 28 cm H2O and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies demonstrating a relative neutrophilia .
On the basis of these results and concern for meningitis, he was empirically started on broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy which was later discontinued. CSF was sent for additional bacterial, viral, fungal, inflammatory, and autoimmune assays. Repeat MRI demonstrated only mild increase in the bilateral occipital lobe FLAIR changes but new extensive leptomeningeal enhancement .
He was started on IV Solumedrol due to concern for the possibility of an inflammatory process, which led to mild improvement in the patient’s headaches but not vision. Subsequent MRI was unchanged. Repeat LP revealed an opening pressure of 50 cm H20 and CSF with a lymphocytic predominance . He was started on acetazolamide and neurosurgery was consulted for intracranial pressure (ICP) management. A right frontal ventriculostomy was placed with an opening pressure of 11 cm H20. The patient never had any significant elevations in ICP and tolerated wean of his ventriculostomy, with eventual removal. All infectious studies were negative as were serum and CSF inflammatory workup. He remained clinically stable and was discharged on a steroid taper.
Two weeks after discharge, his headaches had improved as did his visual acuity to 20/70 on the left and 20/100 on the right. A noncontrasted head CT showed stable occipital hypodensities.
At 4-week follow-up, the patient complained of recurrent headaches and visual decline, nausea, and excessive sleepiness. His visual acuity was noted to stable at 20/70 on the left and improved at 20/50 on the right. Contrasted MRI that had been ordered as part of the routine follow-up demonstrated stable occipital FLAIR changes with residual occipital and cerebellar leptomeningeal enhancement, but more strikingly, the development of extensive tiny bilateral cerebellar enhancing lesions associated with edema, fourth ventricular compression, and early obstructive hydrocephalus .
He was admitted and underwent placement of a right frontal ventriculostomy with an opening pressure of 6 cm H2O and a xanthochromic appearance to the CSF . CSF drainage at 5 cm H2O was initiated and he was started on IV dexamethasone. The neurology and infectious diseases teams were consulted and CSF studies were sent for analysis. Given the cryptogenic posterior fossa lesions, the patient underwent transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) with a bubble study that did not reveal any septal defect or valvular pathology. The patient remained clinically stable, and repeat MRI was roughly stable. Laboratory workup remained unrevealing. Therefore, the patient underwent a suboccipital craniotomy for cerebellar and meningeal biopsy to establish a definitive diagnosis. Subsequent clinical course was unremarkable, and he eventually underwent placement of a right frontal ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Subsequent MRI confirmed adequate shunting of the ventricular system with no other changes. He was eventually discharged on a steroid taper.
Final pathology from the posterior fossa biopsy revealed multiple elongated, diamond-shaped, avidly polarizable crystals in both the leptomeninges and cerebellar cortex [ and ]. There was no evidence of ischemia, vasculitis, infection, necrosis, or other findings to suggest an inflammatory or neoplastic process.
MRI imaging 2 months after biopsy demonstrated significant improvement in occipital FLAIR changes and cerebellar enhancing lesions/edema. At last follow-up 2 years after his initial presentation, he had ongoing headaches and visual difficulties and imaging demonstrating residual bilateral occipital cortical encephalomalacia with resolution of the enhancement and edema .