A 29-year-old woman had been diagnosed with SLE according to the American College of Rheumatology criteria 6 years earlier due to malar rash, photosensitivity, arthritis of the finger joints, wrists and knees, pleural effusion and abnormal titers of the antinuclear and antinative DNA antibodies. Treatment consisted of prednisone as needed and hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/day). Five years after the initial diagnosis, the patient developed exertional dyspnea. Severe PAH was diagnosed by echocardiography and confirmed by pulmonary arterial catheterization (PAC) .
Oral anticoagulation with phenprocoumon and treatment with bosentan (125 mg bid) and sildenafil (50 mg tid) was initiated. Cyclophosphamide (100 mg qd) was added to the SLE therapy for 4 months and thereafter replaced by azathioprine (100 mg qd). The patient's clinical status improved significantly and repeated PAC 3 months later showed a significant decrease in mean pulmonary arterial pressure (MPAP) with a concomitant increase in cardiac index (CI) resulting in a decreased pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) . Echocardiography performed after a further 8 months under a stable clinical condition showed completely normalized right heart dimensions and pulmonary arterial pressure. One week later, pregnancy at the 5th week of gestation was diagnosed, despite repeated advice to practice birth control and insistent information about the maternal and fetal risks of pregnancy in SLE-associated PAH as well as the teratogenic potential of bosentan and phenprocoumon. Since a termination of the pregnancy was out of the question for the patient, bosentan and phenprocoumon were immediately stopped and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) was started. Sildenafil, azathioprine, and hydroxychloroquine were left unchanged whereas prednisone was augmented to 25 mg daily to prevent SLE relapse. The patient was followed fortnightly by an interdisciplinary team and repeated clinical and echocardiographic examinations remained stable until the 35th week of gestation. Intrauterine fetal growth assessed sonographically was normal at all times.
At 35 weeks however, echocardiography showed an elevated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 40 mmHg above the right atrial pressure. The patient was hospitalized and treatment with inhaled iloprost was established 5 to 6 times daily at an initial daily dose of 50 μg, increasing to 100 μg within 1 week. A caesarean section was scheduled for week 37. Hemodynamic assessment with PAC before the operation showed a MPAP between 20 and 26 mmHg with a CI around 4-5 L/min/m2. A healthy female infant weighing 2760 g with Apgar scores of 8, 9 and 10 at 1, 5 and 10 minutes, respectively, was delivered via caesarean section under epidural anesthesia. The patient remained stable throughout the operation. The PAC was continued during 24 hours postoperatively showing stable pulmonary hemodynamics. Prednisone was augmented to 50 mg qd on the day of delivery and then continued at a dose of 30 mg qd for the next 2 months to prevent postpartal relapse of SLE. Mother and child were discharged 10 days later under stable conditions. Breast-feeding was declined. Sildenafil, inhaled iloprost, azathioprine and hydroxychloroquine were continued, LMWH was replaced by phenprocoumon. Eleven weeks later, progressive dyspnea and fatigue developed and a relapse of SLE was diagnosed with reappearance of tender swollen joints in the fingers, wrists and knees, malar rash and pleuropericardial effusion. Echocardiography showed a rise in RVSP to 57 mmHg. Prednisone and azathioprine were augmented to 50 mg qd and 150 mg qd, respectively, and bosentan 125 mg bid was added to the established therapy. The patient remains in a stable condition and her daughter is thriving well.