A 70-year-old male patient suffered direct trauma resulting in a compound fracture of the tibia and fibula of the left leg. He was treated with an external fixator for four months followed by plaster cast immobilization for three weeks. After removal of the cast, he presented edema and was referred for physiotherapy where he performed five sessions of manual lymph drainage and six sessions of hydrotherapy without resolving the condition. The patient presented with fever and paresthesia of the left leg. A physical examination identified interdigital mycosis between the toes of the left foot, and the medical diagnosis was erysipelas.
After treating erysipelas, the patient presented hypersensitivity, pain, and worsening of the edema. The patient was referred for clinical treatment. The method proposed included manual lymph drainage (Godoy and Godoy technique) [, ], the technique using linear movements which manually displace the lymph along the anatomic path of the lymphatic vessels. The Godoy and Godoy technique was developed based on the normal anatomy and on physiology and pathophysiological processes and adapted for each type of lymphedema and obeys the concepts of the hydrodynamic principles needed to drain collectors, and a mechanical lymph drainage (RAGodoy device), an apparatus that performs plantar flexion and dorsiflexion exercises, was utilized to dynamically evaluate venous pressure variations during passive exercising, for two hours per day for ten consecutive days [, ]. Water displacement volumetry was used to quantify the leg size reduction. Before starting treatment, the difference between the edematous leg and the contralateral limb was 567 mL.
After the first session, the patient had less hypersensitivity with the pain improving. Treatment reduced the affected leg by about 497 mL, that is, 87% of the excess volume. Moreover, there was a reduction of 129 mL of the normal leg volume. The initial (pretreatment) and final (after ten treatment sessions) volumes of both legs are shown in and . This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of FAMERP (#20445-11/05/2012).