A seven-year-old boy presented with marked generalized hypopigmentation, reduced visual acuity, photophobia, and nystagmus . He had always bruised easily but superficially with minor trauma, without history of internal organ bleeding . His parents were unrelated, and he had an unaffected brother and sister. Best corrected monocular visual acuity was 20/200 in both eyes. Due to presence of nystagmus, monocular vision was measured by fogging the fellow eye with +6 D overcorrection. Binocular visual acuity was 20/160 when he maintained fusion. Refraction was +10.00-4.00×10° in the right and +9.00-4.00×160° in the left eye. He had obvious horizontal jerk nystagmus and 50 prism diopters (PD) of intermittent exotropia. His green irides were markedly transilluminable , both fundi were hypopigmented and foveal hypoplasia was evident. The patient was found to have a platelet storage-pool defect together with prolonged bleeding time and abnormal platelet aggregation studies. His bleeding time was prolonged, however prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and platelet counts were normal. There was severe platelet release defect with low ADP and increased ATP/ADP ratio. A classic method of platelet aggregometry was performed. In this method, a panel of platelet agonists (collagen, ADP, and ristocetin) at a range of concentrations, triggers platelet activation and is used to detect storage-pool and secretion defects. Von Willebrand factor (vWF) activity was 76%, vWF antigen was 68%, and factor VIII activity was 55% (all values within normal limits). Tyrosinase activity was not measured.
The patient underwent strabismus surgery considering precautions such as reserving platelet concentrates in case of a hemorrhagic event. A 10 mm recession of both lateral recti was performed. Exotropia was reduced to 35 PD postoperatively. Three months later, a 6 mm resection of both medial rectus muscles was performed. After the second operation, the eyes became nearly orthophoric . Visual acuity increased to 20/120 and nystagmus was decreased subjectively and objectively. Although intraoperative conjunctival bleeding was more than usual, platelet transfusion was not required. After 18 months, the eyes were nearly orthophoric and the patient was happy with the results.