A healthy 8year old male child presented with a history of a gradually increasing swelling around the right shoulder joint since 2 months. It had been painful right from the beginning and associated with mild restriction of movements. He denied any history of trauma or any other systemic complaints. The swelling progressed in size over next month. On examination there was a tender swelling on the proximal anteromedial aspect of shoulder. The swelling was not fixed to underlying bone and overlying skin. The mobility of swelling was less in longitudinal direction. Abduction and forward flexion of the shoulder were painfully restricted.
Radiological examination revealed multiple well defined swellings on anteromedial aspect of proximal humerus with calcified wall. One of the swelling was approximately 2cm X 2cm. This picture was suggestive of calcified hydatid cyst or chondrocalcinosis. Total blood count was 12000 with predominance of leucocytes with normal eosinophilic count. Ultrasound of abdomen and chest showed no evidence of hydatid cyst. Ultrasound guided aspiration of the large swelling was suggestive of inflammation with no evidence of infection.
MRI showed well defined lesion with calcific wall with multiple loose bodies. These swelling were arising from biceps tendon sheath. MRI reported normal articular cartilage of glenohumeral articulation without any loose bodies inside the joint. Radiologist opined in favor of a synovial chondromatosis and gave a differential diagnosis of calcified hydatid cyst. There is only one reported case of extra articular synovial chondromatosis in subacromial bursa around shoulder.
Considering patients symptoms we decided to excise the swelling. Under general anaesthesia the lesion was approached through delto pectoral approach. The proximal part of pectoralis major insertion was released to expose the swelling. Well defined swelling was arising from biceps tendon sheath, with multiple other small lesions. No communication was seen to shoulder joint. All the swellings were excised. To ensure complete excision intra operative image intensifier was used. Child reported complete resolution of pain at three week after the surgery.
Histopathology revealed circumscribed lobulated nodules of osteocartilaginous tissue with the stroma consisting of cellular fibroblastic tissue. Some fragments were covered with synovial tissue. There was no evidence of infection or malignancy in the specimen, and this was consistent with the appearance of synovial chondromatosis.
The child was symptom free at 1 year after the surgery. There was no pain and limitation of motion then.