A 16-year-old boy presented at our hospital with sudden-onset general headache and vomiting which had lasted for 2 days. His headache was aggravated in the orthostatic position and relieved in the recumbent position. Neurological examination was uninformative. The patient stated that he had had no recent head trauma. He had been diagnosed with an arachnoid cyst (AC) in his right middle cranial fossa at 6 years of age, without any comorbidities. Computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral subdural effusions and slit-like lateral ventricles with no significant changes to the AC . In addition to the CT findings, MRI showed obliteration of the prepontine cistern with flattening of the pons against the clivus and descent of the cerebellar tonsils, suggesting brain sagging. After intravenous hydration followed by 2 days´ bed rest, his symptoms abated. Based on the clinical course, he was retrospectively diagnosed as having suffered spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypovolemia. One month later, the patient again experienced recurrent headache and vomiting. This time, the headache was significantly on the right and had been gradual in onset. The neurological examination was still unremarkable but repeat CT after another month revealed a hyperdense right subdural hematoma (SDH) and a hyperdense change in the AC with obvious compression of the right lateral ventricle and evident midline shift to the left . MRI showed the presence of the outer membrane of the AC between the AC and the SDH. The size of the AC was unchanged. His blood count and coagulation markers were normal. He was diagnosed as having chronic right side SDH with intracystic hemorrhage, which resulted in the elevation of intracranial pressure (ICP). An urgent hematoma evacuation was performed under local anesthesia by burr-hole irrigation surgery. Postoperative CT confirmed complete evacuation of the SDH and the patient became symptom-free immediately after surgery. Postoperative follow-up CT 3 months after surgery showed no change in the volume of the AC and no recurrence of SDH. The lateral ventricles and subdural space were again normal in size .