A healthy 33-year-old man arrived at the emergency department complaining of fever and scrotal pain, 3 days after para-anal abscess drainage. Physical findings included scrotal and perianal swelling, ischemic skin and crepitus over distal scrotum. Rapid progression to septic shock required hemodynamic support and ventilation and allowed diagnosis of Fournier’s gangrene.
Urgent aggressive debridement on day 0 had to be repeated several times due to shock persistence and multiple organ failure. The consequent defect corresponded to 12% of the body surface and involved most of the perineal area including the base of the penis . Orchiectomy of a necrotic testis was performed and a diverting colostomy prevented wound contamination.
Streptococcus pyogenes was the main bacteria isolated from the wound. The histologic examination diagnosed necrotizing dermohypodermitis and vascular thrombi characterizing necrotizing fasciitis.
Negative pressure dressings were applied on day 6 and changed regularly to prepare the wound bed for grafting. The abdominal and perineal defects were then covered by meshed split skin grafts in 2 steps and vacuum-assisted closure (VAC®) was used for dressing .
Overall graft take was 90%. Neither hypertrophic nor retractile scar was detected during follow-up .
Complete anodermal destruction resulted in anal stenosis. Anoplasty by cutaneous advancement flap in the grafted area was successfully carried out 18 months later.
The patient suffered from testicular pain when sitting because the remaining grafted testis was fixed over the perineum. Neoscrotal plasty was therefore performed 2 years later with local skin flaps in the grafted skin region.
One of the main concerns of this young man was persistent penile lymphedema, skin excess and altered sensitivity over the distal penile shaft, which affected his sex life . After unsuccessful conservative treatment for 2 years we performed a circumcision with a large excision of skin excess along with resection of the underlying subcutaneous edematous tissue. However, lymphedema persisted in the remaining distal penile shaft and the patient was very demanding for additional correction despite the risks of worsening the hypoesthesia. Therefore, in a second step, we undertook a “penile lift,” consisting of a circumferential incision around the coronal sulcus and a ventral incision through the median raphe. The skin was lifted, degloving the penile shaft to 3 centimeters from the skin graft located at the base. This proximal bridge of penile skin adjacent to the skin graft was not edematous and did not need subdermal excision; it therefore provided the vascular supply for the cutaneous flap. Radical subcutaneous excision removed all fibrotic and edematous tissue lying above Buck’s fascia. The dermocutaneous flap was pulled down over the penile body, and the distal skin excess was excised . The flap edges looked well vascularized. At the same time, we performed a partial scar removal by abdominal and crural lift to reduce the grafted surface.
Sensitivity of the penile shaft remained diminished but glans sensitivity was normal and no recurrence of lymphedema was observed. The patient now has normal mobility. He is very satisfied with the outcome and has returned to a normal professional, social, and sexual life .