A 50-year-old male who had no significant past medical history was noted to have progressive weakness of his lower extremities over a 2-week period. He had numbness starting in his mid-abdominal area and radiating down both legs to the top of both feet. He had no lower back or thoracic pain and no urinary or bowel incontinence. There was normal strength in the upper and lower extremities with no difficulty walking on heels and toes; however, he had difficulty in standing from a squat position. Sensory examination revealed decreased pin-prick and temperature sensation from just below the umbilicus down into the feet. There were normal deep tendon reflexes for his upper and lower extremities except for hyper-reflexia of the right knee. He also had bilaterally down-going toes with no clonus.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine revealed a well-circumscribed isotense T1/bright T2 homogeneously enhancing intradural, extramedullary mass centered at the T5–6 level eccentric to the right [Figure and ]. A dural tail appeared posteriorly with the displacement of the cord to the left, with approximately 80% canal compromise. A portion of this mass in the form of a dumbbell shape extended through the right T5–6 neural foramen , which was otherwise normal in dimension. MRI of the brain, cervical, and lumbar spine was normal.
The patient underwent laminectomy at T4–T6. An extradural component of the tumor was seen on the right T5–6 foramen . Opening the dura showed an intradural and extramedullary mass with a clearly identifiable cleavage caudal and cephalad of the tumor without attachment to the dura . The tumor was easily removed off the spinal cord except for the central portion that was attached to the pia and vasculature of the spinal cord, but did not invade the spinal cord. By microdissection, the entire tumor was removed. The tumor extended through the right T5–6 foramen and was easily dissected off the nerve root.
Sections of the tumor microscopically showed a moderately cellular ependymoma characterized by perivascular pseudorosette formation evidenced by round to irregular nuclei with fibrillar processes extending to and surrounding a central blood vessel. Mild nuclear pleomorphism with a mitotic activity was identified. Focal endothelial proliferation and a few foci of necrosis were seen. Several areas of the ependymoma displayed tanycytic features in which the cells were arranged in fascicles of variable density.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed a strong diffuse immunoreactivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), strong membrane immunoreactivity for CD56, and strong nuclear and cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for S100. The perinuclear dot-like immunoreactivity for the epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) was equivocal as the patchy staining noted was not of a greater intensity as that seen on the negative control study. The neoplastic cells were nonreactive for CD34 and neurofilament. The Ki-67 labeling index was variable with foci of the greatest labeling estimated at 5–15%. The final pathologic diagnosis was an anaplastic ependymoma, WHO grade 3.
Following surgery, the patient received external beam radiation between T3 and T8 with a total dose of 5000 cGy delivered using a three-field arrangement with daily doses of 200 cGy. The patient with 6-month follow-up had no recurrent tumor with normal MRI of the brain, cervical, and lumbar spine. He was neurologically intact except for poor proprioception in lower extremities which was unchanged from the time before initiation of surgery.