A 23-year-old woman, who had been a known case of XP since her childhood, was admitted to our hospital for excision of face mass and skin graft surgery. The pathology test of the lesion showed squamous cell carcinoma. Her airway examination revealed some anatomical and pathological abnormalities. The stiffness of her neck and jaw caused decreased motion and limited head extension and jaw protrusion. Her mouth opening was limited to < 20 mm; through this opening two relatively large upper incisor teeth were observed. Pharyngeal examination revealed score 4 mallampati. Also, we found Pectuscarinatum in her chest, a multiple erotic keratotic lesion and a deformity in her nose, and keratoconjunctivitis and corneal opacity in her eyes. All these findings predicted difficult intubation .
She had a short stature and weight of 28 Kg (BMI = 19), cachectic appearance with some deformities in the extremities. A neurological examination showed a minor decline in intelligence quotient (IQ). She was calm and cooperative but not completely oriented to time and space, with some decreased muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes. Her cardiovascular examination and paraclinical evaluation results were within the normal limit. General anesthesia was planned for the surgery. The patient was admitted to the operating room without any premedication to avoid unwanted sedation. All of the patient’s body was covered to protect it from UV and artificial lights in the operating room. We established standard monitoring including: pulse oximetry (SpO2), capnography (end tidal CO2), precordial cardioscopy and non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP). A peripheral venous on the arm was cannulated with a 22 G catheter. Once the preparations of anesthesia and surgery teams and the availability of difficult intubation equipment were ensured, the patient was cautiously pre-medicated intravenously with 25 µg of titrated fentanyl and 0.5 mg midazolam, to maintain spontaneous breathing. Then, general anesthesia was induced with inhalation of sevoflurane (manufactured by Aesica Queen borough, UK) 2.5% to 5% without using a neuromuscular agent while maintaining spontaneous breathing. After elimination of reflexes and reaching enough depth of anesthesia by bispectral index (BIS) count of about 55, an appropriate laryngeal mask (number 2.5) was inserted and floated; fixed when good lung ventilation was ensured. The surgeon infiltrated 5 ml of 2% lidocaine around the surgery site before starting the surgery. Anesthesia was maintained by 2% sevoflurane with a 50:50 mixture of oxygen and air. The procedure lasted 110 minutes without any complications. The patient’s non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP) reading was between 125 and 98 as maxima, and 81 and 6 mmHg as minima; her heart rate was between 75 and 105 beats/minute, her SpO2 ranged from 97% to 100%, and her ETCO2 was between 33 and 37 mmHg. The surgery was completed uneventfully. After 10 minutes, when the patient was awake and obeyed to open her eyes, she was extubated. Postoperative analgesia was assured by bupivacaine infiltration around the wound at the end of the surgery and prescription of acetaminophen (as 325 mg-suppository) every four hours. The patient was discharged from the hospital one day after the surgery without any new complaints.