A 23-year-old postpartum woman was referred to our emergency department (ED) due to right-eye sudden blindness after receiving poly-D, L-lactic acid (PDLLA) subdermal filler (AestheFill; REGEN Biotech, Inc., Seoul, South Korea) injection at a clinic. She had a smooth pregnancy period and delivered the baby successfully 2 months ago. She never had blurred vision before. After injection of the PDLLA subdermal filler at the glabella, she had burning sensation on the right forehead away from the injection site, followed by right-eye vision loss within just a few seconds. She also felt dizzy and vomited several times after injection. She was sent to the ED of another medical center and then referred to our hospital.
During physical examination, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) with Snellen chart was only seeing hand motion at 30 cm of the right eye and 1.0 of the left eye. The patient also had relative afferent pupillary defect of the right eye. There was no corneal edema, ophthalmoplegia, ptosis or any strabismus of the right eye. There were few pinhole scars on the glabella and medial side above and beneath the right eyebrow. No skin necrosis was seen .
The brain and orbital computed tomography scan were performed and the results were within normal limits. The complete blood count, electrolytes, and coagulation profiles were all unremarkable. Fundus photographs showed nasal upper branch retinal artery occlusion and temporal artery occlusion due to multiple filler embolus. Sectoral retinal whitening surrounding the occluded arteries was noted .
Optical coherence tomography images showed increased reflectivity and thickness of the inner retina and a corresponding decrease of reflectivity in the outer layer of the retina and retinal pigment epithelium/choriocapillaris layer . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed delayed vascular filling with late-phase multiple leakages and multiple occluded arterioles with terminal non-perfusion .
At ED, we laid the patient in the supine position and lowered her intraocular pressure using topical Brimonidine tartrate 0.2%/Timolol maleate 0.5% (Combigan, Allergan Inc.) and 5-min ocular massage (repeated pressure applied to the globe for 10–15 s, followed by sudden release). Steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 500 mg four times a day for 3 days) and infusion of heparin and alprostadil were given soon after retinal artery occlusion was confirmed. The next day, her right-eye vision got mild improvement, and her BCVA improved to 0.05. We also arranged hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) 5 days later, with a total of 40 HBOT sessions administered in the following two months. After two months, her fundus showed no more retina whitening but vessel sheathing and focal atrophy . OCT showed inner retina atrophy and ellipsoid zone disruption . But surprisingly, her right-eye BCVA improved to 0.3. Improvement of central scotoma was also confirmed by visual field examinations .