A 90-year-old woman with a medical history of atrial fibrillation, transient ischaemic attack, hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and chronic renal dysfunction after nephrectomy was referred to our clinic with Class II heart failure symptoms due to severe aortic stenosis. She used a vitamin K antagonist for atrial fibrillation (CHA2DS2-VASc Score 7). On physical examination, a crescendo–decrescendo grade 3/6 systolic murmur was heard parasternal in the second right intercostal space with radiation to the carotid arteries. Coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis, and her transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed good left ventricular function with severe aortic stenosis (peak gradient 92 mmHg, mean gradient 60 mmHg, valve area of 0.42 cm2). Multislice cardiac computed tomography (MSCT) showed an aortic valve annulus of 22.9 × 26.5 mm, area of 480 mm2, and perimeter of 77 mm. Therefore, a 29 mm of Medtronic CoreValve prosthesis was chosen. Based on her age and an increased operative risk demonstrated by a logistic EuroSCORE-II of 3.74%, our multidisciplinary valve team decided to treat the patient with TAVI.
We performed the TAVI with the self-expandable CoreValve according to standard practice, with pre-dilation with a balloon of 25 mm. The final angiography showed only mild regurgitation and an implantation depth of 12.9 mm on non-coronary cusp and 13.2 mm on coronary cusp side. No post-dilation was performed. The procedure was complicated by a peri-procedural complete atrioventricular (AV) block, for which a permanent DDDR pacemaker was implanted after 3 days. One week post-TAVI, the patient was discharged in a clinically good condition. TTE at discharged showed a trace of PAR.
However, 12 days post-TAVI, the patient presented to our emergency department with dyspnoea and oedema in the legs caused by acute left- and right-sided heart failure. On examination, a harsh holosystolic grade 3/6 murmur was heard along the sternal border and on the apex.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) and TTE showed a mild to moderate PAR near the non-coronary cusp, and a VSD of 1 cm, just under the pericardial skirt of the CoreValve stent, with a flow from the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) to the right ventricular outflow tract [Vmax 4 m/s, diastolic vena contracta (VC) width 5 mm], and systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 44 mmHg. The rupture did not extend to the aortic root or to the right atrium . Retrospectively, on echocardiography 4 days after TAVI a small left to right shunt was already visible.
During admission, the patient was haemodynamically and respiratory stable. However, kidney function and diuresis were deteriorating by left-sided heart failure. Since conservative treatment would mean a low chance of survival, decision was made to close the VSD and the PAR with a transcatheter closure device.
Ventricular septal defect and PAR closure was performed under general anaesthesia through the right femoral artery. At the start of the procedure, TOE showed an increased VSD flow (Vmax 2.9 m/s, diastolic VC width 5 mm) and increased moderate PAR, compared to the previous TOE 2 days earlier . Angiography showed a significant flow from the right coronary sinus to the right ventricle .
At first, a 5 French catheter of Cordis JR was used to pass the VSD from the aortic side with a 35 softwire. The wire was advanced to the left pulmonary artery where it was snared. A loop was created by pulling back the softwire to the femoral vein. At second, the VSD was sized at 9 mm with a 20 mm PTS® sizing balloon. Subsequently, a 10-mm Amplatzer® atrial septal occluder (ASO) was positioned through the VSD by the use of an Amplatzer® patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) ductus delivery catheter of 6 French. The disc was on the left ventricle side located half inside the LVOT-part of the CoreValve and half on the muscular intraventricular septum and on the right ventricular side just above the tricuspid valve.
After ASO implantation, angiography showed a further increase of regurgitation through the paravalvular opening at the right coronary sinus and through the struts of the ASO to the right ventricle. To address the regurgitation, an Amplatzer vascular plug II was placed: a 6 French long-sheath braided of Cook was used to approach the valve from the aortic side. The CoreValve stent was passed through the stent struts just above the valve. Next the paravalvular opening was passed with a PT2 0.014″ 300 cm wire over which a Cordis Adroit MP1 of 5 French followed by a Cook CXI 4 French support catheter of 125 cm were advanced into the right ventricle using the telescope technique. An Amplatzer vascular plug II of 8 mm was placed in the paravalvular regurgitation trajectory from the VSD to the right coronary sinus. The final angiography showed no obstruction of the right coronary artery and only trace regurgitation through the vascular plug and septal occluder . TOE showed a good position of the ASO and a marked reduction of both systolic and diastolic flow through the VSD, with a systolic VC width of 3 mm , without a sign of LVOT obstruction.
After the procedure, the patient was immediately asymptomatic and kidney function and diuresis improved within a few days. Four days after the procedure, TTE showed no PAR and a further decrease of the VSD flow (Vmax 3.7–4.4 m/s) and lower systolic pulmonary artery pressures (28 mmHg) . The following morning, the patient could be discharged without any symptoms.
Seven days after discharge, patient presented to our emergency department with severe fatigue and possible melena. She appeared to have a severe anaemia with an Hb level of 3.5 mmol/L (reference value 7.4–9.6 mmol/L), LD 2563 U/L (reference value 0–250 U/L), and haptoglobin <0.05 g/L (reference value 0.3–2 g/L). Prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR) was 4.42 (reference value 0.9–1.15). TOE showed mild PAR through the Amplatzer device and a mild left to right shunt, both through and past the ASO (Vmax > 4 m/s), and normal left ventricle function. Working diagnosis for the cause of anaemia was haemolysis due to the high-velocity blood flow through the devices. Gastrointestinal causes were excluded, since gastrointestinal endoscopy showed no abnormalities. After six units red cell transfusion, patient was discharged with oral iron suppletion. The following weeks, she received red cell transfusions in outpatient setting twice (first time 3 units, second time 8 units). Furthermore, darbepoetin alfa was started and the phenprocoumon was stopped completely. Cessation of anticoagulation does not improve endothelialization, and therefore not directly influences haemolytic anaemia in a positive way. However, we still decided to interrupt the anticoagulation use in order to minimize other possible contributing factors to a worsening of the anaemia. One year after the complicated TAVI procedure, patient is doing well, living at home without the need of red cell transfusions, and without any antiplatelet/anticoagulant treatment or embolization problems. The mild PAR and mild left to right shunt across the VSD has remained stable, without any haemodynamic or clinical consequences or haemolysis.