A 49-year-old right-handed woman presented with left-sided headache, double vision, and left-sided facial numbness. She was found to have a multiloculated lesion appearing to originate from the region of the left orbital apex measuring 3 cm × 2.5 cm × 1.7 cm with signal intensity consistent with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) likely representing an arachnoid cyst. The lesion displaced the optic chiasm to the right. The left optic nerve was also displaced along with the internal carotid artery and middle cerebral artery . She underwent a left pterional craniotomy for broad cyst fenestration/resection without complications. Postoperatively, she reported total resolution of her symptoms. Postoperative imaging indicated complete resolution of her cyst . Three years later, she developed recurrence of her presenting symptoms. Follow-up imaging indicated that the cyst had recurred . She subsequently underwent a second craniotomy, cyst fenestration, and placement of a left cystoperitoneal shunt. Postoperatively, she suffered from a new tremor and underwent electroencephalogram (EEG) testing. Although no seizures were noted, the neurologist recommended treating her with Keppra. Her postoperative imaging confirmed resolution of the cyst . Although her headache and visual symptoms had improved, she began to suffer from new symptoms including staring spells, severe expressive aphasia, and right upper extremity tremor that she did not have preoperatively. Neuropsychological evaluation revealed difficulty with expressive language, cognitive flexibility, bilateral manual dexterity, psychomotor slowing, attention, and depression symptoms. She returned to the neurosurgery clinic 2 weeks after surgery and found to have a new left-sided pseudomeningocele. Her adjustable shunt valve was programed to the lowest setting. She returned to clinic 1 month later without change in her symptoms, imaging, or pseudomeningocele. A radiotracer shunt evaluation was performed which demonstrated proximal and distal shunt patency. She was taken back to the operative theater for dural repair and for conversion of her shunt to a valveless system. The shunt was evaluated during surgery, demonstrating complete proximal patency and proper distal drainage proximal to the valve. Postoperatively, her symptoms of aphasia, facial pain, and tremor were completely resolved. Follow-up formal neuropsychological testing indicated significant improvements in expressive speech, verbal fluency, psychomotor speed, bilateral fine motor speed, and mood. Relative to estimated premorbid function, she had continued mild difficulty with memory and verbal fluency. At her 9-month follow-up, she is almost asymptomatic.