A 24-year-old woman presented to our hospital with pain in her knee. At the age of seven, she developed nephrotic syndrome and was diagnosed with primary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) by renal biopsy . Nephrotic syndrome gradually worsened without symptoms such as edema. She was administered corticosteroids from the age of 18 years, but did not respond to this therapy. Cyclosporine was then administered, but was discontinued within one week due to the adverse effect of fatigue. Corticosteroids were tapered with proteinuria of 4 to 6 g per 24 hours.
When she presented to our hospital, she had poorly developed nails and small corneas. Intraocular pressure was normal. She gradually developed pain in her knee over 12 months. X-ray and computed tomography were performed to systemically evaluate the orthopedic morphology, and revealed hypoplastic patellas, dislocation of the elbows, and iliac horns in the pelvis . Laboratory data showed hypoalbuminemia and the excretion of a large amount of protein in the urine, indicating nephrotic syndrome with renal insufficiency. Other serological results revealed that the secondary causes of nephrotic syndrome such as autoimmune disease, hematological diseases, or infection were negative . Her clinical course of SRNS and orthopedic manifestations indicated NPS; therefore, we performed a genetic analysis, which showed a heterozygous mutation in the first base of the fifth intron of the LMX1B gene (c.819 + 1G > A) . Since this mutation was not detected in her parents, our case was considered to have a de novo mutation.
In a review of renal biopsy at the age of 7, light microscopy revealed focal glomerular lesions only . Immunofluorescence showed slightly positive staining for IgM and C3 within glomerular segmental lesions . Electron microscopy displayed mild irregular thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and swollen podocytes with partial foot process effacement, whereas distinctive lesions such as electron-lucent areas within the GBM were not detected . Although we were unable to perform renal biopsy again because of renal atrophy (parenchymal thinning, an indistinct corticomedullary junction, and longitudinal length of 9 cm by ultrasonography), nephropathy in this case was considered to be associated with NPS. Therefore, we discontinued corticosteroids gradually without the exacerbation of nephrotic syndrome.