The patient was a 39-year-old pregnant Iranian woman, G4P3L3 (gravidity 4, parity 3, live births 3), who presented to the emergency department of a specialized women’s and neonatal hospital with spotting and abdominal pain at the 6th week of gestation based on the reported last menstrual period (LMP). In her obstetrician history, she had three pregnancies delivered by natural vaginal delivery (NVD) at term without any complications. She had a history of contraceptive IUD use for the last 3 years, which was removed 2 months before the current admission due to spotting. The patient did not mention any other symptoms. Her past medical history, drug history, and family history were otherwise unremarkable. The patient mentioned no history of smoking or drinking alcohol.
On physical examination, her vital signs were in normal ranges. Her abdomen was firm, without tenderness, rebound tenderness, guarding, or rigidity. Otherwise, her physical examination was unremarkable. Her notable laboratory finding was β-human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) > 15,000, which indicates definite pregnancy. Transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) showed no evidence of intrauterine pregnancy, but a well-circumscribed gestational sac in the left ovary with crown–rump length (CRL) of 55 mm, compatible with a gestational age of 12 weeks and 1 day and visible fetal heart rate (FHR) of the fetus, highly suggestive of left ovarian ectopic pregnancy . TVS also revealed mild pelvic free fluid.
The patient was diagnosed with OEP and underwent laparotomy surgery, which revealed a gestational sac in the left ovary with visible FHR and about 100 mL of blood, which was evacuated. The gestational sac was surgically removed, and a partial left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. Concerning the patient's gravidity and age, the patient's left fallopian tube was completely resected for ovarian cancer prophylaxis . We resected the left ovary partially to remove the gestational sac, which was entirely in the left ovary. A live fetus was in the gestational sac at 12 weeks gestational age . Her post-op β-HCG level was 1901. She was discharged in a stable condition 2 days postoperatively. The histopathological examination of the samples confirmed the diagnosis of OEP . In the histopathological examination, the tube was intact and clearly separated from the ovary. In addition, ovarian tissue was present in the sack wall . The patient was followed for 1 month; β-HCG decreased gradually, with no complications in this period.