A 44-year-old Hispanic man was diagnosed in October 2006 with a primary mediastinal seminoma complicated by superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome. He was started on a first-line systemic therapy of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin (BEP). Bleomycin (30 units) was administered on days 2, 9 and 16; etoposide (100 mg/m2 intravenously) on days 1 to 5; and cisplatin (20 mg/m2 intravenously) on days 1 to 5 every three weeks for a total of four cycles. The total cumulative bleomycin dosage was 360 units with the last dose of bleomycin administered on 29 December 2006. Following chemotherapy, the patient achieved a complete response to treatment with resolution of the SVC syndrome. His anterior mediastinal mass decreased substantially in size, with a complete normalization of the standardized uptake value (SUV) by computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET); his beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) level decreased from 5452 to an undetectable level; and his alpha fetoprotein (AFP) level remained within the normal range. He tolerated the chemotherapy without any adverse side effects.
Three months after the treatment, he presented at the emergency department at Stony Brook University Medical Center, having suffered from progressive shortness of breath for three days but without any other obvious precipitating factors. He was not on any medication and he did not have any gastrointestinal symptoms. Physical examination revealed tachycardia, tachypnea, hypoxia and decreased breath sounds with fine crackles bilaterally. Chest X-ray showed a right lower lobe infiltrate. Interestingly, his eosinophil count had increased from a baseline level of 2% to 10%, although his total white blood cell count was within the normal range. Subsequent CT of his chest showed extensive patchy ground-glass opacities in the right upper lobe, middle lobe and left lung without evidence of any pulmonary embolism . He was treated with ceftriaxone and azithromycin empirically for community acquired pneumonia. Because he did not respond to a four-day course of the antibiotic treatment and showed worsening dyspnea, our patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit, and underwent a thoracoscopic right middle lobe wedge biopsy to investigate possible bleomycin-induced lung toxicity. Pathological examination of the lung tissue revealed severe widespread organizing pneumonia with accompanying eosinophil-rich inflammatory infiltrates . Cultures and stains of the tissue showed negative for any infectious agents including Mycobacterium tuberculosis, viral, fungal or Pneumocystis jirovecii infection. There was also no evidence of seminoma recurrence.
Our patient was started on oral prednisone 70 mg daily, and his respiratory status slowly improved over the next few days. Treatment continued with a high-dose prednisone for one month. A follow-up CT of his chest revealed a complete resolution of the bilateral ground-glass opacities . Furthermore, his peripheral eosinophilia level decreased from 10% to <2%. The prednisone was then tapered off over a period of three months. Our patient has remained symptom-free and disease-free for two years.