The patient is a 72-year-old retired woman. Her main complaint is unprovoked lower back pain accompanied by limited mobility for three months. The pain can be slightly relieved when lying flat but intensifies during movement or turning over. She has undergone conservative treatments such as pain relief and blood stasis removal, but the effects were not satisfactory. Her lower back pain has worsened over the past two weeks, with no neurological symptoms in both lower limbs, such as pain or numbness. She has a history of hypertension for over ten years, during which she has been taking oral antihypertensive drugs. Her blood pressure has been controlled within the normal range.
Significant tenderness and percussion pain were observed at the paravertebral and intervertebral spaces at the T12 level of the thoracolumbar region, with limited mobility in the thoracolumbar segment. Sensory perception, nerve function, and muscle strength in both lower limbs were found to be normal. Bilateral physiological reflexes were present, and pathological reflexes were negative.
The patient underwitted X-ray, CT, and MRI examinations three months before admission . The lateral X-ray image showed a mild compression and posterior convex deformity of the T12 vertebral body, with a Cobb angle of 10.6°and an Sagittal Index of 83.4 %. The transverse CT image showed cortical bone fracture in front of the symptomatic vertebrae, and the horizontal vertebral canal area of the pedicle of 214.3mm2. The sagittal T2-weighted MRI image showed compression of the T12 vertebral body and changes in bone marrow edema, without obvious posterior convex deformity or spinal canal stenosis. After admission, follow-up X-ray, CT, and MRI examinations were performed . The lateral X-ray image showed compression and posterior convex deformity of the T12 vertebral body, with a Cobb angle of 18.4°and an Sagittal Index of 62.8 %. The transverse CT image showed the formation of a fracture line within the symptomatic vertebrae, with posterior wall rupture entering the spinal canal, and the horizontal vertebral canal area of the pedicle of 132.6mm2. The sagittal T2-weighted MRI image showed changes in the T12 vertebral body, including compression and a fracture within the vertebral body, along with posterior convex deformity and accompanying spinal canal stenosis.
The patient was under general anesthesia and in the prone position. The surgical area was sterilized and draped. Using C-arm positioning, the upper and lower vertebrae of the symptomatic vertebrae were located on both sides of the pedicle. A puncture needle (Tianjin Zhengtian) was used for percutaneous pedicle puncture. After satisfactory positioning, the needle core was removed, and a guide wire was inserted. A longitudinal skin incision of about 2 cm was made, and the dilator was expanded step by step. Subsequently, under the guidance of the guide wire, a pedicle screw (Tianjin Zhengtian MIS Plus hollow minimally invasive pedicle screw JJX-IX) was placed. After satisfactory positioning of the screw, under the guidance of C-arm fluoroscopy, a bone cement injector and push rod were used to inject the prepared bone cement (Heraeus OSTEOPAL®V) along the tail end of the pedicle screw, allowing it to diffuse around the screw through the hollow outlet at the front end and the side hole. After the fluoroscopy showed satisfactory diffusion of the bone cement, the bone cement was allowed to solidify. A pre-bent rod of appropriate length was then connected to the screw and tightened with a nut to fix it. The screw was locked in place by the curvature of the connecting rod to reset the diseased vertebra. After resetting the symptomatic vertebrae, percutaneous puncture of the pedicle of the symptomatic vertebrae was performed on one side, with the puncture needle (Shandong Guanlong) finally positioned near the midline of the vertebral body in the anteroposterior view, and in the middle anterior 1/3 in the lateral view. After confirming satisfactory puncture positioning, the bone cement PMMA (Heraeus OSTEOPAL®V) was prepared, and during the wire-drawing period, the bone cement was slowly injected into the vertebral body fissure. The diffusion of the bone cement was observed, and after satisfactory filling, the puncture needle was removed. The tail wing of the screw was broken off, and the incision was cleaned and sutured.
Patients were advised to rest in bed after surgery, but also to engage in some functional exercises, such as straight leg raises and lower limb flexion and extension exercises. On the third day after surgery, they could carry out corresponding activities under the protection of supports. Antibiotics should be routinely used for infection prevention for 3 days, pain relief and thrombosis prevention for 8 days. Triple therapy for osteoporosis should be administered for 1 year, such as bisphosphonates, calcium agents, and calcitriol.
The preoperative visual analogue scale (VAS) score for visual pain simulation was 8.5, and the Oswestry Disability Index (ODI) score was 72.5 %. The VAS score at 1 year postoperative was 2.4, and the ODI score was 25.0 %, indicating significant improvement compared to preoperative scores. Intraoperative X-ray images showed good encapsulation of the screw bone cement, with satisfactory filling and dispersion of bone cement within the T12 vertebral body and no leakage. Correction of the spinal kyphotic deformity was achieved . The positive and lateral X-ray images at 1 year postoperative demonstrated satisfactory dispersion and filling of the bone cement, with no leakage, and the screw position was satisfactory with no loosening or displacement. The vertebral body height and correction of the kyphotic deformity were satisfactory, with a Cobb angle correction of 8.5°and an Sagittal Index correction of 89.7 %. The transverse CT image at 1 year postoperative showed satisfactory filling of the symptomatic vertebrae body with no leakage, and the horizontal vertebral canal area of the pedicle of 215.8mm2, indicating a significant improvement in the degree of stenosis compared to preoperative images .