A 54-year-old man was referred from our Department of Pulmonology to our Department of Otorhinolaryngology complaining of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) device intolerance. He was not able to use it more than 3 h per night, despite changing masks and improving humidity. He only takes tadalafil 20 mg for erectile dysfunction and showed no other comorbidities. His wife did not complain about his snoring. His main concern was a sensation of suffocation during the night, as well as when lying on his back. His body mass index (BMI) was 23.1 m/kg2. Laboratory polysomnography (PSG) showed 299 snore events per hour, an AHI of 25.3, a saturated oxygen level (Sat O2) minimum of 74%, and an oxygen desaturation index (ODI) of 20.2. Awake rhinofibrolaryngoscopy did not show any anatomical findings that explained the CPAP intolerance showing an epiglottis with normal shape and appearance. In this case, our clinical protocol established the recommendation to perform a DISE. It was done following the European position paper protocol using the VOTE classification in the operating room, starting with the patient in supine position. For sedation, 2% propofol syringe infusion pump with target-controlled infusion (TCI) was used, with a target concentration of 2 ng/ml if progressive increases were requiered: 0.2–0.5 ng / ml. Sedation level was monitored using bispectral index (BIS) (BIS Quatro®. Covidien ILc. MA. USA). When the patient was asleep and actively snoring (BIS between 70 and 50), video-flexible endoscopy (TGH Endoscopia. MACHIDA ENT-30PIII. Spain) was used to assess the upper airway to visualize the site of collapse in real time and recording equipment. During DISE, the head was first turned to the right, then to the left and, finally, the mandibular advance maneuver was performed. The findings were observed for a minimum of two cycles in each segment and for each maneuver.
DISE was done without adverse incident and revealed significant swelling of the epiglottis (Supplementary Video 1). A severely obstructed airway surrounded by fluid compatible with LPR was found . The VOTE classification was V1O1T1E2AP, which improved with the Esmarch maneuver.
With this diagnosis, the patient was offered a mandibular advancement device, but rejected it for economic reasons. He was referred to our Department of Gastroenterology. A PPI, pantoprazole (40 mg daily), was prescribed. Conventional esophagoscopy and single-channel pH-metry confirmed grade A esophagitis with mild GERD. Two-channel 24-h pH-metry indicated excellent suppression of gastric acid production with the PPI. Patient was recommended to avoid heavy meals for dinner and to raise the head of the bed for sleeping. The patient continued taking pantoprazole for 3 months but without improvement in his sleep symptoms, so he stopped the PPI treatment. During this time, he asked us to perform an epiglottectomy, but we rejected this option because non-acid reflux had not been discounted. Multichannel impedanciometry with 24-h pH-metry was performed and indicated severe alkaline GERD, mainly of gaseous origin . Non-acid reflux therapy was started with sodium alginate (500 mg twice daily), and his sleep symptoms improved. After 6 months, a control PSG was performed. The AHI had decreased to 8, the Sat O2 min had improved to 87%, and the ODI had declined to 7.7 and snore events decline to 48 per hour. There was no change in his BMI. We performed a new DISE to evaluate the anatomical changes and this showed complete normality, with a VOTE classification of V1O1T1EO .
Treatment with CPAP devices may aggravate airway obstruction in patients with a collapsed epiglottis . Surgery in these cases could be an option , but it is always essential to evaluate the reason for collapse. In our case, the initial findings suggested a potential association with GERD, and DISE was mandatory for a complete evaluation . A conventional ENT examination did not show any pathological findings of the epiglottis that were visualized during DISE.