A 70-year-old Sri Lankan man with well-controlled diabetes mellitus and hypertension over 6 years developed acute onset, high-grade, intermittent fever associated with headache, arthralgia, myalgia, and nausea with no apparent focus of infection. On day 2 since onset of fever, he developed drooping of his eyelids and dysarthria. On day 3, he developed dysphagia and difficulty in walking because of unsteadiness. He did not experience any alteration of consciousness, seizures, sphincter dysfunction, limb weakness, or paresthesia. He was admitted to hospital on the third day of his illness. A timeline of the events starting from onset of fever is summarized in Table . There was no history of recent respiratory or gastrointestinal infection, or immunization. He had not had any neurological diseases in the past. His current medications included losartan for hypertension and metformin for diabetes mellitus.
On examination, his body temperature was 38.5 °C while general examination and respiratory, cardiovascular, and abdominal examinations were normal. His heart rate was 76 beats per minute and his blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. On neurological examination, he was noted to be conscious, alert, and oriented. He had bilateral asymmetric ptosis more on right side, mid-dilated pupils with sluggish reaction to light, and complete bilateral external ophthalmoplegia but without diplopia; optic fundi, visual fields, and acuity were normal. He had bilateral palatal weakness and tongue deviation to right side; the rest of his cranial nerves were normal. He had a broad-based ataxic gait, dysdiadochokinesia, and dysmetria; all tendon reflexes were absent; the rest of the neurological examination of limbs, including sensation, was normal.
Investigations revealed thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 106 × 109/l on day 3, which dropped further to 17 × 109/l on day 6. His platelet count then gradually increased to 164 × 109/l by day 13. His white cell count reduced to 4200 × 109/l on day 5 and then gradually increased to 7100 × 109/l on day 13. Hematocrit was 40% and stable throughout the course of the illness. His creatinine was 99 μmol/l; serum sodium 132 mmol/l; and potassium 3.6 mmol/l. Serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) showed a rise from 115 U/l on day 3 to 243 U/l on day 5 and normalized to 43 U/l by day 10. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 55 U/l on day 3, increased to 127 U/l on day 5, and normalized to 37 U/l by day 10. Other liver functions were normal. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 18 in the first hour and C-reactive protein was 32 mg/l. Urine analysis and an ultrasound scan of his abdomen were normal.
A dengue non-structural protein 1 (NS-1) antigen test by rapid diagnostic test and real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) done on the third day of illness and dengue IgM antibodies by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tested on the seventh day of illness were positive. Serum IgM antibodies to West Nile virus and Japanese encephalitis virus by ELISA were negative on day 7. Nerve conduction studies showed evidence of mild axonal polyneuropathy. Repetitive nerve stimulation did not show decrement. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of his brain were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis performed on the 12th day of illness after recovery of thrombocytopenia was normal with no albuminocytologic dissociation. PCR for dengue virus and dengue IgM antibodies in CSF were negative. Antibodies (IgG, IgM, and IgA) against a panel of gangliosides including GQ1b and GT1a were negative.
DF was treated with fluid replacement at 100 ml/hour while monitoring for plasma leakage clinically and ultrasonically. His fever subsided after 5 days from onset and all hematological parameters returned to normal subsequently. He was treated with intravenously administered immunoglobulin 0.4 g/kg for 5 days starting from the fourth day of his illness. He required nasogastric feeding because of dysphagia. He was treated with swallowing and speech therapy, and gait and balance training.
From around the sixth day of illness, his ptosis and ophthalmoplegia began to improve gradually. His ataxia improved enabling him to walk without support from the eighth day onward. He was discharged from hospital on the 13th day of illness and continued nasogastric feeding, physiotherapy, and speech therapy at home. At review 1 week later, he had made a complete neurological recovery with normal swallowing, complete eye movements, normal gait, and re-emerged deep tendon reflexes.