A 63-year-old man with a 20-year treatment history of depression was admitted to a psychiatric hospital due to the exacerbation of depression. He had psychogenic erectile dysfunction. Despite treatment, his symptoms progressed, leading to suicidal thoughts. During hospitalization, he cut his penile shaft with scissors and was referred to our hospital an hour later.
Initial urological examination showed that the penis was sharply cut 2 cm from the base. There was active bleeding in the dorsal artery and veins, and they were ligated. Foley’s catheter was inserted through the urethral stump, and the penis was ligated with a soft catheter at the base to achieve temporal hemostasis . The amputated glans appeared to be viable. Because the crush of the cut surface was slight and there was no pullout or crush injury in the blood vessel inside the penis, we could expect a good prognosis of replantation . The amputated penis was gently washed, wrapped in a gauze soaked in saline, placed in a plastic bag, and stored on ice.
Psychiatric evaluation revealed a depressed affect and hopelessness, but his consciousness was well-retained, and his suicidal thoughts diminished. He did not have any psychotic symptoms. The patient and his family hoped for the surgical reconstruction of the penis. With a diagnosis of depression without psychosis, psychiatrists judged that the risk of the recurrence of self-mutilation could be controlled by adequate treatment. After a discussion with the multidisciplinary team, we decided to perform microscopic replantation of the penis.
Microscopic replantation was performed by plastic surgeons at 5 hours 15 minutes after the self-mutilation. One dorsal artery and multiple dorsal veins were confirmed on microscopic evaluation. After the urethra was anastomosed with 4-0 absorbable suture, the corpus cavernosum and corpus spongiosum were anastomosed with 4-0 absorbable sutures. With microscopic surgery, one dorsal artery and two dorsal veins were anastomosed with a 10-0 nylon suture, and recovery of the bloodstream was confirmed. Arterial blood supply was resumed at 7 h 8 min from injury. Epineural suture with a 10-0 nylon for anastomosis of the nerve was indicated but not performed because the stump of the nerves could not be identified. The surgery was completed with skin closure using a 5-0 nylon suture . The operation time was 3 hours and 10 minutes, and the amount of bleeding was 75 ml.
After the surgery, psychiatric medication therapy (mirtazapine 45 mg/day) was continued with medical body restraint. The surgical wound recovered well, and neither skin necrosis nor infection occurred. Three months after the surgery, the surgical wound adhered well without atrophy of the glans . After removal of the urethral catheter, the patient could urinate without any signs of urinary stricture. The replanted penis remained viable during follow-up at 6 months , although his erection was not preserved.