A 65-year-old man was referred to the eye clinic with the chief complaint of decreased vision in his right eye for about one month. He had history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) from 12 years ago, which was controlled with oral hypoglycemic drugs (metformin 1500 mgr /day). Patient had an uncomplicated cataract surgery three years ago in this eye. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was light perception (LP) and 6/6 in right and left eye, respectively. In fundus examination, a total RRD with supra-temporal retinal tear with grade C proliferative vitreoretinopathy (sub-retinal band) was detected in the right eye, and there was no sign of diabetic retinopathy in either eye. Patient underwent 23-G pars plana vitrectomy with silicone oil tamponade. After 4 weeks, his vision improved to 2/6 with + 6 diopter correction. Four months later, silicone oil was removed and his vision reached 4/6.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT), in the first week after silicone oil removal, demonstrated an attached retina with attenuation of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) as well as two hype- reflective vertical lines connecting the outer retinal layers to EZ in the fovea region. Some subretinal elevations resembling drusen were also present in nasal macula area. Left eye examination was unremarkable.
Ten months later, the patient presented with decreased vision in this eye again. BCVA dropped to hand motion. The intraocular pressure was within normal range in both eyes. Slit lamp examination of the right eye showed diffuse fine corneal keratic precipitates with 1+ cells in anterior chamber. Notably, the anterior vitreous was moderately opaque with + 3 cells infiltrated according to the Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) Working Group grading for intraocular inflammation . In fundus examination, multiple small yellow sub-retinal deposits were visible in the posterior pole, and a mild peripheral serous retinal detachment was observed. OCT revealed multiple confluent sub retinal and sub-RPE hyper reflective nodular lesions with extension to inner retina and complete disappearance of EZ . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed diffused multiple round hypofluorescent lesions in the form of leopard-spot pigmentation during early and later phases of the angiogram. Some deposits in the macular area stained and some pointy leakages were observed in later phases . Left-eye examination was unremarkable.
Systemic work-up for infectious and inflammatory etiologies including anti-toxoplasma antibody, tuberculin skin test, Veneral disease research laboratory test (VDRL), FTA-ABS antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), serum angiotensin enzyme (ACE), and chest x-ray revealed negative results.
Diagnostic vitreous tap was performed. Cytopathology examination of the vitreous specimen revealed infiltration of atypical lymphoid cells with large nuclei to cytoplasm ratio suggestive of malignant lymphoma .
Spiral CT-scans of the abdomen, pelvis, neck and thorax showed normal results. Magnetic resonanceimaging (MRI) of the brain noted mild cortical brain atrophy with no sign of PCNSL lymphoma.
The patient was scheduled for intravitreal chemotherapy with methotrexate (MTX) at a dose of 400 μg in 0.1 mL twice per week for 4 weeks, and then eight weekly followed by nine monthly injections. One month after the beginning of the intravitreal injections, no significant change happened in the sub retinal and sub-RPE infiltrations, and the vision was LP and did not improve. After one year, the vision improved to hand motion, vitreous opacity disappeared, and anterior vitreous cells were decreased to trace. However, at the OCT, intraretinal and sub-RPE hyper reflective materials remained , so the patient was considered as partially MTX resistance, thereby being scheduled for monthly intravitreal rituximab (1 mg/0.1 ml) injection with periodic brain MRI.