The patient is a 46-year-old Kurdish male mosque servant presenting with pain in the right leg, lower back, right hand, and neck. The patient reported experiencing symptoms of redness in the right buttock and ipsilateral thigh, as well as skin lesions in the left shin, which started gradually, expanded, and became stiff over the course of 3 weeks. Additionally, the patient complained of pain in the lower back and pelvis that worsened with walking, significantly affecting his ability to walk normally. Two years prior, the patient underwent surgery for cervical disc herniation and was subsequently treated with acetaminophen and chlordiazepoxide but experienced no improvement in symptoms. The patient had a history of smoking 20 packs of cigarettes per year but quit smoking 8 years ago. At the time of the study, the patient admitted to using a small amount of opium. During the examination, the patient’s vital signs were stable, and a surgical scar from the disc surgery was noted on his neck. The patient reported painful neck movements, and the Lasegue test of the right leg yielded a positive result. He also experienced pain in the right buttock, and an area of erythema with firm induration measuring 8 × 15 cm was observed. Furthermore, an erythematous and maculopapular lesion measuring 6 × 18 cm was present on the left shin. The right proximal muscle strength was assessed as 4.5, as was the strength of the right lower limb. Deep tendon reflexes (DTR) in the right upper limb were + 3, while in the Achilles lower limb, they were + 4 with clonus.
Preoperative Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the neck revealed the following findings: Cervical lordosis with spondylolysis changes, posterior bulging disk in C3–C4, C4–C5, and C5–C6, resulting in compression of the thecal sac at the affected levels. Additionally, there was evidence of myelomalacia in the cervical cord at the C4 level. Furthermore, a hemangioma was observed in the T1 vertebral body.
Pelvic MRI: Multiple enumerable low signal foci in bilateral femoral head compatible with benign sclerotic lesions such as osteopoikilosis.
Brain MRI: Normal.
Back MRI: Decreased lordosis and dehydration, bulging in L4–L5 level, and bared base seen in L4–L5 and central L5–S1.
Triphsic whole body scan: Enteropathy involving the upper portion of right SI joint, left anterior superior iliac spine, right pelvic brim, bilateral patella, right tibia tuberosity, and bilateral medial malleoli.
Main symptom: Pain in limbs, neck, and lumbar spine, and skin lesion as erythema and warmness in the upper tie, buttock, and leg.
Medical, family, and psychological history: Surgery for disk herniation in the neck spine, diabetes mellitus in his mother and mild hypertension in his father, a history of cigarette smoking (18 packs per year), a history of inhalational opioid use, and no history of psychological disorders.