A 61-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our dermatology department in July 2019 because of a skin eruption that had initiated 3 months earlier. In April there was an acute onset of erythematous macules and papules on both thighs, which later spread to the back, arms, and the back of the hands. Treatment with topical steroids of medium potency (mometasone furoate 0.1%) and hydrating creams was inefficient.
Individual lesions tended to last for approximately 2 days before regression, but were asymptomatic. There were no bullae or erosions, nor mucosal lesions. Exposure to the sun aggravated the skin eruption.
The patient did not experience musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, pulmonary, or any other symptoms. There was no family history of autoimmune or other relevant diseases.
On clinical examination, we found multiple sharply demarcated erythematous plaques on the back, chest, abdomen, and legs, and somewhat less on the arms and hands. There were no lesions on the groin, palmoplantar, or on the scalp .
A 4-mm punch biopsy had already been taken by the referring dermatologist and showed no epidermal abnormalities. In the superficial dermis, however, there was a perivascular inflammatory infiltrate consisting of neutrophils, some histiocytes, lymphocytes, and eosinophils. There was remarkable leukocytoclasis. The vascular endothelium was mildly swollen but without any fibrinoid necrosis of the vascular walls.
Complete blood count showed white blood cells of 10.80 × 109/L with an increase in neutrophils (8.7 × 109/L), but a normal red blood cell and platelet count. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 31 mm and C-reactive protein 7.6 mg/L. The alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) and gamma glutamyl transferase (gammaGT) were mildly increased (ALT 33 U/L, gammaGT 41 U/L). Antinuclear factor (ANF) was positive (1:320) with dsDNA Farr titer of 38.9 IU/mL (normal range < 7.0 IU/mL). Lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipine immunoglobulin M (IgM), anti-Streptolysine O antibodies, and hepatitis B and C serology were negative. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA) was negative, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) was 1/160 but with negative identification of proteinase 3 and myeloperoxidase. Cryoglobulins were present but without monoclonal fractions. Complement analysis showed hypocomplementemia with low component C3 fraction (C3) of 0.58 g/dL (normal range, 0.79–1.52 g/dL) and low component C4 fraction (C4) of 0.06 g/dL (normal range, 0.16–0.38 g/dL). The titer of C1q was 0.09 g/dL (normal range, 0.10–0.26 g/dL) and the anti-C1q antibodies > 400 U/mL (normal range < 15 U/mL). Urinalysis showed proteinuria 2+ and massive hematuria, but also a white blood cell count of 32/µL (normal range ≤ 10).
On the basis of the clinical image, histopathology, and lab results, a diagnosis of hypocomplementemic urticarial vasculitis was made. Additional chest radiography and spirometry were normal. Because of the positive ANF with high dsDNA Farr titer, and proteinuria with massive hematuria on urinalysis, an underlying systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) was suspected. A treatment consisting of high potency topical steroids (betamethasone dipropionate 0.05%) and systemic hydroxychloroquine (200 mg twice daily) was initiated, and the patient was referred to the nephrology department for further evaluation of the kidney function.
More comprehensive laboratory investigations showed a serum creatinine of 0.82 mg/dL and calculated glomerular filtration rate of 77 mL/minute/1.73 m2 (CKD-EPI), which corresponds with chronic renal disease GFR category G2 (KDIGO guidelines). Twenty-four-hour urinalysis showed proteinuria of 0.33 g. Ultrasound showed normal kidney size. Because of the pathological proteinuria, along with massive hematuria and increased white blood cell count, hypocomplementemia and positive ANF (U1RNP positive), a kidney biopsy was performed.
Histopathological evaluation showed focal crescentic and focal mesangial type of glomerular damage. Immunohistochemically there was a full-blown positivity of immunoglobulin A (IgA), immunoglobulin G (IgG), and C1q. These features fit the diagnosis of lupus nephritis class III-A [according to the International Society of Nephrology and the Renal Pathology Society (ISN/RPS) 2003 classification of lupus nephritis].
Therapy according to the Euro-Lupus protocol was initiated, consisting of an intravenous steroid pulse (500 mg/day for 3 days), followed by oral methylprednisolone 0.8 mg/kg/day during the first month, afterwards slowly tapering the dose to 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg/day. Cyclophosphamide (500 mg/day) was given six times, with an interval of 2 weeks. Along with this therapy, protective measures for gastrointestinal disease, candida infections, Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, herpes infection, and osteoporosis was started.
With this treatment regimen, disease control was obtained with complete clearance of the skin eruption and a normal urinalysis without proteinuria nor hematuria within 3 months after the start of treatment. DNA Farr titer became negative, and there was no more complement consumption. Steroids were tapered, and azathioprine as maintenance therapy was initiated at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day with maintained disease control during 4 months of follow-up.