An 87-year-old Caucasian female patient, born in Europe, was admitted to the neurology department with a complaint of vertigo. A stroke was suspected and she received a standard stroke assessment, including a cardiac evaluation given the extensive cardiac history. In 1954, at the age of 21, she underwent a closed mitral commissurotomy for rheumatic mitral stenosis. A year later she developed atrial fibrillation. In 2000, at the age of 67, she underwent mechanical mitral valve replacement (ATS M29; ATS Medical, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) for mitral re-stenosis. Tricuspid valve repair with a ring annuloplasty (CE 34 mm) was performed at the same time. In 2011, she was treated for left-sided breast cancer with mastectomy and lymph node removal; no radiotherapy or chemotherapy. During the last decade, she had been followed for moderate degenerative aortic stenosis (AS), which was felt to be likely non-rheumatic in origin as it had manifested at old age.
She had been taking a vitamin K antagonist for many years with stable international normalized ratio (INR) values. Upon admission, the INR was in the therapeutic range. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly . The cardiothoracic ratio was 0.87. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed the normal systolic function of the hypertrophied left ventricle and normal functioning of the mitral valve prosthesis. The peak and mean trans-mitral gradient were 22 and 4.3 mmHg, respectively. There was no pathologic mitral regurgitation. There was a residual moderate tricuspid regurgitation. The aortic stenosis had progressed to a severe stenosis with a mean gradient of 40 mmHg. Both atria were vastly dilated, the left atrial anterior–posterior (AP) diameter measured 8 cm . Single-plane apical four-chamber left and right atrial volume were 211 mL (143 mL/m2) and 187 mL (127 mL/m2), respectively.
A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) excluded intracardiac thrombi and confirmed normal functioning of the mitral valve prosthesis. The mean trans-mitral gradient was 5 mmHg. There were closing jets but no pathologic valvular or paravalvular jets. Immediately after TOE, the patient developed dysphagia for solid foods. She lost weight due to poor oral intake. A proton-pump inhibitor was prescribed, and she was put on a mixed/liquid diet. Apparently, the patient had difficulty swallowing for some time. Her physician was unaware, and TOE had made it significantly worse. An unfortunate complication, all the more so since magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was negative for recent cerebral ischaemia. Ultimately a peripheral vestibular disorder was suspected.
A barium swallow suggested achalasia , though oesophageal manometry rebutted this and favoured a diagnosis of oesophageal gastric outflow obstruction due to extrinsic compression. Oesophageal peristalsis was disturbed and resting lower oesophageal sphincter pressure and median integrated relaxation pressure were elevated, 90 and 43.5 mmHg, respectively. Peristalsis in the distal oesophagus was preserved, which is atypical for achalasia. During her hospital stay, a work up for transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) was initiated and a cardiac computed tomography (CT) angiography of the thorax was performed as part of the pre-TAVR protocol. Computed tomography angiography demonstrated extrinsic compression of the distal oesophagus by a massively dilated left atrium .
During her hospital stay, the dysphagia spontaneously regressed reaching its former level at discharge. Left atrial reduction surgery, as an attempt to alleviate the obstructive symptoms, was not considered due to age and favourable spontaneous evolution. After a multidisciplinary Heart Team discussion, a decision was made not to proceed with TAVR, given the paucisymptomatic clinical status, difficult vascular approach, and no expected benefit on quality of life. This decision was in line with the European Society of Cardiology guidelines for management of valvular heart disease.
At a 6-month follow-up, the patient was in New York Heart Association Class II. She did not experience angina or syncope. The dysphagia had significantly improved and she had gained weight. Vertigo had not reoccurred.