A 14-year-old boy collapsed while playing a football match at school. Bystander CPR, including both chest compressions and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, was immediately started by a witness who was trained in basic life support (BLS), while the emergency medical system was activated by another layperson. A paramedic BLS ambulance arrived 5 minutes after the event and immediately placed the child on an AED monitor (Heartstart FR2, Philips). Initially, the child was determined to be in a non shockable rhythm, therefore CPR was continued. Two minutes later, the AED monitor detected a shockable rhythm and recommended a shock, which was then administered at 150 joules. Chest compressions and bag-mask ventilation were resumed and one minute after the shock, a palpable pulse with a rate of 85 bpm was detected and the child began to breathe by himself. Fifteen minutes after collapse, the emergency advanced life support team arrived. At that time, heart rhythm was sinus rhythm with premature ventricular beats. Because of respiratory distress, the boy was intubated and transported to a paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for further treatment. On admission physical examination revealed normal range HR with frequent ventricular extra-systoles, normal blood pressure and adequate peripheral perfusion. Amiodarone continuous IV infusion was started. A first echocardiogram exam revealed a structurally intact heart with adequate biventricular function. Cardiac index measured by pulse contour analysis was also within normal limits. His initial laboratory evaluation revealed a serum troponin level of 0.02 (normal: 0.01 – 0.04 ng/mL) that five hours later increased to 1.17 ng/mL, returning to normal ranges 3 days after PICU admission. After cardiac evaluation, oral beta blocker therapy was started. He was on mechanical ventilation during two days and he was weaned without events. Four days after cardiac arrest, the boy was conversing and self-caring. Brain computed tomography and electroencephalogram revealed no abnormalities. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was suggestive of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) and consequently a cardioverter-defibrillator was implanted in order to prevent a new episode of sudden death. He has subsequently returned to school with the advice to not perform vigorous exercise or engage in competitive sports.