A 79-year-old Japanese female visited our hospital in complaining of right hypochondrium pain. She had no remarkable medical or family history. Laboratory tests on admission showed no abnormality except for elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) at 146 ng/mL (normal value, < 5.0) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) at 415 U/mL (normal value, < 37). Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and protein induced by Vitamin K absence or antagonists (PIVKA)-II were within the normal ranges, and hepatitis B viral antigen and hepatitis C antibody assays were both negative. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass lesion measuring approx. 5 cm in diameter at Segment 4 of the liver, and the mass lesion showed ring enhancement on a dynamic study. As positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed no significant uptake signals other than the hepatic mass lesion, we ruled out the possibility of a metastatic liver tumor. Under the clinical diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, a left lobectomy and regional lymph node dissection were performed.
Grossly, the cut surface of the resected specimen showed an irregular, whitish solid tumor measuring 5.3 × 3.5 cm in maximal diameter. The border between the tumor and normal liver was indistinct, and the tumor directly invaded into the omentum and abdominal wall beyond the serosa of the liver .
Histologically, the tumor showed invasive growth without capsule formation . The background liver tissue showed an almost normal appearance. The tumor cells showed marked nuclear atypia and distinct nucleoli and had eosinophil-rich cytoplasm. Many mitotic Figs. (25/10 high-power field [HPF]), venous invasion, and intrahepatic metastatic lesion were observed. Lymphatic vessel invasion and lymph node metastasis were not apparent. Although overt keratinization was not apparent, nests of squamoid cells showing squamous differentiation were seen . We did not observe goblet-like mucin-producing cells, but a gland-like structure and intracytoplasmic and a small amount of extra-cytoplasmic mucin-producing cells were focally observed . Based on these morphological features, we considered the pathological diagnosis of high-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma predominantly composed of an intermediate cell component.
In immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and CK19 but negative for CK8 and hepatocyte paraffin-1. Squamoid cells and intermediate cells were positive for p63, CK14 , CK5/6, and involucrin. Mucin-producing cells were negative for p63 but highlighted by both alcian blue and mucicarmine staining. The tumor cells were focally positive for CEA and CA19–9. Based on these findings, we made the final diagnosis of primary MEC of the liver.
For the analysis of CRTC1/3-MAML2 fusion gene, total RNA was isolated from paraffin-embedded tissue using the miRNeasy FFPE Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), and first-strand cDNA was synthesized using Superscript III Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). The detection of CRTC1/3-MAML2 fusion was performed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using the described primers and conditions . The sequence of the PCR product was confirmed by direct sequencing methods using an ABI Prism 310 sequence analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The RT-PCR products of the patient which electrophoresed in 2% agarose gel showed the presence of CRTC1-MAML2 fusion . CRTC1-MAML2 fusion was confirmed by direct sequencing .
As adjuvant therapy, the oral administration of S-1 (100 mg/day) was started. Two years after the patient’s surgery, para-aortic lymph node swelling was detected by abdominal CT although serum tumor markers (CEA and CA19–9) were within normal ranges. Under the clinical diagnosis of suspected lymph node recurrence, radiation therapy (total 60 Gy) combined with S-1 therapy (100 mg/day) was performed for 13 months. No further therapy was performed. At the time of this writing, almost 10 years after the surgery, the patient is alive with no evidence of tumor recurrence.