A 19-year-old primigravida presented to the Labor and Delivery (L&D) triage unit at our tertiary medical center at 30 weeks gestation reporting two days of vulvar swelling, burning, and pain. These symptoms were preceded by several days of rhinorrhea, myalgias, and malaise. Prior to presentation, her pregnancy course was notable only for chlamydia treated at eight weeks of pregnancy (with negative test of cure in the third trimester) and sickle cell trait. A fetal anatomic ultrasound survey at 20 weeks gestation was unremarkable. She had previously had VZV vaccination (2004 and 2007) and had no history of chickenpox per patient report. Her VZV IgG serology on initial prenatal labs, however, was negative, suggesting the nonimmune status.
On arrival to our triage unit, the patient was afebrile with normal vital signs. Physical exam revealed significant edema, erythema, and tenderness to palpation of the labia majora, minora, and vestibule, with physiologic discharge from the vagina . No discrete lesions were noted, but there was a small area of increased erythema on the innermost aspect of the left labia majus from which a specimen for HSV/VZV direct PCR testing was obtained. No additional lesions were noted. The patient had reassuring fetal monitoring and was discharged home with recommendations for symptomatic treatment including oral antihistamines and ice packs.
Direct testing returned positive for VZV and negative for HSV. Laboratory methodology used at our institution to differentiate VZV and HSV includes a single PCR test with distinct analytes for each virus. Although her negative VZV Ig serology in early pregnancy raised suspicion for primary VZV infection, the localized and unilateral nature of her symptoms was more consistent with genital HZ. As a result, the differential diagnosis included both unusual presentation of primary VZV and genital HZ.
The patient was treated with oral acyclovir 800 milligrams five times per day for 10 days. She was advised to self-isolate at home for seven days or until the lesions crusted over. She had a telephone consultation with maternal fetal medicine to review the potential fetal and maternal risks of infection in pregnancy. Given her late gestational age at presentation, she was counseled on the low likelihood of congenital varicella syndrome. A diagnostic amniocentesis was discussed; this procedure was not completed after shared decision-making. A growth scan after clinical recovery was recommended to screen for fetal growth restriction. We discussed that her risk of neonatal varicella syndrome would be dependent upon gestational age at delivery; specifically, we reviewed that in the absence of preterm delivery, she was highly unlikely to have an affected neonate. Lastly, we discussed the maternal complications that can arise from varicella infection in pregnancy. The patient was counseled to present for care in the event of intractable fever or new respiratory symptoms.
Follow-up exam three weeks later confirmed complete resolution of her symptoms. A growth ultrasound at 36 weeks was normal (estimated fetal weight 2407 grams, 17th percentile). The remainder of her pregnancy was uncomplicated, and the patient had a term spontaneous vaginal delivery. Serial newborn exams were normal with no evidence of prenatal or neonatal infection. The mother and infant were discharged two days after delivery, and postpartum follow-up has been unremarkable.