A 71-year-old Japanese male patient with a 50-year history of smoking and diabetes without medications presented to our hospital with a 2-day history of dyspnoea. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 124/90 mmHg; heart rate, 104 bpm; respiratory rate, 28 breaths/min; and oxygen saturation, 97% on a 2-L nasal cannula. Physical examination revealed moist rales in both lungs and oedema in the lower extremities. Electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment elevation in the anterior leads with long QT (QTc, 472 msec) . A chest radiography demonstrated cardiomegaly with pulmonary congestion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20% with severe hypokinesis of the anterior wall. Laboratory analysis showed elevated levels of cardiac enzymes [creatine kinase-MB, 70 U/L (normal range, 7–15 U/L); troponin-I, 148, 155 pg/mL (normal range: ≤ 26 pg/mL)]; creatinine [1.24 mg/dL (normal range: 0.65–1.07 mg/dL)]; brain natriuretic peptide [2079 pg/mL (normal range: ≤ 18.4 pg/mL)] and glycated haemoglobin [8.2% (normal range: 4.9–6.0%)]. No electrolyte abnormalities were observed. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction with congestive heart failure. Subsequently, emergency coronary angiography was performed, revealing three-vessel disease, with severe stenosis of the left anterior descending artery (LAD), left circumflex artery (LCX) and total occlusion of the right coronary artery (RCA) . Rentrop Grade 2 collaterals were observed from the septal branch and LCX to the distal portion of the RCA . After a discussion within the cardiology team, including cardiologists, cardiovascular surgeons, cardiovascular nurses and biomedical equipment technicians, we decided to perform coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) after intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) implantation. However, the patient experienced ventricular tachycardia (VT) and ventricular fibrillation (VF) before CABG. Despite cardioversion, amiodarone administration (50 mg/h) and general sedation, ventricular arrhythmia recurred, leading to ES. Subsequently, veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was added to IABP to maintain haemodynamics, and percutaneous coronary intervention was performed to improve the coronary flow. Although drug-eluting stents were implanted in the proximal segment of the LAD and LCX , VT/VFs did not decrease; therefore, RCA was also re-vascularized the following day . After complete coronary revascularization, ventricular arrhythmia prevalence decreased; however, VT/VFs occurred easily due to the R-on-T phenomenon associated with QT prolongation . Although intravenous lidocaine (80 mg/h) was administered, it did not provide many benefits. After discussions with a clinical cardiac electrophysiologist, catheter ablation was thought to pose a high risk because of unstable haemodynamic status and the absence of a suitable access route. Due to uncontrollable VT/VF recurrence and poor cardiac function improvement, VA-ECMO and IABP were changed to Impella 5.0® (Abiomed Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) on hospitalization Day 5, after which the patient’s haemodynamic status stabilized; however, VT/VFs did not completely disappear, and frequent cardioversion was still required. We decided to administer percutaneous left SGB (levobupivacaine, 25 mg twice daily) on the 9th day of admission. Subsequently, the prevalence of VT/VFs requiring cardioversion relatively decreased (but did not disappear completely), and we could de-escalate Impella to IABP. Temporarily discontinuing SGB 5 days after initiation due to the absence of the practitioner who performed the procedure caused a noticeable increase in VT/VFs. Therefore, SGB was considered effective for VT/VF inhibition and was resumed. Subsequently, amiodarone/lidocaine was replaced with nifekalant (20 mg/h). After initiating concomitant SGB and nifekalant, the VT/VFs suddenly disappeared, and no recurrence was observed during the rest of the patient’s hospital stay . Subsequently, haemodynamic status became stable, and IABP was explanted during hospitalization Day 19. On the 30th day post-admission, nifekalant was switched with 100 mg bepridil, after which QT time did not prolong further, and recurrent VT/VFs were not observed. Next, medication modification and rehabilitation were performed, and the patient was implanted with a transvenous cardioverter-defibrillator. Cardiac resynchronization therapy was not selected because of the narrow QRS duration of 92 msec. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to another hospital for further rehabilitation on hospitalization Day 164. At discharge, his laboratory data showed reduced brain natriuretic peptide and creatinine levels to 495.1 pg/mL and 0.90 mg/dL, respectively, and LVEF was improved to 35%. The patient was prescribed bisoprolol 2.5 mg, enalapril 1.25 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, azosemide 30 mg, empagliflozin 10 mg, and bepridil 100 mg. He was discharged in an ambulatory condition 10 weeks after the transfer and did not experience arrhythmia or heart failure during the 1-month follow-up period.