A 77-year-old Japanese man with no particular medical history had observed thickening of the Achilles tendon bilaterally and patellar tendon enlargement from the age of 40. He reported paresthesia that began in the legs and later spread to the arms. He was admitted to Toho University Omori Medical Center for diagnosis a progressively unsteady gait from the age of 65 years, which was considered due to spinal ataxia. His father had died of lung cancer and his mother of renal failure. There was no family history (parents, siblings, or children) of CTX and his parents’ marriage was not consanguineous. He was born in Japan and worked as a public employee after graduating high school.
The deep tendon reflex in the lower limbs was hyperactive, and the Babinski reflex was present bilaterally. Pain and temperature sensation was normal; however, joint positioning and vibration sensation were impaired in the lower extremities, and the Romberg sign was present. General physical examination revealed no abnormalities, and he did not show signs of either dementia (his mini-mental state examination score was 29) or any psychiatric disorder. Cataracts were not observed upon ophthalmologic examination.
Serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels were normal, while cholestanol levels were elevated (10.4 μg/ml; normal, 3.3–5.6 μg/ml). Serum antinuclear antibody, anti-SSA antibody, vitamins B12 and E, folate, copper, lactic acid were normal, syphilis and anti-aquaporin 4 antibody were negative and cerebrospinal fluid examinations were normal.
Brain MRI, including the images of the cerebellar white matter, was normal; however, cervical sagittal T2-weighted MRI revealed a high intensity area in the dorsal columns of the C2–C7 cervical cord . Knee axial and sagittal gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI showed a low intensity area in the fringes and an unbalance enhanced area in the center . A nerve conduction study and visual evoked potential were normal, but somatosensory evoked potential was absent in the lower extremities. After diagnosing spinal form CTX, the patient was treated with 750 mg/day CDCA.
Genomic DNA was isolated from the peripheral blood leukocytes using a DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions, and was used as a template for polymerase chain reaction (PCR). All 9 exons of CYP27A1 were separately amplified by PCR and their nucleotide sequences were ascertained by direct nucleotide sequence analysis.
CYP27A1 analysis revealed two point mutations. One was an A-to-G mutation in exon 1, resulting in an amino acid substitution of Gln (CAG) to Arg (CGG) at codon 254 (Q85R) , and the other was a G-to-A mutation in exon 7, resulting in an amino acid substitution of Arg (CGG) to Gln (CAG) at codon 1214 (R405Q) . p.R405Q in CYP27A1 had previously been reported in three siblings with CTX , and in several Japanese CTX patients [, ]. p.Q85R had previously been reported as the first mutation identified in all variations of CTX.