The patient was a 34-year-old right-handed dominant male, who has worked as a technician for the national telecommunication company. He was brought to the emergency department of our complex hospital because of falling from almost a nine-meter height when he was fixing the main wires of a phone post. His past medical history was negative for any disease or allergy. At first, measures of basic life support and advanced trauma life support was performed classically because of the nature of high-energy trauma. The patient was alert (GCS: 15) and roughly recall that he had fell on his trunk and right limb. Vital signs were stable during several assessments. Chest, abdomen, spine and pelvic examinations were surprisingly non-significant. Other than some small abrasions and signs of contusion on his trunk, there was an obvious tenderness and limitation of the range of motion of the right wrist associated with moderate swelling and no skin breakage. The neurovascular exam was normal. A short forearm splint was applied to the wrist and after patient stabilization, initial anteroposterior and lateral X-ray showed isolated displaced avulsion fracture of the right lunate . Spiral computerized tomography scanning demonstrated that the fragment avulsed from the proximal articulation of the lunate and constituted about 30% of the articular surface . There was no other osseous pathology.
On the third day of injury, with due attention to noticeable displacement of the fractured fragment and probable ligament injury, we decided to perform open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). According to the volar location of avulsed fragment, the lunate was approached by an extended carpal tunnel release through a zigzag volar incision (Green 2011). By cutting the proximal half of the flexor retinaculum and retracting digital flexor tendons and median nerve, the palmar radiocarpal capsule was identified. It was intact but hyperemic and incised longitudinally to open the joint. A relatively small (5 × 7 millimeter) osteochondral fragment was in the radiolunate articular space. A corresponding crater, which consisted of about 30% of the palmar half of the proximal articular surface of lunate showed the exact site of fracture. A tenuous soft tissue attached to the fragment that connected it to the radius and was possibly related to the short radiolunate ligament. Of note, the greatest portion of the short radiolunate ligament, other bones, articular cartilage and visible ligaments including palmar lunotriquetral ligament were intact. It was not possible to open the lunotriquetral space by pushing the lunate and triquetrum. Intra-operative imaging by the image intensifier was negative for dynamic or static instability. Being comminuted and failing to reduce the small fragment for fixation by a headless screw caused us to remove the free osteochondral fragment instead of ORIF. The volar capsule was sutured by an absorbable suture. Intra and post-operative radiographic assessments were normal except for the empty site of avulsed fragment. Post-operatively, the wrist was immobilized in a short arm cast for three weeks and then active motion of wrist was begun. Wrist range of motion (ROM) started at three weeks and a wrist support was worn for an additional five weeks. After six weeks, the wrist reached full range of motion without pain. Strengthening exercises begun after three months. The patient returned to his work after six months. Radiographic assessment consisting of stress view at six and twelve weeks postoperatively was completely normal.
Final follow up was 33 months after the injury. The patient had no limitation for professional and recreational activities. He could return to his previous work with the same functional level of activity. Except for dorsiflexion loss of 15°, range of motion of the wrist was identical to other sides. Quick DASH score was calculated as 0. Anteroposterior and lateral views demonstrated no sign of lunate avascular necrosis or degenerative joint disease. Slight volar intercalated segment instability (VISI) identified on lateral x-ray by a capitolunate angle of 26°, which demonstrated early stages of static carpal instability. The patient refused any additional diagnostic (such as magnetic resonance imaging) or therapeutic measure despite being informed about possible complications of VISI.