A 3-year-old female child was referred to our Head and Neck Department complaining about right-sided neck swelling since 2 months ago. The case had no pain in swelling, fever, trauma, dysphagia, and dyspnoea. Physical examination revealed a palpable mass of 4×3 cm in the right side carotid triangle that was firmly consistent, as well as nontender and nonfluctuant in nature. There was no evidence indicating the movement of swelling on deglutition. Overlying skin was reported to be normal. In addition, there were no signs of inflammation. Cervical lymph nodes were normal and systemic examination was unremarkable.
Applied Examinations
No abnormality was observed in the results of haemogram, chest X-ray, and blood chemistries. Computed tomography scan showed a well-circumscribed, isodense, and nonenhancing soft tissue mass with a size of 46×40 mm along the carotid space on right side. Bilateral thyroid gland appeared to be normal in size, shape, and echogenicity. Bilateral submandibular glands, parotid glands, and carotid arteries appeared normal. Laryngeal and parapharyngeal structures were also normal. The diagnosis was carotid body tumor and fine-needle aspiration cytology was not performed.
Procedure:
The patient was subjected to excision of the cervical mass. She underwent the surgery under general anesthesia with orotracheal intubation. A horizontal incision was carried out on the right side of the neck from the posterior border of right sternomastoid to the midline. The subplatysmal flap was elevated.
After dissecting the fibers of strap muscles, the swelling was discovered encasing the right common carotid artery from which it was carefully dissected and separated . The mass was completely removed as the adjacent structures were not infiltrated. The right-sided common carotid artery and internal jugular vein were preserved . Then it was followed by an uneventful recovery. The clinical follow-up of the patient has demonstrated no recurrence so far.
Gross Examination:
The excised mass was greyish white, 4x3x1 cm in size, as well as soft and cystic. In the incised section, the cystic cavity was noted at one end, along with papillary projections.
Histological examination:
Histopathological examination showed that the tumor consisted of large round to oval cells having vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli and scanty eosinophilic cytoplasm. The tumor cells were observed in zellballen pattern. Intervening fibrocollagenous stroma was infiltrated by mononuclear cells and congested blood vessels. Microscopic features were also suggestive of carotid body tumor.
The results of immunohistochemistry showed immunoreactivity to Mi-2 protein (CD99), vimentin with paranuclear immunopositivity for pancytokeratin. The tumor is immunonegative for leukocyte common antigen (LCA/CD45), S100 protein, desmin, myogenin, synaptophysin, cluster of differentiation 31, ETS-related gene, and transducin-like enhancer of split-1. Immunohistochemical findings were confirmatory for ES (-). The results of a positron emission tomography scan of the whole body were normal. Then the patient was treated by means of radiotherapy.