Written, informed consent was obtained from the patient’s guardian for the publication of this case report.
A Thai male baby was born by elective caesarean section at 34 weeks of gestation by a 19-year-old, primigravida Thai female at a private hospital. The mother did not have any major diseases, and there was no family history of diabetes mellitus. No evidence of complications of pregnancy was found during the antenatal period. Gastroschisis was detected by prenatal ultrasonography during routine screening. Bowel loops were seen herniating into the amniotic cavity, and they were floating without any covering membrane. Dexamethasone (5 mg intramuscularly, with 4 doses 12-hourly) was then administered before pregnancy termination. The baby boy’s birth weight was 1590 g, appropriate for his gestational age. The Apgar scores at the 1st and the 5th min were 9 and 10, respectively. The baby was active, and no associated anomalies were detected.
The baby was shifted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). The intestinal loops were enclosed in a sterile plastic sheet and placed in midline. The blood sugar level was checked immediately, with a result of 114 mg/dL (6.3 mmol/L). Six milliliters per hour (ml/h) of 10 % Dextrose and one-fifth normal saline (10 %D/N/5) were administered with a glucose infusion rate, or GIR, of 6.28 mg/kg/min. A complete blood count and serum electrolyte test were performed, but the results were normal.Subsequently, the baby was transferred to a university tertiary hospital for repair of the gastroschisis. Upon his arrival, the blood sugar level was checked in his 4th hour of life by point-of-care testing (POCT, the Lifescan SureStep Flexx Meter, Lifescan, Inc., United States). The result showed “high”, which was equivalent to a glucose concentration >600 mg/dL in the pertinent plasma. An analysis of the plasma glucose by a laboratory test was not able to be performed because of a difficult venipuncture. However, laboratory tests did show negative findings of urine ketone and urine sugar. The decrement of GIR was adjusted in order to decrease the blood glucose levels. The intravenous fluid was changed to 5 %D/N/5 to keep the GIR at 4–8 mg/kg/min. The POCT was repeated hourly, but the results still revealed “high” even though the GIR was further reduced to 1.65 mg/kg/min at the 6th hour of life. Gastroschisis is considered to be a surgical emergency requiring the closure or coverage of the abdominal contents after birth. A multi-disciplinary team, including paediatric surgeons, anaesthesiologists and neonatologists, were enrolled to discuss the risks and the benefits of delaying surgery. They were concerned about evaporation and heat loss. Stress and infection would also worsen the hyperglycaemic condition. The team finally decided to send the patient to the operative room because of the large abdominal wall defect that needed a sterile site and some special equipment. Meanwhile, fluid resuscitation was performed and POCT was rechecked.
In the operating room, standard monitoring was performed. It included pre- and post-ductal oximetry, an electrocardiogram, non-invasive blood pressure, capnography, temperature, POCT and urine output. A general anaesthesia utilising an endotracheal tube was inducted by administering thiopental and intubating with succinylcholine. The anaesthesia was maintained by using fentanyl, atracurium, isoflurane, air and oxygen. The intraoperative POCT sustained high during the 1st hour of the surgery. The intravenous regular insulin infusion was started at 0.06 units/kg/h, and the glucose infusion rate was reduced to 1.57 mg/kg/min in the 2nd hour. One hour after initiation of the regular insulin, the POCT reading of the baby’s blood sugar level was still immeasurably high. A constant, intravenous glucose infusion rate was maintained. Then, the regular insulin infusion dose was increased from 0.06 to 0.1 units/kg/h, and blood sugar level was checked.
The staged repair, utilising a protective silo placement, lasted for 3 h. The patient remained intubated and received a regular insulin infusion dose of 0.1 units/kg/h while being transferred to the neonatal surgical ICU. His blood sugar level had a tendency to decrease at the 10th hour of life. The first measurable result by POCT was 406 mg/dL, and the venous blood sugar confirmation at that time was 426 mg/dL. Then, 0.06 units/kg/h of intravenous regular insulin infusion was given for 4 h. The regular insulin was stopped at the 14th hour of life when the blood sugar result was 161 mg/dL. The blood sugar level, the insulin infusion and the intraoperative management are summarised at Table . Neither seizure nor convulsion was found during the perioperative period.
The baby was scheduled for a fascial closure on his 3rd day of life. The surgery was uneventful, and he was discharged to home after 2 weeks of admission. His blood sugar level was in the normal range from his 14th hour of life until the hospital discharge, and he did not demonstrate any hyperglycaemic episodes. During the long-term follow-up at the 3rd, 8th, and 20th months of age, the child presented with normal growth and development without any signs of metabolic syndrome or neurological problems.