A 25 days old boy was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit of Nemazee Hospital of Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, due to respiratory distress and mild central cyanosis. A cardiac murmur was detected on out-patient visit. Respiratory rate was 70/minute, pulse rate 147/minute and BP 80/35 mmHg. Pulse was bounding, pericardium active with a single loud P2, and grade 3/6 ejection systolic murmur heard best at apex and left sternal border.
A chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly with increased vascular markings . Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with right QRS axis deviation and biventricular hypertrophy.
Echocardiographic studies revealed situs solitus, intact interatrial septum with normal systemic and pulmonary venous connections. Intact interventricular septum with normal mitral valve and tricuspid valve demonstrated by two dimentional, color mapping and pulsed Doppler studies .
A single arterial trunk with 4 thick leaflets originated from both ventricles with straddling ventricular septum . A gradient of about 44 mmHg measured by continuous wave Doppler was detected between left ventricle and arterial trunk . Anti-failure therapy started while the patient was on waiting list for surgery.
At 7 months of age with possibility of large aorta-pulmonary window versus PTA type B1, cardiac catheterization and angiography was performed. There was a 50 mmHg gradient between left ventricle and arterial trunk.
Left and right ventricular angiogram revealed intact ventricular septum . Arterial trunk angiogram on anterior-posterior view and lateral projections showed opacification of the coronaries, pulmonary arteries and aortic arch .
Operative findings revealed a single arterial trunk emerging from both ventricles which over-rided an intact interventricular septum . The truncal valve was tricuspid. The septal crest was attached to the inferior aspect of one cusp and stretching the confronting commissure by a thick fibrotic raphe dividing the valve into two separate orifices right in the midpart, giving rise to almost one and a half leaflets in each side. There was some fibrous web below the valve in the left side which was resected. The connection of the right ventricular outflow tract to this valve and the trunk was closed by a Gortex patch through the valve. The cusps were left as they were in both sides. The routine repair of the truncus arteriosus was continued by connecting the right ventriculotomy to the main pulmonary artery which was resected from the posterior aspect of the trunk via a 17 mm aortic homograft. The aortic defect was repaired by bovine pericardial patch and the transected aorta reconnected. The patient tolerated the procedure well. He was extubated after 20 hours and discharged on the tenth day of hospitalization.
Post-operative echocardiography 1 week after surgical repair revealed acceptable ejection fraction (64%) with mild pulmonary insufficiency and mean pulmonary artery pressure of 64 mmHg and diastolic pressure of 45 mmHg. On the follow-up 4 months later, the degree of homograft insufficiency was reduced to trivial and mean pulmonary artery pressure was decreased to about 18 mmHg while the patient received sildenafil to control pulmonary arterial hypertension.