A 21-year-old young woman with diabetes was admitted to our hospital due to recurrent nausea and vomiting. She experienced polydipsia and polyuria a year ago and was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. Initially she was treated with acarbose and blood glucose was not monitored. After six months, she discontinued antidiabetic drug at her own discretion. About two months ago, she was taken to the hospital in a coma and was diagnosed with diabetic ketoacidosis. Since then, insulin has been used to control blood glucose. Even though blood glucose control was under control, she still suffered from serious nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain and fatigue. Her body weight gradually lost 15 kg in two months. In order to improve these symptoms, the patient was admitted to our hospital. This patient’s maternal grandfather had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), but her parents are in good health. There were no other family members with diabetes.
On admission, this patient was in a status of very cachectic nutritional. She was 161.0 cm tall and only 35.9 kg in weight. Body mass index (BMI) was only 13.85 kg/m2. Blood pressure was 111 vs. 54 mmHg. The patient has got serious malnutrition and muscular dystrophy. The physical examination of the heart and lungs showed no abnormalities. The patient complained of persistent lower abdominal pain, but the physical examination showed no abnormal abdominal signs.
After hospital admission, insulin was used consistently and blood glucose was well controlled. Both enteral and parenteral nutrition was given to improve nutritional status. A series of examinations were performed to seek the cause of nausea, vomiting, and weakness. At the same time, the etiology of the patient's diabetes was explored.
The patient's liver and kidney function were normal. Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) was 6.7% (normal reference value: 4.0 ~ 6.5%). Fasting serum insulin was 4.12 mU/L (normal reference value: 2.39 ~ 23.29 mU/L) and fasting serum c-peptide was 0.39 ng/ml (normal reference value: 0.81 ~ 3.85 ng/ml). Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) was excluded because of negative diabetes autoantibodies, including glutamate decarboxylase antibody (GADA), protein tyrosine phosphatase antibody (IA-2A), insulin antibody (IAA) and islet cell antibody (ICA). Hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia were found. Serum magnesium was 0.37 mmol/L (normal reference value: 0.7 ~ 1.1 mmol/L) and the fractional excretion of magnesium (FEMg) was 9.7% (normal reference value: < 4%). Serum potassium was 3.32 mmol/L (normal reference value: 3.5 ~ 5.3 mmol/L) and the fractional excretion of potassium (FEK) was 8.5% (normal reference value: < 10%). The patient's thyroid, parathyroid, pituitary, and adrenal functions were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed intrahepatic calcification. Biliary system, pancreas, spleen and genitourinary system were normal. Gastroscopic examination revealed non-atrophic gastritis with bile reflux.
Hypokalemia was quickly corrected after potassium chloride supplementation, but hypomagnesemia was refractory. Genetic testing was considered to screen for a specific type of diabetes due to the patient's refractory hypomagnesemia, unexplained abdominal pain and weight loss. After obtained informed consent from the patient, genetic testing was adopted. By the full exon detection method of chip capture high-throughput sequencing, there was a large heterozygous fragment deletion on chromosome 17, the deletion interval was chr17:34,493,374 to 36,347,081, about 1.85 Mb. And deletion of exons 1–9 of HNF1B heterozygosity missing was approved .
Ultimately, MODY5 with HNF1B heterozygosity missing based on 17q12 recurrent deletion syndrome was diagnosed.