We report a case of 35-year-old gentleman, farmer by profession, with no prior co-morbidities who developed sudden loss of consciousness. The patient presented to a local hospital with ventricular tachycardia. He was successfully resuscitated with the achievement of sinus rhythm. Cardiac catheterization showed tight distal stenosis in left circumflex artery. The patient was then referred to our tertiary care hospital where he presented in the emergency department in hemodynamically stable condition. On plain x-ray chest, the left heart border is slightly rounded . Echocardiography revealed normal sized cardiac chambers with moderately reduced left ventricular systolic function and a large cystic extra cardiac mass abutting the left atrium and anterolateral wall of the left ventricle. No internal vascularity was noted in the mass. The patient then underwent CT chest examination which showed a large well-defined cystic lesion with internal detached membrane (CE3) compressing the left ventricle . CT revealed hydatid cyst arising from the left ventricle. Bilateral lungs, liver and spleen were normal. ELISA-based qualitative assessment of echinococcal IgG confirmed the findings. The patient was then immediately started with albendazole and was rushed to the operating room. Left posterolateral thoracotomy was performed . Pericardium was exposed, and left phrenic nerve was identified. Longitudinal incision was made on the pericardium anterior to the phrenic nerve, and pericardium was retracted. Bulging posterolateral wall of the heart was identified. Left atrium and obtuse marginal branches of left circumflex artery were identified. The hydatid cyst pseudo-capsule was delineated in the posterolateral myocardial wall, and fluid was aspirated. Then, a curvilinear incision was made on the pseudo-capsule. Large hydatid cyst with its daughter cysts was removed completely from the lateral myocardial wall. The cavity was thoroughly irrigated with hypertonic saline solution. Hemostasis was secured, and the walls of the myocardium were left open to prevent abscess formation. Pericardial and pleural chest drains were placed, and chest wall was closed in layers. Patient was extubated after 4 hours in CICU and was discharged on 4th postoperative day. He was kept on albendazole therapy for a year. Patient was seen at regular intervals in the clinic. He remained well with no recurrence of disease. Ethical approval for the publication of this case was granted by the Ethics Review Committee vides “2021-5869-15470.” Informed written consent for participation was obtained from the patient.