A retired brazilian 64-year-old female started to present, 9 months ago, with postprandial vomiting of undigested content and stabbing abdominal pain. Those were constant symptoms that persisted for 12 months. Concomitantly, onset of lower limbs musculoskeletal pain, sporadic frontal headache, fatigue, hyporexia and weight loss of 18 kg in the same period. Few days after the onset of the abdominal and musculoskeletal pain, the patient reported nocturia, with 4 to 5 episodes each night with a foamy urine. The bowel habit alternated between constipated and normal, although there was no change in the appearance of the stool during the period of the disease.
The family history showed no significant informations beyond the low socioeconomic level. There were no significant past interventions related to the current symptoms.
In the investigation of the condition, laboratory tests were requested (complete blood count, electrolytes, calcium, magnesium and pancreatic enzymes). The results showed a significant hypercalcemia and the patient was hospitalized, as we can see in the Fig. , which shows the disease timeline. At the time of admission, she was in good general condition, with diffuse cutaneous pallor, hypotrophic and eutonic muscles, discrete lower limb edema, capillary refill time of less than 3 s, anicteric, acyanotic and afebrile. She had a heart rate of 82 beats per minute, blood pressure of 160/80 mmHg and was eupneic. There were no abnormalities in the respiratory and cardiovascular examination. In the abdominal deep palpation, it was possible to notice mesogastric pain. It’s also important to take note of telangiectasias in the malleolar region of both limbs, and hypochromic and hyperchromic lower limb macules measuring up to 0.5 cm which, according to the patient, were local and severely itchy.
At the time, the main diagnostic hypotheses were multiple myeloma, hyperparathyroidism, pancreatitis secondary to hypercalcemia, osteolytic neoplasms and other cancers that present with hypercalcemia.
More laboratory tests were made, showing a normocytic and hypochromic anemia (Hb: 8.2 g/dL; Ht: 24.2%; MCV: 84.9 fL), leukocytes of 61,000/mm3 and platelets of 23,600/mm3. Also a serum calcium of 11.67 mg/dL and ionizable calcium of 6.51 mg/dL. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) was decreased (13.58 pg/mL) and there were high levels of urea (101.7 mg/dL) and creatinine (3.97 mg/dL), setting up a framework of acute kidney injury which lasted 2 months, not requiring renal replacement therapy.
Following the investigation of multiple myeloma and other pathologies, it was found an unchanged chest radiograph, normal values of immunoglobulins (IgA, IgG, IgM and total IgE), a normal myelogram and bone marrow biopsy showing only dysplastic abnormalities, not consistent with multiple myeloma.
Not confirming the previous diagnostic hypothesis, the team decided to perform the 25-hydroxy vitamin D dosage, which showed high serum values (100 ng/dL), as well as the diluted vitamin D test, which also presented high values (374 ng/dl), confirming the diagnosis of hypervitaminosis D.
Despite denying the use of non-prescribed drugs, when asked specifically about vitamins, the patient reported taking various vitamin complexes, including cholecalciferol once daily for about 6 months. She had access to several of them through samples provided by a close relative. Thus, exogenous vitamin D intoxication was diagnosed to the team’s surprise.
The team maintained hypercalcemic crisis management with pharmacological measures, in addition to prescribed paroxetine hydrochloride (20 mg once daily) to relieve the patient’s anxiety. The procedures performed were mainly vigorous hydration (50 ml/kg in 2 h), furosemide, bisphosphonates and blood pressure control with amlodipine and atenolol. Related to hypervitaminosis, behavior measures were conducted, with immediate cessation of supplementation use.
In July , the patient was discharged from hospital in remission of musculoskeletal and gastrointestinal symptoms, weight gain, serum calcium values ​​of 10.76 mg/dL and ionizable calcium values of 6.52 mg/dL. According to serum calcium, we could access the adherence to behavioral measures, with complete cessation of vitamin D use. However, she was discharged with permanent renal damage. A serum creatinine of 1,77 mg/dl for a period of more than 3 months was noted on follow-up, closing a diagnosis of chronic kidney disease class KDIGO 4.