A 52-year old man was diagnosed with squamous-cell esophageal cancer of the lower third. Pretherapeutical investigations included endoscopical biopsy, CT scan, endosonography and mediastinoscopy with lymph-node biopsy. These investigations showed a locally advanced stage T4N1 cancer.
The patient was scheduled for two cycles of neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy with cisplatin 100 mg per m2 and 5-FU 1000 mg per m2. After the first chemotherapy cycle the patient developed grade 3 mucositis and esophagitis combined with an infection of the port-a-cath system, which had to be removed. This intense toxicity gave us reason to search for a dihydropyrimidin-dehydrogenase-deficiency. The result of the genetic testing was negative. Because of the toxic esophagitis and mucositis the patient refused to undergo the planned radiotherapy. From the second cycle continous 5-FU was replaced by oral capecitabine because of the port-a-cath infection and cetuximab was added as an alternative to radiotherapy after informed consent in a compassionate use setting. The EGFR-testing had shown a strong overexpression in all tumor cells. The treatment consisted of an intravenous standard loading dose of 400 mg per m2 after administration of diphenhydramine and ranitidine and continued with 250 mg per m2 once weekly for four weeks. After five weeks the patient developed disseminated pustules with generalized deeply infiltrated erythematous plaques highly indicative for a severe acute generalized exanthematic pustulosis (AGEP) as shown in figure . These symptoms diminished after four days of dexamethasone, cefuroxime, silver sulfadiazine cream and diphenhydramine therapy. Because of this severe adverse effect cetuximab was stopped and a restaging CT scan was performed.
Reevaluation showed nearly no remission of the tumor as well as stable disease in the suspect lymph nodes. Because of lack of response and the intense toxicity the patient wanted to stop the neoadjuvant therapy and proceeded to transthoracic en bloc oesophagectomy five weeks after the last cetuximab application. Replacement of the esophagus was performed with an orthotopic gastric tube and cervical esophago-gastrostomy. On the third postoperative day a leakage from the right thoracic drain was observed and the following immediate revision operation showed an erosion of the stomach, which was most likely caused by a thoracic drain positioned in the vicinity of the gastric tube. The anastomosis 3 cm above the defect was completely intact with macroscopic sufficient blood circulation. Because of an additional fibrinous pleurisy we had to conduct a disconnection esophagostomy, catheter-gastrostomy and -jejunostomy for early enteral feeding. After four days the patient developed an airleak of the left main bronchus just below the tracheal bifurcation. At the time of the first bronchoscopy we found a 5 mm ulcer where the tracheal tube cuff was located during the operation until extubation on the first postoperative day. Within four days the defect's size increased by fourfold as shown in figure and a tracheal stent had to be implanted. This stent successfully closed the leak for several hours until a second leakage above the first was observed which was covered by the cuff of the tracheal tube. Neither the stent nor the cuff could successfully reduce the airleak and the situation demanded a right-sided intubation. Three days later the patient died due to refractory gas exchange dysfunction and circulation instability.
The patient's squamous-cell esophageal cancer of the lower third (35 – 38 cm from incisor teeth) was treated by en bloc transthoracic oesophagectomy with paraesophageal, paratracheal, aorto-pulmonary and paracardial lymphadenectomy including lymph nodes of the splenic, hepatic and celiac arteries followed by cervical esophagogastrostomy under general anesthesia with separate intubation. The operation time was 4.5 hours and the blood loss approximately 600 ml. The reoperation consisted of a disconnection esophagostomy, catheter-gastrostomy and -jejunostomy. The tracheal leakage was treated by a 12 French Dumont silicone stent.
Histologic tumor studies were done by haematology and eosin staining and EGFR-overexpression was measured by EGFR Pharm Dx kit K 1494 (Dako Cytomation).
The oesophageal tumour was staged as ypT3 N1(9/25) MX R0 on final pathology. After reoperation the histologic examination of the resected specimen revealed extensive ischemic necrosis of the gastric mucosa with erosions and microabscesses, oedematous submucosa and the muscular and serosal layer next to the defect in good order.
The autopsy showed massive fibrinous pleurisy, mediastinitis, left-sided bronchitis and bronchopneumonia in addition to the 2 cm tracheal defect of the membranous part of the left main bronchus. Histological complete tracheal wall destruction was observed with fibrin, necrotic areas and focal formation of granulation tissue without evidence of residual tumour .