A 73-year-old male patient presented with gradual gait difficulty and four-limb weakness. The patient also complained of persistent dull pain in the occipitocervical region. There was no history of previous trauma. The patient was under treatment for hypertension and had a history of lumbar laminectomy and discectomy several years ago. Physical examination revealed spastic quadriparesis (3/5 on the right and 2/5 on the left), positive Hoffmann's sign, extensor plantar response, and increased deep tendon reflexes. The gait appeared to be spastic, but cerebellar examinations were within normal range. Although the patient was complaining of tingling in all extremities, no apparent deficit was found during routine sensory examinations.
With a high suspicion of a space-occupying lesion, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which revealed a tumor with bony characteristics at the level of the foramen magnum. The tumor created significant compression of the cervicomedullary junction . 3D bone computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the lesion to arise from right suboccipital bone containing both cortical and cancellous elements [Figure and ]. On CT myelography, cord compression was apparent .
The patient underwent a right medial suboccipital craniectomy under general anesthesia in the prone position. A Mayfield clamp was applied and the midline incision was made from just above the inion to the C2 spinous process. The suboccipital muscles were dissected subperiosteally on the right side. A small right medial suboccipital craniectomy plus unilateral removal of the C1 posterior arch was done to visualize all parts of the tumor, which necessitated removing the posterolateral rim of the foramen magnum. The solid bony lesion was resected totally using air drill and rongeur. Fortunately, the tumor had no encroachment on the dura mater of the posterior fossa or right vertebral artery and was completely resected.
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient had significant recovery immediately after the operation. Postoperative CT scan confirmed removal of the lesion .
The pathological examination of the specimens revealed mature bone trabecules covered by the cartilaginous tissue with no atypia or mitotic figure, in favor of an osteochondroma .
At 18 months follow-up, all of the patient's symptoms resolved except for intermittent headache, which might be attributed to the craniectomy site. Mild limb spasticity remained.