A 38-year-old Spanish woman, current smoker, with hypothyroidism and obesity (90 kg, BMI 35) was referred in March 2021 from Primary Care to the Internal Medicine Department. She had persistent fever for 5 days (38°–39 °C) and asthenia. The first evaluation revealed the presence of fever, parotid enlargement, bilateral anterior uveitis, and peripheral facial palsy on the left side. In the chest X-ray, it was noticed the presence of bilateral hilar adenopathies, with better visualization in the thorax tomography . The blood tests showed an angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) value of 77 U/L (normal value 12–40); the rest of parameters: hemogram, liver and renal test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), c reactive protein (CRP), serum calcium, ferritin, proteinogram, serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis E virus (HEV), QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test, antinuclear antibodies and several autoimmune tests were negative. Urine, blood and sputum cultures were negative.
With the clinical manifestations and the complementary tests, the diagnosis of Heerfordt syndrome as manifestation of acute sarcoidosis was established. Since the syndrome with pulmonary hiliar adenopathies is considered pathognomonic of sarcoidosis, it was decided to treat without histopathology confirmation. Oral prednisone was prescribed at a dose of 30 mg/day, for two months with subsequent control.
In the first evaluation after a month of treatment, she was better. The fever and the parotid enlargement had subsided, the left facial palsy improved. The ophthalmological evaluation showed resolution of the uveitis, with normal ocular examination. However, she had new clinical data: headache, dizziness, and upper limbs paresthesia. Her blood count, chemistry tests, ESR, CRP, urine and thorax X-Ray were normal. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed normal results. In addition, the upper limb electroneurogram showed sensitive involvement in the median nerve at the level of the right carpal tunnel. As no neurological involvement of sarcoidosis was demonstrated and other possible causes of the symptoms were ruled out, prednisone was continued at 30 mg/day for a month more with subsequent taper until discontinuation in 2 months.
In June 2021 she was evaluated, and all of her symptoms had resolved. However, four days after discontinuing glucocorticoids, she consulted again for decreased vision, pain and ocular erythema. A bilateral panuveitis was diagnosed (positive Tyndall, posterior synechiae, vitreous condensation and papilla thickening) by eye fundus examination and Optical Coherence Tomography. She was treated with topical glucocorticoids and cycloplegics. One week later, the patient presented worsening of her uveitis symptoms in addition to fever of 38 °C. The patient was admitted and treated with intravenous methylprednisolone pulses at a dose of 500 mg/day for 3 days. The ophthalmologic response was very satisfactory, with remission of pain, and almost complete recovery of visual acuity. After discussing the case in the Multidisciplinary Committee of Autoimmune Diseases, it was decided to add to the treatment methotrexate (20 mg/week SC) and adalimumab (40 mg/2 weeks SC), in addition to prednisone (20 mg/day PO).
A month later the patient reported improvement of her symptoms: no fever, improvement of her visual acuity. Her paresthesias had also improved. It was decided to maintain the dosage of the prescribed medication.
In August 2021 she consulted several times due to persistent headache, fever, and asthenia. It was decided to increase the daily dose of oral prednisone from 20 to 1 mg/Kg/day (80 mg) for 10 days in addition to methotrexate and adalimumab. A month later she continued with the same symptoms and was admitted for monitoring and to rule out other possible etiology (i. e. central nervous system infection). During the admission the patient presented with a fever of 38 C and persistence of holocranial headache. Occasionally she presented anomia and paraphasias. Ophthalmological examination showed new signs of uveitis. The patient reported adequate compliance with methotrexate and adalimumab treatment. Her blood tests showed hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL (normal value 13–16), ESR 46 mm/h (normal value 0–20), CRP 0.7 mg/L (normal value < 5) aspartate transaminase (AST) 140 IU/L (normal value 0–37), alanine transaminase (ALT) 225 IU/L (normal value 0–40), angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) 20 U/L (normal value 12–40) Ca 3.9 mEq/L (normal value 8.5–10.5). Urine, blood and sputum cultures were negative. Other tests: ferritin, proteinogram, serology for HIV, HBV, HCV, HEV, QuantiFERON-TB Gold Test, antinuclear antibodies and autoimmune tests were normal or negative. Lumbar puncture was performed with 30 leukocytes (90% mononuclear), glucose, proteins, and normal adenosine deaminase. In addition to negativity for Gram, acid and alcohol fast bacilli (AAFB), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for enterovirus and mycobacteria, herpes simplex virus (HSV), varicela herpes virus (VHZ); antineuronal antibodies were negative.
The electroencephalogram was normal. Brain MRI and AngioMRI showed scarce punctate images with signal of hyperintensity in subcortical white matter of frontal predominance in relation to possible demyelination/nonspecific gliosis, without foci of restriction, space-occupying lesions, or hemorrhagic foci. Echobronchoscopy showed subcarinal lymphadenopathies. A needle aspiration biopsy of hiliar thoracic lymphadenopathies was performed, and the result showed granulomatous lymphadenitis of sarcoid type . Cytology and microbiology samples were negative. Flow cytometry showed no alteration of the T lymphocytes, non-Hodgkin B lymphoma was ruled out.
The case was discussed again in the Multidisciplinary Committee of Systemic Autoimmune Diseases. It was decided to discontinue methotrexate, due to hepatotoxicity. Given the suspicion of neurological sarcoidosis, adalimumab was changed to cyclophosphamide plus infliximab. After obtaining informed consent, methylprednisolone boluses were prescribed (500 mg/day for 3 days IV), followed by cyclophosphamide (500 mg/ each 2 weeks IV) and infliximab (450 mg/each cycle IV—5 mg/Kg weight—at weeks 0, 2, 6 and then every 8 weeks. Subsequent dose of prednisone of 15 mg/day PO. After 3 months with this treatment, she had no fever normal, had normal visual acuity, and the headache decreased. As a sequel her right eye had mydriasis and snowballs in the eye fundus examination. The patient noticed an improvement in the intensity of the initial symptoms of her disease with the treatments administered. However, she noticed a decrease in her quality of life. The patient follow-up continues. Timeline of the disease process is described in Fig.