A 76-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted for a trabeculectomy in the left phakic eye (LE) for uncontrolled open-angle glaucoma. Visual acuity (VA) was 4/10. The patient denied a history of systemic illness apart from type II diabetes mellitus.
Uncomplicated trabeculectomy was performed during which an Ologen implant was placed on top of the scleral flap under the conjunctiva before the final suturing. On the first post-operative day, there was a diffuse superior bleb. The anterior chamber (AC) was half normal depth and contained a minimal reaction of 1+ cells and flare . One week post-operatively the situation was unchanged. Ten days post-operatively, our patient complained of LE discharge pain and VA decreased to "light-perception". Anterior chamber had 3+ cells and flare, and there was also 2 mm layered hypopyon with plastic fibrin across the pupillary margin . Vitreous involvement was present obscuring visualization of the fundus.
On the same day the patient underwent vitrectomy, during which the vitreous cutter was placed in the mid vitreous and before turning on the infusion, 0.5 mL vitreous sample was aspirated. Subsequently the infusion was turned on and the cortical vitreous was excised. An intra-vitreal injection of vancomycin and amikacin was administered. The Ologen implant was not removed from the trabeculectomy since there were no signs of severe blebitis. Vitrectomy cassette and samples were sent to the laboratory. Ologen implants from the same batch, with the one used, were sent for culture; additionally, blood samples and samples from our patient's conjunctiva were send for culture. Avelox tablets 400 mg (moxifloxacin-hydrochloride) twice a day, ofloxacin and dexamethasone drops four times a day and atropine drops twice a day, were administered post-operatively.
Our patient responded well to treatment and infection started resolving from the first post-operative day. Cultures from both undiluted vitreous and cassette grew Lactobacillus brevis, blood and cultures from the conjunctival samples and the collagen implants (from the same batch) were negative for any microorganism. One week later fundus reflex was visible in slit-lamp biomicroscopy , and 30 days later VA was 1/10 and intra-ocular pressure 14 mmHg. Six months later our patient underwent uncomplicated phacoemulsification and intra-ocular lens implantation. Eight months after initial surgery VA is 2/10 and intra-ocular pressure is 14 mmHg without any anti-glaucoma medication.