The patient was an 80-year-old female who developed progressive paralysis of the lower extremities and radicular pain of the left leg, which confined her to a wheelchair daily over the past two years. Sensory disturbances of the anterior bilateral thighs, lateral crura and dorsum of the feet were found through physical examination. The Lasegue sign of the left leg was positive, and the bilateral Babinski signs were negative. Flexion and extension lateral lumbar radiographs showed relative dynamic stability at all lumbar segments . Lumbar computed tomography (CT) showed multilevel degenerative stenosis and L4 spondylolisthesis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed serious stenosis from L1-2 to L5-S1 and left lateral recess stenosis at L5-S1 .
According to the patient's symptoms, physical examination, and imaging findings, the patient did not have significant lumbar instability, which was also the indication of non-fusion surgery. Because of multilevel severe stenosis and extensive neurological defects, it was difficult to identify one or two segments as the responsible segments. One stage surgery would take longer operation time and more intraoperative blood loss. So we performed staged procedures. In the first stage procedure, the patient's radicular pain of lower limb was considered, double ULBD at L4-5 and L5-S1 from the left side was performed through first-stage UBE to decompress the bilateral L5 and S1 nerve roots and dural sacs .
The left leg pain improved significantly the first day after the first-stage procedure. But the patient still could not realize to walk independently. So we continued to perform ULBD at L3-4, L2-3 and L1-2 from the same side one week after the first-stage surgery. The bilateral L3, L2, and L1 nerve roots and dural sacs were decompressed through the second-stage procedure . Bilateral nerve roots were exposed at all segments to ensure adequate lateral decompression of the lumbar canal .
Celecoxib was given to relieve the low back pain postoperatively. The patient recovered to ambulate with a Boston brace after the second-stage surgery and rehabilitative training. The patient was discharged home after her low back pain was relieved, and she was able to bend and stretch her back . Postoperative lumbar radiographs showed the range of laminectomies and decompressed lumbar spinal canals . The patient has been followed-up for 1 year since the second-stage operation and reports significantly improved pain levels and the ability to complete daily activities. The 1-year follow-up's imagings showed satisfactory decompression of lumbar spinal canals, and the spondylolisthesis of L4 still not progressed .