The patient was a 9-month-old girl with no pertinent medical history. She had suffered vomiting and diarrhea for 1 week and was then transferred to our hospital. She looked exhausted and apathetic to her surroundings, and abdominal distention without tenderness was noted. Blood tests revealed microcytic anemia with a hemoglobin level of 5.8 g/dL, but results of biochemical tests, including measurements of hepatic, renal, and pancreatic enzymes, were within normal ranges, and levels of inflammation markers were not elevated . Careful documentation of the history with the parents revealed no episode of abdominal pain or blunt trauma to the abdomen since birth.
Abdominal ultrasonography depicted massive ascites. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a cystic mass, approximately 2 cm in diameter, anterior to the second portion of duodenum . The cyst exhibited hypointensity on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and high intensity on T2-weighted MRI . We suspected intra-abdominal ruptured lymphatic malformation at this point. After blood transfusion to correct the anemia, exploratory laparotomy revealed that the peritoneal cavity was filled with bloody ascites and clots, and the omentum was found to cover the second portion of the duodenum. After removing the omentum from the duodenal wall, we found a pinhole in the anterior wall of the cyst, which was misdiagnosed as a duodenal perforation. The pinhole was closed with absorbable sutures and an omental patch .
Five days after laparotomy, blood tests showed an elevation in serum pancreatic amylase levels (up to 314 U/L). CT depicted a slightly enhanced fluid collection adjacent to the duodenum, which was indicative of abdominal abscess and minor leakage from the closed pinhole. We stopped the patient’s oral feeding, initiated intravenous hyperalimentation, and continued intravenous antibiotics. One week later, the abscess-like lesion appeared smaller on CT, and no leakage was observed in an upper gastrointestinal contrast study.
We restarted oral feeding; however, the serum amylase level did not normalize. The drainage tube was removed, and then the serum amylase level rose to 1109 U/L. One month after the laparotomy, MRI showed significantly increased ascites in the left upper abdomen, whereas the cystic lesion became much smaller, and the pancreas appeared normal .
The ascites was drained through a small incision while the patient was under general anesthesia. The amount of pancreatic amylase in the ascites was excessive (11,069 U/L), which suggested that pancreatic fluid had been leaking continuously into the peritoneal cavity. We initiated total parenteral nutrition via a central venous catheter. Treatment with octreotide was also initiated to decrease the secretion of pancreatic fluid. Despite these maximum efforts with conservative therapy, the patient remained unable to tolerate sufficient oral feeding, and total parenteral nutrition was continued.
Three months after the laparotomy, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed while the patient was under general anesthesia. Endoscopic findings revealed that the minor papilla was more developed than the major papilla . Contrast medium injected into the major papilla revealed a thread-like tortuous hypoplastic ventral pancreatic duct in communication with a relatively dilated dorsal pancreatic duct. The dilated dorsal pancreatic duct ended in a pancreatic pseudocyst near the minor papilla. This pseudocyst was misidentified as the anterior wall of the duodenum during laparotomy and an abscess-like lesion on CT after the first surgery. ERCP showed that contrast medium was leaking from the pancreatic pseudocyst into the peritoneal cavity . These findings were highly suggestive of PD.
Endoscopic placement of the pancreatic stent was planned together with second laparotomy for draining the abdominal pancreatic fluid. We tried to insert the pancreatic stent via the minor papilla, but it was not possible because the minor papilla was almost completely obstructed. Instead, the stent was inserted via the major papilla across the junction of the ventral and dorsal pancreatic ducts, and two drainage tubes were placed in the peritoneum near the surface of the pancreatic pseudocyst.
After the second laparotomy, the serum amylase level normalized, and the patient’s condition improved, although the pancreatic stent spontaneously became dislodged 3 days after its placement. The postoperative level of amylase in the drain fluid gradually increased. The peritoneal drains were replaced 2 weeks after laparotomy, but then the volume of drainage decreased, and the level of serum amylase rose again. Although another pancreatic stent was placed endoscopically through the major papilla, it was not effective in achieving adequate drainage.
The anastomosis of pseudocyst with alimentary tract was considered to be ideal, but the wall of the pseudocyst, as depicted by serial ultrasonography, seemed too fragile to perform it. Thus, we selected endoscopic ultrasonography-guided pseudocyst drainage. Enhanced CT had most recently shown that the pseudocyst was 28 × 20 mm in size and adjacent to the stomach. Under the guidance of endoscopic ultrasonography, the pseudocyst was punctured via the gastric wall, and a 7-Fr pigtail catheter was placed to serve as a stent . The serum amylase level then normalized quickly, and the pancreatic fluid stopped leaking completely. The patient was discharged home; her hospitalization had lasted 7 months.
The patient is currently healthy and putting on weight. However, because the pseudocyst has not shrunk, the pigtail catheter must be exchanged while she is under general anesthesia every 4 months.