A 68-year-old Asian man presented to our out-patient department with lower back and bilateral leg pain for 1 year. The symptom was described as a “tingling sensation,” and the pain in both his thighs was aggravated by walking for more than 20 minutes. The diagnosis was neurogenic intermittent claudication, which was not relieved by analgesics, muscle relaxants, and other medications. Lumbar spine magnetic resonance imaging showed degenerative spondylolisthesis and severe degenerative central canal and bilateral foraminal stenosis .
At first, we performed a transforaminal nerve root block, but his symptoms did not improve. We discussed his condition with a specialist from our anesthesiology department to formulate a plan for managing his symptoms. We decided to perform percutaneous epidural neuroplasty with a Racz catheter. If his symptoms and signs were not relieved with neuroplasty, a surgical procedure would be considered.
After obtaining our patient’s informed consent, we transferred him to our operation room, and he was placed in a prone position. Following sterile preparation and draping, we inserted a 16-gauge RX Coudé needle through his sacral hiatus. We performed epidurography with 10 ml of water-soluble contrast media. Before the epidural catheter was inserted, we checked its integrity by injecting 1 ml of sodium chloride to flush the catheter. The Racz neuroplasty catheter was inserted through the needle under continuous fluoroscopy. Undue resistance or abnormality did not occur during the insertion of the catheter and injection of materials. We injected 1500 units of hyaluronidase in 10 ml of normal saline. In addition, 9 ml of 0.125 % bupivacaine and 4 mg of dexamethasone were injected. After the injections, the anesthesiologist tried to pull out the catheter in the epidural space. During the procedure, our patient experienced severe burning pain on both buttock areas and suddenly moved his back and legs on the surgical table. We made him relax by injecting analgesics. Following this event, our patient complained of radiating pain on his left buttock. The anesthesiologist felt resistance while removing the catheter. Under fluoroscopy, the catheter could not be removed because it was trapped in the left foraminal portion of the vertebra. The distal tip of the sheared catheter was exposed and was palpable in the subcutaneous layer of the puncture site. As the anesthesiologist pulled the end portion of the catheter, the wire of the epidural catheter stretched out of shape and was not removed.
During the procedure, the epidural catheter was finally broken. The anesthesiologist continuously tried to remove the broken catheter in the coccyx but was unsuccessful. Subsequently, our patient experienced more severe radiating pain in his left leg. Lumbar spine three-dimensional computed tomography (CT) revealed that the epidural catheter tip was located at the left neural foraminal inlet at the lumbar vertebral body 5 (L5) to sacral vertebral body 1 (S1) level . We explained the errant issue and its possible complications to our patient. We decided to perform surgical removal of the broken neuroplasty catheter with his consent. He was moved to our operating room and placed in a prone position under general anesthesia.
A total punch laminectomy was performed, starting from the lower margin of the lamina of lumbar vertebral body 4 (L4). The catheter was confirmed to be present in the inlet area of the left L5 to S1 facet and was removed by retraction. The size of the retained catheter was 12 cm . After identifying the nerve root of L4, we performed foraminotomy. The nerve root of L5 was trapped in the bony structure. The facet joints on L4 to L5 were totally removed. Subsequently, both L4 nerves were released. While the thecal sac and nerve root were retracted, discectomy was performed at the L4 to L5 level. We performed lumbar interbody fusion with cages and transpedicular screw fixations on L4 to L5 and then closed the surgical wound. Our patient’s symptoms subsided after the surgery. There was no evidence of infection at the operation site. During a 12-month postsurgical follow-up period, our patient experienced no symptoms and no neurological deficits.