A 76-year-old Chinese male, with a history of heavy smoking (30 pack-years), presented to a local hospital due to continuous coughing and phlegm in September 2016. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a space-occupying lesion in the left lower lobe and left pleural effusion, and central type lung cancer was considered. In May 2017, the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination. CT scan identified several solitary lumps in the left lower lobe, and the patient also had mediastinal lymphadenopathy and pleural metastasis . An immunohistochemistry (IHC) examination of the transbronchial needle aspiration biopsy specimen revealed that the tumor cells exhibited a strong positive staining for CK5/6, P40, and P63 . Based on the IHC examination, the patient was diagnosed with stage IV squamous cell lung carcinoma (pT4N3M1). According to the patient’s wishes and the exclusion of treatment contraindications, the patient underwent treatment with endostar (a novel recombinant human endostatin) combined with chemotherapy: docetaxel and cisplatin. Though the clinical effect assessment showed a PR, the patient ceased treatment due to emerging chemotherapy-induced side effects, namely supraventricular tachycardia. Then, amplification refractory mutation system PCR, to assess the tissue biopsy for EGFR exon 18–21, showed a deletion mutation in exon 19 of EGFR , prompting the initiation of the EGFR-inhibitor icotinib (125 mg tid). A month later, a CT scan revealed a slight enlargement of the primary mass and multiple nodules in the lung compared with the day before the icotinib treatment . Based on the unsatisfactory therapeutic effects, the patient received docetaxel and cisplatin again. In order to establish effective therapy and re-evaluate the molecular features, DNA was extracted from the fresh puncture sample and was subjected to DNA sequencing analysis using next-generation sequencing (NGS). The result showed that the patient had HER2 exon 8 S310Y mutation (c.929C>A) with an allelic fraction of 42.49% and wild-type EGFR . Thus, afatinib administration began on November 20, 2017 after prior therapy showed no clinical response. Shortly after the afatinib treatment, the patient experienced rapid clinical symptom relief. After 1 month of the afatinib therapy, a repeated CT scan demonstrated a slight decreased tumor size in the left lobe . According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors guidelines (version 1.1), the patient was considered to have stable disease (SD) in response to afatinib. During the treatment with afatinib, there were no treatment-related adverse events, including no abnormal hepatic and renal functions. Thus far, after 8 months, no progressive disease has been observed in the patient and he is continuing the treatment with afatinib.
This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the Zhejiang Provincial People’s Hospital. Written informed consent has also been provided by the patient for publishing the case details and accompanying images in the case study.