A 61-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with pleuritic chest pain. Ten days earlier, he underwent pulmonary vein isolation (PVI) by cryothermal ablation for treatment of paroxysmal AF at another hospital.
His medical history included diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and AF, for which he was treated with empagliflozin, dabigatran, and bisoprolol. His physical examination was unremarkable except for a pericardial friction rub. His electrocardiogram (ECG) showed diffuse ST-elevation with a concave pattern and PR depression. Laboratory results, including troponin levels, were within normal limits. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated preserved ventricular function and a small to medium circumferential pericardial effusion . He was hospitalized with a presumptive diagnosis of pericarditis and promptly treated with 0.5 mg/kg/day of prednisone and 0.5 mg colchicine twice daily. Clinical improvement followed, and after 4 days, he was discharged with a recommendation to complete the course of the treatment and follow-up in the community.
Six days after discharge, he presented to the ED again with severe weakness and fatigue, a single syncopal episode, blood-tinted vomitus, and pleuritic chest pain. His blood pressure was 80/50 mmHg, his temperature 38.5°C, and his oxygen saturation 96% in room air. Laboratory examination revealed haemoglobin of 11.2 gr/dL (normal range 12–16 gr/dL), mild neutrophilia of 9.23 103/uL (normal range 1.9–8 103/uL), and a creatinine level of 1.72 mg/dL (normal range 0.5–0.95 mg/dL) with a high urea concentration of 114.1 mg/dL (normal range 17–43 mg/dL). Troponin levels were normal. A nasogastric tube was inserted and drained a large amount of coffee-ground matter with no evidence of active bleeding. Bedside TTE showed no differences from the previous study. The presumptive diagnosis was mediastinitis due to AOF following PVI cryoablation. The patient received 2000 cc of intravenous fluids, 0.5 mcg/kg/min of norepinephrine, and broad-spectrum antibiotics: amoxicillin clavulanate (1 g tid) and fluconazole 400 mg once daily. Non-gated CT angiography demonstrated multiple mediastinal lymph nodes and a small amount of fluid in the mediastinum and pericardium without extravasation of contrast medium from the left atrium into the oesophagus and with no pneumomediastinum or pneumopericardium . Brain CT showed no focal lesion.
During the next several hours, the patient developed multiorgan failure, his haemoglobin level declined to 9.7 mg/dL, and his creatinine level rose to 1.83 mg/dL. He was intubated and mechanically ventilated, yet there was still no definitive proof of AOF. At this time (the day after his second admission), a third TTE showed the same amount of pericardial effusion, preserved biventricular function, and no air in the cardiac cavities (Clip 1). The study was completed by injection of 10 mL of agitated saline through the nasogastric tube, which was retracted to the mid-oesophagus in order for the tip to be at the presumptive level of the atrium. Immediately after the injection, bubbles appeared in the left atrium and left ventricle, confirming the diagnosis of AOF (/Clip2).
With a definitive diagnosis of AOF, the patient was transferred to the operating room and underwent surgical repair of a left atrium necrotic rupture in the posterior wall and adjacent to the left inferior pulmonary vein using a pericardial patch. Gastroscopy was performed within 24 h for definitive closure of the fistula from the oesophageal side. On examination, a 12 mm tear was found in the low oesophagus and closed with four endoclips. The postoperative period was characterized by high-grade fever and haemodynamic instability. The patient was treated with meropenem (1 g tid) and 100 mg micafungin per day due to positive polymicrobial (Streptococcus constellatus, Candida glabrata, and Candida albicans) pleural fluid cultures.
After 30 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged for rehabilitation.