A 70-year-old white man presented with a history of lower urinary tract symptoms suggestive of prostatic enlargement. His background history included appendicectomy, diverticulitis, hypertension, and past heavy alcohol intake. He denied any significant family history. On examination, his prostate was found to be smooth and mildly enlarged. At this stage his PSA was measured at 1.8. Within 2 months it nearly doubled to 3.2 and a hard nodule was now felt on the right side of his prostate. He had a prostate biopsy under ultrasound guidance 3 months later and was found to have adenocarcinoma with Gleason score of 9 (5+4). Of the cores examined, 11 out of 17 were positive for adenocarcinoma. His prostate volume was 27 cc.
He underwent staging with a bone scan and CT of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis. There was no evidence of metastatic disease but there was evidence suggestive of liver cirrhosis on CT. After lengthy discussion with his urologist and radiation oncologist he proceeded with external beam radiotherapy with neoadjuvant and adjuvant androgen deprivation therapy. He received 76 Gy in 38 fractions using a conformal technique within 8 months of the prostate biopsy. He was also commenced on 3-monthly Eligard (leuprolide acetate also known as leuprorelin) subcutaneous injections (22.5 mg) over his lower abdomen for androgen deprivation.
He started to note the development of abnormal swelling over his deltoids to the extent that it was interfering with his activities of daily living. The swelling was so large that he was unable to wear some shirts and he was unable to abduct and forward flex his shoulder joint which made reaching over his head to retrieve items from cupboards very difficult. He noticed these swellings over the 2 months post his first Eligard (leuprolide acetate also known as leuprorelin) injection ; however, this was not raised until one of his radiotherapy sessions. On examination he was noted to have a raised soft mass over his deltoids bilaterally measuring approximately 10 cm in diameter. His leuprolide injection was ceased. During the period of leuprolide treatment (9 months) he did not have any regimen change to his regular medications. His PSA and testosterone levels at the end of his radiotherapy were 0.03 ng/mL and 1 nmol/L respectively. Upon stopping the leuprolide injections he did note his hot flushes symptom had improved. A thorax CT was performed and confirmed these masses to be adipose tissue. He went to see a plastic surgeon who performed liposuction of the lipodystrophies on his deltoid regions. This had a good effect at 6 months postoperative follow up .
On his most recent follow up, he unfortunately showed signs of clinical relapse with a rising PSA from 0.75 ng/mL and testosterone of 26.8 nmol/L (January 2014) to a PSA of 24 ng/mL and testosterone level of 34.1 nmol/L (September 2014) as well as evidence of bone metastases on a repeat bone scan. He was then recommenced on goserelin acetate 10.8 mg 3-monthly subcutaneous injection as a single agent for further treatment which has so far seemed successful.