A 52-year-old man was diagnosed with carcinoma on his EGJ following complaints of appetite loss. A histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen revealed adenosquamous carcinoma at a previous hospital. He was then referred to our hospital.
He had undergone appendectomy due to appendicitis at 13 years of age. He was an ex-smoker and drank 360 ml of distilled spirits every day. His height and weight were 178.1 cm and 51.9 kg, respectively. His body temperature was elevated to 38.5 °C. A hematologic examination showed inflammatory reaction (white blood cell 12430/μL, neutrophil cell 86%, and C-reactive protein 4.80 mg/dL), mild renal disorder (blood urea nitrogen 26.8 mg/dL and creatinine 1.07 mg/dL), and alkaline phosphatase elevation (361 U/L). All tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9) were within the respective normal ranges. Bacterial cultivation of the blood, sputum, and urine showed no obvious infectious findings.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a 150-mm (100 mm esophageal side and 50 mm gastric side) type 1 tumor on his EGJ that was obstructing the passage of food . The epicenter of the tumor appeared to be on the esophagus. A histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen revealed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma at the gastric side; however, only necrotic tissue was observed at the esophageal side. Endoscopically, there was no evidence of Barrett’s esophagus.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography did not reveal any invasion of the adjacent structures; however, five swollen regional lymph nodes were detected. 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with computed tomography did not reveal distant metastases. We clinically diagnosed his tumor as advanced esophageal cancer, Lt Ae G, type 1, 150 mm, well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, cT3 N2 M0, cStage IIIB according to the Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification of malignant tumors, seventh edition (UICC-TNM 7th).
We performed video-assisted thoracic subtotal esophagectomy, open total gastrectomy, two-field plus left cervical paraesophageal lymphadenectomy, subcutaneous reconstruction using a free jejunal graft, and jejunostomy. The operation time was 8 h and 35 min, and the estimated blood loss was 64 mL. He experienced postoperative complications of grade IIIb anastomotic leakage, grade II pneumonitis, and grade I left recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis according to the Clavien–Dindo classification , all of which improved with treatment, and he was discharged on post-operative day 24.
Macroscopically, the lesion consisted of two components: a 7.5-cm type 2 tumor and a 9-cm type 1 tumor at the proximal end of the type 2 tumor . The type 2 tumor showed a white-gray cut surface, while the type 1 tumor showed the same white-gray cut surface with necrosis and hemorrhaging . Whether the epicenter of the lesion was at the gastric side or esophageal side was unclear, as most of the EGJ had been replaced by the tumor. Microscopically, the type 2 tumor was predominantly solid or cribriform proliferation of tumor cells with clear cytoplasm, which was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with enteroblastic-like differentiation . The tumor cells of the adenocarcinoma component had periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive globules and were positive for sal-like protein 4 (SALL 4) and negative for α-fetoprotein (AFP) or human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2) . The reasons why enteroblastic-like differentiation was considered to have occurred were as follows: the tumor cells had clear cytoplasm, while they were also PAS-positive and SALL 4-positive. The type 1 tumors consisted of adenocarcinoma, like the type 2 tumor, which was positive for SALL 4, and spindle cells (sarcomatous component) growing mainly in the submucosal layer . There was no obvious SCC component in the type 1 tumor. Part of the sarcomatous component showed cartilage differentiation . The type 2 and type 1 lesions were continuous lesions, and there were smooth transitional features between the two lesions. The epicenter of the tumor was at the EGJ. The deepest invasive site was associated with the type 2 tumor, which showed invasion to the subserosa. The horizontal and vertical margins were negative for tumor cells. Histologically, there was no evidence of Barrett’s esophagus in the resected specimen. We observed all resected esophagus specimens with a cutting width of approximately 10 mm. The adenocarcinoma component was present in 10 of 27 resected lymph nodes. The tumor was finally diagnosed as carcinosarcoma of the EGJ with a carcinomatous component of adenocarcinoma, Siewert type II, type 1 + 2, 110 mm, pT3 N3 M0, pStage IIIC according to UICC-TNM 7th.
The patient underwent adjuvant systemic chemotherapy with S-1 for gastric adenocarcinoma but developed para-aortic lymph node metastases 5 months after surgery.