A 55-year-old white male, with a past medical history of a surgically repaired perforated duodenal ulcer and no significant family medical history, presented to the emergency department of Aleppo University Hospital complaining of a 2-h period acute severe abdominal pain, flatulence, tachypnea and chest discomfort. The pain was sudden, dull aching in nature and periumbilical at first then quickly became generalized. The patient denied having any symptoms prior to presentation. On clinical examination, patient was alert, conscious, afebrile, tachypneic and distressed; with a pulse of 75 bpm and blood pressure of 140/90 mm Hg. His oxygen saturation was 96% in room air and ECG was normal. On examination of the abdomen, severe distension, tenderness and tympanicity on percussion were noted. Laboratory values included a normal white blood cell count and a normal serum urea nitrogen and creatinine levels, other serum laboratory values such as Na, K, Ca were measured to rule out electrolyte abnormalities and were within normal range.
An erect CXR was performed and showed bilateral subdiaphragmatic air-levels [Fig. : the original resolution of this image is 1280 × 960, no downstream processing was applied]. Tension pneumoperitoneum was diagnosed-based on clinical picture, symptoms and radiographic features- and emergent paracentesis using a needle under the right costal margin was performed to reduce distention which led to evacuation of large amounts of air.
The patient was referred to surgery immediately-without performing a CT scan to avoid delay in management due to the urgent nature of the patient- and an emergency investigational laparotomy was performed through a standard midline incision over abdomen, stomach investigation revealed severe gastric distention, strangulated closed-loop gastric volvulus along with a full thickness, 4-cm long anterior and a 5 cm-long posterior gastric wall lacerations with a severely stenotic pylorus. Duodenum investigation revealed stenosis and fibrosis along the first part in site of an old ulcer. Small intestine investigation revealed multiple cystic lesions 140 cm away from Treitz ligament extending to large areas of small intestines [Fig. : the original resolution of this image is 1280 × 960, no downstream processing was applied], the lesions were sub-serosal, bubble-like, fragile and necrotic in some areas. Some degree of ischemia was found along the intestines that can be attributed-based on clinical picture, massive pneumoperitoneum and diffuse ischemic changes of bowels- to abdominal compartment syndrome. Surgical repair of the gastric lacerations and a gastro-jejunal anastomosis were performed to bypass the stenosis. Due to the extensive spreading of PCI and ischemia of the bowels and the absence of localized necrosis, surgical resection of such long length of bowel was not considered.
Biopsies were taken from cystic lesions, and revealed cysts with focal granulomas composed of aggregated epithelioid histiocytes and multiple foreign body-type multinucleated giant cells surrounding the cysts [Figs. , : the original resolution of this images is 1280 × 960, no downstream processing was applied].
Post-operatively; over the next 48 h, the patient became hypotensive, tachycardic and developed altered mental status, hypoxia [Spo2 = 82%], fever and leukocytosis [WBC 15.8] with neutrophilia. The patient was shortly intubated and broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated immediately along with fluids and vasopressors but unfortunately the patient died soon afterwards. The presumed cause of death is probably either due to ischemia–reperfusion injury and reactive oxygen species or septic shock. Post-mortem pathology and/or autopsy was not performed due to refusal of family to consent.