The patient, a 29-year-old male, due to COVID-19 infection, was under monitoring at home when due to sudden drop in saturation, fell down on the ground with the right arm externally rotated, and abducted with the right shoulder impacting the ground first. The patient, being unconscious, was immediately shifted to the hospital and was kept under intensive care. The patient regained consciousness after 3 days. The patient immediately started feeling heavy in the right shoulder with some restriction in movements. The patient was advised to have a portable radiograph in the intensive care units, where fracture was missed .
On finishing the treatment of COVID-19, the patient presented to us and a fresh set of radiographs were taken . This was 14 days post-injury. The patient was diagnosed with non-displaced greater tuberosity fracture along with lesser tuberosity displaced fracture, with restriction in external rotation and weakness in internal rotation.
To identify the integrity of the subscapularis muscle, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was advised. MRI was clearly suggestive of subscapularis avulsion fracture .
Computed tomography (CT) scan was also done to define the bone size and displacement from its original position .
The patient was planned for an open subscapularis repair and lesser tuberosity reduction surgery.
Deltopectoral approach was chosen and the lesser tuberosity fragment was identified. Along with the torn fibers of subscapularis tendon, the fragment was mobilized and fracture site was cleared for any fibrotic callus. The fragment on complete reduction was fixed using 2 4.0 mm cancellous screws. Greater tuberosity fragment was undisplaced with early signs of union, so was left alone . Post-fixation, the patient was immobilized for a period of 3 weeks.
The patient was then eventually mobilized with pendulum movements and progressive range of motion exercises. The patient achieved near-complete passive ranges of motion at 4 weeks postoperatively . Muscle activation exercises were started, followed by progressive strengthening of the muscles.
At 3 months follow-up, the patient has normal ranges of motion with complete union of the fracture fragment and full scar integrity (, ).