A 64-year-old Caucasian female with a 5-year history of recurrent episodes of nephrolithiasis that required lithotripsy proceeded to our institution with a complaint of epigastric pain and nausea the last 2 weeks in addition to fatigue and joint pain. The clinical examination was unremarkable. Subsequent laboratory investigations detected hypercalcemia (2.8 mmol/L), hypophosphatemia (0.69 mmol/L) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) (15 pmol/L).
The patient had no family history of thyroid or parathyroid disorders or history of previous radiation. No previous surgical history or commorbidities existed, apart from mild hypertension. All these findings in conjunction with the patient’s clinical presentation lead to the assumption that the patient had primary hyperparathyroidism (PHPT). Then, an ultrasound and additional Tc-99m-MIBI scintigraphy where performed, and they detected a parathyroid adenoma located posteriorly the right lobe of thyroid gland. Following these, a parathyroid adenoma surgical excision was finally scheduled.
A standard thyroid collar incision of approximately 6 cm was performed and was extended over the sternocleidomastoid muscles, approximately 2 cm above the sternal notch. While the surgeons attempted to detect and retract both the carotid artery and the jugular vein, they incidentally detected that the RCCA emerged higher from the level of the right sternoclavicular joint due to an anatomical aberration of the trajectory of the BCT, from which RCCA arises.
More specifically, surgeons performed meticulous descending exposure of the RCCA and finally detected the bifurcation point of the BCT at the level of the third tracheal ring anterior to the trachea . In particular, the BCT emerged as in usual fashion from the aortic arch and then ascended aberrantly to the left side of the trachea and finally divided into the RSA and the RCCA at the cervical level of the trachea. After the detailful exposure of the operative field and the gentle retraction of all the large vessels, surgeons continued as in usual fashion and the operation was uneventful, although such an anatomic variation may augment the potentiality of accidental injury and severe hemorrhage when it is not discovered preoperatively.
The patient was discharged with instructions the 2nd postoperative day, when the drainage placed was finally remo . At the follow-up, the 7th postoperative day the patient had none complication. The histology of the mass confirmed the diagnosis of parathyroid adenoma that was composed predominantly of oxyphil cells without any malignant components. Serum calcium level was 2.69 mmol/L and iPTH 17.8 pg/mL 12 h after the operation. At the 6-month follow-up the patient had no complications.