A 67-year-old Chinese male of Han ethnicity developed pain in the left neck 14 days prior after eating mud fish. He was healthy and denied a history of infectious diseases, chronic diseases, thrombotic disease, surgical trauma, blood transfusion, allergies, or contact with poisonous substances. Physical examination on admission revealed the following: fever, chills, fatigue, mild dysuria, diffusive swelling pain of the neck on the left side, and high skin temperature. His left neck was tender and edematous with cellulitis. The mass was scleroid with a liquefied center. Other parameters were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count, 12.2 × 109/L; neutrophil count, 11.76 × 109/L; platelet (PLT) count, 51 × 109/L; C-reactive protein (CRP) level, 146 mg/L; procalcitonin (PCT), 156.99 ng/mL; temperature, 39.5 °C; respiratory rate, 24 breaths per minute; pulse, 118 beats per minute; and blood pressure (BP), 109/61 mmHg. The patient stated that he had been to many hospitals in the last 2 weeks and that the use of antibiotics such as ceftriaxone and metronidazole slightly alleviated his neck pain at first. However, the effect was temporary and no longer present after he transferred to Shanghai, and 3 days before he presented to our hospital, he noticed extreme swelling and felt increased pain in the area of his neck mass . A series of further examinations were performed, with the following results: glucose, 22.13 mmol/L; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 43.1 seconds; prothrombin time (PT), 17.3 seconds; fibrinogen (Fg), 5.0 g/L; fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (FDP), 7.3 mg/L; and D-dimer (D-D), 2.1 mg/L. Urine analysis was positive for glucose, blood, protein, and white blood cells. Infectious diseases and acute nephrology were considered. The culture of blood and fluid obtained from the mass was negative for any bacteria including anaerobic bacteria, mycoplasma, or fungus. Ultrasound revealed mixed echogenicity in the left neck mass that was irregular in shape. The mass was approximately 74 × 37 mm in size. Color Doppler revealed generalized thrombosis of the internal jugular vein. CT of the chest and neck was conducted and suggested that the cervical abscess extended to the thorax and superior mediastinum, without a signal from the left internal jugular vein. Multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes were observed. The trachea and left thyroid were also compressed . Video laryngoscopy excluded the possibility of pyriform sinus fistula or any foreign body. Pus obtained from the mass showed many neutrophils and large amounts of necrotic tissue, and 14 days of combination antibiotic treatment (imipenem and teicoplanin) and regular insulin therapy in our hospital returned the patient’s temperature, routine blood markers, CRP and PCT levels, and coagulation function to normal. However, the neck mass remained. Therefore, the surgery department was consulted.
The patient was taken to the operating room. The neck mass adhered tightly to the surrounding tissue, and the involved segment of the left internal jugular vein was exposed by sharp dissection . The proximal part of the mass needed to be ligated first to avoid small thrombus detachment. There was a large amount of inflammation and fibrosis present in the involved area. The involved segment of the internal jugular vein and the whole neck mass were completely resected, and the distal part of the internal jugular vein was fully ligated . The pathological examination showed hemorrhagic necrosis with the proliferation of fibrous and granulation tissue and the accumulation of foam-like cells and multinuclear giant cells . The patient recovered and was discharged a week after surgery. No other adverse events happened.