A 50-year-old female, department store salesperson by profession, with idiopathic bilateral avascular necrosis, underwent primary left hip THA in 2003 at an outside institution 3 years before evaluation at our hospital presented with worsening right hip pain. Radiographs demonstrated secondary osteoarthritis right hip for which cementless ceramic on polyethylene (CoP) THA was done. On the left side, there was well functioning THA without evidence of any loosening. Review of operative record identified components as cementless metal-on-polyethylene (MoP) THA on left side. The posterolateral incision at left hip was well healed with no evidence of any infection.
In 2011, the patient started gradual onset of pain in the left hip. Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated polyethylene wearing with aseptic loosening of both acetabular and femoral components. The patient underwent revision cementless CoM THA left side in 2011 using 54 mm pinnacle acetabular shell, cobalt chromium metal liner, 36 mm Biolox delta ceramic head, S-ROM titanium alloy femoral stem with titanium sintered proximal sleeve (Depuy, Jhonson and Jhonson co., Warsaw, IN). On the acetabular side allo chip bone graft was used for osteolytic lesions, encirclage wiring done for greater trochanter. Intraoperative findings were loosening of femoral stem and acetabular cup along with mild metallosis on acetabulum and femoral side. Postoperative period was eventless with substantial improvement in function. Acetabular cup inclination and anteversion angle were 45° and 20° respectively estimated from plain radiograph. Femoral anterversion was 15° with normal stem alignment. At 6-week follow-up, the patient was made partial weight bearing increasing to full weight bearing with an assistive device and active abduction over a 6-week period.
After 1 year of follow-up in 2012, patient complaint of mild discomfort in the groin in the left inguinal region. On examination soft swelling, non-tender, 2 cm × 3 cm size with no signs of inflammation was present in inguinal region. Radiographs showed normal alignment and position of hip prosthesis with no signs of loosening . Ultrasonography suggestive of cystic lesion in illiopsoas area in the left anterior hip (3.76 cm × 3.12 cm × 2.95 cm) suspected to be iliopsoas bursitis. Serum inflammatory markers and complete blood counts were within normal limits. Clinical examination showed a painless normal range of motion at left hip. The patient was kept under observation after refusal for ultrasonography-guided aspiration.
After one month, she complains left groin and thigh pain, limping followed by impaired ambulation in few days. The patient showed an increase in size of iliopsoas cystic lesion. Follow-up radiographs showed signs of acetabular cup superior and lateral migration, increased inclination angle with evidence of loosening and well-fixed femoral stem . CT scan showed well circumscribed cystic lesion around the left hip with an expansion of in iliopsoas region . CT scan also showed the superior segmental defect in the acetabulum along with loosening of acetabular cup. Positive radioisotope bone scan indicates acetabular loosening. Serum C-reactive protein was 0.6 mg/Dl, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 28 mm/h. Her complete blood count was normal. Serum cobalt and chromium was significantly raised (serum Co = 2.4 µg/L, serum Cr = 22.5 µg/L).
Given the clinical and imaging findings, combined with a history of CoM THA, it was felt that patients symptoms were likely aseptic loosening of acetabular cup with local soft tissue response due to elevated serum metal ions. Surgical exploration with revision THA for loosened implant was discussed with patient. The patient underwent revision surgery using posterolateral approach. The pseudotumor and surrounding inflamed synovitis sac was excised. The cystic soft tissue extended to hip joint was stained with features suggestive of metallosis . Hip was dislocated and loosened acetabular cup along with cobalt-chromium liner was removed. There is corrosive wear at the metal liner with large “black stripe” across the top of retrieved ceramic femoral head . The proximal femoral sleeve and the femoral taper showed no corrosion or wear. The femoral stem with proximal sleeve was well fixed with no evidence of corrosion.
The intraoperative frozen section of mass showed less than 5 polymorphonuclear leukocytes per high-power field in all the three specimens. Intraoperative dark gray colored fluid analysis was done with 58% polymorphonuclear, 39% lymphocytic, and 3% mononuclear cells. After aggressive debridement of metallic and necrotic tissue, acetabular cavitary defects were filled with mixed autogenous bone graft and allograft bone chips. On the acetabular side, the patient was revised with 52 mm trabecular metal shell (52 mm) with metal buttress to address the superior bone defect (zimmer, warsaw, Indiana, USA). Highly cross-linked polyethylene liner was applied with 32 mm biolox delta ceramic femoral head (Depuy, Jhonson and Jhonson co., Warsaw, IN).
Operative cultures for soft tissue and fluid were both negative for infection. Histopathology was consistent with metallosis. For each tissue fragment, sections were routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined with light microscopy. On microscopic examination, the inner surface covered with eosinophilic fibrinoid material with local fibrotic tissue. The histopathology analysis supports morphology consistent with the metallosis as an inflammatory response to metal particles. It revealed abundant lymphocytes, histiocytes, occasional plasma cells, foreign body type giant cells, and black metal particles (-).
After 6 weeks of partial weight bearing, the patient was fully mobilized with full weight bearing over 6-week period. At 6 month repeat serum metal ion analysis showed decrease level with cobalt and chromium levels of 1.3, 2.54 µg/L, respectively. The recent cobalt and chromium measurements were 0.66 and 0.42 µg/L, respectively. The patient with continued improvements in function with full weight bearing walking at last follow-up with Harris hip score of 87 compared with 58 preoperatively.