A 4-year-old girl with speech dyspraxia was referred to the Pediatric Developmental Behavior Clinic. She was full-term born to a woman aged > 40 years via vaginal delivery, G1P1, with a birth weight of 3100 g (75th percentile), birth height of 52.0 cm (75th percentile), and head circumference of 34.5 cm (50th percentile). No other medical issues or concerns were noted during the pregnancy period. She had been hospitalized twice during the neonatal period—once for pathological jaundice and once for sepsis. The proband could sit at the age of 6 months and walk at the age of 13 months; however, she had a significant expressive language delay. Her parents displayed normal physical growth and mental development, and both families declared no significant health or psychological issues.
On physical examination, her height was found to be 98 cm (3 percentiles for her age); weight, 15.2 kg (within the 3 to 10 percentiles for her age); and head circumference, 48.5 cm (< 3 percentiles for her age). Distinctive facial features, including a low-setting ear, bilateral nostril valgus, depressed nasal bridge, short philtrum, thin lips, and small chin, were noted. The Gesell Development Diagnosis Scale, which was used to assess the proband’s development quotient (DQ), reported the following findings: gross motor DQ 54, fine motor DQ 65, sociality DQ 54; and language DQ 39. The S-M social Living Ability Test resulted in a score of 8. During speech and body language communication in the consultation room, she displayed sharing behaviors or facial expressions and maintained normal back-and-forth conversations with normal eye contact.
His biochemical parameters, including serum or plasma levels of lactic acid; cysteine; very long chain fatty acids, amino acids; blood lipids; cholesterol; and hormones including thyroid stimulating hormone, thyroxine, luteinizing hormone, and follicle-stimulating hormone, were all within the normal range. No abnormal metabolites were noted in urinary mucopolysaccharides and organic acid, or on electroencephalography and head magnetic resonance imaging. Additionally, hearing and vision examination, echocardiography, abdominal ultrasound, gastrointestinal ultrasound, genitourinary ultrasound, and X-ray examination of bones revealed no abnormal findings.
Whole-exome sequencing was performed, which identified a de novo nonsense variant (c.3533C > A; p.S1178X) of the KDM5C gene in the proband ; no other pathogenic gene variation was noted. This nonsense variation was expected to cause a loss-of-gene function; the proband’s parents lacked this variant. Serine 1178 is highly conserved across different species . This variation has not yet been reported in the literature or the ClinVar database, and is predicted to be “disease causing” by rare exome variant ensemble learner (REVEL). According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines , this variation is apathogenic (PVS1 + PS2 + PM2).
X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) analysis was performed using the human androgen receptor assay as described previously . Briefly, the genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes and incubated with the restriction enzyme HpaII to digest the unmethylated active DNA. The mixture of digested and undigested DNA was PCR amplified with FAM-labelled fluorescent primers flanking a region comprising both the polymorphic and restriction sites, and then analyzed by capillary gel electrophoresis. When the X chromosome is inactivated, the restriction site of HpaII is methylated and cannot be cut, while the active X chromosome is the opposite. Therefore, if genomic DNA was digested first with HpaII followed by PCR amplification, only the inactivated X chromosome had a product. The degree of X-inactivation was calculated from the peak height. According to the analysis, the patient did not show significant skewed X-inactivation .