The case was a 34y/o female developed with left hip pain and inability to weight-bearing after simple falling while walking. Thus her weight-bearing was impaired severely. Following informed consent, she was visited at the Orthopedics department and complained of obscure hip pain for six past months. She had been visited previously by physicians several times and treated as muscle spasm and low back pain. Her history was unremarkable, and the patient did not mention any positive past medical, surgical, or drug prescription history. In addition, there were no signs of fever and weight loss. Physical examination detected hip tenderness, and restricted range of motion . The neurovascular examination was normal. However, in obtained plain radiographs a pathologic fracture of the proximal femur, destructive bone mass, and soft tissue involvement were determined .
The clinical and radiological assessment suggested a destructive bone lesion with a suspicion of malignancy. Then the patient was admitted to our institute at Jundishapour University of Medical Sciences, Ahwaz, Iran for further evaluation. Tumor follow-up was started and necessary evaluations such as pelvic MRI, related lab tests, chest, and abdominal pelvic CT scan, bone mass densitometry, and whole body scan were done. The results of lab tests including Hb, PLT, WBC, Ca, P, BS, TFT, LFT, BUN, CRE, ESR, PTH were in the normal range and viral markers were also negative. Besides, the obtained results of several measured specific bone turnover markers including serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BSAP) (79.69 ± 3.9 U/L), and osteocalcin (23.58 ± 5.1 ng/mL) demonstrated a high level in serum of the patient. The obtained MRI images of the pelvis showed a large mass with a 131 ∗ 70 mm size and irregular border at T1/T2 intermediate signal intensity. Furthermore, MRI revealed an intramedullary lesion with heterogeneous enhancement at diaphysis and metaphysis of the proximal part of left femur and infiltration to adjacent anterior and posterior muscle compartment. There was no involvement of neurovascular bundle enhancement at diaphysis and metaphysis of the left femur proximal part .
MRI scans (Siemens, MAGNETOM Espree model, 1.5 T, Erlangen, Germany) showed an expansion of the subperiosteal space, without spread to the underlying cortex. Whole body scan with Technetium-99m (TC_99m), demonstrated a hypoactive expanded bony lesion in left trochanteric region without involvement of other sites . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed without evidence of metastatic disease as determined by staging chest radiographs, chest computed tomography scans, and bone scans. Following initial evaluation, the patient underwent open surgical biopsy from both the bone and soft tissue and was sent for pathological evaluation. Microscopic examination revealed an undifferentiated tumor consisting of small, round blue tumor cells with hyperchromatic round to oval shaped nuclei in favor of Ewing's sarcoma and recommended for immune histochemical (IHC) study for CD99, CD45, vimentin, and desmin markers analysis. The IHC findings showed the tumor cells were strongly positive for CD99 and vimentin and negative for CD45 and desmine, which also implies Ewing's sarcoma .
The patient was referred to an oncologist and so decided for adjuvant chemotherapy regimen, and radiotherapy without surgical resection, and closed follow-up. She was then treated with 7 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy regimen consisted of VAC (vincristine 2 mg/m2, Adriamycin 75 mg/m2, and cyclophosphamide 1200 mg/m2) alternating with IE (ifosfamide 1800 mg/m2 and etoposide 100 mg/m2) for 6 months. Then, radiation therapy consisted of 5400 cGy (180 cGy/fraction) was added to chemotherapy for local control of the tumor metastasis. The patient until now (4 years later) has remained alive without evidence of recurrence or metastasis.
During the chemo-radiotherapy period, the patient was under closed follow up with lab and radiographic imaging. The follow-up images (bone scan, MRI, plain radiograph and CT scan) were done based on the recommendations of the CESS/LESS groups that proposed a defined timing of different imaging procedures . Follow-up imaging in serial radiographs after completion of the therapy showed good improvement and no evidence of metastasis was visible. Hip X-ray was done and demonstrated that the tumor was disappeared quietly and fracture was healed (B). Eventually, the chemo-radio treatment lasted for 12 months and the patient health status was excellent and remained asymptomatic and disease-free. Furthermore, Chest and abdominopelvic CT scan were negative for probable metastasis and involvement of any other sites. The last new MRI of the hip (3.8 years after diagnosis) was done that demonstrated no evidence of retained soft tissue involvement or bone tumor (A). The patient was referred for follow-up bone scan. The last one was taken 3.8 years later and result was negative for any bone involvement (B and C). The quantified bone turnover markers i.e. BSAP, and osteocalcin identified a normal range after completion of treatment. Following the chemotherapy and radiotherapy, bone mass densitometry (BMD) showed a clear decrease in bone mass of proximal femur (A). However, as the result of dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scan indicated (A), other sites including spine and total hip did not exhibit reduced BMD. The patient was satisfied, with no pain in rest or walking, some degree of limping due to mal-union appeared that patient was suggested for corrective osteotomy that refused.