This case study describes a 5-year-old boy diagnosed with severe and persistent ITW. No risk factors were noted in his perinatal history, and there was no family history of ITW. His psychomotor development proceeded appropriately until the age of 2 years when he started to walk with a toe-walking gait pattern. ITW persisted until he was 4 years of age. Specifically, there was no evidence of increased muscle tone or altered reflexes, and there appeared to be no neuromuscular explanation for the toe walking. The patient exhibited no evidence of foot abnormalities, and the absence of neuromuscular disease, confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging, revealed the clinical diagnosis of ITW. Importantly, although this patient underwent 1 year of physical therapy (PT), including home exercises and nighttime bracing with plastic orthotics to maintain the stretch/flexibility of the Achilles’ tendons, his toe-walking condition worsened over time. In the opinion of an orthopedist, these developments were sufficiently severe to warrant corrective osteotomy, but the patient’s parents refused to provide consent. In this case, a 1-year, nonsurgical treatment program, including TICs combined with a PT program based on NDT principles, was offered and accepted by the parents of the patient.
With both knees in extension, he did not exhibit a passive aDF to neutral plantigrade. Upon clinical evaluation, hyperactivity of the toe-grasping reflex could be observed, which intensified with the placement of the subject in the upright position. The parents estimated that the patient spent 100% of his time on his toes. In addition, bilateral Achilles’ tendon contracture developed, both forefeet were splayed, and a disproportionately wide forefoot was observed compared with the heel and external tibial torsion, which frequently develops to compensate for the lack of a flat foot contact .
Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent will be made available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The Bioethical Committee of the Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, Poland approved the current report.