A 33-year-old female known to have asymptomatic multiple and large radicular and pelvic Tarlov cysts extending from L5 to S3 roots discovered in 2016 on an MRI done for low back pain , was admitted to our center 7 days after delivery for painful S1 right sciatica (intensity of 10 on visual analogic scale (VAS)). The patient presented without neurological motor deficit, especially on ankle plantar flexors and hip extensors testing. Achilles reflex was still present. In a supine position, no positive straight leg raise or crossed straight leg raise was observed, and in a seated position, Bechterew or slump tests were both negative. She has also no genitopelvic sensory and/or motor dysfunction (clitoral, vaginal, urinary bladder, or bowel discomfort and/or dysfunction), corresponding to pudendal and pelvic nerve testing. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large pelvic cystic formation of 36 × 29 mm on the right S1 nerve root , with a fluid-fluid level corresponding to a post-partum hemorrhagic complication and compressing the distal portion of right S1 nerve. No visible focal intramedullary signal abnormality was observed. The Conus terminalis was located at the level of the L1 vertebrae. A low-grade lumbar osteoarthritis was noted between L3 and S1, predominantly in L4-L5 without notable root. The intracystic hemorrhage was responsible for a global increase in the volume of the cyst compared to the previous MRI, explaining the sciatica. After a multidisciplinary discussion, a CT-guided puncture-aspiration of the cyst under local anesthesia was decided . The procedure was performed without any complications; 8 cc of a hemorrhagic fluid was aspirated , relieving the patient's sciatica immediately (intensity of zero on the VAS scale after the procedure). No sealing procedure was performed to limit the risk of intracystic rebleeding, and to avoid the risk of recompression due to the cyst filling on the S1 root. illustrates the decompression of the sciatic verve concomitant with the cyst shrinkage after aspiration (31 × 25 mm). The effects on pain were immediate. No neurological deterioration occurred after the procedure, and specifically on the genitopelvic sensory and/or motor function. The patient was still pain-free (VAS zero) at 12 months follow-up, and the Tarlov cyst did not fill-up on the MRI follow-up . Remodeling was observed at the level of the aspirated cyst. A volume analysis pre/post-procedure showed that the cyst had lost 7% of its initial volume, and the S1 root is better visualized.