A 58-year-old Chinese Han woman was admitted to our hospital, with a complaint of subsequent tremor, mental disorder and limbs weakness since she was 53 years old. The patient initially presented mild persistent tremor in the right hand but accepted no special treatment. Two years later, the tremor deteriorated to affect eating. At the same time, the patient began to conceive the bank, police and internet being deceptive, but still accepted no consultation. After two and a half years, apathy, diminished social interest, confusion, fabrication of non-existent things, oligologia, and decreased appetite, appeared in succession. One month later, the patient was diagnosed with mental disorder in a psychiatric clinic and given olanzapine 10 mg and oxazepam 7.5 mg one time every night and aripiprazole 2.5 mg one time every day to improve the psychiatric symptoms, as well as given trihexyphenidyl 2.5 mg three times every day to alleviate tremors. Considering the diagnosis of Parkinson’s disease (PD), madopar was also prescribed with a dosage of 125 mg three times every day but stopped 4 days later due to the emergence of unsteadiness in standing. About one and a half months later, weakness in the right limbs appeared and gradually deteriorated to stand with assistance. After 2 months, olanzapine, oxazepam, aripiprazole, and trihexyphenidyl were all stopped. During treatment of the above drugs, slow response, occasional urinary and fecal incontinence, sleep reversal, and mutism emerged. One month later, the patient came to our clinic for further consultation. No fever, seizure, infection and dysphagia were reported by the caregivers, except for dysphonia.
Neurological examination revealed mutism, resting tremor and cogwheel-like rigidity in upper limbs, weakness in all limbs especially in the right lower limb, decreased deep tendon reflexes except the right upper limb, positive jaw jerk and palmomaxillary reflex, but no orthostatic hypotension and pathological reflexes. The Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and other neurological examination could not be accomplished by her conditions.
Hematological, biochemical and immune-related blood tests were normal results. Normal cell count, glucose level and immune-related indexes except mildly increased protein level (530.0 (150–400) mg/L) were detected in cerebrospinal fluid by lumbar puncture. Parameters related with tumor and paraneoplastic syndrome in blood and cerebrospinal fluid were all negative. Twenty-four hours ambulatory electroencephalograph revealed no abnormality. Nerve conduction study showed decreased compound muscle action potential amplitude in bilateral peroneal nerves. Needle electromyography examination detected chronic denervation potential in right tibialis anterior.
The initial brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanned at the age of 53 years old, and displayed no cerebral atrophy and hyperintensities on DWI and T2WI . However, in 58 years old, brain MRI revealed atrophy of frontal, temporal and parietal lobes, but still without high-intensity signals on DWI and T2WI . At the same time, 18F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/magnetic resonance (PET/MR) showed hypometabolism in the corresponding cortexes with atrophy, and in the right putamen nucleus . The result of whole exome sequencing was negative. Detection of GGC repeats number in NOTCH2NLC gene showed 107 (normal number <40), an abnormal expansion . Skin biopsy with punch from 10 cm above ankle was carried out, and displayed intranuclear inclusions with p62 immunoreactivity in the adipocyte of cutaneous sweat duct . Finally, the diagnosis of NIID was made. Due to no effective drugs for NIID at present, only the symptomatic treatment was given. The patient had no evident improvement half a year later.