A 1.5 year old captive female red panda (Ailurus fulgens) was found to be lethargic and anorectic at Panda Valley, the Chengdu Field Research Center for Giant Pandas in Dujiangyan, China. Oral and nasal secretions were collected for the search of Canine Distemper Virus (CDV) and Canine Parvovirus (CPV) using AsanEsay Test (ASAN PHARM. Co., LTD), and the results were negative. It was anaesthetized with 21 mg Zoletil (intramuscular injection) at a dose of 3 mg/kg body weight, and treated with an intravenous injection of 350 mg Sulperazon (Cefoperazone Sodium and Sulbactam Sodium) in 150 mL 0.9% NaCl. The complete blood count and biochemical analysis results are shown in Additional file . Compared with a previous report on blood counts and biochemical parameters of 28 healthy red pandas, the values of neutrophils, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) found in this study were significantly higher while remaining parameters were normal . She was moved to the quarantine area of the Chengdu Research Base of Giant Panda Breeding for daily treatment of oral Cefpodoxime Proxetil 50 mg. During the three-day treatment, she did not eat or defecate, and then died.
During necropsy, the red panda’s skin and fur was intact, and no traumatic injuries were observed. Both kidneys were swollen with several white pinpoint spots on the cutting surface, with white cord-like streaks in the medulla. The liver was icteric, with soft and brittle texture, and few dark red ecchymoses on the cutting surface. The lungs were dark red with multifocal plaques of black-red hemorrhage. The spleen was swollen and dark red with a small number of black-red plaques. The heart and intestines were intact, with no obvious lesions.
Specimens, including the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, gastrointestinal tract and other tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and routinely processed in paraffin. Sections (5 μm) were stained with haematoxylin and eosin Y (H&E) and evaluated for histopathological changes under the microscope (Leica DM4B optics). Histopathological analysis revealed significant glomerular congestion in the renal cortex, necrosis of renal tubular epithelial cells, collapse of renal tubular lumens and interstitial infiltration of neutrophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages . Cord-like interstitial inflammatory lesions were noted in the renal medulla regions, as normal collecting duct structures were replaced by extensive inflammation . In the liver, there was vesicular degeneration or steatosis of hepatocytes, mild congestion, and perivascular inflammatory cell (neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes) infiltration . In the lung, alveolar walls were thickened by lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and congestion. Some alveolar spaces collapsed, while others were dilated due to compensatory emphysema . Expanded lymphoid follicular germinal centers showed increased splenic white pulp, while red pulp showed congestion, hemorrhage and inflammation with nuclear debris . Mesenteric lymph node sinuses were dilated with increased macrophages and lymphocytes . Other tissues (heart, pancreas, stomach, digestive tract) did not show any pathological lesion.
Strains were isolated from the kidney, liver and lung samples. Genomic DNA was individually extracted from the isolates using the TIANamp Bacteria DNA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Tiangen Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The 16S rRNA gene was amplified by PCR performed in a T100™ Thermal Cycler (Bio-rad, USA). The amplified 1500 bp 16S rRNA genes of the isolated strains shared the highest identity (99.45%) with that of E. coli (GenBank: LC050175.1), and the phylogenetic analysis demonstrated that the isolated strain and E. coli strains have high phylogenetic relatedness using the Neighbor-Joining method . The sequence of the isolated strain was submitted to GenBank under the accession number MT820501.
Genomic DNA was extracted using a sample of high-quality, high-molecular-weight DNA prepared using the TIANamp Bacteria DNA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Tiangen Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The sample was sent to an external laboratory for whole genome sequencing using the PacBio RS II platform (completed by Biomarker Technologies Co, LTD.). The complete genome size of the E. coli chromosome isolated from the red panda was 4,990,420 bp (GenBank: PRJNA668015). BLAST alignment of the predicted protein sequence with the Antibiotic Resistance Gene Database (ARDB) showed that the strain contained 20 resistance genes (Additional file ) including acra, acrb, mdte, mdtf, mdtn, mdto, mdtp, tolc, arna, baca, bcr, bl1_ec, emre, ksga, macb, mdfa, mdtg, mdth, mdtk and mdtl. These genes can mediate resistance to aminoglycosides, β-lactams, macrolides and other antibiotics through resistance-nodulation-cell division transporter system, multidrug resistance efflux pump and other ways. BLAST alignment with the Virulence Factor Database (VFDB) showed that the measured E. coli contained 713 virulence factors (Additional file ), including outer membrane protein, flagella, P pili, S pili, type I pili, cytotoxic necrosis factor, and hemolysin. In addition, factors related to the iron uptake system and other types of systems were identified. Among these virulence factors, PapA, PapC, OmpA, OmpU and other virulence factors were specific to Uropathogenic Escherichia coli (UPEC) , thus confirming its identity.