A 30-year-old woman undergoing regular follow-ups at an antenatal clinic and no treatment with any medicines except iron supplementation presented to our clinic. In the 29th week of gestation, a cystic mass approximately 1.8 × 2.0 cm in size located in the pharynx was noted on a routine ultrasound examination of the fetus. One month later, follow-up sonography revealed the lesion to have the same size. The amniotic fluid index (AFI) was 21.43 cm in the 30th week of gestation and increased up to 24.2 cm in the 34th week of gestation, and polyhydramnios was defined as AFI > 24 cm. There was a possibility of intubation failure. We planned an elective cesarean section with ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) for prolonged stabilization of the fetal hemodynamic environment at the 38th week of gestation. A multidisciplinary team was assembled involving 2 neonatologists, 2 otorhinolaryngologists, 2 obstetricians, and 4 scrub nurses. A neonatologist performed successful intubation immediately after exposure of the fetal body, followed by umbilical cord clamping and delivery of the baby. The patient presented at birth with stable vital signs during endotracheal intubation.
The female neonate was the first child born to the 33-year-old father and 30-year-old mother. The Apgar scores at 1 and 5 min were 7 and 8, respectively. She had a body weight of 2330 g (3rd percentile), height of 45 cm (25th percentile), and a head circumference of 32 cm (20th percentile); thus, she was diagnosed with asymmetric intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR). On the third day of life, the TORCH screening was done with serum immunoglobulin M (IgM) of toxoplasma and rubella, whole blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2, and real-time PCR of cytomegalovirus from urine, and all were negative.
A 3D computed tomography (CT) of the chest airway performed shortly after birth showed airway obstruction owing to a cystic mass in the choana, nasopharynx, and oropharynx ; we could not exclude the diagnosis of an encephalocele. Non-contrast brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed for further evaluation at the age of 10 days old; MR protocol included axial T2-weighted image, axial T2 fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), axial diffusion-weighted image, susceptibility-weighted image, and three-dimensional T1- and T2-weight image with multiplanar reconstruction. On the MRI, the mass showed a 4-mm fistula-like structure directed to the sphenoid bone; however, there was no definite communication with intracranial structure .
An elective surgery was performed at 16 days of age by otorhinolaryngologists. Under general anesthesia, removal of the pharyngeal mass through a transoral approach was performed in the Rose position. A whitish, protruding mass adhered to the prevertebral fascia and nasal septum, but was easily dissected to complete extirpation. The mass was 1.6 × 1.1 × 0.4 cm in size and 0.3 g in weight . Histological examination at low magnification revealed that the mass was a cystic lesion with complex papillary proliferation of epithelial cells. The wall of the cyst was composed of glial and fibrovascular tissues . At high magnification, the papillary components of the cyst comprised a single layer of epithelial cells and fibrovascular cores. Epithelial cells were cuboidal-to-columnar in shape and had round-to-oval and basally located nuclei with an eosinophilic cytoplasm, resembling epithelial cells of the choroid plexus tissue. Cytologic atypia or mitotic activity was not identified . The histologic features of the tumor were consistent with those of a CPP, arising from glial heterotopia. The choroid plexus-like cells showed focal positivity for Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostain . Pathology analysis was consistent with WHO grade I CPP. Extubation was performed at 2 days after surgery, and the respiration rate and peripheral saturation were stable. Seven months post-surgery, a non-enhanced CT of the pharynx was performed and resection site was clear. Chromosome analysis revealed a normal female karyotype with 46, XX at 7 months of age. Currently, the patient is doing well without any symptoms until 10 months.