A 33-year old man attended our hospital with a sacral mass (80 mm × 59 mm × 53 mm) detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) two days previously. The patient defecated once every 4 to 5 days. The patient had no nausea or vomiting, no abdominal pain or distention, no blood in stools, and no rectal tenesmus. The patient attended our hospital for surgical treatment. During the course of the disease, the general condition, diet, and mental state of the patient were good. There was no history of cough, urinary frequency and urgency, or any other abnormal sensations. Based on the digital rectal examination (knee-chest posture), the mass was palpable within 4 cm at the 12 o’clock position. The mass was solid with a clear boundary, good mobility, and no tenderness. However, the upper edge of the mass could not be felt. In addition, there was no blood or pus staining on the surface of the glove. The MRI examination showed numerous short T1 signals and long T2 signals and many long T1 signals and mixed T2 signals in the posterior rectal space . The largest mass was approximately 100 mm × 59 mm × 53 mm in size and compressed the rectum and bladder filling was poor. There were no abnormalities in the size of the prostate and bilateral seminal vesicles. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral para-femoral and inguinal regions. The MRI examination indicated abnormal signals in the retrorectal and anterior sacral spaces, and the cystic masses were investigated more fully. The carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA) level was 26.97 ng/mL (normal: 0–3 ng/mL) and the carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA 19–9) level was 106.50 U/mL (normal: 0–35 ng/mL). However, gastroscopic and enteroscopic examinations showed no signs of gastrointestinal tumor.
The patient underwent surgical resection of the masses located in retrorectal and anterior sacral spaces. Lumbar anesthesia was performed with the patient in the left lateral position. An incision of approximately 10 cm was posterior sagittal and located 1 cm to the right of midline. The coccyx tip was removed to expose the presacral mass. During the surgical procedure, a cystic mass was found in the right and posterior lateral region of the rectum and 200 mL pale yellow liquid was drained. The cystic mass was carefully separated and resected. Another mass was observed adjacent to the cystic mass and light green viscous liquid was drained. The mass was also separated and resected . Complete masses resection with adequate margin was performed to achieve the R0 resection. The resected tissues were sent for further histopathological examination. A drainage tube was placed in the retrorectal and anterior sacral spaces. The operation was performed without problems, and the patient was given oxygen, anti-inflammatories, and fluid replacement treatment.
The histopathological examination revealed that the masses were tailgut cysts accompanied by carcinogenesis (high to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma) infiltrating the smooth muscle wall and surrounding fibrous tissues . The immunohistological examination showed positive staining of CDX2, CK20, Ki67, and villin, which further indicated the adenocarcinoma transition of the tailgut cysts . The CEA level was 2.82 ng/mL (normal: 0–3 ng/mL) and the CA 19–9 level was 30.52 U/mL (normal: 0–35 ng/mL) 1 week post-surgery. The patient recovered well and was discharged 10 days post-surgery.