A 66-year-old female was admitted to our hospital in Kermanshah (Iran) in July 2013, with chest pain and congenital thymic cyst (CTC) and characteristic history of flushing and periorbital edema. Her symptom was not positional and was not exacerbated by breathing. Her medical history was remarkable and previous myocardial infarction events were reported. Routine blood tests were normal, and no tumor markers were found. Chest radiography was normal and routine echocardiography for heart revealed no abnormally. Her medical and family histories, clinical status and blood and urine tests, were unremarkable. Postoperative retrospective analysis of signs and symptoms revealed facial edema caused by intermittent obstruction of superior vena cava (SVC) by a cyst. Exploration of mediastinum was performed through a median sternotomy, resulting in a postoperative diagnosis of a mediastinal cyst. A soft and fluctuant cyst was present in the middle mediastinum in residual thymus tissue around the SVC and retro subclavian vein, and was easily dissected from these organs. No pedicle was attached to the inferior aspect of the cyst. The cyst had a thin wall and contained watery fluid. Judging from its anatomic location and contents, the cyst was diagnosed as a congenital cyst. The cyst was resected after dissection of the inferior surface in the left lateral aspect of SVC and retro subclavian vein in mediastinum . As of the content of the cyst, the number of cells was few and the cell count revealed no lymphocytes. The fluid did not contain of triglyceride. Microscopically, the cyst wall consisted of thin fibrous connective tissue with monolayer cells on its luminal surface. Thus, the cyst was histologically compatible with the congenital thymic cyst ( - ). The patient’s postoperative course was complicated by a transudative left pleural effusion. It emerged on the first postoperative day, decreased gradually on the fifth postoperative day and dissolved spontaneously one week after the operation. The patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day and had no symptoms eight months later. The surgical specimen was a solitary cyst with a fibrous thin wall, measuring 10 × 6 cm at its maximum width and length. Microscopically, the cystic walls were irregularly lined by keratinized squamous epithelium and focally flattened endothelium ( and ) with varying thickness, and contained scattered nests of thymic tissue including small lymphocytes and epithelial cells. These findings were consistent with a thymic cyst, and the macroscopic features indicated a congenital type.