We hereby present the case of a 24-year-old woman with trauma-induced cerebral dyschromatopsia. The patient had a brain contusion on the right anterior temporal lobe, a part of the fusiform gyrus due to automobile accident. When she woke up after the trauma, she thought the right half of the hospital staffs’ uniform was blue and the left half was green, and she thought “it was very fashionable”. But when she told her family about it, she realized that the uniform was actually all blue, and 3 days after the injury she visited our department.
At the initial examination, her visual acuity was 20/16 OU, and the intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg OU. There were no significant findings in the anterior segment of the eye, media, or fundus. She passed the Panel D-15 hue arrangement test with one error, and the results of the Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue test were within the normal limits . Full-field electroretinography (ERG) was within the normal range including the S-cone ERGs. Neither Goldmann perimetry nor standard automated perimetry (SAP) showed any abnormal findings , but SWAP showed a decrease in sensitivity in the left hemilateral fields . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed evidence of the cerebral contusions on the right anterior temporal lobe and subarachnoid hemorrhages in the base of brain .
Progress: Follow-up examination showed that the misidentification of blue as green in the left hemilateral field had improved approximately 1 week after the injury. Three months after the injury, the patient reported that colors in left hemilateral fields were slightly desaturated compared to the normal side but it was almost unnoticeable in daily life. In addition, the awareness of left hemilateral field dyschromatopsia disappeared completely 8 months after the injury. Although, the sensitivity in the left hemilateral field of both eyes was improved in the SWAP tests, a slight decrease was still present 22 months after the injury . OCT showed a thinning of the GCC in the area corresponding to the left hemilateral dyschromatopsia at 14 months after the trauma in both eyes . At 20 months, no progress of GCC thinning was observed. Throughout the course, there were no accompanying symptoms.