A 61-year-old man acutely developed diplopia and balance disorders. 24 h after onset, he was admitted in the hospital due to ascending paresthesias and an emerging tetraparesis. On day 4 after onset, examination showed a drowsy patient with ophthalmoparesis, areflexia and severe tetraparesis. Plantar responses were flexor. The cerebrospinal fluid study was normal. IgM to Mycoplasma Pneumoniae and IgG anti-GQ1b (1:2560) were detected. IgG and IgM anti- GM1, −GD1a, −GD1b and -GM2 were absent. Two MRIs of the brain, one with gadolinium, were normal. The patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) (0,4 g/kg/day X 5 days) but worsened to complete ophthalmoplegia, tetraplegia and coma needing mechanical ventilation. Considering the severity of the condition a second IVIg course was started on day 24. A few days later he began to improve, with initial resolution of the drowsiness and bulbar symptoms, and partial resolution of the ophtalmoplegia. The patient was weaned off ventilation on day 41 and transferred to rehabilitation on day 57 with improved muscle strength (MCR scale: 2–3/5 in the lower and 2/5 in the upper limbs). After considering the results of the nerve conduction studies performed on days 72 and 128, we searched for antibodies to Neurofascin155, Contactin1 and Contactin associated protein1 that resulted negative. On the other hand, five months after the onset of symptoms, the anti GQ1b IgG rate remained elevated (1:2560).
A third IVIg course was started on day 179. On day 240, the patient had recovered muscle strength, except in the right upper limb (MCR scale: 3–4/5) and showed mild gait ataxia.
Four serial conduction studies were performed . On day 4 compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) were not recordable or were very reduced in amplitudes with slightly prolonged distal motor latencies (DML) and normal motor conduction velocities (MCVs). Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) showed reduced amplitudes in the right sural nerve and were not recordable in the five other nerves. On day 72, distal CMAPs, previously undetectable, were measured at 5.3 and 2.6 mV in the median nerves, and 1.1 mV in the left ulnar nerve. CMAP amplitude of the right ulnar nerve was increased by 512%. Partial CBs, defined as > 30% decrease of proximal CMAP amplitude without abnormal temporal dispersion of proximal CMAP (< 30% increased CMAP duration) , emerged in intermediate nerve segments of both median and ulnar nerves with decrements of proximal CMAP amplitudes ranging from 30.2 to 73% . An additional partial CB was detectable in the right median nerve in the Erb’s point-axilla segment . MCVs were slow. SNAPs with reduced amplitude were recordable in 7/8 nerves. On day 128, distal CMAP amplitudes furtherly increased with however persistently low distal CMAP amplitudes for the common peroneal nerves. Partial CBs improved in the intermediate segments of left median and right ulnar nerves.
The last study on day 240 showed distal CMAP amplitudes in the normal range, except in the left peroneal nerve as well as the resolution of CBs in all nerves with the exception of the emergence of a partial CB in the intermediate segment of the left peroneal nerve, possibly revealed by the increased distal CMAP amplitude due to the resolution of a distal CB. MCV were still slow in some nerve segments. SNAPs amplitudes remained reduced reaching the normal range in only 1/8 nerves.