A 60-year-old female patient presented with dyspepsia, abdominal pain, and weight loss of 1-year duration.
The patient denied other GI or anaemic symptoms. She was a non-smoker and did not drink alcohol.
The patient’s past medical history was free apart from prolonged proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) intake.
There was no family history of gastrointestinal polyposis or colorectal malignancy.
The physical examination was unremarkable apart from alopecia and onychodystrophy .
The patient’s laboratory profile was within normal limits including a full complete blood picture (CBC), chemistry, serum albumin, serum calcium, urine analysis, antinuclear antibody (ANA), and IgG-4.
Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (OGD) revealed diffuse markedly thickened gastric mucosa involving the whole stomach (fundus, body, and antrum), with thickened and tortuous gastric rugae, and numerous polypoidal lesions (3-10 mm in diameter), with a hyperaemic mucosa, and to a lesser extent down to the duodenal bulb and second part of the duodenum . Multiple conventional biopsies were taken, and polypectomy was done for the large polyps for histopathological examination. Biopsies showed marked hyperplasia and cystic dilation of foveolar glands with inflammatory cell infiltration including eosinophils, hyperplastic polyps, chronic gastritis, and Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection with no atypia or malignancy . IgG4-immunohistochemistry showed a very faintly positive signal.
Endoscopic ultrasound was done later and showed a significantly hypertrophic mucosa and muscularis mucosa, while the submucosa and the muscularis propria were spared, favouring its benign nature. Wall thickness was up to 8-10 mm (normal wall thickness is up to 4 mm) .
Colonoscopy showed multiple variable-sized, sessile, and pedunculated polyps (~15), scattered at different parts of the colon. Snaring of the large polyps was done after submucosal injection , and histopathological examination showed typical features of benign juvenile-like and hamartomatous polyps without dysplastic changes, while pathology of other polyps revealed tubular adenomatous polyps with low-grade dysplasia.
Both push enteroscopy and terminal ileoscopy showed no polyposis with a normal mucosa in the 3rd and 4th portions of the duodenum, the proximal jejunum, and the terminal ileum.
Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen & pelvis with oral and intravenous (IV) contrast revealed mild circumferential mural thickening of the gastric wall.