A 22-year-old Caucasian male farmer presented to our surgery clinic with hypogastric discomfort that started 1 month earlier and was not accompanied by severe pain, radiation of pain, nausea, vomiting, burning micturition, flank pain, pyuria, hematuria, or fever. Similarly, he had an insignificant surgical and medical history. His physical examination was normal except for mild tenderness in the left hypochondrium. There were no abnormal pulmonary signs and no peripheral lymphadenopathy.
Complete blood count, renal function tests, and liver function tests were normal with no eosinophilia. Immunological examination revealed negative Echinococcus immunoglobulin (Ig)G antibody titers (reference: negative ≤ 1:160). Urine tests did not reveal any signs of hydatiduria, and chest X-ray was also normal.
Ultrasonography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a well-defined lesion in the mid and upper pole of the left kidney, measuring 14 cm in the largest dimension. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the abdomen and pelvis confirmed these findings, and showed a compression of the kidney downwards, anteriorly, and medially, as well as an upwards pushed spleen. The cyst appeared to have a thickened, nonenhancing, noncalcified regular wall surrounding a homogeneous fluid. No similar lesion in the contralateral kidney, liver, nor lungs could be detected .
With these findings, a clinical diagnosis of a simple renal cyst was made, with a suspicion of renal hydatid disease. A transabdominal retroperitoneal approach through a subcostal incision was planned, with the aim of organ preservation. During the exploration, a large cystic structure was found to arise from the middle and the upper pole of the left kidney. After sucking the inner cyst fluid, we strongly suspected a hydatid disease; therefore, the operation field was protected with swabs soaked in 20% hypertonic saline. The cyst was opened and contents were evacuated, and 20% hypertonic saline was instilled as a scolicidal agent owing to the high probability of an uncontrolled spillage of content. Finally, the cyst was excised with a rim of normal parenchyma, and the specimen was sent for pathological examination .
Histopathologic examination confirmed the hydatidosis with the presence of a laminated acellular and eosinophilic membrane along with many scolices in the cystic lumen .
The patient was discharged on the third postoperative day with oral albendazole 400 mg for 3 months. No recurrence was detected in the postoperative 3- and 6-month follow-up ultrasound (USG) and 6-month follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan, and the patient remained in good health with normal renal function.