A 60-year-old man, with no comorbidities and living in a rural area free of Filariasis, begun a follow-up with the Body Contour Group (Plastic Surgery Department) of our institute in 2016. He reported that the scrotum began to swell in 2009, slowly and progressively, to a massive injury, depriving him of physical and sexual activities. Although he denied urogenital infections, he reported that he had recurrent episodes of scrotal erysipelas.
On physical examination, it was evident a massive lymphedema of the scrotum, approximately 20 cm x 30 cm x 40 cm, with a buried penis in the mass and non-palpable testicles. The skin of the scrotum presented with increased thickness and areas of peeling, hardened when palpated. A BMI of 27 was calculated. .
The patient’s preoperative prepare was done with a cleaning of the inguinoscrotal region for three consecutive days with chlorhexidine, 3 times a day. The patient, when in decubitus, was maintained with continuous elevation of the lower limbs. Ciprofloxacin was used as prophylactic antibiotic. The preoperative surgical demarcation consisted of marking the midline and the transition between healthy skin and diseased skin, circumferentially, aiming to involve the entire areas with lymphedema. In addition, an anesthetist and a cardiologist evaluated the patient in preoperative and considerated his surgical risk as moderate, indicating general anesthesia, thrombosis prophylaxis in postoperative and measurement of myocardial necrosis markers, as recommended in Novo et al. .
An incision was made in the marked area, beginning with the supra-pubic region; a careful dissection was carried out within the infiltrated and hardened tissue that occupies the entire mass; as the dissection progressed, the skin incision is continued throughout the circumference of the mass. Meticulous dissection allows preservation of the penile body and the elements of the spermatic cord, resecting the skin of the penis superficial to the Buck's fascia.
During the resection of the lesion (sent to anatomopathological study), we preserved two posterolateral healthy skin flaps in the perineal region, which were used for reconstruction of the scrotum. The tunica albuginea was opened, to avoid hydrocele, and bilateral orchidopexy was made to avoid testicular torsion. . Subsequent coverage with the aforementioned flaps was then performed .
For penile coverage, split-thickness skin graft (removed from the left thigh) was fixed between the glans and the base of the penis. To avoid contracture of the graft and retraction of the penis, a broken line suture (Z-plasty) was used in the topography of the median raphe.
The skin graft was kept occluded with a dressing adapted for medium compression and held for 5 days to avoid local traumas and consequent loss of it. The bladder catheter was maintained for the same period and the hygiene of the genital area was performed daily by the nursing team, avoiding manipulation by the patient. Graft opening was performed on the 5th postoperative day, with total graft integration. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day, with local care guidelines. Anatomopathological exam confirmed chronic lymphedema. The mass weighted 9,9 kg.
The follow-up was kept for 20 months . The patient regained sexual and physical activities and he had not had new episodes of erysipelas.