A 50-year-old male active drug-abuser was admitted for persistent fever, asthenia and moderate dyspnea lasting for 10 days. The cardiac tones were arrhythmic, with evidence of atrial fibrillation at the EKG, and the lungs' vesicular murmur was reduced with diffuse noises at chest auscultation, absence of skin clinical manifestations and treatable abdomen. The SARS-Cov-2 swab tested positive, and three blood cultures, obtained from different peripheral veins, resulted positive for Staphylococcus Aureus. Transthoracic echocardiography detected a huge mobile mass (24 × 17 mm) adherent to the pulmonary valve, protruding through the RVOT in the pulmonary trunk . The tricuspid valve (TV) presented with severe regurgitation without evidence of vegetations. Chest CT scan showed bilateral interstitial pneumonia with ground-glass opacities, and superimposed right lower lobe pneumonia, probably related to septic embolization . Despite the risk of massive pulmonary embolization, we deferred surgery in order to stabilize the viral pictures and to avoid a possible ARDS evolution, which could be exacerbated by immediate surgery [sternotomy and extracorporeal circulation(ECC)]. The patient was treated with low-dose cortisone (methylprednisolone 40 mg/die I.V.), low-molecular weight Heparin (4000 I.U. twice/day), and Remdesivir (100 mg/die) for 5 days. Respiratory support was achieved with Venturi Mask [fractional inspired oxygen (FiO2) = 60%] without signs of impending respiratory failure [partial oxygen pressure (pO2) = 115 mmHg; partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) = 35 mmHg; P/F ratio = 219] nor signs of ARDS evolution at a control CT scan. Surgery was then planned via median sternotomy, and ECC was instituted by means of ascending aorta and bicaval cannulation. Without cardiac arrest, pulmonary trunk was opened and a huge vegetation attached to the posterior PV leaflet was removed . A 25 Edwards Perimount bioprosthesis (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) was then implanted, enlarging the RVOT with a heterologous pericardial patch. Finally, a TV De-Vega annuloplasty was performed without prosthetic ring, in order to limit the use of foreign material, considering the habit of intravenous drug addiction . The postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged from ICU in second POD. Culture-driven antibiotic therapy (Linezolid 600 mg twice/day and Oxacillin 12 g/die I.V.) was continued for six weeks with progressive clinical and infective stabilization. The patient was discharged on 28th day after surgery, from the cardiopulmonary rehabilitation center with normal cardiopulmonary objectivity, negative blood cultures and improved chest CT.