A 65-year-old female presented with suspected angina symptoms and two syncope episodes. She had a history of hypertension and dyslipidaemia with beta-blocker and statin treatment, and was initially considered as having non-specific chest pain based on a negative treadmill test (TMT) result 10 years ago. Recently, she complained of resting chest pain for 2 min at night, and was newly diagnosed as R-ACAOS with an IAC (a vessel traverse between the pulmonary artery and aorta) with severe stenosis at the ostium by CCTA and was referred from a different hospital . The physical examination, cardiac biomarkers, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram results were unremarkable. There was no stress-induced ischaemic ST-segment change or arrhythmia on TMT, and no regional myocardial perfusion defect on single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT). Subsequent coronary angiography showed a normal left coronary artery (LCA) and a moderate stenosis at the ostial RCA . In detail , a JL 3.5 guide catheter (GC) was kept afloat near ostium of RCA, one guidewire was initially inserted into LCA to stabilize the GC. Then the second guidewire with floating wire technique was smoothly inserted into distal RCA for additional intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) study, and the GC was non-selective engagement in order to check the features of proximal to ostial RCA by IVUS. Subsequently, elliptical stenosis with slit-like orifice features with a minimal lumen area of 5.81 mm2 and stenosis of 45% in diastole was detected by IVUS . Based on hybrid cardiac imaging and previous data from case series, conservative management (e.g. beta-blocker, nicorandil, and statin) including exercise restriction was recommended. In addition, the patient, who previously suffered from syncope, characterized by sudden onset, short duration, and spontaneous complete recovery during the meal, after bath and resting state, was considered as vasovagal syncope due to dizziness caused by a postural hypotension without any determinable reason during index hospitalization, and haemodynamic stability was recovered by saline infusion. The patient had no complaint at 12-month follow-ups.