A 34 year-old female presented with two days of insidious onset right sided lower thoracic and upper lumbar pain. The pain was constant, worse with movement, and particularly increased with deep inspiration and laughing. No abdominal or limb pain, paraesthesia or numbness was noted. Her numerical rating scale (NRS) was 6/10, and she mentioned the pain felt slightly different yet no more severe than several previous episodes of lower lumbar pain. Characteristically, her pain was achy and deep, with no associated symptoms of nausea, malaise, fever, bloating, emesis, dysuria or haematuria. It was no worse or better around meals or alcohol intake. The patient was not in distress however appeared slightly more anxious as usually her back pain was not so constant.
The patient had presented several times over the preceding two years for chiropractic care for episodes of mechanical lower lumbar, neck, right hip and left shoulder pain. Her prior chiropractic treatments had consisted of spinal manipulation, mobilisation, myofascial release, rehabilitation and education. The patient’s musculoskeletal complaints usually recovered successfully with conservative management. Static mechanical allodynia had been consistently noted axially and peripherally over the previous two years, however no other symptoms or signs indicating fibromyalgia diagnosis were noted. In fact, the patient’s allodynia had been improving steadily in congruence with her increase in exercise over the preceding couple of years.
The youngest of her three children was two years old, and she had been increasing her frequency, duration and intensity of exercise over the preceding 1.5 years with regular jogging, boot-camp, and crossfit classes. Her increased exercise had resulted in reduction of weight from 92 kg to 85 kg, as well as a significant gain in strength and sense of well-being. Initial fear-avoidance behaviour to exercise post-partum due to chronic right hip pain of gluteal medius tendinopathy origin had taken several months to improve, and included education and graded progression of exercise.
Medical health history was significant for left sided Erb’s palsy at parturition, and resection of 85 % of her pancreas at age five weeks due to intractable neonatal hypoglycemia. She had gestational diabetes during all three pregnancies and had current type 2 diabetes. No current medications were being consumed. Family history was unknown.
Physical examination revealed unremarkable lumbar neurological examination and lumbar nerve root stress tests. Active lumbar and thoracic range of motion caused increased right-sided back pain in all ranges along the T8-L2 segments in the area of the erector spinae muscles. Active and passive right lumbar lateral flexion and right lumbar Kemp’s test particularly worsened her back pain. Using the Modified Ashworth Scale for grading hypertonia, this patient had Grade 2 muscle hypertonicity noted with palpation of the right sided lower thoracic and upper lumbar erector spinae and psoas muscles in contrast to Grade 0 on the left side. Palpation underneath the right costal margin elicited only mild tenderness without sharp pain or inspiratory arrest (i.e., negative Murphy sign).
There were obvious signs of musculoskeletal involvement to her acute thoracolumbar back pain. However, due to the new, more constant pain presentation and positive cholecystitis risk factors in this patient that included pain location, female sex, age over twenty, parity (3 children), patient habitus, and significant weight-loss over the prior year, there was high suspicion of acute cholecystitis. Initial presentation was a weekend day and she was recommended and referred by letter to see her general practitioner on the following Monday for clinical opinion. She was also recommended to go to the hospital immediately if her pain worsened, began to affect the abdominopelvic region, or if she felt unwell. The patient consented to a trial treatment of myofascial release and spinal manipulation in hope that her symptoms and signs may just be of mechanical origin and some pain relief may be achieved. The patient felt slightly better immediately post treatment however interestingly pre- and post-treatment muscle hypertonicity was palpably unchanged.
Three days post initial presentation she had a diagnostic ultrasound which revealed clinical signs of acute cholecystitis including focal tenderness over the gallbladder, a 25 mm non-mobile stone at the body/fundal region, a moderate amount of sludge extending towards the gallbladder neck, slight thickening of the gallbladder wall, and no evidence of pericholecystic fluid. Phone discussion with the patient the day of the ultrasound revealed that she had recently developed right hypogastric pain which was severe post ingestion of fatty foods. Additionally, her back pain had increased in intensity to a NRS of 8/10.
She was diagnosed with acute cholecystitis by her General Practitioner, was prescribed antibiotics and paracetamol and referred to a specialist. Within a week of medication introduction and restriction of high fatty meal intake, her back and abdominal pain had significantly decreased to a NRS of 1/10. Fifty-three days after initial presentation she had a successful laparoscopic cholecystectomy with no complications. Monthly follow-up over the next six months with this patient post-surgery revealed no current back or abdominal pain in the previously affected thoracolumbar area. She returned to exercise two month’s post-surgery.
In this case, delayed cholecystectomy was decided by her specialist. Therefore, early referral to her general practitioner likely did not affect her temporal surgical outcome. However, early referral assisted in early diagnosis via ultrasound which may have reduced secondary bacterial complications and improved patient comfortability as she was prescribed antibiotics and paracetamol.