Written informed consent for the publication of data and any related images was obtained from the patient.
A 42-year-old man was admitted to our hospital due to multiple injury sustained in a motorcycle accident. The Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score on admission was 7 (E1V2M4). Head computed tomography (CT) revealed thick subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in the right Sylvian fissure . We initially considered the possibility of a ruptured aneurysm that caused consciousness disturbance before the accident rather than traumatic SAH caused by the accident. Therefore, we performed head CT angiography (CTA), but no suspicious vascular lesions were detected . Thoracic CT showed bilateral pneumothorax, lung contusion, multiple limb fractures, right hemothorax, and sternal fracture. The intensivist intubated the patient under sedation and performed thoracic drainage. Due to findings of pneumonia, antibiotics (sulbactam/ampicillin 2 g/day, i.v.) were administered for 12 days. On day 5, the patient was extubated, but his disturbance of consciousness persisted (GCS score=13, E3V4M6).
Follow-up head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion-weighted imaging performed on day 7 showed small high-intensity areas in the bilateral hemispheres and corpus callosum, indicating diffuse axonal injury. Head magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed stenosis of the right M1 portion, suggesting traumatic SAH-induced vasospasm . However, we also considered the possibility of a dissecting lesion. We continued intensive care with medical treatment and conservative therapy for the diffuse axonal injury. In addition, we administered extracellular fluid to prevent ischemic complications due to cerebral vasospasm, but we did not administer antiplatelet therapy due to the possibility of MCA dissection.
On day 13, we performed follow-up MRA, which showed stenosis of the M1 portion extending to the M1-M2 bifurcation . Although the primary SAH was diffuse, the stenosis was limited to the right MCA. Therefore, we suspected MCA dissection and performed three-dimensional CTA on day 20, which revealed a small 2.5-mm saccular aneurysm on the superior wall of the M2 superior trunk . This suggested that the thick SAH was caused by a right MCA dissecting aneurysm. On digital subtraction angiography (DSA) performed on day 23, the maximal aneurysm diameter was 3.6 mm .
Surgical treatment was scheduled for day 26; however, the patient suddenly developed left hemiparesis on day 24. Head CT detected fresh SAH around the right Sylvian fissure. We suspected pseudoaneurysm rupture; therefore, we sedated and intubated the patient. Emergency surgery was performed on day 25.
The actual length of the dissecting lesion was uncertain, but we suspected that the stenosis from the right M1 portion to the M1-M2 bifurcation reflected the dissecting lesion and that the left hemiparesis was induced by lenticulostriate artery (LSA) thrombosis caused by M1 dissection. Based on this, we considered M1-M2 trapping and vascular reconstruction. Fortunately, the frontal and parietal branches of the right superficial temporal artery (STA) were well-developed and double-barrel low-flow bypass seemed to be sufficient for reconstruction of the M2 lesion. Hence, we decided to perform M1-M2 trapping surgery assisted by an STA-MCA double-barrel bypass [ and ].
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia with monitoring of somatosensory and motor evoked potentials of the extremities. Both STA branches were harvested and frontotemporal craniotomy was performed in the usual fashion. When we removed the cranial bone, we found a hard bony process attached the surface of the dura mater along the middle meningeal artery . We elevated the right frontal lobe, evacuated the cerebrospinal fluid from the carotid cistern, and secured the right ICA. Next, we dissected the distal Sylvian fissure and secured the M2 superior and inferior trunks. We found a fibrin clot on the proximal portion of the M2 superior trunk, suggesting the rupture point. Therefore, we dissected the proximal Sylvian fissure from the terminal ICA to the distal M1. Contrary to our expectation, we found no obvious M1 dissection. Since the fibrin clot we observed was located on the superior wall of the M2 superior trunk, we decided to perform a STA-M2 (superior trunk) bypass before identifying the rupture point and selected the frontal branch as the donor artery. After completion of the STA-M2 bypass, we performed dissection around the rupture point. LSAs were found behind M1 and preserved. We removed the clot at the rupture point under M1 temporary occlusion and a small laceration of approximately 10-mm was revealed along the superior wall of the M2 superior trunk , which indicated that the aneurysm was a pseudoaneurysm. We attempted to trap the lacerated point to preserve antegrade blood flow from M1 to the M2 inferior trunk and to avoid LSA thrombosis due to distal M1 blind allay. Although the origin of the M2 inferior trunk was slightly stenosed, only a proximal M2 clip was performed, and the lacerated point was trapped with titanium clips [ and 4c]. Indocyanine green video angiography showed perfect patency of the STA-M2 bypass, antegrade blood flow from the M1 to the M2 inferior trunk, and LSA .
We administered antiplatelet therapy with ozagrel sodium (80 mg/day), edaravone (60 mg/day), fasudil hydrochloride hydrate (90 mg/day), and cilostazol (200 mg/day) for 2 weeks. Follow-up head MRI/A on day 39 showed no additional infarctions. Postoperative DSA on day 56 showed excellent bypass patency with a mild stenotic lesion at the M1-M2 bifurcation and M2 inferior trunk . Cilostazol (200 mg/day) was administered for the MCA stenosis. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital on day 89 with severe left hemiparesis (manual muscle test grade = 1). On the 5-month follow-up at the outpatient clinic, the left hemiparesis had improved slightly and the patient could walk independently (modified Rankin Scale score = 3).