The authors present a 74-year-old female farmer from a mountain village of Hubei province, China, with no history of excessive exposure to heat or surgery, no family history of this disorder or glaucoma. This study was carried out following informed consent from the patient, and the tissue was handled according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
The best corrected visual acuity was finger counting at 0.05 m in the right eye and 12/20 in the left eye, the vision loss of both eyes could not be corrected with glasses. The intraocular pressure was 60 mmHg in the right eye and 17 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed that the right cornea was edematous and the anterior chambers of both eyes were shallow. The right pupil was ellipse and fixed, dilated to 7 mm, the diameter of the left pupil was 4 mm. Both lenses had moderate opacity and this was more serious in the right eye. The cup/disc ratio was 0.5 in the right eye and 0.3 in the left eye. Clear, diaphanous membranes were seen in both anterior chambers . The capsular peeling was limited to the central anterior capsule. There was no iris transillumination, pseudoexfoliation, or phacodonesis, which may be accompanied with lens capsule true exfoliation. Gonioscopy of the left eye revealed a narrow open angle at 6 o’clock and a closed angle at 12 o’clock . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM,SW-2100; Tianjin Suowei Electronic Technology Co., Ltd., China) demonstrated a membrane inserting into the anterior chamber from the surface of the anterior lens capsule .
The major diagnosis was primary angle closure glaucoma in the right eye and eclipse period in the left eye. The authors prescribed mannitol, 1% pilocarpine and 2% mikelan eye drops, after which the intraocular pressure of the right eye dropped to 17 mmHg within 24 h, the corneal edema had decreased under the slit-lamp microscope. After a few days, the patient underwent a non eventful trabeculectomy in her right eye, and a cataract phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation in her left eye. The split membrane and the central anterior capsule of the left eye was extracted separately and fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde immediately after surgery, submitted for ultrastructural pathologic examination (transmission electron microscopy [TEM]: FEI Tecnai G2 12; FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA).