An 80-year-old woman was referred to our hospital following detection of a giant mass in the pancreatic head on abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed for a close examination of a mass in the right breast. She had no gastrointestinal obstruction, no weight loss, no history of diabetes or ovarian cancer, and no family history of cancer. Blood test results showed mild anemia (red blood cells: 368 × 104/mm3, hemoglobin: 11.8 g/dl) and hypoalbuminemia (albumin: 3.5 g/dl). Hepatobiliary enzyme and tumor marker levels (carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA): 3.8 ng/ml, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) 12 U/ml, DUPAN-2 ≤ 25 U/ml, Span-1 19 U/ml) were normal. CT revealed a 90-mm-sized tumor in the pancreatic head comprising a mixture of solid and cystic components, with contrast enhancement . The tumor had grown within the main pancreatic duct, not within branches, compressing and narrowing the duodenum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a giant cystic lesion with a clear border and smooth margin in the pancreatic head, contiguous with the dilated main pancreatic duct (MPD). On MRI, the tumor showed as low intensity in the interior on T1-weighted image (T1WI), high intensity in the interior on T2WI, and low intensity at the periphery on both images . As both CT and MRI suggested that the lesion was located in the pancreatic head invading the duodenum, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) were performed. EGD revealed a semi-circumferential papillary tumor protruding into the lumen from the first portion of the duodenum to the anterior wall of the second portion . The tumor was located twofold proximal to the papilla of Vater, and the mucosa of the papilla of Vater was intact . EUS revealed a flat isoechoic mural nodule of 4 mm in the dilated MPD in the pancreatic head , which was not found in the pancreatic body or tail. Tumor biopsy performed at the time of EGD revealed atypical cylindrical cells with enlarged nuclei in a tubular and papillary arrangement on hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining, and the pathological diagnosis was adenocarcinoma. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET-CT) revealed an accumulation of SUV max 6.75 in the pancreatic head tumor, but not in other organs .
Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with main duct-type or mixed-type IPMN with an associated invasive carcinoma. Because of the absence of distant metastasis, although the mass in the right breast was diagnosed as a ductal carcinoma in situ by biopsy, IPMN with an associated invasive carcinoma was considered a prognostic factor by the institutional tumor board, and we therefore performed a curative-intent pancreatic resection. Considering the patient’s age and wishes, surgery was performed without neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Open subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (SSPPD) and regional lymphadenectomy were performed after confirming negative intraoperative peritoneal lavage cytology. During laparotomy, the tumor was identified in the pancreatic head, with no obvious serosal or vascular invasion . The duration of surgery was 314 min, and intraoperative blood loss was 55 ml. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 13 without complications.
The surgical specimen revealed a papillary tumor with a diameter of 75 mm, protruding toward the duodenum from the pancreatic head. The tumor contained cysts filled with mucus. The mucosa of the papilla of Vater was intact . Surgical margins were negative (R0). Histopathological examination revealed cells with an eosinophilic cytoplasm, deeply stained nuclei, and mucus with increased papillae on HE staining . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for MUC5AC, MUC6, and HepPar-1; and partially positive for CDX-2 and MUC2 . In addition, papillary lesions were identified in the epithelium of both the main and accessory pancreatic ducts and protruded toward the duodenal mucosa from the accessory papilla, while extending to replace the duodenal mucosa with no obvious stromal invasion on HE staining . Based on these findings, the patient was pathologically diagnosed with High-grade IOPN. The final pathological stage was TisN0M0, Stage0 (UICC for International Cancer Control, 8th edition), and the patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy.
Two months after pancreatectomy, partial mastectomy with sentinel lymph node biopsy was performed for right breast cancer, and the patient was diagnosed with ductal carcinoma in situ. The patient has remained alive 5 months after pancreatectomy, with no recurrence or metastasis.