A 70-year-old man underwent colorectal resection for rectal cancer (well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, pT3a N0, stage IIA). At this time, no pulmonary lesion was detected on computed tomography (CT) . Eighteen months later, a well-defined solid nodule appeared in the upper lobe of the right lung on CT . The diameter of the nodule was 0.8 cm. After a further 6 months, the diameter increased up to 2.1 cm . Positron emission tomography revealed high uptake in the nodule. Serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and CA19-9 were within the normal range, and no recurrence of the rectal cancer was found.
Based on radiological findings and the speed of growth, the lung nodule was clinically diagnosed as a metastatic tumor originating from the rectal cancer. Thoracoscopic wedge resection of the right upper lung lobe was subsequently performed. A frozen section of the resected tumor was examined perioperatively. The intraoperative pathological diagnosis was metastatic adenocarcinoma, and the surgery was completed without additional resection. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.
Further pathological examination of the surgical specimens including the previously resected rectal cancer was performed. The histological features of the lung tumor revealed findings typical of colorectal adenocarcinoma and resembled those of the original rectal cancer . Furthermore, immunohistochemical study of the lung tumor was performed with multiplex antibody reagent (Pathology Institute corporation, Toyama, Japan) containing napsin A (clone: TMU-Ad02) and TTF-1 (clone: SPT24). The study showed that both markers were positive. The specimens were reexamined with polyclonal napsin A antibodies (Nichirei Biosciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan) and the rabbit monoclonal TTF-1 antibody (clone: SP141, Roche) in separate experiments. In addition, we obtained an immunohistochemical stain from a third-party laboratory (Kyodo Byori Inc., Kobe, Japan). They used two monoclonal antibodies; napsin A (clone: IP64, Leica Biosystems Newcastle Ltd.) ; TTF-1 (clone: SPT24, Novocastra) . All results were positive for both markers. Thus, we finally diagnosed the lung nodule as a metastasis from the napsin A-positive rectal cancer.
The patient then received eight cycles of combined chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and capecitabine. The patient is alive without any recurrence 34 months after the first surgery for primary rectal cancer.