A 9-year-old male of black African ethnicity was brought by his parents to our primary care hospital because for 2 days he had been experiencing intermittent sudden perceptions of his parents’ heads either “shrinking” or “expanding” although he could still recognize their faces. He also had the same perception of objects around him. The visual perceptions were usually brief, resolved spontaneously and did not involve confusion in colours or individuals. For fear of a magico-religious origin of the illness, his parents took him to a traditional healer where he was given various herbal concoctions to drink for 2 days but there was no regression of the symptoms.
It is worth mentioning that 1 week prior to the onset of the visual symptoms the boy had developed an intermittent high grade fever which persisted in spite of the oral antimalarial (arthemeter and lumefantrin combination) and antipyretic medications (paracetamol and ibuprofen) which his parents gave to him at home. The fever was associated with general weakness, loss of appetite and severe polyarthralgia.
The review of systems revealed severe headache and postprandial vomiting. The child did not have abnormal auditory or tactile perceptions. This was his first time of having visual problems. He was diagnosed with and treated for severe malaria at the ages of 2 and 6 but visual disturbances were not reported on these occasions. His past history was otherwise without particularity.
On admission, the boy still experienced the visual distortions. Clinical examination revealed an extremely lethargic patient with pale conjunctivae and icteric sclerae. His Glasgow coma score was 15/15 and he was oriented in person, place and time. His vital signs were: blood pressure: 70/50 mmHg, pulse: 117beats/min, respiratory rate: 29breaths/min, and temperature: 36 °C. There was mucocutaneous pallor. Neurological examination revealed generalized hypotonia but there were neither focal neurological nor meningeal signs. Head and neck examination as well as the rest of the physical examination was without notable findings as well.
Severe malaria was suspected. Typhoid encephalopathy and hepatic encephalopathy were considered as differential diagnoses. A series of laboratory tests were then requested:To confirm the diagnosis of malaria, a thick blood film analysis was done which was remarkable for hyperparasitaemia at 277,000 trophozoites/μl (obtained from the product of the number of parasites counted per 100 white cells on the thick blood smear and the number of white cells per microliter of blood), A full blood count revealed a haemoglobin value of 8.3 g/dl (moderate anaemia) and a platelet count of 101,000 platelets/mm3 (moderate thrombocytopenia) The random blood sugar was 50 mg/dL (moderate hypoglycaemia) The Widal test was used to check the possibility of typhoid and the titre was weakly positive. Hepatitis B and C antigens were negative and liver enzymes were within normal limits
In view of prostration and hyperparasitaemia, the boy was diagnosed with severe malaria. The patient was placed on quinine 300 mg in 300 ml of glucose infusion to flow over 4 h and to be repeated 8 hourly. He was also placed on intravenous paracetamol at a dose of 450 mg 6 hourly. Two hours after the first quinine and glucose infusion, he had an episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizures that were arrested with slowly administered intravenous diazepam. Meningo-encephalitis was considered as a possible aetiology of the neurological problems. Subsequent lumbar puncture and cerebrospinal fluid analysis were without particularity. The quinine and glucose infusions were continued for 5 days and the clinical progress was good. Oral relay of the antimalarial drug was done with Quinine tablets at a dose of 900 mg daily in three divided doses for 5 days. The patient was discharged after 8 days of hospitalization and reviewed on out-patient basis. A repeat of the thick blood film analysis 2 weeks after discharge was negative for malaria parasites. The visual symptoms which were experienced by the boy were suggestive of AIWS and they had completely resolved after the successful treatment of malaria. No further visual abnormalities were reported during 3 months of follow-up and reassurance.