In April 2015, a 2.6-year-old boy was admitted to the Shanghai Children's Medical Center due to persistent fever and abdominal pain that lasted more than 2 months. His physical examination revealed hard lumps near the umbilicus in the left middle and right lower abdomen, with poor motion and no obvious tenderness. A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) indicated a huge space occupation (6.5 cm × 8.8 cm × 12.4 cm) in the left abdomen and suspected a malignant abdominal tumor. Retroperitoneal partial tumor resection was performed, and the postoperative pathology was consistent with Burkitt’s lymphoma. The contrast-enhanced CT of other organs and bone scans did not show an abnormal space occupation, and bone marrow aspiration did not suggest bone marrow infiltration. Laboratory investigations showed normal white blood cell count, hemoglobin level, and platelet count and a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level (15 mg/L, normal <8 mg/L). Fluorescence in situ hybridization was negative for c-Myc, BCL2, and ALK rearrangements. Immune typing was negative for PAS, PASD, CDPP, CK, CGA, SYN, S100, CD3, CD4, ACK1, PGM1, MAC387, CD30, EMA, and PES and positive for CD20, CD79a, Ki67, PAX5, VIM, INI-1, and CD34. The etiological test was positive for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and immunoglobulin M (IgM), despite normal DNA quantification of EBV. No autoantibodies were detected at that time, and no significant travel, medical, or family ailment histories were noted. According to the World Health Organization 2016 classification criteria for hematopoietic and lymphoid tumors and St. Jude/Murphy staging criteria (, ), the patient was eventually diagnosed with stage 3 Burkitt's lymphoma due to a local but unresectable abdominal mass. Subsequently, he was enrolled in the R4 group of the CCCG-BNHL-2015 chemotherapy regimen since his lactate dehydrogenase level is >4 times the normal value (3532 U/L) . The patient underwent radical excision of the abdominal tumor after the fourth course of chemotherapy and completed six courses of chemotherapy. To consolidate the effects of chemotherapy and reduce cancer relapse, the patient underwent an autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) at the end of his chemotherapy. The patient was followed up regularly for nearly 4.5 years after ASCT, showing event-free survival.
In August 2020, the patient was presented to our hospital again due to recurrent fever accompanied by a rash that lasted for 2 months. The rash was initially confined to the cheeks and appeared with erythematous scales. It was accompanied by pruritus with partial maculopapular scabs, which gradually spread to the extremities. Physical examination revealed oral ulcers and swollen cervical lymph nodes. The patient denied any other discomfort, such as joint pain, hair loss, or fatigue. etiological examination was negative for serologic EBV, cytomegalovirus, and tuberculosis. Routine blood examination suggested leukopenia (2.97 × 109/L), anemia (98 g/L) with a positive Coombs test, and thrombocytopenia (104 × 109/L). No naive lymphocytes were identified on bone marrow aspiration, and the bone marrow biopsy did not indicate lymphoma relapse. Auto-immunological examination indicated positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) with a titer of 1:1,000. Anti-ribosomal antibody (anti-rRNP), anti-Smith antibody (anti-Sm), anti-SSA/Ro52 antibody (anti-SSA/Ro52), anti-SSA/Ro60 antibody (anti-SSA/Ro60), anti-SSB antibody (anti-SSB), anti-double-stranded DNA antibody (anti-dsDNA), anti-nucleosome antibody, anti-histone antibody, and anti-ribosomal antibodies were all positive, whereas antiphospholipid antibodies were negative. Meanwhile, the level of complement 3 (C3 0.29 g/L, normal at 0.9–1.8 g/L), complement 4 (C4 0.04 g/L, normal at 0.1–0.4 g/L), and the total complement activities (CH50 U/ml, normal at 23–46 U/ml) were also low. Immunoglobulins G and globulins were elevated, with values of 26 g/L (normal at 6.3–15.0 g/L) and 40.8 g/L (normal at 18–32 g/L), respectively, while the rheumatoid factor was normal. Other biochemical tests indicated an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level (89 mm/h, normal at 0–20 mm/h) and normal liver and kidney functions. The maximum 24-h urinary protein level was 440 mg, with renal puncture indicating that the pathology coincided with lupus nephritis III + V. No pleural or pericardial effusion was identified on high-resolution CT of the chest or cardiac ultrasound. Ultrasonography of the thyroid and two salivary glands indicated an uneven echo of the thyroid and submandibular glands. The patient denied a family history of connective tissue disease, and whole-exome sequencing revealed no abnormalities. SLE was diagnosed according to the European League Against Rheumatism and the American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) 2019 diagnostic criteria , with a score of 20 (fever, subacute cutaneous lupus, anemia with positive Coombs test, low C3 and C4, and positive anti-Sm and anti-dsDNA). The patient may also have been diagnosed with SLE with features of Sjogren's syndrome since was positive for anti-SSA and anti-SSB and had a fever, high IgG level, leukopenia, elevated ESR level, and even abnormal submaxillary gland echo on ultrasonography.
The patient was administered glucocorticoids, hydroxychloroquine, and mycophenolate. Glucocorticoid administration was discontinued by August 2022 gradually. During the follow-up period, the anticardiolipin antibody began to be positive, and involvement of neuropsychiatric lupus and interstitial lung disease in other organs did not occur. During the most recent follow-up in May 2023, the patient is currently alive and has not experienced a relapse of Burkitt's lymphoma and disease activity of SLE. The latest ANA test was also positive, with a titer of 1:320, and only anti-SSA/Ro52, anti-SSA/Ro60, and anti-rRNP remained positive.