An 18-year-old Dravidian woman presented to our hospital with right submandibular swelling of three to four months' duration. An examination revealed a firm, non-tender swelling in the right submandibular region measuring 3 cm × 3 cm . Computed tomographic (CT) scan findings were a minimally enhancing, hypodense lesion measuring 4.5 cm × 3.7 cm × 2.6 cm within the right submandibular salivary gland, with an enhancing rim of the normal submandibular gland at the periphery . The CT scan revealed no evidence of the mass lesion elsewhere in the head and neck region. Fine-needle aspiration was done, which showed moderately cellular smears composed of cells arranged in loose clusters and sheets showing a whorling pattern in places. Individual cells were polygonal to spindle-shaped with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclei were round to ovoid and regular with finely granular, evenly distributed chromatin. Few cells showed intra-nuclear cytoplasmic inclusion . On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of right submandibular gland neoplastic lesion, suggestive of oncocytoma, was made. The possibility of a primary ectopic meningioma was also considered on the basis of the findings of the whorling arrangement of cells and intra-nuclear inclusion. Intra-operatively, the submandibular salivary gland could be dissected separately, and the well-circumscribed tumor was seen in the vicinity of the deep lobe of the gland, which was surgically excised. Grossly, two tissue masses were removed. The larger mass was smooth, firm, well circumscribed and oblong, measuring 3 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm. The cut surface was grayish white with few areas of congestion. The smaller mass was a salivary gland. The cut surface of the gland appeared unremarkable. Multiple sections were taken from the tumor. Histologically, the lesion was characterized by a lobular architecture and showed uniform spindle-cell proliferation separated by hyalinized collagen bundles. The cells were arranged in short fascicles, in concentric whorls and, in places, in a typical meningothelial pattern . The neoplastic cells had abundant, lightly eosinophilic cytoplasm, indistinct cytoplasmic borders and round or oval nuclei with finely dispersed chromatin and indistinct nucleoli. A careful search revealed psammoma bodies. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed using the following pre-diluted, ready-to-use primary antibodies: epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (clone E29; Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA), vimentin (clone V-9; BioGenex, Hyderabad, India cytokeratin (CK) (clone AE-1/AE-3; Dako) and S-100 protein (polyclonal antibody S100A4; Dako). The tumor cells showed intense reactivity for EMA and vimentin, but not for CK or S-100 protein . On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of primary extra-cranial ectopic meningioma was made.