A 27-year-old female patient with a known history of ASD closure was referred to our department due to abnormal drainage of IVC to the LA.
Since her operation at the age of 3, she had a gradual limitation of activity associated with cyanosis. At the age of 9, she was advised to have another operation, but unfortunately, her family refused. Over the years, the patient tolerated her symptoms until she got married 5 years before presentation. Since then, she has had five recurrent abortions. Each pregnancy reached 10–13 weeks gestational age and then intrauterine death occurred. The last abortion was 6 months before presentation despite anticoagulant therapy including enoxaparin and aspirin.
A full workup of investigations was done including chromosomal analysis, thrombophilia, protein C, protein S, anti-phospholipid, anti-cardiolipin, toxoplasma antibody, and genetic study. All her investigations were normal except for the presence of polycythaemia with haemoglobin 21 g/dL and low oxygen saturation.
TEE revealed a small diameter of right atrium RA (2.5 cm) and right ventricle RV (2.0 cm). Both LA and left ventricle (LV) were dilated with an end-systolic diameter of 6 and 6.9 cm, respectively. Abnormal drainage of IVC to the LA was seen. No evidence of intra atrial shunt was detected. This was verified by injection of a 10 cc contrast air bubble through the femoral vein (, see , ). Right-sided heart catheterization confirmed the above findings with decreased RA and RV pressure and increase LA pressure (, see , ).
When presented to our department, she had central cyanosis with oxygen saturation of 75%. Blood pressure was normal with a regular pulse of 75 beats per minute. Heart and chest examinations were normal except for a 2/6 systolic ejection murmur without fixed splitting of S2. Besides central cyanosis and finger clubbing, her general examination was unremarkable. Routine laboratory investigations were all normal except for a high haemoglobin level of 21 g/dL, haematocrit of 63%, and a high red blood cell of 7.5 million cells per microliter. Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly with decreased pulmonary vascular markings.
In view of the present findings, a decision was made to perform surgery. The heart was exposed through a median sternotomy. After dissection of adhesions, cardiopulmonary bypass was instituted through cannulation of the aorta, superior vena cava, and right femoral vein. Exposure of the RA revealed a small cavity with no evidence of inter-atrial communication, and the orifice of IVC was not seen.
The septum was incised along the previous surgical incision, and the orifice of IVC was seen draining completely into the LA . A polytetrafluoroethylene patch was used to close the intra-atrial septum making the IVC orifice in the RA.
After surgical correction, oxygen saturation reached 99%. TEE showed no residual shunts. Cardiac dimensions were as follows: RA (3.5 cm), RV (2.9 cm), LA (4.8), and LV was 6 cm. Both operative and postoperative recovery were uneventful. The patient was discharged after 5 days with normal oxygen saturation. Follow-up echocardiography revealed normal drainage of IVC to the RA (, see , ).
The patient had two full-term pregnancies 1 and 2 years later after the surgery with normal delivery of well-developed infants weighing 3500 and 3700 g, respectively. During that period, no history of abortion was encountered.