A one-year-old male patient presented with fever, productive cough and dyspnea. On clinical examination he had pale face, nasal flaring and intercostal retraction. Physical examination of his chest revealed widespread crackles and wheezing and radiographic findings were suggestive of pneumonia. Laboratory data were not significant with the exception of nasopharyngeal aspirate that was positive for Respiratory Syncytial Virus A by PCR.
The child was affected by a polymalformative syndrome and his past medical history included necrotizing enterocolits and extended resection of affected intestinal tract. Due to short residual intestinal length after resection, he developed SBS that required long-term parenteral nutrition combined with enteral nutrition administered by gastrostomy tube. At four months of life, he experienced anaphylaxis due to cow’s milk proteins administered through gastrostomy; sensitization to CMP was confirmed by specific IgEs levels that were positive for α-lactalbumin (13.5 kU/L), β -lactoglobulin (91.9 kU/L) and casein (>100 kU/L). Avoidance of milk and dairy products was recommended and enteral nutrition with extensively hydrolyzed milk formula was suggested.
Due to the respiratory effort, the comorbidity and the precarious clinical balance during the hospitalization, antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam was administered despite viral infection. Moreover, because of the severity of bronchospasm in the context of acute respiratory exacerbation due to viral infection, lactose free methyl-prednisolone (Urbason 40 mg, Sanofi-Aventis) was added to therapy.
After two days of therapy without any side effect, the patient was given methyl-prednisolone sodium succinate (Solu-Medrol 40 mg, Pfizer) instead of Urbason because of a temporary lack of availability.
Within few minutes of the first intravenous administration of steroid therapy, the patient presented with wheezing and generalized urticaria. Symptoms resolved after parenteral administration of antihistamine.
Because steroid administration was preceded by antibiotic therapy, an allergic reaction to piperacillin/tazobactam was suspected and antibiotic was discontinued. Steroid treatment was maintained unchanged and anaphylaxis with giant urticaria, eyelid edema, tightened laryngospasm and severe dyspnea occurred within few minutes of the second intravenous administration of 10 mg of methyl-prednisolone sodium succinate. Steroid therapy was stopped and parenteral antihistamine and epinephrine were given with prompt resolution of symptoms.
Total IgE and serum-specific IgE antibody measured with the Phadia CAP RAST system, Phadia diagnostics (the lower limit of detection was 0.35 UA/mL and the upper limit of detection was 100 UA/mL) were done during the hospitalization with increased values of total IgE (687 kU/L), α-lactalbumin IgE (22.3 kU/L), β -lactoglobulin IgE (92.7 kU/L) and casein IgE (>100 kU/L).
On the basis of the clear clinical history and laboratory findings, we hypothesized that Solu-Medrol 40 mg was the cause of the allergic reaction and the previous antibiotic and steroid therapy were restarted without side effects. Diagnostic drug challenge with lactose containing preparation was not performed due to the recent history of severe systemic reaction. Nevertheless, after 4 weeks of suspected reaction, the above hypothesis was confirmed with skin prick test and intradermal test with pure methyl-prednisolone sodium succinate used respectively at the concentration of 20 mg/ml and 2 mg/ml : the tests were positive for formulation of 40 mg and negative for formulation of 125 mg. The presence of potentially allergenic milk proteins in ten different batches of the implicated product (Solu-Medrol 40 mg, Pfizer) was assessed by SDS-PAGE and Immunoblotting methods. We detected traces of milk proteins in samples from all ten batches tested, confirming our hypothesis of milk allergen contamination.