A previously well 43-year-old man presented with chronic urticaria . There was no obvious precipitant identified from the history, he was systemically well and investigations including FBP, U&E, LFTs, TFTs, ESR, and CRP were normal. A polyclonal increase in IgG and IgA was noted with an associated small (< 1 g/L) IgM kappa paraprotein. The rash was resistant to conventional treatment with non-sedating antihistamines.
At review, 6 months later, he had developed generalized fatigue, fever, night sweats, arthralgia, right knee and tibial pain, weight loss and bilateral axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy.
Investigations showed a persistent neutrophilia (> 15 × 109/L) and raised ESR and CRP. Other haematological indices were within normal limits. A persistent polyclonal elevation in IgG, A and M was noted, with the IgM kappa paraprotein increased to 3.3 g/L. Serum ferritin was mildly elevated (361 μg/L, normal range 18–325). An inflammatory arthritis was suspected, and admission arranged for further investigation and treatment.
Quotidian spiking fevers (> 38°C) were recorded whilst an inpatient. Isotope bone scan showed increased tracer uptake at proximal aspect of right tibia in comparison with the left. MRI right knee showed non specific marrow signal change at distal end of femur/proximal tibia. CT chest, abdomen and pelvis showed florid bilateral axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy . Serum antibodies to nuclei, extractable nuclear antigens, double stranded DNA, cyclic citrullinated peptide, and neutrophil cytoplasmic antigens were all negative. Rheumatoid factor was negative and serum C3 and C4 levels were normal. There was a slight elevation in B2 microglobulin and plasma viscosity, but lymphocyte subsets including kappa/lambda ratios were normal, and urine analysis was negative for Bence Jones protein. Serological investigations for EBV, CMV, HIV, syphilis, hepatitis A, B and C, borrelia burgdoderi, brucella abortus, chlamydia, Q fever, mycoplasma, and HHV8 were negative. ASOT was < 200. Urine cultures for mycobacterium were repeatedly negative.
Skin biopsy demonstrated an inflammatory infiltrate in the epidermis, suggestive of either rheumatoid arthritis or Still's disease. Lymph node biopsy revealed polyclonal reactive hyperplasia with abundance of plasma cells . Castleman disease was considered but excluded after a further biopsy and review by several expert histopathologists. Bone marrow biopsy showed reactive changes only.
Mutations were not found in the coding regions of MVK, TNFRSF1A, and NLRP3 (previously NALP3/CIAS1) making the diagnoses of Hyper IgD syndrome, TNF receptor associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS), and Muckle Wells/Familial Cold Urticaria all unlikely.
A tentative diagnosis of Adult Onset Still's Disease (AOSD) was made. Trials of etoricoxib, and subsequent oral prednisolone (40 mg daily) with methotrexate (20 mg weekly) were however ineffective. Two cycles of pulsed methylprednisolone (250 mg and 500 mg) resulted in transient improvement in both symptoms and inflammatory markers over the initial 36 hours, but symptoms returned on completion of cycle. A trial of infliximab (5 mg/kg) resulted in a paradoxical exacerbation with night sweats, fever, arthralgia and urticaria.
Symptoms and signs persisted over the next year despite symptomatic treatment. The patient was severely disabled by these and only able to work part time.
Four years after initial presentation, a further trial of prednisolone (60 mg/day) was commenced. 48 hours after commencement of treatment there was almost complete resolution of symptoms. Initial CRP (149 mg/L) fell to 10.8 mg/L after 13 days treatment. Azathioprine was commenced as a steroid sparing agent however the development of severe arthralgia, joint stiffness, rash, and fever with a CRP of 164 mg/L led to its withdrawal after 9 days. Mycophenolate mofetil (1 g BD) was substituted however despite 3 months treatment; prednisolone dose could not be reduced below 50 mg/day.
Given the unresponsiveness of this patient's disease to a number of immunosuppressant drugs, and reports of a beneficial response in refractory AOSD , a trial of anakinra, (100 mg/day) was commenced. Within 24 hours there was almost complete resolution of symptoms. CRP normalized within 7 days. The patient has remained on anakinra therapy for 16 months with continued symptom control. Temporary interruption of treatment on two occasions was associated with recurrence of rash, fever and arthralgia within 24 hours. Symptoms quickly resolved on recommencing anakinra. In light of the clinical course and following an extensive literature review, the final diagnosis of SS was made. The patient fulfilled both essential criteria and 6 of the additional criteria established by Lipsker et al .