A 48-year-old woman was admitted with neoplasms in the middle lobe of the liver, which were diagnosed by abdominal ultrasonography. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a poorly defined low-density lesion in the middle lobe of the liver (mainly located in the S4b and S5 segments), which was significantly enhanced, and was suspected to be an angiogenic liver tumor . Further examination revealed that the levels of neuron-specific enolase (NSE) of the patient were elevated . Combined with her imaging characteristics and our previous clinical experience , it was determined that the lesion might be a liver neuroendocrine tumor. The rest of the patient’s examination and laboratory indicators were all normal, and no obvious abnormality was found in the physical examination. Based on the above condition analysis, our preoperative diagnosis was a centrally located liver tumor and that a liver neuroendocrine neoplasm could not be excluded. We planned to perform anatomical central hepatectomy, namely a territory resection around the middle hepatic vein . During the operation we were surprised by the discovery of a gallbladder tumor rather than the liver lesion suggested by CT imaging . Therefore, we quickly adjusted the operative protocol and performed a cholecystectomy, hepatoduodenal ligament lymph node dissection, and partial hepatectomy . Meanwhile, the rapid frozen pathological examination during the operation indicated that the margin of the cystic duct and liver was negative. This unexpected intraoperative situation triggered our profound reflection. After the operation, when we reviewed the CT images of the patients again and combined them with the intraoperative situation, we realized that this was an extremely complex gallbladder tumor. The bottom and body of the gallbladder had been filled with solid masses and enhanced significantly, whereas the density of the neck of the gallbladder was still normal . As for the clear enhancement of the liver around the gallbladder (i.e., what we had mistaken for liver lesions before surgery), this was most likely related to abnormal perfusion or the existence of an arteriovenous fistula. Postoperative pathological analysis revealed that the size of gallbladder lesion was about 6.0 cm × 4.0 cm × 3.5 cm, which invaded the whole layer of gallbladder wall and partly involved the adjacent liver tissue. Combined with immunohistochemical staining, it was consistent with paraganglioma of gallbladder. Microscopically, the lesion was mainly located within the submucosa of the gallbladder. The tumor cells were diffusely distributed in clusters, mainly composed of principal cells and sustentacular cells. The chief cells were mostly arranged in nests, forming a characteristic “zellballen” architecture, and the cell clusters were filled with blood sinuses . Further detailed immunohistochemical analysis revealed that broad-spectrum pan-cytokeratin (CK-pan) antibody staining was negative, which means that the tumor originated from non-epithelial tissue. Chromogranin A (CgA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and synaptophysin (Syn), three important neuroendocrine markers, were all positive; S-100 highlighted surrounding sustentacular cells, and the Ki-67 proliferation index of tumor cells was 10% . To further exclude metastatic paraganglioma, the patient underwent a post-operative systemic positron emission tomography-computed tomography [specifically 18F-FDG (fluorodeoxyglucose F 18) PET-CT] scanning, which revealed no other hypermetabolic lesions. Collectively, the final diagnosis was primary gallbladder paraganglioma with partial liver invasion. In view of the abundant blood supply of the tumor and its potential for malignancy, we recommended that the patient take surufatinib, a new oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor developed completely independently in China at 1 month after surgery. Surufatinib has dual anti-angiogenic and immunomodulatory activity, and has been shown to be effective in clinical trials in non-pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor patients. We regularly followed up with the patient for half a year; her general condition was fine. Serum NSE levels showed a continuous downward trend , and no obvious abnormality was found in biochemical tests and imaging examinations.