A 22-year-old right-handed woman was referred for management of jerky movements and abnormal posturing of the right hand that had developed since acute hemorrhage in the right cerebellar hemisphere secondary to a cavernous malformation. At age 19, she developed an episode of severe headache with vomiting, and poor coordination. Examination revealed ataxia in her right upper extremity along with jerks and abnormal posturing of her right hand and fingers. Brain computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hemorrhage in the right cerebellar hemisphere compressing the fourth ventricle . No structure lesions were found in the supratentorial region. Resection of the mass and pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of cavernous malformation. Her headache improved after surgery. However, mild ataxia in the right arm, abnormal posturing of the hand and spontaneous and sudden jerks of the right fingers persisted. Furthermore, the jerks were unable to be suppressed voluntarily but disappeared during sleep. Alcohol intake did not seem to affect those abnormal movements, but anxiety and stress worsened the symptoms.
Neurological examination at our clinic showed mild dysmetria in the right upper extremity on the finger-to-nose test. The right hand showed occasional brisk jerks at rest which became more evident on maintaining posture, but were not provoked by touch. Abnormal posturing of the fingers was noted, which was accentuated while outstretching. An abnormally tight grip was observed while writing with a pencil. (See Additional file 1, a video footage of the patient showing these features in more detail). The patient presented symmetrical deep tendon reflex and intact proprioceptive sensation. No long-tract signs were found. There were no changes in the severity of these involuntary movements during a 6-month trial of piracetam, biperiden, baclofen and clonazepam.
A 15-month follow-up MRI demonstrated a post-operative malacic lesion in the right cerebellar hemisphere . Surface electromyography (EMG) recordings of the right forearm while keeping outstretched illustrated the typical features of myoclonus with synchronous bursts (93–97 ms) of EMG activities in agonist and antagonist muscles .