A 70-year-old man presented to the hospital with exertional dyspnea and pedal edema. The patient had a complete heart block one year back, for which he got a DDDR pacemaker implanted. LV function and coronary angiogram were normal at the time of pacemaker implantation. Before presenting to our hospital, the patient was admitted to the local hospital and managed for heart failure.The echocardiography showed a dilated LV with severe LV dysfunction (LV ejection fraction 25%) and plasma B-type natriuretic peptide level was found to be 877 pg/mL. When evaluated at our centre. ECG showed paced rhythm with a QRS interval of 160 ms . The decrease in ejection fraction was due to RV pacing hence device up-gradation to cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) was planned. An organized timeline of the patient’s symptoms and interventions is presented in Table .
A coronary angiogram was done to rule out coronary artery disease (CAD) as a cause for severe LV dysfunction. During the coronary angiogram, levophase was done to visualize the coronary sinus and locate its ostium in the left and right anterior oblique views. After visualizing the anatomy of the CS, the posterolateral vein was pointed out as a possible vessel for LV lead implantation. The posterolateral vein had difficult annatomy as it originated perpendicular to CS. Left subclavian vein puncture was taken, and an LV sheath was inserted. Using AL-1 diagnostic catheter, CS was cannulated through the LV sheath with 0.014 × 180 cm Terumo guidewire. Whisper Extra Support (WES) guidewire was placed in the posterolateral vein. LV lead could not be advanced through the ostium of the posterolateral vein due to difficult angulation. Since the LV lead could not be advanced, a sub-selector catheter was used, but despite this, the LV lead could not be advanced. Hence, a second WES wire was placed in the posterolateral vein. LV wire was inserted into the posterolateral vein with a second support wire. LV lead was positioned in Coronary Sinus, but while trying to slit the Coronary Sinus delivery catheter, LV lead dislodged.
Two wires were again placed in the posterolateral vein. This time on one of the wires, a 1.5 × 8 mm balloon was passed distally and inflated to entrap the other wire. Following this, the LV lead could be advanced distally. The balloon was then deflated, and slitting of the delivery catheter was attempted, but again, the lead got dislodged. On the third attempt again, two wires were placed in the posterolateral vein. An inflated balloon was used on one of the wires to trap the second wire and push the LV lead distally into the posterolateral vein. Subsequently, this balloon was deflated, removed and another balloon 2 × 12 mm was passed on the same wire. This balloon was placed proximal to the lead and inflated to entrap the LV lead so that it would not dislodge while slitting the delivery catheter. After inflating the balloon, the sub-selector catheter was removed, and then the delivery catheter was slit. Then the balloon on the second wire was deflated and removed along with the second wire. With an anchor balloon inflated proximal to LV lead, the delivery sheath was slit successfully without lead dislodgement. The proximal anchor balloon effect enabled LV lead positioning at the midportion of the posterolateral vein. The leads were connected to a CRT pacemaker (Additional File ). After the procedure, narrowing of the (110 ms) on ECG was observed .
The patient underwent the procedure well without any complications and was discharged from the hospital the following day. The fluoroscopy time was 45 min. Device programming and lead values at the time of discharge from the hospital are summarized in Table .