An 18-year-old man was taken to our hospital emergency room by a 120 ambulance after his motorcycle collided with a taxi on October 12, 2021. Digital radiography and whole-body computed tomography (CT) showed left tibia and fibula open fractures, rib fractures, patella fracture, scapula fracture, acetabular fracture, femoral neck fracture, intertrochanteric fracture, and posterior hip dislocation . Immediately, we placed traction on the injured limb to prevent further displacement of the fracture and damage to the blood supply to the femoral head. Preoperative traction failed to correct the posterior hip dislocation, and the position of the femoral head remained unchanged. After 1 week, the patient general condition stabilized, we decided to perform surgery for the patient, and we decided to use the Kocher-Langenbeck approach in the lateral decubitus position . Because this patient had an intertrochanteric fracture and ipsilateral femoral neck fracture, a proximal femoral anatomic plate and cannulated screws were used to fix the proximal femur. Accurate reduction of the femoral neck fracture was performed, and the fracture was compressed with 2 cannulated screws. Notably, we also reconstructed the blood supply of the femoral head with a quadratus femoris bone flap graft. The type of acetabular fracture was a fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum, and we performed anatomic reduction of the fracture and fixation with reconstructive plates and cannulated screws .
Postoperatively, the patient remained in a position of mild flexion and abduction of the left hip joint during the 4-week bedridden period and then ended the bedridden period and entered an intensive 2-week rehabilitation program. Six weeks after surgery, he was able to walk on crutches without weight bearing on his left lower extremity. On discharge at 12 weeks postoperatively, the patient did not complain of significant left leg pain, and left hip joint function was satisfactory. He followed the physical therapy instructions that we suggested for home rehabilitation to strengthen muscles and keep joints moving. DR and CT examinations were performed 3 months and 6 months after surgery, and the findings indicated that the fracture was healing. At 20 months after surgery, DR, CT, and MRI of the patient hip indicated that the fracture had completely healed .
When we followed up with the patient at 6 months after surgery, the fracture union condition was evaluated by DR and CT examination and clinical symptoms. Clinical symptoms of pain with weight bearing, range of motion in the left hip joint and radiographic results were evaluated. His left hip joint range of motion was 0° to 110° in flexion, 0° to 10° in extension, 0° to 30° in abduction, 0° to 20° in adduction, and slightly limited in internal and external rotation, and his Harris Hip Score was 90 . DR examination did not reveal traumatic arthritis. The proximal femur fractures and acetabulum fractures healed almost completely, with no sign of femoral head necrosis, despite mild limitation of hip motion. Six months after surgery, the patient was able to walk and carry out daily activities without any support. At 20 months postoperatively, the function and healing of the affected hip was comprehensively assessed by physical examination, DR, CT, and MRI. The Harris hip score was 94 points , which included: normal appearance (4 points), no pain or discomfort (44 points), mild limping without any assistive tools (19 points), one-time maximal walking distance of more than 9 kilometers (8 points) The hip joint range of motion is 0° to 120° of flexion, 0° to 20° of extension, 0° to 45° of abduction, 0° to 20° of adduction, and 0° to 40° of internal and external rotation (5 points). We obtained informed consent from the patient and his guardian for publication of this case report.