A 54-year-old female Caucasian patient presented to the orthopaedic department of the clinic complaining of a six month left shoulder pain, especially localized in the scapular region, and a progressive weakness of the left upper extremity. She recalled no trauma to the shoulder and the symptoms were aggravated by lifting objects overhead. Physical examination revealed full passive ROM, but significant weakness was found in abduction (60°) and in external rotation (15°). Moderate atrophy of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus was also found. Manuel test strength resulted 3/5 for supraspinatus and infraspinatus. There was no sensory loss detectable in the left upper extremity, nor reflex changes.
X-rays of the cervical spine and shoulder region were normal. Electromyography revealed denervative changes with fibrillation and P waves on rest and reduction of motor units on active movement of the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles. Nerve conduction studies showed slowing of SSN motor conduction [11.5 (normal value from 3.3 ± 0.5)]. An MRI of the left shoulder revealed moderate rotator cuff tear and changes in the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles secondary to atrophy (denervation). These changes include decreased muscle bulk, fatty infiltration, and homogeneous high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. MRI did not identify any specific pathology of the suprascapular notch area (tumors or ganglion cysts, scapular bone’s congenital structural changes), nor the STSL (thickening or ossification).
The patient was arthroscopically treated. Five portals were used: (i) the classic posterior portal (typically used to visualize the glenohumeral joint and the subacromial space), (ii) a lateral subacromial portal, (iii) an anterior portal (iv) the Neviaser portal and (v) the SSN portal described by Lafosse and Tomasi . After inspection of the glenohumeral joint, the arthroscope was introduced into the subacromial space till the suprascapular notch. The STSL was found ossified and the SSN was entrapped as the amount of space around it was extremely limited . The ligament was sectioned using an arthroscopic scissor and a 4 mm spine punch (,). Finally, the rotator cuff rupture was repaired. The patient had immediate pain relief after surgery (VAS <4) and was discharged on the following day. On the 6th month an EMG was obtained and revealed significant improvement of the SSN. The patient returned to her daily activities 3 months after surgery.