A 59-year-old male with a past medical history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux disease, intracranial bleed, posterior pseudo-meningocele as well as schizophrenia was transferred to our tertiary care hospital for escalation of care on 3/30/2020 with a known COVID-19 infection based on PCR test. The patient experienced rapid worsening respiratory failure with acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock related to bacterial pneumonia, cytokine storm syndrome requiring intubation and initiation of multiple vasopressors. Shortly after arrival he was placed in a prone position as part of a lung protective protocol. His pharmaceutical treatment involved multiple therapies including azithromycin, vancomycin, cefepime, hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir/ritonavir, and the interleukin 6 inhibitor tocilizumab.
After clinical stabilization, he was later transferred to the general inpatient floor on hospital day 16 and subsequently tested negative via COVID-19 by PCR. However, in the following days, he once again tested positive for COVID-19 after he redeveloped respiratory distress requiring transfer back to the intensive care unit (ICU). Following a failed attempt at extubating, the patient underwent a tracheostomy and percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube. The patient's hospital course was further complicated by superimposed bacterial pneumonia and associated left empyema infected by Pseudomonas aeringosa (, ). After placement of a chest tube, the patient developed a complex hemothorax thought to be a result of a combination of tissue plasminogen activation instillations and systemic therapeutic anticoagulation for deep vein thrombosis.
After an extensive period of nonoperative management, the patient was evaluated by the thoracic surgery team due to failure to improve clinically. On hospital day 57, following a multidisciplinary discussion, the patient underwent a left anterolateral muscle-sparing thoracotomy and complete pulmonary decortication. Due to the extensive intrapleural adhesions and associated necrotic left lower lobe of the lung that was fused to the diaphragm , the patient underwent multiple left lower lobe therapeutic extended wedge en bloc with diaphragm and primary diaphragmatic repair. The operation was challenging with respect to impressively thick adhesions as well as 250 mL of associated hemothorax and multiple purulent lung abscesses. During the operation, areas of non-viable, necrotic lung tissue were completely resected. The specimens obtained were sent to pathology for further analysis. The patient recovered well after surgery and eventually was transferred to an outside facility for rehabilitation.