A 46-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of fatigue and fever. On admission, a complete blood count revealed the following: haemoglobin 7.9 g/dL, platelet count 21 × 109/L, and white blood cell count 0.4 × 109/L. A bone marrow sample was markedly hypocellular, containing 1.4% myeloblasts and micromegakaryocytes. He was diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) on the basis of morphological features. Chromosomal examination showed 42–44, XY, − 4, − 5, del (7), − 9, − 17, − 20, + 1-3mar, inc [6/6].
The patient received allogeneic HSCT using peripheral blood from a human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 6/6 matched sibling 1 month after hospitalization, with a conditioning regimen of cyclophosphamide (120 mg/kg) and total body irradiation (12 Gy). Neutrophil engraftment was achieved 21 days after the first HSCT. However, recurrence of MDS was confirmed 91 days after HSCT.
Four months after the initial HSCT, he received a second HSCT using HLA 4/6 bidirectional mismatched single unit cord blood with a conditioning regimen of fludarabine (150 mg/m2), melphalan (80 mg/m2), and busulfan (12.8 mg/kg). GVHD prophylaxis consisted of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil. He achieved neutrophil engraftment at 15 days after the second HSCT. Immunosuppressive therapy was rapidly tapered and discontinued at 3 months after the second HSCT to prevent disease recurrence.
The patient developed persistent ascites and pleural effusion 25 days after the second HSCT . Initially, this was thought to be due to the engraftment syndrome because he presented with persistent fever without liver and kidney dysfunction. No additional immunosuppressive treatment was administered because he had no organ dysfunctions and had a high risk of disease. His symptoms, other than ascites and pleural effusion, were improved after observation. Ten months after the second HSCT, ascites inspection was performed because ascites and pleural effusion were sustained since the symptoms appeared. Ascites involved a yellow and exudative fluid with a serum ascites albumin gradient of 0.9. The fluid contained no abnormal cells. Staining and culturing for bacteria, fungi, and mycobacteria were negative. During that time, cough and dyspnea developed, and he was diagnosed with bronchiolitis obliterans because of decreased forced expiratory volume in 1 s and no findings on lung computed tomography. He was treated with clarithromycin and inhaled steroids but without a systemic corticosteroid. His serositis was also considered to be a cGVHD-related condition. His ascites decreased gradually and disappeared at 1 year after the second HSCT without a systemic corticosteroid or other immunosuppressive agents.
Two years after the second HSCT, he presented with nausea, weight loss, and constipation. Computed tomography revealed no intestinal obstruction, but did reveal dilated, thickened, and adhered small bowel loops showing a mass-like appearance as if they had a capsule . Although peritoneum biopsy was not performed because of the concern about intestinal perforation (worsening symptoms), he was diagnosed with EPS on the basis of clinical findings. He received corticosteroid therapy (20 mg/body) without any improvement in symptoms. He developed recurrence of MDS at 1 month after initiation of corticosteroid therapy. This progressed into acute myeloid leukaemia after 3 months. He died 31 months after the second HSCT.
The patient’s family gave permission for an immediate autopsy of all organs to obtain a definitive diagnosis. Macroscopically, the entire intestine had adhered into a single “cocoon” with fibrotic peritoneal thickening . Histologically, intestinal loops were adhered to each other with intervening fibrosis, and showed signs of superficial fibrin deposition, fibroblast proliferation, and sclerotic fibrous peritoneal thickening with sparse inflammatory cell infiltration , confirming the most characteristic features of EPS.