A 46-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital due to repeated fever with headache that lasted 10 d and was exacerbated for 1 d.
The patient developed fever without any obvious cause 10 days before admission, with a body temperature of 39 °C, along with headache and vomiting. The patient initially believed that she had upper respiratory infection, and therefore self-administered anti-cold medication, which did not alleviate the symptoms.
SLE involving the hematologic system and kidneys was diagnosed 1 year previously, and renal pathology showed class IV LN. The patient underwent hemodialysis several times due to acute kidney injury. Glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants were maintained. The patient’s past medical record is summarized in Tables and .
Her personal and family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination upon admission indicated a body temperature 38.7 °C, a conscious but dispirited state, painful expression, Cushing syndrome, anemic appearance, facial edema, butterfly-shaped erythema visible on both maxillofacial regions, and diffused moist rales audible in both lungs. No abnormalities were identified in the heart and abdomen. Nervous system examination indicated neck stiffness (+), Kernig sign (+), Brudzinski’s sign (+), high muscle tension in the lower limbs, and Babinski sign (+).
Routine blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 12.34x109/L, neutrophil % of 83.6%, hemoglobin of 92 g/L, hematocrit of 28.5%, platelets of 123 × 109/L, high sensitivity C reactive protein of 18.85 mg/L, procalcitonin of 0.296 ng/mL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 60 mm/h, creatinine of 233 μmol/L, albumin of 22.5 g/L, and a CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.31. A urine test for 24 h urine protein was 5769.4 mg to 9443.5 mg/24 h.
Chest computed tomography indicated dispersed inflammation and fibrotic lesions in both lungs. Brain enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple nodular abnormal signals in both frontal lobes, left parietal and temporal lobes, and the left masseteric space (left temporalis and masseter region).