A 33-year-old Thai woman presented with progressive back and arm pain for 2 weeks. Her body weight (BW) had increased by 10 kg over the preceding 2-year period, and she had also noticed dark striae on her abdominal wall. She complained of excessive acne on her face, but she still had normal menstrual cycles and no hirsutism. She had not visited a hospital about the symptoms before. Then, 2 weeks prior to admission, she had a non-severe falling accident, but she still had worsening back and right arm pain. She also had a history of occasional use of Chinese herbs and weight loss pills. On examination, a rounded face, truncal obesity, and wide purplish striae on her abdominal wall and right thigh were observed. Her blood pressure was 160/90 mmHg. CS was therefore suspected.
The provisional diagnosis of ECS was confirmed by a 24-hour urinary free cortisol (UFC) level of 529.4 μg/day, serum cortisol levels after 1 and 4 mg dexamethasone suppression of 26 and 25.7 mcg/dL, respectively, and a loss of physiologic diurnal variation. ACTH-independent CS was determined by an ACTH level of 3.21 pg/mL , and computed tomography of her upper abdomen showed a lipid-poor left adrenal adenoma (size, 2.8 cm) and a lipid-poor right adrenal adenoma (size, 1.1 cm; Fig. ). Due to the bilateral adrenal nodules, an atypical finding in adrenal CS, adrenal venous sampling (AVS) was performed to determine the potential side of the excess cortisol production. Using the reference method of William F. Young Jr et al., the AVS revealed a predominantly left-sided ratio of adrenal venous to peripheral plasma cortisol (ratio, 3.21), which was compatible with a left cortisol-producing adrenal adenoma and a right, nonfunctioning adrenal adenoma . In addition to the investigations for CS, plain films of the lumbosacral spine were obtained to evaluate her back pain, and they revealed a compression fracture of the T5–T10 vertebrae. Moreover, we found several osteolytic lesions in her ribs and pelvic bone that are not normally discovered in CS . Metastatic cancers and MM were suspected.
Further diagnostic investigations were performed to identify the cause of the bone lesions and to determine if abnormal levels of ACTH were the source of the CS. A complete blood count showed hemoglobin (Hb) 10.2 g/dL, hematocrit 31.2%, white blood cells (WBCs) 10.95 × 109/L with neutrophil predominating, and a normal platelet count. A peripheral blood smear displayed normochromic normocytic red cells without Rouleaux formation. There was mildly elevated serum creatinine (1.01 mg/dL), and a normal level of serum calcium (9.8 mg/dL). Serum albumin was 4.3 g/L, while serum globulin was 2.5 g/L. A bone survey revealed generalized osteolytic lesions involving her skull, mandible, both clavicles, her right scapular, both sides of her ribs, her right humerus, and her pelvic bones. A serum protein electrophoresis found hypogammaglobulinemia without detecting monoclonal gammopathy by immunofixation. The serum free kappa light chain level was 3540 mg/L, while the serum free lambda light chain level was 6.7 mg/L, with a Kappa:Lambda ratio of 531:1. A bone marrow aspiration showed plasma cells and plasmablasts over 80% and a bone marrow biopsy demonstrated numerous CD138+ plasma cells with kappa light chain restriction . The serum β2-microglobulin was 2.98 mg/L. Kappa light chain MM, International Staging System stage I, was diagnosed.
Because our patient had hypercortisolism, the endogenous corticosteroid might have been suppressing plasma cell proliferation in the MM. She also had no critical conditions for emergency surgical treatment of the CS. MM was therefore set as the priority treatment to eliminate the clonal plasma cells. We decided to treat her with a bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone (VCD) regimen consisting of: bortezomib 2 mg intravenously on days 1, 8, 15, and 22; cyclophosphamide 400 mg orally on days 1, 8, 15, and 22; and dexamethasone 40 mg orally on days 1, 8, 15, and 22. The treatment was recycled every 28 days, with a total of six cycles. While she was receiving this chemotherapy regimen, she did not develop hyperglycemia or dyslipidemia. After six cycles, she finally achieved a very good partial response, according to the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) response criteria, and a stem cell collection was made after this cycle. The protocol for stem cell mobilization consisted of 4000 mg of cyclophosphamide in normal saline (250 mL) administered intravenously for 4 hours on day 1, and filgrastim 600 mcg in 5% dextrose water (100 mL) administered intravenously for 15 minutes on each of days 2–10. The stem cells were collected on days 10–11 without any negative CS effect on the stem cell collection process; the CD34+ cell count was 4.4 × 106 cells/kg BW. An autologous stem cell transplant was performed in September 2014. There were no serious complications, and gained a deeper response in the form of a complete response after this intervention. Subsequently, 5 months after the stem cell transplant, a left laparoscopic adrenalectomy was successfully undertaken. The pathological report showed an adrenal cortical adenoma of size 2.0 × 2.4 × 0.6 cm . Her serum cortisol level returned to 1 mcg/dL after the operation; she received a steroid replacement, which was gradually discontinued over 9 months. Her blood pressure decreased slowly, and we successfully tapered off the anti-hypertensive drugs over 2 months. Her Cushingoid appearance gradually subsided. Eventually, she was in remission of both diseases after more than 30 months of treatment. Timeline of her symptoms, treatments, and outcome was provided in Additional file .