A 66-year old man, who had been a heavy smoker for longer than 30 years, had a remote history of hypertension, hypothyroidism, and repeated surgical procedures (laparotomic surgery for appendicitis at 29, L5-S1 laminectomy at 44 and right hip surgery at 60). At the age of 65 he was diagnosed with a cancer in the sigmoid-rectum (pT3 pN1a adenocarcinoma) and underwent laparoscopic left hemicolectomy. Two days after the intervention, stump dehiscence required further laparotomic surgery. The clinical course was then complicated by bowel obstruction and sclerosing peritonitis which had to be surgically treated 20 and 32 days after the first surgery. During the latter procedure, the microbiological analysis of the surgical wound indicated the presence of a MRSA, and intravenous meropenem 3g/day was started. On day 35 since the first intervention, another surgery was needed because of the development of hemoperitoneum. The patient received repeated transfusions because of the worsening anemia. On day 48 he started developing a renal failure, which eventually required a kidney biopsy leading to the diagnosis of IgA nephropathy. The clinical conditions worsened during the following nine weeks, with fever up to 38.6°C and blood cultural examination positive for MRSA. He was treated with ceftriaxone, and then with methylprednisolon 40mg/day for 3 days. Up to this moment he had never had either neurological or psychiatric symptoms; some days later, however, he became anxious and restless and had a relapse of mild fever. He did not complain of headache and showed psychomotor retardation with preserved orientation and without any significant consciousness impairment. A neurologic consultation indicated an amimic face with bilateral myosis and reduced blinking. A preexisting and already known mild postural tremor was accompanied by almost continuous stereotyped limb movements, generalized weakness and suction-like mouth dyskinesias; no signs of meningeal irritation were found. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan disclosed no recent lesions and electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a diffuse slowing without evidence of epileptic activity. A brain MRI showed a mild enlargement of the lateral ventricles, which were surrounded by a slight increased signal in the FLAIR sequences . A signal abnormality indicating dense material inside the ventricles was clearly recognizable in the diffusion sequences , which strongly supported infection. Spinal tap was then performed and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed increased leukocytes (1000/mm3, normal values 0-5) and protein content (8460 mg/l, normal values 150-450); glucose was not detectable and MRSA was found at the cultural examination. Vancomycin was started with an initial dosage of 1g/48h, later on raised to 1.5g/day because of low vancomycin plasma levels. Renal function did not worsen in the days during vancomycin administration. The patient was no longer febrile and showed a gradual improvement of clinical condition. Dexamethasone 8mg/day was administered as adjuvant therapy. Five days later, the stereotyped movements had disappeared, although the slight preexisting postural tremor was still superimposed by occasional myoclonic jerks and kinetic tremor in the left upper limb. Further two weeks later the neurological examination was negative, the leukocytes count in the CSF was decreased to 64/mm3, CSF glucose was still moderately low (27mg/dL, normal values 40-85), protein content was normal (294 mg/l) and both blood and CSF cultural examinations were negative. Vancomycin was replaced by linezolid to avoid further kidney damage, and the patient could be discharged to home after 7 weeks since the diagnosis of CNS infection.