The patient was a 34-year-old nulligravida woman who presented with 12-month history of infertility. The patient’s past medical history was notable for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and uterine fibroids having undergone an open myomectomy two years prior to presentation. The patient’s partner was a healthy 36-year-old male with no prior paternity nor any prior attempt at initiating a pregnancy with another partner. He reported normal energy and libido and denied erectile and orgasmic dysfunction. There was no history of testicular trauma, testicular tumor, or steroid use.
The patient and her partner both denied known family history of infertility, early menopause, recurrent miscarriage, stillbirth, learning disabilities, congenital anomalies, or genetic disorders.
The patient’s initial infertility workup was notable for an anti-Mullerian hormone level of 20 ng/ml, a pelvic ultrasound which showed multiple small intramural fibroids with no submucosal component, and polycystic ovarian morphology. The remainder of her evaluation was unremarkable with a day 3 lab follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 8 IU/L, estradiol 51 pg/ml, Prolactin 22 ng/ml, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 0.56 IU/ml, and hemoglobin A1c 5.5%. Her partner’s semen analysis was overall reassuring with a volume of 0.9 ml, concentration of 98.8 million/mL, 81% motility, and 7% normal forms.
The patient underwent ovarian hyperstimulation using an antagonist protocol. Ovarian hyperstimulation was initiated with recombinant FSH (Gonal-F, EMD-Serono) and human menopausal gonadotropin (HMG) (Menopur, Ferring Pharmaceuticals). The patient started on a dose of 150 IU FSH and 75 IU HMG. A gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-antagonist (Cetrotide, EMD-Serono, 250 mg) was initiated on cycle day 8 to prevent ovulation. On cycle day 13, the patient’s peak estradiol level was 3039 pg/mL, with 10+ follicles noted on the right and left ovaries, and the patient was triggered with 40 units GnRH-agonist (leuprolide acetate, Abbott Laboratories). Estradiol levels below 3500 pg/ml are at low risk of OHSS. The patient was planned for a freeze-all cycle given her robust response, and due to personal reasons, preferred to freeze both oocytes and embryos.
The patient took her trigger shot 36 hours prior to her planned retrieval and called 24 hours after trigger shot reporting acute onset 10/10 right-sided abdominal pain. The patient felt waves of pain radiating to her back, legs, and right flank. Movement worsened her pain, but her pain improved on sitting still. The patient denied nausea, vomiting, and fever. The patient had no left -sided pain. The patient tried simethicone without relief.
The patient presented to the emergency department. Vitals were stable and within normal limits. Labs were sent and notable for white blood cells 11K/uL with 67% neutrophils. Her hematocrit was 40%, and other labs including electrolytes were normal. A computed tomography scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated bilaterally enlarged ovaries consistent with hormonal stimulation and a normal appearing appendix. A pelvic ultrasound demonstrated bilaterally enlarged ovaries with color flow on Doppler bilaterally . On examination, the patient had tenderness in bilateral lower quadrants, right greater than left, with voluntary guarding.
Given enlarged ovaries, acute onset abdominal pain, tenderness on examination, and leukocytosis, the decision was made to proceed to the operating room urgently for diagnostic laparoscopy to evaluate for ovarian torsion. Abdominal entry was achieved via Veress needle. Initially two 5-mm ports were placed in bilateral lower quadrants. An additional 5-mm port was placed 8 cm lateral to the umbilicus on the right to facilitate manipulation of the large torsed ovary. Initial review demonstrated no intra-abdominal adhesions and normal upper abdominal survey.
Inspection of the pelvis showed the right ovary to be torsed once around the IP ligament, and was detorsed using a blunt-tipped grasper. In trying to detorse the ovary, the ovarian cortex was noted to be friable, and 2 – 3 punctures were incidentally made. The ovary was ultimately placed in its anatomically correct position and the inferior aspects of both ovaries were placed under the uterus. The left ovary was enlarged but normal in appearance and was not torsed.
The patient felt well and had complete pain relief following the detorsion and was discharged home. The patient did not receive venous thromboembolic prophylaxis perioperatively as she was in a low-risk category, and the literature shows no increased risk of venous thromboembolism following ovarian detorsion. The patient returned the following day for her scheduled oocyte retrieval. Both ovaries appeared normal on ultrasound at the time of her retrieval. Seventy-two total oocytes were retrieved, 70 of which were mature (metaphase II [MII]). Thirty-six MII oocytes were cryopreserved and 34 were inseminated with conventional IVF with a 79.4% fertilization rate (27/34). Sixteen blastocyst stage embryos were cryopreserved.