A 26-year-old woman with non-mosaic Edwards syndrome presented to the clinic for follow up after recent hospitalization for aspiration pneumonia. The definitive diagnosis of trisomy 18 was made prenatally utilizing chromosomal analysis and G-banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) on cells obtained via amniocentesis. Her past medical history is characterized by severe growth and intellectual limitations, recurrent history of infections, especially respiratory system infections, and a ventricular septal defect (VSD) that was never surgically repaired. She has been in her usual state of health under the complete care of her mother for all daily living needs for the past seven years until recently, when she was found to be in respiratory distress and hypoxic (O2 saturation decreased to 77% on room air). She was admitted to the hospital and was diagnosed with and treated for aspiration pneumonia, from which she recovered and was discharged shortly after with significant improvement of her respiratory symptoms. While this was not her first episode of aspiration pneumonia, she was deemed inappropriate for gastrostomy tube placement during several previous hospitalizations. During the follow-up clinical visit, she was wheelchair bound, cheerful and able to mumble some verbal sounds, and in no acute distress. Her vital signs showed blood pressure of 104/64 mmHg, heart rate of 87 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and weight of 45 pounds. Physical examination revealed a small head, no occipital protuberance, low-set ears, small jaw, broad nasal bridge, and ocular hypertelorism; however, both vision and auditory acuity were intact. Chest examination revealed severe kyphoscoliosis; clear lungs upon auscultation; and a soft non-holosystolic murmur, best heard at the left lower sternal border. Abdominal examination showed soft abdomen, with positive bowel sounds and no palpable organomegaly. Extremities were well perfused with 2 + distal pulses. The hands were clenched, and palmar creases were normal. No clubbing, cyanosis, or rocker-bottom feet were noted. Echocardiogram was only remarkable for a small muscular VSD with left to right shunting . Laboratory results were unremarkable on follow-up, including any significant hematological, renal, or liver impairment.