A 20-year-old Japanese woman was working in a restaurant and experienced discomfort in her left thigh on the seventh day before her hospital admission. On the next day, she felt pain in the same area while walking, and subsequently consulted a physician, who prescribed an antiphlogistic sedative patch on the fifth day before her admission. On the third day before her admission, she developed a fever (38 °C) and subsequently consulted another physician, who prescribed an antipyretic drug. However, she continued to experience fever and pain in her left thigh flexor during rest. Therefore, she consulted another physician and was admitted to our hospital, where she was prescribed a single dose of acetaminophen (400 mg). She did not have a history of domestic or overseas travel, participation in outdoor activities, or trauma.
Upon admission, she had a blood pressure of 110/63 mmHg, a pulse of 107 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and a temperature of 38.9 °C. Her left thigh flexor appeared slightly red, with mild swelling, warmth, and pain. However, her head, lungs, heart, abdomen, and back did not exhibit redness or swelling. Her white blood cell count was 12,100 cells/mm3, her hemoglobin level was 10.8 g/dL, and her C-reactive protein level was 24.11 mg/dL. Her liver and renal functions were normal, and the HIV antibody/p24 antigen test (fourth generation) provided negative results. However, enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed fluid between the dorsal distal muscles of her left thigh and an enhanced margin of fluid , which we diagnosed as an abscess. There were no other abscess-like formations outside of her lower extremities.
An incision was made in her left thigh on the day of admission, the abscess was continuously drained, and we treated her using ampicillin/sulbactam (four doses per day, up to 12 g daily). Two sets of blood cultures provided negative results; however, a culture of a fasciotomy specimen from the abscess revealed positive results for GAS. Definitive identification of the GAS isolate was performed using the rapid streptococcus test (Rapid ID32 STREP; bioMerieux SA, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Therefore, we changed the patient’s treatment to penicillin G (24 million units per day via continuous infusion) on day 5. However, drug eruption in response to the penicillin G was suspected on day 12, and we changed the antibiotic to clindamycin on day 13 (2700 mg in three doses per day). We stopped the continuous drainage on day 15, and switched the treatment to oral clindamycin on day 16 (600 mg three times per day). The patient was discharged after 17 days in the hospital, and her antibiotic treatment lasted 4 weeks. We did not observe any side effects that were related to the clindamycin treatment. The patient has remained in good health during the 1-year follow-up after her discharge from the hospital.