An otherwise healthy 27-year-old female patient was referred to our center for anti-CD19 CAR T-cell therapy (axicabtagene ciloleucel: axi-cell) for primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBCL), stage IIXB at diagnosis for mediastinal bulky, refractory to two lines of standard chemotherapy . Before CAR T-cell infusion, she underwent a 30-Gray mediastinal irradiation as a bridge therapy. After 48 h from CAR T-cell infusion, the patient developed a fever with no associated hypotension or hypoxia (CRS grade 1). In accordance with our local guidelines, for persistent grade 1 CRS, she was treated with tocilizumab (8 mg/kg), resulting in complete resolution of systemic symptoms on day +6. Nevertheless, the following day, she developed mild ideo-motor slowing, dysgraphia, and drowsiness. The clinical picture was consistent with a grade 2 ICANS. A head CT scan was unrevealing, and treatment with dexamethasone (10 mg q6h) was started. EEG revealed frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (FIRDA), while cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal cellular counts and negative comprehensive microbiological investigations, but very high protein levels (320 mg/dL). Despite prompt administration of steroid treatment, at day +9, her neurological status progressively worsened to a comatose state within 24 h (ICANS grade 4); therefore, she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Brain MRI revealed multiple focal punctate areas of T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensity localized in the body and isthmus of the corpus callosum, with no contrast enhancement (, ). No restriction on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) or hypointensity on susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) was observed within the corpus callosum. Following high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g daily) administration, her neurological status resolved within 48 h. Neurological examination revealed retrograde amnesia regarding the days spent in ICU and mild dysgraphia that persisted until day +12. Remarkably, the follow-up brain MRI (day +13) did not reveal any abnormalities in the corpus callosum, except for a reduction of fractional anisotropy in the diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) sequences (, ). The patient was re-transferred to the hematology ward, and the corticosteroid therapy was gradually tapered. On day +16, steroid treatment was stopped entirely, and the patient was discharged home. She did not develop any late-onset neurotoxicity, and her lymphoma was still in complete remission at the last follow-up, more than 2 years after CAR T-cell therapy.