An 87-year-old woman with known osteoporosis fell on her right hip with subsequent pain and immobility and presented elsewhere. Radiographs revealed a multifragmentary intertrochanteric fracture with subtrochanteric extension and mild preexisting hip osteoarthritis . Two days later, an open reduction and osteosynthesis with a cephalomedullary nail (Proximal Femoral Nail Antirotation®, PFN-A 125°, DePuy Synthes, Raynham, Massachusetts, USA), with cerclage of the trochanter minor was performed . One-week post-surgery, the patient was discharged to rehabilitation center with allowed full weight-bearing with a walking frame.
Further 2 weeks later, the patient suffered from immediate aggravation of pain without a previous event. A radiographic control showed an articular cutout of the blade and revision surgery was undertaken with implant removal and exchange nailing using (Proximal Femoral Nail®, PFN 125°; DePuy Synthes, Raynham, Massachusetts, USA) and application of demineralized bone matrix (cyclOS®, Mathys Medical AG, Bettlach, Switzerland; DBX®, J&J Medical Devices, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA) (, ). The mobilization was restricted to no weight-bearing with only bed-wheelchair transfer allowed. On 6 and 12 weeks follow-up, the patient was free of pain with strict non-weight-bearing. Radiographs showed progressive consolidation. After 3 months of restriction, full weight-bearing was allowed and physiotherapeutic measures for strengthening recommended. At the 1-year follow-up, the patient was satisfied and only felt pain in stress situations (e.g., hometrainer activity). A balanced gait was possible with the use of a walking frame. On the radiographs, progressive consolidation with unchanged position of the nail was noted. No more follow-up visitations were planned at another institution.
Four and a half years post-revision surgery, the patient immediately felt exacerbation of pain on the right hip and was admitted to our institution for the 1st time. The subsequent radiographs and computed tomography revealed a non-union with nail fatigue breakage, no signs for osteoarthritis nor any damage noted to the joint by the cutout . Revision surgery was scheduled after septic non-union was ruled out with exchange nailing using a cement augmented cephalomedullary nail (PFN 125°, DePuy Synthes, Raynham, Massachusetts, USA) by the senior author (, ). Distally a dynamic locking screw and proximally the lateral cortical notching technique allowed for axial loading and dynamization at the fracture site during weight-bearing . The rationale for the lateral cortical notching technique in the present case is that initially the lateral end of the femoral neck screw laying on the lateral cortical bone was blocking axial gliding of the entire nail resulting in the non-union. We used a short intramedullary nail instead of a long nail for revision to minimize blood loss, surgical time, and risk for transfusion . In addition, autologous bone graft (with growth factors and scaffold) and an osteoinductive agent bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) supported biology.
Full weight-bearing was allowed and the patient discharged to a rehabilitation clinic 1 week post-surgery. At the 6 and 12 months follow-up, the patient was completely free of pain and has achieved equal ambulation as before revision surgery. The radiographs showed a complete consolidation of the fracture with unchanged position of the nail (, ).