An 80-year old female with a history of Alzheimer’s dementia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and chronic kidney disease was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with hypotension and lactic acidosis following a 2-week history of progressive altered mental status and physical decline. Initial blood pressure was 89/56 with a normal heart rate and oxygen saturation. No fever or tachypnea was present. Lactic acid was 3.6 mmol/L. There was a leukocytosis of 14.7 x 103 cells/μL with neutrophilic predominance. Troponin peaked at 1104 pg/mL. No other laboratory or clinical abnormalities were present. Wells score was 0 points; age was the only of the PE rule-out criteria met . D-dimer was not obtained on admission. She was admitted for presumptive septic shock and treated with fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Following these interventions, her blood pressure improved and her lactic acidosis resolved. The troponin elevation was felt to be secondary to demand ischemia from sepsis. Blood cultures were negative. Per family, she had reached her pre-hospital baseline. After two nights of hemodynamic stability and improvement in the ICU, she was transferred to the gerontology unit for further care and discharge planning.
As part of initial assessment on arrival to the gerontology unit, the patient was afebrile, heart rate 80, blood pressure 117/62, SpO2 99% on room air. Jugular venous distension was present with a normal cardiopulmonary auscultatory exam. No peripheral edema or asymmetric lower extremity swelling was present. Cardiac POCUS using a HUD revealed a dilated RV with akinesis of the mid-RV free wall with apical sparing, consistent with McConnell’s sign . Diastolic septal flattening was also present in the parasternal short-axis view, consistent with D-sign. The inferior vena cava (IVC) was dilated to 3.0 cm with minimal inspiratory variation . These findings were confirmed with formal transthoracic echocardiography. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed evidence of an S1Q3T3 pattern not present in prior exams . D-dimer was 51 190 ng/mL. Computed tomography (CT) angiography of the chest showed a saddle PE involving both main pulmonary arteries with evidence of RV strain . The patient was immediately initiated on a heparin infusion and subsequently transitioned to oral apixaban without any hemodynamic compromise or further complications for the remainder of her hospitalization. On review of her home medications, the patient was taking megestrol as an outpatient. This was thought to be the etiology of her thromboembolism, so no further hypercoagulability workup was pursued.