A 67-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department after she had collapsed. She was found to be hyponatraemic. Her medical history consisted of hypertension, previous fractured left neck of femur and bilateral breast implants for cosmetic reasons. She had a 50 pack year smoking history but had given up six months previously. She described a more insidious history of tiredness and weight loss of 2 kg over the preceding few months, although she denied having coughs or haemoptysis. Physical examination of all systems including her chest was unremarkable.
Her chest X-ray showed a large soft tissue density lesion in the right hemithorax, which included her bilateral breast implants . A computed tomography (CT) of her chest showed a large mass, predominantly in the right upper lobe of the lung extending from the right hilum. The mass demonstrated a largely cystic appearance (Hounsfield unit 14) communicating with the sub-segmental dilated bronchi that gave a 'fingers in glove' appearance . There was a notable mural enhancement of the medial aspect of this mass adjacent to the right hilum . A bronchoscopy revealed a soft tissue lesion in the right upper lobe bronchus with the appearance of granulation or necrotic tissue . At that time, a provisional diagnosis of complex bronchocele based on CT findings was made.
A PET-CT scan was subsequently performed, which demonstrated fludeoxyglucose uptake within the medial side of the mass with an SUV of 4 to 5 . No other abnormally active areas were identified in the chest or elsewhere . The findings strongly suggested malignant pathology, so the patient was referred to cardiothoracic surgeons for an open lung biopsy. Operative findings revealed a complex cystic mass involving all three lobes of the right lung. Histopathology showed pools of mucin within the extracellular fibroconnective tissues with scattered pleomorphic malignant cells within the mucin pool. Immunocytochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of a primary lung mucinous cystadenocarcinoma .
Curative surgery was not attempted in view of extensive multilobar involvement of the tumour and poor pre-operative lung reserve. The patient was referred to oncologists for radical radiotherapy with the possibility of chemotherapy.