A 74-year-old Japanese woman was evaluated for a mass that she noted in the left axillary region. Her past and medication histories were unremarkable. On physical examination, there was a palpable, thumb-sized, hard, elastic, freely movable mass in the left axilla. No breast masses or skin lesions were noted. Blood tests showed a normal white blood cell count, but a differential showed mildly elevated eosinophils (6%). Biochemical tests showed mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 326 IU/l (normal, 60-200 IU/l), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 2.3 ng/ml (normal, <5.0 ng/ml), cancer antigen 15-3 (CA15-3) of 10.0 IU/ml (normal, <30.0 IU/ml), National Cancer Center-stomach-439 (NCC-ST-439) of 3.3 U/ml (normal, <7.0 U/ml), and elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) of 604.9 U/ml (normal, 122.0–496.0 U/ml). Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) G4 was normal at 47.7 mg/dl (normal, 4.8–105.0 mg/dl), but immunoglobulin E-radioimmunosorbent test (IgE-RIST) results were elevated at 3032 IU/ml (normal, <173.0 IU/ml).
Ultrasonography (US) of the left axilla showed multiple LNs with irregular margins in which central hyperechogenicity was lost (maximum size: 2.2 cm × 1.5 cm) . A systemic search using computed tomography (CT) showed multiple lymphadenopathy only in the left axilla, with no other systemic lymphadenopathy or mass-like lesions suspicious of a primary tumour . To differentiate a malignancy such as malignant lymphoma or LN metastases from an unknown primary tumour, a core needle biopsy (CNB) of the left axillary LNs was performed. Pathology examination of the CNB showed LNs with rich eosinophilic infiltration but no evidence of any atypical cells .
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed no evidence of malignant lymphoma or LN metastases from an occult breast cancer (cytokeratin (CK) 7-negative, CK20-negative, and cluster of differentiation (CD) 117-negative). Biopsy of an excised LN was performed under local anaesthesia for a definitive diagnosis. Histopathology showed various-sized lymphoid follicles, large nodular lesions with an enlarged mantle zone, and multiple germinal centres in single nodules . Proliferation of small blood vessels and marked eosinophilic infiltration were also observed between the nodes . IHC staining of the germinal centres was positive for CD10, negative for B-cell lymphoma (bcl)-2, and positive for bcl-6 . Staining was positive for IgG in the germinal centres and between nodes, and some areas were IgG4-positive .
An IgG4-related disease was also considered, but serum IgG4 levels were normal. The findings eventually led to a diagnosis of KD. The patient was followed up, in part based on her own wishes, and an ultrasound performed 3 months later showed disappearance of the axillary lymphadenopathy. As of this writing, 6 months after the initial examination, there has been no recurrence of KD.