A previously healthy 6-months-old female infant was referred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit of the Clinics Hospital of University of Campinas (CH-UNICAMP) because of a coma. Fifteen days prior to the coma, the patient had presented respiratory symptoms and had received antipyretics and short-acting B2-agonists. Four days prior to the coma, the patient presented respiratory distress and a fever, and was admitted to a secondary hospital in the metropolitan region of Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. On the first day of hospitalization, the patient had a persistent fever and sinus tachycardia. A chest X-ray revealed an increased cardiac area with no radiographic changes in the lungs . The following day, an echocardiography revealed pericardial thickening with bulky effusion and signs of cardiac tamponade. The patient was reported to be in good general condition. On the third day of hospitalization, the patient suffered from seizures. Diazepam, phenobarbital, and phenytoin were administered, and an urgent transfer to the intensive care unit was requested. During transport, the patient was intubated and was administered dobutamine. Upon arrival to the CH-UNICAMP, the patient went into hypotensive shock, with a Glasgow coma score of 3.
After hemodynamic stabilization, a computed tomography (CT), a lumbar puncture, radiography, blood cultures, and laboratory tests were performed. The initial hemogram was: Hb 6.1 g/dL; Ht 19.8%; red blood cell count 3,320,000/mm3; white blood cell count 4290/mm3 (15.3% neutrophils; 12.2% band cells; 70.4% lymphocytes; 2.1% monocytes); platelet count 166000/mm3. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed: Proteins 1291 mg/dL; Blood cells 730/mm3; Glucose 0 ­mg/­dL; Leukocytes 51 cells/mm3 (86% neutrophils). Numerous gram-positive cocci were visualized in the CSF bacterioscopy. Ceftriaxone was administered to the patient at a dose of 100 mg/kg. For hemodynamic stabilization, epinephrine was required at an infusion rate of 0.3 mcg/kg/ min. The CT revealed diffuse cerebral edema and chest radiography showed a discrete peribronchial heterogeneous opacity in the right hemithorax and cardiomegaly. A bedside ultrasound showed a septate pericardial effusion without pulmonary consolidation. The neurological examination showed that the patient was brain dead, and a pericardiocentesis was not performed. Streptococcus pneumoniae was identified in the blood and CSF cultures. The bacteria were susceptible to the following antibiotics: sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim; benzylpenicillin; erythromycin; ceftriaxone; vancomycin; and levofloxacin. Brain death was confirmed according to protocol.