A 72-year-old man was scheduled for colonoscopy due to a colonic lesion (lateral spreading tumor at ascending colon) incidentally discovered during a routine health check two months prior. A split-dose PEG lavage was used as the bowel preparation regimen. The night before the colonoscopy, oral prescription of polyethylene glycol (GI klean powder®) was given for bowel preparation. He was advised to increase water intake for adequate bowel prepare and prevention of dehydration. On the day of the colonoscopy, the patient was alert, oriented and denied any discomfort during the morning visit. However, he was found to be lethargic and disoriented a couple hours later during anesthesia evaluation prior to the procedure. In the presence of the anesthesiologist, the patient suddenly developed tonic-clonic seizure. His convulsion spontaneously subsided after approximately one minute. After rapid intubation, he was sent to the intensive care unit for further evaluation.
Upon reviewing the patient’s medical history, he had benign prostate hyperplasia with significant symptoms of urinary frequency and nocturia. For symptom control, he had been taking 0.1 mg of desmopressin and 5 mg of solifenacin once daily for a year. He had a normal serum sodium at 138 mEq/L three weeks before presentation, had no history of seizures, and no family history significant of any specific diseases.
Upon further evaluation, brain computed tomography did not reveal any space-occupying lesion or bleeding (shown in Fig. ). The serum biochemistry yielded the following results: sodium was 111 mEq/L, potassium was 3.0 mEq/L, total calcium was 7.6 mg/dl, albumin was 3.9 g/dl, phosphate was 2.1 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen was 5.0 mg/dl, creatinine was 0.4 mg/dl, creatinine kinase was 1427 U/L, creatinine kinase-MB was 65 U/L, and troponin-T was 0.04 ng/ml. Hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypocalcemia were indicated. The fasting blood glucose level was 174 mg/dl, thyroid-stimulating hormone was 1.51 ulU/mL, free thyroxine (free T4) was 1.21 ng/dl, cortisol at 4 PM was 25.17 μg/dL, and adrenocorticotropic hormone was 9.3 pg/ml, serum osmolality was 233 mOsm/L. A diagnosis of seizure secondary to acute severe hyponatremia was made. To correct his serum sodium, he was given intravenous injection of 3% saline. Urine osmolality measured a couple hours into treatment was low at 87 mOsm/L.
Patient received a total of 1 L of 3% saline over the first 24 hrs, and serum sodium increased from 111 mEq/L to 119 mEq/L. He was then started on normal saline for treatment. At 48 hrs, his serum sodium level was 126 mEq/L, with serum osmolality at 262 mOsm/L. Serum sodium was 133 mEq/L after three days of treatment. During this period, he received at total of 5 L IV fluid and made 11 L of urine. He was successfully extubated and there was no associated neurologic deficit. The patient’s only complaint was generalized muscle pain. According to the patient, he had been nervous about the colonoscopy and wanted to ensure adequate bowel preparation by drinking a large amount of water in addition to his bowel preparation regimen. He reported a total water consumption of 5.5 L on the morning of the scheduled examination. With his medication history, excessive water intake, and low urine osmolality, the patient’s acute hyponatremia was believed to be due to water intoxication facilitated by the use of desmopressin.