A 48-year-old female patient presented in December 2022 with a complaint of acute painless diminution of vision OS that occurred approximately 2 months earlier. History taking revealed that visual symptoms started four days after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) which was performed two months earlier for an acute myocardial ischemic (MI) event. Furthermore, the patient reported undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) one year before for another myocardial ischemic event. The rather late presentation after nearly two months from the onset of visual symptoms was explained by the patient being admitted in the surgical intensive care unit (ICU) and inpatient ward for two weeks following CABG. At the time of presentation, BCVA was 6/6 OD and 3/60 OS. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable OU. Conversely, fundus examination OS revealed multiple yellowish-white lesions i.e. cotton-wool spots exclusively in the posterior pole. Fundoscopic examination OD was completely normal. FFA was delayed until 6 weeks after the onset of visual symptoms because the patient was admitted in the surgical ICU and inpatient ward for two weeks after CABG. Also, the cardiothoracic surgeon recommended that FFA be deferred for a few more weeks until the patient’s general condition stabilized which further contributed to the late presentation. FFA OS showed delayed arterial and venous filling, prolonged arterio-venous transit (A-V transit), patchy choroidal filling with choroidal dropouts, mid-peripheral retinal microaneurysms, peripheral retinal ischemia, widened irregular foveal avascular zone (FAZ) and late perivascular staining . SD-OCT and OCTA OS were performed at presentation which revealed multiple inner retinal hyperreflectivities that corresponded to the cotton-wool spots . It also showed diffuse macular thinning predominantly affecting inner retinal layers which, we hypothesize, was the sequelae of Purtscher flecken that had already resolved given the late presentation of the patient 2 months after the onset of symptoms . Furthermore, OCTA showed decreased macular vascular density, optic nerve head (ONH) and radial peripapillary capillary density (RPCD) OS compared to OD . Our initial differential diagnosis included central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO), branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO), cotton-wool spots caused by surgery-related anemia or bacteremia, retinitis and Purtscher-like retinopathy. However, CRAO and BRAO were discarded on basis of patchy, multifocal, discrete yellowish-white inner retinal lesions as opposed to the diffuse or sectoral retinal whitening characteristic of CRAO and BRAO respectively. Anemia and bacteremia were excluded because complete blood count (CBC) showed only mild microcytic hypochromic anemia with blood hemoglobin level of 10.2 gm/dl not sufficient to cause extensive cotton-wool spots. Also, CBC was negative for leukocytosis and bandemia and there was no history of fever which are important markers of bacteremia. In addition, retinitis was excluded due to the relatively poor vision that was inconsistent with the foveal-sparing lesions, were they to be retinitis and also on the basis of absence of inflammatory signs in both the posterior and anterior segments. Moreover, the angiographic findings of delayed arterial and venous filling and prolonged arteriovenous (A-V) transit time highly suggested a vascular rather than an inflammatory etiology particularly in a patient with history of two episodes of acute myocardial ischemia. Therefore, a diagnosis of Purtscher-like retinopathy was made based on the multiple cotton-wool spots with the exclusive posterior pole distribution, the supporting FFA and SD-OCT findings elaborated earlier as well as the presence of a suggestive concurrent systemic cause i.e. APS which was diagnosed later. This is consistent with the diagnostic criteria of Purtscher retinopathy proposed by Miguel et al. where a diagnosis of Purtscher retinopathy is made when a patient has at least three of the five stated criteria which include Purtscher flecken, retinal hemorrhages in low to moderate number, cotton-wool spots confined to the posterior pole, a probable explanatory association and complementary investigations compatible with the diagnosis . Our case fulfills three of these criteria including the cotton-wool spots confined to the posterior pole, the probable cause which is APS and the compatible investigative findings in FFA, SD-OCT and OCTA [, ]. We also hypothesize that the patient probably had Purtscher flecken, that had nonetheless resolved at the rather late time of presentation 2 months after the onset of symptoms. However, the marked inner retinal thinning highly suggested that Purtscher flecken may have indeed developed at an earlier stage of the disease. A diagnosis of Purtscher-like retinopathy in a young female patient with systemic manifestations of occlusive vasculopathy necessitated further evaluation for an underlying systemic cause that, we suggest, was the causative factor of both the myocardial ischemia and the Purtscher-like retinopathy. So, the patient was referred to a rheumatologist who diagnosed her with primary APS based on the arterial thrombotic events i.e. myocardial infarctions, retinal microvascular thrombosis i.e. Purtscher-like retinopathy, thrombosed segments of radial, ulnar, anterior tibial, posterior tibial and peroneal arteries in arterial duplex and CT angiography and positive anticardiolipin antibodies (aCL) according to the updated Sapporo classification of APS . Other laboratory investigations, performed by the rheumatologist, included CBC, liver enzymes i.e. alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST), kidney function tests i.e. serum creatinine and blood urea, rheumatoid factor (RF), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies (dsDNA Abs), β2GP and LA. RF, ANA and dsDNA Abs were negative excluding SLE which is a common cause of secondary APS. CBC was positive for mild microcytic hypochromic anemia with other parameters being within normal ranges. Also, liver enzymes and kidney function tests were normal. Despite β2GP and LA being negative, persistently high aCL together with the aforementioned clinical signs supported a diagnosis of primary APS according to the updated Sapporo classification of APS . Consequently, the patient was hospitalized and received anticoagulants, pulsed steroid therapy and cyclophosphamide. In conclusion, the patient was diagnosed as Purtscher-like retinopathy secondary to APS which may have been precipitated by CABG.