A 3-year-old boy with fever for 5 days was admitted to our hospital. KD was diagnosed by typical symptoms including rashes, strawberry tongue, cervical lymphadenitis, conjunctivitis, and extremity edema. Besides these symptoms, the boy was noted to have eyelid ptosis , muscle weakness with diminished patellar tendon reflex, nasal congestion and mastoid tenderness. The muscle strength of upper limbs was scaled as grade IV, and lower limbs grade III. Blood testing was performed, which revealed increased white blood cell counts, elevated C-reactive protein and transaminases, and decreased K+ . Echocardiography showed normal bilateral coronary artery but minor regurgitation in the mitral and tricuspid valves. Cranial CT suggested otitis media and mastoiditis. As COVID-19-associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome overlaps with KD, the patient underwent testing for COVID-19. Both RT-PCR and antibody measurement were negative. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) with the dosage of 2 g/kg and aspirin with the dosage of 30 mg/kg/d were given immediately. Furthermore, according to the Kobayashi risk stratification , methylprednisolone infusion was initiated (2.8 mg/kg/d, administered every 8 h) for adjunctive anti-inflammatory therapy. Other therapies were administered at the same time, including latamoxef recommended by an otorhinolaryngologist for otitis media and mastoiditis, human albumin infusion, potassium supplement, and glutathione (reduced) and glycyrrhizin for hepatoprotection.
On the 2nd day of admission, the hypokalemia and hypoalbuminemia were corrected with the serum concentration of 3.89 mmol/L and 31.7 g/L respectively. However, fever, eyelid ptosis and muscle weakness were not improved. Family history of disease with similar symptoms was denied and toxin exposure was excluded. Neostigmine testing, lumber puncture, and cerebral and full spine MRI were performed, which, however, did not show evidence for neural and muscular diseases such as myasthenia gravis, Guillain-Barre syndrome and meningitis. On the 5th day of admission, the fever was resolved, and the lower limb muscle strength was recovered gradually to grade IV with a weak patellar tendon reflex elicited. Nasal congestion and mastoid tenderness were improved gradually. On the 6th day of admission, eyelid ptosis disappeared; ophthalmoscopy, electromyography and metabolism disease screening showed normal results; white blood cell count and C-reactive protein became normal; and aspirin was reduced to 3 mg/kg daily. On the 8th day of admission, 5 days after the initial KD rashes disappeared, the boy started to develop new itching rashes over his trunk, and the blood routine showed elevated eosinophil counts. Drug allergy was suspected, and aspirin and latamoxef were replaced by clopidogrel and ertapenem respectively. Cetirizine was administered for anti-allergy therapy. The rashes faded 3 days later. Methylprednisolone dosage was reduced to 1 mg/kg/d and tapered in 4 weeks (completed in outpatient clinic). On the 14th day of admission, the muscle strength and muscle tension returned to normal completely, patellar tendon reflex could be drawn out normally, and the boy regained full ambulatory ability. Laboratory evaluation showed normal hepatic and renal function, stable electrolytes, and normal D-Dimer. Echocardiography showed normal size and function of the heart without any regurgitation and normal inner diameter of bilateral coronary artery. Hearing screening was normal. Whole-exome sequencing did to identify genetic abnormalities. The patient was discharged after 20 days of hospitalization. At the 1-month follow-up after discharge, the boy was healthy without muscle weakness and eyelid ptosis recurrence.