A Hispanic 48-year-old man referred to the specialized headache consultation for diagnosis of cluster headache, which did not obtain improvement of symptoms after treatment with oxygen at 10 L per minute, verapamil 240 mg, topiramate 100 mg per day, and bilateral occipital block with lidocaine 2% without epinephrine. In our assessment, we found a 4-month history of high-severity, 30-minute right orbital pain episodes associated with ipsilateral tearing without residual pain, as often as two to eight attacks per day; precipitating factors were not identified. There was no history of headache prior to the referred period, and no smoking or alcohol consumption. The psychosocial and family history was irrelevant. In this evaluation, there was also a documented report of paresthesias in the right submental region together with reports of 8-pound weight loss attributed by the patient to a decrease in food intake since the beginning of the headache episodes. The general physical examination showed slight induration in the gingival region corresponding to the territory of the right submental nerve; the neurological exploration was within normal limits.
Due to the refractoriness of the symptoms along with previous Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), Magnetic resonance venography (MRV), and Cerebro spinal fluid (CSF) studies within normal limits in addition to weight loss, it was considered to rule out underlying systemic etiologies with neurological manifestations. F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET) was then performed, which demonstrated findings suggestive of disseminated metastatic disease with predominance in the gastric region, affecting right mandibular region plus multiple foci in the cranial region . Due to the predominant gastric involvement, the patient was referred to gastroenterology where an endoscopy of digestive tract was performed, of which leather bottle stomach was reported with histology study of high-grade B-cell lymphoma. This finding matched the result of biopsy performed in the right submental nerve over the induration area reported at our service admission . After the excisional biopsy on the mental nerve, the pain episodes disappeared, leaving a hypoesthetic area in the corresponding territory. After the above-described clinical analysis, the diagnosis of cluster headache and numb chin syndrome secondary to B-cell lymphoma stage 4B was considered. Despite initiation of treatment, the patient died 3 weeks after the diagnosis.