A 12-year-old female had consulted at the Department of Gynecology for pelvic pain for 22 days which was intense in the evening at lying. She had a polyuria for 10 days and occurred over the night where she woke up 7 times on average to urinate. There was no notion of traumatism. There was no medical and surgical history. There was no concept of sexually transmitted infections. The socio-economic level was considered average; she had never smoked and did not drink alcohol. She had normal pubertal development with chest changes and pubic hair.
Clinical examination displayed a temperature of temperature at 37 °C, a weight of 46 kg for a size of 1.34 m, BMI was 25,62Kg/m2. The blood pressure was 110/60mmhg. The general condition was good. The patient suffered from pain in the right pelvic region triggered by palpation, and thus, limiting the movement of the right hip. Palpable adenopathy was absent. The remaining physical examination was normal. The biological examination was normal. The abdominal ultrasound showed a solid mass that occupied the right ovary. The biological check-up was in normal. Alpha-fetoprotein and β-hCG were normal. Ultrasound of the abdomen showed a solid mass that occupied the right ovary.
The patient underwent an ovariectomy. The macroscopic analysis revealed that the ovariectomy was grayish, irregular and elastic and measured 17cmx14cmx9cm. The ovarian sections were heterogeneous, including red areas and hemorrhagic territories. The normal ovarian tissue was not identified. The Fallopian tube was normal. The contralateral adnexa and the uterine body were normal. The peritoneum was apparently normal and the peritoneal cavity contained approximately 1000 mL of blood ascetic fluid.
The sections of the ovarian tumor were made and ten blocks of paraffin were made. Conventional histology showed a malignant vascular tumor proliferation made of many very small vascular luminesces with endothelial cells exhibiting nuclear atypia and mitoses. The necrosis was present. As diagnostic hypotheses, we primarily reported angiosarcoma followed by hemangiopericytoma . Three blocks of paraffin embedded ovarian tissue were sent to a well-equipped laboratory in France for immunohistochemistry analysis to confirm the diagnosis.
The result of immunohistochemistry analysis was CD31+, CD34+, and Factor VIII+ . The tumor cells were SMA-, desmin-, melanin A-, and S-100-. The diagnosis of grade 2 angiosarcoma (FNCLCC) was confirmed after a multidisciplinary consultation. The patient was eligible for chemotherapy according to the CWS-2002P protocol. However, the patient’s family had a financial issue.