A 23-year-old male presented to a referral hospital following attempted suicide by intramuscular self-injection of approximately 5 ml of kerosene blended with rodenticide into two sites in his left upper limb. This act was his first, and was preceded by a relationship conflict. There was no history of poison ingestion, previously diagnosed mental health disorder, underlying chronic medical illness, or regular-use medication, and no significant previous surgical history. He subsequently developed a seizure, lost consciousness, and was brought by his neighbours to the accident and emergency unit within 2 h of poisoning.
At admission to the medical ward, he was conscious, alert, and had no focal neurological signs. He experienced abdominal pain and generalized body aches. Local examination revealed needle-entry marks over the left wrist and cubital fossa. Examination of other extremities was normal. Respiratory and cardiovascular system assessment was normal; he was afebrile; but abdominal assessment revealed generalized tenderness. His blood pressure was 113/86 mmHg, pulse rate 115 bpm, oxygen saturation 96% in room air, with a random blood glucose level of 8.0 mmol/L. At admission, the attending physician recommended nil per os for at least 24 h, intravenous normal saline and dextrose 3 l were administered in 24 h, and analgesics were given. A complete blood count revealed a white blood cell count of 3880 cell/μl, haemoglobin level of 17.4 g/dl, and platelet count of 177,000/μl. The following day, he had developed marked swelling of the left forearm and hand; the skin had blisters and was shiny; and cold fingers with limited movement were noted. On the basis of these signs, a diagnosis of compartment syndrome of the left upper extremity was reached, which warranted urgent fasciotomy and surgical debridement. This prompted his transfer to the surgical department, followed by fasciotomy extension and repeat surgical debridement on day-8 and day-17, with removal of devitalized skin and subcutaneous tissue. A shows a photograph of the left upper limb on day-19 post-fasciotomy. Surgical procedures were accomplished using intramuscular pethidine, and were not associated with prolonged bleeding. Limb elevation was performed, and wound dressing was done using vinegar and vaseline gauze. Following the third session of debridement, the patient developed hemorrhage originating from the anterior proximal forearm. Pressure dressing was applied, intramuscular phytomenadione (vitamin K1) was administered, and haemostasis was achieved. Blood grouping and crossmatching was done (O rhesus D positive), and he was subsequently transfused with 2 units of whole blood. The pretransfusion haemoglobin level was 4.4 g/dl. No other laboratory or radiological investigations were requested due to financial challenges, and maintenance therapy with vitamin K1 was not recommended.
During the course of hospitalization, no other history of unexplained bleeding was documented. Intravenous antibiotics were administered (Ampiclox 1 g 8 hourly, and Metronidazole 500 mg 8 hourly, Meropenem 1 g 8 hourly), intravenous crystalloids, analgesics (intravenous tramadol 100 mg 8 hourly, diclofenac 75 mg 8 hourly, oral morphine 10 ml 8 hourly, paracetamol tabs 1 g 8 hourly), bisacodyl tablets 10 mg nocte, haematinics, and oral fluid intake. He also received evaluation by a physiotherapist, and mental health assessment by a psychiatrist. A diagnosis of depression was made, and oral amitriptyline was prescribed.
Gradually, granulation tissue formed, and he was discharged 42 days after admission. Home-based follow-up on day-63 revealed granulation tissue formation with slopy edges of the wound (B). Wound care continued, and on day-155 after fasciotomy, the wounds had healed, but with contractures at the left wrist (C). The patient had no other concerns, and was able to perform routine activities, including riding a motorcycle. Continuation of physiotherapy was recommended.