An 86-year-old male patient was referred to our institution in June 2017 to undergo an endoscopic low urinary-tract re-evaluation 2 months after the detection of a “low-grade urothelial neoplasia” in urinary cytology performed in an outside institution in a patient with hematuria. The patient had a history of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) from 2002 (TaG2). The disease relapsed in 2007 and it was subsequently treated with Taxol + Hydat-b and intravescical BCG (Calmette-Guérin bacillus) until 2009. Follow up examinations were negative thereafter. A transurethral Resection of Prostate (TURP) was also performed in 2002 for benign prostate enlargement (BPE). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast, performed at an outside institution 2 months prior, revealed numerous diverticula in the bladder in the absence of proliferative heteroformations. Past medical history highlighted a 30-year smoking history. The patient had hypertension, chronic kidney disease (creatinine clearance = 25 ml/min), and a sick sinus syndrome treated (2016) with a dual-chambered pacemaker implantation. Physical examination was negligible overall. An office cystoscopy, in February 2017, revealed a 2- to 3-cm tumor on the left lateral wall of the bladder . A TURBT was performed in June 2017, and revealed a large tumor extended for 3.5 cm with a thin stalk peduncle on the left lateral wall of the bladder, cephalad and lateral to the left ureteral orifice. The exophytic part of the tumor was resected with the underlying bladder wall (July 2017). The remaining bladder quadrants were free of suspicious lesions even after NBI (Narrow Band Imaging) evaluation. The follow-up program included a cystoscopy, blood-analysis and whole-body CT scan every 6 months. In our case, the follow-up (most recently in January 2019) were negative, and the patient had no distant metastases.
The surgical specimens were formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded. The sections were stained with H&E. Immunohistochemistry was performed using avidin biotin complex technique and diaminobenzidine as chromogen. The immunohistochemistry was performed with vimentin (Dako, clone V9, monoclonal mouse anti-human), muscle actin (Dako, clone HHF35, monoclonal mouse anti-human), cytokeratin (Dako, clone AE1/ AE3, monoclonal mouse anti-human), CD44 (Dako, clone DF1485, monoclonal mouse anti-human), smooth muscle actin (Dako, clone 1A4, monoclonal mouse anti-human), CD68 (Dako, clone PG-M1, monoclonal mouse anti-human), Myoglobin (Dako, clone MYO7F7, monoclonal mouse anti-human), EMA (Dako, clone E29, monoclonal mouse anti-human), PSA (Dako, clone ER-PR8, monoclonal mouse anti-human), CK7 (Dako, clone OV-TL 12/30, monoclonal mouse anti-human), CK20 (Dako, clone KS20.8, monoclonal mouse anti-human), desmin (Dako, clone D33, monoclonal mouse anti-human), prostatic acid phosphatase (Dako, clone PASE/4LJ, monoclonal mouse anti-human), caldesmon (Dako, clone h-CD, monoclonal mouse anti-human), GATA-3 (Dako, clone L50–823, monoclonal mouse anti-human), high molecular weight cytokeratins (Roche-Ventana, clone 34ßE12, mouse monoclonal primary antibody), Ki-67 (Roche-Ventana, clone 30–9, rabbit monoclonal primary antibody), p63 (Roche-Ventana, clone 4A4, mouse monoclonal primary antibody), ALK (Dako, Clone ALK-1, M7195, mouse monoclonal antibody), ER (Dako, clone 1D5, mouse monoclonal antibody), PR (Dako, clone PgR636, mouse monoclonal antibody) and p53 (Roche-Ventana, clone Bp-53-11, mouse monoclonal primary antibody) following the manufacturer’s protocol dilution. We also performed routine positive and negative controls. Histologically, the tumor was composed of two components. The first component consists in interlacing fascicles of spindle cells with blunt-ended, cigar-shaped nuclei and copious eosinophilic cytoplasm without marked cellular atypia . The second component, sometimes prevalent, consisted of multinucleated, osteoclast-like giant cells (OGCs), dispersed throughout the tumor and, even when numerous, separated by the spindled cells of the leiomyosarcoma. The cytoplasm was finely granular and eosinophilic, and the nuclei were round or oval and often with a small round nucleolus . The first spindle cell component showed invasion of the surrounding bladder muscular wall, often areas of tumor necrosis and 4 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. There was neither mature bone nor osteoid tissue. The resection margins are free of tumor. Neoplastic cells were uniformly positive for vimentin and SM actin , focally for CD44 and HHF35, negative for epithelial markers such as cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and EMA. There was positivity for PR. The OGCs were positive for CD68 and negative for ALK and epithelial markers such as cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and EMA. These findings led us to a diagnosis of well differentiated bladder leiomyosarcoma with prominent osteoclast-type giant cell reaction (T1N0M0; G3, AJCC stage II).