A 47-year-old woman with a history of sick sinus syndrome, diagnosed 9 years previously, presented to our hospital. She experienced worsening shortness of breath and a decline from New York Heart Association functional class Ⅰ to Ⅱ. A Holter electrocardiogram showed a decreasing trend in the total heart rate to ∼55 000 beats per day. Chest radiography showed a gradual increase in the cardiothoracic ratio. Stress echocardiography showed an impaired heart rate response to exercise. Based on these findings, the patient was scheduled for permanent pacemaker implantation. On admission, her blood pressure was 109/66 mmHg, heart rate 37 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. Physical examination revealed clear lung sounds, absent heart murmurs, and no lower extremity oedema.
Her medical history included diabetes mellitus and treated submucous uterine myoma.
The differential diagnosis for shortness of breath in a patient with sick sinus syndrome includes ischaemic heart and lung diseases.
Laboratory data showed a slightly elevated level of N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (132 pg/mL, normal levels <55 pg/mL). Creatinine and electrolyte levels were normal. Chest radiography revealed no lung infiltration. The cardiothoracic ratio was 55%. Electrocardiography showed sinus bradycardia, at 43 b.p.m. . Echocardiography revealed a dilated CS. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 71%, without significant valvular disease ( and ). Preprocedural cardiac MDCT showed PLSVC with absent RSVC . Cardiac MDCT showed no significant coronary artery stenosis.
Considering the correlation between the symptoms and electrocardiographic findings, the patient was scheduled for conventional permanent pacemaker implantation. The procedure was performed under local anaesthesia. Venography confirmed an absent RSVC and drainage of both subclavian veins into the right atrium (RA) via the enlarged CS. Owing to the absent RSVC, we opted for the left subclavian venous approach. First, we implanted an RV pacing lead through the left subclavian vein. When placing the RV lead via the CS, the steep angle between the CS ostium and tricuspid valve made it difficult to place the lead into the RV septum. We used a catheter delivery sheath (Model C315-S10, Medtronic, MN, USA), designed for the outflow tract or RV septum, and successfully introduced the sheath into the RV after performing right atrial angiography using a 4 Fr pigtail catheter, then screwed in SelectSecure™ 3830 lead (Medtronic) to the low septum of the RV . The sensing and capture thresholds were acceptable (sensed R-wave, 3.75 mV; threshold, 3.5 V/0.4 ms/bipolar). We then focused on RA pacing lead implantation. Initially, we used a stylet to manipulate the RA lead. However, we could not deliver the RA lead into the right atrial appendage. Therefore, we used a catheter delivery sheath (Model C315-H40, Medtronic) designed for the RV apex or triangle of Koch. The sheath was successfully advanced close to the right atrial appendage using a 4 Fr pigtail catheter. After radiopaque contrast was injected from the 4 Fr pigtail catheter to evaluate the right atrial appendage, the SelectSecure™ 3830 lead was screwed into the right atrial appendage . The lead showed acceptable sensing and capture thresholds (sensed P-wave, 0.75 mV; threshold, 5.0 V/1.0 ms). Both leads were connected to a pacemaker generator (Azure™ XT, Medtronic). The total time of the procedure was 259 min, and the radiation fluoroscopy lasted 60 min. A pacemaker check was performed 1 week after implantation. The leads were stable on chest radiography, and the sensing and capture thresholds were unchanged. The patient was discharged on Day 9 without complications.
At the 1-month follow-up, the patient was free of heart failure symptoms and had decreased levels of N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide. Moreover, the leads were stable on chest radiography, and the sensing and capture thresholds were unchanged.