A 76-year-old Syrian man was admitted to the emergency room with a complaint of frequency dysuria and gross hematuria lasting for 6 h. The medical history included hypertension and diabetes mellitus type 2 with no abnormalities. Other medical, family and psychosocial histories were clear. At presentation, the vital signs were stable, and clinical examination revealed that the other organs were normal. Initial hematology tests revealed elevated white blood cell counts (WBCs) (20,000/μL), hemoglobin (HGB) (11 g/dL), mean corpuscular volume (MCV; 82 fl), and platelet counts (254,000/μL), as well as moderate renal insufficiency (creatinine: 1.9 mg/dL; urea: 130 mg/dL). Abdominal echography revealed severe and mild hydronephrosis in the right and left kidney, respectively, with no renal stones or calculus. However, there was a significant thickness in the bladder wall (diameter: 1.5 cm).
A cystoscopy was then performed to obtain a biopsy. The histopathology report showed pathological changes, possibly suggesting denuded cystitis, low-grade dysplasia, and severe interstitial cystitis. No invasive tumor was found in the specimen examined. Abdominal and pelvic contrast-enhancing multi-slice computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of hydronephrosis in the right kidney with a filling defect in the pelvis; this was described as a non-enhancing hypodense area in the pelvis and inferior calyces . Thoracic CT revealed band-like opacities in the right upper lobe.
A primary diagnosis of RCC was made based on the clinical presentation, the laboratory test results, and the imaging investigations. As a result, the patient underwent an open radical right nephrectomy and ureterectomy. The histopathology examination of specimens showed the existence of granulomatous pyelonephritis and necrotizing and caseous centers, which confirmed the correct diagnosis of urinary tract TB (UTTB). The granulomatous inflammation was extended to most of the ureter, pelvis, and calyces. In addition, patchy infiltrations were present in the renal parenchyma accompanied by focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. The final diagnosis was diffuse interstitial nephritis and UTTB . Treatment with anti-TB drugs was initiated, with a recommended regular follow-up for 2 years. Unlikely, on day 10 of the follow-up, the patient had an ischemic stroke and died due to stroke complications.