A 65-year-old woman presenting with cough and waist discomfort who had a history of lung adenocarcinoma with multiple metastases to regional lymph nodes, bones, the left adrenal, and the brain was admitted to our hospital to receive chemoradiotherapy. On admission, her vital signs were normal, and supplemental oxygen therapy was not required. During hospitalization, she received one dose of pemetrexed (0.8 g) and carboplatin (500 mg) for chemotherapy. Six days later, she received local radiotherapy on the lumbar spine a total of 6 times. According to the Padua prediction score , she was judged as having a low risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) and did not receive prophylactic anticoagulation for VTE. On the day after terminating radiotherapy, she suffered a sudden cardiac arrest on her way to the bathroom. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed immediately. Fortunately, she returned to spontaneous circulation after receiving a 10-min high-quality CPR. She was intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Upon admission to the ICU, she regained consciousness, but the collapsed hemodynamics persisted, with a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 62 mmHg on a regime of norepinephrine (NE) of 0.6 μg/kg/min. The arterial blood gas test revealed a high level of lactate of 8.5 mmol/L and partial pressure of oxygen of 110 mmHg under invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 50%. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia and SI QIII TIII, with negative T wave in V1–4 leads . An ultrasound cardiography showed an enlarged right ventricle and a flattened intraventricular septum (“D”-shaped left ventricle) during systole . The blood test revealed a high level of D-Dimer of 37,198 ng/mL. Based on these findings, PE was suspected to be the cause of cardiac arrest. Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography was subsequently performed and revealed a massive saddle thrombus straddling the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk and extending into the left and right pulmonary arteries , suggesting the diagnosis of SPE. Unfortunately, the cardiothoracic and vascular surgery team in our hospital could not provide mature embolectomy or percutaneous catheter-directed treatment. Thus, intravenous thrombolysis was considered, and a half-dose regimen of recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rtPA, 50 mg of alteplase, Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany) was administrated for 120 min given the high risk of bleeding.
However, the patient’s condition was not improved and deteriorated on the following morning; she presented with anuria for more than 6 h; the MAP decreased to 51 mm Hg with the infused dose of NE increasing to 0.9 μg/kg/min, and the lactate level progressively increased to 11.0 mmol/L. The decision on the initiation of VA-ECMO was rapidly made by the ECMO team in the ICU. The percutaneous cannulation was performed under ultrasound guidance, with a 21-Fr drainage catheter (Maquet Cardiopulmonary AG, Rastatt, Germany) placing at from the right femoral vein to the right atrium and a 15-Fr arterial catheter (Maquet Cardiopulmonary AG, Rastatt, Germany) inserting into the left femoral artery. Additionally, a 6-Fr introducer sheath (Cordis, USA) was inserted into the left superficial femoral artery to prevent distal limb ischemia. The VA-ECMO pump was initiated at 3000 rpm, resulting in a blood flow of 3.1 L/min. Meanwhile, continuous renal replacement therapy was also started, with the dialysis catheter connecting to the ECMO circuit. Systemic anticoagulation with adjusted-dose unfractionated heparin was implemented to prevent thrombotic events, with an initial dose of 5.6 U/kg/h (the patient body weight of 67 kg) without a loading dose, maintaining an activated coagulation time (ACT) range of 150–170 s and an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) of 40–60 s to avoid intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). Given the narrow target range of ACT and aPTT, the dose of unfractionated heparin for each adjustment was between 0.9 and 1.9 U/kg/h. To closely monitor the coagulation function, we adopted a frequent examination of ACT and aPTT which were repeated every 2 h and 4 h, respectively.
After commencing VA-ECMO, her hemodynamic status stabilized rapidly; the MAP increased to 80 mmHg, accompanied by a progressively decreased infused dose of NE. The blood lactate level was normalized within 12 h and the use of NE was discontinued within 48 h of VA-ECMO initiation. On the 3rd day of VA-ECMO beginning, ultrasound cardiography was reevaluated and showed that the enlarged right ventricle was mitigated and the “D”-shaped left ventricle disappeared during the cardiac cycle . Thus, she started to be weaned off VA-ECMO, and VA-ECMO was successfully ceased within 72 h of initiation without any clotting or bleeding complications. The patient was weaned off IMV on the 6th day of ICU admission and transferred from the ICU to the general ward 3 days later with good neurological function. One week later, renal recovery (no requirement of renal replacement therapy) was achieved. Finally, the patient was discharged from the hospital 2 weeks later after ICU discharge. At a follow-up of 5 months after discharging from the ICU, the patient is still alive and has a good quality of life.