A 54-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with a 10-day history of fever, confusion, and fatigue. One week prior to admission he had a transient loss of consciousness (TLC). He reported standing up after a strained defecation, after which he lost consciousness. He woke up seconds later, lying down on his bathroom floor having no memory of the event. There was no report of incontinence; he had no early symptoms such as lightheadedness or palpitations, any chest pain, headache, or subsequent confusion.
Upon admission, he was alert and haemodynamically stable, with a temperature of 39°C. Physical examination was otherwise normal and 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was unremarkable . A head computed tomography (CT) excluded cerebral haemorrhage.
His medical history is notable for smoking and he was not taking any medications or illicit drugs. He was immunocompetent and there was no history of immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory treatment. He had no family history of cardiovascular disease or sudden cardiac death. One year prior to the present admission, he was hospitalized for chest pain and underwent coronary angiography with normal coronary anatomy. Transthoracic echocardiography was also performed and was normal .
An initial workup including chest radiography, urinalysis, complete blood count, routine blood chemistries, human immunodeficiency viruses immunoassay, and blood and urine cultures did not reveal the source of his fever. Thereafter, a gradual cognitive impairment, aphasia, and facial asymmetry were noticed, prompting further investigation by CT angiography (CTA) of the brain and neck, lumbar puncture, and empiric antiviral treatment with intravenous Acyclovir. Our differential diagnosis at this point mainly comprised of vasculitis/angiitis, meningoencephalitis, and stroke. CTA demonstrated changes at the left hemispheric blood vessels correlating with cerebral vasculitis or angiitis . Lumbar puncture showed mildly elevated protein level of 50 mg/dL (normal values 5–20 mg/dL), normal glucose level of 56 mg/dL, with blood glucose of 90 mg/dL, and marked pleocytosis with a lymphocytic predominance (86%). Polymerase chain reaction analysis from the cerebrospinal fluid confirmed the presence of herpes simplex virus (HSV). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) test was not performed due to its unavailability, although it may have shown potential cerebral lesions, which might have been missed by CT, and prompt the diagnosis of HSV encephalitis.
Due to his syncopal event, a 24 h Holter ECG monitoring was performed a day before the Lumbar Puncture (LP) test. The Holter documented five episodes of sinus arrest; prominent ones being 11 and 32 s at 06:13 and 10:09 o'clock accordingly . The average heart rhythm documented was sinus at 80 beats per minute (b.p.m.), with a minimal sinus rate of 65 b.p.m. and a maximal rate of 112 b.p.m. During this last sinus arrest, the patient had a TLC that was noticed by the staff. He was urgently transferred to the intensive cardiac care unit (ICCU) for further assessment and monitoring. During his stay in the ICCU, his cognitive impairment and focal deficits resolved and the fever subsided. He had no further episodes of syncope or documented bradycardia. Repeated echocardiography was also normal. Due to the potentially reversible underlying cause and complete recovery of his symptoms and heart rate, the decision was made not to implant a cardiac pacemaker.
Our patient was subsequently transferred back to the internal ward and completed an unremarkable 14 days of treatment with intravenous Acyclovir. Subsequent Holter ECG revealed normal heart rate without any evidence of bradycardia.
Upon discharge, an implanted loop recorder was considered, but was rejected by the patient. At 1 year follow-up, he was stable and had no further episodes of syncope or documented bradycardia. Follow-up Holter ECG performed 5 months after discharge documented normal heart rate and no evidence of bradycardia.