In November 2020, a 51-year-old man was examined at a local hospital for moderate anemia (hemoglobin level of 80 g/L) after a routine physical examination. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) findings showed uneven thickening of the terminal ileum . Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) showed a local soft tissue mass at the distal ileum with abnormally elevated glucose metabolism, which was considered a malignant lesion of the small intestine with multiple lymph node metastases in the abdominal cavity. Then, a puncture aspiration biopsy of the abdominal neoplasm was performed on 3 December 2020. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed CD99 (+), vimentin (+), S-100 (+), CD117 (+), partial non-specific enolase (NSE) weakness (+), TdT (−), TTF-1 (−), CgA (−), and WT-1 (−). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) molecular assay revealed the presence of EWSR1 gene disruption. With immunohistochemical and molecular results combined, Ewing sarcoma was confirmed .
For further treatment, the patient presented to the oncology department of our hospital on 9 December 2020. We did a preliminary evaluation of the patient. On physical exam, he was lucid, generally in good condition, and without fever, and his vital signs were within the normal range. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examination showed no obvious abnormalities. Laboratory results showed white blood cells 6.4 × 109/L, red blood cells 4.73 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 93 g/L, and platelets 301 × 109/L. Liver and kidney function was normal. Tumor markers were normal except for carbohydrate antigen 125 (45.1 U/ml), which was slightly elevated. Since PCT is not routinely required, we did not initially test for it. Based on the surgeon’s consultation, we decided to administer chemotherapy first, closely review it during chemotherapy, and then change the treatment measures according to the evolution of the disease. According to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, we selected the standard first-line treatment includes chemotherapy with a five-drug regimen of vincristine, Adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide, and alternating ifosfamide and etoposide (VAC/IE) for the patient with this tumor and began on the second day of hospitalization. On 9 February 2021, the patient had a sudden high fever without obvious causes outside the hospital. The auxiliary examination at the local hospital showed no abnormalities in blood routine, C-reactive protein (CRP), and blood culture. Also, the CT showed no signs of abscess or infection. Only PCT levels were shockingly over 200 ng/ml. To determine the cause of the fever, peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) tubes were removed for culture. As in the blood culture, no pathogenic bacteria were found. After 8 days of treatment with ceftazidime and levofloxacin at the local hospital, the patient’s temperature returned to normal and without any abnormal clinical symptoms or signs. However, the PCT levels were still over 200 ng/ml. Over the next 3 months or so, several imaging reviews were performed, and there was no finding of infection. Meanwhile, the efficacy assessment was stable disease (SD). During the same period, the PCT level was repeatedly reviewed also, with no exception, always over 200 ng/ml. In addition, other infection indicators were normal as usual, including CRP less than 5 mg/L each time, serum amyloid A (SAA) less than 4.8 mg/L each time, and white blood cells approximately 5 × 109/L each time. The patient no longer had a fever or any discomfort.
On 6 May 2021, the patient returned to our hospital again for efficacy evaluation. Up to now, he has completed six cycles of chemotherapy of the five-drug regimen of VAC/IE. The enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his abdomen still indicates SD. Combined with the consultation opinions of gastrointestinal surgery and repeated film review, it was found that there is no engulfment of vessels of each lesion including lymph nodes, so it was considered that the abdominal mass could be removed. For the record, the PCT level at this time is still greater than 200 ng/ml. Other routine laboratory findings include white blood cells 5.29 × 109/L, red blood cells 3.87 × 109/L, hemoglobin 100 g/L, and platelets 243 × 109/L. Serum creatinine and transaminase were normal, and serum albumin and serum calcium levels were normal. The patient had no fever or discomfort. After the exclusion of surgery-related contraindications, the patient underwent abdominal mass resection smoothly on 14 May 2021. Ewing sarcoma was diagnosed again by postoperative pathology. Immunohistochemistry showed CD99 (+), S-100 partial (+), CK minority (+), P53 partial weak (+), Syn minority (+), Ki67 approximately 60% (+), and CgA (−). Molecular assay (FISH) showed positive EWSR1 gene disruption . Unexpectedly, laboratory examination revealed 2.80 ng/mL of PCT on the first postoperative day, and there were no other special abnormalities except for a certain degree of increase in the white blood cells (17.35 × 109/L), which was considered a normal postoperative change. Stunningly high levels of PCT, which lasted nearly 100 days in the absence of infection, dropped almost a hundredfold after one operation .
After approximately 0.5 months, we received the gene test report of the patient’s tumor specimen and peripheral blood based on the detection method of 520-gene panel next-generation sequencing (NGS). The results showed EWSR–ERG gene rearrangement (fusion). After this operation , the patient regularly returned to the hospital for postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with a two-drug regimen consisting of albumin-bound paclitaxel and gemcitabine. The efficacy assessment during each review was the status of no evidence of disease (NED). In addition, it cannot be ignored that the PCT level did not rise anymore. It never went above 0.5 ng/ml again. Until now, in March 2022, the patient still presents to our hospital for re-examination to monitor the change of the disease.
Finally, we reiterate that we have the patient’s oral and written consent, which could confirm that the investigators obtained informed consent to publish information and images from the participant.