A 33-year-old pregnant woman, gravida 6, para 1, was hospitalized on August 10, 2019, 52 days after embryo transfer, presenting with 11 days of pain in the left lumbar back after curettage. The menstrual cycle was 29–30 days, 3–5 days, LMP: 2019-6-8. On June 19, two D3 embryos (10C, 2; 8C, 2) were thawed and transferred in the natural cycle. After transfer, luteal support was provided, including diprogesterone (Abbott, the Netherlands) 20 mg, b.i.d., p.o. and progesterone (Xianju, China) 40 mg, q.d., i.m. The serum β-hCG increased from 8 days after embryo transfer . Twenty days after transfer, the anechoic area in the uterus was 20 mm × 10 mm by vaginal pelvic ultrasound, similar to the gestational sac. Thirty-five days after transfer, the anechoic area in the uterus was re-examined and found to be 19 mm × 6 mm, and accessory tissues showed no obvious abnormalities. Both laboratory data and ultrasound imaging results suggested embryo arrest, and curettage was performed on July 30 (41 days after transfer). Villus tissue was observed in the uterine cavity after the operation. On August 2nd, the patient experienced intermittent left back pain with distension and no relief. The patient took painkillers, and the pain was relieved without dizziness, anal distention, nausea or vomiting. On August 9th, the pathological result of curettage content validated the villous tissue supporting uterus pregnancy . On August 10th, the patient experienced worse pain that was not relieved with painkillers. The vital signs of the patient were steady, and percussion pain of the left costal ridge angle was positive. The ultrasound of the pelvic cavity showed that the uterus was 49 mm × 55 mm × 44 mm with regular shape, uniform echo of the myometrium, and a 17 mm × 12 mm uneven echo area in the uterine cavity . Colour Doppler flow imaging showed a small amount of blood flow, 25 mm × 12 mm in the left ovary and 27 mm × 15 mm in the right ovary. No echoic area was found in the Douglas pouch. Behind the left kidney, there was a 49 mm × 39 mm heterogeneous echo area, which was similar to the gestational sac, a 36 mm × 25 mm anechoic area. The crown-lump length of the embryo was 25 mm, without primitive beating of heart tube, suggesting abdominal pregnancy . The urgent β-hCG blood test was 74,678 mIU/ml. Retroperitoneal pregnancy was hinted. Then, abdominal CT showed that a round soft tissue density shadow could be seen in front of the left psoas major muscle, with dense liquid in the centre. The maximum diameter of the lesion was 36 mm, and the maximum diameter of the low density was 25.7 mm. The arteriovenous phase could be seen with venules entering. Occupying lesions of the left psoas major muscle at the middle and lower poles of the left kidney were considered , and the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy was established in combination with the history.
The patient had a spontaneous abortion in 2009, and a right salpingectomy was performed in 2010 due to an ectopic pregnancy of the right fallopian tube. In 2011, a baby girl was delivered vaginally at full term. In July 2012, an ectopic pregnancy of the left fallopian was treated with drugs. In 2013, salpingography showed that the left fallopian tube was unobstructed and that the right was absent. In June 2013, in vitro fertilization was performed, two D3 embryos were transferred, and laparoscopic left salpingectomy was performed due to the left fallopian pregnancy. In April 2019, two blastocysts were transferred in the natural cycle without pregnancy.
After admission, laparotomy was performed with a 15-cm-long incision between the 11th costal segment of the posterior axillary line, which was then gradually separated into the lower back fascia layer by layer, freed and removed to the 11th ribs to fully expose the operative field. Careful blunt separation of the retroperitoneal space was performed. At the position of the left renal hilum, a gestational sac implanted in the left psoas major muscle was exposed, and the capsule was complete. After freeing of the tissue around the gestational sac, the gestational sac with a size of approximately 50 mm × 40 mm was clearly exposed, and the foetal bud was approximately 25 mm long . Sufficient haemostasis was achieved at the attachment of the gestational sac, and 10 mg of methotrexate was injected locally. Before discharge, the patient expressed remorse for not communicating with doctors regarding the pain at the onset until painkillers were useless and appreciated the diagnosis and treatment in time. Fifty days later, blood serum β-hCG decreased to normal levels .