A 41-year-old man was admitted to our hospital presenting with swelling and redness of right lower leg for half a year . On admission, his body temperature was 36.9 ℃, pulse rate was 99 per min, blood pressure was 106/75 mmHg, respiratory rate was 21 per min, and he was conscious. He had suffered from pneumonia several times, hepatitis B and tuberculosis. Seven years ago, he had a chest computed tomography (CT) performed on him suggesting a thymoma and therefore he underwent thymectomy. After the thymoma resection, he had been in health without recurrence, and received no medical treatment. His family history was unremarkable. He had not contact with any animals commonly infected with C. coli, including chicken, cattle, pigs, etc. He had no history of eating uncooked chicken, beef, or pork neither. He had not complained of any abdominal symptoms including abdominal pain and diarrhea.
A cellular immunoassay was performed during hospitalization. Results revealed markedly reduced lymphocytes with 552 total cells/μL (normal lower value 1000 cells/μL), CD4+ T cells = 104 cells/μL (normal lower value 580 cells/μL), CD8+ T cells = 333 cells/μL (normal lower value 200 cells/μL), an inverted CD4/CD8 T-cell ratio of 0.31 (normal value 1–1.5), CD19+ CD20+ B-lymphocytes = 0 cells/μL (normal lower value 80 cells/μL), CD3+ CD16+ CD56+ natural killer (NK) lymphocytes = 8 cells/μL (normal value 40–600 cells/μL). HIV test showed negative and a severe hypogammaglobulinemia existed, with IgG 253 mg/dL (normal value 751–1560 mg/dL), IgA 12 mg/dL (normal value 82–453 mg/dL), and IgM 4 mg/dL (normal value, 46–304 mg/dL). On the basis of (1) past history of thymoma, (2) B lymphocyte deficiency and CD4 + T lymphopenia, (3) hypogammaglobulinemia, (4) repeated infections, he was reasonably diagnosed as having GS.
The patient was treated with intravenous cefoperazone/sulbactam (3.0 g, every 8 h) and teicoplanin (0.4 g, per day) for 1 week. Because C. coli was isolated from the blood specimen at the time of admission, the therapy was changed to intravenous administration of imipenem/cilastatin (1.0 g, every 8 h) and oral azithromycin (0.5 g, per day), which are recommended as empiric agents for Campylobacter bacteremia . His symptoms and the inflammation improved. 11 days later, the therapy was changed to oral administration of azithromycin for 4 weeks only. However, the cellulitis on his right lower leg relapsed and blood culture yielded C. coli again. Then intravenous imipenem/cilastatin for 2 weeks was re-added to the treatment. The cellulitis was resolved and blood culture became negative shortly. The patient was discharged on the 59th hospital day. Intravenous meropenem (1.0 g, every 8 h) and oral azithromycin for one month were administered in the local hospital near his home.
However, the C. coli bacteremia accompanied by leg cellulitis relapsed two times, 4 and 7 months later. Intravenous administration cefoperazone/sulbactam and etimicin (0.3 g, per day) for 3 weeks were effective for the bacteremia at the 1st relapse. The patient was discharged after the therapy was changed from intravenous administration of cefoperazone/sulbactam and etimicin to oral administration of minocycline (0.1 g, twice a day), clarithromycin (0.25 g, twice a day) and faropenem (0.15 g, 3 times a day) for 1 month. Intravenous meropenem (2.0 g, every 8 h) and amikacin (0.4 g, per day) for 1 month were effective for the bacteremia at the 2nd relapse. Due to hypogammaglobulinemia, immunoglobulin (Ig)-replacement therapy (10 g, per day for 2 weeks) was provided in this period. IgG level was markedly elevated by immunoglobulin infusion. However, IgM and IgA levels were almost unaffected. IgA fluctuated between 12 and 17 mg/dL and IgM fluctuated between 4 and 11 mg/dL. The patient was discharged after the therapy was changed from intravenous administration of meropenem and amikacin to oral administration of amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium (0.457 g, four times a day) and gentamicin (0.12 g, four times a day) for 3 months.
A painless gastroscopic examination revealed chronic superficial antral gastritis while colonoscopic examination showed no abnormality. A whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan provided no valuable evidence of visceral infection, and the transthoracic echocardiography did not suggest infective endocarditis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lower legs showed high intensity at the subcutaneous tissues on long T1 and T2 inversion recovery, but an abscess or osteomyelitis formation was not indicated. Although the fecal specimen was obtained repeatedly, the stool cultures were negative for C. coli.
The patient has been regularly followed up in our outpatient department. He has been feeling well and living a normal life for about one year without relapse of bacteremia. No adverse and unanticipated events were reported by him.