A 29-year-old man complained of joint pain, fever, rash and intermittent diarrhea for about a year. One year ago, he had arthralgia and swelling in the ankles, knees, wrists and digital joints, together with fever (>38.7 °C) and erythematous nodular rashes with diameter of about 1 cm turn up on his limbs,These rashes have vague boundaries with the normal skin nearby . The watery and soft stools occurred intermittently, with 3–4 bouts a day and 4–5 days a month. He had been diagnosed with reactive arthritis. After taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as celecoxib, arthritis, fever and rash were relieved for a short time before recurrence. He didn’t undergo gastrointestinal surgery. After being admitted to our hospital, his blood cell count, urinary analysis and stool routine with occult blood test were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 104 mm/h (0–21 mm/h), C-reactive protein (CRP) 94.7 mg/L (0–8 mg/l), interleukin-6(IL-6) 123.8 ng/ml (0–7 ng/ml) were all increased. HLA-B27 was negative. No abnormalities were found in the procalcitonin, blood culture, Multiple virus antibody, T-SPOT.TB, tumor marker, anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-dsDNA antibody (AdsDNA), anti-ENA antibodies, rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-CCP, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Electronic gastrointestinal endoscope (FUJINON EVE 400 SERIES VIDEO SYSTEM), results of abdomen CT and bone marrow aspiration cytology were normal. Distribution of the gut bacterial flora showed dysbacteriosis with 10 % klebsiellapneumoniae, 80 % E. coli and 10 % peptostreptococcus. The result of SIBO test (hydrogen-methane breath test with lactulose as the substrate) was positive . A further skin biopsy was taken from a rash on the left lower extremity and Low power microscope shows lymphocyte and neutrophile granulocyte around deep blood vessels of dermis . He was diagnosed with BADAS (caused by small intestinal bacterial overgrowth). The patient was improved dramatically after treatment with doxycycline 0.2 g/day and methylprednisolone 40 mg/day for a week. Glucocorticoid tapered gradually to withdrawal. The patient was followed up for 12 months without recurrent symptoms.