A 74-year-old man with medical history of ADPKD, benign prostate hypertrophy,
hypertension, and a 2-year history of PD visited our outpatient clinic, complaining
of left flank pain, fever, and chills for the past 3 days. He was in his usual state
of health until 1 month before when he went golfing and got insect bite and
cellulitis of his left ankle. He consulted a dermatologist the next day and was
treated with cefdinir for a week and cellulitis healed. Three weeks before the
admission, he had a low-grade fever, which sometimes spiked to 38°C to 39°C. Two
weeks before his admission, he began to feel the left flank pain. He denies having
any sexual intercourse for more than 5 years or a medical history of sexually
transmitted diseases. He has no obvious family history of polycystic kidney disease;
however, his mother as well as her sister and brother died of intracranial
hemorrhage at the age of their 40s or 50s, which suggested ruptured cerebral
aneurysm, a complication of ADPKD. On physical examination, his vital signs were
normal. He had tenderness on left upper quadrant; however, any peritoneal irritation
symptoms, such as rebound tenderness or muscular guarding, were absent. On digital
examination, he had a slight sense of discomfort but no obvious tenderness,
indicating the possibility of prostatitis. There was no skin rash. Laboratory data
revealed an elevated white blood cell count with left shift. Urinalysis revealed a
low level of white blood cells . HIV test was negative. A computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed complicated cysts . An abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to
identify an infected cyst. The MRI scan revealed several complicated cysts, and it
was difficult to determine the infected cyst . Therefore, we did not drain the
infected cyst.
Judging from his localized symptoms, with no signs of peritoneal irritation, and the
CT scan findings, the most likely diagnosis was a cyst infection. We administered
intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone (2 g/d) on admission. As the possibility of
accompanying prostatitis still remained, we switched to IV levofloxacin (500 mg
q48 h) to cover both the cyst infection and prostatitis. On the third day, his
symptoms improved and his body temperature was reduced to almost normal range, which
was about 36°C. We checked cell counts of peritoneal fluid once every 2 to 4 days
for 9 days and found that the cell counts remained consistently low . On the fifth
day, gram-negative spiral bacteria were detected in the 2 sets of blood cultures,
which were found to be H cinaedi on the 10th day. Peritoneal fluid
culture also revealed the presence of the same bacteria, although urine culture was
negative for it. The subsequent cultures of peritoneal fluid were negative. On the
basis of a past report of H cinaedi bacteremia, we switched back to
ceftriaxone and continued it for 2 weeks. Subsequently, we switched to oral doxycycline (200 mg/d), and he was
discharged. Doxycycline was then continued for 2 weeks, and he fully recovered.