A 22-years old male patient presented with dyspnoea, fatigue and systemic hypertension. Physical examination revealed an increased second heart sound with an associated gallop rhythm and a diastolic murmur heard best at the cardiac apex. Radial pulses were normal but the femoral pulses were weak. Blood pressure measured at the left arm was higher than the one measured at the left leg. Chest X-ray showed rib notching and cardiomegaly . Further evaluation with echocardiography revealed an aortic root dilatation of 42 mm with ascending aorta dilatation 68 mm and concomitant severe aortic valve insufficiency (3+). The left ventricle was dilated with end diastolic diameter 75 mm and associated systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 35 percent. Pulmonary hypertension 60 to 25 mean 40 mm Hg was also present. Thoracic CT scanning with intravenous contrast medium showed an ascending aorta aneurysm of 68 mm .
Cardiac catheterization was performed showing normal coronary arteries and severe aortic coarctation with a 70 mm Hg gradient measured across the descending aorta. The minimum diameter of the stenotic region on the aorta was 2 mm. The patient was classified as functional class III according to NYHA.
Correction of aortic coarctation was performed first by using a less invasive method. After heparinization and administration of antibiotic prophylaxis, dilatation across the coarctation site with balloon angioplasty was performed. Dilatation was accomplished by using 3 consecutive catheters of increasing size (8, 12, and 15 mm in diameter respectively). Post-dilatation aortography showed no residual gradients and the stenotic region was increased to 15 mm in diameter. The procedure was uncomplicated and the patient was released the following day.
Two weeks after balloon angioplasty the patient was re-admitted for management of the intracardiac pathology. Pre-operational thoracic CT scanning was performed to exclude any post-dilatational aneurysm formation at the site of balloon anchorage and determine descending aorta diameter . Arterial cannulation at the right axillary artery was performed using a synthetic PTFE 8 mm graft. The purpose of this was twofold; to avoid the cannulation difficulties of inserting the aortic cannula into the hypoplastic femoral arteries and prevent vascular damage to the aorta after the recent angioplasty. A two-staged venous cannula was inserted into the inferior vena cava and cardiopulmonary bypass was established. Because of the ascending aorta aneurysmal dilatation and the concomitant aortic valvular regurgitation the patient underwent replacement of the ascending aorta with a metallic valved conduit (St Jude 27 mm) using the modified Bentall procedure. Cross-clamping time was 111 min and total bypass time was 138 min. The patients' recovery was unremarkable and he was discharged on the 12th postoperative day.
At follow-up three years postoperatively the patient is normotensive with a functional aortic valve. Repeat CT scanning showed no re-coarctation or aortic aneurysm formation.