A 7-year-old girl was brought to the orthopaedic department because of mild knee and back pain associated with restricted spine mobility. She was born full term following an uneventful gestation. At birth her length was around the 3rd percentile, whereas her occipito-frontal circumference (OFC) and weight were around the 25th percentile. She was clinically and radiographically diagnosed as having achondroplasia. This was confirmed through the detection of the common mutation of FGFR3 for achondroplasia. The parents were of normal height, healthy and non-consanguineous. Clinical examination at the age of 7 years showed marked growth deficiency, -4 standard deviations, and her OFC and weight were around the 50th percentile. Craniofacially the head appeared large with frontal bossing, but with midfacial hypoplasia. The hands were short and broad with fingers exhibiting a three-pronged (trident) appearance. Movements of the thoracolumbar spine were limited, but movements of the cervical region were spared. No associated abnormalities were detected on examination of the nervous system, eyes, heart or abdomen. The results of full blood analysis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were normal. Moreover, there were no laboratory data suggestive of endocrinopathies, hypophosphatasia and/or hypercalcaemia.
A skeletal survey and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were undertaken at the age of 7 years . Achondroplasia is characterised by a long, narrow trunk and short limbs, especially in a proximal segment. It is the most common form of non-lethal skeletal dysplasia and the most common type of short-limb dwarfism [-] and is usually diagnosed at birth. Clinically the rhizomelic limb shortening and the broad and prominent forehead may not be striking, but radiologically the pelvis is clearly abnormal. The complications of achondroplasia involve many organ systems, but in most instances they are consequences of abnormal linear bone growth. About 10% of patients have tibial bowing by the age of 5 years which progresses through childhood, affecting 42% of adult patients. In adulthood and postadulthood periods the spinal canal size decreases with age relative to the size of the spinal cord, leading to lumbar spinal canal stenosis. One-third of patients with achondroplasia develop spinal stenosis requiring surgical intervention. However, this condition rarely develops before the age of 15 years [-,]. MRI has been performed on a number of children with achondroplasia in order to study the aetiology behind the development of spinal canal stenosis . Spinal ligaments were not included.
Enchondromatosis is a common bony dysplasia with a variable pattern of bony involvement. The well-differentiated forms of enchondromatosis are Ollier disease, Maffucci syndrome, metachondromatosis, spondyloenchondromatosis, dysspondyloenchondromatosis and genochondromatosis I and II [,].
Unlike other types of enchondromatosis, metaphyseal enchondromatosis is characterised by extensive development of enchondromas within the epiphysis before closure of the growth plate [,,,]. Numakura et al. reported the cases of three boys presenting with achondroplasia and metaphyseal enchondromatosis. Nizankowska-Blaz and Kozlowski reported the case of a girl with achondroplasia with knee pain secondary to metaphyseal enchondromatosis. Scanning techniques were not used in these cases, and spinal involvement was not seen. Frydman et al. described the development of quadriparesis in connection with spondyloenchondrodysplasia. Spinal scanning was not used. Al Kaissi et al. described progressive vertebral fusion in connection with spinal enchondromatosis in a girl without achondroplasia. The patient's father had been a patient at the rheumatology department because of thoracic spine bony ankylosis, even though all of his rheumatological tests had proven negative. They suggested that this father and daughter pair have a possibly distinctive form of spinal enchondromatosis associated with progressive ossification of the spinal ligaments.