A 10-year-old girl presented with headache, fever, and easy fatigability of 5 days, associated with vomiting, and a generalized rash lasting 2 days. She did not have a previous history of drug allergy or chronic illness. She had received all childhood vaccines.
On physical examination: her BMI was 13.7 <5th percentile (CDC BMI chart for her age). She had a fever of 39 degrees, her blood pressure ranging between 60/40 to 90/50 (with I.V fluid resuscitation), her tonsils were swollen red with exudates and her right anterior cervical lymph nodes were enlarged. Two days after admission she developed decreased air entry in her lungs bilaterally, abdominal tenderness on epigastric area and multiple erythematous, macular skin lesions over the trunk and extremities. On seventh day these advanced to dark discoulorations of right hand, fingers and all toes . Initially she was conscious without neurologic deficit but progressively deteriorated and lapsed in to coma.
Laboratory investigation revealed persistently elevated white blood cells with neutrophilia and raised ESR. Her blood culture had no bacterial growth. She had hyponateremia, raised serum creatinine, sterile pyuria, and albuminuria. Her liver enzymatic and synthetic functions were raised twice the normal values on the third day, and became 10 times on day five. Between the third and fifth day, serum albumin and total protein dropped further. Her HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C and anti nuclear antibody (ANA) tests were all negative. Her D-dimers, Lactate-dehydrogenas (LDH) and CRP were all markedly elevated.
Her abdominal ultrasound showed mesenteric lymphadenitis, bilateral renal parenchymal echogenecity, hypoechoic hepatomegaly. Her chest X -ray revealed bilateral pleural effusion and cardiomegaly . Her pleural fluid was transudate and peritoneal fluid showed high WBC count with neutrophil predominance; however both fluids were negative for gram stain or acid-fast stains. Her Echocardiography was indicative of dilated cardiomyopathy. Doppler ultra-sound revealed multiple right upper and lower digital arterial tree occlusive microthrombi.
Treatment and course
Initially she was treated for acute pyelonephritis, sepsis and mild hyponatremia. On the third day she developed cough, respiratory distress and hypotension; with an echocardiography result of biventricular dysfunctions; uncontrolled sepsis with multi-organ involvement was considered. Antibiotics were revised to Vancomycin and Meropenum and she was managed with diuretics and inotropes.
On day-four she had signs of impending respiratory failure with persistent hypotension, she was intubated and put on synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV). She was resuscitated with I.V fluids and then treated with Adrenaline and then Dopamine. On the fifth and sixth days, she was in decompensated shock despite continuous efforts and on day- seven, she developed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) with gangrenous digits. She was transfused with fresh frozen plasma and platelet concentrate, Enoxaparin was started. A second COVID RT-PCR sample was taken (COVID-19 antibody test was not available). She was started on Dexamethason, Asprin and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
On the ninth day, she became unconscious with pin pointed reactive pupils, stroke due to DIC was considered but brain imaging was not possible due to her critical condition. She succumbed on the next day, with possible cause of death attributed to multi-organ failure following MIS-C. The second RT-PCR test for COVID 19 was reported as positive after her death.