A 4 year-old female presented with a two-month history of recurrent episodes of pancreatitis. Her clinical symptoms were diffuse, episodic abdominal pain in the absence of vomiting, weight loss, fevers or joint pain. Stools were described as bulky and green. On physical examination of the abdomen, there was mild tenderness in the epigastrium, but no peritoneal signs nor hepatosplenomegaly. At the time of initial presentation, the patient's serum lipase and amylase were >30,000 U/L and >18,000 U/L, respectively. The remainder of her laboratory workup was normal, including serum cholesterol and triglycerides. An abdominal ultrasound showed a hyperechoic pancreas consistent with pancreatitis, and a hepatobiliary system that appeared normal. The patient received supportive care, including bowel rest and hydration, and was ultimately discharged on a low fat diet once her serum amylase and lipase normalized. Her previous investigations included a normal sweat chloride test and a normal endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
The patient was subsequently readmitted one month later with another episode of clinical pancreatitis. On examination of her previous ERCP images, the possibility of short ventral duct was suspected and a repeat ERCP demonstrated pancreatic duct divisum. She underwent minor papilla sphincterotomy and pancreatic duct stent placement. Despite the sphincterotomy, she was again readmitted to hospital on three separate occasions over 12 months with clinical and biochemical pancreatitis, prompting the institution of pancreatic enzyme supplementation with meals and snacks.
Cystic fibrosis (CF) was suspected, but sweat chloride was 23 mEq/L and a CF gene mutation analysis was positive for only one copy of the ΔF508 mutation. She then underwent nasal potential difference measurements. Mean baseline potential difference was -28 mV (range -21 to -35 mV). Superfusion of amiloride to lower the sodium potential blocked 55% of the potential difference, and was within normal limits. The low chloride and isoproterenol responses were equivocal, but suggestive of CF, thereby raising concerns for an unidentified CF mutation on the second allele. .
Extended Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Receptor (CFTR) mutation analysis showed that the patient was positive for the L997F mutation in addition to the ΔF508, both known cystic fibrosis-causing mutations. She had no respiratory complaints and had repeated pulmonary function testing that was normal. Interestingly, her father is of Irish ancestry and her mother is of Maltese descent. Both were shown to carry a CF mutation, the mother carrying the more obscure L997F mutation. Three of four siblings were later found to carry one or the other mutation and remain healthy.