A 69-year-old woman, without cardiovascular risk factors or cardiovascular history. She arrived at hospital with functional class NYHA II and postprandial fullness. Physical examination findings were not significant.
The diagnostic protocol commenced with a chest X-ray revealing cardiomegaly. Subsequently, point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) detected pericardial effusion along with hemodynamic compromise, necessitating pericardiocentesis that led to partial clinical improvement. Nonetheless, the patient experienced clinical deterioration again, requiring referral to our medical center. A transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram detected right ventricular systolic dysfunction, pericardial effusion with 26 mm separation between sac leaves in the left ventricular free wall, and a tumor mass fixed to the anterior wall of the pulmonary artery trunk (orthogonal diameter 29 × 52 mm) with multilobed characteristics, the mass exhibited areas of heterogeneous density and hypogenicity, which were suggestive of necrosis. Color doppler flow detected in the mass suggested vascularization, leading to a 90% obstruction of the main lumen of the pulmonary artery with an obstructive gradient of 68 mmHg. At the proximal end of the mass, it infiltrated the free and anterior wall of the left ventricle, and collapse of the left atrial appendage . The imaging protocol using chest tomography was conducted and confirmed the lesion's location. It was described as a lobulated exophytic mass with low attenuation and peripheral enhancement, accompanied by pleural effusion and thrombi in the pulmonary artery trunk , provides visual representation of these findings.
The patient's case was evaluated by the heart team, and it was concluded that due to the recurrence of the pericardial effusion and findings, a pericardial window with a biopsy of the tumor was necessary. The tumor biopsy report confirmed the presence of a primary cardiac leiomyosarcoma with positive immunohistochemical results for smooth muscle actin and desmin . The patient received an oncology evaluation that showed evidence of metastatic tumor activity in the brain magnetic resonance imaging; therefore, only palliative treatment was recommended.
The patient experienced clinical decline related to ventricular dysfunction, resulting in death 5-month post-diagnosis.