A 55-year-old woman was brought to our hospital by ambulance for acute abdominal pain and vomiting. She had a past medical history of NF-I and schizophrenia. She had no history of hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipemia. She had multiple café au lait spots on her body. Her blood pressure was 149/103 mmHg, heart rate was 105 beats/min, and body temperature was 36.9 °C. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the upper abdomen. Laboratory findings revealed signs of inflammatory reaction (white blood cell count 18,800/μL and C-reactive protein level 0.23 mg/dL) and anemia (hemoglobin 11.7 g/dL). Enhanced abdominal computed tomography showed a hematoma in the retroperitoneum, multiple aneurysms arising from the jejunal artery, and a lesion suggestive of an aneurysm in the head of the pancreas . Hence, we suspected rupture of visceral artery aneurysms and performed emergency angiography, which revealed an aneurysm arising from the jejunal artery and a lesion with extravasation of blood at the periphery of the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery (PDA) . We judged the periphery of PDA as a responsible lesion and embolized from the distal side to the proximal side of the aneurysm using several pushable coils (C-stopper coil, Piolax Medical Devices Inc., Kanagawa, Japan) . However, on postoperative day 2, the hemoglobin level decreased to 6.3 g/dL, and hence emergency angiography was performed again, which revealed a lesion with extravasation from a branch of superior mesenteric artery (SMA) which was not detected at the first time . We deployed several detachable coils (Target, Stryker, Fremont, CA, USA) into the distal side of the ruptured jejunal aneurysm and then embolized the aneurysm by filling the same detachable coils. To avoid proximal migration of coils into the main trunk of SMA, the same detachable coils were deployed into the proximal side of the aneurysm during the occlusion SMA of the orifice of the jejunal branch using a microballoon catheter (Attendant SP, Terumo Clinical Supply, Gifu, Japan) . After embolization, we confirmed that the jejunal blood flow was maintained on SMA angiogram . On the next day, hemostasis was confirmed by repeat angiography. However, she developed delayed gastric emptying due to compression of hematoma, which slowly disappeared, and she was discharged on postoperative day 27. Since there are still some aneurysms, we will follow the aneurysms by computed tomography once a year.