A 29-year-old single woman, an assistant nurse of the Douala tribe in Cameroon. She is G1P0010, and sexually active since the age of 18. She has been frequenting her present partner for the past three years and came to the outpatient unit of the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the Douala General Hospital, Cameroon, with the complaint of inability to conceive for 3 years. She has a past history of self-medication for C. trachomatis infection and induced abortion (dilatation and aspiration) at 8 weeks gestation, five years and nine years earlier, respectively. She also has a history of four life-time sexual partners but denies use of any form of contraception. She is currently not experiencing any pelvic pain or dyspareunia.
On Physical examination, the conjunctivae were not pale, the breast and abdominal examination were unremarkable. There was no vaginal discharge on speculum examination but there was mild cervical motion tenderness on bimanual examination. Vaginal and cervical cultures for Chlamydia trachomatis, N. gonorrhea and bacterial vaginosis were negative. Syphilis serology was also negative.
A pelvic ultrasound scan showed a normal uterus measuring 76 × 47 mm with bilateral tubular structures with well-defined echogenic wall, a folded configuration, and linear echoes protruding into the tubal lumen suggestive of bilateral hydrosalpinges. Both ovaries were normal. A hysterosalpingography (HSG) done with antibiotic prophylaxis (amoxicilline-clavulanic acid) showed a normal uterine cavity with bilateral proximal tubal obstruction . Her current partner denied follow-up.
She came back four days after the HSG with a painless moderate mucopurulent vaginal discharge requiring the use of panty liners. Her physical findings showed a normal temperature of 37.2 °C, blood pressure 120/80 mmHg and pulse 84 beats per minute. There was a non-tender depressible abdomen. On speculum examination, there was a creamy non-offensive (muco-purulent) vaginal discharge from the cervical os and bimanual examination revealed cervical motion tenderness and adnexal tenderness. Vaginal and cervical samples were taken for culture and sensitivity (gonorrhea, chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma genitalium, Bacterial vaginosis and anaerobes). We also requested for a full blood count, coagulation studies, C-reactive protein, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology, HBsAg and started antimicrobial therapy with ofloxacin; 400 mg bid, metronidazole; 500 mg tid and ketoprofene suppositories; 100 mg bid. We had a presumptive diagnosis of bilateral pyosalpinges so we counseled the patient for the possibility of bilateral salpingectomy with subsequent In-vitro fertilization and booked her for laparoscopic surgery. At laparoscopy, there were abundant peri-hepatic adhesions (perihepatitis or Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome) , free serous peritoneal fluid that was collected and sent for bacteriology and acid-fast bacilli. Both tubes were whitish in colour, swollen, severely inflamed and distorted with bilateral distal obstruction . There were also intestino-uterine and tubo-ovarian adhesions. We did bilateral salpingostomy and drained abundant purulent secretions from both tubes . The mucosa of both tubes was completely absent with very thick tubal wall (Tubal score 4). We carried out complete pelvic adhesiolysis, bilateral salpingectomy and lysis of the peri-hepatic adhesions (Additional file ). Some of these adhesions were sent to the laboratory for C. trachomatis testing.
The family of the patient did not consent to histo-pathologic analysis of the removed tubes and preferred to carry out traditional rites which entailed among other things burying the tubes. The patient was discharged from hospital 72 h after surgery and her hospital stay was uneventful.
The results of laboratory work-up came out after surgery showing that the C-reactive protein was elevated 18 mg/l, white blood cell count was 12.000/mm3, polymorphonuclear neutrophils were 72%, HIV was positive, Ureaplasma urealyticulum was positive and Gardnerella vaginalis was present. These microorganisms were sensitive to ofloxacin and metronidazole so we continued the treatment we had started for 15 days and counseled the patient to register in the national HIV treatment programme. The husband was prescribed ofloxacin empirically since he was not compliant to follow-up.