A 55-year-old man was hospitalized with a predominant complaint of bilateral vision impairment for nearly 15 years. He had a medical history of chronic CSC for >18 months. His uncorrected visual acuity was 20/80 in both eyes. His intraocular pressure (IOP) was 13.2 mmHg in the right eye and 12.8 mmHg in the left eye. A slit-lamp examination revealed a slightly shallow anterior chamber, cortical and posterior subcapsular opacity, and macular pigmentary disorder in both eyes. The axial length was 22.97 mm in the right eye and 22.68 mm in the left eye. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed shallow anterior chambers, with a depth of 2.01 mm in the right eye and 2.03 mm in the left eye, iris bombe, partially occluded slit-like opened angle, zonules in all directions, and a small distance from the lens equator to the ciliary body in both eyes . The lens thickness, measured using a LENSTAR®, could not be determined in the right eye and was 5.30 mm in the left eye. The results of fundus photography , type B ultrasonography , and perimetry of the left eye were unremarkable. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) of the left eye showed a hyperfluorescent superofoveal area with several leaking sites. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed serous foveal pigment epithelial detachment on the nasal side, and discontinuity of the inner segment–outer segment junction in the left eye . The patient’s medical history included insomnia, but his general physical examinations were normal.
The patient was diagnosed with bilateral cataract, CSC in the left eye, and bilateral suspected lenticonus. He was treated with clear corneal incision phacoemulsification in the left eye under topical anesthesia. The surgery went smoothly until the phacoemulsification probe was exchanged for the irrigation/aspiration probe, when the anterior chamber flattened, resulting in contact between the posterior capsule and the cornea. Attempts to reform the anterior chamber using viscoelastics failed, and the iris prolapsed from the main incision. A vitrectomy lens revealed the presence of a red reflex, unclear fundus details, and the absence of any obvious bump. Therefore, infusion misdirection syndrome was suspected. Dry pars plana anterior vitrectomy using a 25G vitrector was performed, followed by vitrectomy with anterior chamber irrigation soon after the formation of a shallow anterior chamber. The anterior chamber was reformed after anterior vitrectomy, and the rest of the surgery was uneventful. The patient only complained of slight soreness at the end of the vitrectomy. His blood pressure and heart rate were stable throughout surgery.
On postoperative day 1, his visual acuity was finger counting/30 cm in the left eye and his IOP was normal. A slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival congestion, corneal edema, and a normal depth of the anterior chamber. A fundus examination revealed localized serous choroidal detachment. Fundus photography revealed suprachoroidal exudation in the macula in the left eye . Type B ultrasound revealed serous choroidal detachment, with minimal blood at the posterior pole . OCT showed a bulging macular choroid, with edematous neuroepithelium and subfoveal effusion . During the follow-up period after surgery, the IOP of the left eye was mildly elevated, but remained within the normal range. On postoperative day 50, the patient’s visual acuity had recovered to 20/32. Fundus photography, ultrasonography, and OCT revealed complete resolution of the uveal effusion .