A 54-year-old woman presented with recurrent dull abdominal pain for six months, which became aggravated during the last one month.
The patient had recurrent chronic dull pain in her left abdomen for six months without showing any obvious causes. She did not receive any treatment until the pain became unexpectedly aggravated in the last one month, with nausea and difficulty in defecating. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a tumor in the right kidney and a vast left retroperitoneal mass. The patient was admitted to the West China Hospital, Sichuan University.
The patient did not have a history of previous diseases.
The patient did not have personal or familial risk factors for renal malignancies.
On physical examination, hard, fixed, and tender abdominal masses were palpated in her right and left abdomen. The patient’s blood pressure was normal (116/73 mmHg).
Before surgery, laboratory tests showed that dopamine level was increased to 6.26 nmol/L, which was much higher than the standard value of 0.31 nmol/L. Normetanephrine level was 0.84 nmol/L, much higher than the standard value of 0.71 nmol/L. The 3-methoxytyramine level was increased to 239.82 pg/mL, exceeding the 18.4 pg/mL standard value. The patient’s serum potassium was 3.86 mmol/L, which was within the standard range.
An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the upper and lower abdomen showed a huge solid cyst mass in the patient’s left retroperitoneum. Maximum diameter of the mass was 20.6 cm, which presented apparent intensification with plenty of blood supply. A solid irregular tumor was found in the right kidney with a diameter of 9.2 cm, which showed uneven and apparent high density, with partial necrosis. The vein of the right kidney was strengthened and curved. An irregular, dense nodule was detected in the vein lumen. .
The upper part of the resected right kidney contained a tumor with a maximum diameter of 10.5 cm. The cut surface of the specimen was tan to whitish or yellowish in color, solid, and showed hemorrhage and necrosis. The tumor invaded the capsule of the kidney . The left retroperitoneal tumor had a maximum diameter of 21.5 cm. The cut section appeared dark red, and cystic changes, hemorrhage, and necrosis were observed. Distinct, confluent whitish to yellowish nodules were observed within the tumor mass .
Histopathological examination of the right kidney tumor showed a typical World Health Organization (WHO) grade 3 CCRCC morphology, characterized by clear tumor cells with distinct cell membranes and focal necrosis . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed characteristic positivity for PAX8 , CAIX , and EMA, as well as intact expression of fumarate hydratase and succinate dehydrogenase (SDHB). The results were negative for CK7 and TFE3 expression. The final diagnosis was CCRCC with WHO/ISUP grade 3.
Two components were observed in the left retroperitoneal tumor mass. The main tumor component (grossly dark-red areas) showed typical pheochromocytoma morphology with amphophilic tumor cells arranged in organoid nests, and cords and rich stromal capillary vasculature . IHC showed positive staining for CgA , Syn , and intact expression of SDHB, but was negative for PAX8 , CAIX , CR, inhibin-α, MART(A103), TFE3, and EMA, with a Ki67 index of approximately 2%. The other tumor component from the whitish to yellowish areas showed CCRCC morphology similar to that of the right kidney tumor , and was immunohistochemically positive for PAX8 , CAIX , EMA, and SDHB, but negative for CgA , Syn , S-100, CR, inhibin-α, MART-190 (A103), and TFE3, with a Ki67 index of approximately 5%, consistent with the diagnosis of metastatic CCRCC.
WES was first performed on the CCRCC component tissue within the left retroperitoneal PCC, together with normal right kidney tissue, using a HiSeq next-generation sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, United States) at GloriousMed Technology (Beijing, China). DNA extraction and quantification, library preparation, and sequencing were performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. Next generation sequencing results identified a c.529A>T (p.Arg177Ter) somatic mutation in the VHL gene.
Sanger sequencing was performed using the following primers: 5'- TCT GAA AGA GCG ATG CCT CC-3' (Forward primer) and 5'- TCT CCC ATC CGT TGA TGT GC-3' (Reverse primer). The 169bp PCR products were sequenced in both sense and antisense directions using an automated sequencer (ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyzer; Applied Biosystems, United States). Sanger sequencing was performed on the right kidney CCRCC , CCRCC tumor component within the left PCC tumor mass , PCC , and right normal kidney tissue . These results confirmed that the right kidney CCRCC and left metastatic CCRCC tumor components had an identical VHL c.529A>T mutation. This mutation was not detected in the left retroperitoneal PCC or in normal tissue samples obtained from the right kidney resection specimen .
We also analyzed the tissue samples using FISH, which showed a loss of chromosome 3p in the right kidney CCRCC , as well as in the metastatic CCRCC component within the left PCC . Loss of 3p was not observed in the left retroperitoneal PCC or in normal tissue samples obtained from the right kidney .
Sequencing and FISH analyses demonstrated that identical molecular features were shared by the primary right kidney CCRCC and the CCRCC component within the left retroperitoneal PCC, further supporting the final diagnosis of the right kidney CCRCC metastasizing to PCC.