Fever and fatigue.
An 84-year-old bedridden man presented to the clinic with complaints of fever and fatigue and was hospitalized on January 2021.
He had been taking medication for hypertension and diabetes for more than 10 years and underwent interventional treatment for coronary atherosclerotic heart disease 4 years prior.
He had no history of viral hepatitis B or family history of cancer.
Rales could be heard in the lungs, and edema was visible in the lower extremities.
A laboratory exam revealed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 66 g/L), elevated C reactive protein (169 mg/L), and hydrogen hexachloro platinum (III).
B mode ultrasonography showed several swollen cervical lymph nodes, with the largest being 1.7 cm × 1.1 cm with an abnormal structure. An abdominal computed tomography scan with contrast revealed pulmonary infection, no evidence of splenomegaly, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum and abdominal region, with a maximum size of 2.5 cm × 2.5 cm . We completed the routine examination of the BM, and no abnormal cells were detected in the smear. However, using BM as a specimen, flow cytometry identified a group of abnormal monoclonal B cells that showed restricted expression of the intracellular kappa light chain. This group of B cells tested positive for CD19, CD20, and CD79b and were negative for CD5, CD10, CD23, and FMC7 . The morphology of the BM biopsy suggested that small B-cell lymphomas were scattered, indicating that the disease involved the BM .
In the case of monoclonal small B-lymphocyte tumors, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma (LPL), and Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM) should be considered. However, patients with CLL usually also express CD5 and CD23, and the peripheral blood is involved; this patient did not have these characteristics. Our case was characterized by IgM monoclonal gammopathy without plasmacytoid changes. To further confirm the diagnosis, we performed a biopsy of the patient’s cervical lymph nodes. The immunohistochemical results of the lymph nodes are as follows : Bcl-2(+); Bcl-6(+); CD10(-); CD20(+); CD3(-); CD5(-); CMYC(40%); CyclinD1(-); Ki67(70%); MUM-1(+); P53(60%).