A 43-year-old Sri Lankan man with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension presented with fever for 3 days which was associated with arthralgia, myalgia, dry cough and headache, but without features of meningism. Fever resolved after 3 days and he was well except for arthralgia and myalgia. After 1 week of resolution of fever he developed recurrent episodes of vomiting followed by development of an unsteady gait with increased tonicity of his right upper limb and paucity of speech. There was no history of altered level of consciousness, involuntary movements or seizures. He was admitted to the local hospital with above symptoms on the 12th day of his illness. On admission to the local hospital he was afebrile, pulse rate was 104 bpm and blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg. His Glasgow coma scale score (GCS) was 15/15, pupils were equally reactive to light and there was no neck stiffness. During the hospital stay he had resurgence of fever with worsening rigidity and difficulty in walking. He was noted to have a sodium of 97 mmol/L, which was corrected with hypertonic saline up to 119 mmol/L. His haematological and biochemical investigations done at local hospital are shown in Table . After 4 days of sodium correction he developed reduced level of consciousness, bradykinesia and tremors of both upper and lower limbs symmetrically. His speech remained sparse and there were no seizures. Non contrast computed tomography (NCCT) brain was normal. Cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) analysis was not done. He was transferred to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka (NHSL), Colombo on the 22nd day of his illness for further management.
There was no history of recent travel, animal contact, familial movement disorders, past history of psychiatric disorders or exposure to toxic substances including methanol, ethylene glycol or cyanide. He was a non-smoker and consumed alcohol occasionally at social events.
On examination, his body mass index was 24.2 kg/m2, afebrile and there was no neck stiffness. GCS was 11/15 (best motor reponse—6, best verbal response—2, and eye opening—3). He had features of Parkinsonism including bradykinesia, rigidity and tremors symmetrically involving both upper and lower limbs. Increased muscle tone and hyper-reflexia were noted in all four limbs with bilateral extensor plantar responses. He had ignition failure and a narrow-based shuffling gait. Speech was sparse with an expressionless face (see Additional file for video 1). Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were normal.
His haematological and biochemical investigations done at NHSL are shown in Table .
Screening for sepsis including urine full report, urine/ blood cultures and chest radiograph were unremarkable. Variation of his serum sodium levels are shown in the Fig. . Sodium level was 138 mmol/L on admission to our hospital. NCCT brain was normal. CSF analysis on the 23rd day of the illness, was normal except for an elevated level of protein. Antibodies against Japanese encephalitis, polymerase chain reaction of Herpes simplex virus and Mycobacterium tuberculosis were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed bilateral symmetrical T2 FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion recovery) high signal involving caudate, lentiform nuclei, thalami and external capsules. Furthermore, the characteristic central trident shaped T2 FLAIR high signal area was evident in the pons . A diagnosis of ODS was made based on the history of rapid sodium correction and abnormalities detected on the cranial MRI.
As infection in the CNS was suspected intravenous ceftriaxone and aciclovir were administered for fourteen days. Parkinsonism was treated symptomatically with co-careldopa and benzhexol. Intubation was not needed and he was fed via a naso-gastric feeding tube. In order to reverse the effects of ODS, sodium re-lowering therapy was attempted with 5% dextrose but failed to achieve clinical improvement and induce target hyponatraemia. Thus, the patient was initiated on alternate day plasmapheresis with a total plasma exchange volume of 11,132 mL. There was improvement of his rigidity, tremors and bradykinesia with plasmapheresis but without improvement in his speech and gait initially. However, at the end of five cycles there was complete neurological recovery (see Additional file for video 2). Variation of sodium level with sodium re-lowering therapy and plasmapheresis is shown in Fig. . Neurological reassessment done three months after discharge showed sustained complete recovery and repeat MRI brain showed complete resolution at five months .