Our patient was a 31-year-old Caucasian man with a medical history significant for pineal blastoma at the age of 3 years who had undergone tumor resection, chemotherapy, radiation, and ventriculoperitoneal shunt at that time. He presented to our institution with slurred speech, left-sided weakness, and left facial droop for the last 3 days prior to admission. His neurological examination was significant for lower left facial droop, mild dysarthria, 1/5 left lower and upper extremity strength, and some component of left-sided neglect. The patient was not given tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), because his symptoms presented outside the time window for tPA infusion.
He was found to have acute ischemic infarct of the right basal ganglia based on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , as well as incidental brain masses consistent with the diagnosis of meningioma . Further workup revealed right M1 occlusion on a brain magnetic resonance angiogram . He was admitted for a full stroke workup that was remarkable for low-density lipoprotein of 117 mg/dl, A1C of 5.9%, uneventful echocardiogram with ejection fraction of 60–65%, no patent foramen oval, and normal atrial size. Noticeably, the patient had a hypercoagulable workup that was unremarkable. He was started on “baby” acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) 81 mg, and his atorvastatin dose was increased from 20 mg prior to admission into 40 mg.
Two days after admission, the patient’s condition worsened with decreased left upper extremity and lower extremity strength. Subsequently, clopidogrel 300 mg was loaded, then the patient started on clopidogrel 75 mg daily in addition to ASA 81 mg. Repeated computed tomography of the head (CTH) and brain MRI were both stable with no worsening infarct or newly developed hemorrhage. During further investigation of the brain ischemic area, a computed tomographic perfusion (CTP) study with acetazolamide (Diamox; Teva Pharmaceuticals, North Wales, PA, USA) demonstrated evidence of baseline oligemia with post-Diamox steal phenomenon involving a large portion of the right MCA territory (type III response) with a small internal region of matched cerebral blood volume (CBV) defect (that is, infarct core). Also, the study showed evidence of pre-Diamox penumbra volume 132.52 ml and pre-Diamox infarct volume 14.97 ml . A conventional cerebral angiogram showed evidence of right M1 occlusion with collateral supply from the right anterior cerebral artery and right posterior cerebral artery . The neurosurgery preferred not to do bypass surgery and preferred to continue medical treatment.
After 5 admission days, the patient was discharged to the acute rehabilitation unit while receiving ASA and clopidogrel for 3 months, then only ASA for the rest of his life, in addition to atorvastatin 40 mg. He was also discharged on 30 days of cardiac event monitoring, which did not show any abnormal rhythm or atrial fibrillation later on. Three months after discharge, the patient was able to lift his left arm and leg antigravity but with spasticity that significantly improved with baclofen and botulinum toxin injection that were prescribed during his rehabilitation stay. Regarding the patient’s brain meningiomas, he was evaluated by the neurosurgery that recommended one year brain MRI follow up.