The patient was a 67-year-old man who underwent laparoscopic high anterior resection with colorectal anastomosis using the double stapling technique (DST) as a treatment for rectal cancer (RS, T4a, N0, M0, Stage IIB (TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors)) in May 2018. The early postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day without complication. Subsequently, adjuvant chemotherapy was started with oral uracil and tegafur plus leucovorin (UFT/LV); however, he complained of frequent defecation and melena after the completion of the first course of chemotherapy. Colonoscopy was therefore performed and anastomotic stenosis was pointed out. Granulation tissue development caused the stenosis to obstruct . Biopsy of the granulated tissue showed no malignant findings. Endoscopic treatment was performed but failed due to intestinal perforation while searching for the lumen with the endoscopic balloon dilator and the guide wire. Low anterior resection was therefore performed with diverting colostomy as emergency surgery. After the operation, he was asymptomatic and completed five cycles of UFT/LV. At 6 months after the second operation, the patient indicated that he wanted the colostomy closed. Thus, colonoscopy was performed as a preoperative evaluation. Complete anastomotic stenosis was again pointed out. The length of the stenosis is about 10 mm. Due to concerns about strong adhesions of the pelvic cavity after two times surgeries, we planned endoscopic dilation using the rendezvous method to treat complete anastomotic stenosis.
The anastomotic lesion became narrow, and the lumen of anastomotic site was difficult to detect. Endoscopes (OLYMPUS GIF TYPE Q260) were inserted simultaneously from both oral side via colostomy and anal sides, and treatment was started . An incision was made from the anal side with a needle scalpel (needle scalpel, OLYMPUS) while looking at the light source from oral side via colostomy and a fluoroscopic image. However it did not open with that, so next incision was made from oral side via colostomy and open it. Dilation was subsequently performed from the anal side using 8.5–10.5-mm balloons (OLYMPUS EZDilate Endoscopic Balloon Dilator) at 1 atm, 2 atm, and 3 atm, for 1 min each. Finally, the stenosis showed remarkable improvement. No clear perforation was observed on endoscopy. After the treatment, the lumen of the anastomotic site was observed to have narrowed again and endoscopic dilatation was repeated. In addition, local injection of steroids (triamcinolone, 40 mg) was performed after endoscopic dilatation. The lumen of the anastomotic stenosis remained after the local injection of steroids and closure of the colostomy was performed 9 months after the second operation. A total of 11 times of endoscopic dilations were performed from endoscopic dilation using the rendezvous method to the stoma closure operation . He was discharged 30 days after surgery without problems with his defecation function or anastomotic stenosis.
Our case considered that this endoscopic procedure is useful as a method to release the complete obstruction of the anastomosis. In addition, local injection of steroid may be useful for the treatment of anastomotic stricture. In the course of the patient after closing colostomy, we have dilatations and local steroid injections at the same time, two times in total. After last procedure, the patients have no recurrence signs more than 12 months .