A twelve-years-old boy with a good health condition and without any trauma began toexperience pain at the right shoulder. The pain was mild at the beginning and graduallyincreased. At the time of referring (April 2010) to our clinic in Mashhad University of Medical Science,Iran; he had a 9 months history of right shoulder pain. This pain became persistent with night acceleration and relatively responds to non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). On further examination the pain located in front of right shoulder with no obvious tender or swollen area. There was no regional lymph node enlargement. True AP X-ray only showed limited sclerosis at right coracoid base.
Complete blood count, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were allnormal.Technetium-99m bone scan showed increase uptake on the right coracoid process,then CT-scan revealed a wellcircumscribed area representing the nidus above the sub-coracoidcenterof ossification .Because proximity to the neurovascular bundle we couldn't use radiofrequency ablation technique, so the patient underwent open surgery with amini deltopectoral approach, The coracoids was exposed with preservation of all attachments of pectoralis minor, conjoined tendon, coracoacromial and coracoclavicular ligaments; Then two osteotomies were performed; first 7-8 mm proximal to coracoid tip and the second osteotomy the other at the base of coracoid just distal to subcoracoidphyseal line, a segment of coracoid about 2 cm long resected which contains lesion and its surrounding sclerosis; at gross morphology the cone shape section had a grayish nidus. Intra operative radiograph of resected fragment of bone shows a small nidus.
Tip of coracoid securely re-attached to its anatomic base and fixed with a 36 mm length, 4 mm cancellous screw and the incision was repaired in layers .The shoulder supported in a sling for 4 weeks. Histological examination revealed a fibro vascular tissue with osteoid formation and prominent plump osteoblasts compatible with osteoid osteoma .