A 43-year-old right handed woman presented in 2006 with difficulty writing, impaired dexterity of the right hand, and mild unsteadiness with walking. Her sole initial symptom was difficulty writing with the right hand and with time, other dexterous movements with the right hand became affected. Her left hand was asymptomatic. On examination, she scored 30 on the MMSE. There was a subtle dysarthria. She walked well except for a slight tendency to veer to either side. There was mild bilateral upper extremity dysmetria and mild ataxia with heel-to-shin. With the hands outstretched, as well as when performing movements with the right hand (especially writing), the proximal and distal thumb flexed involuntarily into the palm. When attempting to write, there was flexion of the right thumb, extension of the wrist, and excessive flexion at the PIP joint of all fingers. She did not notice any sensory tricks for dystonia and did not have mirror dystonia. Her reflexes were 2+ in the upper extremities and 3+ in the lower extremities. Brain MRI demonstrated cerebellar and brainstem atrophy.
Her mother was reported to have a progressive gait disorder, presenting with unsteadiness, hand clumsiness and dysarthria. We later learned that her mother had been diagnosed with SCA2 with 37 CAG repeats. Prior to death, her mother had a resting tremor, nystagmus, and cervical dystonia. Our patient’s maternal grandmother, two of three siblings and several maternal uncles and cousins were all similarly affected; a total of ten individuals were considered symptomatic in a three generation pedigree .
The patient was not seen again until eight years later, at age 51. During that time, there had been only mild progression of cerebellar symptoms but the dystonia of the right hand continued to worsen to the extent that she was barely able to write and the dystonia also impaired many other tasks with the right hand. On examination, dysarthria remained mild. There was severe writer’s dystonia (Additional file 1: Video 1) with excessive flexion of the thumb and all digits, poor control of the pen, and extension of the wrist. With the hands outstretched there was flexion of the right thumb into the palm and mild extension of the first finger at the MCP joint. There was moderate dysmetria with finger-to-nose on the right. There was slight dysdiadokokinesia of the left hand and mild dysmetria with finger-to-nose on the left. There was mild gait ataxia. Although the saccades were not overtly slow, when making saccades between horizontal targets, they were almost always performed with a simultaneous blink, which can be sign of subtle slowing or difficulty in initiation . There was no significant improvement with 600 mg per day of levodopa, the maximally tolerated dose of trihexyphenidyl, as well as botulinum toxin. As such, in 2015, at age 52, she underwent deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the left globus pallidus internus (GPi), resulting in significant improvement in the dystonia. The monopolar Medtronic device achieved optimal settings at: Lead C + 0-, frequency of 165 Hz, voltage of 2.4 V and PW of 450 μs.
When seen 2 years after DBS (Additional file 2: Video 2), there was much less spontaneous flexion of the right thumb into the palm with the arms outstretched. Although not shown on the video, there was marked improvement in her ability to write within the first several months following DBS. Compared to pre-operatively, she performed finger-to-nose better on the right suggesting that dystonia rather than ataxia was the main cause of impairment prior to DBS. The dysmetria of the left upper extremity had progressed but there was still only mild dysdiadokokinesia bilaterally. The gait ataxia had progressed but she was still ambulatory without an assist device and reported no falls. She was unable to tandem walk.