A 19-year-old male presented with a recurrent angular deformity and severe LLD of left lower leg after several surgeries in other hospitals due to tibia fracture. The first fracture was occurred when he was 13-year-old caused by falling from the chair. There was no sign of union after initially treated by bone setter for 6 months. Then, patient was brought to orthopedic surgeon and treated with open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) with plate and screw. Four years later, the patient had undergone several revision ORIF because his bone was re-fractured with trivial mechanism in 8–12 months interval. Lastly, the implant was removed, and the bone was debrided with suspicion of infected non-union. However, tissue culture confirmed no infection. No family history with the similar condition. The patient was then referred to Fatmawati General Hospital, Jakarta, Indonesia, for further diagnostic work-up and treatment.
At the physical examination there was bowing of left lower leg with 10 cm LLD. There were no soft tissue defect, dehiscence, or sinuses observed at the previous scar and surroundings (A–C). Café au lait spots were found at the back with varying sizes from 3 mm to a large macule of 15 × 25 mm (D). From serial radiograph, both fracture ends were gradually tapered from time to time. Bone discontinuity was persistent, and the implant failed to fixed the fragment in physiologic loading (E and F). After implant removal, cortical thickening which reduced the medullary canal were seen on both tapered end (G).
Surgery was performed by 1 senior author (F.M.) who is experienced in the field of pediatric orthopedic and limb deformity correction in a single academic orthopedic surgical practice. At the first stage, a meticulous resection of sclerotic bone edges and surrounding fibrous hamartoma was performed at the junction of middle and distal segment of tibia and fibula as well (A and B). After that, the angular deformity was corrected. The limb alignment and joint orientation were restored and maintained. Stable construction was achieved by Ilizarov's frame consisted of three circular frames coupled with transfixing wires and pins located at proximal, middle, and distal segment of tibia (C and D). Osteotomy was performed at proximal segment between proximal and middle ring to allow bone transport in order to fill 12 cm defect after resection. Intramedullary pin was utilized to guide bone transport process. The pathological result from the resected pseudoarthrosis showed a mature lamellar bone tissue surrounded with soft tissue consisted of spindle cell proliferation.
Bone transport performed after a week with 1 mm daily divided into four times. At the fourth months of transport process, transported bone segment which almost reached docking site with 10 cm length of transport was interfered with skin invagination at docking site. Next surgery was performed to remove the embedded soft tissue, compress the docking site, and readjust the axis. Intraoperatively, both edges of contact point were viable for union. Therefore, bone grafts were unnecessary. The tibia was further lengthened while the docking site was compressed between middle and distal ring, until it reached the same length as the opposite side in four months more, which was reached 10 cm. The frame was maintained until callus consolidation at one year. Intravenous bisphosphonate administration was given annually to improve bone healing biologically. The summary of method is illustrated in .
Serial radiological examinations were done . At one-year follow-up, the limb length was restored, and radiological examination showed union at docking site and callus consolidation at transport and lengthening site. The frame was removed, and the patient started to practice partial weight bearing. At another 6 months, a solid union had achieved. The wound had healed nicely, no significant bowing and length discrepancy and patient had walk with protected weight bearing .