A 15-year-old female patient presented to the outpatient department of tertiary care
hospital with an erythematous rash on the face, easy fatiguability, and joint pain
for 2 months. The rash began over her face and spread to bilateral upper extremities
and was photosensitive and pruritic. On further inquiry, the patient also has pain
in the small joints of her both hands that are associated with joint stiffness more
prominent at night and remained for less than 20 minutes. There was no associated
fever, weight loss, and no proximal muscle weakness. The patient was an 8th-grade
high school student with no significant past medical history. Family history was
unremarkable for malignancies or rheumatologic disorders. She had regular menses
with normal flow and has been taking a balanced diet. The patient used oral
non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for joint pain. On examination, the
patient was vitally stable with the vital signs of blood pressure of 120/80 mm Hg, a
pulse rate of 88 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 17 breaths, and a
temperature of 37°C. There was an erythematous maculopapular malar rash on the face
involving the forehead, nasal bridge, and bilateral cheeks with sparring of
nasolabial folds .
Palmar erythema and an erythematous violaceous, slightly scaling, densely set
confluent papules with sparring of the articular regions were also noted on fingers,
dorsum of the hand, and ventral and dorsal surfaces of both forearms .
Joint examinations revealed mild swelling of the dorsal and palmar aspects of the
fingers affecting the metacarpophalangeal joints with sparing the interphalangeal
joints. Periungual swelling was observed, and hyperpigmented patches were present on
her knee joints with no grotton’s papules. Upon examination there was no
lymphadenopathy or visceromegaly. The rest of the systemic examination was
unremarkable. Laboratory evaluation revealed normocytic anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Her immunological tests including
ANA and other antibodies related to SLE were negative .
Peripheral blood smear showed normocytic normochromic anemia and urine analysis was
unremarkable for hematuria, pyuria, proteinuria, and/or cellular casts, and her
echocardiography revealed preserved left ventricular function with no valvular
abnormalities. Skin biopsy was not performed due to lack of affordability. Liver and
renal function tests and urinalysis were within normal limits. Chest X-ray and
electrocardiography revealed no abnormality. Blood culture was negative for
bacterial infection. Ophthalmologic examinations were also normal. Coombs test was
negative. The patient was diagnosed with a case of ANA-negative SLE in accordance
with ACR criteria 1997. Patient fulfilled 4 out of 11 characteristics, that is,
malar rash, photosensitivity, arthritis and anemia. ACR criteria includes 11
features for diagnosis of SLE, that is, includes malar rash, discoid rash,
photosensitivity, oral ulcer,arthritis,serositis, renal disease, neurologic
disorder, hematologic disorders (anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia),
immunologic disorder and ANA test positive. Four of the 11 features listed are
necessary for a diagnosis. She was given a tablet of prednisolone 5 mg two tablets TDS for one-month,
topical fluticasone ointment (appropriate 10 g) twice daily for one month, a tablet
of calcium and vitamin D for one month, a tablet of hydroxychloroquine 200 mg one
tablet twice daily, tablet Naproxen 250 mg one tablet twice daily and capsule
pantoprazole 40 mg once daily for one morning. At 4 week follow up the patient
described marked improvement in the joint pain and photosensitivity the oral steroid
therapy was tapered, and topical steroids, naproxen, and pantoprazole were stopped
and she was continued with hydroxychloroquine. At 8 weeks the patient’s rash
decreased in severity and he was continued with hydroxychloroquine for 6 months.