A 30-year-old, gravida 2, para 1, with no relevant medical history other than previous self-limiting episodes of palpitations, was referred to a regional hospital by her general practitioner on account of palpitations, tachycardia and general malaise at 26 weeks and 3 days gestational age. First pregnancy has been uncomplicated. Given the early gestational age, she was referred to our tertiary care centre. Clinical examination revealed normal vital parameters besides a heart rate of 184 per minute and a normal auscultation of heart and lungs (no summation gallop). The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a small QRS tachycardia isoelectric ST-segments and repolarization disorders in leads III and aVF, suggestive of an AVNRT . Transthoracic echocardiography was normal (normal contractility, no chamber dilatation). Biological and biochemical analysis were normal, as was thyroid function. Foetal monitoring was obtained by electrophysiology and cardiotocography (CTG) displaying a normal pattern with a normal baseline foetal heart rate of 140 beats per minute. Transabdominal ultrasonographic examination showed a foetus in breech position with normal heart rate, normal amniotic fluid, placenta anterior, and an estimated foetal weight of 1100 g.
At the outset, treatment consisted of carotid sinus massage and Valsalva manoeuver, neither of which was successful. As a second step, pharmacological cardioversion was attempted. Adenosine 6 mg as a bolus was administered intravenously in the right brachial vein with an 18 gauge catheter, which resulted in prompt conversion to sinus rhythm.
Throughout the administration of adenosine, both patient and foetus were under continuous electrocardiographic monitoring. After the administration of adenosine, the CTG showed an abrupt change of maternal heart rate without any discernable change of the foetal heart rate on the CTG . We tried to assess the electrophysiological effect of adenosine on the foetus by analyzing the foetal ECG within the first 60 s after maternal conversion to sinus rhythm. Four seconds after the sudden decrease in maternal heart rate, the tracing suggests the absence of a QRS complex at the expected time interval (between QRS complex 7 and 8). Depending on how we interpreted the small complexes , we can explain this either by the presence of a ventricular extrasystole (as ‘a’ could signify a possible QRS complex) with a compensatory pause or as an AV block (as ‘a’ nor ‘b’ are showing real resemblance with other ventricular activity seen on this foetal ECG and therefore ‘b’ possible being a non-conducted P wave).
Following one day of observation, the patient was discharged from the hospital in good general health. She was referred back to her regular obstetric healthcare. At 38 weeks of gestation, she had a recurrent episode of AVNRT which was successfully terminated with an intravenous bolus of 6 mg adenosine. An oral beta-blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg) was started to prevent recurrences. Soon after pharmacological cardioversion, she went into spontaneous labour and had an uncomplicated repeat cesarean section, originally scheduled for 39 weeks of gestation. After birth, the neonate was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit for observation. Apgar scores were normal as was umbilical cord pH. There were no signs of neonatal adverse outcome. Four months post-partum, the patient underwent an uncomplicated ablation of her slow pathway of the AVNRT.