A 38 year old female, housewife, came to our outpatient department with chief complaints of pain and swelling over right knee since 6 months. Pain was mild and activity related to start with and progressed to moderate and continuous. There was no history of precedent trauma, no history of fever, weight loss and anorexia. Patient had not solicited any treatment for this. On examination, there was diffuse bony swelling with crunchy ‘feel’ over right femoral condyles more localized to left side, extending to popliteal fossa. Overlying skin and muscles were free and mobile. Patient was unable to squat and walk painfree with knee ROM halted to 50 degree flexion but no fixed flexion deformity and full terminal extension possible.
On plain radiographs, a distinct expansile radiolytic lesion was found in lateral femoral condyle, with articular step off , but no cortical breach on medial, lateral or posterior side, with thinned out nonsclerotic margin, graded as Campanacci Grade 2 . MRI was done, which reaffirmed heterogeneous hyperintense lesion measuring 55x41 mm in epimetaphyseal region of lateral femoral condyle, with no soft tissue involvement(&). A confirmatory biopsy was taken with all precautions for future procedure. Biopsy track was marked so as to include in approach during resection.
On confirmation of GCT in biopsy, a marginal resection and curettage with articular reconstruction and PMMA cementing for skeletal support was planned. Under spinal anesthesia, with tourniquet, an anterolateral parapatellar approach was taken, with view of future need of knee arthroplasty. After adequate visualisation of tumor extent and articular margin, marking was done for wide resection (&). Surgical mops were placed before opening the marrow, to avoid surrounding tissue contamination. Cortical breakout of lateral femoral wall occurred midway and curettage was done till the extent of viable bleeding bone. Cauterization of margins was carried out followed by denaturation of margins using 5 % Phenol soaked mop(&). Articular margin of lateral knee joint was reconstructed after elevation of subchondral bone and fixation using 1.8 mm threaded K wires . Bone defect was again curetted and prepared for cementing. PMMA cement, dual dose, was prepared using vacuum mixing technique, and the bone defect was filled with PMMA cement. Threaded K wires were cut short, with ends for future retrieval. Closure was done in layers after tourniquet release and adequate hemostasis control.
Patient was advised immediate ROM exercises on postoperative day 1 and allowed Full weight bearing with support. Patient could gain 90 degree flexion of knee with 10 degree terminal extension lag and Straight leg Raise possible (-).
After 3 months, Postoperative radiology was done to see status of distal femur. Chest xrays were taken every 3 months. Patient was followed for 2 years and has shown no signs of recurrence, cement subsidence or K wire loosening .