A 52-year-old man was referred to our hospital due to bloody stool. He received medication due to schizophrenia. He had no allergies, family history, and surgical history. His vital sign was stable. Physical examination demonstrated no abdominal pain. On digital examination, there was a smooth rubbery mass located 6 cm from the anal verge. No inflammation and anemia were observed by laboratory data. His tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen19-9 were not elevated. Colonoscopy showed 20-mm of sub-mucosal tumor at low rectum (a). The tumor was soft and move easily. An endoscopic ultrasonography revealed low echoic mass (b). Biopsy and repeat boring biopsy revealed no specific findings. Abdominal computed tomography showed that a 20-mm low density mass at posterior of lower rectum . There was no swollen lymph node surround the tumor. Differential diagnoses were dermoid cyst, enteric cyst, hamartoma, teratoma, neuroendocrine tumor, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, and duplication cyst. As the existence of malignant lesion was unassailable, we obtained informed consent from the patient. Then we planned TME for synchronous trans abdominal and trans-anal approach.
Two surgeon team, abdominal and trans-anal team, performed the operation to shorten operation time, reduce blood loss and recognize proper layer. Each surgeons had ten-year experience in gastrointestinal surgery. Abdominal surgery performed laparoscopically using 5 port technique (10 mm port above the umbilicus, 5 mm port in the right and left upper/lower quadrant). They transected inferior mesenteric artery and vein. Then splenic flexure was full mobilized. To perform ta-TME, we introduced GelPOINTR Path Trans anal Access Platform (Applied Medical, Inc. Rancho Santa Margerita, CA, USA) to anal canal. A standard 10 mm-camera and conventional laparoscopic instrument were used . The tumor located low to middle rectum. The rectal lumen was double purse-string closed with prolene suture. Starting posteriority, dissection was carried out through rectal wall to the mesorectal fascia, and up to presacral space. Next, full thick ness incision anterior wall to lateral wall. When we perform lateral dissection, we mind not to injury sacral nerve and neurovascular bundle to prevent postoperative urological disorder. Finally, the anal space communicated to abdominal space. The specimen was removal through the enlarged umbilicus wound. The reconstruction was completed by single stapling technique. Macroscopically, rectum had a submucosal mass sized 15 mm in diameter (a) that showed cystic change fulfilled mucinous content in cutting surface (b). Histologically, cyst wall was covered with heterotopic ciliated epithelium and composed of smooth muscle. Finally, rectal duplication cyst was diagnosed (c). Fortunately, the tumor was completely resected, and there was no evidence of malignant change. Postoperative course was uneventful. After the six months clinical follow up with no adjuvant treatment, he has no evidence of recurrence.