A girl presented with asymptomatic proteinuria, which was revealed by a urinary screening test performed in Japan when she was 3 years old. She had no family history of renal or neurological disorders. The urine protein to creatinine ratio (UPCR) was 1.0–1.5 g/gCr (reference range < 0.2 g/gCr) at that time. Ultrasonography revealed normal echogenicity in both kidneys. She developed nephrotic syndrome, without systemic edema, at the age of 8 years. Polyuria and polydipsia with a urine output of 3L in a day were also documented. UPCR was 11.5 g/gCr, and the serum albumin level was 2.1 g/dL (reference range 3.7–5.5 g/dL). The serum creatinine level was 0.97 mg/dL (eGFR was 46.8 mL/min/1.73m2). The urine specific gravity was 1.008, and urinary beta 2-microglobulin increased to 9,269 µg/L (reference range ≤ 150 μg/L). A kidney biopsy revealed that 13 (52%) of 25 glomeruli showed segmental or global sclerosis. Furthermore, two glomeruli showed cellular lesions, which were characterized by swollen, vacuolated, and proliferative glomerular epithelial cells, throughout Bowman’s space. The underlying glomerular capillaries were partially collapsed and occluded by swollen endothelial cells and karyorrhexis, which was consistent with a pathological diagnosis of FSGS . No glomeruli with collapse and overlying podocyte hypertrophy and hyperplasia were not observed. Cystic dilatations of the tubules and interstitial fibrosis were also observed . The patient presented with no neurological manifestations, such as seizures or developmental delays. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalogram detected no abnormalities. She could hold her head up at 4 months old, sit at 8 months old, pull up to stand at 9 moths and speak single words at 1 year and 6 months old. She did not need special support to attend school. Her renal function continued to deteriorate, and she eventually developed ESRD, despite the administration of angiotensin receptor blockers. At 9 years of age, pre-emptive kidney transplantation was performed, with a kidney donated by her mother. No recurrence of proteinuria has been observed for 1 year and 9 months after transplantation.
We performed whole-exome analysis using a previously described method , focusing on variants in the genes that are currently known to cause FSGS or nephronophthisis , and identified a de novo novel heterozygous C to A transition (c.1461C > A) in the last exon of TRIM8, resulting in a premature stop codon (p.Tyr487*). The alternative and reference allele counts were 68 (46%) and 80 (54%), respectively. Sanger sequencing showed that the individual had the variant but that her parents did not. This variant was absent in population databases including the Exome Aggregation Consortium database (ExAC, ), Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD, ), 1000 Genomes (1000G, ), ESP6500 . No additional pathogenic variants in the genes that are currently known to cause FSGS or nephronophthisis were identified . This variant was classified as pathogenic (PVS1, PM1, PM2, PM6, and PP4) based on the criteria developed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics .
The sequence analysis of mRNA was performed as previouly reported methods . RNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells with the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA was treated with DNase (QIAGEN) to avoid genomic DNA contamination, and 200 ng of total RNA was reverse transcribed, using the SuperScript VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the mRNA analysis. The following primers were used to amplify and sequence exon 6 of TRIM8 from cDNA: 5’-GAGTGTCCCCCTGTACCCTT -3’ (forward) and 5’-CTACAGGGTGTATGGGCAGC-3’ (reverse). Polymerase chain reaction experiments were performed, using Invitrogen Platinum II Taq Hot-Start DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and T100TM Thermal Cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories) identifing mRNA sequences transcribed from the TRIM8 mutant allele , which confirmed the escape from nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) .
Immunohistochemical analysis were performed using the formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded kidney biopsy specimens obtained from the present patient and nine control individuals consisting of three living kidney transplantation donors who served as normal controls, five patients with primary FSGS and one patient with nephronophthisis who served as disease controls. We performed autoclave-based antigen retrieval, for 15 min at 105 °C, in Bond Epitope Retrieval Solution 2 (Leica Biosystems Newcastle, Ltd., Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK). Specimens were incubated with goat polyclonal antibody against an epitope corresponding to amino acids 540–551, at the C-terminus of human TRIM8 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA; catalog no. ab4302), overnight, at a dilution of 1:500 . Immunofluorescence staining, using the anti-TRIM8 antibody in normal control specimens, is shown in Fig. . TRIM8 expression was observed in the nuclei of all glomerular cells . Double immunostaining with mouse anti-human podocalyxin monoclonal antibody (PHM5, Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany), at a dilution of 1:100 which was used as a podocyte marker and mouse anti-human cluster of differentiation 34 (CD34) monoclonal antibody (QBEND/10, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), at a dilution of 1:40 which was used as an endothelial cell marker showed that TRIM8 was expressed in the nuclei of podocytes and endothelial cells, respectively. Proximal tubular cells that were identified by mouse anti-human cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10) monoclonal antibody (56C6, Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) without dilution and distal tubular cells that were identified by mouse anti-human epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) monoclonal antibody (Clone E29, Dako, Santa Clara, California, USA) without dilution also showed the nuclear expression of TRIM8 protein . Similar findings were observed in specimens from disease controls . In contrast, the present patient showed a lack of TRIM8 protein expression in any cells in the glomeruli and tubules . The tubules showing cystic dilatation were positive for EMA, but negative for CD10, indicating that cystic dilatation was evident in the distal tubules (Fg. I and ). IHC staining, using anti-SOCS1 goat polyclonal antibody (Abcam, catalog no. ab9870), at a dilution of 1:500 of the kidney biopsy specimens derived from the present patient showed stronger cytoplasmic SOCS1 expression in glomerular and tubular cells than observed in control samples .