A 67-year-old male underwent tumor resection of the left proximal humerus and subsequent reconstruction using an endoprosthesis 18 years ago. The patient complained of progressive pain for 30 months. He visited our institution and underwent a radiography examination in January 2019. Pain severity was assessed using the visual analogue scale (VAS), and the range of motions (ROMs) of the shoulder and elbow were measured. The VAS score was 6 points. The ROM of the shoulder in six directions (forward flexion, backward extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation, and internal rotation) was 30°, 30°, 25°, 10°, 40°, and 40° respectively. The ROM of the elbow in four directions (extension, flexion, pronation, and supination) was 0°, 110°, 70°, and 70°, respectively. The ROM results showed limited motion of the shoulder joint and mildly affected motion of the elbow joint. The X-ray showed significant loosening of the endoprosthesis, with severe periprosthetic osteolysis around the stem .
The computed tomography (CT) data of the left upper limb was collected and imported into Mimics software (Materialise Corp., Leuven, Belgium) for building 3D models of the affected limb and the primary endoprosthesis. 3D models were set in STL format and imported into Geomagic Studio software (Geomagic Inc., Morrisville, NC, USA) . Considering the severe osteolysis of the lateral bone, only the medial bone along with the short distal bone segment can be supportive for fixation of the revision endoprosthesis.
After informed written consent was obtained from the patient, a personalized stem-plate composite was planned. In detail, the main body of the stem-plate composite was a tapered straight stem, which was designed for providing intramedullary fixation and consistent with the limb alignment of the humerus. However, this patient suffered a significant bone loss of the lateral region of the residual humerus bone, resulting in inadequate fixation of the revision endoprosthesis using intramedullary fixation alone. Therefore, a side plate was designed on the lateral for supplementary fixation to poor lateral bone stock, which matched the lateral shape of the residual bone segment. The stem and the plate were designed as a monobloc, and the revision procedure was simulated preoperatively . To promote osseointegration, a porous structure layer (1.5 mm) was placed on the stem. The stem-plate composite was fabricated using electron beam melting technology (ARCAM Q10plus, Mölndal, Sweden), and the material was titanium (Ti-6Al-4V) powder. In addition, modular proximal humerus endoprosthesis (PHE) was prepared, which can be assembled with the stem-plate composite.
The surgery was performed by the senior surgeon (CQ T). After general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position and the left shoulder was elevated with padding slightly. A 20 cm long incision along the original incision in the front of the left shoulder was performed. After removing the hypertrophic scar tissue , the loosened PHE was extracted from the medullary cavity. The key points during surgery were taking out the bone cement as much as possible and inserting the 3D-printed stem-plate composite into the residual bone segment according to preoperative planning. First, carefully removing the bone cement created a good implantation environment, which could ensure smooth insertion of the stem-plate composite and direct contact between the host bone and porous interface for bone ingrowth. Second, a small amount of bone from the residual humerus was removed to create a channel to accommodate the passage of the connection between the plate and the stem. After ensuring the appropriate position of the 3D-printed stem-plate composite, screws were inserted and the steel wire was strapped to increase initial stability. And then, modular PHE was assembled with the stem-plate composite, with a twist angle of 30 degrees. Intraoperative bleeding was ~400 mL. All in all, satisfactory intraoperative anesthesia, stable vital signs of the patient, and no special adverse events occurred. Postoperative anti-infection, prevention of thrombosis, and close observation of drainage and vital signs were performed.
During the follow-up of 50 months, no complications were observed, such as deep infection, aseptic loosening, or structural failure. Postoperative radiological examination showed endoprostheses in an accurate position. In addition, the osteointegration of the bone/implant interface was evaluated by Tomosynthesis Shimadzu Metal Artifact Reduction Technology (T-SMART). And the T-SMART images showed good osseointegration at the interface . The VAS score was improved to 1 point postoperatively. At the last follow-up, the ROM of the shoulder in six directions (forward flexion, backward extension, abduction, adduction, external rotation, and internal rotation) was 40°, 40°, 45°, 20°, 50°, and 50°, respectively. The ROM of the elbow in four directions (extension, flexion, pronation, and supination) was 0°, 125°, 80°, and 80°, respectively. In addition, no varus or valgus of the elbow joint was observed. Limb function was assessed by the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society Score (MSTS) and the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) shoulder score. The MSTS score was 27, and the ASES score was 87%. The left arm could meet the requirements of daily activities, without limitation.