A 32-year-old man visited our center due to “heart palpitations for 2 mo”.
In the past 2 mo, the patient had persistent palpitations without obvious inducement, but there was no discomfort such as chest pain and dyspnea.
The patient had sustained palpitations recently and had a history of similar attacks in the past. He completed a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) in the outpatient clinic and was diagnosed with AF. The patient still had palpitations and discomfort after taking metoprolol sustained-release tablets for heart rate control, and was admitted to the hospital for catheter ablation of AF. He had a history of TOF, and underwent palliative correction surgery 20 years ago, involving correction of complex congenital heart disease and pulmonary artery artificial vascular implantation.
The patient denied any family history of congenital heart disease and AF.
Surgical scars were seen on the chest, arrhythmia was present, a systolic murmur was heard in the auscultation area of the pulmonary valve, and the cardiac boundary was enlarged.
No obvious abnormalities were found during preoperative examinations such as routine blood and liver and kidney function tests.
The 12-lead ECG showed AF . Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the changes after TOF correction and pulmonary artery implantation, with the formation of collateral circulation between the descending aorta and the left pulmonary artery, no shunt at the ventricular septum level, enlargement of the right heart, and moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation . Transesophageal echocardiography did not show the atrial septal shunt, which ruled out the possibility of “pentalogy of Fallot” in this patient. In addition, pulmonary venous computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed preoperatively to evaluate pulmonary venous structure and function, showing that the right heart was significantly enlarged, and no obvious filling defect was found in the lumen. An artificial blood vessel shadow was seen between the right pulmonary artery and the right ventricle. The left side of the descending aorta was connected to the left pulmonary artery by another artificial blood vessel . These two artificial vessels may have reduced the symptoms of right ventricular outflow tract obstruction.