A 19-year-old Caucasian male was admitted to Bunbury Regional Hospital (BRH) in WA during February 2012 for multiple trauma following a motor vehicle accident. The patient, a New Zealand national, was in Australia working as a dairy farmer. He had been hospitalised at BRH 3 months earlier for a crush injury of his hand. He had no known allergies and his only other medical history was of mild asthma requiring occasional inhaled salbutamol. He was transferred from BRH to the State Trauma Unit at Royal Perth Hospital via the Royal Flying Doctor Service.
Initial computerised tomography and X-ray scans revealed a minor mandibular fracture, two severe distal phalangeal fractures and extensive pelvic fracturing with associated haematoma. Haemoperitoneum and lacerations to the skin, right kidney and bladder were also found. On admission, the patient was placed on 4.5 g intravenous (IV) piperacillin/tazobactam three times daily for 6 days to prophylax against infection complicating the pelvic and abdominal trauma. Pelvic injuries were initially managed conservatively, but on the second day of his admission, after worsening abdominal pain, he underwent an exploratory laparotomy. At the procedure , a bladder injury was noted and repaired. On the same day, he also underwent surgical debridement of the finger wounds. Mandibular fractures were managed conservatively.
On the fourth day of admission, the patient developed a fever with a temperature of 38.4 °C and associated tachycardia and tachypnoea. He began to exhibit abdominal distension and frequent bowel motions with loose stools. Blood cultures taken at this time were negative. At 7 days post-admission, IV piperacillin/tazobactam was ceased. The patient underwent an open reduction and internal fixation of the pubic symphysis and was commenced on IV cephazolin 1 g 6 hourly, as peri-operative prophylaxis for 48 h. His fevers continued while his bowel motions became more frequent and CDI was suspected. A stool sample was collected at 9 days post-admission for standard faecal microscopy and culture. At 10 days post-admission, he was noted to have pus discharging from the urethra and was recommenced on piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g IV three times daily for 5 days for treatment of presumed urinary tract infection. There was no significant pathogen identified from a urethral swab taken at the time.
PCR testing (BD GeneOhm™ Cdiff Assay, BD Diagnostics) of the stool specimen detected the presence of the C. difficile toxin B gene (tcdB). Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus was also detected but Aeromonas, Campylobacter, Norovirus, Salmonella, Shigella and intestinal parasites were not. His haematological profile at this time showed thrombocytosis (628×109 l−1) [normal range, 150 to 450×109 l−1], neutrophilia (12.03×109 l−1) [normal range, 2 to 7.5×109 l−1], low haemoglobin (87 g l−1) [normal range, 115 to 165 g l−1] and hypo-albuminaemia (27 g l−1) [normal range, 35 to 45 g l−1]. Based on these laboratory results, the patient immediately began a 10 day course of metronidazole 400 mg IV three times daily and was placed under contact precautions. Ten days post-admission, the patient developed a deep infection complicating the pelvic plate. At this time, he was recommenced on piperacillin/tazobactam empirically. He underwent debridement of the wound on day 14 and day 19 of the admission, and he underwent an exchange of the pelvic plate on day 21 of his admission. No specimens for culture were obtained from the wound. The patient continued on piperacillin/tazobactam for 18 days, after which time he developed a presumed delayed hypersensitivity reaction to piperacillin/tazobactam (rash fever, eosinophilia and liver function derangement) and was subsequently changed to IV cephazolin 2 g 8 hourly. After 6 days of metronidazole treatment (16 days post-admission), his fever and CDI symptoms had subsided. A faecal specimen collected 23 days post-admission was PCR negative for the toxin B gene and the patient was discharged to the physical rehabilitation unit after a total of 46 days as an in-patient. The patient completed 6 weeks of IV antimicrobial therapy for the infection of the pelvic plate, after which time he continued on oral cephalexin, with the plan for this to continue this until the pelvic plate could be definitively removed. No further episodes of CDI were noted.