A 10-year-old Sudanese boy with no prior medical history, presented to our pediatric hospital, with sudden onset headache, vomiting, and visual loss for a duration of 10 days. The headache is severe, constant, throbbing in nature, aggravated by valsalva maneuver, and not associated by double vision or tinnitus. Patient also complained of vomiting several times per day mainly at early morning and has no relation to meal. Two days later, patient developed transient visual obscurations that occurred several times a day. There were no other associated symptoms. No relevant past medical history was present and patient was not on regular medications. No family history of similar condition.
Physical examination revealed thin boy with weight of 21 kg and height of 119 cm placing him below the third percentile for his age. BMI was 14.8 kg/m2. The patient was conscious, oriented to time, place, and person. Blood pressure 90/65 mmHg, pulse rate 110 bpm, and respiratory rate 26 c/pm. On face examination, there were obvious differences between the two sides. Reduced movement of the forehead had been noted on the left side (absent wrinkle on the left side) . Patient was unable to close his left eye completely at rest . On smiling, there was deviation of angle of the mouth and decreased activity of the muscles on the left side . No pain behind ear, no alteration in taste, no dry eyes or tearing, and patient had normal hearing. Restriction in looking at the lateral side was detected on the left side . Superior, inferior, and medial visions were normal in both eyes. So, our patient has papilledema, left facial LMNL, and left 6th nerve palsy. The remaining cranial nerves, sensory systems, reflexes, coordination, and sphincters were intact. Ophthalmological examination revealed grade 4 papilloedema. The rest of his physical and systemic examinations were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed no space occupying lesion, normal sella appearance , normal perioptic disc spaces , no deformity, displacement, or obstruction of the ventricular system . Complete blood count, urine general, liver function tests, renal function tests with electrolytes, coagulation profile, thyroid function tests, and vasculitic profile were within normal ranges. LP revealed clear CSF with opening pressure of 300 cm H2O and normal CSF constituents.
The diagnosis was definite IIH as he fulfilled all items of the criteria (symptoms of increased intra cranial pressure “headache and vomiting”, no localizing findings in neurological examinations except for false localizing signs “VI nerve palsy”, normal brain CT and MRI, high opening pressure “300 cm H2O” and normal CSF constituents).
He was started on acetazolamide tablets 250 mg twice daily (25 mg/kg/day), methylprednisolone 1 mg/daily and paracetamol tablets 250 mg/6hourly. The patient clinical condition improved gradually and discharged on good condition on acetazolamide tablets 250 mg once daily. On follow-up 1 month later, there was significant improvement in headache and visual obscurations, and vomiting was stop with partial resolution of papilledema to grade 2 .
Magnetic resonance venography and CT venography were not done due to financial challenges. They were usually done to analyze orbit, sellar, cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, and venographic findings in IIH. Brain MRI and CT were possible alternatives which showed normal sella appearance, normal perioptic disc spaces, and normal size of ventricles.