A 72-year-old man with a history of T1D was admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine complaining of alternating hyperglycemia and numerous hypoglycemic episodes.
The patient signed the informed consent for the acquisition, analysis, and publishing of the anonymized data collected. Since no personal identification data were used in this manuscript, the ethics committee approval is not needed.
The patient had been diagnosed with T1D in 1994 at a diabetes center and treated with insulin thereafter, continuing follow-up at an endocrinology department. He was a former smoker (15 pack-years), non-drinker, and reported a family history of diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. After the T1D diagnosis, his clinical course was complicated by peripheral neuropathy, arterial hypertension, OSAS (obstructive sleep apnea syndrome) and multiple episodes of angina, requiring placement of intracoronary stents for an N-STEMI (non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction) in 2011. At the time of our first observation, the patient’s medications included a β-blocker, an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)-inhibitor, double antiplatelet therapy, ranolazine, statins, furosemide and pregabalin. Diabetes medications consisted of basal-bolus insulin therapy, in the form of long-acting insulin glargine 30 I.U. at bedtime, and short-acting insulin lispro at meals (8 I.U. at breakfast and dinner, 15 I.U. at lunch). Last year, his family doctor had recommended increasing the doses of short-acting insulin at meals, in order to improve the glycemic control, but his conditions were deteriorating due to the onset of numerous hypoglycemic episodes (up to 4 per day) and an increased appetite. At physical examination, the patient had a high body mass index (BMI) and abdominal circumference, and his condition was classified as metabolic syndrome with class I obesity . The laboratory tests showed unsatisfactory glycemic compensation and a suboptimal lipid profile but preserved renal function (see ). Serum C-peptide levels had never been determined in any of the patient’s clinical records. Nor had the presence of autoantibodies to diabetes-associated antigens ever been evaluated since the T1D diagnosis. The fasting serum C-peptide assay was performed and resulted within the normal range. The patient’s clinical history, as well as his phenotype, suggested a diagnosis of T2D rather than T1D. This view was confirmed by the finding of normal C-peptide levels. Ezetimibe and metformin were added to the therapy, and the short-acting insulin dose was tapered until complete discontinuation at 10 days. Owing to the patient’s very high cardiovascular risk, either an SGLT2i or a GLP-1RA was particularly indicated. His obesity status and referred increase in appetite led us to institute therapy with dulaglutide, a long-acting GLP-1RA. Over the next 4 weeks, the long-acting insulin doses were also completely discontinued. After 4 weeks of treatment, the patient’s glycated hemoglobin values had normalized and no further hypoglycemic episodes occurred. After 2 months of dulaglutide treatment, and the insulin discontinuation, the patient achieved 10 kg of weight loss and a reduction in abdominal circumference by 13 cm.