A 44-year-old Afro-Caribbean woman missionary worker with homozygous sickle cell disease (HbSS), originally from Grenada, was admitted to hospital with a three-day history of worsening shortness of breath, productive cough with yellow sputum, and pain in her lower back and both lower limbs. She denied any gastrointestinal symptoms.
In terms of her sickle cell anemia, the patient reported two previous sickle cell crises. The first in Grenada, in 2002, when she was plasma exchanged and the second, five months previously in Barbados, when she was transfused one unit of blood. She also had a history of pigmented gallstones. She was taking regular folic acid. Her vaccinations were not up-to-date and no prophylactic penicillin was being taken.
On examination, the patient was dehydrated, febrile at 38.5°C, tachycardic and desaturating on room air. She was clinically jaundiced. A systolic flow murmur was noted on examination of her cardiovascular system. On auscultation of her chest, there was reduced air entry and crepitations at the right base. Her abdominal examination revealed a mildly tender, enlarged liver. Her lower back and both thighs were tender on palpation.
Laboratory results showed a hemoglobin of 6.7 g/dL (her baseline hemoglobin was 7 g/dL); mean cell volume 87.8 fl; white cell count 18.7 × 109/L; neutrophils 13.6 × 109/L; platelets 81.0 × 109/L; C-reactive protein > 250 mg/L; creatinine kinase 10 U/L. Chest radiography showed a globular heart, moderate bilateral effusions, sickle cell bony changes but no focal consolidation.
Our patient's chest crisis was managed with analgesia, hydration, and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). Intravenous amoxicillin (500 mg every eight hours) and clarithromycin (500 mg every 12 hours) were prescribed to cover a possible chest infection. Despite this, her clinical condition continued to deteriorate and her hemoglobin dropped to 5.4 g/dL. It was then decided to perform an exchange transfusion.
On the second hospital day, Salmonella agbeni was grown from blood cultures and intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 hours) commenced. The patient continued to have persistent temperature spikes of > 38.5°C despite a two-week course of ceftriaxone. For enhanced intra-cellular penetration, ceftriaxone was then changed to oral ciprofloxacin (500 mg every 12 hours), to which the organism was also sensitive. Repeat blood cultures and stool cultures to assess carrier status were negative.
After seven days of ciprofloxacin our patient developed limited hip extension on the right with persistently raised inflammatory markers: C-reactive protein 237 mg/L; white cell count 16.2 × 109/L; neutrophils 12.3 × 109/L. In order to ascertain a focus of infection, plain radiography and a bone scan of her hips and pelvis were performed. The former demonstrated chronic avascular necrosis and the latter increased vascularity around the right hip. It was suggested this may represent infection and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the hips and pelvis was performed. This revealed the diagnosis of pyomyositis, with particular involvement of the left obturator externus and adductor brevis muscles (yellow arrow), and the right obturator externus, iliacus and iliopsoas muscles (red arrow) .
Both orthopedic and radiology teams were consulted and it was decided there was no collection that could be drained either surgically or radiologically. As the source of infection was most likely to be gastrointestinal, a combination of intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 hours) and metronidazole (400 mg every eight hours) was prescribed to cover the possibility of a polymicrobial infection. Our patient was examined after a total of six weeks of intravenous antibiotic therapy and was found to have no residual functional limitations, her C-reactive protein had normalized and resolution was noted on repeat MRI .