A 70-year-old man consulted a neighborhood doctor with a history of discomfort in swallowing and underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The examination showed mucous membrane irregularities in the thoracic esophagus , biopsy revealed squamous cell carcinoma, and the patient was referred to our hospital. We made the diagnosis of esophageal cancer (Ut, type 0-IIc, T1b/MtLt, type 0-IIc, T1b, N2, M0, cStage II) and planned to treat the patient by radical surgery after neoadjuvant therapy. The patient was enrolled in a clinical trial of neoadjuvant therapy for esophageal cancer (JCOG1109) and was assigned to the neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy group (2 courses of CF therapy: cisplatin 75 mg/m2, 5-fluorouracil 1000 mg/m2, and radiation: 41.4 Gy, 1.8 Gy × 23 fr).
Preoperative CT examination revealed a RAA , and based on the findings of 3D-CT, we classified the RAA as type IIIB1 (Edwards classification), which is the most frequently encountered type of RAA . We performed thoracoscopic esophagectomy via a left thoracic approach with the patient placed in the prone position, cervical esophagogastric conduit reconstruction via the retrosternal route, and three-field lymph node dissection. Although Kommerell’s diverticulum could be easily confirmed, the descending aorta took a meandering course, making it difficult for the esophagus to be mobilized and detached and therefore also to identify the ductus arteriosus (DA) and left RLN. Continuous and intermittent intraoperative RLN monitoring using NIM-RESPONSE® 3.0 (Medtronic Japan, Tokyo, Japan) allowed the position of the left RLN to be accurately determined , and upper mediastinal lymph node dissection and mobilization of the upper thoracic esophagus were performed safely . The right RLN was considered to be recurrent in the aortic arch, but could not be identified during thoracic surgery. Therefore, intraoperative right RLN monitoring was not performed, and lymph nodes along the right RLN were dissected through a neck incision. Postoperatively, the patient showed no evidence of RLN palsy, but needed conservative treatment for anastomotic leakage. The patient was discharged 46 days after the surgery. Histopathological examination revealed complete response of the primary tumor and lymph node metastasis in 101L. A follow-up examination performed 22 months after the operation revealed no evidence of recurrence. Although intraoperative nerve monitoring for esophageal cancer surgery is not covered by public medical insurance, its cost was reimbursed as research expenses, as the procedure was conducted with the approval of the institutional review board of Tokai University Hospital.