A 46-year-old man was transferred to our emergency department with a 15-cm stitched wound on a large kermesinus hemangioma-like lump on the left lateral thigh . The patient was hit by a car 1 day before. The patient was admitted immediately. The entire left lower extremity presented a compulsive contracture deformity with massive swelling, induration, and varicosities . Systemic examination revealed severe anemia, and an emergency transfusion was performed. Radiographs of the left leg showed a shaft fracture at the proximal third of the femur with extensive high-density shadows distributed in the flexor muscle side . Ultrasonography of the limb showed normal blood flow of the main vessels and venous malformations in the dermis. Three-dimensional computed tomography (CT) reconstruction confirmed a femoral fracture and a continuous artery with massive skeletal structural deformities along the extremity . The contralateral limb radiograph revealed a normal skeletal structure.
The patient claimed to have a “port-wine birthmark” on the left foot at birth. With growth and development, the port-wine stain started to spread, and the entire left lower limb was progressively flexed and contracted with loss of function. The condition stabilized after his growth stopped. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested diffuse soft tissue hemangiomas, and a diagnosis of KTS was made based on the medical history and clinical characteristics . A technetium 99 m-methyl diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP) bone scan also indicated extensive radioactivity concentration on the flexor side of the limb, and a diagnosis of HO was inferred . However, it was difficult to distinguish whether the high-density shadow and radioactive concentration exhibited on imaging was intramuscular calcification or ossification.
After hospitalization, the patient’s lateral thigh wound began to show signs of necrosis on the 3rd day. Lower extremity digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed vascular distribution and blood supply of the diseased limb . No arteriovenous fistulas were found during DSA. On the fifth day, bacterial culture from the wound showed a gram-positive bacterial infection. On the seventh day, an amputation was performed at the fracture site to the proximal of the infected necrotic foci. Owing to the high amputation plane, a tourniquet could not be used. Due to extensive vascular malformations and soft tissue ossification, bleeding during surgery was excessive and difficult to control by conventional electrocoagulation and ligation. Extensive ossification impeded the progress of the surgery. The intraoperative blood transfusion was 17 units. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for advanced life support. Ossification specimens provided histopathologic evidence of HO . Normal trabecular bone formation and bone structure construction were detected. The patient was discharged on the 33rd day after hospitalization, and a postoperative X-ray was performed . In order to maintain hemoglobin stability, the patient was transfused 55 units of blood during hospitalization. On follow-up at 2 months, the amputation wound healed well.
The patient and his family provided informed consent for genetic testing. Gene sequencing was performed using next-generation sequencing technology (NGS). Heterozygous mutations at chromosome 13 in both parents led to a homozygotic mutation in the patient, resulting in a FoxO1 translation error . The sequencing results were explained to the subjects according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines . The study was approved by the local ethics committee.
The NGS sequencing of the FoxO1 gene revealed a novel homozygotic missense variation in Exon 2, c.1532C > T, leading to a translation error at amino acid 551 (p.A551V). It was predicted to be disease causing based on Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) analysis. The SIFT score was 0.041, and the SIFT converted rank score was 0.419.