Proband is a 49-year-old male. At the age of 38, the patient reported difficulties in standing-up from a sitting position. Symptoms showed a slow but progressive worsening. He noticed upper and lower limb weakness and difficulty in daily activities such as carrying a child and stumbling. At the age of 49, the patient had difficulties in walking unaided, climbing up the stairs, and standing up from sitting and lying positions .
Neurological examination at the age of 46 revealed symmetric atrophy and weakness of limb proximal muscle. Shoulder abduction and adduction were 4/5 grades (MRC-scale) on both sides. Elbow flexion and extension 4/5 bilaterally. Wrist and fingers flexion and extension were normal. Hip flexion was 3/5, hip extension - 4/5 bilaterally. Knee flexion and extension were 3/5 grades bilaterally. Ankle plantar flexion was 4/5 and dorsiflexion - 4/5 on both sides. We observed weakness of axial muscles predominantly affecting the paraspinal and abdominal muscles. The patient showed a wide based gait with a lordotic posture. Positive Gowers’ sign and mild enlargement of the calves was also noted. Tendon reflexes, sensory examination, and cranial nerve examination were normal. Cognitive testing did not reveal any frontal lobe and other cognitive abnormalities. During 4 years of follow up the muscle weakness slowly progressed. We noticed the muscle strength deterioration in the distal parts of the upper limbs. A slight asymmetry of muscle strength appeared with the right limbs being more affected. The patient can walk unaided a few meters and uses walking sticks most of the time. We did not find any cognitive deterioration. A nerve conduction study at the age of 46 did not show any abnormalities. Needle electromyography revealed myopathic changes without spontaneous activity. The myopathic pattern was more prominent in the proximal parts of the limbs. His creatine kinase (CK) level at the age of 46 was 1,237 U/L (reference range: 25–195 U/L), it increased to 1,309 U/L after a year. Whole body bone scintigraphy showed no abnormalities characteristic of Paget’s disease.
Whole body MRI showed fatty replacement, predominantly affecting right vastus intermedius and medialis, gastrocnemius and soleus in calf, abdomen wall and lumbar muscles .
Family history revealed a similar phenotype of the patient’s father and paternal uncle. The uncle had difficulty walking and experienced muscle weakness from the age of 40, however he died at 59.
The patient’s father is a 73-year-old male. At the age of 60, he started to struggle climbing stairs, and he suffered from frequent falls. At the age of 68, he had difficulty walking and started using crutches. He also has difficulty standing up from sitting and lying positions. ENMG examination revealed signs of partial axonal degeneration of the motor nerves in the lower limbs. Myopathic patterns were recorded in all muscles of the lower limbs (especially the quadriceps femoris) and the proximal muscles of the upper limbs. His CK level was 119 U/L.
Next-generation sequencing analysis of the proband revealed a previously reported pathogenic heterozygous variant NM_007126.5:c.277C > T (NP_009057.1:p.(Arg93Cys)) in exon 3 of the VCP gene. Based on the guidelines of ACMG/AMP for interpretation of sequence variants, it is classified as pathogenic (categories: PP5, PP3, PM1, PM5, and PM2) . Segregation analysis showed that the detected variant is inherited from the affected father. The detailed sequencing and analysis methods have previously been described .