Mr. R is a 47-year-old man who presented to the emergency department (ED) with coffee-ground emesis in the context of heavy drinking. He had a self-reported psychiatric history of schizoaffective disorder, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and depression. He had used cocaine and marijuana infrequently in the past.
On initial evaluation, Mr. R’s heart rate was 120 beats per minute, oxygen saturation was 88% on room air, his hemoglobin level dropped from 11.0 to 9.5 g/dL, and his serum creatinine was 1.44 mg/dL (baseline 0.7–1.1), later peaking at 3.01 (glomerular filtration rate, GFR, 25.21 ml/min). He had a liver ultrasound from 3 months earlier that read, “mild hepatomegaly with steatosis. No ultrasound evidence of cirrhosis or portal hypertension.” After acute stabilization with fluid resuscitation, symptom-triggered alcohol withdrawal management, and close monitoring of blood counts, Mr. R underwent an endoscopy, revealing esophagitis and gastritis.
During the admission, he was evaluated by the addiction consult service, who confirmed that his home AUD medications included naltrexone, acamprosate, disulfiram, and gabapentin. They recommended a reduced dose of acamprosate and gabapentin due to a reduced GFR. Disulfiram was not continued as the patient’s adherence appeared to fluctuate, placing him at risk of severe vomiting and bleeding in a future episode of drinking. He had received intramuscular naltrexone two weeks prior, so there was no indication to administer it imminently. Notably, he mentioned taking large amounts of ibuprofen in recent weeks following an outpatient septoplasty procedure.
Mr. R began heavy alcohol use in college, increasing after graduation and finding work as a teacher. At the most, he drank 1.75 L of whiskey per day. This led to numerous problems including losing relationships and jobs (teaching). He had multiple prior hospital encounters related to alcohol withdrawal and other complications. Mr. R sought treatment at the recommendation of his primary care physician (PCP), attending addiction clinic for therapy and medications (co-managed with PCP).
In therapy, Mr. R presented as alert, oriented, and lucid. He described his depression as a “black hole” within his body, though with no active suicidality. Mr. R was highly creative and had been a prolific artist. He lamented about loneliness and boredom. He struggled to process the loss of relationships. Addressing sleep issues, existential issues, triggers leading to use, relapse prevention, and building a sober support network were goals in therapy. He regularly attended appointments, took AUD medications consistently, and engaged in support groups.
See Fig. for a timeline of more recent events along with prescribed AUD and psychiatric medications. He had a period of sobriety for 12 months, ending a couple months prior to the index admission. For much of this time-period, his AUD medications were intramuscular (IM) naltrexone 380 mg monthly, disulfiram 250 mg daily, and gabapentin 600 mg TID; his psychiatric medications were sertraline 150 mg daily, bupropion 300 mg daily, and risperidone 0.5 mg daily. He had been prescribed acamprosate 666 mg three times daily (TID) prior to his year of sobriety.
Near the end of this sober period, Mr. R’s outpatient therapist had been on leave, he missed a naltrexone injection, he stopped taking his psychiatric medications, and he started a new teaching job– where students were reportedly disrespectful. He identified job frustrations as well as boredom and loneliness as his main triggers to drink multiple 750 ml liquor bottles over 3 days, resulting in a hospitalization for hematemesis (prior to index).
He then started venlafaxine 225 mg daily, increased his risperidone to 2 mg nightly, and restarted acamprosate plus his other AUD medications. He returned to drinking within two weeks, leading to another hospital admission. One month later, he had his septoplasty performed. Two weeks later, he began drinking again and presented to the emergency department, discharging upon rapid detoxification. Another two weeks later, he presented to the hospital for the index admission.
Quotations were recorded with permission during the index admission and displayed in Table . Unless otherwise specified, the patient was prompted to describe his experience with a medication and mention any beneficial or adverse effects. Quotations are lightly edited for clarity.
Mr. R followed up with a new counselor. He continued his AUD and psychiatric medications and followed up regularly with his outpatient providers. He presented to the hospital again six times before being placed on a state-sanctioned involuntary commitment (compulsory treatment, typically starting in a residential setting). He was discharged from residential treatment after four weeks to an intensive outpatient program. He continued to engage in outpatient counseling. At six months following initiation of the involuntary commitment, he had not resumed alcohol use.