A 78-year-old italian man was referred to our hospital because of oppressive chest pain. His past history included myocardial infarction and cerebral transient ischemic attach (TIA), hypercholesterolemia, systemic hypertension, chronic renal failure, peripheral arterial disease and anemia; he had also marked limitation of physical activity. At the admission the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a right bundle branch block, left anterior hemiblock, Q waves in anterior and inferior leads and ST abnormalities in anterior leads; myoglobin was 228 ng/ml and troponin 12 ng/ml. So diagnosis was ACS-NSTEMI. Antiaggregant and anticoagulant treatment, including glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors, was administered; because of urination difficulty, a bladder catheter was inserted. Congestive heart failure was documented with impaired functional class (NYHA III-IV).
Seven days after recovery, the patient became tachypnoic and feverish. His body temperature was 38.4°C, blood pressure was 150/70 mmHg and pulse rate 90 beats/min. Physical examination revealed a pansystolic murmur of grade 3/6 audible on mitral area and there were signs of peripheral embolism (Osler noduli). Laboratory examinations showed an hypocromic and microcytic anemia (with hemoglobin 8.8 g/dl and hematocrit 27.7%), polymorphonuclear leukocytosis (white blood cells 17,7 × 103/ml). Other findings were as follow: glycaemia 134 mg/dl, urea 174 mg/dl, creatinine 2.93 mg/dl, phosphate 3.64 mmol/L and myoglobin 343 ng/ml. Urine cultures resulted positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a calcified mitral annulus with an echo-dense spherical, tumor-like mass, located close to the posterior leaflet . A typical vegetation was located at the base of the posterior mitral leaflet, especially on the ventricular surface . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of IE associated with MAC. On Doppler color-flow mapping, a mild mitral regurgitation was seen in the left atrium; no obstruction to the diastolic transmitral flow was found. The left ventricle was dilated with akinesia of the apex and hypokinesia of the other segments and an ejection fraction of 30%. The right ventricle and right atrium were normal. The aortic valve was tricuspid and showed some calcification.
Blood cultures were performed three times, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) grew in all samples. An antibiotic therapy was started with rifampicin 600 mg/die and oxacillin 8 g/die.
The patient died few days later for multiorgan failure.