An 11-year-old male presented in our emergency room with lethargy, vomiting, weakness, left peripheral facial nerve paralysis, and left Hemiparesis signs. He was the first child of nonconsanguineous parents, born at term after a normal pregnancy. His past medical history revealed sickle cell disease (SCD), diagnosed at the age of 2 years by hemoglobin (HgB) electrophoresis, and he was on folic acid only. He had received all of his immunizations along with the pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccine. He had frequent hospitalization in the context of acute painful episodes, as well as blood transfusions. He underwent a tonsillectomy at the age of nine years. His family history showed that both parents were sickle cell carrier.
At admission to the PICU, he was pale and in reduced general condition. On physical examination, he had a normal heart rate with 100 beats/min and 2/6 murmur. Detailed neurological examination showed left-sided paralysis with increased deep tendon reflexes and a positive Babinski sign, rising concern of a cerebral stroke. There was no adenopathy nor hepatosplenomegaly. The rest of his physical examination was unremarkable.
His initial vital signs were: respiratory rate: 25 breaths/min, Spo2: 93% through a nasal canal 1 l/minute, blood pressure: 100/60 mmHg, and temperature: 37°C. His weight was 25 kg.
His initial laboratory workup showed elevated white blood cells (WBCs) and platelets count, decreased HgB, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase [Table ].
A brain computed tomography (CT) was performed, and was within normal. A chest radiograph was also done, and it was normal.
He underwent a partial blood exchange (20 ml/kg), then we initiated the treatment with Hydroxyurea (20 mg/kg/dose once daily).
By day 2, a brain CT was repeated, which showed a hypodense area in the right temporoparietal region, confirming ischemic stroke.
By day 3, the patient developed a fever of 40°C, at a rate of 3 peaks/day. Biochemical workups were normal except for elevated WBCs, with decreased HgB. A chest radiograph was performed, which showed bilateral infiltrates. He was commenced on vancomycin, ceftazidime, and clarithromycin.
By day 10, the patient was weaned off oxygen with slight improvement in upper and lower left extremity movement on physiotherapy, but the fever persisted with nonobvious cause which is consistent with FUO. A complete blood count, C-reactive protein (CRP), blood culture, serologic test for typhoid fever, and brucellosis were done [Table ], as well as MRI in order to investigate a potential cerebral abscess, which showed a right sub-acute temporoparietal infarction [Fig. ].
Based on the results of Table , which showed a markedly elevated WBCs, decreased HgB, and elevated CRP; a simple blood transfusion was performed and the patient was commenced on a broad-spectrum antibiotic. An episode of hemolysis occurred during the transfusion; therefore, it was immediately discontinued. A direct-coombs (IgG) test was negative, but the indirect-coombs test was positive, which is consistent with alloimmune hemolytic anemia. The hemolysis was mild and self-limited, so we did not need using immunosuppressive therapy. Conversely, we had difficulty accessing to compatible blood for subsequent transfusions, which prompted us to use Vitamin B9 and Vitamin B12.
By day 20, the fever remained elevated (40°C), with 2 peaks/24 h. A complete blood count, CRP, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, procalcitonin, serologic test for typhoid fever and brucellosis was performed [Table ], as well abdominal ultrasound which excluded any visceral abscess, and an echocardiogram, which rule out infective endocarditis, but it showed an important pericardial infusion. A whole-body CT scan was performed, in which nodular hyperplasia was observed in the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
Following results presented in Table , which showed elevated WBCs, platelet count, CRP, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and decreased HgB; he underwent a bone marrow needle aspiration, to rule out malignancy or any other infiltrate disease, it showed a reactive hyperplastic bone marrow without abnormal cells. The antibiotics were stopped for 72 h to detect pharmacotherapy fever. Despite this, the fever persisted, and viral and rheumatologic causes were raised, as well as inflammatory bowel disease.
Coronavirus disease 2019 PCR, anti Hbs-Ag, HCV PCR, CMV IgM, fecal calprotectin, antinuclear antibodies, antidouble-stranded DNA antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies test, were ordered [Table ].
According to the findings presented in Table , which showed a positive CMV IgM (2.3 Ru/ml, normal value: up to 0,5 Ru/ml), and the diagnosis of CMV infection was made after confirming the result with a positive CMV PCR (113 000 copies/ml, undetectable: up to 100 copies/ml) [Table ]. The patient was commenced on Ganciclovir (5 mg/kg every 12 h for 14 days), and the fever disappeared after 4 days of treatment.
By day 37, after the improvement in general condition and mobility of the patient’s left extremities, he was discharged with a recommendation to continue physiotherapy and hydroxyurea.