An 83-year-old man on clopidogrel for coronary artery disease presented to the emergency department of our institution with symptoms of anaemia for the past 3 weeks including increasing fatigue and increasing shortness of breath on exertion. He denied any per rectal bleeding or change in bowel habits and had no significant weight loss. He was noted to have a large partially reducible right inguinoscrotal hernia on examination containing bowel which he stated had been present for more than 10 years, which had remained unchanged in size in the last few years.
His other significant background consisted of hypertension, three previous transient ischaemic attacks, type 2 diabetes mellitus and had a permanent pacemaker for sick sinus syndrome.
Colonoscopy demonstrated a large non-obstructing tumour located at the ascending colon. The tumour was confirmed as adenocarcinoma on histopathology.
Further investigations included a CEA level of 2 μg/L and computed tomography of the chest and abdomen which did not demonstrate metastatic disease but that the ascending colon tumour was located in his right inguinoscrotal hernia .
He underwent a laparoscopic right hemicolectomy. The caecal pole was adherent to the scrotal sac, and the adhesion was deemed to be inflammatory related rather than direct invasion from the tumour. Laparoscopic adhesiolysis was performed with a moderate degree of difficulty. A 30° laparoscope was used and inserted into the inguinoscrotal hernia for an angled view . Bowel manipulation was performed with atraumatic graspers, and adhesiolysis was achieved by an energy device (Olympus Thunderbeat™). Further mobilisation followed a standard lateral to medial approach, followed by inferior to superior mobilisation. The omentum was dissected off the transverse colon, lesser sac entered and hepatic flexure to transverse colon was mobilised. The ileocolic pedicle was isolated and stapled, and the diseased colon was delivered through the umbilical port site. A resection and a functional end-to-end anastomosis were performed with the GIA™ 80 mm stapler (Medtronic). Pneumoperitoneum was then re-established, and the deep ring was closed snugly around cord structures with 2-0 V-Loc™ (Medtronic) non-absorbable sutures laparoscopically.
He had an unremarkable post-op recovery and was discharged home after 7 days. There was no recurrence of the inguinoscrotal hernia at his 4-week post-operative review.
Histopathology confirmed that the ascending colon mucinous adenocarcinoma had invaded partially into serosa with clear resection margins. Four out of 15 lymph nodes were positive. TNM staging was T4aN2aM0 with an R0 resection.
Given the high-risk cancer and poor prognostic features, he is currently being planned for adjuvant capecitabine monotherapy.