A 76-year-old male, former paper mill worker with 40-pack-year smoking history, was diagnosed with lung adenocarcinoma. His past medical history included hepatic steatosis, coronary artery disease requiring the insertion of an implantable cardiac defibrillator, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. During a screening computed tomography (CT) chest, he was incidentally found to have an 11 × 9 mm nodule in the left upper lobe of the lungs (shown in ). The nodule slowly grew over time, with a 3 mm increase over 6 months, which made it suspicious for malignancy. The positron emission tomography and CT obtained 6 months after the initial detection of the nodule were negative for lymphadenopathy or distant metastatic disease. The patient underwent surgical resection with wedge lobectomy, using video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), with curative intent. The pathology of the nodule was consistent with non-small cell lung cancer, adenocarcinoma type, with immunohistochemical stains positive for TTF-1 and napsin A and negative for CK 5/6 and p40. No involvement was found in the 18 resected regional lymph nodes, and the pathologic stage of the malignancy was IA2 (T1b N0 M0).
Five months after VATS, the patient developed acute dyspnea, fatigue, and general malaise. Repeat positron emission tomography and CT showed diffuse metastatic disease in the liver (shown in ) and bones. The results of the complete blood counts were unremarkable, and there was no clinical or laboratory evidence of sepsis. The metabolic profile revealed hyperuricemia (16.4 mg/dL, normal 3.5–7.2 mg/dL), hyperkalemia (6.4 mmol/L, normal 3.5–5.1 mmol/L), hyperphosphatemia (5.9 mg/dL, normal 2.5–4.5 mg/dL), and normocalcemia (10.0 mg/dL). There was ARF (serum creatinine 4.3 mg/dL, normal 0.67–1.17 mg/dL), along with metabolic acidosis (bicarbonate level 12 mmol/L, normal 22–29 mmol/L). The results of the laboratory tests were consistent with TLS complicated by ARF. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, where he was given intravenous fluids and a dose of rasburicase (0.2 mg/kg intravenously over 30 min). The medical staff was planning to initiate hemodialysis, but the patient and his family elected to comfort care only, in view of the poor clinical conditions and the incurable nature of the disease. The patient died 2 days later. An autopsy was not performed. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).