A 60-year-old man was referred for evaluation of bilateral blurry vision, worse in the left eye. He reported no medical history and was not on any systemic medications. Ocular history was notable for allergic conjunctivitis and bilateral primary open-angle glaucoma, and intraocular pressures were successfully controlled with dorzolamide-timolol 22.3/6.8 mg/mL twice daily in both eyes and bimatoprost 0.01% nightly in both eyes. He occasionally used preservative-free artificial tears when allergy symptoms flared. The patient had documented normal corneal evaluations prior to symptom onset.
The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 three months prior to presentation, confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of a nasal swab specimen. Systemic symptoms lasted for approximately 7 days and included sore throat, chills, and nasal congestion. The patient experienced mild redness, pain, photophobia, and decreased vision in both eyes, left worse than right, towards the end of his systemic syndrome. He attributed his ocular symptoms to allergies and did not seek medical attention. However, his ocular symptoms significantly worsened after his systemic symptoms resolved. One month later, the patient was evaluated by his primary ophthalmologist and found to have bilateral interstitial keratitis. He was treated for presumed herpetic infection with oral valacyclovir 1 g three times daily for 10 days and topical prednisolone acetate 1% four times daily in both eyes. Symptoms improved over the ensuing 2 weeks, however, because bilateral visual acuity remained compromised, the patient was referred to our institution for corneal evaluation.
At presentation, the patient reported his only symptom to be bilaterally reduced vision, worse in his left eye. His best spectacle-corrected visual acuity was 20/80 in the right eye and 20/300 in the left eye. Intraocular pressures were 13 mmHg and 12 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. No relative afferent pupillary defect was noted. Slit lamp evaluation demonstrated that his conjunctiva was white and quiet bilaterally. Examination of the right cornea revealed superficial and deep scarring with stromal vascularization inferotemporally extending approximately 2.5 mm from the limbus. The left cornea had a more advanced clinical picture, with inferonasal superficial and deep scarring and associated vascularization extending approximately 5.5 mm from the limbus into the visual axis . The anterior chambers were deep and with no inflammation bilaterally. There was mild symmetric nuclear sclerosis that was consistent with the patient's age. Posterior segment examinations were unremarkable. Given the presence of significant corneal scarring, a rigid gas permeable contact lens over refraction was performed, which improved the visual acuity to 20/50 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye. The depth of corneal scarring was verified by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (Optovue Inc., Fremont, CA, USA) .
The clinical picture of bilateral IK prompted laboratory investigation. Laboratory results were positive for Epstein-Barr virus viral capsid antigen IgG antibody, Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen IgG antibody, and herpes simplex virus 1 IgG antibody . The remainder of the laboratory testing was negative, including evaluation for syphilis, Lyme disease, and tuberculosis.
The patient was monitored on topical prednisolone acetate 1% four times daily in both eyes, and no improvement in vision or corneal opacification was noted over the ensuing 3 months. Topical steroids were subsequently tapered. Given his functional vision using rigid gas permeable contact lenses, the patient has opted to continue this management course and thus keratoplasty is not planned for the foreseeable future.