An 11-year-old male presented to the emergency department after injuring his shoulder in a baseball game. The patient expressed that he felt a “pop” in his right shoulder while swinging a baseball bat in a Little League game. He denied both a direct blow and any other trauma. On physical exam, he had full, pain-free passive range of motion of the right shoulder but experienced pain with active range of motion, particularly with internal rotation against resistance. Scapular Y and standard anteroposterior shoulder radiographs were obtained and read as negative . He was later discharged with a muscle strain.
Over the course of the following year, the patient had continued shoulder pain and tightness and was thus unable to throw the ball effectively. As a result, he switched positions from the 3rd base to the 1st base to limit the amount of stress placed on his injured shoulder. Despite this transition, he repeatedly experienced episodes of his right shoulder “popping,” which were accompanied by pain.
Upon presenting to our institution 14 months postinjury, the patient was otherwise healthy and axillary X-rays demonstrated an age indeterminate fracture of the humeral head . Subsequent MRI showed heterogeneous signal and thickening of subscapularis fibers at the lesser tuberosity attachment as well as osseous fragmentation . These findings were suggestive of a prior avulsion fracture of the lesser tuberosity with interstitial tearing of the inferior subscapularis fibers. Surgery was recommended, and the patient and his family agreed to proceed accordingly. Repair of the subscapularis tendon was performed through the deltopectoral approach . Four Mason-Allen sutures were used to anchor and stabilize the subscapularis tendon with excellent compression. The fracture fragment was tied down to the lateral aspect of the lesser tuberosity and attached to the periosteum with nonabsorbable Ethibond sutures. After the operation, the patient did not stay in the hospital. He was immobilized in a sling for 6 weeks and then rehabbed using a subscapularis tendon repair protocol. The patient had full range of motion at the 3-month follow-up appointment. At the 1-year follow-up, he was asymptomatic, had full range of motion, noted no feelings of locking, and was able to return to throwing and all baseball activities.