A 27-year-old man was emergently transported to the operating room due to hemorrhagic shock and cardiac tamponade following penetrating chest trauma. The patient was confused, with a heart rate of 134/min and blood pressure (BP) of 72/34. Induction of anesthesia was performed with ketamine 30 mg and succinylcholine 70 mg, and the patient intubated.
The surgeon approached the patient with an anterolateral thoracotomy. Immediately after pericardiotomy the patient became asystole. Open cardiac massage was started for the patient and continued for about 40 min, when electrocardiographic monitoring revealed ventricular fibrillation. Amiodarone 300 mg was slowly infused for the patient. Because internal paddles were not available, extrathoracic defibrillation with monophasic shock 200 J using standard paddles was attempted. The cardiac rhythm immediately changed to sinus rhythm with a BP of 102/47. Magnesium sulfate 2 g was slowly infused for the patient. The BP remained stable in the remaining time of the operation. The stab wound (approximately 2 cm) in the apex of the left ventricle was sutured, pericardium was closed, chest tube was inserted, the ribs were approximated and finally chest wall was closed.
During the 40 min cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) the patient received only a small dose of hyoscine (5 mg) to guarantee his amnesia. From successful defibrillation to the end of surgery, two bolus doses of ketamine 20 mg was administered for the patient. Muscle relaxation was established with cisatracurium 4 mg intraoperatively and reversed with neostigmine and atropine at the end of surgery. The patient was mechanically ventilated with tidal volume of 400 ml and respiratory rate of 12/min. The fluids given to the patient in the operating room included isogroup partially cross-matched packed red blood cell 8 units, fresh frozen plasma 4 units, lactated Ringer’s solution 2000 ml, hypertonic saline 5% 200 ml, normal saline 1000 ml, and mannitol 20% 150 ml. The patient was transported to the surgical intensive care unit (ICU), while intubated but with spontaneous breathing. He was not awake but showed motor response to painful stimulation.
The patient remained intubated in the ICU for 48 h under sedation with morphine sulfate and midazolam. Magnesium sulfate 1 g/h and maintenance dose of amiodarone were infused for the first 24 h postoperatively. During this period, respiratory support was performed with continuous positive airway pressure mode with pressure support 10 cm H2O and positive end expiratory pressure equal to 5 cm H2O. The patient tolerated this mode comfortably. Laboratory data in the first postoperative day showed increased creatinine (Cr = 1.6), hyperkalemia (K = 7.5), hypocalcemia (Ca = 6.7), hemoglobin = 10.6 mg/dl, platelet count = 108,000 and international normalized ratio equal to 1.9. Other laboratory examinations, including blood sugar, liver function tests, and other electrolytes were within normal range. The patient was given kay oxalate for his hyperkalemia. Serum creatinine decreased gradually, and electrolytes normalized in the following days without the need for dialysis.
The patient was extubated in the 3rd postoperative day when he became conscious. Analgesia with elastomeric infusion pump containing morphine sulfate was continued for the next 3 days and then changed to oral analgesic medications. Chest tube was removed in the 5th postoperative day. On the 8th postoperative day, he was discharged to home with good general condition without any neurologic sequel.