A 64-year-old man presented to our department in December 2013 for progressive right frontal mass with dull aching for 9 months. His medical history was unremarkable except for 2 years of hypertension. The familial history was negative, with no neurocutaneous system disorders of the first grade relatives.
The vital signs were stable. A mass at the right frontal region could be palpated, about 5 cm in diameter, hard, fixed, with no obviously red, swollen, or tender of the superficial scalp.
Cranial CT scan showed an mixed iso-/hyperdensity mass in the right frontal cranial bone, about 60 to 198 Hu, measuring 34 × 21 mm, with clear margin. The peripheral bone appeared destructive absorption. The MR was contraindicated for metal implant .
The patient underwent total tumor resection through right frontal approach on 24 December, 2013. The tumor eroded both the external and internal lamina of the cranial bone. The tumor was solid, soft, tender, pale white, rich blood supplied, and was adhesive to the underlying dura mater. The dura mater was yet intact, sparing the parenchyma of the cortex. The intraoperative rapid frost pathologic examination revealed malignant changes, and so after tumor resection, the adjacent dura mater was removed as well which was reconstructed with self aponeurosis. The peripheral bone was resected to the negative zone. The excision margin was about 2 cm.
The pathologic examination reported amelanotic melanoma of intermediate grade, with positive of HMB45, MelanA (sparsely), S-100, Vimentin, CD99, SMA (sparsely), and CD34, and negative of CK, EMA, CEA, CK5/6, CK8/18, TTF-1, SYN, CD56, CgA, Desmin, MyoD1, TFE3, PAS, and PR. The Ki-67 was 20% to 30% (±) .
The further examination includes CT scan of the chest, abdominal, and the pelvic region and the PET scan of the whole brain and body, which were all negative.
The patient was discharged 3 days after the operation with no complications and went on for adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy (concomitant stereotactic radiosurgery + ipilimumab). For more than 5 months of follow-up, the patient recovers well with no recurrence or related sequelae.
We summarized the CNS melanocytic lesions of our neurosurgery department since 2008. Then we used the search engine of PubMed with keywords of melanoma or melanomatosis or melanocytoma or melanocytosis, and CNS and primary and further searched with keywords of CNS or brain or cranial or spinal, and amelanotic.
Thirty-two cases of CNS melanocytic lesions of our department were defined since 2008. Forty-three English reports of CNS melanocytic lesions and 14 reports about CNS amelanotic melanoma were searched. The details were summarized in the tables .