A 74-year-old woman was found unresponsive outdoors, and the ambient temperature on the arrival of emergency medical services to the scene was −1.7°C. At that time, she was in shock, with a body temperature of 24.6°C. During her transfer to our hospital, she suffered cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA). On arrival, she was still in CPA, and her cardiac rhythm was ventricular fibrillation. Veno-arterial ECMO was initiated for resuscitation and rewarming, and she became responsive to commands after a few minutes. Rewarming was aimed at increasing her body temperature to 36°C as rapidly as possible with the inclusion of a heater-cooler device with ECMO. Whole-body computed tomography scan with contrast enhancement showed no abnormalities that could explain the cause of CPA. She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), and the return of spontaneous circulation was achieved at the time of admission without adrenaline and defibrillation. The left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction was approximately 60% estimated visually.
Her blood pressure suddenly dropped 1 h after the ICU admission, and echocardiography showed severe diffuse hypokinesis of the LV wall and apical akinesis. Coronary angiography undertaken on day 2 indicated that coronary arteries were intact . Left ventriculography showed typical takotsubo-like dysfunction in the end-systolic phase and hyperdynamic basal contraction, and apical akinesis as well as a T-wave inversion in multiple leads on the electrocardiogram . Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with takotsubo cardiomyopathy. Left ventricular wall motion gradually improved, and she was taken off ECMO on day 3 and extubated on day 5. Echocardiography on day 6 showed that abnormalities in the LV wall motion had almost disappeared.
She was discharged from the ICU on day 8. She confessed having ingested several sleeping pills. Therefore, she was moved to the psychiatric ward to receive psychological treatment on day 12 and was discharged on day 43 without neurological deficits.