A 36-year-old woman, Gravida 3 Para 1, spontaneous abortion 2, was admitted to Tu Du Hospital due to spontaneous labor with vaginal bleeding sign. The patient’s medical history was otherwise unremarkable. Her obstetric history recorded a previous cesarean section for breech presentation and two miscarriages. At hospitalization, the patient had normal vital signs. She was at term after an uncomplicated gestation except for placenta previa Grade I. She had a known abnormal placentation site at 28 weeks of gestational age.
Therefore, an emergency C-section was scheduled. Before surgery, the patient was normotensive with a pulse of 82 beats per minute (bpm) and respiratory rate of 20 times per min. Her pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) was 21.6 kg/m2. In this pregnancy, her BMI was 25.6 kg/m2 (maternal weight: 54 kg, maternal height: 145 cm). Her legs were noted without gross varicose veins. Complete blood count was normal; coagulation parameters included prothrombin time (PT) of 98%, international normalized ration (INR) of 1.01, temps de quick (TQ) of 13.4 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 28.8 s, and plasma fibrinogen of 480 mg/dL. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia of 116 bpm. The chest radiograph was normal. Obstetric examination revealed infrequent episodes of mild uterine contraction, a closed cervix, and intact membranes. Ultrasound showed normal fetal development in transverse lie, with an estimated weight of 3100 g with normal Doppler blood flow. The cardiotocography (CTG) proceeded as Group I by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists criteria (ACOG 2009). The airway was Mallampati grade II.
At the beginning of the cesarean delivery, her blood pressure was at 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 100 bpm, and peripheral transcutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 100%. The patient underwent general anesthesia with tracheal intubation. After 10 min of surgery, a healthy male newborn weighing 3100 g was delivered with reported Apgar scores of 7 and 8 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, and a normal placenta was gently extracted. Transparent amniotic fluid was approximately 500 ml. However, the patient’s cardiopulmonary system collapsed immediately after placental extraction. At this time, her vital signs deteriorated with blood pressure (BP) at 90/60 mmHg, tachycardia at 125 beats/min, and SpO2 suddenly dropping to 86%. Shock index (SI) of 1.4 (0.5–0.7). Therefore, the initial differential diagnosis was amniotic embolism versus acute pulmonary embolism . A “Red Code” was called by anesthesia while the obstetricians continued to manage the surgery. A multidisciplinary team managed the resuscitation. She responded to a total of 30 mg doses of ephedrine.
During surgery, the obstetrician focused on hemostasis carefully. Bilateral artery ligation, placental bed sutures, and B-Lynch compression sutures were all performed due to the high risk of PPH. Uterotonic drugs including oxytocin, methyl ergonovine, carboprost, and tranexamic acid were administered. The uterus was contracted, so the team decided to preserve the uterus. The uterus and abdomen were quickly and carefully closed to minimize the surgical time. An abdominal drain was placed. Total estimated blood loss was measured at 500 ml and surgical time duration was 100 min. Urine output was measured at 100 ml during surgery.
Meanwhile, urgent transthoracic echocardiography showed a sizable thrombus in the pulmonary vasculature, in the subclavian vein, in the right jugular vein, and in the right ventricular cavity . Thus, a diagnosis of pulmonary embolism was established. Ultrasonic assessment demonstrated no abnormalities in the lower limb veins.
After surgery, the patient was transferred immediately to the intensive care unit (ICU) where she was cared for by a multidisciplinary team consisting of obstetrician, anesthetist, cardiologist, hematologist, and sonographer. Ventilation was maintained by a positive pressure-supported respirator. She was sedated, paralyzed, and maintained with a narcotic, an anticonvulsant drug, and a muscle relaxant drug (Fentanyl 100 mg 02 ampules combined with Midazolam 5 mg 05 ampules intravenous infusion at 6 ml/h, with Rocuronium 10 mg/ml × 5 ampules in 45 ml sodium chloride 0.9% for 50 ml infused via an intravenous electric pump at 10 ml/h). Additional analgesia included subcutaneous morphine sulfate 10 mg and diclofenac 100-mg rectal suppository.
D-dimer levels were markedly increased to 46,700 ng/ml. The coagulation profile showed a weak to moderate blood clot contraction with PT = 62%, INR = 1.29, TQ = 13.8 s, TCK = 34 s, and fibrinogen = 136 mg/dl. Hemoglobin level fell to 7.6 g/dl. The patient was transfused with 2 units of AB-positive packed red blood cells (350 ml/unit) and was given 4 packs of fresh frozen plasma (200 ml/unit), as well as all 10 packs of cryoprecipitate (50 ml/unit). The patient received a therapeutic dose of one ampule of low-molecular-weight heparin (25,000 IU/5 ml/ampule). The abdomen drained 200 ml of abdominal cavity fluid without active bleeding. An intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotic (tarzocin 4.5 g/ampule every 6 h) was given to prevent the secondary infection.
After counseling with an interdisciplinary team, the patient was transferred to Cho Ray Hospital, a tertiary general hospital for further management after 16 h of obstetric and hemodynamic stabilization. At the tertiary center, chest X-ray was normal, and cardiac ultrasound revealed mild right ventricular dilation and normal left systolic function. Unfortunately, the computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) confirmed nearly total occlusion of segmental arterial branches from the upper lobes of both lungs, the left and the right lower lobar branches. The descending branch of the left pulmonary artery was partially occluded; the lateral basal and the posterior basal arterial branches of the left lower lobe were completely occluded. Both lungs had small pleural effusions and passive atelectasis of inferior areas. Abdominal ultrasound showed free air, infiltration, and a small amount of fluid in the lower right abdomen. The hepatic and renal function tests as well as the electrolyte profile were within normal limits. However, high sensitivity Troponin 1 and NT-proBNP were elevated at 637.5 pg/mL and 96.75 pmol/L, respectively. The complete blood count test showed moderate anemia with Hb of 79 g/L (7.9 g/dL), an increased white blood cell count (WBC) of 17.69 G/L, and a low platelet count of 119 G/L.
At the tertiary hospital, the patient received 2 additional units of blood and was intensively treated with anti-coagulant therapy. Specifically, heparin 10,000 IU was first administered with 50 ml sodium chloride 0.9% solution, giving a bolus of 15 ml (3000 IU) and maintenance of 4–6 ml per hour (18 IU/kg) monitored by activated clotting time (ACT) levels (147–172 s). On the second day, the patient was extubated; oxygenation was supported with a nasal cannula. Heparin was stopped. Lovenox 60 mg/0.6 ml was subcutaneously injected twice a day at 12-h intervals. Additionally, she received pantoprazole for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) during her admission to the intensive care unit. She was discharged after 2 weeks in good health, with normal consciousness and without neurological injuries. The patient and her family felt grateful to the team for saving her life.