A 29-year-old female presented with left flank pain for 4 months before admission. There was no hematuria. A large lump was palpated on left flank and there was costovertebral angle tenderness. Laboratory examination revealed low hemoglobin (Hb = 8.8 g/dL), hematocrit (28.1%), red blood cell count (3.68 million/µL), MCV (76.4 fl), MCH (23.9 pg), and MCHC (31.3 g/dL). There was an increased platelet and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Urinalysis revealed high bacterial count. Abdominopelvic CT demonstrated both kidneys in normal shape and size. The cortical and medullary boundaries were clear. A dense mass (HU 40) with surrounding gliosis (HU 20) was seen in the left part of the renal cortex, which was well circumscribed and regular. After contrast administration, an increase in the solid component (HU 60) was seen. The size of the lesion was approximately 7.5 × 11.4 × 11.8 cm . The patient received blood transfusion for anemia correction. But it was later found that the lump was enlarged and the patient also complained about frequent dizziness and dark vision.
The patient underwent left radical nephrectomy with wide perirenal excision and paraaortic lymph nodes resection. Macroscopic examination showed that the kidney looked lumpy, brownish gray in color, and cystic, with a size of 12 × 5 × 4 cm. In the cystic part, the size was 13 × 9 ×13 cm. On lamellar cutting, there were cystic areas with brownish red liquid and the inner surface was a necrotic, brittle, and hemorrhagic mass. The ureter was 5 cm long and 0.5 cm in diameter. Microscopic examination from necrotic and hemorrhagic masses tissue revealed lysed cells with minimal bleeding and infiltration of inflammatory cells . Tissue preparation from the periphery of the lysis area revealed a loose tissue with clusters of polymorphic, round, oval, spindle, stellate cells with enlarged nuclei, vesicular, and difficult to see cytoplasm . Multinucleated giant cells and rhabdoid cells were also found. No lympho-vascular invasion was found. Based on these findings, it was concluded that it was sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma.
Macroscopic examination of the excised lymph nodes revealed that they were gray in color, chewy, and 1 cm in diameter. Microscopic examination revealed a proliferation of secondary lymphoid follicles in the cortex that extended to the paracortex. Around the follicle there was bleeding accompanied by a light neutrophil infiltration . No signs of malignancy were found. And it was concluded that it was reactive follicular hyperplasia. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with SRCC with clear cell carcinoma (grade IV) as a differential diagnosis.
Three-months post-surgery, the patient had no complaints and was in good condition; laboratory examination showed low LDH (128 U/L) in blood. In urine it was found that patient has high leucocyte esterase (500 cell/microliter), high leucocyte (294.2/microliter), and high bacterial count (3121.1/microliter). Other blood examination and urinalysis were within normal limits. Abdominal CT scan showed that neither images of mass nor enlargement of lymph node were found .