A 36-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital for worsening renal function. At the age of 17, he was diagnosed with diffuse cutaneous SSc with a positive anti-Scl-70 antibody. When he was 26-years-old, he developed proteinuria with positive anti-dsDNA antibody, hypocomplementemia, and polyarthritis. A kidney biopsy revealed class V lupus nephritis. He was treated with intensive immunosuppressive therapy of prednisolone (PSL) 40 mg/day (0.6 mg/kg/day) and tacrolimus (TAC) 3 mg/day; however, his renal function resulted in end-stage renal disease. At age 30-years-old, he underwent ABO-compatible kidney transplantation. The transplantation was successful, and he had been treated with PSL, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), and TAC. However, he started suffering from cytomegalovirus (CMV) disease repeatedly. MMF was switched to everolimus (EVL) to control CMV disease 6 weeks prior to admission. His kidney function had been stable with serum creatinine (sCr) around 1.10 mg/dL but declined 2 weeks before admission.
On admission, he was asymptomatic. His medication included PSL 5 mg/day, TAC 5 mg/day, and EVL 1.5 mg/day. His blood pressure was 118/70 mmHg. Physical examination revealed fine crackles in the bilateral lungs, marked skin thickening extended to the trunk resulting in the fingers’ contracture. Multiple ulcers were observed on the tips of the fingers, elbows, and knees. Blood tests showed sCr 1.65 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate 40.1 ml/min/1.73m2, and anti-dsDNA antibody was negative. CMV antigenemia was not detected. The TAC and EVL troughs were 2.2 ng/mL and 4.4 ng/mL, respectively. Urine protein was 0.50 g/gCr. Granular casts were detected with no microscopic hematuria.
Renal biopsy showed focal destructive tubulitis and interstitial mononuclear cell infiltration with multinuclear giant cells , indicating granulomatous interstitial nephritis (GIN). Secondary causes for GIN such as drugs, viruses, tuberculosis, and sarcoidosis were not evident; he had not taken any medications including nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and antibiotics. He had no symptoms or serological and radiological abnormalities suggestive of viruses, tuberculosis, or sarcoidosis. Intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg was administered, and PSL dose was increased to 30 mg/day (0.8 mg/kg/day). EVL was switched to MMF. His renal function ameliorated tentatively but worsened a week later . His platelet counts decreased from 300,000 to 150,000/μL, while neither schistocytes nor low haptoglobin were observed. Three weeks after worsening renal function again, diarrhea appeared along with serum CMV-PCR 51.2 copies/mL, leading to the diagnosis of CMV enteritis. Although intravenous ganciclovir improved enteritis quickly, his renal function continued deteriorating and his platelet counts had not recovered; therefore, a second kidney biopsy was performed.
The specimen contained four glomeruli, one of which showed global sclerosis. All remaining glomeruli collapsed. A glomerulus showed double contours of the glomerular basement membrane and microaneurysm . Diffuse interstitial mononuclear cell infiltration and fibrosis were found, but multinuclear giant cells disappeared. Mucoid intimal thickening of the arteriole was conspicuous and microvascular thrombi were present in some areas . There was moderate fibrotic intimal thickening in the interlobular arteries and severe intimal hyalinosis in the arterioles. There was no evidence of vasculitis, including peritubular capillaritis. Immunofluorescence was all negative, including C4d. Electron microscopy was not performed due to sample errors. We diagnosed it as acute thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA). He showed no signs of antibody-mediated rejection, active lupus nephritis, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), or hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS). The TAC trough had been under 5 ng/mL. CMV enteritis had not occurred at the time renal deterioration appeared again. Therefore, we concluded his TMA as normotensive SRC, considering his blood pressure had not elevated. Temocapril 2 mg/day was added, and the deterioration of renal function stopped at about sCr 3.6 mg/dL . However, his renal function continued to worsen gradually, leading to the initiation of hemodialysis 1 month later.