An 8-year-old girl was admitted to our general ward because of left lower extremity pain and ulceration. In outpatient visits she received analgesics as it was assumed that the pain was musculoskeletal. The chief complaint had begun 80 days prior to presentation. Left leg pain gradually increased from a simple sore foot only after playing or walking to a severe continuous pain that became aggravated during the night. At first, the skin over the shin became scaly, then erythema and ulcer appeared. The girl's parents denied any recent trauma.
The patient was born at 28 weeks' gestational age with 570 g weight and 29 cm height. There was no history of exchange or umbilical catheterization in the neonatal period. Expect for a delay in speaking, the rest of her developmental milestones were normal. The postnatal hearing screening test was normal. Growth parameters were always undesirable. At the age of 2 years, she experienced a prolonged seizure and right hemiplegia due to a cerebrovascular accident. Thrombophilia was not diagnosed when the accident happened, but aspirin and enoxaparin were started. After that, phenobarbital was started because of convulsions, but since drug tapering was associated with stuttering and prolonged aphasia, the drug was continued. She was the third child of non-related parents. The other children were normal.
On physical examination, she was a sweet girl interested in socializing. Her general condition was good but she seemed tired and sad, because of difficulty in falling asleep for a long time. Her head circumference, weight and height measurements were 35 cm, 7 kg and 77 cm, respectively. Her bird-like face was remarkable. Her hair was sparse and thin. Her skin was highly pigmented. There was no pallor or jaundice ( and ). Body temperature was within the normal range. Other vital signs, including blood pressure and level of consciousness, were normal.
The left foot was cool and bluish compared to the other side. The dorsalis pedis pulses of both extremities were not detectable. The popliteal artery pulse was not detectable on the left side but the right side was normal. Femoral pulses were normally palpable. No edema or varicose veins were apparent. The skin of the left extremity was shiny and a 5 by 3 cm corrosive ulcer with well-demarcated and gangrenous margins was evident on the shin. The ulcer bed was white and dark red without any obvious secretion . There were also two smaller wounds on the fourth toe and anterior aspect of the knee on the same side. The ankle brachial index was 0.2 and the resting ankle pressure was 40 mmHg. Oxygen saturation was 35% and 95% in the left and right toes, respectively.
Sensory system examinations of both legs were normal at the level of patient cooperation. However, the patient complained about a burning sensation in the left extremity. The muscle strength of the right upper and lower limbs was slightly lower than that of the left, because of the previous cerebral cardiovascular event. Her heart, lungs and abdomen were normal.
Since we were suspicious of a vascular problem according to the history and physical examination, we urgently asked for a consultation with a vascular surgeon and ordered Doppler ultrasound and limb angiography. Doppler ultrasound revealed a monophasic spectral wave and low peak systolic velocity in the left limb. In parallel, CT angiography confirmed long segmental narrowing and significant stenosis in the left superficial femoral artery .
The potential complications of endovascular surgery in such a patient with small vasculature were described to the parents and they did not consent to surgical intervention. On the other hand, there is not sufficient evidence on the safety and efficacy of several medical treatments in pediatrics. Therefore, conservative wound care, organ placement at the level of heart, aspirin and better nutrition were recommended.
On the follow-up visit, the condition of the wound had improved. The patient's mood, appetite and sleep were not acceptable, so a psychological consultation was requested.