A 27-year-old white male presented in December 2015 for evaluation of a relapsed conventional chordoma arising from the lumber spine. His diagnosis dated back to August 2013, when he underwent additional evaluation due to a recurrent lower back pain. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine and sacrum revealed a solid expansive lesion on L2 topography, with an extensive epidural soft tissue component, infiltrating the bone marrow and determining compression of the dural sac. At that time, a core biopsy was performed, which revealed a lesion consistent with a grade 2 chordoma with positive immunostaining for pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), S-100 protein, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and Ki-67 index of 20%. The immunohistochemical assessment of brachyury was not conclusive. Three months after the diagnosis, the patient underwent L2 vertebrectomy with negative microscopic margins that confirmed the diagnosis of chordoma of the lumbar spine.
Surgical treatment was followed by adjuvant intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) to the tumor bed (45 Gy in 25 fractions), and he was then managed expectantly until September/2015, when he presented with disease relapse. MRI of the lumbosacral spine showed multiple lesions of cystic appearance and of small dimensions distributed in paravertebral soft parts at the level of L2, in the right psoas muscle and in the vertebral bodies of T11 and T12, measuring up to 2.2 cm, the largest diameter, without significant contrast enhancement. A new biopsy was then performed and reviewed by a reference pathologist, with histological confirmation of atypical chordoma. The neoplasia showed an expansive and multilobulated pattern of invasion and aspect of chordoma, with epithelioid and eosinophilic cells in the chondromyxoid matrix background. The mitosis figures were observed up to 04/10 high-power fields (HPFs) . There were no areas of dedifferentiation (INI-1 intact). Despite the morphological and immunoexpression of cytokeratins, EMA and vimentin in neoplastic cells, expression of brachyury in the neoplasia was not detected . Of note, even though it is an unusual finding, negative brachyury can be observed in rare cases, predominantly solid chordomas comprising more atypical cells with mitoses and necrosis .
A repeat MRI performed after 1 month revealed an increase in previously existing lesions, compression of the dural sac and medullary cone by a lesion extending from T11 to T12, and additional noncontiguous lesions at the level of L2 and multiple nodules measuring up to 1 cm in the right posterior abdominal musculature. In view of the spinal cord compression, a new surgical approach was recommended, and the patient underwent a T11-T12 level partial resection/decompression.
Eight months later, disease progression was once again documented in the thoracolumbar transition and the patient underwent another surgical procedure, with partial resection of the epidural lesion between T11 and T12, as well as the additional lesions between L1-L2 and L3. One month later, the control MRI showed an increase in the dimensions of the preexisting lesions in the lumbar spine and in the abdominal musculature, without new foci. The patient was then treated with image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT) at the dose of 54 Gy in the surgical bed and in regions of gross disease (bilateral paravertebral between T10 and S1). One month after the end of the radiotherapy treatment, a new MRI was performed , which indicated disease progression outside the radiated area.
Considering the lack of salvage therapies available in this scenario, a FoundationOne®Heme genomic profiling assay was requested, which revealed 5 nondrugable genomic alterations: ATM Q2593∗ mutation, ARID1A S2149fs∗47 mutation, CDKN2A/B loss, EP300 L415P mutation (subclonal), and MLL3 Y306∗ mutation. INI-1/SMARCB1 was included in the panel and showed no mutations. Despite the rationale for the use of poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors in patients with loss-of-function ATM mutations, there were no ongoing clinical trials for those alterations at that time.
Given the limited therapeutic options in the scenario, systemic treatment with pazopanib 800 mg/day was recommended. The patient developed grade 3 neutropenia, requiring dose reduction (400 mg daily, followed by 400 mg alternated with 800 mg per day), with subsequent good tolerance.
Restaging scans were performed following approximately 3 months of treatment with pazopanib, showing a reduction in size of previously described lesions in anterior paravertebral region, right psoas, and abdominal musculature, and stable dimensions of remaining foci of disease; no new lesions were characterized . The sum of the target lesions measurements showed a 23.1% reduction between baseline and posttreatment images . Although reduction in target lesions was observed, accompanied by clinical improvement, we could not confirm a partial response according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors 1.1 (RECIST 1.1). Focal growth in the form a paravertebral lesion was noted after 9 months of therapy, accompanied by sustained control of additional target lesions. Decision was made to proceed with salvage surgical resection of the area of progression. Due to the stability of nonexcised foci of disease, treatment with pazopanib was resumed after the surgery, and the patient continues to endure prolonged clinical benefit more than 15 months after treatment initiation.