A 45-year-old man presented with pain in the left thigh and limitation of movement at the left hip and knee joint for one month. Ten days prior to presentation, his symptoms had worsened, and he began to have flank pain. He was afebrile. He had no history of diabetes mellitus, neoplasm, or gastrointestinal or genitourinary disease. The pain exacerbated when he lifted his left thigh against the examiner's hand. He reported no tenderness to palpation or percussion of his lumbar vertebrae. Laboratory studies showed an elevated sedimentation rate (ESR) of 55 mm/h, white cell count (WBC) 10.4 × 109/L and C-reactive protein (CRP) 183 mg/L. Stool and urine tests were normal.
One week after he was admitted to the hospital, the patient became febrile to >39°C. Ultrasound revealed a bulky, non-uniform hypoechoic mass anterior to the left hip, which extended intra-abdominally up to the iliac fossa, and to the position of the psoas muscle. CT and MRI of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a large lesion with abnormal signal intensities in the left psoas muscle . MRI and emission computerized tomography (ECT) excluded spondylodiscitis and osteomyelitis. Ultrasound guided percutaneous drainage yielded 300 ml of pus from the psoas muscle; culture of this material detected Staphylococcus aureus. Blood culture was negative.
Penicillin (3.2 million units twice daily) and levofloxacin (2 g twice daily) were given. A drain was left in situ after the percutaneous drainage, and was removed 5 days later when the catheter had had no output for 2 consecutive days. After the surgery, the patient reported relief of pain. His temperature returned to normal; however, ten days later, the patient complained of persistent pain in his left thigh. Plain film and CT scan revealed that the abscess had extended to the thigh adductors extending almost to the knee , even while the abscess in the psoas muscle had decreased in size.
Open surgical drainage was performed at the flank and at the thigh; yielding 350 ml of pus from the thigh. Postoperative drain was removed 10 days later when the catheter output was nil for 2 consecutive days. Antibiotics were administered for 3 weeks, and the patient made a good recovery. Follow-up CT scan performed one month after surgery revealed complete resolution of the abscess.