A 57-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the emergency department for refractory left flank pain and gross hematuria.
Because of intermittent left flank pain, he underwent rigid URSL and J-J ureteral stent placement for symptomatic left ureteral stone at another medical institution. The following procedure was performed under spinal anesthesia: Cystolithotripsy for one vesical stone (size, 11 mm × 7 mm), dilatation of the left ureteral orifice with a metal cone-tip dilator, and an 8 French ureteroscope with lithoclast for the left middle-third of the ureteral stone (size, 10 mm × 7 mm). However, massive bleeding after severe cough was noted during the procedure, and a J-J ureteral stent was inserted for ureteral protection. The patient was transferred to our emergency department for refractory left flank pain, gross hematuria, and severe anemia.
The patient had received ESWL for a stone in the left kidney six months before the current episode. The patient was still experiencing intermittent left flank pain due to residual renal and ureter stones. He denied antiplatelet/anticoagulant therapy and recent traumatic injury.
The patient had a history of hypertension, chronic kidney disease, and gout. He did not have a history of congenital coagulation disorder or any known malignancy. His family history was not contributory. The patient denied tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption habits.
Left flank ecchymosis and knocking tenderness .
Before admission, the patient had undergone component therapy with packed red blood cells for severe anemia wherein his hemoglobin level decreased to 6.8 g/dL (baseline hemoglobin level, 14-15 g/dL). Blood test results on admission to our emergency department are presented in Table . Relative anemia was noted, with a hemoglobin level of 12.7 g/dL; however, the platelet count was within the normal range. The activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was 36.4 s, which was slightly above the normal values (24.0-34.9 s), whereas prothrombin time was 11.4 s, which was within the normal range (8-12 s). His renal function showed mild recovery after treatment.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a contrast extravasation of approximately 1.8 cm and 0.8 cm over the upper and lower renal cortex, respectively, in the arterial phase ; however, both did not increase in size or attenuation in the delayed phase . A > 10-cm-thick subcapsular hematoma accumulation was noted along with an intravesical hematoma. Symptomatic pseudoaneurysm with active bleeding was suspected.