A man in his early 40s had a low-grade fever and was positive for SARS-CoV-2 in the polymerase chain reaction result 5 days after. He did not have a smoking history and underlying pulmonary diseases. Due to no symptoms except for the low-grade fever, chest X-ray had not been performed at diagnosis of COVID-19. However, 1 day after diagnosis, he suddenly complained of left chest pain with dyspnea and visited our hospital. Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37.7 °C, an oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 93% without supplemental oxygenation, blood pressure of 117/81 mmHg and heart rate of 99 beats/min. Laboratory tests revealed a normal leukocyte count (7320 cells/μL) and slightly elevated serum C-reactive protein levels (0.30 mg/dL). Chest X-ray revealed significant pneumothorax in the left lung field , with 78% of the Light index . Chest computed tomography (CT) performed to determine appropriate thoracic space for drainage tube revealed left lung collapse without pneumomediastinum and patchy ground-glass opacity (GGO) in the right lower lobe. We inserted a chest drainage tube (20 Fr) into the intrathoracic space without negative pressure 9 h after he reported chest pain and his respiratory symptoms disappeared and SpO2 improved to 98%; however, after 2 h, he re-experienced dyspnea with a lower SpO2 of 92%. Chest X-ray revealed an improved collapse but infiltration of the expanded lung. Chest CT performed on the following day to distinguish re-expansion pulmonary edema from COVID-19 pneumonia revealed extensive consolidation with ground-glass opacities in all lobes of the expanded left lung . No significant morphological abnormality as a risk for pneumothorax has been observed. Re-expansion pulmonary edema was diagnosed instead of COVID-19 pneumonia progression based on this clinical course. His dyspnea and oxygenation status gradually improved without any intervention, including supplemental oxygen, diuretics or steroid administration, and abnormal lung involvements observed in the chest CT were diminished 7 days after the chest drainage procedure .