The patient is a 47 year old Native American female without significant past medical history or known CD risk factors who presented after being critically injured in a motor vehicle accident. During her trauma evaluation and stabilization, a posterior mediastinal mass was noted as shown in . She was taken to the operating room for multiple internal injuries necessitating surgical repair. Visualization of the mass was noted but was not attended to at that time. After a several month recovery, she returned to the thoracic surgeon for follow-up and further workup of the mass. Biopsy was performed via mediastinoscopy and pathology results revealed angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia, consistent with CD. CT and PET-CT scans were performed which showed the mass to be 5.5 cm x 4.6 cm with a peak SUV of 5.3. Due to the location of the mass and history of recent prior surgery, she was determined not to be a good candidate for complete surgical resection. She was then referred to consider radiotherapy treatment options.
Treatment simulation was performed in the supine position and immobilization via a vac-lock. Treatment planning was performed on Eclipse External Beam Planning 7.5.51 (Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto CA). Given the midline, posterior location of the mass, IMRT was utilized to reduce the dose gradient and toxicity to the surrounding normal tissues. The gross tumor volume (GTV) was contoured and expanded 5 mm to create the planning target volume (PTV). The patient was treated to a total dose of 4320 cGy. RT was delivered in nine initial once daily fractions of 180 cGy to a total dose of 1620. She was then placed on a 10 day break followed by re-simulation and treatment planning. She then completed the total 4320 cGy dose prescription without interruption in 180 cGy once daily fractions. Radiation therapy (RT) beam arrangements are shown in . The initial PTV volume was 235.7 cm3 and the re-CT PTV following treatment break was reduced to 120 cm3, a reduction of approximately 50.9%. Cumulative dose volume constraints allowed the mean total lung dose to be limited to 961 cGy and the 20% volume to be limited to 1706 cGy. The heart was limited to a mean dose of 939 cGy, and the expanded cord mean to 1163 cGy. Dose volume histograms of each plan (pre and post treatment break) and a cumulative plan sum are shown in , , and . A summary of mean and max dose statistics is shown in . No acute side effects were noted during treatment.
At a follow-up of ten months, the patient has had no disease progression. She did develop RTOG grade III pneumonitis at three months follow-up which was managed by steroids. Follow-up PETCT showed the mass to be stable at 3.9 cmx 5.1 cm and SUV values to be at background. No late effects have occurred.