A 43-year-old white female (II:2) presented with reduced vision in her right eye, inadvertently noticed when closing her left eye. On examination visual acuities were 6/60 OD and 6/7.5 OS. Fundoscopy revealed bilateral central atrophy, seen clearly on autofluorescence imaging (AF) . Eight years later AF imaging showed a preserved small central spot of AF, surrounded by a reduced AF signal corresponding to the area of atrophy, which increased in size over time, with a ring of AF. . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging, 10 years after initial presentation, showed loss of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) . These features were consistent with a macular dystrophy, with features of bull’s eye maculopathy (BEM). Electrophysiology testing showed that the pattern electro-retinogram was significantly affected in both eyes; the rod electro-retinogram (ERG) showed slight increase in implicit times of both ‘a’ and ‘b’ waves with significant reduction of the ‘b’ wave amplitude. The photopic and 30 Hz flicker stimuli were normal; the EOG light rise was borderline reduced in the right eye, and normal in the left . In view of the family history of Stargardt macular dystrophy (STGD1) and the BEM phenotype genetic testing for ABCA4 variants was undertaken. Sanger sequencing was used to screen all 50 exons and approximately 50 base pairs of flanking intronic regions (standard practice at the time) in the proband. This identified a single previously reported pathogenic variant c.4685 T > C, p.(I1562T) , in the proband (II/2, Fig. ), but a second variant was not identified; (at that time, 15–30% of STGD patients were reported as having only one detectable mutation in ABCA4 [–]). A family survey was then performed including her sister (II:4) and father (I:2), who were consented and examined. Her sister (II:4), previously diagnosed with STGD1 aged 18 years old, was re-examined at 46 years. Visual acuities were 6/60 right and left, and fundoscopy showed marked central atrophy . The atrophy seen on AF and OCT imaging were similar to that seen in the proband, but were more advanced . Multimodal imaging at follow up 4 years later, aged 54 years, showed a further increase in central atrophy . Their father (I:2), aged 70 years old, was asymptomatic with visual acuities of 6/6 right, and left with a normal appearing fundus . However, his AF imaging showed abnormalities of central stippled reduction in signal, consistent with early macular atrophy , but less advanced than that seen in his daughters . Nine years after his diagnosis, aged 79, his visual acuities had deteriorated to 6/60 right, and left and he had developed central atrophic changes similar to his daughters . Electrophysiology results were not available for II:4, or I:II. None of the family had any co-existing systemic disorders.
Segregation analysis in the family revealed that her father (I:2) carried the c.4685 T > C variant, but the proband’s affected sister (II:4) did not, indicating that this ABCA4 variant was not relevant to the macular dystrophy in this family .
Targeted sequencing of 70 genes associated with retinal degeneration was performed in the proband . A heterozygous variant, c.121C > T (p.R41W), was identified in the cone-rod homeobox (CRX) gene. Sanger sequencing confirmed the variant was present in all three affected family members . This variant has previously been reported as a dominant pathogenic variant that causes cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) . The family were informed of the genetic diagnosis and had follow-up genetic counselling for an autosomal dominant disease inheritance pattern associated with variable expressivity and reduced penetrance.