A 55-year-old woman visited our clinic because of typical biliary colic. She had undergone cholecystectomy because of symptomatic gallstone disease 3 years earlier. For the last 6 months she had suffered from intermittently occurring colic. The pain was located in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. The patient identified the complaint as being the same pain as she had experienced prior to the cholecystectomy. The colic was triggered by ingestion of fat. The patient also noted short periods of discoloured stools and dark urine without jaundice. In addition, the patient had classical reflux complaints with heartburn and acid regurgitation.
Laboratory investigations did not show any signs of cholestasis: aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) 15 U/l (normal value 10 to 40 U/l), alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) 17 U/l (normal value 5 to 45 U/l), alkaline phosphatase 59 U/l (normal value 40 to 120 U/l) and bilirubin 9 μmol/l (normal value 1 to 15 μmol/l). However, an ultrasound investigation of the upper abdomen showed a slightly dilated common bile duct of 8 mm, with signs of small stones. Owing to the reflux complaints, an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed. A hiatus hernia with reflux oesophagitis grade III according to Savary and Miller was diagnosed. It was decided that the patient should be treated with pantoprazol 40 mg daily. An ERCP was performed 4 weeks later. During this period there were no changes in the clinical condition with the exception of complete remission of the reflux complaints. A normal major papilla was seen. The pancreatic duct was normal. Despite several attempts it was not possible to gain access to the common bile duct. As the common bile duct was dilated it was decided to perform a precut papillotomy with the needle knife. Despite several attempts the common bile duct could not be cannulated and at that point the procedure was terminated.
Several hours later the patient complained of increasing pain in the upper part of her abdomen. The abdomen was tender with an absence of peristalsis. Examination of the blood revealed a serum amylase of 1142 U/l (normal value 60 to 220 U/l), ASAT of 1142 U/l (normal value 10 to 40 U/l), ALAT of 1220 U/l (normal value 5 to 45 U/l), alkaline phosphatase of 131 U/l (normal value 40 to 120 U/l) and γGT of 392 U/l (normal value 5 to 35 U/l). There was a leukocytosis of 15.6 × 109/litre. An X-ray of the abdomen showed air in the retroperitoneal space. The clinical diagnosis was post-ERCP pancreatitis with perforation due to the precut papillotomy.
Computed tomography (CT) scanning with contrast enhancement 2 days later showed a right-sided pleural effusion and a collection of air in the retroperitoneal space. The head and corpus of the pancreas were normal; some infiltration in the region of the tail of the pancreas was seen. There was no necrosis. The common bile duct was dilated with a diameter of 1 cm.
The liver enzymes and hyperamylasaemia returned to normal within 3 days. On account of persisting leukocytosis and a body temperature of 38.3°C antibiotic therapy was started (cefuroxim and metronidazole). Blood cultures were negative. Enteral feeding via a tube in the proximal jejunum was started. Eight days after the onset of the pancreatitis the patient again developed fever (39.5°C) without obvious explanation. Blood investigations still showed a leukocytosis (17.3 × 109/ml), with an acute phase reaction (elevation of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein). This time blood culture was positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antibiotic therapy was changed to ciprofloxacin. Her body temperature became subfebrile.
A CT scan taken 7 days later showed normalisation of the pancreas. The infiltration in the tail of the pancreas had almost subsided and the retroperitoneal air had disappeared. There was still pleural effusion and some ascites present. The clinical condition of the patient further improved, the fever disappeared and the abdomen was non-tender. The patient had normal stools. The treatment with opioids was tapered and normal oral feeding was started.
Sixteen days after the ERCP, when discharge of the patient was already being considered, her clinical condition deteriorated acutely. The patient became dyspnoeic, anxious and tachycardic, with a drop in blood pressure. Blood gas analysis showed respiratory alkalosis with hypoxaemia. Acute pulmonary embolism was suspected and treatment with anticoagulant therapy was started. Electrocardiography showed tachycardia with no signs of acute embolism or myocardial infarction. Cardiac ultrasound did not show signs of infarction or high pressures in the right side of the heart. The clinical situation worsened over the next 30 minutes. Ventricular tachycardia developed, respiratory arrest occurred and despite resuscitation the patient died within 1 hour.
Post-mortem examination showed no signs of acute myocardial infarction or pulmonary embolism. Both lungs showed signs of congestion compatible with the resuscitation. There was pleural fluid present. The culture was sterile. The pancreas showed signs of necrosis in the head and tail. There was fat necrosis in the retroperitoneum. No abscesses were seen. There were no signs of recent local bleeding. The common bile duct was dilated but there were no signs of stones in the common bile duct. A perforation opening at the level of the papilla was not detected. Two litres of ascites were present. There were no signs of systemic septicaemia, despite the fact that culture of the intra-abdominal fluid was positive for Enterococcus faecalis. Macroscopic examination was unable to identify any direct cause of death. Revision of the final CT scan did not reveal signs of necrosis.
Histological examination of the pancreas showed normal pancreatic tissue as well as areas with fatty necrosis. However, histological examination of sections of the lungs showed signs consistent with massive intrapulmonary fat embolism . The final diagnosis was death due to massive intrapulmonary fat embolism which occurred 16 days after the onset of a post-ERCP pancreatitis.