A 30-year-old male patient was detected as having pancytopenia for 23 years and fever for 11 d.
Twenty-three years ago, at six years of age, a Chinese boy sought medical attention with major complaints of rapidly progressive weakness, fatigue, and pallor. This patient was detected as having pancytopenia and diagnosed with AA by BM aspirate and biopsy at several centers. He was prescribed cyclosporine (CsA) and stanozolol, showing a good hematological response. His symptoms gradually improved, but his peripheral blood cell counts had never reached the normal levels. In 2004, he experienced his first relapse 8 mo after the discontinuation of CsA, and was reinstituted on CsA, again showing a good response. In 2011, he underwent his second relapse 3 mo after the discontinuation of CsA. This time, he was referred to our center. On admission, major complaints included progressive weakness and fatigue for 1 mo and high-grade fever for 11 d. His peak body temperature had risen to 39.7 °C, with the absence of evident localized signs or symptoms.
The patient had no history of diseases of the hematopoietic system or significant infections before the diagnosis of AA.
He had a history of dimethylbenzene exposure due to his house being decorated 8 mo before being sent to the doctor.
No family history of inherited, hematological, or autoimmune diseases was recorded.
His height was 173 cm, and his body weight 63.5 kg. The body temperature was 38.7 °C; breathing rate 23 bp/min; heart rate 98 bp/min; and blood pressure (BP) 124/82 mmHg. Upon physical examination, except for the bruising pallor complexion, no physical abnormalities were recorded. Conspicuous mucocutaneous hemorrhage, jaundice, or exanthemata was not presented. No significant signs of the nervous system, respiratory system, cardiovascular system, gastrointestinal symptom, urogenital system, and skeletal musculature system were found.
On admission, routine blood test revealed the following results: white blood cells (WBCs), 1730/µL; absolute neutrophil count (ANC), 270/µL; red blood cells (RBCs), 1860000/µL; hemoglobulin level (Hb), 5.4 g/dL; platelets (Plts), 6000 /µL; absolute reticulocyte count (Ret), 7600/µL; and C-reaction protein (CRP), 145.8 mg/L. No abnormalities were detected in his urine examination, coagulation profile, liver and renal function, lactate dehydrogenase, antinuclear antibodies, or serological tests for hepatitis A, B, and C, and anti-HIV antibodies. His blood culture was sterile. Expression of CD55 and CD59 was within the normal limits. Evaluation of BM smears from the posterior superior iliac spine revealed severe hypocellularity with severe fatty replacement, predominantly lymphocytes, with few erythrocyte and myeloid precursors as well as no megalokaryocytes or dysplasia . Peripheral blood smears confirmed the severe neutropenia without atypical blood cells. No positive cytogenetic findings were identified by culturing the BM sample. A reticulocyte reaction was not observed following a tentative treatment with folinate and mecobalamin.
No signs of pulmonary infection were noted by chest computed tomography. Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly were not observed by ultrasonographic examination.