In 2019, a 5-year-old girl was referred to the metabolism department in the Children's University Hospital in Damascus with a complaint of short stature, with a height of 96 cm and a weight of 13 kg. She presented with developmental delay, stubby fingers, and unique facial features that included: coarse face, facial hirsutism, bushy eyebrows, telecanthus, flat nasal bridge, long philtrum, low set ears, and a short neck (, ). The patient had a history of jerking seizures, and was treated with Phenobarbital and Phenytoin. Additionally, the patient had Patent Ductus Arteriosus (PDA) with normal pulmonary pressure, for which she was prescribed Digoxin.
For further investigation, radiographs and laboratory tests were performed. Spine radiographs showed mild kyphoscoliosis, and signs of osteoporosis in the form of reduction of vertebral body height , which also had low density on the radiographs. Left hand radiographs showed mild acroosteolysis in the distal phalanges, and due to the early onset of the symptoms and the early diagnosis, the bone lysis is not severe and frank . Head and neck radiographs showed that the patient had elongated sella turcica and an elevated palate . Bone densitometry with dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) was performed and the results showed a lumbar spine Z-score of −4.8 (−46%) and a bone mineral density (BMD) of 0.232 for the lumbar vertebras. Laboratory results and the karyotype were normal.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta was suspected, but the clinical and facial features pointed towards mucopolysaccaride disorders (MPS), which were excluded as a definitive diagnosis after showing normal results for the screening of lysosomal MPS enzymes. This warranted a whole exome sequencing (WES) to screen for other possible genetic disorders. WES results came positive for autosomal dominant NOTCH2 gene-related disorders. The sequencing revealed a heterozygous nonsense mutation (NM_024408.3:c.6463G > T) protein change (Glu2155*), which creates a premature stop codon.
Pairing the genetic results with the clinical features, the patient was diagnosed with Hajdu-Cheney Syndrome in February 2020, and was started on 0.05 mg/kg/dose of IV zolidronic acid every six months, in addition to calcium and vitamin D supplements due to very low levels of vitamin D, and the patient was prescribed a back brace to correct the spine deformities (see ).
On the first follow up in October 2020, the patient's height and laboratory results had improved. Ophthalmological exam was performed, showing a mild cloudy cornea, retina hypoplasia, normal ocular pressure and optic nerve features. Vision acuity was normal (10/10).
The patient's second follow up in April 2021 showed significant improvement in the patient's height, BMD and Z-score . The patient's Z-score, which was −4.8 at the time of the diagnosis, improved to −3.3 after the administration of Zoledronic Acid. Additionally, her BMD improved from 0.23 to 0.31, and she gained 11 cm in height over the course of the 2 years follow up.