A 75-year-old woman without an immunodeficiency history was referred to our hospital because of hypoxemia and shock. She visited a former doctor with a complaint of watery diarrhea that had persisted for 10 days and was diagnosed and treated for acute gastroenteritis. Her medical history included chronic atrial fibrillation and cardiogenic cerebral infarction. During her visit at our hospital, she had clear consciousness of the Glasgow Coma Scale E4V5M6, presented hypoxemia with SpO2 97% under oxygen 12 L/min, respirations 20/min, shock with a blood pressure of 70/40 mmHg, heart rate of 91 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 23 breaths/min, body temperature of 36.3 °C, and tenderness throughout the abdomen. Her height was 151 cm, weight was 59.8 kg, while his body mass index (BMI) was 26.2 kg/m2. Laboratory data revealed increased white blood cells (14.9 × 109/L), increased C-reactive protein (18.8 mg/dL), acute kidney injury (blood urea nitrogen level: 52.6 mg/dL; creatinine level: 4.35 mg/dL), coagulopathy (international normalized ratio [INR]: 2.3; activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT]: 48.9 s; d-dimers 15 μg/mL), and hypoproteinemia (albumin: 2.5 g/dL; total protein: 5.5 g/dL). A whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan without a contrast agent showed edema of the duodenum, and wall thickening was observed in the entire colon, especially from the ascending to the transverse colon . Thus, the patient was diagnosed with general infectious colitis and started on conservative and antibacterial therapies with fasting fluid replacement. However, abdominal pain and diarrhea intensified, and the CT scan performed also showed worsening edema of the colon and marked intestinal dilatation. In addition, the patient had atrial fibrillation and required rehydration for severe diarrhea, which made volume control difficult. Subsequently, the patient's respiratory condition deteriorated due to complications, such as heart failure and pulmonary edema, which required intubation and ventilatory management.
Bloody stools were observed on day 11 after admission, while a colonoscopy performed on day 19 showed a generally edematous mucosa; the sigmoid colon was frequently hemorrhagic, with a few deep-drilled longitudinal ulcers . The inflammation was so severe that we could not perform a total colonoscopy. The distribution and appearance of the lesions were not endoscopic findings highly suspicious of inflammatory bowel diseases, such as ulcerative colitis (UC) or Crohn's disease. Histopathological examination of the colon mucosa revealed positive CMV antigenemia (C7HRP) day 22 after admission. Ganciclovir (2.5 mg/kg/day) was started on day 22 when CMV infection was strongly suspected. The patient was found to have serum CMV–deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) positive, CMV–immunoglobulin (Ig) G 3.7 (EIA cutoff < 1.9), and CMV–IgM 0.26 (EIA cut off < 0.79). In addition to the symptoms and endoscopic findings, the diagnosis of CMV enteritis was considered definite. Mucosal histology at the time of endoscopy showed no findings suggestive of infection by other pathogens or inflammatory bowel disease. Diseases causing immunosuppression and other possible causes of enteritis were also closely examined ; however, all were negative. After ganciclovir was started, hematochezia disappeared temporarily, but gastrointestinal symptoms, such as diarrhea and abdominal pain did not improve. On day 40, colonoscopy was performed, and the mucosa of the large intestine was generally edematous with redness and erosion. Inflammatory changes were particularly worse in the sigmoid colon, longitudinal ulcers and round ulcers were scattered, and the condition was slightly worse than the previous time . Gamma-globulin 5 g/day volume for 3 days was administered for 3 days. In addition, ganciclovir was administered for 33 days, but the patient's condition worsened; thus, she was considered to have ganciclovir-resistant CMV, and antiviral treatment was changed from ganciclovir to foscarnet on day 55. Foscarnet was started at a volume of 90 mg/kg twice daily, but due to strong side effects of renal dysfunction and electrolyte abnormalities, the dose was reduced to 85 mg/kg once daily and continued. However, there was no progress even with foscarnet, and the treatment was terminated after 11 days because of drug-induced renal injury. Moreover, she had persistent abdominal pain and watery stool. She was considered to have other complications and was treated with methylprednisolone (125 mg/day for 3 days, 40 mg/day for 7 days, 30 mg/day for 7 days); Due to worsening symptoms, methylprednisolone was tapered off early. In addition, the patient had a large number of watery stools, difficulty in volume control, pleural effusion, and temporary respiratory failure . Colonoscopy was performed on day 75 of hospitalization and revealed a full circumferential ulcer in the rectum, which was highly suspicious for mucosal desquamation and perforation into the retroperitoneum.
Medical treatment was ineffective, and the gastrointestinal findings continued to worsen over time. In addition, colonoscopy showed rectal mucosal shedding and perforation of the retroperitoneum. Initially, the patient required ventilation and intensive care management. Once his condition stabilized and he was discharged from the intensive care unit, he again developed respiratory failure due to poor volume control and required intensive care and oxygen therapy. However, although she was undernourished, her state of consciousness was clear and had stable circulation and inflammation; thus, we decided to perform surgical interventions. Colonoscopy and CT scan revealed that the rectum was in communication or nearly in communication with the retroperitoneal free space, and edema in the entire large intestine and section of the small intestine . It was difficult to assess the extent of the infected intestinal tract and to determine the extent of surgical bowel resection. Preoperative contrast-enhanced CT scan confirmed the extent of small intestinal mucosal edema. The small intestine 40–50 cm from the ileum to the mouth showed continuous wall thickening, which was determined to be an infected intestinal tract. It was decided to perform a combined resection of the small intestine with edema. Intraoperative endoscopy was also prepared. On day 88, total colectomy, partial resection of the small intestine (50 cm), and monotreme colostomy were performed. The intestinal serosa showed no gross findings of ischemia or inflammation. The colon and small intestine showed strong adhesions that may have been due to inflammatory changes. Rectal resection was performed just above the peritoneal reflection. The small intestine was manually checked and resected, where the mucosal edema seemed particularly strong. Intraoperatively, the resection specimen was viewed to confirm that the small bowel resection margins were not highly inflamed. The excised intestinal tract showed detachment of the entire mucous membranes . The resected intestinal specimen histopathological examination revealed inflammatory granulation of the tissue with necrosis and a high lymphocyte-predominant inflammatory cell infiltration. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining and CMV immunostaining showed nuclear inclusion bodies, indicating CMV infection . Histopathological examination did not reveal any other causes of enteritis. Her general condition improved postoperatively, and oral intake resumed. Serum CMV DNA was negative on day 119. She was then transferred to a transitional care facility for rehabilitation on day 139 and was discharged on day 582. She is now at home and has had no recurrences. Activities of Daily Living is wheelchair-bound and can transfer to a wheelchair by herself. He is able to manage his colostomy by herself and has no dementia. Home health care is intervening, but food intake is good and no supplemental fluids are being administered. Home nursing care is used once a week.