A 26-year-old man without any history of medical illness, was referred for horizontal diplopia that worsened on left gaze. He had been admitted for a head trauma caused by a motor vehicle accident the previous day. He had an unremarkable ocular history. He was admitted in the emergency department with a normal Glasgow coma score (GCS = 15). He was alert and oriented, and he demonstrated normal motor and sensory examination of the extremities. And did not demonstrate dysarthria or aphasia. Facial sensation was intact to light touch in V1, V2, and V3 and tongue was midline.
His ophthalmologic examination revealed a complete CN VI palsy (absent abduction), , providing the basis for absent lateral gaze with lift eye, he also complained of binocular diplopia on left horizontal gazes, without any reduced visual acuity in both eyes. Left CV VII palsy was noticed and graded as 6/6 House-Brackmann . A pyramid nasal deviation was also obvious .
There was no hearing loss and the otoscopic examen was normal. Although no evidence of relative afferent pupil defect or CN III palsy was observed. The remainder of the neurologic and physical examination was unremarkable.
Brain CT scan showed translabyrinthique fracture of the left temporal bone with extension to the left apex petrous and central skull base including sphenoid lateral wall .
EMG has demonstrated left PFP with a complete bloc of conduction in the apex petrous.
Follow-up was coordinated in conjunction with the otolaryngology and ophthalmology services regarding management of CN VI and VII palsies. A conservative management was adopted including corticotherapy, eye protection and facial passive physiotherapy.
The patient recovered facial nerve function to a 2/6 House-Brackmann at 10 weeks’ post-accident, he reported improved ability to abduct the left eye without any residual diplopia, the patient was satisfied with the evolution under medical treatment. Our study has been reported following the SCARE 2020 Checklist criteria .