A woman in her sixties presented to another hospital with abdominal pain. She had a history of bronchial asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and two cesarean sections. Plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) suggested an intraperitoneal tumor, and she was referred to our hospital. She had no smoking history, and she drank alcohol only occasionally. There were no abnormal results on laboratory tests; in particular, the serum carcinoembryonic antigen concentration was 8.9 ng/mL, and the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 concentration was 1.1 ng/mL. Enhanced CT revealed a 2-mm low-density tumor in the abdominal cavity . Plain pelvic magnetic resonance imaging showed a tumor with internal heterogeneity and high signal intensity in the mesentery on T2-weighted imaging, and diffusion restriction was observed. Considering these findings, our provisional diagnosis was an intra-abdominal tumor, such as a gastrointestinal stromal tumor, schwannoma, or malignant lymphoma. To confirm the diagnosis, we decided to perform laparoscopic tumor resection.
First, we inspected the peritoneal cavity with a laparoscope. This revealed numerous nodules in the small bowel mesentery , and the pouch of Douglas , indicating peritoneal dissemination of the cancer. A 20-mm-diameter white tumor was found in the small intestine near the disseminated nodules , which we diagnosed this as a small intestinal cancer. We then made a small skin incision and inspected the small intestine . The tumor was located approximately 130 cm on the oral side, toward the ileocecal valve. Because of the obvious peritoneal dissemination, we performed small bowel resection, with harvesting of some lymph nodes and peritoneal nodules. The operation time was 1 h and 35 min, and the intraoperative blood loss volume was 10 mL. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on postoperative day 9.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a tumor protruding to the contralateral side of the mesentery. Microscopic examination revealed that the tumor was in a true diverticulum and was a well- to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . Enlarged spaces covered by flattened atypical cells were observed adjacent to the cancer . These findings suggested that the cancer was derived from ectopic mucosa. No gastric mucosa, intestinal mucosa, acinar cells, or islets of Langerhans were detected. Immunohistochemical staining of the tumor was positive for cytokeratin 7 and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and negative for cytokeratin 20 and caudal type homeobox 2 . The localization of the tumor and adjacent tissue suggested that the origin of the tumor was Heinrich type 3 ectopic pancreas, which was consistent with the findings on immunohistochemical staining. Adenocarcinoma was also found in all resected lymph nodes and disseminated nodules. Thus, the final pathological diagnosis was an adenocarcinoma in Meckel’s diverticulum, pT4N2M1 (UICC 8th edition).
We treated the cancer as an unresectable pancreatic cancer, commencing gemcitabine (GEM) as a therapeutic measure 6 weeks after the surgery. Because this rare cancer arose from ectopic pancreatic tissue, we performed comprehensive genetic profiling (CGP) using Foundation One® caudal type homeobox (Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Tokyo, Japan). CGP analysis showed no actionable mutations; therefore, we added nanoparticle albumin-based paclitaxel (nab-PTX) from the third course of GEM. Follow-up CT showed that the disseminated nodules were stable, in accordance with the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, 12 months after surgery. Currently, 15 months after surgery, the patient continues to receive combination chemotherapy with GEM + nab-PTX and remains asymptomatic.