A 60-year-old Sri Lankan woman with longstanding hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and bronchial asthma presented to a general medical ward with a recent history of a large, spontaneous, painless bruise over her right thigh. Medication included low dose aspirin 75mg daily. There was no family history of bleeding disorders and she was haemodynamically stable. An ultrasound scan excluded coexisting deep soft tissue haematomas and a full blood count demonstrated a white blood cell count of 11.2×109/L with normal differentials, haemoglobin level of 12.3g/dL and a platelet count of 258×109/L. Coagulation screening revealed an aPTT of 66.4 seconds with normal bleeding, prothrombin and thrombin time, results that were confirmed over repeated assays. The results of her blood films, urea, electrolytes, creatinine and liver function tests were all normal.
Further investigation in our haematology unit demonstrated the presence of a time-dependent inhibitor of coagulation via prolonged aPTT and a mixing study that did not correct with the addition of normal plasma and incubation for 2 hours (aPTT was 52 seconds when the mixing test was performed, with a ratio of her plasma to normal plasma of 50:50). A mixing study of incubated and fresh mixed plasma did not demonstrate a temperature-dependent inhibitor of coagulation (aPTT was 27 seconds with a ratio of her plasma to normal plasma of 50:50). Clotting factor VIII assay and inhibitor titres were not possible due to a lack of facilities. An indirect assay of deficient factor was carried out by adding factor VIII or IX deficient plasma to her plasma. The aPTT was corrected by adding factor IX deficient plasma, but not by factor VIII deficient plasma, thus suggesting factor VIII deficiency. Plasma fibrinogen was 260mg/dL (150 to 250) and platelet aggregation studies were compatible with the expected aspirin-induced changes. This therefore suggested a diagnosis of acquired haemophilia A. Investigation for associated conditions revealed positive antinuclear antibody (ANA) and antithyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO; microsomal) antibody titre of over 1/80 and 1000IU/L respectively. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 4mU/L (normal range 0.3 to 4.2mU/L) during the present admission. A previous hyperthyroid state with TSH of <0.01mU/L and free thyroxine (T4) of 2.87ng/dL had led to the present hypothyroidism with a corrective thyroxine replacement therapy of 100μg daily. The present state of hypothyroidism with a high titre of anti-TPO antibody was suggestive of autoimmune thyroiditis. Anti-double-stranded DNA was negative. Tests for lupus anticoagulant and anti-cardiolipin antibody were negative. These tests were carried out due to the isolated prolonged aPTT and the positivity of ANA respectively.
Acquired haemophilia A in association with autoimmune thyroiditis was therefore diagnosed. It was promptly treated with a combination of oral prednisolone 60mg daily and alendronate, calcium and vitamin D therapy for bone protection.
Four weeks later she presented with painful swelling of her right calf muscle. There were no features of compartment syndrome and the diagnosis of deep muscle haematoma was confirmed by ultrasound examination. The aPTT was 96 seconds on admission. Acute limb-threatening bleeding was successfully managed with recombinant activated factor VII (NovoSeven®). Cyclophosphamide 100mg daily was added to the immunosuppressive regime to induce remission. Eight weeks later, aPTT returned to within the normal range and there were no further haemorrhagic manifestations.