A 34-year-old man was referred to our clinic. His symptoms were left nasal obstruction, foul-smelling discharge, and occasional nasal bleeding. His symptoms had been lasting for three months. During physical examination, the foul-smelling discharge in the left nasal cavity was aspirated. On the left side of the nasal cavity, a hard, immobile, white colored mass was observed between the deviated nasal septum and nasal sill extending to the inferior surface of the inferior turbinate. The tip of the mass was covered with nasal mucosa. It looked like a tooth. Onn the right side of nasal cavity, we observed mucosal bulging on the nasal sill and right turbinate hypertrophy. The patient was asymptomatic on the right nasal cavity. A coronal section of a paranasal CT scan of the patient was observed and a mass of bone density arising from the left nasal cavity floor was seen .
The mass in the left nasal cavity had the same appearance and density of the tooth. This structure was evaluated as an ectopic tooth. In addition, another ectopic tooth was observed in the right nasal cavity. The axial section of the paranasal CT scan of this patient was observed and an ectopic tooth along the base of the nasal cavity was seen .
Extension of the right nasal cavity was minimal. The patient was operated under general anesthesia. After removing the left sided deviation of the cartilage septum, we observed a hard white colored bone, which looked like a tooth and was vertical to the direction of the nasal sill. The left ectopic tooth was excised using punch forceps. It was 2cm in length. The root of the tooth was 1cm in length .
The tip of tooth was covered with mucosa. Nasal packing was administered in the nasal cavity to prevent bleeding after surgery and was removed after two days. The right ectopic tooth was just followed, because it was asymptomatic. There were no complications (bleeding, synechiae, or repeated complaints). There were no complaints after the operation or during the one-year follow up.