An 86-year-old man was observed to have skin erosion and high levels of bilirubin in the urine, after which he visited our hospital. Obstructive jaundice was referred and both of liver mass and biliary mass were diagnosed. He underwent a left hepatectomy, a left caudal lobectomy (with a medial hepatic vein preservation), an extrahepatic bile duct resection, and a right hepatic cholangiojejunostomy. During operation, the root of LHV and the branch of MHV were ligated twice. The 4Fr silicon tube (Atom Medical, Tokyo, Japan) was placed as internal biliary stent. The operation time was 349 min and the intraoperative bleeding was 720 ml. A 19 Fr closed, low-pressure, continuous suction silicone drain (Johnson & Johnson, New Jersey, USA) was placed on the transected liver surface. Histological diagnosis of liver mass was adenocarcinoma (moderately differentiated type, tub2), and that of biliary mass was papillary adenocarcinoma (pup) and adenocarcinoma (moderately differentiated type, tub2). Therefore, we diagnosed as double primary cancers of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and perihilar cholangiocarcinoma. On the seventh postoperative day, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed the presence of fluid collection at the transected liver surface . We then diagnosed the bile leakage caused by injury of peripheral bile duct and abscess under the right diaphragm had formed. The drain was exchanged for a 12 Fr silicone drain (Create Medic, Kanagawa, Japan) by using a 0.035 in angle-stiff type guidewire (TERUMO, Tokyo, JAPAN) under fluoroscopy. The bile leakage was under control by the drainage. Therefore, we did not consider biliary drainage with ENBD or ERBD via ERCP. However, a fever then occurred, due to the poor drainage of an abscess under the right diaphragm. The tip of the drain was reduced, and the drain was replaced with a 12 Fr silicone drain by using a guidewire on the 15th postoperative day. The tip of the drain was deeply inserted in order for the drain to enter into the cavity . At that time, the guidewire insertion operation was difficult, and the guidewire was vigorously inserted. When inserting the drain, there was a high degree of resistance, but the drain was finally inserted. Afterwards, the blood was discharged from the drain, and the drain was closed on the same day. When the drain was opened the next day, blood was again discharged. A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed that the tip of the drain had pierced the inferior vena cava (IVC) from the root of the middle hepatic vein and had become placed into the right RA . Because 1 month had not passed after the operation, a high degree of adhesion at the surgical site was expected. Therefore, the operation was assessed to be difficult. Additionally, there were risks of intraabdominal hemorrhage and of bleeding into the cavity of the abscess. There was also the risk of a fibrin embolism that may have occurred due to the presence of fibrin. Thus, after consultation with the cardiovascular surgeon about hemostasis, and the risk of performing a thrombectomy, due to the sudden changes, the tip of the drain was removed from the IVC by using fluoroscopy under general anesthesia. At that time, it was confirmed by the use of transesophageal echocardiography that the tip of the drain had been removed to the outside of the area of the IVC. Afterwards, there was no incidence bleeding from the drain, but a persistent fever of 39 °C continued to occur. Echocardiography was performed to investigate the heat source, and a 3.0 × 1.4 cm mass with good mobility was discovered, extending from the IVC to the RA. A contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrated a series of low density areas, extending from the abscess cavity to the transected liver surface and to the RA. Although removal by the use of interventional radiology was considered, it was decided that there was a risk of a complication of pulmonary embolism due to the large and movable mass, and it was decided that emergency open heart surgery should be performed for the removal of the tumor . A right atrial incision, thrombus removal, and a middle hepatic vein merging section closure surgery were performed. When the RA incision was performed and the lumen was confirmed, and approximately 5 mm of the perforated portion was located near the root of the middle hepatic vein, and at the same site approximately 3 cm of a yellow-brown mass was discovered. The drain and the mass was removed and the middle hepatic vein was sutured and closed . The operation time was 142 min, and the intraoperative bleeding was 400 ml. Histologically, the mass was primarily composed of fibrin thrombus, and a collection of neutrophils were primarily observed at the peripheral portion of the mass . A tissue culture examination detected the presence of Enterobacter aerogenes.
The fever was promptly relieved and inflammation and infection gradually improved after the open heart surgery, and the patient was transferred to the hospital for cardiac rehabilitation at 68 days after the first operation.