A 68-year old male presented with ocular pain and redness for 4 weeks. He ingested raw meat about 1 month before, and ocular symptoms developed with general ache the next day. The patient didn’t have history related with pets. He frequently had eaten the uncooked meat.
He had been treated with topical and systemic steroid in another clinic for 2 weeks, and was referred to our clinic due to uncontrolled inflammation and intraocular pressure (IOP). Medical history and systemic work-ups for conditions related to scleritis, including herpes virus, Wegener’s granulomatosis, rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory bowel diseases, revealed no remarkable abnormality.
He had been using topical steroid and IOP-lowering drugs and taking oral steroid (prednisolone 15 mg/days). The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in both eyes, and IOP was 35 mmHg in the right eye and 36 mmHg in the left eye. He was pseudophakic in both eyes. The episcleral and deep scleral vessels were engorged diffusely, and 0.5+ cells were noted in the anterior chamber of both eyes . There was no remarkable sign in visual field test or gonioscopy. Vitreous haziness was not detected. Three whitish plaques mimicking cotton wool spots were found in the para-foveal area of the right eye. Optical coherent tomography (OCT) depicted well demarcated hyper-reflective round lesion in the retinal nerve fibers (RNF) layer with posterior shadowing . These findings suggest retinal granuloma rather than infarction in the RNF. Ultrasonography showed diffuse thickening of the sclera in both eyes. Fluorescein angiography demonstrated no abnormal hyper-fluorescein in the early phase and mild leakage around optic disc and whitish spots in the late phase . A white spot similar to the lesions developed in the left eye 10 days later .
Considering that his symptoms presented just after eating raw meat, additional laboratory work-ups for parasites were performed. The serologic evaluation detected specific immunoglobulin G antibody against toxocara, but no other organisms including Cysticercus, Paragonimus, Sparganum, and Clonorchis. Albendazole (400 mg bid/day) was prescribed for 10 days, combined with oral prednisolone (30 mg/day). The scleritis resolved and IOP became normal by 2 weeks. All medications were discontinued at 3 weeks. The whitish lesions also disappeared . There was no recurrence until 5 months after stopping medications.