An 11-year-old girl was referred from the interventional radiology department of our institution with a history of the right calf and foot swelling which was intensely painful to touch. Child had been keeping the knee in flexion and ankle in equinus to get relief from pain. She was a toe walker and had a fixed deformity in her right ankle. There were no such lesions elsewhere in the body. For the same complaints, she had undergone sclerotherapy 2 years back. However, the lesion recurred and symptoms failed to improve. Hence, she underwent an embolization procedure 1 year back. There was no resolution of symptoms following the second procedure as well. On examination, there was fullness in the calf and medial aspect of the ankle. Dilated veins could be seen all over the right thigh, leg, and foot. The child would not allow any sort of palpation in the area. The knee was kept in flexion for ease of pain but range of motion was full. Ankle was fixed in the 60 degree equinus . There were no neuro vascular deficits in the leg. Other limbs had no abnormality. A contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done for the lower limb (-). It showed 4 × 2 × 7 cm enhancing lesions involving gastrocnemius and soleus muscles showing early arterial enhancement with multiple branches from posterior-tibial, common peroneal artery, and early venous drainage which was suggestive of venous malformation. Another similar lesion was found in the distal Achilles tendon measuring 2. 5 × 2. 1 × 3 cm and medial to the calcaneus measuring 4 × 4 × 2.5 cm. Lesions were stable in comparison to MRI done 8 months before. Multidisciplinary team meeting involving the interventional radiologist, orthopedic oncologist, vascular surgeon, and pathologist was convened. The clinical correlation to a fibro-adipose venous anomaly was made and because of the poor outcomes of interventional procedures in such cases in the literature, an en bloc resection of the tumor was planned. Pediatric orthopedic opinion was also sought for correction of the fixed equinus deformity in the ankle. Incision was planned mid-posterior over the swelling. The lesion was well distinguishable from the normal tissue. It was firm in consistency . Resection was done en-bloc. There was a residual muscle gap of 6 cm . Lesion was excised from the ankle by extending the same incision. The lesion in the ankle was friable and difficult to locate as its location was not intramuscular . The tendo achilles was lengthened by Z-plasty to achieve a neutral ankle . Child was put in an above knee cast post operatively to counter the action of gastrocnemius muscle. Wound inspection was done on day 5 through a window in the cast. Child was made to ambulate on the fiber-cast. Histopathology section of the gastrocnemius lesion revealed fibroadipose and fibrocartilaginous tissue with variably sized vascular channels and cavernous spaces filled with hemorrhage. There was no evidence of malignancy . The ankle lesions showed lobules of adipose tissue with small capillaries in myxoid stroma with small to medium thick walled vessels . All the findings were in agreement with the fibroadipose venous anomaly. At 1-year follow-up, the repeat scans showed no recurrence. The foot was plantigrade and the child was walking with a slight limp. She was referred for gait training.