A 74-year-old woman with ESRD secondary to diabetes and maintained on hemodialysis three times per week presented to the Emergency Department with constipation, lower abdominal discomfort, prominent rectal pain, and blood-tinged stools. She had no watery diarrhea. Physical exam was significant for diffuse abdominal tenderness. Initial work up was significant for stable complete blood count and basic metabolic panel, with a stool specimen positive for C. difficile toxin by PCR in the context of recently treated C. difficile infection. Notably, symptoms were different from her prior episode of C. difficile associated diarrhea 11 months earlier. This was felt to be representative of a prior infection. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed non-specific circumferential rectal thickening with fat stranding suggestive of an inflammatory/infectious or malignant process .
Sigmoidoscopy with biopsies was performed to establish a diagnosis, which revealed circumferential ulcerations, exudates, and purplish hue to the mucosa in the mid- and distal rectum consistent with ischemia. No classic endoscopic findings consistent with C. difficile infection, such as pseudomembranes, were identified.
Endoscopic biopsies of the rectal ulcerations revealed pill fragments consistent with sevelamer crystals in the exudate. Sevelamer crystals in the fibropurulent/ necrotic debris identified on histology displayed a characteristic “fish scale” pattern as shown in Fig. . No crystals were present within the preserved tissue fragments in the sample. Overall the findings were that of an ulcer without specific features to point to any other particular etiology (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease, ischemia etc.). The patient had commenced sevelamer (Renvela 1,600 mg orally 3 times a day) approximately 2 months prior to her presentation. Sevelamer-induced mucosal injury was confirmed, the medication was discontinued, and treatment with calcium acetate was substituted. Her constipation resolved with conservative medical management. Her incidentally positive C. difficile PCR was not felt to represent true infection, but was conservatively treated with a 10-day course of oral vancomycin.