On December 29th, 2022, a 68-year-old male was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of fever, cough, and productive sputum persisting for 10 days. The patient developed a fever 10 days ago, with a maximum body temperature of 39.5°C. Additionally, the patient experienced coughing and sputum production but without hemoptysis, dyspnea, chest pain, or chest tightness. Despite receiving antipyretic treatments, the patient experienced recurring fever. Consequently, he sought medical attention at the pulmonary specialist clinic and was hospitalized. Four years ago, he received left lung transplantation due to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and has since been prescribed tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisone. During the physical examination, velcro rales were detected in the right lung, while the breath sounds in the left lung were found to be clear. In our department, the patient tested positive for COVID-19 nucleic acid, with a 73.4 mg/L increase in C-reactive protein (CRP), while white blood cell (WBC) and neutrophil counts were within the normal range. Meanwhile, the analysis of lymphocyte subsets revealed a decrease in CD8+T cells and B cells, while CD4+T cells remained within the normal range. Other laboratory values were displayed in . Scattered ground-glass opacities were observed in the left lung on first chest CT imaging, along with fibrosis and honeycomb changes in the right lung . Based on the epidemiology of COVID-19 in China, along with the patient’s medical history and positive examinations, a diagnosis of COVID-19 pneumonia was made. The treatment involved the administration of Paxlovid and methylprednisolone intravenously and subsequently orally for 21 days, with a total dosage of approximately 400 mg. Simultaneously, tacrolimus was discontinued while the dosage of mycophenolate mofetil was reduced. Throughout his hospitalization, he did not require supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation. After the symptoms improved, he was discharged.
Two weeks later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital due to an exacerbation of cough and expectoration. The patient tested positive for COVID-19 nucleic acid once more, with a significant increase in WBC, neutrophils, and CRP levels . The second pulmonary CT scan showed consolidation superimposed to pre-existing fibrotic changes on the lower lobe of the right lung, which was absent in the first chest CT scan. Additionally, the COVID-19-related ground-glass opacities on the left lung disappeared on the second CT, with residual tiny scars . Given the possibility of bacterial or fungal co-infection, we used piperacillin sodium-tazobactam sodium intravenously (4.5g q8h) for a week and caspofungin (70 mg loading dose on day 1, followed by 50 mg daily) for 2 weeks.
On the second day of hospitalization, we conducted a bronchoscopy. During bronchoscopy, narrowing of the lumen in the dorsal branch of the right lower lung with visible secretions was observed; no abnormalities were detected in other lobes . Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) of alveolar lavage fluid identified the presence of Nocardia farcinica, an opportunistic pathogen commonly associated with infections in immunocompromised patients. Following a definitive diagnosis, linezolid (0.6 g q12h) was given intravenously for 2 weeks, while molnupiravir (0.8 g bid) for five days was prescribed specifically for the COVID-19 coronavirus. Both tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil were administered as per standard protocol. Finally, the inflammatory index progressively decreased, leading to an improvement in the condition. After discharge, the patient switched to oral treatment of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Upon 14 days and 85 days after the diagnosis, the patient underwent chest CT examination, which displayed nocardiosis lesions in the right lung were gradually resolved . The patient is currently undergoing regular follow-up at the clinic. The medical timeline is listed in .