A 61-year-old female of Puerto Rican ancestry was evaluated in Medical Genetics for seemingly separate chronic pain syndromes. She had previously been seen in Family Practice, Gastroenterology, Pain Medicine, Neurology, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Gynecology, and Ophthalmology departments.
The patient had attacks of facial pain; preliminary diagnosis of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome was made. Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome is a rare nonhereditary disorder characterized by facial weakness, swelling of the face and lips, and furrowing of the tongue. The patient reported similar symptoms in other family members. As familial Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome had not been reported in the literature, the patient was referred to Medical Genetics for further evaluation. A detailed family history revealed similar facial pain episodes in the patient's mother and four of seven siblings, suggesting a genetic condition of autosomal dominant inheritance . The age of onset of symptoms in the family ranged from 18 to 52 years.
The patient had pain involving both sides of the body, both above and below the waistline, including the posterior cervical region. The areas of most severe pain were in the neck, shoulders, both upper extremities, entire back, buttock area, and bilateral lower extremities. Heating pads seem to improve the constant pain and patient preferred a room temperature of 27°C (80°F).
The episodic pain triggers included stressful events (work meetings), defecation, and cold temperatures.
The patient's facial pain symptoms were most consistent with a diagnosis of PEPD. She had two separate episodes of severe facial pain that resulted in hospitalization at the ages of 52 and 61 years. The first episode consisted of severe headache lasting 3 days, right facial swelling, right eye weakness, and forehead paralysis. The second episode consisted of a global thunderclap headache, left orbital eye pain, left facial paralysis with decreased sensation, and right-sided ptosis, in addition to facial swelling and weakness. MR and CT brain imaging were unremarkable.
The facial pain also occurred several times each day and was triggered by cold, smiling, brushing teeth, and chewing, but not by touching the face or food. Paroxysmal type of electrical pain shoots down the right mandible. This may be followed by a pulling sensation in her right cheek and eye. Intensity was typically 5 on a scale of 10, although it may reach 10. The pain was accompanied by dripping lacrimation in the right eye but no facial flushing or sweating . The lacrimation was worse when she was eating but she does not describe gustatory sweating . Patient's facial pain lasted for several hours. Patient avoids eating cold foods like popsicles and melts ice cream before eating it. Patient also avoids eating in public.
Sinus congestion previously triggered pain, but this mostly resolved after three sinus operations. She denied tear secretion and flushing being triggers for pain .
She described often having rectal pain during defecation, consistent with PEPD. This began around the age of 45 and had progressively increased in severity. She described the rectal pain severity to be worse than pain associated with childbirth (10/10); the pain attacks lasted for hours.
She denied having seizures, including the period during childhood; however, patient had several syncope events as an adult.
She reported “fibromyalgia attacks” that occur about twice a month, after stressful events like meetings and cold temperature, which affect the entire body and pain was described as achy and dull; pain lasted for several days. The patient was previously diagnosed with fibromyalgia by Family Medicine at the age of 56 by the American College of Rheumatology 1990 criteria. These findings suggest a complex pain phenotype that consisted of pain attacks akin to PEPD in addition to persistent pain that can be observed in SFN. The patient was also asked about symptoms specific to PEPD.
The patient completed the Neuropathic Pain Scale to evaluate the intensity and characteristics of pain . She described a constant pain that was intense, sharp, deep, and often cold. The intensity was reported as a 5/10 in the coccyx and lower back. She described episodic sharp pain (10/10) in the neck, legs, and back. She reported that the coccyx pain radiates most often to her left leg but sometimes radiates down both legs, lasting for hours. She also described a cold pain (8/10), especially in her feet, even on warm days.
Additionally, the patient completed a small nerve fiber questionnaire , which examined the presence and frequency of features associated with SFN such as sweating, diarrhea, constipation, incontinence, dry eyes, dry mouth, dizziness upon standing, palpitations, hot flashes, skin sensitivity, burning feet, sheet intolerance, and restless legs. She reported persistent constipation, dry eyes with occasional diarrhea, and excessive sweating. She denied urination problems, dry mouth, dizziness upon standing, palpitations, hot flashes, sensitive skin, burning feet, sheet intolerance, or restless legs. These findings indicate that the patient exhibits certain features observed in SFN like neuropathic pain, persistent pain, and perhaps some of the autonomic features.
The patient was asked about symptoms of IEM. She did not have severe burning pain in the distal limbs or pain triggered by warmth.
EMG was performed by neurology when patient was 55 and 56 years old for evaluation of Bell's palsy; the first was one was unremarkable, while the second one showed mononeuropathy at the wrist.
“The patient was referred with a diagnosis of familial Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome. No gene has been associated with Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome before. The authors considered several strategies to hunt for the Melkersson-Rosenthal gene. The authors could not identify any strong candidate genes for Sanger sequencing. It was decided to use the WES approach of testing about 20,000 genes with one test.”
A sample of the patient's blood was sent to Baylor Medical Genetics Laboratories (Houston, TX) for WES using an Illumina HiSeq platform (San Diego, CA). WES analysis detected a pathogenic heterozygous c.2159T>A (p.I720K) mutation in the SCN9A gene. The cost of the WES test was $7000 (USA); the results were available for us after 9 weeks. This patient's testing was paid for by the Mayo Clinic Individualized Medicine Clinic. We estimate the mean out of pocket expense for WES for patients with commercial insurance at $1000 or less.
Treatment options for SCN9A channelopathies are suboptimal. Patients with PEPD have experienced some benefit with carbamazepine . This patient was treated with oxcarbazepine 150 mg twice daily. After 6 weeks of oxcarbazepine treatment she developed Stevens-Johnson syndrome, with skin redness and peeling. Her pain had not improved with oxcarbazepine. Oxcarbazepine was stopped and gabapentin was then begun. The gabapentin regimen was 100 mg three times a day (10 days), 300 mg three times a day (10 days), and finally 600 mg three times per day (10 days). Gabapentin was stopped after the patient reported no improvement and that it was too sedating.
The patient was next offered lacosamide. Lacosamide is an adjunctive treatment for partial onset seizures and diabetic neuropathic pain. Lacosamide enhances slow inactivation of Nav1.7 and as such may be a valuable choice of treatment. A clinical trial of lacosamide for patients with SCN9A mutations has been registered and is recruiting . The patient declined lacosamide after she was told there was an increased risk of suicidal behavior and ideation (as with all antiepileptic drugs).
The patient reported that nontraditional therapies have been the most effective at treating her pain. Following severe facial pain episodes, her symptoms improved with massage, acupuncture, and cold compresses. Heating pads have improved her constant pain.
The cause of the patient's constipation was diagnosed as pelvic floor dysfunction by anal rectal manometry and MR defecography. The patient described remarkable improvement in constipation after pelvic floor retraining with biofeedback. A physical therapist administered treatment once a week for six weeks (standard regime for our and other centers). Treatment consisted of external therapeutic ultrasound, 5 min of therapeutic exercise, and 30 min of soft tissue mobilization with manual therapy to gluteal muscles, piriformis, coccygeus, ST ligaments, levator ani, and ischiopubic points. At the end of treatment, she was having one bowel movement most days compared to a bowel movement once a month since early childhood.
Return of constipation after pelvic floor retraining with biofeedback occurs in about half of patients at one year . This patient's constipation returned after 4 years and the patient had a second course of pelvic floor retraining with biofeedback. The treatment was again effective and her constipation resolved. We speculate that her pelvic floor dysfunction was a compensatory response to rectal pain during defecation resulting from the SCN9A mutation.