A 74-year-old woman was admitted with worsening heart failure. She reported a history of rheumatic heart disease with surgical mitral commissurotomy performed 54 years ago and aortic valve replacement with a mechanical prosthesis 15 years ago. Additionally, she had persistent atrial fibrillation (AF) for the past 17 years; the left atrial appendage had been excised during the previous surgery.
The patient’s medical history was generally unremarkable, except for systemic arterial hypertension. Medications included loop diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, low-dose beta-blockers, dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers, and acenocoumarol.
On clinical examination, there were bilateral lower limb oedema and bibasilar lung crackles, indicative of decompensated heart failure. The electrocardiogram showed AF with a ventricular rate of 90/min. Laboratory investigations at admission showed the following: haemoglobin 12.8 g/dL (12–16 g/dL), white blood count 7380 × 103/µL (3.50–11 × 103/µL), international normalized ratio (INR) 3.3 (target INR 3.0), and normal renal and hepatic function. Electrolytes were within normal range. NT-proBNP level was 1505 ng/L (<125 ng/L). The chest X-ray revealed interstitial syndrome.
On transthoracic echocardiography, mitral valve area (MVA) was 1.0 cm² (as measured by both planimetry and continuity equation), and mean transmitral pressure gradient was 10 mmHg; these findings were deemed consistent with clinically significant mitral stenosis. Trace MR was also observed. The Wilkins score—a grading system describing echocardiographic appearance of the mitral valve and used to select patients suitable for PTMC—was 9 (mobility 3, thickening 2, calcifications 3, and subvalvular thickening 1). Noticeably, the subvalvular apparatus exhibited only mild calcifications of the subvalvular chordae and of the head of papillary muscle. There were severe left and right atrial dilatation, and tricuspid annulus was dilated (end-diastolic diameter 40 mm), with visually estimated moderate secondary tricuspid regurgitation. Estimated systolic pulmonary pressure was 48 mmHg, and indexed stroke volume was 28 mL/m2. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) confirmed thickened, poorly mobile, and moderately calcified mitral valve leaflets ( and ; see , ), and there was no atrial thrombus. Due to a EuroSCORE II–predicted surgical mortality of 5.84%, PTMC was offered as first-line treatment, despite unfavourable patient characteristics, including advanced age, history of commissurotomy, persistent AF, and a Wilkins score >8 indicating suboptimal suitability for the procedure. Transoesophageal echocardiography–guided PTMC was performed using a 26 mm Inoue balloon catheter (Toray Medical®). A stepwise incremental dilatation technique, calculated based on reference balloon size minus 2 mm as per the formula by Hung et al., was employed. After the second inflation at 25 mm, a 16 × 8 mm left ventricular mass was noticed, swinging in systole towards the outflow tract, which remained attached to the anterior mitral leaflet via one or several chordae ( and ; see , ). This mobile mass was consistent with a ruptured anterolateral PMR, and the procedure was immediately aborted. Unexpectedly, despite the papillary muscle disruption, the resulting MR was only of mild-to-moderate severity (; see , ). There was good clinical and haemodynamic tolerance, favouring initially a watchful waiting strategy. On repeated echocardiography, performed at Days 4 and 10 after PTMC, MR severity remained mild to moderate, with an effective mitral regurgitant orifice area of 0.10 cm2 and a regurgitant volume of 21 mL ( and ). The mean mitral gradient was 7 mmHg, and MVA was 1.4 cm2 by planimetry. During outpatient follow-up visits, the patient reported limited but stable exercise capacity (New York Heart Association III). As a result, the decision was made to proceed with surgery. Due to patient’s hesitancy, the operation was only performed 6 weeks later and involved removal of the ruptured papillary muscle , placement of a mechanical mitral valve prosthesis, and tricuspid annuloplasty. The procedure was uncomplicated and resulted in a marked symptomatic improvement, with the patient’s length of stay being 16 days, followed by rehabilitation. Her last follow-up visit, conducted 6 months after the intervention, demonstrated sustained and significant functional improvement.