We present the case of a 54 year old woman with RASB (poorly differentiated angiosarcoma of the left breast; pT1a, pNX, M0, L0, V0) after a history of invasive-ductal cancer of the left breast, pT1c (1.8 cm), G3, pN3a (22/23), L1, V0, M0, ER positive, PR positive, HER-2/neu negative) treated in July 2012 with breast-conserving surgery with clear resection margins, adjuvant chemotherapy with 6 cycles of epirubicin and cyclophosphamide, adjuvant irradiation of the left breast and left axillary, supra-, and infraclavicular region with 50 Gray, and adjuvant endocrine therapy with the aromatase inhibitor anastrozole. In August 2016, a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed to remove a tumor of the left ovary, which was diagnosed as distant breast cancer recurrence. At the same time, in August 2016, a small, purple skin lesion of 1.2 cm in diameter was noted in the inner upper quadrant of the right breast. RASB was diagnosed by punch biopsy and the tumor was completely excised. Staging procedures (computed tomography scans of the thorax and abdomen, bone scintigraphy) showed no evidence of further recurrence. A systemic second-line chemotherapy with 6 cycles of liposomal doxorubicine was initiated. Five months later, a local recurrence of RASB was diagnosed and mastectomy was performed. Staging procedures (computed tomography scans of the thorax and abdomen, bone scintigraphy) were again performed and showed no evidence of distant metastases. No further chemotherapy was applied. After 5 months of follow-up, the patient is alive with no evidence of disease. Figure shows the histological presentation of the RASB in the mastectomy specimen of the left breast as well as immunohistochemical stainings for proliferation marker protein Ki-67, platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule (PECAM-1), trans-acting T-cell-specific transcription factor GATA-3, and cytokeratins. The tumor demonstrated strong positivity for MIB1 and PECAM-1, but negativity for GATA-3 and cytokeratin. Figure shows an image of the initial RASB diagnosed in August 2016.
In general, angiosarcomas including RASB are high-grade tumors of endothelial origin. They arise from small blood or lymphatic vessels and display varying degrees of nuclear atypia, hyperchromatic nuclei, large nucleoli, and frequent mitoses. Ultrastructural findings may include Weibel-Palade bodies (tubular structures found in normal endothelium) and pinocytic vesicles. Areas of hemorrhage into the surrounding stroma may also be present . Pathology typically shows stratified squamous epithelium and a superficial dermal based proliferation of large, plump, atypical spindled and epithelioid cells with large, pleomorphic vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli [, , , ]. Additional typical features including spindle cells with pleomorphic epithelioid eosinophilic cytoplasm and small papillary proliferations.