A 68-year-old Caucasian man with a past medical history of Crohn’s disease, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, obstructive sleep apnea, and atrial fibrillation, as well as noncontributory psychosocial or family history, was diagnosed with adverse risk, therapy-related AML after presenting with progressive cytopenias . His bone marrow (BM) biopsy was remarkable for 27% blasts in a background of trilineage dysplasia with a karyotype of del(5q), del(20q), and trisomy 8. Targeted next-generation sequencing revealed a pathogenic somatic mutation in TP53 as well as variants of unknown significance in ASXL1, FAS, and PIK3CA. AML with myelodysplasia-related changes was diagnosed based on his TP53 mutation and complex karyotype. He achieved first complete remission (CR1) with no measurable residual disease (minimal residual disease [MRD]-negative) by multiparametric flow cytometry after 5 cycles of decitabine/venetoclax combination therapy. His initial chemotherapy course was complicated by the development of pulmonary nodules within 1 month of treatment initiation, concerning for invasive fungal infection (without microbiologic confirmation). He was treated with posaconazole with subsequent resolution. He then underwent haploidentical HSCT with peripheral blood stem cells from a relative using a reduced-intensity conditioning regimen consisting of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and total-body irradiation (Flu/CY/TBI). GVHD prophylaxis consisted of post-transplant cyclophosphamide, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil. His post-transplant course was complicated by Morganella morganii bacteremia, a Demodex skin infection, and grade II-III acute GVHD of the skin. Peripheral blood chimerism on day +90 post-transplant demonstrated successful engraftment, with 99–100% donor cells, and a BM biopsy showed continued MRD-negative CR.
Unfortunately, a repeat BM biopsy 6 months following transplant showed a 0.2% abnormal blast population by flow cytometry. To augment the graft-versus-leukemia effect, the patient received two cycles of post-allo-HSCT azacitidine, and immunosuppressants were rapidly tapered. However, a BM biopsy on day +223 following transplant revealed relapsed AML with a 10% blast population exhibiting complex cytogenetics and a pathogenic mutation in TP53, as well as variants of unknown significance in FAS, PIK3CA, SETD2, and TET2, with mixed chimerism. The patient was then admitted to the hospital for salvage induction with FLAG-IDA (fludarabine, cytarabine, idarubicin, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [G-CSF]).
During the hospital admission for FLAG-IDA induction (day +249 post-transplant), the patient developed febrile neutropenia with throat irritation and an accompanying cough. His physical exam was notable for decreased breath sounds and bilateral wheezes. He was found to have respiratory syncytial virus and started on ribavirin (oral) with meropenem and levofloxacin due to persistent fevers and a new oxygen requirement. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan (day +261) scan demonstrated new nodular opacities with surrounding ground glass along with bibasilar consolidations . Due to concern for possible pulmonary fungal infection, bronchoscopy was performed. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was only remarkable for an Aspergillus galactomannan index >2; serum cell-free fungal DNA was negative. Given radiographic findings suspicious for a fungal infection and a positive BAL fungal marker, antifungal treatment was started using intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (AmBisome®). His fever curve and oxygen requirement improved after initiation of antifungal therapy and count recovery. He was then discharged on posaconazole, as well as prophylactic acyclovir and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. However, he was readmitted shortly afterwards with low-grade fever, rigors, chills, cough, and hypoxemia. A chest/abdomen/pelvis CT scan (day +279) was remarkable for increased confluence of consolidations in both lower lobes and additional nodules throughout both lungs . The patient was treated for a presumed aspiration pneumonia with broad-spectrum antibiotics, which led to resolution of the fevers and improvement of the cough.
Two weeks following discharge, outpatient CT chest (day +302) imaging revealed progressive bronchocentric and basilar-predominant nodular consolidations despite continued treatment with posaconazole . Additionally, the patient continued to experience a persistent cough with clear sputum and without associated dyspnea or B symptoms. He was readmitted to the hospital for expedited workup of the CT findings, with concern for a persistent invasive fungal infection. EBV-PCR was ordered (day +303), and fine needle aspiration and core biopsy of the right lower lobe were performed (day +304). Unfortunately, the patient developed increased work of breathing and altered mental status, necessitating transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU) (day +305).
His EBV deoxyribonucleic acid polymerase chain reaction (DNA PCR) results returned positive on day +308 at 23,142 IU/mL. Of note, the patient was screened every 2 weeks for EBV-DNA from day +23 post-transplant to day +241 with negative results. The lung biopsy revealed a uniform population of medium to large lymphoid cells with irregular nuclear contours, coarse chromatin, and scant cytoplasm. The final diagnosis was monomorphic PTLD with EBV-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma . By flow cytometry, the abnormal B-cell population expressed CD38 (bright), CD45, surface CD19, surface CD22 (77%), and CD20 (62%), and was negative for CD5, CD10, and surface light chain expression. In situ hybridization showed that the PTLD was EBV-positive and kappa light chain-restricted . A periodic acid-Schiff-diastase stain did not demonstrate any fungal organisms. Although preliminary results from the EBV DNA and lung biopsy became available on day +308, the patient’s condition had acutely deteriorated, requiring intubation and pressor support. Based on his family’s wishes, he was transitioned to comfort care and passed away on day +308.