A 70-year-old-female, with a history of diabetes, arterial hypertension and mild chronic renal failure, fifteen days before her admission to our Department, had been admitted to another hospital, because of substernal squeezing pain of ten hours duration and an electrocardiogram compatible with acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction (ST-segment elevation in leads V1 to V4). Moreover, an echocardiographic study on admission was reported to show regional wall motion abnormalities in the territory of distribution of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD). In the absence of contraindications, she was administered fibrinolysis with Tenekteplase, which was considered successful using the current clinical and electrocardiographic criteria. On hospital day 5, the patient had an episode of hypotension, which was treated with infusion of normal saline but no further investigation due to its short duration and her relatively prompt recovery. On the 9th post-infarct day, the patient was discharged with the recommendation for follow-up coronary angiography.
Six days later, the patient was admitted to our Department for the scheduled coronary arteriography. She reported mild exertional dyspnea and fatigue until about 3 days ago. On examination the patient was an obese woman who appeared well. Her blood pressure was 115/80 and her pulse 80. The only remarkable finding on chest examination was a grade 1-2/6 parasternal holosystolic murmur without gallop or rub. The electrocardiogram was compatible with her recent anteroseptal infarction. An echocardiographic study was performed and disclosed a DMR, consisting of VSD [due to the rupture of the interventricular septum (IVS), with a maximal pressure gradient of approximately 90 mmHg], and rupture of the apical part of the LV free wall with pseudoaneurysm formation . The global LV contractility was affected with the ejection fraction being approximately 40%, whereas the anterior wall appeared hypokinetic and the apex akinetic. A coronary arteriography performed on the same day showed a total occlusion of the LAD branch in its proximal part along with an 80% stenosis of the first obtuse marginal branch of the left circumflex coronary artery. The right coronary angiogram disclosed a 50% stenosis in the midportion of the right coronary artery. In addition left ventriculography confirmed the abnormal communication between left and right ventricle .
On the next day, the patient was transferred to a Cardiac Surgery Center, and underwent surgical closure of the DMR along with double bypass-grafting (left internal mammary artery grafting applied to the LAD and saphenous vein bypass grafting to the obtuse marginal branch).