On October 2013, a 30 year-old unmarried Iranian woman (known case of dysthymic disorder) was admitted to Emergency Department (ED) of 22-Bahman Psychiatric Hospital (Qazvin, Iran) with seizure without any history of head trauma. No medications were administered en route to the hospital. For about five minutes early after admission, she had seizure one time again, thus she suddenly had tonic-clonic seizure (full body “shaking” movements lasting approximately two minutes) with upward gaze and loss of consciousness. Then, postictal confusion with clouded consciousness, regressed attitude and behavior and psycho-motor retardation happened for about two hours. After postictal phase, she indicated to use Zolpidem for a year due to insomnia and not receiving any other medication. She started to use Zolpidem with 5 mg per day irregularly since a year ago but augmented its daily dosage gradually from three months before to 100-150 mg per day in divided doses. She used this dosage for about one month prior to her seizure. She had drug tolerance, abuse and dependence and if she had not used tablets, she would become irritable with decreased energy, feeling of weakness and tremor of hands and feet. In the day of admission, she had not used Zolpidem to maintain her alertness for an important ceremony and after a period of 16 hours without taking Zolpidem, she developed an abstinence syndrome, with generalized tonic clonic seizures. In her medical history, she did not have any systemic, organic, metabolic or endocrine problems unless a history of adenoidectomy 25 years ago and dysthymic disorder from one year ago. She had not experienced any seizure already. In her drug history, she just had used Zolpidem with the mentioned dosage. Some of patient's characteristics were summarized in .
Her pupils were 4 mm and reactive bilaterally. The initial resting 12 lead electrocardiography (EKG) showed normal sinus rhythm without any abnormal changes. There was no localizing or lateralizing neurological signs. Full blood count, urea, electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, hematology studies, renal, thyroid and liver function tests had normal results. Substance-drug abuse tests had negative results. Due to the urgency of patient and availability of computed tomography (CT) scan, we first performed spiral brain CT scan without contrast, which had normal findings. The next day we requested brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalography (EEG), which had normal findings. After all evaluations, we did not find any other etiologies except Zolpidem withdrawal. Our patient was detoxified by tapering Zolpidem gradually over one week. We prescribed quetiapine 25 mg before sleep and clonazepam 1 mg per day. No other seizure attack was noted during hospitalization. Finally, after about 10 days hospitalization, she was discharged with a healthy condition with venlafaxine 75 mg thrice daily (t.i.d), clonazepam 1mg daily and quetiapine 25 mg daily at bed time (for her insomnia). In about 6 months follow-up after the first seizure, she had no further seizure attacks.