A 30-year-old Caucasian woman presented to hospital with a three-week history of influenza like symptoms, including joint and muscle aches, fatigue, fever, rigors and tachycardia. She denied breathlessness or productive cough. She had already received a course of antibiotics from her general practitioner. Her inflammatory markers were normal, but a chest radiograph showed bilateral patchy areas of consolidation. She was discharged with a further course of oral antibiotics for presumed pneumonia.
Her symptoms gradually resolved, but the radiological abnormalities persisted on serial chest radiographs. She was subsequently referred to our respiratory clinic six weeks after her initial presentation.
In the clinic, our patient reported feeling well, apart from dry cough and tiredness. Her medical history included childhood asthma, asymptomatic chronic idiopathic urticaria, irritable bowel syndrome and multiple sclerosis. She had been receiving treatment for multiple sclerosis with interferon-β for the previous five months at a dose of 44μg subcutaneously three times a week. Concern that the fever and influenza-like symptoms were possible side effects led to discontinuation of the interferon therapy, which was not resumed. She was also taking omeprazole, mebeverine and amitriptyline. Her family history was relevant for multiple sclerosis in her sister, hypothyroidism and polymyalgia rheumatica in her mother and type 2 diabetes mellitus in her father. She smoked 10 to 15 cigarettes a day. On examination, she had normal vital signs. There was no lymphadenopathy and she did not have any skin lesions. The results of cardiovascular examination were normal. Respiratory examination revealed an area of bronchial breathing on her left lung, but there was no wheeze or crepitations.
At her initial presentation with presumed pneumonia, her full blood count, renal and liver function, and calcium and glucose levels were all normal. She had a C-reactive protein level of 11mg/L (normal range, less than 5mg/L). Normal results were found at the clinic for her thyroid function, an autoimmune screen - including levels of antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigen and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody - and her 24-hour urinary calcium levels. A plain chest radiograph (Figure
) and a computed tomography scan of her thorax (Figure
) are shown.
Pulmonary function testing revealed a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 2.8L/sec (95% of predicted rate), a forced vital capacity (FVC) of 3.56 L (105% of predicted volume), an FEV1/FVC ratio of 94%, a transfer factor of the lung for carbon monoxide of 74% of the predicted capacity, and a carbon monoxide transfer coefficient of 85% of the predicted value.
On bronchoscopy, the mucosa was fragile and hyperemic. Fluid from bronchoalveolar lavage was negative for malignancy and infection. Acid-fast bacilli were not detected on microscopy or culture of the bronchoalveolar lavage specimen. A transbronchial lung biopsy specimen showed the presence of histiocytes, giant cells and noncaseating granulomas (Figure
), consistent with a diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis.
Although our patient felt better after the interferon-β was discontinued, she continued to report fatigue and persistent dry cough. She had persistent and extensive bilateral parenchymal changes in her lungs and some degree of impairment in her lung function test, including reduced transfer factor of the lung for carbon monoxide. For these reasons, she was started on 40mg of prednisolone daily. Within four weeks of treatment, there was significant resolution of the radiological abnormalities, her cough disappeared, and she reported reduced fatigue. She continued on a reducing regime of steroid therapy over the following six months and remained well with no flare-up of sarcoidosis. Her disease course was mild and resembled that of reported interferon-induced sarcoidosis cases, as discussed in the following section.