A 65-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a six-week history of lethargy and loss of appetite. She had also noticed progressive pedal edema for a few weeks. She had no significant past medical history. An initial examination revealed that she was pale and hypotensive (blood pressure 98/60 mmHg) with significant peripheral edema.
Her investigations revealed hyponatremia (118 mmol/L), abnormal liver function tests with albumin 25 g/L, alkaline phosphatase 244 units/L, alanine transaminase 61 units/L, aspartate transaminase 61 units/L, and pancytopenia with hemoglobin 11 g/dL, white blood cell count 3.0 × 109/L, platelet count 99 × 109/L. A 250 μg short tetracosatrin test showed cortisol results at 0 minute of 93 nmol/L, 30 minutes of 43 nmol/L and 60 minutes of 315 mmol/L, suggestive of adrenal failure. Baseline plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone was reduced at 4 ng/L (reference range 10 ng/L to 40 ng/L) in keeping with secondary hypoadrenalism. She was started on hydrocortisone replacement and showed slight improvement. Further endocrine tests showed thyroid-stimulating hormone 0.35 mU/L, free thyroxine 7.1 pmol/L, free tri-iodothyronine less than 1.7 pmol/L, suggesting secondary hypothyroidism; follicle stimulating hormone 6.3 U/L and luteinizing hormone 1.2 U/L, indicating secondary hypogonadism; serum prolactin 343 mIU/L and serum insulin-like growth factor 1 34 nmol/L (normal range 6 nmol/L to 36 nmol/L). There was no evidence of diabetes insipidus. These tests were interpreted as showing generalized anterior pituitary dysfunction. Our patient received thyroxine replacement in addition to hydrocortisone and was subjectively improved. Even after steroids, there was no evidence of diabetes insipidus.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her pituitary revealed no mass lesions in her pituitary. In view of her peripheral edema, an abdominal and pelvic ultrasound was performed which revealed multiple intra-abdominal lymph nodes, multiple solid liver lesions and a 2 cm right groin lymph node . Full body computed tomography (CT) confirmed the ultrasound findings as well as identifying involvement of the base of her skull. She underwent a biopsy from a right groin lymph node, which showed reactive changes only. Subsequently a liver biopsy was reported as showing a highly malignant anaplastic tumor of unknown origin.
Our patient was referred to the local oncology unit where histology was reviewed. Immunophenotyping was performed with CD19, CD20, CD22, CD79 and B-cell lymphoma 2 and the diagnosis was confirmed as diffuse large B-cell non Hodgkin's lymphoma . A positron emission tomography (PET) scan confirmed widespread disease including the pituitary (Stage 4).
Our patient received six cycles of chemotherapy with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin and prednisolone (R-CHOP). Repeat PET scanning showed a complete metabolic response at all known previous sites of the disease .
At the same time, steroid and thyroxine replacement doses were progressively withdrawn under close monitoring. There was full recovery of her adrenal, thyroid and gonadal axes and she was off all medication and clinically well when reviewed in the endocrine clinic 10 months after completing chemotherapy (see Table ).