In January 2015, a 61-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our Oral Pathology and Medicine Unit by his own dentist for white oral lesions, since it was initially thought to be a fungal infection and he had received treatment based on topical antifungals, without a significant clinical improvement.
Past medical history included appendectomy, cholecystectomy, and tonsillectomy. He had never smoked or used drugs recreationally and did not drink alcohol. At the time of the first visit, he was not taking any medication. No symptoms were referred by the patient, but he had noted a progressive increase of the lesion size in recent months. Clinical examination showed a thickened hyperkeratosis, which was confluent in widely exophytic papillary plaques. These lesions appeared homogeneously whitish-gray with verrucous surface and localized on the maxillary gingiva and palatal and alveolar ridge mucosa . Incisional biopsies were performed, and multiple samples of tissue from the lesions were taken, using a 3-mm punch biopsy.
The histopathological analysis revealed exophytic, hyperkeratotic lesions with prominent verruciform or papillary surface and acanthosis forming droplet-shaped epithelial projections into the lamina propria . A sample was described as a hyperkeratosis with finding areas of verrucous hyperplasia. Other two gingival samples showed a hyperkeratosis with focal mild degree dysplasia . Some areas showed intraepithelial alteration compatible with human papillomavirus infection. One portion of the gingival biopsy specimen, previously frozen, was used for DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) extraction. Human papillomavirus DNA presence was confirmed with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplifications, and the viral typing, by direct sequencing of DNA common genomic region L1, displayed positive result for research of HPV subtype. Before surgical procedure, a complete blood cell count was performed to exclude coagulation disorders, along with viral profile. The excision of the lesion has been performed, under local anesthesia, using a diode laser (wavelength 808 nm) set at 1.5 W, the optical fiber, 300 μm, in a pulsated-wave emission mode to reduce the layer carbonization of the tissues . The size of the lesion was 1.25 × 3.0 cm, and the laser settings were fluence 16 J/cm2, pulse length 20 ms, and spot diameter of 2 mm. No postoperative complications, as well as no swelling and/or pain reported by the patient, have been observed. A periodic follow-up every 6 months has been scheduled. At the last oral examination, 2 years after surgery, we found no signs of loss of alveolar process in correspondence of the surgical ablation site, whereas a mild hyperkeratosis of the maxillary vestibular gingiva was clinically objectified . The microscopic examination performed on a tissue specimen taken in the same area of the laser treatment showed no signs of epithelial dysplasia .