An 11-month-old boy presented with left inguinoscrotal swelling that had begun since birth. He had no medical history. During the initial physical examination, there was a translucent mass in the left scrotum (A). Ultrasonography showed a huge hydrocele (8 cm) extending from the swollen scrotum to the abdominal cavity via the internal inguinal canal and a compressed testicle at the bottom of the scrotum (B). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high signal intensity of a unilocular hydrocele on T2-weighted images (C). Additionally, the abdominal hydrocele was compressing the bladder to the right (C). We opted to perform LPEC, as we reasoned that the ASH exhibited a firm adhesion of the spermatic cord to the processus vaginalis (PV) and LPEC could allow performing a high ligation with minimum detachment.
LPEC was performed as described previously , . The procedure was performed under general anesthesia. A paraumbilical block was added for postoperative pain relief. After a small skin incision at the umbilicus, an expandable 5-mm trocar was inserted. The abdominal cavity was filled with CO2 at a flow rate of 0.8–1.0 L/min to a level of 6–7 mm Hg. A 30° telescope was inserted through the umbilical port. After obtaining adequate view of the abdominal cavity, the assistant's working forceps was inserted via the lateral abdominal wall. The operative bed was tilted to the head-down (10–15°) to relocate the intestine from the internal inguinal regions to the upper abdomen. Subsequently, abdominal inspection of the internal inguinal regions was performed to detect the PV and ASH. We confirmed the “Springback sign” (SBB sign) wherein the hydrocele swelled into the abdominal cavity when the scrotum was compressed and shrank when the scrotum was released. Laparoscopic findings showed a whitish mass in the abdominal cavity through the left internal inguinal ring (A and B). A long and straight 19-gauge needle (Lapaherclosure; Hakko Medical Co., Tokyo, Japan) that has a wire loop to hold a nonabsorbable suture thread at the tip of the needle was inserted via the surface of the inguinal region. After performing the extraperitoneal purse suture around the internal inguinal ring without the puncture of ASH and pulling out both the ends of the suture thread, the PV orifice was completely closed (C). After removing the forceps, the umbilical wound was closed. The postoperative course was uneventful. No recurrence of ASH was found in the first postoperative year.