A 26-year-old Caucasian male presented with history of intermittent episodes of pleuritic chest associated with three episodes of haemoptysis, three days prior to admission. The volume of blood coughed out was 15 ml in each instance and the chest pain lasted only a few minutes, resolving spontaneously. He denied any fever, shortness of breath, palpitation, loss of appetite or weight loss. His past medical history was significant for recurrent pneumonia and epididymitis during childhood and adolescence. He previously underwent scrotal exploration and orchidopexy for torsion of the right testis 9 months ago. He denied history of substance abuse or sexually transmitted diseases. Physical examination revealed that his vital signs were within normal limits, chest was clear with no added sounds and there was no calf tenderness.
Routine blood tests including a D-dimer level and COVID-19 PCR test did not reveal any abnormalities. Chest X-ray showed normal cardio-mediastinal contour and no evidence of any lung lesions. Further investigation with a CT chest showed aberrant formation of segmental lung tissue within the left lower lobe with air trapping in a postero-basal location. There was no discernable communication to the bronchial tree . This region had a systemic arterial supply taking origin from the descending thoracic aorta above the diaphragm . Venous drainage was via the pulmonary venous system, namely the left inferior pulmonary vein. There was also ground glass change within the sequestered segment which was suggestive of infection and/or haemorrhage. Findings were suggestive of an intra-lobar pulmonary sequestration. A lung function test performed showed normal spirometry values and CO transfer factor.
There were no further episodes of haemoptysis following admission and the case was referred to us for surgical management. The patient was positioned in the right lateral decubitus position after induction of anaesthaesia and double lumen endotracheal tube was inserted to isolate the left lung. Initially, a VATS port was introduced in the 8th intercostal space in the anterior axillary line and the pleural cavity was inspected. An anomalous artery approximately 3 cm in diameter was seen arising from the lower part of the descending thoracic aorta supplying the sequestered segment . The venous drainage was to the inferior pulmonary vein and there was no separate airway communication of the sequestered lung to the tracheobronchial tree.
In order to achieve safe control and division of the large anomalous artery, it was decided to make a separate posterolateral thoracotomy incision (about 6 cm in length). The fifth intercostal space was entered after splitting the latissimus dorsi muscle and sparing the serratus anterior. The anomalous artery was stapled and divided using an Endo GIA™ 45 mm vascular stapler . The inferior pulmonary vein, the ongoing lower lobe pulmonary artery and the superior segmental artery were stapled and divided using endo GIA staplers. The left lower lobe bronchus was divided after test inflation of the lung and the left lower lobe was delivered. Warm saline was infiltrated and inflation of the lung showed no air leak. An indwelling extrapleural catheter was inserted under direct vision for pain relief. The wound was closed in layers with a 24 Fr drain placed through the port site. The patient was extubated in theatre and shifted to recovery in a stable state. Post-operative Chest X-ray showed good expansion of the left lung. The pleural drain was removed on post-operative day 2 and the patient was discharged home uneventfully on day 3.
Histopathology of the specimen grossly demonstrated a subpleural focally cystic area with dense haemorrhagic parenchyma measuring 20 × 10 × 15 mm in the superior segment. Microscopy showed the artery entering the lower segment and patchy recent intra-alveolar haemorrhage in normally alveolated lung. There were also foci of lymphocytic interstitial inflammation.
The patient had an uncomplicated post-operative course and was asymptomatic when reviewed after 6 weeks from surgery.