A 45-year-old Saudi male presented to the emergency department of a local hospital in March of 2018 with a typical picture of acute appendicitis; he was admitted for an open appendectomy. Intraoperatively, they discovered a perforated appendix; histopathology revealed a severely inflamed perforated appendix. After 4 days, his first operation was complicated by a feculent discharge from the peritoneal drain due to a complicated cecal fistula with a septic clinical picture. He was admitted for an exploratory laparotomy, and segmental resection of the involved bowel with primary anastomosis was done. Two days after the second operation, he had an anastomotic leak with peritonitis, and he had feculent discharge from the wound site and the peritoneal drain; he was shifted to the operating room for an exploratory laparotomy where a right hemicolectomy was done with primary anastomosis. On the seventh day, and despite the two operative attempts, the patient had intraperitoneal dissemination of fecal material and generalized peritonitis for the third time; he was sent for an exploratory laparotomy where a diverting ileostomy and a colostomy as a mucus fistula was done.
The patient did not have any remarkable family history, he is medically free, not a smoker or alcoholic and doesn't have any significant medical history.
After 9 months, the patient was admitted to the General Surgery department in Al-Hada Armed Forces Hospital for an open ileostomy and colostomy reversal surgery. His abdominal examination revealed a normal soft and lax abdomen with a right ileostomy and left colostomy openings. On admission to Al-Hada Hospital, his white blood cell count was 6.12 × 10−9/l, mostly lymphocytes (3.27 × 10−9/l). His hemoglobin was 146 g/l, platelet count was 370 × 10−9/l. C- reactive protein was 1.5 mg/l, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 15 mm/h. Carcinoembryonic antigen was 0.9 ng/ml.
White blood cell count normal range is 4 to 11 × 10−9/l, lymphocytes normal range is 0.1 to 1.1 × 10−9/l. Hemoglobin normal range is 135 to 180 g/l. Platelets normal range is 150 to 400 × 10−9/l, C- reactive protein normal range is 0.0 to 5.0 mg/l, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) normal range is 0.0 to 10.0 mm/h, and Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) normal range is 0.0 to 5.0 ng/ml.
Pre-operative abdominal computerized tomography with the contrast given intravenously, orally, rectally, and through the ileostomy. The axial CT view is shown in . The coronal and sagittal CT views are shown in .
Pre-operative abdominal CT insured a patent passage of the bowel. But the calcified densities and fat stranding opacities were thought to be related to post-operative changes. Intraoperatively, laparotomy under general anesthesia showed adhesions and several irregular bone-like tissues of hard consistency and sharp edges with some spindle-shaped structures resembling needles were found on the mesentery of the small intestine . All the bone-like tissues were carefully removed.
The bone-like tissues were examined histologically . It showed trabecular bone fragments, suggestive of heterotopic ossification. Post-operatively, the patient was advanced slowly to a normal diet, and he improved gradually. The patient's last follow-up was in January 2021; he showed complete recovery with no complications.