A 64-year-old female with no significant past medical history was referred to our institution after new microcalcifications were identified in the left breast on screening mammography. Diagnostic ultrasonography (US) showed a 4.9 × 5.1 × 4.2 mm low echoic mass on the left between external-inferior and internal-inferior quadrants . Only duct papillomatosis was found on core needle biopsy. This was found to be concordant, and she was treated with observation.
Two and a half years after the first consultation, she palpated a mass at the same location. A new US highlighted a larger 26.1 × 22.6 × 26.8 mm low echoic mass . Benign adenomyoepithelioma (AME) was identified on core needle biopsy. As the patient was a candidate for breast conservation, lumpectomy was performed. The histological analysis revealed a benign AME with few mitotic figures measuring 31 × 27 × 21 mm. All surgical margins were negative . The tumor consisted of both epithelial cells positive for CAM 5.2 and myoepithelial cells positive for α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) .
Six months after the primary operation, she noticed a mass at the same location again. Diagnostic US highlighted a 34 × 26 mm hypoechoic mass along the left lumpectomy cavity . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no signs of distant metastasis. MRI showed multiple masses, which invaded the skin. Pectoralis muscle invasion was also suspected .
We therefore performed a left mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection. Pathological examination showed a malignant AME with multiple AME tumors collectively measuring 110 × 105 × 55 mm . The tumor consisted of both epithelial cells positive for CAM 5.2 and myoepithelial cells positive for SMA. Ki-67 labeling index (Ki-67) was 44%. The myoepithelial cells were strongly positive for P53 . Additional intraductal consistent with AME were spread about one third of the entire breast. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that these lesions were also consistent with AME. Resected lymph nodes (0/26) were negative.
Eight months after the secondary operation, chest X-ray and CT revealed two nodular masses located in her left upper (measuring 8 × 7 mm) and right upper lobes of the lungs (measuring 10 × 7 mm) . She underwent chemotherapy with fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide (FEC) for 9 cycles. Imaging after 9 cycles showed a partial reduction in the lung metastases and no other new distant metastasis. Due to the cardiotoxicity of epirubicin, we elected to perform pulmonary metastasectomies. A left upper lobectomy with video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) and subsequently a right segmentectomy (S2) were performed.
Nine months after the metastasectomy, however, she presented with right lower abdominal pain and dysuria. A whole-body CT scan demonstrated multiple lung metastases, right kidney metastasis, right adrenal metastasis, ovarian metastasis, and abdominal paraaortic node metastasis. She underwent salvage eribulin monotherapy. The whole-body CT after eribulin 3 cycles demonstrated that the diseases continued to progress. Two months later, she had expired. Autopsy demonstrated that the metastasis was widespread to the heart muscle, kidney, and brain .