A 44-year-old woman with symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and weakness of the limbs for more than 10 months was admitted to a local hospital. Initial examination revealed high blood pressure; the systolic blood pressure exceeded 200 mmHg. Laboratory investigations showed that the patient had a total serum calcium of 4.84 mmol/L (reference range: 2.1-2.6 mmol/L) and a PTH level of 1396.5 pg/mL (reference range: 12.00–88.00 pg/mL). She was diagnosed with pHPT according to the guidelines for diagnosis and treatment by Marcella D Walker and Shonni J Silverberg . Preoperative neck ultrasonography (US) revealed a mass close to the lower side of the right thyroid lobe that was considering as right parathyroid adenoma and a cystic solid mass in the sheath of the left carotid artery that was considered as schwannoma by the radiologist, which was consistent with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . 99mTc-Sestamibi scintigraphy (MIBI) showed an uptake in the right inferior parathyroid mass; therefore, the patient was suspected of having right lower parathyroid adenoma. However, MIBI was negative in cystic solid mass in the sheath of the left carotid artery.
The patient was diagnosed with pHPT and was treated with intravenous hydration with 0.9% saline daily and diuretics. The mass and the tissue of the right lower pole of the thyroid gland were removed after operation. Intraoperative quick-frozen section showed the possibility of thyroid adenoma nodule. Meanwhile, intra-operative PTH level did not show significant decrease. Considering that frozen section analysis and intraoperative PTH measurement could not always provide the final definitive diagnosis and further neck exploration would cause unnecessarily extra damage and prolong the operation time, the operation was terminated after communicating with the family members by the surgeons at the local hospital. Finally, the paraffin-embedded tissue was showed to be a thyroid follicular adenoma with a small amount of parathyroid tissue on postoperative pathologic examination . After surgery, the patient’s symptoms persisted without a significant decrease in PTH level (range: 276.30–615.2 pg/mL) and serum calcium (range: 2.43–3.24 mmol/L) . Subsequently, computed tomography (CT) reported a mass in the sheath of the left carotid artery, while the MIBI findings were still negative . Even positron emission tomography (PET) did not show increased metabolism of the left neck mass which was considered a neurogenic tumor, highly suggestive of the schwannoma suggested by the radiologist. During that time, the patient was treated with bisphosphonates – zoledronic acid. However, serum calcium was still higher than the normal range during treatment.
Later, the patient was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. Upon admission to our hospital, a more detailed history was obtained. Her family and other medical histories were unremarkable. On physical examination, her blood pressure was slightly high (BP: 151/101 mmHg); a 4-cm–long, old, horizontal surgical scar could be seen on the neck, which was well healed. A mass was palpable behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle of the left neck, with smooth surface, clear borders, normal mobility and no tenderness. Laboratory investigations in our hospital showed hypercalcemia and elevated PTH level. In addition, the patient also had hypokalemia (2.8 mmol/L, reference range: 3.5–5.3 mmol/L), increased urinary calcium excretion (7.9 mmol/24 h, reference range: 2.5–7.5 mmol/24 h), and decreased urinary phosphorus excretion (13.5 mmol/24 h, reference range: 16.1–42 mmol/24 h). Osteoporosis was defined by dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) (T score: -2.5 or below), and the bone mineral density (BMD) values (in g/cm2) of the lumbar spine (L1–L4), femoral neck, and hip were 0.731, 0.559, and 0.694, respectively. T-scores were -2.9, -2.6, and -2.0, respectively. US of the neck also suggested that the mass in the sheath of the left carotid artery might be a schwannoma . To identify the exact lesion location, an SVS was performed. Following SVS, the highest quick PTH peaks in the left middle and superior thyroid vein were identified . This result highly suggested that a PTH-producing tissue was present in the cystic solid mass in the sheath of the left carotid artery, which was suggestive of an ectopic parathyroid gland. The patient then underwent a second operation to remove the mass in the sheath of the left carotid artery; the excised mass measured 5.5 cm × 2.5 cm × 2 cm in size. The final pathological diagnosis of an ectopic parathyroid adenoma was confirmed . On the first day after the second operation, the patient’s serum calcium and PTH levels had normalized. Her symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and weakness also disappeared postoperatively. She was pleased with the treatment.