An 84-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for treatment of a primary RP tumour. At the age of 52, the patient underwent complete resection of a mass, approximately 3 cm at RP in 1991. The pathological diagnosis was LMS. Twenty-four years after the primary resection, metachronous recurrences occurred within the soft tissues, which were repeatedly resected. The recurrence sites were as follows: psoas muscle, latissimus dorsi muscle, deltoid muscle, and chest wall. As the tumours within the soft tissues felt stiff upon palpation, these tumours were easily detected by the patient. Ten recurrences occurred in the extremities, two in the retroperitoneum and three in the back. The chest wall was also involved twice, but both were completely resected. In 2015, multiple liver metastases were identified. Computed tomography(CT) showed that the tumour was located in segments 4, 5, 6, and 8. The whole tumour was enhanced in the early phase, and the enhancement was prolonged in the late phase (A–C). Ethoxybenzyl-magnetic resonance imaging(EOB-MRI) revealed that the tumours showed a high signal intensity on T2WI and a low signal intensity on T1WI (A and B). S4 subsegmentectomy and partial resection of sections 5,6, and 8, and cholecystectomy were performed. The operation time was 338 min, while intraoperative bleeding was measured in 400 ml. Gross examination revealed tumors with a fleshly and white-gray appearance and haemorrhagic foci . Microscopically, the neoplastic cells appeared elongated with abundant cytoplasm and centrally located nuclei containing blunt-ended nucleoli resembling cigars . Pathological examination revealed LMS metastasis. In 2017, liver metastasis recurred, and partial resection of segments 3 and 4 was performed (A). The patient was pathologically diagnosed with LMS metastases. In 2019, the patient underwent liver resection for the third time for segment 8 recurrence and survived with no signs of recurrence 1 year after the last surgery (B). Long-term survival of 29 years was achieved after undergoing over 20 surgical resections. All procedures used in this study were approved by the ethics committee of our institution. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and accompanying images