In March 2020, a 59-year-old woman with diabetes mellitus presented with a two-year history of ulcerated rashes on the left ankle and both sides of the jaw. Three years prior to the presentation, the patient was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes at a local hospital but had not received standard treatment. The patient worked at a construction site but denied a history of skin trauma. The skin lesions were slightly itchy and sometimes painful. The patient had been assessed at another clinic, where she received surgical treatment for a suspected cutaneous tumor. Physical examination revealed three annular areas of erythematous and raised plaque with an ulcer over the left ankle and both sides of the jaw .
The fasting blood glucose concentration was 10.41 mmol/L (reference range: 3.90–6.10 mmol/L) while the white blood cell count was 3800 cells/mm3 (reference range: 4000 to 10000 cells/mm3), with 47.7% neutrophils and 30.2% lymphocytes. Liver and renal function tests were done, and the results were within normal ranges. HIV serology was negative. Direct microscopy of exudate smears in either 10% of potassium hydroxide solution (KOH) or fluorescence staining displayed slender hyphae . Biopsies were taken from skin lesions on the left chin and left ankle, before being immediately sent for histopathological examination and fungal culture. Both lesions showed similar histopathological responses, with pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia in the epidermis; neutrophil abscess in the superficial dermis, diffuse lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and a few neutrophils infiltrated in the dermis; and multinucleated giant cells.
Periodic acid-Schiff stain revealed dark red spores in multinucleated giant cells . The mycological culture of exudate from the three lesions and biopsied tissues from the two lesions were performed on Sabouraud dextrose agar that contained 0.05% chloramphenicol, at 25°C. The growth of creamy, brownish-beige colonies that are typical of Sporothrix spp. was noted after incubation . All of the samples developed similar colonies on SDA slant media. Microculture showed thin septate hyphae with conidia in a dense arrangement at its extremities. The fungal culture was confirmed to be S. globosa by sequencing the ribosomal region ITS1-ITS2 of the rDNA (GenBank accession no. OP614927). Conclusively, the patient was diagnosed with cutaneous disseminated sporotrichosis caused by S. globosa infection.
Antifungal susceptibility testing using commerical microdilution plate (Trek Diagnostic Systems, Ltd., East Grinstead, United Kingdom) was carried out based on the manufacturer’s instructions. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values were as follows: anidulafungin (0.25 μg/ml), micafungin (0.5 μg/ml), fluconazole (>256 μg/ml), itraconazole (0.5 μg/ml), voriconazole (>8 μg/ml), caspofungin (1 μg/ml), 5-flucytosine (4.0 μg/ml), posaconazole (1.0 μg/ml) and amphotericin B (<0.12 μg/ml).
Considering the clinical epidemiological diagnosis on the patient, therapy with itraconazole was initiated at 400 mg/day, for two months. During treatment, liver and kidney function were normal; blood glucose concentration varied between 9.85 mmol/l and 12.57 mmol/l; and the WBC count varied from 3400 cells/mm3 to 3700 cells/mm3. The patient declined diabetes treatment and tests for identifying the cause of the low count of white blood cells. On the 40th day, Leucogen Tablets (60 mg/day) were administered to the patient to raise the white blood cell count. Finally, after a two-month course of treatment, the lesions resolved, and the WBC count rose to 4100 cells/mm3. There was no recurrence after three years of follow-up and the patient is currently being treated for diabetes at a local hospital.