We present the case of a 40-year-old Caucasian man who sought emergency medical attention on 26 August 2022 due to odynophagia, a swollen right submandibular lymph node, cervical pain, and a fever of up to 38°C. He reported having had high-risk sexual contact (exclusively oral intercourse) 2 weeks before the onset of the symptoms. His male partner was diagnosed with genital HMPXV 5 days later with a positive real-time PCR for orthopoxvirus. Until that moment, our patient was asymptomatic. He had previously been diagnosed with human papillomavirus condyloma, for which he had been treated with cryotherapy and imiquimod. There were no known drug allergies. The patient lived in a suburban area of Madrid with his mother and no animals. He had never been vaccinated for smallpox. Informed consent was given prior to writing and publishing this case report.
The physical exam revealed swollen tonsils and uvula. Multiple coalescing ulcerations covered the right tonsil with a necrotic base and confluent lesions, which showed a necrotic center and white margins . No anogenital or skin lesions were present at this initial visit. During his stay at the hospital, a small number of millimetric umbilicated pustules with an erythematous base on the trunk and the proximal region of the limbs also appeared .
With verbal consent, swabs from nasopharyngeal, rectal, and urine samples were taken by the Dermatology Department at the Emergency Room (ER). Given that the patient did not present alarming signs, he was prescribed amoxicillin and anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen) and was discharged.
Two hours later, he suddenly woke up at home, in his bed, due to an oppressive epigastric pain extending to the chest. The pain lasted approximately one and a half hours and prompted his return to the ER. At the time of admission, the temperature was 36.3°; blood pressure, 102/70 mm Hg; heart rate, 75 beats per minute; and basal oxygen saturation, 95%. There were no heart murmurs in the cardiac auscultation. No signs of edema were observed.
The chest x-ray revealed no significant findings . The electrocardiogram (ECG) on arrival showed a diffuse ST elevation with an upward concavity in leads (I, II, AVL, V4, V5, and V6), a negative T wave in III, and a diffusely depressed PR segment . The initial troponin I determination was 9.7 ng/ml (Architect Abbot), and the C-reactive protein level was 10.5 mg/L (normal value < 5 mg/L). The transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. No regional wall abnormalities, no significant valve diseases, and no pericardial effusion was observed .
The patient was later admitted to the coronary care unit; he remained asymptomatic and hemodynamically stable. Chest pain was controlled with intravenous anti-inflammatory drugs (50 mg of dexketoprofen every 8 h) and 0.5 mg of colchicine every 12 h. No more drugs were administered. Forty-eight hours later, the HMPXV infection was confirmed by the Microbiology Department at our hospital. Samples sent for testing included urine and plasma; swabs were taken from a suspected skin lesion, and rectal and pharyngeal samples were collected. A microbiological diagnosis was made by real-time PCR . In addition, he was screened for sexually transmitted infections (STIs), including Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, in a pharyngeal swab, a rectal swab, and a first-void urine sample, as well as HBV, HIV, HCV, and syphilis serology, which came back negative.
During admission to the coronary care unit, the Infectious Diseases team monitored the patient, and other potential causes of acute myopericarditis were discarded. Differential diagnoses included viral and bacterial infections, non-infectious causes such as drug abuse, hypersensitivity reactions, and systemic disorders.
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance (CMR) performed on day 6 showed a preserved left ejection fraction (56%) with no regional wall abnormalities. An increased myocardial and pericardial signal intensity on the T2 STIR sequence was suggestive of edema . On the T1 mapping, an average native T1 of 1,160 ms was observed, and on the T2 mapping, an average T2 of 60 ms was observed. In addition, the quantitative assessment of the cardiac ECV (extracellular volume) was 35%. The T1 and T2 mapping values were measured on a 1.5 Tesla MR Philips machine within a single breath-hold using a modified Look-Locker with inversion recovery (MOLLI) and gradient and spin echo (Gra-SE) sequences, respectively. Normal native myocardial T1 values lie between 1,025 and 1,075 ms, whereas T2 values lie between 50 and 57 ms (internally validated). A color-coded image of T2 mapping , native T1 , and enhanced T1 mapping were also performed. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) images, obtained by using a balanced fast field echo (FFE) sequence, showed subepicardial and mesocardial enhancement of the myocardium and mild signs of pericarditis, which were considered consistent with acute myopericarditis (–). The patient met all modified Lake Louise criteria for myocarditis: T2 criteria (myocardial edema shown on a T2 STIR sequence and T2 mapping) and T1 criteria (non-ischemic myocardial injury shown on an LGE sequence and T1 mapping). Signs of mild pericarditis were also exhibited.
According to the CMR results, the myocardial injury and inflammatory markers, as well as the remarkable electrocardiographic findings, supported the diagnosis of acute myopericarditis. Moreover, the temporary association with an active HMPXV infection and ruling out other possibilities of causes of myopericarditis suggested a myopericarditis associated with an orthopoxvirus infection. Therefore, a myocardial biopsy or coronariography was not required.
As potential HMPXV infection complications (systemic involvement and myocardial damage) occurred in this patient, requiring hospitalization, tecovirimat was requested from a drug agency. Following the Infectious Diseases Department's instructions, the treatment started 48 h after admission: 600 mg of oral Tecovirimat every 12 h for 14 days. No adverse events were reported. During his stay at the hospital, the previous electrocardiographic findings became normal , whereas the oropharyngeal lesions increased in size and coalesced into large ulcerations located on both tonsils and the uvula (, ).
After the resolution of the symptoms and the improvement in the inflammatory response and the myocardial injury markers , the patient was discharged with close monitoring and follow up by both the Cardiology, Infectious Diseases, and Dermatology departments. The patient's last visit was on 5 October and he had completely recovered. Transthoracic echocardiogram and pharyngeal examination were normal without swollen submandibular adenopathy, and he remained asymptomatic. Pharyngeal samples for HMPXV tested positive on 5 September and 12 September and finally negative on 20 September. A new CMR will be performed 6 months after the episode, approximately on 20 March 2023.