A 38-year-old male presented to the hospital with a firm swelling over the 2nd metatarsal slowly progressing over a period of 4 months, during the time of presentation, the patient complained of pain while walking. On examination, the swelling was firm and hard, with deformity present over foot, there was no distal neurovascular deficit .
Blood investigations were within normal limits and infection markers were not raised. Initial screening radiological investigations included X-rays. It showed a tumorous growth involving the shaft of the 2nd metatarsal of the right foot, with a characteristic soap bubble appearance . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) imaging and computerized tomographic (CT) scan done and excision of tumor planned with ray’s amputation of the 2nd metatarsal. MRI is a fairly non-specific modality of treatment, in this case, it was primarily done to assess preoperatively the surrounding soft tissue for better pre-operative planning of the excision.
A straight 8 cm incision centered over the second metatarsal taken and tumor dissection done to separate it from the surrounding soft tissue and tumor with involved metatarsal excised. The 1st and the 3rd metatarsal bone were held in approximation with the use of Ethibond sutures and tightened to reduce the gap between the bones created a result of the void after removal of the tumor tissue. This was done as a precautionary measure as giant cell tumors of the bone have a high incidence of recurrence at the same site after excision curettage. On gross assessment, the intraoperative sample showed that the GCTB has a dark brown-to-reddish appearance that is friable in texture. The gold standard for diagnosing a GCT is based on biopsy histopathological findings. The key histomorphologic feature is multinucleated giant cells .
Postoperatively, below-knee slab was given for support and continued for 2 weeks later partial weight-bearing started with boot Walker after suture removal. Six monthly chest radiograph and CT scan were done to detect any metastatic involvement but no any local or systemic involvement was found at 1 year. At follow-up of 1 year, the patient is doing all the daily activities without any difficulty and has normal range of motion. Moreover, radiograph does not show any signs of recurrence .