A 27-year-old man was suffering from uncomfortable feelings. He had no family history of Tourette's syndrome or physical comorbidities. At age six, he started calling out “Je [dʒə]” and “I [i],” spitting, and touching his body. Around the age of 10, his doctor told him that his symptoms would improve without any treatment by the age of 20.
After having graduated from university, he began working in sales to the age of 25, when he retired and started attending a school for comedy. At this time, his symptoms remained, so he visited another children's clinic, where he was diagnosed with Tourette's syndrome. He was prescribed 1 mg of oral risperidone, but his verbal and motor tics continued.
When he was 27, he decided to visit our hospital in April 2017. His doctor prescribed 1.5 mg oral risperidone, to be taken just before bed. Within 1 week, his family members reported that he stopped calling out “Je” and “I,” spitting, and touching his body. However, he still wanted to call out, in some occasions, especially when he felt stressed. After increasing the dose of risperidone to 2 mg, he was moved to another hospital because his doctor assessed that his tic symptoms were successfully treated. However, the symptoms reappeared one month later. In July 2017, his doctor increased the dose of risperidone to 2.5 mg. Thereafter, he experienced no tics.
In February 2018, he began to experience a strange feeling for approximately 15 minutes that people seemed to walk quickly, but then return to a normal pace. His family told him that people had been walking at a normal pace. He experienced this feeling at least twice a week for 6 months. This usually appeared when he looked at the window after he went to bed at night. He was still taking 2.5 mg of oral risperidone. In July 2018, he visited our hospital again to treat these symptoms. He also suffered from ejaculation difficulty. At that time, he was neither depressed nor manic.
In September 2018, the dose of risperidone was decreased to 1.5 mg and coadministration of 6 mg oral aripiprazole was initiated. From October 2018 onwards, he has no longer experienced the abnormal feeling of “time going fast.” His ejaculation disorder has also improved. On the basis of these observations, we gradually reduced the dose of risperidone, whereas the dose of aripiprazole was increased.
Since December 2018, he has been taking 15 mg of oral aripiprazole alone and has never experienced the feeling of “time is going too fast” again or suffered from tics. Currently, he is attending a school for comedy.