An 82-year-old Caucasian man was referred by his general practitioner because of nocturnal enuresis, declining renal function, and a palpable bladder. He was taking aspirin for ischemic heart disease. On admission, his estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 12mL/minute (creatinine was 398mmol/L), hemoglobin was 9.5g/dL, platelet count was 357 (×109/L), and coagulation profile was normal. Insertion of a urethral catheter produced a residual volume of 2900mL. He was put on intravenous fluid replacement and monitored for diuresis. Over the following 48 hours, he developed significant hematuria causing anemia (hemoglobin of 7.8g/dL) and requiring bladder irrigation and blood transfusion. He became oliguric and his renal function deteriorated to an eGFR of 7mL/minute (creatinine of 670mmol/L). An ultrasound evaluation revealed an enlarged prostate (150mL) and bilateral hydronephrosis with echogenic material within the pelvicalyceal systems .
A computed tomography scan confirmed dilatation of both renal pelvises and both ureters filled with material consistent with blood clots .
Our patient developed leukocytosis (20,000/mm3) with a C-reactive protein of 188mg/L and so bilateral 8-French nephrostomies were inserted on day 4. Despite regular flushing, they became blocked on day 6. Cystoscopy revealed a large occlusive prostate and a trabeculated bladder with numerous diverticulae. After an attempt at bilateral retrograde stenting was unsuccessful because of dilated and very tortuous ureters filled with clots, he underwent percutaneous nephroscopic examination and washout of the left renal pelvis and insertion of a 24-French drain. No stones or malignancies were identified. He declined the procedure on the right side, where the nephrostomy was left in situ and was flushed regularly until an accidental dislodgement. His urine output increased significantly, reflecting a progressive improvement in renal function. The hematuria eventually settled. Repeat ultrasound and left nephrostogram demonstrated a clearance of the clots from the collecting system .
The left nephrostomy was removed, and our patient was discharged on day 18 with an indwelling urethral catheter and listed for an urgent transurethral resection of the prostate. His eGFR at discharge was 26mL/minute.