A 53-year-old man, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status class II, presented for radical prostatectomy for prostatic adenocarcinoma without signs of metastasis. Past medical history included the following: diet-controlled diabetes, benign hypertension, well-controlled hypercholesterolemia, history of hepatitis and cholecystitis. Induction of anesthesia was achieved using fentanyl 2 mcg/kg, propofol 3 mg/kg and succinylcholine 2 mg/kg, followed by tracheal intubation. Anesthesia was maintained using sevoflurane 1 monitored anesthesia care (MAC) with controlled ventilation. Baseline blood pressure was 124/70 mm Hg, and systolic pressure was maintained at 100 mm Hg throughout the course of surgery. Radical retropubic prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy were performed. Frozen sections revealed no malignancy in the lymph nodes. Estimated blood loss was 500 mL and no transfusion was required. The patient was extubated in satisfactory condition while still in the operating room.
In the postoperative care unit (PACU), the patient could converse normally and was moving all extremities but was still mildly sedated. One hour later, he was found to have a left hemiplegia, facial dropping, slurred speech and his head was turned to the right. Pupils were equal and reactive. He was unable to stick his tongue out but was able to state that he was in a hospital. The patient had normal strength in the right arm and right leg. Neurology consultation recommended “no definitive therapy” because more than 8 hours had elapsed from the induction time, wherein the patient was found to be neurologically intact. Contributory factors for stroke were not present, which included obesity, smoking, family history of stroke, history of stroke or transient ischemic episodes (TIEs), intracranial cerebrovascular disease, noncontrolled hypertension, extracranial carotid stenosis, ulcerative atherosclerotic plaques, noncontrolled hyperlipidemia, peripheral vascular diseases, noncontrolled diabetes mellitus, sickle cell disease, cardiac causes (e.g., atrial fibrillation, myocardial infarction, atrial myoma, ventricular aneurysm, prosthetic heart valve, heart failure, coronary artery disease), hypercoagulable state (protein S and C deficiency, Factor V deficiency, antithrombin III, lupus anticoagulant, antiphospholipid antibody, anticardiolipin, homocysteinurea). Perioperative factors related to anesthesia included type of surgery (e.g., cerebrovascular and cardiovascular), perioperative hemodynamic instability, prolonged hypotension or hypertension, central venous internal jugular vein catheterization, conditions of elevated airway pressure in face of potential patent foramen ovale.
Serial CT scans of the head were performed, which showed a right-sided cerebral infarction without mass effect . The following day his mental status deteriorated, and he was urgently intubated. Mannitol was administered, and CT scans of the head showed malignant hemispheric right CVA with a 3-mm and later an 8-mm leftward midline shift and small left frontal swelling. Right decompressive hemicraniectomy was performed, and an intracranial pressure (ICP) monitor was placed. Initial ICP was 11 mm Hg. Repeat CT scans after surgery showed extensive edema and swelling of both hemispheres . On postoperative day 3, nuclear imaging demonstrated absence of cerebral blood flow, and the patient was declared brain dead by nuclear medicine criteria. The ICP rose to 70 mm Hg on postoperative day 3, and the patient expired later that day.
At autopsy, the brain demonstrated non-hemorrhagic thromboembolic cerebrovascular disease and an acute infarct in the territory of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) . The patient had increased intracranial pressure, central as well as left and right uncal herniations with acute cerebral and brainstem hypoxic/ ischemic injuries. Massive diffuse brain swelling with herniation through the skull defect was also noted. Mild atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and systemic disease were seen without occlusive disease including the carotids. There was diffuse pulmonary congestion and mild pulmonary edema. There were hypertensive changes in the heart (ventricular hypertrophy, mild atrial dilatation) with no acute event noted. There was no evidence of thrombosis in the pelvic and iliac veins.