We present a 57 year old gentleman with CKD 5 who had an autogenous brachiocephalic fistula 4 months prior to presentation to us. During their last surgical clinical visit, the fistula was noted to be poorly maturing and then referred to interventional radiology for fistulogram and possible endovascular intervention to assist with fistula maturation.
The patient had a fistulogram which demonstrated a high grade juxta-anastomotic stenosis which was successfully balloon dilated. After a 6 week follow up clinic visit the fistula was still immature and a duplex scan, a second fistulogram with possible intervention were requested.
Fistulogram was performed via an antegrade approach from an access just proximal to the swing point. There was an “apparent” stenosis which was angioplastied then followed by severe spasm . which was perceived by the operator to be recalcitrant stenosis. In the light of this perceived recalcitrant stenosis, a decision to stent the area was taken. After measuring the vessel diameter based on the immediate post-plasty images a 6 mm diameter × 5 cm length Viabahn stent (Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) was selected and deployed in the standard fashion.
Following stent deployment, the stent migrated and stopped at the confluence of the cephalic vein and the subclavian vein . At the time the operator thought the stent was stable and unlikely to cause harm to the patient in this position. However, after reviewing the images with colleagues including vascular surgeons a decision was made to attempt to retract the stent into the arm which would be easier for the surgeon to retrieve the stent surgically, if required. The patient was subsequently brought back 24 h later to the interventional radiology suite.
Initial fluoroscopic image of the left shoulder region demonstrated the stent was absent from the final position documented the previous day indicating the stent had migrated further . Fluoroscopic scanning of the chest identified the stent to overlie the left lower lobe .
Subsequent Pulmonary angiogram confirmed the stent to lie within a segmental pulmonary artery of the left lower lobe .
After discussion of the options, risks and benefits with the patient and a multidisciplinary team, a decision to attempt stent retrieval was made versus leaving the stent in situ.
After appropriate informed written consent, the right groin was prepped and in the standard fashion. Right common femoral vein access was then upsized to accept a 16 F sheath (Cook, Bloomington. IN USA). Main pulmonary access was then performed with an APC pulmonary catheter (Cook, Bloomington. IN USA). The APC catheter was then removed over a Storq wire (Cook, Bloomington. IN USA) wire and subsequently a 12 F 70 cm braided sheath was advanced into the main pulmonary artery and then left lower lobe pulmonary artery. Pulmonary angiograms performed identified the optimal projection to identify the vessel to access. After accessing the appropriate vessel the 12F sheath was advanced just to the origin of the branch above the stent. Subsequently a 15 mm Amplatz Gooseneck snare (ev3, Plymouth MN, USA) was manipulated until the stent was lassoed at about half way along the stent. Given the flexibility and potential collapsibility of the Viabahn stent it was over-sheathed carefully collapsing and gently retracting the captured stent to minimize potential vessel injury . Once the stent had been totally ensheathed, the 12F sheath was retracted through the outer 16F sheath coaxially. The stent was retrieved intact .
The procedure was performed under moderate sedation using Fentanyl and midazolam with continuous monitoring of the patient’s vitals by a dedicated nurse. Throughout the procedure the patient remained hemodynamically stable with normal respiratory function. Post procedure the patient was observed for 6 h post procedure before being discharged home in a stable condition.
The patient has so far been followed up for 3.5 years and has not developed any adverse pulmonary or cardiac condition. Interval CTPA done at an outside facility showed normal pulmonary vasculature with no evidence of pulmonary vessel injury.