A 56-year-old woman was found to have bilateral lung nodules on low-dose computer tomography (CT) during a routine medical examination and was referred to our hospital. She denied any discomfort, such as cough, sputum, chest pain, or body weight loss. The patient has no underlying disease and has a family history of liver cancer (father). Most importantly, she used to be a heavy smoker for 30 years. On chest radiograph, an abnormal shadow was noticed in the left upper lobe. CT images revealed a solitary nodule with a diameter of 18.9 × 17.8 mm in the left upper lobe . Besides, severe bronchiectasis was found on CT as well. Therefore, she was admitted to National Taiwan University Cancer Center and underwent pulmonary function test and cardiac sonography. The results showed forced expiratory volume in the first second of 2.41 L, which is 115.2% as predicted, and good left ventricle contractility with left ventricle ejection fraction of 69.6%.
A left upper lobe S1-S3 segmentectomy and groups 5, 6, and 11 lymph node dissection were performed under uniportal video-assisted thoracoscopic (VATS) surgery. The intraoperative frozen biopsy showed adenocarcinoma with inflammatory cell-rich background. Grossly, the tumor was yellowish, well-defined, soft-to-elastic in texture tumor, and 21 × 15 × 14 mm in size . The pathological findings showed a complex glandular structure with frequent squamoid morules. The tumor cells have basally oriented nuclei and vacuolated cytoplasm. In addition, small foci of fibroblastic stroma are identified focally . Immunohistochemical stains showed TTF-1 positivity, CK (AE1/AE3) positivity, CDX-2 negativity, PAX8 negativity, and nuclear stain on beta-catenin. The low-grade fetal adenocarcinoma of lung origin was favored. Next-generation sequencing revealed no G719X and Exon 19 deletions, S768I, T790M, and Exon 20 insertions, and L858R and L861Q EGFR mutation.
No lymph node metastasis was detected. Moreover, both the postoperative follow-up of brain magnetic resonance imaging with/without contrast and whole-body fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography showed no distant metastasis. The final diagnosis was low-grade fetal adenocarcinoma (pT1cN0Mx, stage IA3).