A 50 year-old woman underwent thymectomy for a 40-mm localized anterior mediastinal tumor diagnosed using chest radiography. The histopathological diagnosis was of a microinvasive thymoma, WHO histologic classification type B1, Masaoka stage II. She had no symptoms of MG, but her serum levels of anti-acetylcholine receptor were elevated (7.5 nmol/l). The patients did not receive adjuvant therapy following the thymectomy.
Ten years later, local recurrent thymoma was identified using computed tomography (CT) . The patients received two 3-day courses of methyl prednisolone pulses (1000 mg/day) before surgery, and the size of the tumor decreased following the treatment. She subsequently underwent a complete resection of the recurrent thymoma. The histopathological diagnosis of the recurrent disease was the same as the initial diagnosis. Similar to the initial treatment, she did not receive adjuvant therapy for the recurrent disease.
Three years later, at the age of 63, she began experiencing chronic fatigue and shortness of breath. A blood test revealed that the patient had severe anemia and reticulocytopenia (hemoglobin: 4.6 g/dl, reticulocytes: 1000/μl), and a bone marrow analysis revealed severe erythrocytopenia in the absence of abnormal findings of myeloid cells and megakaryocytes. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with PRCA. A CT scan revealed multiple pleural tumors and swelling of the right hilum lymph node , indicating the presence of recurrent thymoma. She was scheduled to receive treatment for PRCA before treatment for thymoma.
The patient began receiving orally-administered cyclosporine in December 2011. The initial dosage of cyclosporine was 5 mg/kg/day, which is the standard initial dosage for PRCA treatment , and it was adjusted to maintain serum trough levels of 100–150 ng/ml, which is the lower limit range of normal concentration considering the patient’s age and its renal toxicity. No cyclosporine-associated side effects were observed over the course of therapy. Three weeks after the initiation of cyclosporine therapy, the patient’s hemoglobin levels and reticulocyte count strongly increased, and no blood transfusions were required. Hemoglobin levels reached the normal range in February 2012. In May 2012, CT findings revealed that all of the thymoma lesions had decreased in size, despite the fact that the patient had only been treated with cyclosporine. She continued receiving cyclosporine therapy and was not treated with chemotherapy or radiation treatment. In March 2013, a CT scan demonstrated that the patient was in CR . There was an attempt to reduce the cyclosporine dosage in January 2014; however, PRCA relapsed in November 2015 even though the thymoma was in CR. The cyclosporine dose was immediately increased, and the anemia rapidly resolved. Since the PRCA recurrence, the patient has continued receiving cyclosporine therapy (150 mg/day), and both PRCA and thymoma have remained in CR. Now, she has maintained CR of thymoma for more than 3 years without any side effects.