A 51-year-old Bedouin Arabic man with a dominant right hand noticed a small nodule on the proximal dorsal side of his right forearm that had persisted for 18 months. He had not sought any medical advice. He is a known smoker and works as a security guard, has no prior history of alcohol consumption or radiation exposure, was previously diagnosed with depression and receiving oral risperidone 4 mg, and has a positive family history of ocular and breast cancer. When first noticed, the painless nodule was 1.0 × 1.0 cm, but it started to grow slowly over the course of 18 months. It was excised at an outside facility when it reached roughly 4.0 × 4.0 cm because it was thought to be a benign mass. It was removed in pieces using a transverse incision, and pathological examination showed a spindle-cell tumor with features suggestive of MPNST. The patient presented to King Hussein Cancer Center 4 months after the initial excision with an oval-shaped, large, exophytic, fungating, hemorrhagic, firm, and painful mass measuring 10.0 × 15.0 cm at the same site of the previously excised nodule . At presentation, his vital signs were unremarkable, with a temperature of 36.6 °C, pulse rate of 72 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute, blood pressure of 114/76 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 96%, and a pain score of 7/10. His physical checkup revealed power of 3+/5 in his fingers and wrist extension, an intact sensation at the dorsum of the hand with intact median and ulnar nerve function, full range of motion in the elbow and shoulder joints with an intact vascular examination, and no evidence of local lymph node enlargement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a predominantly subcutaneous soft tissue mass at the proximal ulnar aspect of the right forearm with evidence of surrounding muscular fascial involvement and irregularity of the overlying skin, albeit without invasion of the surrounding bony structures . The mass measured 8.0 × 3.3 cm in the axial dimension and 9.8 cm in the craniocaudal dimension. Whole-body positron emission tomography/computed tomography scan showed multiple, bilateral, variably sized pulmonary nodules consistent with pulmonary metastasis, the largest of which measured 1.6 × 1.4 cm in transaxial dimension adjacent to the right oblique fissure . The result of a bone scan was negative. A multidisciplinary committee discussed with the patient and his family the treatment plan, stating that his cancer was in stage IV according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer guidelines , including starting with chemotherapy followed by surgical excision, but he opted to proceed with the excision first because he could not tolerate the foul smell and severe pain and was concerned that he might develop an infection if he was left untreated. Also, it was discussed that pulmonary metastasectomy was impossible to achieve while maintaining functional lung capacity. On admission, the patient had a hemoglobin level of 13.7 g/dl, white blood cell count of 10.2 × 103/μl, platelet count of 234 × 103/μl, albumin of 4 g/dl, creatinine of 0.7 mg/dl, and normal values for the rest of the liver and kidney function tests.
With the aid of a bloodless field using a tourniquet without exsanguination, we outlined a wide local excision about 3 cm away from the tumor. An elliptical incision was made while carefully inspecting the soft tissue mass to avoid any iatrogenic dissection through the tumor. Multiple frozen sections were sent during the operation from the deep proximal and deep distal ends, and the result was negative for malignancy. The mass was taken en bloc with a safety margin from the extensor digitorum communis muscle (EDCM) . An approximation of the muscles was done to cover the exposed tendon, as well as undermining and approximation of skin . This was followed by vacuum pressure dressing and physiotherapy. After 10 days, the pathology report was issued with the final diagnosis of grade 3 MPNST with heterologous bony elements and negative resection margins . The patient was then staged for another procedure for both flexor carpi radialis tendon transfer to extensor digitorum communis tendon and soft tissue defect coverage with a split-thickness skin graft harvested from the ipsilateral thigh. The patient was splinted for 1 month, and he was seen every 2 weeks to check for the skin graft until it was completely healed . Two months after the procedure, and on a biweekly basis, physiotherapy and occupational therapy were resumed after the removal of the splint. The patient regained his full range of elbow motion as well as most of his finger extension.
The patient was then started on palliative intravenous chemotherapy (two cycles of 3600 mg ifosfamide and 200 mg etoposide daily for 5 consecutive days in each cycle) and radiotherapy to his lung metastasis (50 Gy/eight fractions), which all failed because of disease progression. The patient was planned for single-agent doxorubicin, but he developed respiratory failure type 2 and elected a “do not resuscitate” status, so he was referred for palliative care. The patient died at home 7 months after the operation, and an autopsy was not done, because it is only indicated in cases of homicide or upon family request in Jordan.