An 18-month-old boy with pre-B cell ALL currently 3 weeks after the maintenance chemotherapy with vincristine PEG-asparaginase, methotrexate, doxorubicin and dexamethasone was referred to our center due to intermittent fever with unknown origin. Other symptoms included rash, diarrhea, vomiting, cough, or coryza. Physical examination revealed paleness without any specific symptom for infection. There was no other finding in favor of systemic or pulmonary embolism.
Laboratory tests revealed low level of white blood cell count, hemoglobin, and platelet. Our patient had elevated markers of thrombosis, inflammation, and cardiac injury. High levels of D-dimer (4000 pg/ml; day 6), fibrinogen (647 mg/dl; day 12), and fibrin degradation product (FDP) (10 ng/ml; day 12) were observed. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 1518, 1272, 866 and 622 U/L at day 1, 3, 6, and 12, respectively. Moreover, elevated level of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were observed .
The blood culture was positive for Pseudomonas Spp. Due to the patient’s critical condition, antibiotic therapy was initiated with meropenem and vancomycin and continued for four weeks.
Nasopharyngeal samples were collected and tested for SARS-CoV-2 using the Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) assay according to the previous report . Meanwhile, a positive nasopharyngeal PCR for COVID-19 was reported and stayed positive for eight consecutive weeks . The high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed no sign of pneumonia or pulmonary embolism. A portal venous catheter was implanted for anti-cancer therapy, and adequate anticoagulant therapy was administered after the diagnosis of the thrombosis was diagnosed.
Initial echocardiography indicated a semilunar thrombotic mass extending from right SVC into the right atrium without coronary or myocardial involvement . The patient was a candidate for surgical mass removal due to increased risk for thromboembolic events; however, the intervention was postponed because of his unstable condition.
Enoxaparin was administered with continuous monitoring of the level of anti-Xa activity. The serial echocardiographic studies found a slow but continuous reduction in the mass size ; therefore, surgical removal of the thrombosis was cancelled in favour of anticoagulation therapy with medical follow-up. After 4 months, follow-up echocardiography was performed and the result indicated that the thrombosis was completely resolved .
Follow-up SARS-CoV-2 testing was performed on day 3, 12, 40 and 60 with the goals of removing isolation precautions, and supporting appropriate discharge planning and all test were positive for SARS-CoV-2 nasopharyngeal rRT-PCR of SARS-CoV-2.