A 45–50 year old healthy, left-hand dominant female with no known allergies presented with a three year history of left shoulder pain after falling onto it while playing a sport. The patient has a history of hypothyroidism adequately managed with oral thyroid hormone replacement. The patient's symptoms included weakness with overhead activity as well as some pain with abduction, which was affecting day-to-day activities and lifestyle. This was initially being managed conservatively by the patient's primary care provider, but the pain and dysfunction persisted despite activity modification, physical therapy, and anti-inflammatory medication. Imaging modalities included direct bilateral anteroposterior radiographs to compare displacement against the contralateral side and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left clavicle. These demonstrated a grade III AC separation, with 1 cm of superior displacement of the left clavicle, which was measured as the distance from the top of the coracoid to the bottom of the clavicle. Given the lack of clinical improvement after extensive conservative management, the patient was referred to our clinic and it was decided a coracoclavicular (CC) reconstruction would be the best option to alleviate pain and improve function.
The patient was placed under general anesthesia and positioned supine and reclined at a 45 degree angle in the “beach chair” position. The left shoulder was subsequently draped and sterilized. Through an open technique, the CC ligament reconstruction was performed using a semitendinosus allograft looped around the coracoid process and tied over the top of the clavicle. This was reinforced by FiberTape (Arthrex, Naples, FL) around the coracoid process and through separate drill holes in the anatomic position of the trapezoid and conoid ligaments. Findings during surgery confirmed arthrosis of the AC joint and a Mumford procedure was performed as well (A). The patient tolerated the procedure well and was placed in a shoulder abduction sling postoperatively.
The patient returned to the outpatient clinic a week later for postoperative follow-up and reported persistent pain and low grade fevers since discharge from the hospital. Physical examination revealed slight serous drainage and mild erythema surrounding the wound. No significant swelling or evidence of purulent drainage was noted. At this time, cultures were taken and the patient was admitted to the hospital for suspected overlying cellulitis to be treated with intravenous Vancomycin 750 mg. Initial serological tests showed a white blood cell count (WBC) of 10,500/mcl, c-reactive protein (CRP) of 1.5-mg/dL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 34-mm/h. The patient responded well to intravenous Vancomycin and had improvement of inflammatory markers after treatment. Cultures during this admission demonstrated no growth to date. An infectious disease specialist was consulted prior to the patient's discharge and a plan for a single injection of Orbactiv 1200 mg was agreed upon, as the patient declined outpatient intravenous antibiotic therapy. The patient was discharged from the hospital with marked improvement of all symptoms.
The subsequent follow ups over the next six months in the outpatient clinic showed no significant changes, so further recommendations included physical therapy and continued home exercise. At the patient's six month appointment, she returned with mild intermittent pain over the posterolateral tip of the clavicle despite self-reported adherence to suggested physical therapy. An x-ray of the left shoulder and AC joint was ordered, showing widening of the medial suture tunnel with slight superior displacement of the clavicle (B). At this time, all inflammatory markers were within normal limits and physical examination showed no abnormal findings, so the patient was treated with a corticosteroid injection. She was then instructed to return in one month for a follow up and possible revision surgery to remove the suture and graft material if pain persisted.
At the patient's one month follow up appointment, persistent pain was reported and distal clavicular erosion was appreciated on radiographs, which was concerning for clavicular osteomyelitis . Due to persistent pain and worsening x-ray findings, it was agreed that arthroscopy, subacromial decompression, debridement of calcium and an open modified Mumford procedure along with the removal of suture and graft material were indicated. The surgical procedure was performed by the same orthopedic surgeon who initially reconstructed the patient's CC ligament. The patient was placed under general anesthesia and positioned in a right lateral decubitus position. The left shoulder was sterilized and draped, in addition to having eight-pounds of suspension applied. The prominent distal 5 mm of clavicle was excised and as much of the suture and graft material was removed as possible. The patient tolerated the revision procedure well without complications. Chronic inflammation tissue was noted intraoperatively, but no purulence was appreciated. Tissue specimens demonstrated no growth on cultures, but cultures of the graft and suture fixations demonstrated growth of C. acnes. The patient was given a 10-day course of oral 500 mg Duricef and a four week course of parenteral Vancomycin via a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line for treatment of osteomyelitis secondary to C. acnes infection.
One month after revision surgery, the patient was doing exceptionally well, with no pain or limitations in function. However, a repeat x-ray showed further osteolysis of the distal clavicle . An MRI was ordered which demonstrated no findings suggestive of osteomyelitis. The continued osteolysis after revision surgery was still a concerning and inexplicable finding, and definitive confirmation that the patient's clavicular osteomyelitis had completely resolved was warranted. A fluoroscopically-assisted needle biopsy was performed, which demonstrated no growth of C. acnes at three weeks . A recheck x-ray several months later showed no further progression of the distal clavicle osteolysis. The patient reported resolution of all symptoms and no functional deficits. Physical exam showed no visible deformities with well-healed surgical incisions . The patient continues to be monitored routinely in our clinic, but there has not been any further osteolysis and she remains functionally intact with a good prognosis.