The patient (a Chinese male, 5 months old) was admitted to our department on 17 May 2020 due to skin yellowing for more than 4 months, worsened for 1 month, and fever for 1 day. The patient was the first pregnancy and first delivered child of the mother and was born at full term with birth weight of 2850 g. The parents were healthy, denied history of intermarriage and genetic metabolic diseases, and denied family history of hepatobiliary diseases. The patient developed skin yellowing 3 days after birth, and the yellowing was not alleviated after taking Chinese medicine intermittently (the specific medicine was unknown). Since the onset of skin yellowing, the patient was in good spirits but had poor appetite with yellow stool and urine. Physical examination showed body weight 6 kg, clear mind, good spirits without special facial appearance, developmental delay, unstable head up, moderate yellow staining of the skin and sclera, no abnormalities on heart and lung auscultation, soft abdomen, and redness and swelling around the umbilicus. The liver was 3 cm below the right rib ridge, with medium texture and clear boundary, and the spleen was unreached.
Abdominal ultrasound showed that the intrahepatic bile duct was well revealed and the biliary tract was unobstructed. Umbilical color Doppler ultrasound showed abnormal echo in the umbilical area, suggesting umbilical sinus . Abdominal enhanced CT scan showed that liver was slightly enlarged and the density of parenchyma was diffusely reduced; the volume of both kidneys was increased, parenchymal density was not uniform, and multiple small sac-like unenhanced areas of different sizes were detected, mainly in the renal medulla, suggesting infant polycystic kidneys . Cranial MRI showed multiple punctate abnormal signals in the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres and near the posterior horn of the right ventricle, suggesting the possibility of multiple small hemorrhage lesions; the bilateral prefrontal space, the left cisterna, and the anterior temporal space were slightly widened, and the posterior horn of bilateral ventricles manifested small patchy abnormal signal foci, suggesting the possibility of myelination dysplasia .
Whole-exome sequencing test was performed in the patient and the parents. The patient showed homozygous mutation in the CYP7B1 gene NM_004820.3:c.334C>T(p.Arg112*). The pathogenicity of this mutation has been reported . According to the ACMG guidelines, this mutation is a pathogenic variant. Both parents of the child showed heterozygous mutation at this locus with normal phenotype, conforming to the rule of autosomal recessive inheritance. Figure shows the sequencing results of the patient, father, and mother, from top to bottom panel, respectively.
After admission, the patient was given symptomatic treatments, including anti-infection, liver protection, and choleretic treatment. The yellow staining of the skin was not significantly improved. The patient was given oral UDCA 50 mg three time a day from 21 May to 12 June 2020, 100 mg twice a day from 13 to 18 June, and 125 mg twice a day from 19 June to 1 August. After symptoms improved, the patient was discharged from hospital on 21 June 2020. The patient was regularly followed up for biochemical examinations and check-ups. The parents stopped the drug without doctor’s permission since 2 August, and resumed drug administration at 100 mg twice a day since 19 October 2020 when biochemical examination showed that liver function had deteriorated. On 21 January 2021, the patient was admitted to our department again due to unconsciousness. Unfortunately, septicemia occurred on 21 January 2021, and the family decided to give up treatment on 23 January 2021 and left the hospital.
Blood biochemical examination results of the patient are summarized in Tables and and Fig. , revealing that the levels of most indicators increased shortly after UDCA administration, probably because liver function improvement takes much longer after the drug has its pharmacological effects. With the use of UDCA, the symptoms of the patient improved and all indicators demonstrated a declining trend until 2 August, when the patient stopped taking the medicine without consulting doctor. Thereafter, all indicators increased significantly and symptoms deteriorated until the patient resumed the drug again on 19 October 2020, since when some of the indicators declined again. The last two blood tests, performed on 8 and 23 January 2021, respectively, showed significant enzyme-bilirubin dissociation. Combined with the fact that the patient developed septicemia on 21 January 2021, this suggests that significant hepatocyte necrosis might have occurred since early January 2021 and might be part of the cause of the occurrence of septicemia. However, because the parents refused liver biopsy, the exact explanation for the test results and cause of septicemia is not available. No obvious abnormal products were detected in urine mass spectrometry analysis.