A 59-year-old man suffered from upper gastrointestinal bleeding after successful CPR using TEE.
A 59-year-old man (168 cm, 76.5 kg) was scheduled to undergo aortic and mitral valve replacement as well as tricuspid valve repair for rheumatic heart disease causing progressive angina and recurrent syncope. His symptoms started two years ago with progressive angina and recurrent syncope, which had been worsened over the last six months. TTE revealed moderate aortic valve and mitral valve stenosis, moderate aortic valve regurgitation and mild tricuspid regurgitation, mild left ventricular dilatation, left ventricular hypertrophy, and left ventricular ejection fraction of 71% . Electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm. Along with standard monitoring, an invasive intra-arterial blood pressure monitor was established under regional anesthesia. The patient was stable with a heart rate of 76 beats/min, blood pressure 138/60 mmHg, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation 97% when breathing air. After peripheral venous access was secured, general anesthesia was induced with midazolam, propofol, sufentanil citrate and cisatracurium. Two minutes after successful endotracheal intubation, severe bradycardia (heart rate dropping from 70 beats/min to the 20 beats/min) followed by asystole and an undetectable blood pressure was noticed on the monitor. No skin or mucous membrane changes were observed. Cardiac arrest resuscitation was immediately initiated. Chest compressions were delivered. The patient was mechanically ventilated with 100% oxygen and his airway pressure was normal. Intravenous injection of 1mg epinephrine and 500 mg methylprednisolone were administered. A few minutes later, ventricular fibrillation was observed. Defibrillation with 200 J was applied and CPR was continued. Ventricular fibrillation recurred, amiodarone and sodium bicarbonate were given intravenously and defibrillations were applied for a total of 5 times. Arterial blood gas was drawn showing electrolyte disturbances and elevated glucose and hyperlactacidemia. The entire resuscitation lasted 15 min, while the patient still failed to return spontaneous circulation. A 2 MHz-7 MHz omniplane TEE probe (Philips X7-2T, Amsterdam, Netherlands) was blindly inserted with ease by an anesthesia fellow with more than 2-year experience in cardiac anesthesia to investigate the etiology without interfering with chest compressions. TEE was manipulated in the usual manner, including transgastric view. It detected that the cardiac motion ceased, but the ventricular fibrillation rhythm recurred. The right cardiac chambers were small, the rheumatic mitral stenosis and spontaneous echo contrast (SEC) indicated blood stasis in the left cardiac chambers . The surgeon and attending anesthetist informed the family of the patient’s condition. With their consent, 750 IU/kg heparin was given intravenously and the pCPBR was successfully established by cannulating the arteria and vena femoralis 35 min after the cardiac arrest. The activated clotting time was 604 s during pCPBR. With all these efforts made, the spontaneous circulation with sinus rhythm was finally recovered 67 min after the cardiac arrest. The operation was thus cancelled. TEE imaging was performed to monitor the left ventricular function and to assist with the weaning of pCPBR. The accelerated mitral inflow through the stenosis and aortic valve regurgitation during diastole were shown in a four-chamber view with color Doppler . After uneventful weaning from pCPBR was accomplished with epinephrine and phenylephrine infusions, protamine 400 mg was given to reverse the initial heparinization and the activated clotting time was 137 s. No blood transfusion was administered and his hematocrit was stable at about 40%. During preparation for transshipment, the TEE probe was removed with some bloodstains on the surface. About half an hour after arrival in the intensive-care unit (ICU), acute massive hematochezia appeared and a nasogastric tube was placed immediately, and a moderate amount of dark red bloody fluid was aspirated.
The patient denied a history of systemic drug allergy, gastrointestinal disease or coagulopathy.
The patient had a disease-free personal and family history.
When the patient was transferred to ICU, his temperature was 36.0°C, heart rate was 89 beats per minute, blood pressure was 122/68 mmHg, ventilator-controlled frequency was 20 bpm and oxygen saturation in 50% fractional concentration of inspired oxygen was 100%. The clinical neurological examination revealed a Glasgow Coma scale of E1VTM1, without any other pathological signs.
Preoperatively, the hemoglobin was 16.1 g/dL (normal range 13.0 g/dL-17.5 g/dL), the hematocrit was 42.9% (normal range 40.0%-50.0%), and the international normalized ratio was 0.9 (normal range 0.88-1.15). When the patient arrived at the ICU, the hemoglobin was 12.8 g/dL, the hematocrit was 39%, and the international normalized ratio was 1.76.
An emergent bedside esophagogastroscopy (GIF Type 2T200, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) was performed and demonstrated a Mallory-Weiss linear mucosal tear at the gastroesophageal junction covered with a little fresh blood and no active bleeding was observed .