A 25-year-old woman presented to the ophthalmology department complaining of bilateral blurred vision, headache, and vomiting from one month ago. The patient had a history of right-side PT for one year and surgery for PT one month before. Her review of systems was negative. Her family and social history were insignificant. Her body mass index (BMI) was 21 kg/m2.
We performed a comprehensive neuro-ophthalmic examination of the patient. Ocular examination revealed best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) bilateral 20 of 20, with normal color vision and pupillary light responses. Extraocular motility testing showed no abnormality. Anterior segment examination was within normal limits. Fundus examination showed severe bilateral papilledema with blurred margins . Bilateral Optical coherence tomography (OCT) images of optic discs showed intraretinal fluid tracking from the disc and abnormal retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness increases. Automated visual field 30 − 2 revealed mild loss of sensitivity on the total deviation plot bilaterally . The flash visual electrophysiology showed normal latency and amplitude in both eyes with 1.0 Hz.
Through careful inquiry of her medical history, the patient had a history of surgery for PT at another hospital one month before. According to the patient’s discharge medical report, the preoperative imaging examinations, neuro-ophthalmic examinations, and other regular examinations were normal. Under local anesthesia, the patient underwent a right skull base incision and right-side sigmoid sinus constriction surgery. The sigmoid sinus was pressed downward with a gelatin sponge. PT disappeared immediately after the surgery, but blurred vision, headache, and vomiting developed progressively.
Based on the history above, we repeated neuroimaging examinations on the patient . Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) revealed the right sigmoid sinus postoperative stenosis. The patient underwent a lumbar puncture with an elevated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure of 29 cm H2O. CSF biochemical tests and cultures were negative. Laboratory studies were regular, including routine blood parameters, biochemical factors, conventional coagulation tests, infection indicators, C reactive protein, thyroid function, anti-nuclear antibody, and estradiol. The patient was diagnosed with intracranial hypertension and started on mannitol 50 g BID, furosemide 40 mg QD, and spironolactone 40 mg BID daily. However, she complained of progressive blurred vision with time.
After discussing with the neurologists, we referred the patient to the initial surgeon, who repaired the right-side sigmoid sinus by removing the gelatin sponge implanted in the previous surgery. After the second surgery, her headache and vomiting disappeared immediately, while her blurred vision improved gradually. CSF opening pressure was 14.5 cm H2O at the 1-month follow-up. Ocular examination revealed BCVA 20 of 20 in both eyes. Bilateral papilledema was alleviated remarkably. Neuroimaging showed a well-visualized right-side sigmoid sinus . There was no recurrence during the 3-year follow-up, and her bilateral papilledema resolved entirely . Besides, there was also no recurrence of PT up to the present.