A 60-year-old male presented with pain in his right chest and a fever for the last 4 d.
The patient presented with dull pain in the right chest aggravated by deep breathing and activity. His highest recorded temperature was 38.6℃, accompanied by generalized fatigue, muscle and joint pain, and occasional coughing with a small amount of white sputum. The patient was treated at home with self-administered antipyretic drugs after disease onset, with poor results. Before admission, the patient visited a local hospital where examinations revealed pancytopenia, pneumonia, and pleural effusion.
The patient had a history of hypertension for more than 10 years, which was well controlled with valsartan and amlodipine.
The patient had a history of smoking for more than 30 years (60 cigarettes per day) and drinking for more than 20 years (200 g of liquor per day). The patient’s father had died of esophageal cancer.
Physical symptoms were as follows: temperature, 36.8 °C; blood pressure, 132/75 mmHg; heart rate, 78 beats per min, and respiratory rate, 19 breaths per min. Physical examination revealed no palpable enlargement of the superficial lymph nodes throughout the body, no moist rales in either lungs, or hepatosplenomegaly.
Pancytopenia (absolute monocyte count: 3.55 × 109/L; percentage monocyte: 53.30%; absolute neutrophil count: 1.85 × 109/L; hemoglobin: 76 g/L; platelet: 101 × 109/L) was identified during the initial examination. Peripheral blood smear revealed 54% blasts. C-reactive protein (190.39 mg/L), and D-dimer (29.64 mg/L) levels were increased. Bone marrow smear suggested a high probability of APL. Reggie’s stain showed promyelocyte accounted for about 55% and Peroxidate stain was positivity . A bone marrow biopsy was subsequently performed which revealed a small number of cells with moderately enlarged cytosomes, deviated nuclei, fine chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli, requiring clinical and other tests to exclude AML. Flow cytometry of the specimens was consistent with the immunophenotype of AML. Leukemia-associated 45 fusion genes were not detected. Chromosomal karyotype analysis revealed the presence of 46, XY, i(7)(q10), inc(4)/46, XY(6). Fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed the rearrangement of RARA. Hematology-associated fusion genes were identified, and the TNRC18-RARA fusion gene was detected. The patient underwent repeated bronchoscopies and the final bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) gene X-Pert test was positive.
Chest computed tomography scans revealed bilateral pneumonitis with pleural effusion, partial atelectasis in the lower lobes of both lungs . The patient's lung inflammation gradually deteriorated . Multiple bronchoscopies were performed, and the BALF gene X-Pert test was positive.