The patient was a 48-year-old female clerical worker who lived alone. An abnormal cervical posture initially appeared 7 years before this study (right flexion). The treatment included the prescription of trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride (6 mg), clonazepam (1.5 mg), and baclofen (15 mg), which was effective and resulted in good outcomes. Botulinum treatment was also prescribed and effective, and the symptoms almost disappeared. Five years before this study, the abnormal cervical posture worsened, and symptoms of cervical retroflexion and trunk anteflexion developed. Doses were increased (trihexyphenidyl hydrochloride, 12 mg; clonazepam, 3 mg; and baclofen, 30 mg); however, there was no improvement. Botulinum treatment was also ineffective. During the same period, the right MCA stenosis was observed on head magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). The patient was referred to our hospital and her medical history revealed a persistent depressive disorder. The patient had been in a psychiatric clinic and treated since the age of 22 years. Her current doctor has been treating her since she was 30 years old. Her mother, who had already died, had a delusional disorder. The patient has lived with her mother since childhood. When she was 17 years old, she wanted to go to college because her academic performances were good; however, she dropped out of high school at the request of her mother. Her energy was often exhausted partly because of frequent relocations due to neighborhood troubles caused by her mother, who died when she was 42 years old. She had little interpersonal interaction and often failed when she tried to interact. She frequently made damaging remarks and was often allowed to make detrimental statements about it. She often stayed at home because of her interpersonal relationships and fear of going out. Based on the above-mentioned course and no psychiatric symptoms that could be concluded as delusions, her psychiatric symptoms were judged to be mainly depressed, and she was treated internally as a persistent depressive disorder. She was prescribed propericiazine (15 mg), ramelteon (8 mg), etizolam (2 mg), brotizolam (0.25 mg), mirtazapine (15 mg), nortriptyline hydrochloride (30 mg), levomepromazine hydrochloride (15 mg), and eszopiclone (2 mg) when she visited our hospital. She consumed beer daily (700 mL/day) but had not smoked for 10 years.
Involuntary neurological movements, including cervical back bending and truncal forward bending, were observed while walking . No other neurological focal signs were noted. Her symptoms impaired her ability to work and perform daily activities. However, her symptoms improved while walking backward, in line with task specificity, in which involuntary movements of the trunk occurred only when walking forward. The patient’s blood examination findings, including antinuclear antibody, anti-SS-A antibody, anti-SS-B antibody, anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody, hemoglobin A1c, and ceruloplasmin, were normal. Involuntary movements associated with autoimmune (e.g., stiff person syndrome) or metabolic diseases (e.g., Wilson disease) were not observed. Findings on spinal radiographs were normal and genetic testing was negative for known hereditary dystonia-related genes.
When the patient visited our hospital, MRA revealed the right MCA occlusion [ and ]. In our hospital, perfusion computed tomography (CT) is used to assess CBF in six regions of interest in the cerebral cortex. In this case, we obtained the ratio of the right CBF to the left CBF in four regions, excluding the frontal and occipital regions . In addition, we examined the laterality of blood flow in the basal ganglia . Perfusion CT revealed that the CBF on the right side was 64% and 94% of that on the left side in the cortical areas and basal ganglia, respectively . Digital subtraction angiography revealed almost complete occlusion of the right horizontal segment of the MCA as well as collateral circulation through the pial anastomosis from the anterior cerebral artery .
We performed superficial temporal artery (STA)-MCA bypass surgery because we believed that the dystonia was due to right MCA stenosis . The patient’s symptoms improved immediately after the surgery, except for her mild cervical backbend . Perfusion CT immediately after the surgery showed that the CBF on the right side was 95% and 97% of that on the left side in the cortical areas and basal ganglia, respectively. Furthermore, perfusion CT performed after 6 months showed that the CBF on the right side was 92% and 108% of that on the left side in the cortical areas and basal ganglia, respectively. The right MCA was assessed using MRA 6 months after the operation . Seven months after the surgery, the patient’s involuntary movements showed further improvement , and symptoms have not worsened 2 years later. She had been treated for persistent depressive disorder for a long time; however, changes in psychiatric symptoms were observed 2 years after the operation. Verbosity, the ease with which topics change and the rise in energy when speaking have begun to show a clear rise in mood, although it is not difficult to stop. Therefore, nortriptyline hydrochloride (30 mg) is currently discontinued, and the patient is being followed up.