A 25-year-old male with bilateral intermediate uveitis secondary to a vasoproliferative retinal tumor, and posterior development of cataract and acute glaucoma due to pupillary seclusion in both eyes. After two Nd:YAG laser iridotomies, the IOP remained high despite maximum medical treatment, and an Ahmed glaucoma valve was placed in both eyes, followed by phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation in the capsular bag in both eyes. Postoperative best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/32 (Snellen scale) in the right eye (RE) and 20/40 in the left eye (LE). A month later, the LE required a pars plana vitrectomy and silicone tamponade due to retinal detachment, resulting in amaurosis.
Twenty months after the cataract surgery, a posterior capsulotomy with Nd:YAG laser was performed without complications in the RE due to capsular opacification, with the recovery of the previous BCVA of 20/32. Two months later, the patient developed repeated episodes of inflammation in AC with the closure of the iridotomies and anterior displacement of the iris, together with increased IOP in the RE. These episodes were satisfactorily managed with reopening of the iridotomies and topical corticosteroid therapy, and after them, the iridotomies remained patent, with open AC angle and normal IOP without hypotensive treatment. Six months after the capsulotomy, the patient presented with blurred vision. BCVA was 20/200, and a noticeable anterior displacement of the iridocrystalline diaphragm with generalized AC flattening was observed in the slit lamp. The iridotomies were patent but the IOP was 44 mmHg. The Ahmed valve maintained a good filtering bleb and the tube was correctly positioned in the AC . Behind the intraocular lens, an inflammatory membrane was observed with thickening of the anterior hyaloids, vitreous turbidity, and no signs of uveal effusion in the fundus. The depth and volume of AC estimated by OCULUS Pentacam® HR Type 70900, OCULUS Optikgeräte GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany, were greatly diminished, being 1.82 mm and 46 mm3, respectively . Ocular ultrasound revealed a hyperechoic anterior hyaloid membrane, an increase in vitreous echogenicity with an empty space in the anterior vitreous compatible with aqueous humor collection; choroidal effusion was ruled out. An image of a nodular chorioretinal mass, located inferiorly, corresponding to the vasoproliferative retinal tumor was also found . An inflammatory membrane was observed at the level of the anterior hyaloid and anterior vitreous turbidity , which made it difficult to see the fundus . Although the iridotomies appeared patent, new peripheral iridotomies with Nd:YAG laser were performed without clinical improvement. Suspecting VCB, medical treatment was started with topical atropine, cycloplegic and phenylephrine, topical beta blockers and alpha agonists, oral acetazolamide, and intravenous mannitol. A total of 24 hours later, there was no improvement; therefore, an anterior hyaloidectomy with Nd:YAG laser was performed. A posterior displacement of the iridocrystalline diaphragm and an increase of the AC depth were immediately observed and the IOP dropped to 13 mmHg. The AC study using Pentacam® HR showed a depth of 3.85 mm and a volume of 235 mm3 . After one year of follow-up, the patient maintains a BCVA of 20/32 and there has been no recurrence of the VCB in the RE.