The patient had hoarseness for two months.
A 47-year-old woman weighing 50 kg was presented to us with a two-month history of hoarseness after an influenza. She was diagnosed with vocal cord polyps and was scheduled for vocal cord polypectomy under general anesthesia. Her preoperative blood pressure was 112/78 mmHg, and her heart rate was 85 beats per minute. Anesthesia was induced intravenously with fentanyl (0.25 mg), propofol (100 mg), and rocuronium (50 mg), and the patient was then intubated. The anesthesia was maintained with propofol (100 µg/kg/min), remifentanil (0.5 µg/kg/min), and 1% inhaled sevoflurane. The surgery lasted approximately 15 min with a negligible amount of bleeding. Intraoperative blood pressure was stable, and no vasoactive drugs were administered. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit. Approximately one hour after the surgery, the patient was awake and extubated. She showed a gradual decrease in blood pressure in the recovery room. However, this decrease did not cause concern as her blood pressure was still in the normal range. Her symptoms progressed when she went back to the ward, where she developed low blood pressure and dizziness. Her lowest blood pressure was 77/45 mmHg after fluid therapy. Therefore, intravenous dopamine (3.3 mg/kg·min) was administered to maintain normal blood pressure and the patient’s symptoms improved. Surprisingly, the patient remained dependent on dopamine for more than 24 h without any obvious anesthesia- and surgery-related complications. Therefore, an endocrine etiology was suspected. Her blood hormone levels were then tested, and she underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
The patient did not have a history of past illness.
She denied any personal and family history.
On physical examination, her vital signs were as follows: Body temperature 36.0 °C; blood pressure, 94/73 mmHg with dopamine infusion; heart rate 62 beats per minute and respiratory rate, 16 breaths/min. The patient reported dizziness and slight throat pain.
Endocrine examination of her blood sample revealed an increase in prolactin, a low normal adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and a decreased cortisol level. The other hormones tested were in the normal range .
Brain MRI revealed an empty sella .