We report a case of an 8-year-old female with a 2-week history of recent streptococcal throat infection who presented to the emergency room with torticollis. She was treated conservatively with antibiotics, muscle relaxation, and physiotherapy. Neither an otolaryngology consult nor radiological tests were ordered. A month later, her torticollis persisted, for which she received a CT scan. It showed a C1-C2 AAS, which was consistent with a diagnosis of Grisel’s syndrome. At this point, conservative management was continued with cervical halter traction of 5 lbs., which was subsequently increased to 8 lbs. during her month-long stay in the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). Post manual reduction, she had full range of motion of her neck, and CT showed complete resolution of subluxation. However, she returned with persistent torticollis 3 months later. An MRI at this time showed C1-C2 rotatory subluxation with associated narrowing of the cervico-medullary junction. She underwent Halo application under anesthesia, which was uneventful. After a week, however, the patient showed no improvement. The next step was C1-C2 cervical fusion under general anesthesia in the operating room.
The patient was brought to the operating room and standard monitors were placed. Total intravenous anesthesia was requested by the surgeon as motor and somatosensory evoked potentials would be monitored during surgery. The patient was induced with 200 ml of propofol, 100 mcg of fentanyl, and 2 mg of versed through a preexisting intravenous (IV) line. No muscle relaxants or inhalational agents were used during induction or maintenance of anesthesia. The patient was intubated endotracheally using the video laryngoscope while maintaining inline stabilization of the neck and spinal cord. Patient had been intubated with use of conventional direct laryngoscopy during her previous anesthetic. And so fiberoptic bronchoscope was not required. A second large bore IV and arterial line were placed after intubation. Total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) was used for maintenance with an infusion of 0.1–0.2 mcg/k/min remifentanil and 100–120 mcg/kg/min propofol as tolerated intraoperatively. Somatosensory evoked potentials and motor evoked potentials remained unchanged throughout the surgery. Duration of surgery was about 10 h. The estimated blood loss was one liter. The patient received 2 l of crystalloids, 250 cc of albumin, one unit of packed red blood cells, one unit of fresh frozen plasma, and 500 cc of cell saver. The patient had a foley placed prior to the surgery which showed a urine output of 800 ml. Given that the length of surgery was 10 h, the major fluid shift, and the need for immobilization, the patient was left intubated after surgery. The propofol infusion was continued postoperatively for sedation and she was transferred to the care of the PICU. She was extubated the next day. A follow-up CT scan showed a complete resolution of subluxation. Based upon follow up imaging (see Fig. ), there were no adverse or unexpected outcomes.