A 26-years old female with a family history of a mother diagnosed with schizophrenia, and no personal medical or psychiatric history, was diagnosed with mild COVID-19 infection by nasopharyngeal and throat swab reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), four days after receiving the second dose of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine. She was asymptomatic when she received the COVID-19 vaccine. Two weeks later, she presented to the emergency department with chest pain, where physical examination revealed a heart rate of 110/min. A cardiac ultrasound examination showed a pericardial effusion suggestive of pericarditis. She was started on aspirin and colchicine, with a slow recovery.
One month after receiving the vaccine, she presented to the psychiatric emergency department with acute psychomotor agitation, incoherent speech and total insomnia evolving for five days. She had no recent history of trauma, and no lifetime history of substance use. Routine investigations were done to rule out a differential diagnosis of psychosis according to first signs and the clinical examination, such as cerebrovascular (e.g., stroke, subdural hematomas, cerebral tumors), seizure (e.g., partial complex seizures, temporal lobe epilepsy), metabolic (e.g., phaeochromocytoma), infectious (neurosyphilis, HIV), and endocrine (dysthyroïdism) disorders . Precisely, laboratory tests (including thyroid blood tests and syphilis/HIV serologies) showed an isolated mild anemia. Her electroencephalographic (EEG) and CT brain-scan found no abnormalities. She, and her family members, denied any substance use. She was admitted to our psychiatric unit, where psychiatric examination revealed severe anxiety, delusions of persecution and reference, auditory hallucinations, disorganized speech and behavior. The patient had no delirium symptoms and a lack of insight. Her neurological examination was normal. She was started on intramuscular haloperidol 10 mg/ day and diazepam 10 mg/day. There was a complete resolution of psychotic symptoms within four days of treatment initiation. She was thus diagnosed with a brief psychotic disorder according to the DSM-5 , and was prescribed risperidone (2 mg/day).
On the seventh day of admission, while her discharge has been planned and discussed with the family, she reported the onset of severe asthenia with dysphagia. Physical examination found fever (body temperature of 40 degrees Celsius), tachycardia (heart rate of 123 beats/min), and multiple mouth ulcers. Thoracic auscultation found normal lung and heart sound. A second neurological evaluation revealed a dysarthria with left hemiparesis, evoking an acute stroke. Another psychiatric examination found a concomitant relapse of psychiatric symptoms. On laboratory tests, she had severe acute kidney failure, proteinuria, high CRP values, and pancytopenia. Infectious investigation was negative. The SARS-CoV-2 PCR with nasopharyngeal swab was negative. Chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion. Immune tests identified the presence of antinuclear antibodies. The anti-ENA (extractable nuclear antigen) antibody screen showed strongly positive anti-SSA, anti-Ro52, anti-SSB, as well as weakly positive anti-nucleosome, and anti-histone antibodies. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hyperintense signals in the left fronto-parietal lobes and the cerebellum . Based on these clinical and laboratory evidence, the patient was diagnosed with SLE according to the 2019 American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism (ACR/EULAR) classification criteria . She was then transferred to the internal medicine department and put on Hydroxychloroquine (400 mg daily), prednisone (40 mg daily), Cyclophosphamide (1 g monthly) and risperidone (2 mg daily). Both the SLE and psychotic symptoms improved within one month, and she was discharged. During outpatient follow-up, she was free from neurological and psychiatric symptoms and had good tolerance to treatment.