A 28-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department with right flank pain and gross hematuria. Ultrasound revealed 8 cm right renal mass. Ambulatory computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 7.8 × 6.8 × 8.5 cm, contrast-enhancing tumor in the right kidney with IVC thrombus extending to the level of hepatic veins. Elective surgery was scheduled. However, the patient attended ER ward 5 days before scheduled admission date due to lower limbs edema and pain. Doppler ultrasound revealed massive acute deep vein thrombosis in lower limbs and vena cava below renal veins level. Anticoagulation therapy with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was administered. Patient was scheduled for urgent surgical treatment. Right radical nephrectomy with complete vena cava tumor thrombus resection using liver transplantation techniques (i.e., complete liver mobilization, suprahepatic IVC clamping, Pringle maneuver and wide cavotomy) was performed. Due to failure of the distal embolectomy, IVC was ligated below renal veins in order to prevent pulmonary embolism. During surgery, no gross invasion of the adjacent structures or regional lymphadenopathy was noted. The operative time was 300 min and estimated blood loss was 2000 ml. Patient recovered well and was discharged at sixth day postoperatively with permanent anticoagulation therapy with weight-adjusted curative doses of LMWH.
On gross examination the tumor was 9 cm large, white, solid/cystic, with soft cut-surface, unencapsulated, but infiltrating adipose tissue. Histopathological examination revealed a triphasic nephroblastoma composed predominantly of blastema and non-specific spindle cell stroma with minor epithelioid component. No features of anaplasia were found. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for WT1, CD99, CD57, INI1, CKAE1/AE3, VIM, EMA, SMA, Bcl-2, and PAX-8. HMWCK, CK20, CK7, AMACR, SOX10, MDM2, desmin, MYOD1, caldesmon, myogenin, CD34, and S100 were negative. The tumor was classified as favorable risk group with pathologic stage III according to the Children’s Oncology Group (COG) staging system .
At follow-up visit after 3 months, the patient presented with mild lower limbs edema. On abdominal CT scan, more than 20 liver metastases were identified . According to the strategy proved to be effective in children, patient was scheduled to receive adjuvant chemotherapy with two courses of actinomycin D, vincristine, and doxorubicin. Due to insufficient response, second-line chemotherapy with doxorubicin, cyclofosfamide, etoposide, and carboplatin followed by liver irradiation was administered. CT scan performed 18 months postoperatively has shown complete response with no residual tumor lesions. At last follow-up, the patient presented with mild right lower limb edema, dilated abdominal wall veins and abdominal hernia in the midline of postoperative scar after Mercedes-Benz incision.