The patient was a Japanese woman who was 85 years old at the time of death. She had no family history of neurological diseases, including PD and CJD. She developed PD at the age of 68 years, with gradual left-sided upper extremity resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and difficulty with ambulation. Initial treatment with oral levodopa at 200 mg/day yielded an excellent response. Over a period of 8 years, because of progressive worsening of parkinsonism along with postural instability and freezing of gait, levodopa was gradually increased and associated treatment with ropinirole and droxidopa was added. The patient’s Hoehn and Yahr stage was III–IV until the age of 84 years, when she started developing memory impairment (in April 2019). The following month, she presented with visual hallucinations and delusions of theft despite the withdrawal of ropinirole and droxidopa and treatment with an acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. Her revised Hasegawa Dementia Scale score was 12/30 in May 2019. In June 2019, myoclonus in the face and extremities were noted in addition to the exacerbation of generalized rigidity and bradykinesia; this led to nasogastric tube feeding. She had severe dementia and her Hoehn and Yahr stage was V, with no response to levodopa at 900 mg/day for 3 weeks. After a few months of unfavorable clinical evolution, the patient developed akinetic mutism in August 2019. Deep tendon reflexes were normal and no Babinski sign was elicited. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain using diffusion-weighted imaging (MR-DWI) revealed extensive cortical ribbon-like and basal ganglia hypersignals, which were strongly consistent with CJD . An electroencephalogram (EEG) was abnormal and showed diffuse slow waves with periodic synchronous discharges (PSD). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed elevation of 14-3-3 protein (>500 μg/mL) and total tau (>2,200 pg/mL). Real-time quaking-induced conversion (RT-QuIC) for PrP assays were positive using CSF . The patient died of pneumonia in April 2020. The autopsy was limited to the brain.
An autopsy was performed 15 hours after death. The brain weighed 1,000 g before fixation. A detailed description of neuropathological examination methods is provided in Supplementary Information (Additional file ). Macroscopic examination revealed severe diffuse atrophy of both the cerebrum and cerebellum . The hippocampus was relatively spared but mildly atrophic. The olfactory bulb showed thinning. Depigmentation was evident in the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus . Microscopic examination revealed widespread, severe neuronal loss and gliosis, with ballooned neurons in the cerebral cortex. Fine vacuole-type spongiform changes were detected in all layers of the cerebral cortex that were examined . The entorhinal and transentorhinal cortices showed severe spongiform changes and neuronal loss, whereas the hippocampus and subiculum showed minimal changes. The striatum and thalamus, particularly in the medial part, showed apparent spongiform changes. The globus pallidus and subthalamic nucleus were generally preserved. In the cerebellum, the molecular layer showed mild spongiform changes; neuronal loss was severe in the granule cell layer and mild to moderate in the Purkinje cell layer . In the brainstem, the locus ceruleus and substantia nigra showed severe neuronal loss and gliosis, while such changes were not apparent in the inferior olivary nucleus. Immunostaining for PrP revealed synaptic-type PrP deposition in all layers of the cerebral cortex as well as in the striatum, thalamus, and cerebellar molecular and granular cell layers. The hippocampus, subiculum, globus pallidus, dentate nucleus, substantia nigra, and inferior olivary nucleus also showed very mild to mild synaptic-type PrP deposition. No plaque-type PrP deposition was observed in the regions mentioned above. PrP deposition was not observed in the cerebral or cerebellar white matter.
LB-related α-synucleinopathy (i.e., LBs, Lewy neurites, and neuronal intracytoplasmic inclusions that are immunoreactive for phosphorylated α-synuclein) was also distributed throughout the brainstem, including in the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve, locus ceruleus, substantia nigra, and Edinger–Westphal nucleus. It was also present in the nucleus basalis of Meynert and the limbic systems, including in the olfactory bulb, amygdala, hippocampus, and transentorhinal and cingulate cortices . Only a few phosphorylated α-synuclein-immunoreactive neuronal intracytoplasmic inclusions were observed in the neocortex.
Furthermore, scattered tufted astrocytes, globose-type neurofibrillary tangles, and coiled bodies that were immunoreactive for 4-repeat tau but not 3-repeat tau were observed in the inferior olivary nucleus, substantia nigra, red nucleus, superior colliculus, and periaqueductal gray matter of the midbrain, as well as in the subthalamic nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, and precentral gyrus.
The level of Alzheimer’s disease-related neuropathological changes corresponded to “low” according to the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association classification (Thal phase for amyloid β plaques: 3 , Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease score: B , Braak NFT stage: II ). Very few phosphorylated TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43)-immunoreactive neurites were observed in the uncus of the anterior hippocampus. No argyrophilic grains were identified.
Gene analysis was done using genomic DNA extracted from the autopsied brain. PCR direct sequencing for the PRNP gene that encodes PrP revealed no mutations. The reference sequence used for the PRNP was NM_000311.5. Polymorphic codons showed methionine homozygosity at codon 129 and glutamate homozygosity at codon 219. Immunoblot analysis using anti-PrP antibody (3F4, Signet, Dedham, MA, USA) on a homogenized brain sample disclosed a type 1 pattern .