A 66-year-old female with a past medical history of hypertension and atrial fibrillation. She is under anticoagulant therapy, Vitamin K antagonists (VKAs), (Acenocoumarol 4 mg) was admitted to the hospital after experiencing four days of epigastric pain, jaundice and vomiting without any evidence of trauma. The physical examination revealed pale teguments and mucous membranes. Palpation of the epigastric region revealed tenderness. An electrocardiogram was performed to eliminate a myocardial Infarction. Then a pancreatic assessment was requested for the epigastralgia. We suspected also an alteration of the hemostasis balance because of the patient's antecedents. The blood tests showed, anemia with a hemoglobin level of 5.9 g/dl. The prothrombin level was at 12 % and the INR was 3.4 (target INR was between 2 and 3). The ionogram was normal. The lipase blood level was elevated to 500 U/L. The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis was retained. A CT scan (Without and with enhancement) was performed for the classification of acute pancreatitis (, , ), it showed a swollen pancreas, with homogeneous enhancement. Densification of peri-pancreatic fat, consistent with acute oedemato-interstitial pancreatitis without peri-pancreatic collection. There was no of dilatation of the intra and extra hepatic bile ducts, nor of the pancreatic duct. The CT scan also showed a circumferential and regular parietal thickening, of D2 and D3, reaching the papilla, spontaneously hyperdense evoking a duodenal hematoma. The IDH extended over 8 cm with 20 mm thickness without significant stenosis. Ultrasound imaging showed no abnormalities in gallbladder nor fatty liver. The diagnosis retained, in view of the clinical, biological and radiological data was a duodenal hematoma complicated by an acute pancreatitis. Therapeutically, the patient was hospitalized in the surgical department, where anticoagulants and parenteral nutrition were stopped along. Hydro-electrolytic rebalancing and blood transfusion were initiated. The evolution was marked by an improvement of the clinical state and of the coagulation disorders. A follow-up abdominal CT scan on day 6 of hospitalization showed regression of the duodenal parietal thickening . Oral feeding was tolerated at day 20. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .