A 25-year-old Italian woman developed severe bilateral sensorineural hearing loss over the course of 12 months from her first acute inflammatory episode characterized by conjunctival hyperaemia, interstitial keratitis and tinnitus. Before the admission, the patient had already experienced a 3-week regimen of oral prednisone (50 mg/day at regressive dosage) and dexametasone eye-drops with poor response. After the patient had been screened for a possible infectious origin of her symptoms and all other known causes of interstitial keratitis had been excluded (i.e. syphilis, sarcoidosis, leprosy, Lyme disease, viruses, hypersensitivity to drugs), diagnosis of typical CS was confirmed by positive anti-hsp 70 antibody. An immunosuppressive combination therapy was thus started following the reference protocol of our Centres for systemic autoimmune diseases. It consisted of pulse intravenous cyclophosphamide (400 mg IV once a month, for 6 consecutive months), intramuscular methotrexate (10 mg/sqm once a week with folic acid integration), oral cyclosporine (2.5 mg/kg of lean body weight per day) and prednisone (40 mg per week). Treatment controlled the relapsing ocular inflammation and stopped progression of the typical, ring-shape interstitial keratitis. It was also successful in achieving good control of accompanying symptoms such as dizziness, nausea, and vertigo. The same treatment, however, gave poor results in controlling progressive hearing loss . An anti-Tumour Necrosis Factor (anti-TNF) molecule (adalimumab, 40 mg once a week subcutaneously) was then associated to prednisone and methotrexate for 6 months, but hearing loss continued to worsen. Following the patient's informed consent and approval of local ethics committee, Rituximab was infused as an "off label" adjuvant rescue treatment at the dosage of 500 mg iv/week for 4 consecutive weeks. The same regimen was repeated after 6 months, while oral prednisone at 10 mg every other day was maintained. A noticeable improvement in hearing function was documented by pure tone audiometry starting from the 28th day after the first drug infusion, mostly affecting the right ear . The pre-treatment CD19+ lymphocyte count was 73 cells/uL, which then decreased below the detectibly threshold after the infusion cycles. No other undesirable effects were recorded during or after therapy. At 12 months of follow-up, the audiometry curve was still better than pre-treatment levels and essentially unchanged in comparison to that shown in figure . Other previously experienced manifestations of the syndrome remained under control.