A 24-year old man with mediastinal seminoma was referred to a local hospital for the management of left pleural effusion. He underwent previous radiotherapy, and was then scheduled for standard BEP (Bleomycin, Etoposide, and Cisplatin) protocol consisted of Cisplatin 20 mg/m2 days 1 through 5; Etoposide 100 mg/m2 days 1 through 5 for four cycles; Bleomycin 30 mg weekly for 12 weeks (total dose of bleomycin, 360 mg). However, the occurrence of left pleural effusion did not allow to complete the first cycle of treatment. A chest drainage was placed in the left pleural cavity. The fluid had a triglyceride level of 450 mg/dL, and resulted to be positive for chylomicrons. Despite Non-oral feeding (NPO) and TPN were provided for 30 days, output chylothorax > 800 ml/24 h persisted. Chest computed tomography scan confirmed the persistence of left pleural effusion with atelectasis of left lower lobe. Thus, he was referred to our attention for surgical treatment.
Under general anaesthesia and selective intubation, the patient was placed in right lateral decubitus. Heavy cream was administered via a nasogastric probe producing a copious white chyle dropping which allowed to identify the leakage. Endoscopic view showed diffuse, tenacious and bleeding pleural adhesions that made difficult the identification of TD at level of Poirier’s triangle and of diaphragm. The uniportal incision was converted to a mini-thoracotomy, and TD was identified near to the esophagus in the anatomical space delimited by descending thoracic aorta, the 4th and the 5th posterior intercostal arteries and the vertebral column . Ability to aspirate chyle using a small needle, confirmed that the isolated structure was the TD rather than retroaortic artery . Thus, it was clipped at multiple locations along its path . A mechanical debridement of pleural adhesions were performed and associated to pleural lavage with warm povidone-iodine solution diluted with saline. Two chest tubes were left in the chest. The procedure is summarized in Additional file 1: Video S1.
Complete resolution of chylothorax was obtained the day after. Patient was discharged on post-operative day 5, and no recurrence of chylothorax was observed during the follow-up. One month later, the patient re-started chemotherapy and completed the four cycles of treatment with complete remission of disease. At 15 months from surgery, the disease is stable without sign of progression.