We describe a 65-year-old Caucasian female with known GCA since 2018 with (ultrasound detected) affection of the left axillary artery, left temporal artery and right sided carotid artery. Under ongoing therapy with low-dose prednisolone (4 mg per day) and tocilizumab (162 mg per week subcutaneously since the initial diagnosis), she was admitted to our department of neurology after occurrence of a convulsive epileptic seizure in October 2019. The patient showed only mild symptoms with a left sided latent sensorimotor hemiparesis and slight cognitive impairment. A mild hypertension was known in the patient’s history without any specific medication. During the transport and the admission to our hospital the patient developed moderate hypertensive values up to a maximum of 170/90 mmHg.
Computer tomography (CT) of the brain revealed bilateral distinct occipital hypodense lesions with left sided hemorrhagic features. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral extent T2 hyperintense lesions occipital, parietal, frontal and cerebellar without diffusion restriction with the known hemorrhagic changes on the left side . We performed CT-angiography which was inconspicuous. At that date there was no evidence of active inflammation (halo sign) in the vertebral and temporal arteries using ultra sound. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed bilateral occipital slowing without epileptic activity. The analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was unremarkable, especially without any evidence of JC-virus.
After immediate initiation of antihypertensive and anticonvulsive (Levetiracetam 2 × 750 mg) medication the patient recovered from neurological symptoms within a week and no further seizures appeared since then.
Diagnosis of PRES was established by typical clinical findings and the specific changes in the brain MRI. Several cases of PRES have been reported under other immunosuppressive regiments. So we consider that TCZ - as part of a multi-hit hypothesis in combination with slightly increased blood pressure values against the backdrop of the autoimmune disease itself - caused PRES . Thus, we discontinued TCZ application and continued oral glucocorticosteroids with remaining remission of GCA.