We report the case of a 32-year-old patient, of Caucasian origin, with no notable medical history, nulliparous and nulligravida, who suffered from primary infertility for more than 2 years and in whom, during a primary infertility assessment, a 39 mm left ovarian cyst of organic appearance was observed on pelvic ultrasound . Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a left ovarian mass with infiltration of the uterosacral space . Biologically, ovarian tumor markers including cancer antigen 125 (CA 125), inhibin B, α-fetoprotein, and β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) were all normal, as well as ovarian hormone assessment, pituitary hormones [follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH)], and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) level. Regarding these clinical, radiological, and biological elements, an exploratory laparoscopy was performed and revealed an enlarged left ovary with a dystrophic parenchyma. Multiple biopsies were performed and showed a morphological and immunohistochemical aspect of granulosa tumor of the adults . The exploration was completed by hysteroscopy and an endometriectomy. Histology was normal, with no signs of hyperplasia or malignancy. As part of the extension assessment, chest, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan and positron emission tomography (PET) scan were requested, which showed no abnormality except the known left ovarian cyst. The multidisciplinary oncogynecology tumor board recommended conservative surgery including left anexectomy and infra-colonic omentectomy with peritoneal biopsies, and peritoneal cytology followed by three cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy every 3 weeks according to the “BEP” protocol combining bleomycin (30 units intravenously, days 1, 8, 15), etoposide (100 mg/m2, days 1–5), and cisplatin (20 mg/m2, days 1–5) was decided at the multidisciplinary tumor board, preceded by oocyte cryopreservation. The definitive histology on the surgical specimen confirmed the laparoscopic exploration data. Cytology showed slightly hematic peritoneal fluid, evoking perioperative rupture. The disease is classified as stage Ic1. After 9 weeks of chemotherapy, a check-up including thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic scans as well as tumor markers, in particular HCG, was normal. Subsequently, the patient had two spontaneous pregnancies that proceeded to term, with vaginal delivery, the first of which occurred 3 months after the end of the chemotherapy and the second 14 months later. After 5 years of follow-up, the patient has no sign of tumor progression and the two children are in good health.