A 68-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to perceived abdominal distention for over 20 days. Past medical history included an 8-year infection with HCV and discontinuous anti-viral treatment. Laboratory tests revealed levels of HCV antibodies of 32.900 S/CO (< 1.00), carbohydrate antigen 125 of 361.69 U/ml (< 35.00), neuron-specific enolase of 62.05 ng/ml (< 25.00), and alpha- fetoprotein (AFP) of 113.77 ng/ml (< 20.00). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with tri-phase enhancement revealed an irregular, dense shadow (dimensions 110.0 mm × 160.0 mm) in the left hepatic lobe with cystic fibrosis and scattered uneven calcification within. An abnormally low-density filling defect was observed in the left portal vein .
The patient was scheduled to undergo left hepatic resection, during which an oversized but uncoated mass was detected. The tumor had invaded into the adipose tissue external to the hepatic capsule and grown in with tumor thrombi in the portal vein. Tumor invasion was not observed into nerve and incisal edge tissue, while the surrounding hepatic tissue was obviously infected with chronic hepatitis (G2S2).
Immunohistochemistry revealed carcinoma cells positive for CD34 and CK8 (focalin). Cells were also partially positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), vimentin, and cytokeratin-pan (CK-pan), but negative for desmin and AFP . Histology revealed proliferation of spindle-shaped SHC cells; the cancer was staged at T4. Forty-seven days after the operation, tri-phase enhanced CT detected extensive massive, nodal-like regions in the liver, spleen, peritoneum, omentum majus, and mesentery. These heterogeneous densities with unclear boundaries at the incisal edge of the left hepatic lobe and gastric wall suggested reoccurrence and metastases of the SHC. A low-density filling defect was noted in the main portal vein . Chemotherapy was conducted with pirarubicin and cisplatin for 1 cycle; the curative effect was evaluated as stable disease (SD) , and the patient was followed up for 3 months before quitting therapy.