A 72-year old diabetic male presented at the ENT emergency department with pharyngalgia, odynophagia and fever up to 39oC. Clinical examination revealed a febrile patient with hypoxia, hoarseness and drooling. Flexible fiberoptic Rhino-Pharyngo-Laryngoscopy showed pooling of secretions in the pyriform sinuses, as well as a thickened, edematous, reddish epiglottis that was obstructing the airway .
Lab tests revealed: White Blood cell Count (WBC): 14830 Κ/μL, neutrophils: 83.4%, C-reactive protein (CRP): 101 mg/L, Glucose: 246 mg/dL. An endotracheal intubation was not considered safe and, therefore, an emergency tracheostomy was performed under local anaesthesia. Then general anaesthesia was administered followed by direct laryngoscopy that revealed abscesses on the lingual surface of the epiglottis, the area over the left arytenoid and the right epiglottic vallecula. Abscesses were opened using laser CO2.
Culture were positive for Streptococcus parasanguinis (classified as member of the Streptococcus viridans group-Group A hemolytic streptococci) was isolated. The patient was awakened and moved to the ward. He was administered with ceftriaxone plus clindamycin. In the following days flexible fiberoptic endoscopy revealed persisting protrusion of the left hemilarynx. A CT scan was performed showing an abscess in the paraglottic space (3.1Χ0.9Χ0.5cm) .
He was again taken to the operating room where under general anesthesia and direct laryngoscopy the abscess was drained. He improved the following days, was decannulated on the 13th post-operative day and discharged .
Case Report
A 41-year-old female with a free past medical history presented to the emergency department complaining of pharyngalgia, odynophagia and fever up to 39oC. She was hoarse and drooling.
Endoscopic examination revealed epiglottitis that did not cause airway obstruction.
Lab tests taken during the patient’s admission showed: WBC: 15380 Κ/μL, neutrophils: 83.4%, CRP: 29.1 mg/L.
The patient was admitted for follow-up and was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone plus clindamycin.
She remain stable but on the 5th day showed an exacerbation of her symptoms.
Endoscopy revealed a symmetrical edematous reddish epiglottis and involvement of both the arytenoid and false vocal folds.
A CT scan was performed that showed the existence of an abscess in the preepiglottic space with small abscesses anteriorly to the thyroid cartilage (5.7 x 1.7 x 0.7 cm) .
She was taken to surgery and the abscesses were drained under general anaesthesia through a cervical- U shaped- incision.
The spaces between the superficial layer of the deep cervical fascia and the pretracheal cervical fascia were drained.
Debridement was performed and pus as well as tissue were sent for culture. Necrotic tissue and encrustation were extensively surgically removed. Tissue cultures were positive for streptococcus agalactiae (Group B hemolytic streptococci).
A tracheostomy was then performed to secure the airway following by a direct laryngoscopy where a small quantity of pus was drained from the preepiglottic space through vallecula epiglottica .
The same antibiotic treatment was continued while the trauma was daily irrigated with natural saline through small hunts- “penrose” type. The patient was decannulated on the 6th post-operative day and discharged on the 10th post-op day.