While on a morning mushroom picking expedition in the forest, the 28-year-old victim found three specimens that he believed to be parasol mushrooms (Macrolepiota procera). After returning from the forest at about 10 a.m., he consumed them fried in oil. In the late afternoon, he began to complain of nausea and a feeling of heaviness in the stomach. This aroused his suspicion that he could have eaten Amanita phalloides.
Around 7 p.m., with abdominal pain worsening, the man called a medical rescue team, stating that he had consumed mushrooms similar to Macrolepiota procera found in the forest in the morning. On examination, the patient demonstrated abdominal pain at palpation in the gastric region and high blood pressure (160/100 mmHg). The head of the rescue team established a diagnosis of abdominal pain and primary hypertension. The patient received ranitidine 100 ml i.v. (intravenously) and captopril 12.5 mg p.o. (orally). The decision was made to leave the patient at home with the recommendation to consult a family doctor due to increased blood pressure.
Shortly after leaving the medical rescue team, the patient experienced vomiting, which persisted until the next day, when new symptoms appeared: diarrhea and subpyretic state. The patient contacted the ambulance medical dispatcher again and reported the new symptoms. The dispatcher recommended hydration and refused to dispatch a medical emergency team.
The condition did not improve and the next day the patient called the ambulance again. He informed the same medical dispatcher that he had not been able to eat and had experienced vomiting and diarrhea for 3 days. The dispatcher instructed the victim to drink a lot of water again and suggested that he should travel to the hospital by his own means of transport, claiming that there was no free ambulance.
On the same day, around noon, the victim’s mother called the medical rescue team, reporting vomiting as a reason. At that time, the ambulance was sent to the patient. The head of the rescue team was the same paramedic who attended during the first visit. The interview showed that the patient had vomiting and diarrhea. This time, after undergoing medical rescue operations consisting of treatment with metoclopramide 10 mg i.v, isotonic multielectrolyte physiological fluid 0.5 l i.v and 0.9% NaCl 500 ml i.v, the patient, who was already in a life-threatening health condition, was transported to the hospital. Further tests found that he had signs of liver failure, possibly due to poisoning with Amanita phalloides, and he was referred for further diagnosis and treatment to a higher reference center after administration of 1200 mg of acetylcysteine. Due to life-threatening liver failure, he received a liver transplant from a deceased donor. After long-term treatment and rehabilitation, the patient was finally discharged home in a condition described as good.