A 52 year old female patient with a shortness of breath (New York Heart Association class III) and vertigo on exertion, gradually worsening exercise intolerance and occasionally chest pain for the last 4 months was referred to the Eastern Slovakian Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases for evaluation. Although as a child she was diagnosed with a murmur, she had not been treated and she was lost from the follow-up. At presentation she had a blood pressure of 110/95 mmHg and permanent atrial fibrillation. She exhibited a 1/6 systolic murmur and electrocardiogram showed right axis deviation and signs of right ventricular overload. On physical examination, peripheral edema was present. Serum NTpro brain natriuretic peptide was elevated, 2324 pg/ml.
Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography with a CW Doppler (Siemens SC 2000 Prime, Siemens Medical Solutions, Inc, Mountain View, California, USA) (2D-TTE) revealed AV septum deficiency with enlargement of the right heart chambers (right ventricle and right atrium) and hemodynamically significant left-to-right shunt (pulmonary to systemic blood flow 2:1), right and left AVV valves located at the same level, with bridging leaflet chordal attachments to the crest of the interventricular septum (IVS), typically seen in AVS, right ventricle ejection fraction slightly decreased, severe valvular regurgitation of the common AV valve, large septum primum defect (23 × 28 mm), defect in the membraneous part of the IVS and left ventricle (LV) to right atrium shunt. Moreover, left ventricular outflow tract was prolonged with a hemodynamically insignificant obstruction caused by the attachment of the bridging leaflets. Left ventricle was of normal size with normal global systolic function .
Transesophageal 2D echocardiography (TEE) with a continuous wave (CW) Doppler, confirmed TTE findings of AV septum deficiency, primum atrial septal defect with left-to-right shunt with better visualization of superior bridging leaflets attachments to the IVS and AVV regurgitation .
According to the above results of the 2D echocardiography, the diagnosis of AVSD intermediate (transitional) type was made. For precise assessment of AV septal defects and common AV valve anatomy real time three-dimensional echocardiography (RT3D) was performed.
Real time 3D transthoracic echocardiography (RT3DTTE) enabled complete 3D analysis of the right ventricle, with a calculated ejection fraction of 34% and end-diastolic volume of 161 ml. Real time 3D transesophageal echocardiography (RT3DTEE) revealed an oval in appearance atrial septal primum defect, which could not be visualized in 2D echocardiography with a more precise measurements of 31 × 23 mm. Moreover, two small inlet VSD in the membraneous part of the IVS, between the chordate attachements to the crest of IVS of bridging leaflets, with sizes of 4 × 5 and 7 × 8 mm with a left-to-right shunt were also detected. The common AV valve was found to be with one annulus and two orifices different in shape (triangle on the left side, elliptic on the right side) with malposition of the aorta. The common valve was found to have five leaflets-superior, inferior, left mural, larger right anterior or superior and smaller right inferior leaflet. The left mural leaflet was relatively small with slight restriction. Finally, no tricuspid pouch, described in 2D TTE was detected .
The main findings of the cardiac computed tomography (CCT) were, intermediate AVSD, large atrial septal defect (17 mm), smaller membraneous ventricular septal defect (6 mm), extremely dilated right heart chambers, mainly the right atrium and dilated left atrium, large communication between the atrial septal defect and the right atrium, common AV valve, with the tricuspid part attached to the free wall and the the mitral part (anterior leaflet) thickened and attached to the interventricular septum .
Right heart catheterization showed bidirectional shunt (1:1) at the level of the left atrium and right ventricle, mild pulmonary hypertension (22 mmHg), and pulmonary vascular resistance of 1.7 Wood Units. Left heart catheterization showed no coronary disease.
Initially, due to the lack of expertise by the local hospital, the patient was considered by the local heart team as highly risk (right ventricular dysfunction and dilatation) for surgical correction, and she was offered only conservative treatment. Later, the indication was re-evaluated and she was referred to the National Institute of Cardiovascular Diseases for an elective surgery. The National Institute is a tertiary hospital with an expertise in correction of congenital heart diseases and especially complex patients like the patient who is discussed in this case report.