A 9-year-old girl with uncontrollable twisting of lower limbs was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit due to a depressed level of consciousness. One month ago, the child developed frequent twitching of the left lower extremities for 1–2 h, with no change in her level of consciousness during those attacks. Except for the abnormal limb movements, her parents complained the child recently had mental disorders, manifesting as low frustration threshold, worse memory, and bouts of involuntary laughter. She was then diagnosed with mental illness by a local hospital after the exclusion of conceivable organic medical conditions and was treated with aripiprazole, lorazepam, magnesium valproate and sertraline hydrochloride. However, involuntary muscle twitches were not alleviated but became more frequent and extended to other body regions.
At admission, the patient exhibited a stuporous mental state, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 11 (E3M3V5). Neurological examination revealed no nuchal rigidity, Brudzinski's sign or Kernig's sign. Laboratory tests, including complete blood cell counts, liver and renal functions, serum electrolyte, ammonia, and blood glucose, were all within normal limits. Cranial MRI also revealed no specific abnormality. A subsequent lumbar puncture demonstrated a pressure of 221 mmH2O (80-180 mmH2O), while the routine and biochemical CSF tests showed normal results. Results of the study for microbiological investigations on CSF were negative, including CSF microscopy, CSF culture, CSF serology (herpes simplex virus [HSV] IgG/IgM, cytomegalovirus [CMV] IgG/IgM, varicella-zoster virus [VZV] IgM, measles IgM, Epstein-Barr's virus [EBV] IgM) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for neurotropic viruses. EEG on day 2 showed diffuse slow waves without epileptiform discharges . These results suggested a low probability of infectious causes. Besides, the child underwent examination of ultrasound and CT scans, which showed no teratoma or other tumors.
Based on the typical clinical features (rapid onset, psychiatric symptoms, movement disorder, decreased consciousness and abnormal EEG), autoimmune encephalitis was highly suspected, which was later confirmed by positive anti-NMDAR antibodies in serum and CSF. Empirical therapy was immediately administered with intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg/d) and gamma globulin (12.5 g/d). A 24-h video EEG on day 8 revealed generalized TWs more prominent anteriorly lasting for about 12 h ( and timeline in ). In addition, the child's frequent involuntary jerking movements were confirmed as non-epileptic seizures by the long-term video EEG monitor. No signs of metabolic dysfunction were displayed. Although long-term video EEG recordings showed a disappearance of TWs the next day, the child's mental status still did not improve. Assessment of the child's consciousness revealed partial recovery on day 17, while simultaneous EEG showed diffuse slow waves. The patient finally recovered and was discharged from hospital on day 37 without any evidence of neurological sequelae. Six months later, a routine EEG follow-up just showed mild slow background activity .