A 75-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to hospital with the chief complaints of progressive dyspnea and back pain after eating, for 2 months prior. She had surgical histories of open appendectomy and laparotomy for bowel obstruction due to adhesions at 17 and 69 years old, respectively, but no histories of upper abdominal surgery or trauma. Upon physical examination, she measured 155.2 cm in height, weighed 53.0 kg, and had a BMI of 22.0 kg/m2. Her abdominal examination showed a lower abdominal median incision for bowel obstruction surgery and a right lower abdominal incision for appendectomy. The results of the laboratory tests were normal, but chest X-ray revealed an abnormal gas-filled bowel loops in the left thoracic cavity . Computed tomography (CT) revealed that the stomach, small intestine, colon, pancreas, and spleen had prolapsed into the left thoracic cavity, above the diaphragm, causing significant displacement of the left lung, which led to the diagnosis of a diaphragmatic hernia, such as para-esophageal hiatal hernia or BH . Liver was found on the normal right side. Laparoscopic hernia repair was performed under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation by two-lung ventilation. Trocars were placed at the umbilicus (12-mm camera port), in the right upper abdomen (5-mm), at the right lower abdomen (12-mm port), left upper abdomen (12-mm port), and at the left lower abdomen (5-mm) . Pneumoperitoneum was established at 10 mmHg. When we examined the intra-abdominal cavity, we observed a large posterolateral defect of the left diaphragm. It was clear that part of the stomach, small intestine, transverse colon, spleen, and pancreas had prolapsed into the thoracic cavity, and there was no hernial sac . These hernia contents were reduced back into the abdominal cavity from the left thoracic cavity with the use of atraumatic forceps, and no ischemic change was identified in any of the organs. However, the spleen was entirely contained within the thoracic cavity. The reduction of the spleen into the abdominal cavity was difficult, because the gastrosplenic ligament had adhered to the parietal pleura . The adhesions were exfoliated using an ultrasonic coagulator. Thereafter, the spleen was carefully placed back into the abdominal cavity. Upon examination of the thoracic cavity, no pulmonary adhesions were observed, and a left posterolateral diaphragmatic defect measured approximately 10 × 8 cm in diameter . The diaphragmatic defect was closed using a single layer primary closure method with nonabsorbable 2-0 Ethibond interrupted sutures . Because the diaphragm around the hernial orifice was somewhat fragile, a Ventralight™ ST mesh, coated with a chemically modified substance (Bard/Davol, Warwick, USA), was placed over the defect . The mesh was fixed to the diaphragm with an absorbable tacker. We did not leave a drain in the left chest cavity. The collapsed lung could be re-expanded by positive pressure ventilation without developing acute lung edema. The surgery lasted 266 min, and the blood loss volume was 215 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged in good condition on postoperative day 7. There was no recurrence in the 27 months after the surgery.