A 33-year-old woman was diagnosed with SLE in 2001. The patient was treated with prednisolone (initial and maintenance dose: 50 and 15 mg/day, respectively). Polyarthritis pain, Raynaud’s sign, and photosensitivity were recognized early in the onset of SLE. After initiation of prednisolone, the SLE symptoms improved. The patient complained of persistent palpitations for 1 month.
Examination showed that she was haemodynamically stable. Surface electrocardiography (ECG) revealed narrow QRS tachycardia with a P-wave of 139 b.p.m. The P-wave axis during tachycardia was similar to that observed during sinus rhythm . Of note, 24-h ECG monitoring showed a minimum, maximum, and mean HR of 71, 156, and 103 b.p.m., respectively. In addition, tachycardia was persistent at rest . Laboratory investigations revealed proteinuria (2.3 g/day) and positivity for anti-DNA antibody. In contrast, there was no evidence of secondary pathological sinus tachycardia (e.g. anaemia, hyperthyroidism, or neurohormonal disease). Physical examination, chest X-ray, and echocardiography did not yield evidence of clinically overt structural and/or organic heart disease. We diagnosed IST on the basis of diagnostic criteria. Moreover, bisoprolol (2.5 mg/day), carvedilol (5.0 mg/day), and verapamil (240 mg/day) were administered. However, IST was refractory, and the administration of these agents was discontinued due to the development of adverse effects (i.e. general fatigue, headache, and dizziness).
An electrophysiological evaluation was performed to verify the mechanism of arrhythmia and exclude the presence of other arrhythmias. A multielectrode array catheter (EnSite™ Array, St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) was placed in the right atrium (RA), approximately at the level of the superior vena cava and right atrial junction . A 7-Fr quadripolar ablation catheter with a 4-mm-tip electrode (Therapy™, St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN, USA) was percutaneously introduced into the RA, while the baseline geometry of the RA was determined.
Surface ECG at rest prior to ablation showed a sinus rhythm of HR 100 b.p.m. . Prior to RFCA, the HR was controlled (90–155 b.p.m.) through the intravenous administration of a β1 antagonist and agonist . Moreover, voltage and activation mapping were performed at each HR 90–155 b.p.m. Activation mapping did not show differences in the earliest activation sites (EAS) at HR 90–150 b.p.m. during the intravenous administration of a β1 antagonist and agonist . In contrast, the shift to the posteroseptal of breakout sites (BOS) was clearly distinguished between those from the normal P-wave zones at HR <140 b.p.m. and those from higher-rate sites at HR >140 b.p.m. . This finding was in accordance with the appearance of tall P-waves . Radiofrequency catheter ablation for 30–60 s under a pre-set temperature of 50°C and power limit of 30 W was delivered to the target areas of shifted BOS . The ablation catheter potential prior to ablation was not a complete QS pattern, indicating that it was not the EAS . Thereafter, the maximum HR decreased to 120 b.p.m. regardless of the intravenous administration of a β1 agonist . After RFCA, the palpitations were markedly improved. The patient exhibited an uneventful course without evidence of recurrence for ≥6 months.