A 67-year-old female patient visited the department of neurology for deteriorating cognitive function.
The patient was able to walk with a cane and take care of herself. However, upon presentation, her cognitive function had deteriorated, she could not recognize her neighbors, and she had difficulty walking unassisted.
She had been diagnosed with cerebellar ataxia a few years prior and was on the medications such as cilostazol and atorvastatin.
She had no personal or family history.
At the time of examination, she had a mild fever of 37.8°C, but her other vital signs were stable, and she reported no symptoms other than deteriorated cognitive function. There was no sensory deficit, and motor power was intact, although her coordination was poor.
Laboratory testing confirmed bicytopenia (hemoglobin, 8.5 g/dL; platelet count, 77 × 103/μL) and elevated C-reactive protein (5.26 mg/dL) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (891 IU/L) levels . She was confirmed to have a urinary tract infection caused by Escherichia coli.
Following brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a focal diffusion restrictive lesion in the left parietal lobe and chronic subdural hemorrhage in the right frontal convexity were observed. In addition, pachymeningeal enhancement of the bilateral frontoparietal convexities was noted, suggesting leptomeningeal disease .
Three consecutive lumbar punctures were performed, and a consistent increase in protein and LDH levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was observed. No malignant cells were observed and the CSF pressure was within the normal range (7.5 cmH2O). Abdominal CT showed bilateral enlargement of adrenal glands along with hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Meanwhile, her cognitive function and the results of blood tests were worsening (e.g., exacerbation of cytopenia, elevation of ferritin and triglyceride levels), and, despite improved urinalysis findings after antibiotic therapy, she developed a high fever up to 39°C. Thus, the patient was referred to a hematologist who performed immediate bone marrow exam. Increased numbers of hemophagocytic histiocytes were found without malignant cells, suggesting secondary HLH. PET-CT was performed to identify the underlying disease. An increased FDG uptake was observed in both adrenal glands, the liver, and the right ethmoid sinus , and a biopsy of the right ethmoid sinus was ordered. Histological examination revealed atypical large lymphoid cells with prominent nucleoli in the vessels . Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells were positive for CD20, BCL2, BCL6, and IRF4/MUM1 but negative for CD3 and CD10. In addition, MYD88, TET2, and PIM1 mutations were identified by targeted sequencing using tissues .