A well-built 49-year-old gentleman with a history of depression was brought in by the ambulance following intentional ingestion of yew tree leaves and seeds (∼50 g) as a suicide attempt. The patient also reported consuming yew tree oil the previous day with no effect. On assessment by the ambulance crew, he was found to be profoundly bradycardic, with a heart rate of 38 b.p.m. and hypotensive with blood pressure (BP) of 79/47 mmHg. Prior to arrival at the hospital, he was treated with bolus intravenous saline challenges and intravenous boluses of 600 μg of atropine, totalling 1800 μg.
On admission, the patient was drowsy but coherent and responsive to questions. He admitted to taking yew tree oil and seeds with suicidal intent at 09.30 that morning. He was on sertraline for depression, which was first diagnosed 20 years ago. On examination, he was profoundly bradycardic with a heart rate of 30 b.p.m. and hypotensive with BP of 70/50 mm Hg. His cardiorespiratory, abdominal, and neurological examinations were otherwise unremarkable. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed complete heart block with very broad QRS complex. The patient’s clinical presentation was quickly recognized to be due to yew poisoning after consulting the UK National Poisoning Information Service’s (NPIS) online database, TOXBASE®. He was then transferred as an emergency to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for temporary pacing wire insertion. The patient was paced at 100 b.p.m. with increasing output due to difficulty in capture, but even with adequate pacing capture, the VP did not respond. Eventually, there was failure of electrical capture. Bedside echocardiography revealed severe global biventricular impairment of right and left ventricular systolic function. The systolic BP continued to fall to 50 mmHg, and asystole ensued. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was commenced in accordance with the UK Resuscitation Council’s Advance Life Support guidelines and the patient was intubated and ventilated.
Treatment with 50 mL sodium bicarbonate 8.4%, 10 mL 10% calcium gluconate, and 1 mg of adrenaline was administered within the first cycle of CPR. The local extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) life support team was contacted and the patient provisionally accepted for transfer. Continuous CPR with the LUCAS® chest compression system was initiated an hour into the arrest, in preparation for transfer to the ECMO unit. The patient’s rhythm hitherto had predominantly shown pulseless electrical activity (PEA) and asystole on rhythm checks. There were three documented ventricular tachycardia episodes requiring defibrillation. There were intermittent episodes of return of spontaneous circulation, with a BP of 140/90 mmHg, but each time this was followed by PEA or asystole. Despite prolonged resuscitation period of 1 h and 50 min, serial arterial blood gases continued to deteriorate, with progressive mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis, Type 2 respiratory failure, a rising lactate and hyperglycaemia . This reflects the patient’s critical condition owing to inadequate cardiac output despite persistent resuscitation efforts. After prolonged resuscitation, the patient died 3 h and 12 min post-admission.
Post-mortem examination revealed small needle-shaped plant leaves together with seeds found in the stomach. Ante mortem serum sample analysis sent to the Royal Botanical Gardens and revealed the presence of taxine Type B alkaloids in the patient’s blood. Given the history, serum analysis and post-mortem findings, the cause of death was deemed to be due to yew (leaves, oil, and seed) poisoning.