A 21-month-old girl presented to the emergency department as a case of left-sided mastoiditis with a history of prolonged, persistent fever, left side ear discharge and post auricular swelling. The patient was previously healthy; she had no previous admissions or surgeries and had uneventful antenatal period, she was delivered full term via normal vaginal delivery, and no neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission. She did not take any medications, was up to date with her vaccinations, and had no known allergies. She was doing well until she experienced fever for 25 days prior to admission. Her parent sought medical advice after 4 days of fever and she was treated as a case of tonsillitis with oral Amoxicillin and Clavulanate for 5 days. There was no improvement. In addition to fever, she developed runny nose, cough, and difficulty in breathing that were associated with decreased appetite and hypoactivity. The medication was switched to Azithromycin for 3 days. Despite the changes in antimicrobial drugs, the temperature remained high. Another private doctor prescribed Amoxicillin for another 3 days and the fever subsided just for 2 days at the time of starting Amoxicillin. After that, she developed pain in her left ear and bi-temporal headache as well. She received three doses of intramuscular Penicillin injection. But she did not show any improvement. Then she was diagnosed to have otitis media by Ear Nose Throat doctor and was given high dose of Amoxicillin and Clavulanate for 10 days but she continued to have fever and left ear pain.
Two days before her presentation to hospital, she developed excessive yellowish discharge from her left ear and post auricular swelling along with fever and left ear pain, and was admitted to the hospital under pediatric care. Physical examination revealed an ill-looking patient with a temperature of 39.5 °C, pulse rate of 110 beats/min, respiratory rate of 30/min, and blood pressure of 95/65 mmHg. She was crying and irritable. There was obvious swelling behind her left ear, which was very tender, with yellowish discharge coming out of it. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory workup showed a white blood cell count of 11,400/mm3, with lymphocytes 62.1%, eosinophils 4.6%, and neutrophils 25.9%. The inflammatory markers were elevated; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 55 mm/h (reference range 0–13 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 28 mg/L (reference range < 6 mg/L). CT Scan with and without contrast of the head showed evidence of left side mastoiditis, opacification of the middle ear cavity and the mastoid air cell, with destruction of the mastoid septae and lateral wall, and no intracranial extension. In addition, a peripherally filling defect was noted involving the left transverse sinus and was compatible with sinus venous thrombosis secondary to left sided mastoiditis . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal which showed 0 cell WBC, 0 cell RBC, glucose of 3 mmol/L, protein of 20 mg/dL and negative culture. Thrombotic investigations including prothrombine time, partial thromoplastin time, protein C, protein S, lupus anticoagulant factor V leiden by PCR, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and prothrombin mutation (factor II) by PCRwere within normal limits. The working diagnosis at that time was acute bacterial mastoiditis complicated with cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, and the patient was empirically managed with intravenous Meropenem and anticoagulant medication (Enoxaparin). The pus sample from her ear revealed significant growth of Trichosporon asahii on third day of admission. The sample was tested for identification (ID) and susceptibility by using Vitek 2 Compact. Therefore, Voriconazole 100 mg twice daily intravenously (18 mg/kg/day) was initiated at day three of admission.
During the course of stay in the hospital, the patient became afebrile after 48 h of starting the Voriconzole; post auricular swelling and ear discharge were improved significantly. Despite the aforementioned antibiotic therapy, ear discharge culture remained persistently positive for three occasions and the result was negative at day 7 of admission (4 days after staring Voriconazole). Blood culture did not grow any organism. The Inflammatory markers dropped dramatically (ESR, CRP). Therefore, Meropenem was given for 7 days and Voriconazole intravenously was received for 10 days (6 days after negative ear discharge culture). After 13 days of hospitalization the patient was doing well with no ear discharge. A thorough workup was performed, including flow cytometry (CD markers) and serum immunoglobulins levels. All were unremarkable. She was discharged home on Voriconazole orally for another 3 weeks and was seen at 4 week- outpatient follow up with pediatric infectious diseases care. She was doing very well and her clinical examination and follow up inflammatory markers were normal.
A follow up brain MRI/MRV showed dual venous sinuses which appeared patent with no evidence of venous sinus thrombosis.