A very active 84-year-old male retired general surgeon fell while skiing.
He sustained a left closed injury combining a three-part anterior fracture-dislocation of the humeral head and an ipsilateral long spiral displaced humeral shaft fracture . There were no vascular or neurological complications.
He was referred to our unit after a failed attempt at closed reduction in the local hospital. We performed a computed tomography (CT) scan . The senior author of this paper (GH) treated both fractures in a single-stage operation, using a long stem humeral hemiarthroplasty combined with screw fixation of the long spiral humeral shaft fracture. The operation was performed in a beach chair position under general anesthesia and interscalene block.
A distally extended deltopectoral approach was used to expose both fractures. At the proximal humerus, the tuberosities with their attached rotator cuff tendons were separated from the anteriorly dislocated head, which was removed. A 1 cm cuff tear at the junction of supra and infraspinatus tendons was found. The intra-articular part of the long head of biceps tendon showed fraying, widening and degenerative changes.
A shoulder hemiarthroplasty with a 200 mm stem in 30° of retroversion was performed. The stem was cementless in the proximal part of humeral shaft and cemented in the distal part. A trial implant introduced from proximal to distal into the two fragments was used to determine the optimal height of the implant. The tension of the trial humeral head implant on the long head of the biceps and the distance between the top of the prosthetic head and the upper border of the pectoralis major tendon were also used to optimize the height of the humeral implant.
After removal of the intra-articular part of the long head of the biceps tendon, the final implant was introduced into the proximal humeral fragment using an appropriate 30° retroversion (with reference from the forearm) and cemented into the reduced distal fragment using reduction forceps. The spiral humeral shaft fracture was anatomically reduced around the stem of the definitive implant and fixed with four cortical screws.
The lesser and greater tuberosities were then reduced and fixed in anatomical position on the prosthesis with non-absorbable sutures. Cancellous bone grafting was used to fill in the bone loss between the greater tuberosity and the implant. The small supraspinatus cuff tear was reinserted into the reduced and fixed greater tuberosity using transosseous sutures. A tenodesis of the long head of the biceps tendon was performed in its groove at the upper border of the pectoralis major using non-absorbable sutures.
Postoperative radiographs showed anatomical reduction of the fractures and good position of the prosthesis .
Postoperatively the arm was placed into a standard shoulder sling for six weeks. Postoperative management consisted of early rehabilitation with pendulum passive exercises at day 1, with the addition of passive controlled external rotation exercises three weeks later. Uneventful healing of the tuberosities to the implant as well as the humeral shaft fracture were observed at eighth week of follow-up.
The patient was reviewed by an independent observer at 30 months’ follow-up. His left shoulder and arm were pain free. Active and passive elevation as well as abduction reached 140°, external rotation 35°, and internal rotation reached the fourth lumbar vertebrae. The absolute Constant score was 67% (Ponderated Constant score was 100%). The patient was able to perform his daily activities including driving his car without pain. The 30 months’ follow-up radiographs confirmed satisfactory healing of both the tuberosities (without osteolysis) and the humeral shaft. No signs of stem or implant loosening were observed .