A 21-month-old full-term boy product of normal vaginal delivery, known to have lactose intolerance, has been referred to the pediatric urology clinic for further evaluation of an incidentally discovered left renal mass. His mother noticed a gradually progressive abdominal distension with polyuria, polydipsia, and constipation. The patient's family history includes consanguineous parents with two healthy brothers and ten sisters (2 of them had died during their childhood).
On physical examination, his vital signs were in the normal range, height, and weight on the 25% centile with no dysmorphic features. The abdomen was distended, soft, and lax with no palpable abdominal masses or ascites. Genital examination showed a normal circumcised penis and palpable bilateral testes in the scrotum. In addition, there were positive signs of active rickets.
The initial laboratory workup revealed normal serum creatinine 37 umol/L, reduced serum phosphorus 0.81 mmol/L, markedly elevated serum alkaline phosphatase 2178 unit/L, low serum vitamin D 16.8 ng/ml, elevated blood glucose level 8.9 mmol/L with normal glycosylated HB 5.5%. Additionally, the level of serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was in its normal range (186 unit/L). CBC showed signs of polycythemia (HGB 18.1 g/dL and HCT 52.6%). Urine analysis showed glucosuria and aminoaciduria. Genetic testing was considered because of the family history and clinical presentation, and it was positive for homozygous for the c.474A > C p.(Arg158Ser) familial variant in the SLC2A2 gene, which supported the clinical diagnosis of Fanconi–Bickel syndrome (FBS).
Radiological investigations were done, and the abdominal ultrasound recognized a sharply marginated peripheral hypoechoic hypovascular mass at the upper pole of the left kidney measuring 2.0 × 1.8 × 2.0 cm . Computerized tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast reported a solitary round partially exophytic homogeneously enhancing mass at the upper pole of the left kidney measuring 1.8 × 1.9 × 2 cm in its dimensions. There was no fat density or calcification. The kidneys were mildly enlarged for age and weight. The liver was enlarged measuring 11.3 cm. The anterior ends of the ribs showed splaying and cupping with milder changes in the proximal femoral metaphysis suggestive of active rickets . After investigation, the child was admitted and started on vitamin D3 and One-Alpha® with sodium phosphate q 6 h with a good response until his alkaline phosphatase was normalized to 350 unit/L and phosphorus to 1.81 mmol/L.
Since the renal mass was small, peripheral, and amenable for resection with no evidence of metastases, and the renal function might be affected by the long-term complications of FBS, a decision of NSS was taken after agreement with his parents. The patient then underwent an elective open left partial nephrectomy via a left upper transverse abdominal transperitoneal incision .
Grossly, the excised tumor was single, firm, and measured 21 × 20 × 18 mm. The cut surface was yellow–white in color. It appeared solid and well-circumscribed with lacked fibrous capsular tissue. The renal mass was sent for histopathological assessment and showed a tumor composed of tightly packed tubules with no mitotic figures or necrosis and scanty cytoplasm consistent with MA. Moreover, Wilms’ tumor and renal cell carcinoma were ruled out by immunohistochemical stains for WT1 and CD57 .
After good hydration and tumor resection, his polycythemia began to improve, and he maintained his HGB around 13 g/dL. The patient was discharged home in a good condition with his proper replacement therapies. His follow-up abdominal ultrasound after 12 months showed no signs of recurrence. The patient is stable now and has no active complaints, but he needs further follow-up for any new events.