An otherwise healthy 60-year-old man presented with a 4-mo history of lumbosacral pain, stooped back, and restricted walking with no obvious cause. The symptoms had become significantly aggravated 10 d prior to hospitalization.
This patient had a 4-mo history of lumbosacral pain with no obvious cause, along with stooped and restricted walking. He had visited a local hospital and received Chinese medicine. The patient’s lumbosacral pain worsened, and oral pain medication was not effective. 10 d before admission, the symptoms were further aggravated and radiating pain developed in the back of his left lower leg, which was so strong he could not walk. The patient again visited a local hospital, and lumbar vertebrae computed tomography (CT) showed lumbar vertebral infection. The patient was referred to our hospital due to lumbar vertebral infection.
The patient had no relevant past medical history.
No special personal and family history.
The patient was able to stand using crutches and did not have scoliosis. Movement of the lumbar spine was significantly limited, with approximately 30° anterior flexion, kyphosis, left-right scoliosis, and rotational mobility of about 10° and tenderness of the spinous processes of the lumbar 3-5 vertebrae bilaterally. Cutaneous sensation of both lower extremities was unremarkable, muscle tone was normal, and muscle strength was class IV. Range of motion was essentially normal at the hips, knees, and ankles bilaterally, although the movements were slowed by pain. Knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were normal bilaterally and the Babinski sign was negative.
At admission, his laboratory data were as follows: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 120 mm/h (normal range 0-15 mm/h), C-reactive protein (CRP) 8.33 mg/dL (< 0.8 mg/dL), fibrinogen (FIB) 8.26 g/L (1.8-3.5 g/L), fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) 9.2 µg/mL (0-5 µg/mL), and D-dimer 3.5 mg/L (0-0.55 mg/L). However, tumor markers, brucellosis agglutination, tuberculosis cell immunoassay, and sputum acid-fast bacilli smear were negative.
X-ray analysis showed hyperostosis, sclerosis, and tapering of the fifth lumbar (L5) vertebra and the first sacral (S1) vertebral margins. The third lumbar (L3) vertebra to S1 vertebral margins showed local nonunion with slightly rough margins. The posterior border of L5 and S1 vertebra was incomplete, and L5 vertebra was displaced slightly posteriorly, not exceeding one quarter of the anterior posterior diameter of the S1 vertebra; the L5/S1 intervertebral space was narrowed .
CT revealed bone destruction and hyperplasia at the relative margins of the L3, L4, L5 and S1 vertebra, a small amount of low-density shadow encircling the paravertebral spaces, and bone destruction at the right sacroiliac joint surface .
On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the bone signals of L3, L4, L5 and S1 vertebra were abnormal, showing long T1 and mixed long T2 signals. A small amount of equal-T2 signals surrounded the paravertebral space. The T2 weighted imaging signal of each intervertebral disc was weak. Annular soft tissue shadows were seen at the edges of the L3/L4, L4/L5 and L5/S1 vertebral discs. A soft tissue shadow with prominent limitations was evident at the posterior margin, and the corresponding spinal canal was slightly narrowed .