A 51-year-old Korean man was admitted to our hospital because of severe left flank pain, hematuria, and oliguria for 3 days. Additional complaints included epigastric discomfort and generalized weakness, but he denied fever or emesis. He had a medical history of hypertension for 1 year and TAO for 10 years with intermittent claudication. He had undergone amputation of both of his great toes 10 years prior because of gangrenous change due to TAO. At that time, lower extremity angiography showed that the flow of the right distal portion of the popliteal artery and the proximal portion of the tibiofibular artery were remarkably decreased by occlusion. The left superficial femoral artery was also occluded from its origin, at which collateral arteries had developed . He took beraprost for TAO but had not stopped smoking tobacco products. He had smoked approximately 1 pack per day for 30 years. Four years later, he underwent repeat angiography of his abdominal aorta and lower extremities because of worsening claudication. Occlusion of his left superficial femoral artery, bilateral tibial, and peroneal arteries had progressed. He had never been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, collagen disease or cardiac disease.
Upon presentation, his blood pressure was 180/100mmHg, and his body temperature was 36.4°C. He complained of severe tenderness in his left costovertebral angle area. Raynaud’s toe, skin nodules and phlebitis were not observed.
Laboratory findings showed the following: white blood cell count (WBC) 9700/uL, hemoglobin (Hb) 12.7g/dL, platelets 201×103/uL, serum creatinine 14.02mg/dL, creatinine clearance 3.6ml/minute/1.73m2 according to the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) formula, β2 microglobulin 19.80mg/L, phosphorus 5.48mg/dL, intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) 329.5pg/mL, creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 74U/L and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1687IU/L. Urine sediment contained 0 to 2 WBC and 3 to 5 red blood cells (RBC) per field. Urine protein electrophoresis revealed no paraprotein bands. The blood lipid profile, coagulation tests, protein C, protein S activity, complement fractions, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti-Scl-70, anticardiolipin and antiphospholipid, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were all negative or within normal limits. Electrocardiography and echocardiography were normal.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated left kidney enlargement (9.3cm) with a multifocal infarcted area and a shrunken right kidney (7.6cm). Neither renal artery was visualized .
Abdominal and lower extremity angiography was performed to examine his abdominal aorta and lower extremity arteries. The vascular status in both lower limbs and the viscera had worsened. His superior mesenteric artery, inferior mesenteric artery, both renal arteries, left common iliac artery, and left superficial femoral artery were not visualized, and the arteries below both his knees were occluded. Collateral vessels were well developed in his lower extremities. During examination, a stent was inserted into his left common iliac artery . Upper extremity angiographic CT showed no abnormal findings. His ankle-brachial index was 0.82 on the right and 0.61 on the left.
Renal failure associated with TAO progression was diagnosed. He started continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) and stopped smoking tobacco products. He was discharged with a daily oral anticoagulant, warfarin. Two months after discharge, he complained of postprandial abdominal pain without muscle guarding, preventing him from eating and resulting in an approximately 10kg weight loss. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed gastric mucosal atrophy; a follow-up contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed colitis of the hepatic flexure and transverse colon, which was consistent with ischemic colitis. His vessel status had not changed compared with that at the prior examination . He changed his dialysis modality from CAPD to hemodialysis, which improved his pain. He recently reported abdominal pain with hypotension; however, after a decrease in his hypertension medications and an increase in body weight, his pain resolved.