A 6-year-old Middle-Eastern girl first came to a dermatology clinic with two skin lesions on the dorsum of her foot, along with scaling of her soles and palms, face skin discoloration, and areas of patchy alopecia on her scalp . The patient’s past medical and family history was insignificant for dermatological disease. As claimed by the patient’s mother, the patient first noticed the presence of some eczematous-like lesions on her soles. These lesions were initially limited to soles; however, they spread to her palms and the ventral aspect of her fingers in a few days. Shortly after, she presented with face skin hypopigmentation, followed by the emergence of some alopecic areas on her scalp. Eventually, two lesions with distinct borders grew on the dorsal aspect of her foot.
On physical examination, there were areas of patchy alopecia with well-defined borders over the scalp, mainly on the parietal part, accompanied by a characteristic finding of alopecia areata, exclamation marks in trichoscopy evaluation. In the areas of alopecia, there was no scalp erythema, inflammation, or scaling. The rest of the physical examination showed multiple erythematous, pruritic rashes over both palms, soles, and ventral aspect of fingers. In some areas, these lesions became painful and ulcerated with white scaling. Furthermore, hyperlinearity was found in both soles and palms. In addition to these findings, two distinct red-to-pink colored nodules on the right foot’s dorsal aspect, which favored granuloma annular, were examined. On the face, physical examination revealed symmetrical hypopigmented patches mostly over the buccal area with fine scaling, suggestive of pityriasis alba. Dermoscopic evaluation of the patient’s granuloma annulare lesions demonstrated unfocused vessels, pinkish–reddish background, and yellowish-orange structureless regions . Dermoscopic findings of the scalp in the areas of alopecia revealed some characteristic features of alopecia areata, including black and yellow dots and multiple exclamation marks. Palms and soles dermoscopy exhibited pink background accompanied by scattered dot vessels and yellow or white scaling.
Eventually, the patient was diagnosed with granuloma annular, alopecia areata, and pityriasis alba. The patient was first prescribed topical mometasone twice a day for 1 week, emollients, and mild cleansing soaps to treat eczematous palms and soles lesions, and was maintained with calcineurin inhibitors. Concerning nodules on the foot dorsum, mometasone cream twice daily was started. Moreover, the treatment regimen for the patient’s scalp consisted of topical minoxidil and betamethasone and three sessions with 1-month intervals of triamcinolone acetonide intralesional injections, which demonstrated modest effectiveness in treating alopecia areata.
The patient’s palms and feet responded well to pharmacotherapy during follow-up ; therefore, the topical steroid prescribed for palms and soles lesions had been gradually tapered, and the patient was symptom-free with topical emollients. Granuloma annulare lesions responded well to treatment. However, areas of alopecia were still present on the patient’s scalp.