The proband is a 15-month-old female patient born from healthy nonconsanguineous Italian parents after a regular pregnancy and delivery. Feeding problems and gastroesophageal reflux were noted from the first weeks of life. At the age of 3 months, after the first vaccination, she started to present dystonic postures of the trunk initially misdiagnosed as related to gastroesophageal reflux. At the age of 5 months, after the second vaccination, she started to present irritability, inconsolable crying, psychomotor regression and generalized seizures. She was treated with endorectal diazepam, and after that she had no others seizure episodes. At 7 months of age, after an intercurrent viral illness, she was referred to our department in Pavia. The clinical picture was characterized by psychomotor delay, dystonic-dyskinetic tetraparesis, startle reaction to sudden acoustic stimuli, episodic central apneas. Plasma amino acids revealed high level of alanine, valine, isoleucine and lysine with abnormal ratio alanine:lysine (3.7, range of normality = 1.5-2.5). Urinary organic acids revealed high level of lactic, pyruvic, fumaric and 3-ketoglutaric acids. High levels of lactic and pyruvic acids were also demonstrated both in plasma and CSF. MRI showed bilateral symmetric hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted images in the basal ganglia, thalami and ventral mesencephalum . Brain CT scan didn't show calcification. Fundus oculi showed retinal depigmentation; assessment of VEPs revealed evidence of a conduction delay and ERG showed retinal involvement. Auditory brainstem responses, ECG and echocardiogram were normal.
A treatment with riboflavine 50 mg/day, thiamine 150 mg/day 300 mg: 1/2 cp, carnitine 100 mg/kg/day was started.
At 8 months of age she started to present external ophthalmoplegia and absence of pupillary reaction. Hereafter the clinical picture remained stable.
A muscle tissue biopsy was normal at the morphological and histochemical studies, with the exception of a mild increase in acid phosphatase staining at subsarcolemmal level in a few fibres.
Family history for neurological disorders was negative. General clinical assessment of her mother was normal.
Spectrophotometric determination of the activity of mitochondrial Complex I in muscle showed a residual activity of 36% compared to controls (CI/CS = 5.9 nM/min/mg protein, control values = 16.5 ± 2.6 normalized to citrate synthase, CS).
Large-scale mtDNA rearrangements and mtDNA depletion was excluded by Southern Blot and quantitative PCR assays on muscle-derived DNA.
Direct sequencing of muscle-derived mtDNA revealed the presence of two apparently homoplasmic variants: the novel m.14792C > G and the already known m.14459G > A resulting in p.His16Asp change in cytochrome b (MT-CYB) and p.Ala72Val substitution in ND6 subunit, respectively. Their presence was confirmed by specific PCR-RFLP assays. The sequence also showed that the patient belongs to the mitochondrial haplogroup H2a2, consisting to European ethnic groups.
The mother's mtDNA was homoplasmic for MT-CYB variant and heteroplasmic for the MT-ND6 mutation with a mutational load estimated less than 2% by PCR-RFLP analysis .