An 11-year-old boy was admitted at the ophthalmology department with complaints of severe pain and diminished vision in both eyes for two days. He had never worn glasses, and his ocular history was unremarkable. Six weeks earlier, he had been diagnosed with a seizure disorder by a pediatrician; oral carbamazepine therapy (200 mg twice daily) was started. Three weeks before the onset of ocular symptoms, he had developed fever and generalized skin rash, which was diagnosed as a viral exanthem and managed with supportive therapy.
Ophthalmic examination revealed a best corrected visual acuity of 20/120 in the right eye and 20/60 in the left eye with 9.0 diopters spherical (DSph) and 1.0 diopters cylinder (DCyl) at 90 in the right eye and 10.0 DSph and 1.0 DCyl at 90 in the left eye. The eyelids were swollen, and chemosis was noted in both eyes. Anterior segment examination revealed corneal epithelial edema, shallow anterior chamber with 3 plus cells, sluggishly reacting pupil, and clear crystalline lens in both eyes. Intraocular pressure by Goldmann applanation tonometry was 45 and 40 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Gonioscopy revealed bilateral 360 appositional angle closure, and no angle structures were visible. Fundus examination revealed normal optic disc and vessels with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.3. The axial length of the right eye was 21.91 mm and that of the left eye was 22.05 mm. Considering the acute onset of myopia, bilateral shallow anterior chambers, and angle-closure glaucoma, ciliochoroidal effusion, probably due to carbamazepine, was diagnosed.
In addition to the ocular findings, the child was febrile with a temperature of 39.8C and had a generalized maculopapular rash. The lips were swollen with crusted lesions [Figure 1]. Systemic examination revealed no abnormalities. Investigations revealed leukocytosis (/L) with increased neutrophils (/L) and eosinophils (/L). Peripheral smear showed a few atypical lymphocytes and no blast cells. Hemoglobin level was 12.9 g/dL, and platelet count was /L. Blood culture tests were negative, and liver function tests were within normal limits. A dermatologist was consulted for the skin lesions, and DRESS syndrome was diagnosed.
Carbamazepine was discontinued and substituted with levetiracetam. Treatment was initiated with homatropine, timolol, and topical steroids, along with intravenous mannitol (1 g/kg body weight). His symptoms improved dramatically after two doses of intravenous dexamethasone (4 mg). Ocular examination on the third day revealed a clear cornea, deep anterior chamber with over three cells in both eyes, and posterior synechiae in the right eye [Figure 2]. Intraocular pressure in the right and left eyes was 6 and 5 mmHg, respectively. Fundus examination revealed choroidal folds in the macula and serous elevation of the retina along with scattered retinal hemorrhages [Figure 3].
Along with topical steroids and homatropine, oral prednisolone therapy was started (initial dose, 1 mg/kg body weight) and subsequently tapered. At the three-week follow-up, uveitis and retinal hemorrhages had resolved [Figure 4]. Unaided visual acuity was 20/20, and intraocular pressure was 16 mm Hg in both eyes.