A 50-year-old woman presented with an episode of hemoptysis. She also reported low grade fevers, night sweats and chest discomfort. Her past medical history was notable for allergic rhinitis/sinusitis and asthma, and she experienced recurring upper respiratory tract infections, sinusitis, and bronchitis approximately three times per year. Chest computed tomography imaging revealed left upper lobe consolidation with a central cavitary lesion, adjacent scattered consolidation, ground-glass opacities and tree-in-bud markings . She subsequently underwent bronchoscopy, and bronchoalveolar lavage grew Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC). Consequently, she underwent cavitary MAC treatment with rifampin, ethambutol, erythromycin, and intravenous amikacin with improvements in low-grade fever, night sweats, and chest discomfort.
Four months later, her symptoms returned, and chest imaging revealed a new right basilar lung infiltrate, with increased ground-glass and consolidative focal patchy disease, as well as bronchiectasis. Repeat bronchoscopy revealed a positive fungal culture for Aspergillus and she was subsequently started on voriconazole. Upon re-evaluation, the patient exhibited oral ulcers, purpuric skin lesions, and new onset peripheral neuropathy and was referred for an additional opinion.
Pertinent laboratory findings included a complete blood count with a total white cell count of 11,000 cells per microliter with marked hypereosinophilia at 5200 eosinophils per microliter. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated at 92 mm/hr., and C-reactive protein was elevated at 1.154 mg/dL (normal less than 0.4). Quantitative serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) was also elevated at 520 international units/mL (normal 0 to 11). Patient was negative for ANCA, hepatitis B or C, PR3 antibody and MPO antibody.
Pulmonary function testing demonstrated normal total lung capacity (TLC) and thoracic gas volume but an elevated residual volume at 2.93 L (154% of predicted) suggesting mild air trapping. Airflows were normal, with a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) of 2.67 L (90% of predicted) and forced vital capacity (FVC) was 3.23 L (86% of predicted) with no significant bronchodilator response. Diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) was mildly reduced at 20.97 or 77% of predicted, but when corrected for alveolar volume (VA), corrected to normal with a DLCO/VA of 4.59 or 86% of predicted. The VA was significantly less than the TLC, suggesting gas mal-distribution.
Repeat bronchoscopy was performed with transbronchial biopsies. Histopathology showed acute and chronic inflammation, scattered eosinophils (42 eosinophils per 60 × high power field), fresh hemorrhage and tissue eosinophilia most prominently in the bronchial wall and adjacent alveolated lung parenchyma. There was no evidence of granuloma formation or necrotizing vasculitis .
The constellation of compelling clinical, radiographic, laboratory, and pathologic findings believed to suggest GPA/EGPA overlap syndrome included a cavitary pulmonary lesion unresponsive to anti-microbial therapy, oral ulcers, purpuric skin lesions, peripheral neuropathy, long-standing asthma, chronic sinusitis, one or more episodes of alveolar hemorrhage, migratory pulmonary infiltrates on chest imaging, peripheral hypereosinophilia, a markedly elevated IgE level, elevated inflammatory markers and eosinophilic inflammation in the pulmonary parenchyma on histopathologic examination.
In addition to the very complex clinical picture most suggestive of EGPA/GPA overlap syndrome, there was compelling evidence for a concomitant aspergillus pulmonary infection, and the patient also met criteria for a diagnosis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis. There is a possibility that the aspergillus pulmonary infection may have complicated our patient’s clinical picture as it may have contributed to her pulmonary cavitation and sinusitis.
While the patient had been previously treated with oral corticosteroids and anti-fungal therapy for a prolonged period of time with little improvement, with the addition of anti-interleukin (IL)-5 therapy and cytotoxic therapy (azathioprine) to the oral corticosteroids and anti-fungal therapy, the patient had dramatic improvement in her disease manifestations.
Between 1986 and 2017, we identified 15 cases that described an overlap syndrome involving both GPA and EGPA . Patients ranged in age between 21 and 78. Of those whose sexes were identified, 80 % of cases described were female. All cases described involved the lungs, 60 % described sinus involvement, and over half had displayed renal involvement. An overwhelming majority of patients were positive for c-ANCA and demonstrated eosinophilia (peripheral or tissue involvement). A preponderance of the cases described were treated with systemic corticosteroids combined with cytotoxic/immunosuppressive agents.