An 81-year old, American Society of Anesesthesiolgists (ASA) physical status III, female with past medical history significant for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, prolonged history of depression with previous psychiatric admissions, osteoporosis, gastro-esophageal reflux disease and constipation, was admitted to psychiatry for major depression as her family noted gradual cognitive decline for 2–3 weeks prior to presentation, resulting in a near-catatonic state. Patient reportedly had increasing sadness and started to withdraw, eating and hydrating less and less, and was minimally ambulating secondary to major depression. On admission, she was on buspirone, mitrazapine, bupropion, zolpidem, nortriptyline, lorazepam, pantoprazole, lubiprostone, amlodipine and rosuvastatin – all of which have been tapered off prior to initiation of ECT. Patient had no drug or food allergies. She never smoked cigarettes or consumed alcohol, lived with her husband of forty years. Family history was significant for hypertension and father having a myocardial infarction. She was scheduled to have an ECT as her depression was resistant to pharmacotherapy.
Pre-procedure testing showed a normal echocardiogram (ejection fraction of 75%, normal right ventricular systolic function), normal complete blood count and chemistry panel. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm and chest X-ray ruled out any acute pathology. Routine cardiology clearance was obtained and the patient was recommended to be started on aspirin 81 mg once daily. One week after admission, the patient was scheduled to have an ECT, once all medications were tapered off.
Pre-anaesthetic evaluation revealed an elderly female who was alert, not oriented to place or time but oriented to person, with a heart rate of 78 beats per minute and a blood pressure of 118/76 mm of Hg. She was 5’4” and weighed 140 lb with a BMI of 24. Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable.
On the day of the procedure, the patient was alert and ambulatory and was escorted to the ECT room. A total intravenous anaesthesia was planned for the right unilateral ECT. In the operating room the patient’s ECG leads II and V5, non invasive blood pressure (NIBP) and SaO2, were monitored. A tourniquet was inflated over the left leg and methohexital 100 mg followed by succinylcholine 80 mg was used for general anesthesia and neuromuscular blockade respectively. After the fifth escalating (0.5 seconds doubling up to 8 seconds duration, 20 Hz, 800 mA, 0.3 ms) electric stimulations, a seizure was witnessed in the left lower extremity and immediately after, the patient desaturated and became bradycardic (heart rate in 50’s), with no palpable pulse. A diagnosis of pulseless electrical activity was made and advanced cardiac life support (ACLS®) protocol for cardiac arrest was initiated. Patient was successfully resuscitated with in 3 min after being intubated and receiving 1 mg of intravenous atropine and 1 mg of intravenous epinephrine. A right femoral venous catheter was also placed during resuscitation. The initial arterial blood gases during the arrest on 100% FiO2 were: pH = 7.44, pCO2 = 31, pO2 = 209 and HCO3 = 21.3. She was later transferred to the medical intensive care unit, where she was uneventfully extubated a day after the cardiac arrest. An echocardiogram done immediately after cardiac arrest could not visualize the right ventricle wall and the left ventricle had an ejection fraction of 65% with akinesis of the entire inferoseptal wall. ECG and troponins were negative for myocardial infarction.
Further investigations revealed the presence of a DVT in the left popliteal and superficial femoral veins, with no evidence of DVT in the right lower extremity. A computerized tomography (CT) of the chest with IV contrast revealed a large embolus completely occluding the right lower lobe pulmonary artery along with small filling defects in the left lower lobe pulmonary artery . There was an associated area of pulmonary infarction (Hampton hump) measuring 2.5 × 4.5 cm involving the base of the right upper lobe .
The pulmonary embolus thus diagnosed, was treated with enoxaparin and the patient was later bridged to warfarin with a target INR of 2.0-3.0. Subsequently, an inferior vena cava (IVC) filter was placed to preclude further embolization into the pulmonary artery. At the time of discharge to sub-acute rehabilitation center, 7 days after cardiac arrest, patient was able to communicate verbally, her mental status has not only not suffered, but was significantly improved, compared to pre-admission level. Catatonia or near-catatonia, as in this case, are known to resolve as quickly as with single treatment, requiring no consequent treatments, now even months after the initial procedure. Patient has since returned to fully independent living in the community.