Our 28-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with recurrent shortness of breath for one year, even after minimal physical activity, and the symptoms were aggravated for 3 days. She did not have a family history of either PH or any lung or heart diseases. She was a teetotaler, nonsmoker and never abused any addictive drugs or had other PVOD-associated risk factors . Her preliminary examination demonstrated that she was afebrile and presented with the following physical examination parameters: 121/82 mmHg blood pressure, 101 beats/min heart rate, 22 breaths/min respiratory rate, 92% oxygen saturation index on room air, and a New York Heart Association functional class III heart failure. She had clear bilateral breathing sounds and an accentuated second pulmonic heart sound. Her bilateral lower limbs displayed slight pitting edema, while dermal examination demonstrated symptoms of Raynaud's phenomenon in both hands. Other laboratory values, such as thyroid function test, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, HIV, D-dimer, C reactive protein, rheumatic factor, antiphospholipid antibody, and anti-vasculitis antibody, were within the normal range.
Her transthoracic echocardiogram illustrated PH features such as right ventricle hypertrophy, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, mild pericardial effusion, preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (62%) and fractional shortening (36%). A subsequent right heart catheterization at rest confirmed the diagnosis of PH: the patient had a pulmonary artery pressure of 62 mmHg, a pulmonary artery wedge pressure of 10 mmHg, a cardiac output by thermodilution of 2.05 L/min and a calculated pulmonary vascular resistance of 25 Wood units. Although the pulmonary ventilation/perfusion scan did not show any signs of thromboembolic disease, high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) illustrated a dilated pulmonary artery, slight pericardial effusion and bilateral ground-glass nodules/opacities . Her abdominal ultrasound demonstrated a crude and thick-walled gallbladder, hepatomegaly, seroperitoneum and an increased inner diameter of the inferior vena cava and hepatic vein, suggesting hepatic congestion, while the pulmonary function test showed moderate-to-severe mixed ventilation dysfunction.
Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disease in which the glands of external secretions, such as the eye and mouth, are inflamed. Since our patient presented with symptoms of dry eyes and Raynaud's phenomenon, which were in combination with being positive for anti-nuclear antibody (anti-SSA, + +) and having increased level of procalcitonin, a labial salivary gland biopsy was performed that demonstrated the infiltration of lymphocyte foci in between the salivary glands—a valid confirmation of the diagnosis of SS.
Because our patient demonstrated bilateral ground-glass nodules/opacities, we did not rule out the possibility of PVOD. Hence, whole exome sequencing was carried out, and we identified a biallelic mutation in EIF2AK4 at c.1021 C > T (p. Gln341*) . In addition, pedigree screening led us to identify a heterozygous EIF2AK4 mutation in her father’s DNA . Furthermore, her thoracoscopic biopsy demonstrated marked venule thickening and luminal occlusion due to intimal proliferation and medial hypertrophy , validating the diagnosis of PVOD. After multidisciplinary discussion and being fully informed about the risks to the patient, PAH-targeted therapies, such as tadalafil (20 mg, qd), macitentan (10 mg, qd), hydroxychloroquine (0.2 g, qd), and other symptomatic treatments, were initiated. The timeline of disease process for this patient was shown in Additional file . Her therapeutic regimens were continued for the next three years with periodic follow-up. Although she was admitted to the hospital multiple times for acute exacerbation of PAH during her three-year treatment period, surprisingly, she showed a satisfactory clinical response to PAH therapies, her disease symptoms were alleviated, and no sign of pulmonary edema was observed during the follow-up period.