A 43-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our primary care services with a three-month history of recurrent, laboratory confirmed Escherichia coli urinary tract infections. She was diagnosed with gestational diabetes at age 33 years, and in the postpartum period, diet controlled type 2 diabetes mellitus and concomitant hypertension were confirmed. She required insulin therapy some five years later, and, following seropositivity to anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies, was diagnosed with latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood (LADA). In addition, she developed autoimmune hypothyroidism at age 38 years. Despite medication compliance and dietary control, she reported a recent history of increased insulin requirements and uncontrolled hypertension with concomitant recurrent urinary tract infections. Our patient is not sexually active.
Renal ultrasound examination, to rule out underlying renal pathology, revealed an incidental 8cm right adrenal mass of both solid and cystic components . A subsequent non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis confirmed a solid heterogeneous mass consistent with a pheochromocytoma, 9cm in maximal dimension. No regional adenopathy, vascular invasion or metastatic disease was evident . There were no other features suggestive of multiple endocrine neoplasia. On physical examination, her blood pressure was elevated at 160/90mmHg with no orthostatic changes. Her fasting blood glucose was 12mmol/L and her glycated hemoglobin level (HbA1C) was 9.9%. Her body mass index was within the normal range at 22.5. A 24-hour urinary collection provided biochemical confirmation with grossly elevated levels of catecholamines and metabolites .
Following a 10-day course of phenoxybenzamine α-adrenergic blockade, the patient underwent an open right adrenalectomy. The immediate post-operative period was complicated by profound episodes of hypotension, requiring three days of inotropic support in high dependency care. Her recovery after this period was uncomplicated with an observed reduction in insulin requirements and anti-hypertensive therapy .
Histopathological examination of the excised tissue confirmed a 9.5x9.6cm solid heterogeneous tumor arising from her right adrenal medulla . Microscopic evaluation revealed Zellballen cellular architecture, a distinct characteristic of paragangliomas. There was no invasion of adjacent tissues or blood vessels and the MIB-1 proliferation index was 3%, favoring benign behavior . Iodine-131-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy performed two weeks post-operatively confirmed complete excision with no evidence of metastatic disease . Two years post-operatively our patient is symptom-free with normal urinary catecholamines and metabolites. She denies any further recurrence of urinary tract infections post-operatively. She continues to take anti-hypertensive and insulin therapy.