The patient was a 54-year-old woman who made an emergency visit to our hospital because of low back pain, shoulder pain, visual impairment, and anemia. A soft mass in the right orbital adipose tissue, thickening of the entire circumference of the wall of the gastric corpus, left axillary adenopathy, multiple nodular shadows in the bilateral pleura, pleural effusion, ascites, and a swollen para-aortic lymph nodes were found on computed tomography (CT). Furthermore, bone scintigraphy showed uptake in multiple sites including the cranial bone, spine, and ribs.
At first, systemic metastasis and multiple bone metastases of an occult cancer was considered, and excisional biopsy of the axillary lymph node was performed for a definitive diagnosis. Based on the pathological findings, axillary lymph node metastasis of invasive lobular carcinoma (ER-positive, PgR-positive, and HER2-negative) was diagnosed. A mass was not palpable in the left breast, and no clear mass shadow was observed within the left breast on ultrasonography (US), but there were irregular low echoic lesions and structural distortions in the upper-lateral quadrant of the breast.
Core-needle biopsy yielded a diagnosis of invasive lobular carcinoma (stage IV) originating from primary left breast cancer was diagnosed. Levels of the tumor markers CEA and CA15-3 were elevated to 26.6 ng/ml and 90.8 U/ml, respectively. Chemotherapy (epirubicin 90 mg/m2 + cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2) was initiated. The tumor marker levels normalized 6 months later, and the visceral metastases almost disappeared on imaging a year later.
After performing ten cycles of chemotherapy, the treatment was switched to hormone therapy with letrozole for maintenance. Rapid elevation of tumor marker levels (CEA 3.9–23.0, CA15-3 9.0–38.7), as manifested by severe anemia, was noted 14 months later, and fragmented red cells emerged in the peripheral blood . The Laboratory data were as follows, Red Blood Cell counts 1.51 × 106/µl, Hemoglobin 5.4 g/dl, Platelet counts 8.0 × 104 µl, LDH 1137 IU/µl. The result of Coombs’ test was negative, no coagulation system abnormalities were noted (D-dimer 1.7 µg/ml, FDP 3.7 μg/ml, PT-INR 1.02, and APTT 31 s), and renal function was normal.
Systemic examination with CT showed no evidence of visceral metastasis, and bone scintigraphy revealed slight inhomogeneous uptake in the spine, ribs, and pelvis ; however, there was no clear exacerbation compared to previous results. Positron emission tomography-CT showed slight FDG uptake mainly in the spine and pelvis, but visceral metastasis was not identified. Although two bone-marrow biopsies were performed, dry tap occurred; thus, tumor cells could not be confirmed. The patient had difficulty walking because of severe anemia and required blood transfusions twice a week. The characteristic fragmented red cells, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia were observed; moreover, the underlying breast cancer, the synchronicity of the elevation of tumor markers, and the patient’s symptoms confirmed the diagnosis. Considering the circumstances mentioned above, we diagnosed the patient’s clinical features as CR-MAHA associated with multiple bone metastases, and chemotherapy with paclitaxel (80 mg/m2 weekly) was initiated.
As the therapeutic effect was difficult to detect by imaging, this was determined based on the clinical symptoms and changes in tumor marker levels. Therapeutic course and changes in tumor marker levels, red blood and platelet counts are shown in Figs. and .
Paclitaxel (PTX) was effective, with the tumor marker levels decreasing, the fragmented red cells in the peripheral blood disappearing, the frequency of blood transfusion reducing, and anemia improving. However, 3 months later, tumor marker levels increased again, fragmented red cells emerged in the peripheral blood, and anemia was exacerbated. Chemotherapy was switched to Eribulin and a temporary decrease in tumor marker levels and improvement in anemia were observed, but 3 months later, tumor marker levels increased again, with exacerbation of anemia and an increase in fragmented red cells.
Another switch in treatment was planned, but deterioration of liver function and exacerbation of hepatosplenomegaly were observed along with an elevation in tumor marker levels (CEA 29.0–135, CA15-3 102 to >300). CT and US did not show a space-occupying legion suggestive of liver metastasis. Liver failure developed and chemotherapy was discontinued. Best supportive care was selected and the patient died a month later. The survival period after MAHA onset was 13 months, and the overall survival after diagnosis was 41 months.