An 11-year-old girl was referred to the cardiology clinic on account of left hemiplegia of one month duration. The hemiplegia was of sudden onset and was associated with headache, dizziness and vomiting at onset. She had also been having intermittent episodes of palpitations and had just been discharged from hospital two weeks earlier after being managed for an intracranial space-occupying lesion, with raised intracranial pressure, left hemiplegia and multiple cranial nerve palsy. She had a positive history of sudden death in her family (an uncle and her grandmother).
On examination, she had a hemiplegic gait, a left CN V1, VII palsy and decreased power, tone and reflexes in the left upper and lower limb. A regular pulse and wide blood pressure difference was noted in both right and left upper limbs (right 120/50 mmHg, left 60 mmHg/unrecordable).
Previous tests had been done when she was admitted. MRI of the brain showed subacute right thalamic infarct, and her blood lipid profile and random blood glucose results were normal. Her genotype was AA, mantoux was negative, chest radiograph was normal, and PT/PTTK was also normal.
A diagnosis of peripheral artery disease was entertained and magnetic resonance angiography of both carotid arteries was done, which was normal. The ECG showed sinus rhythm with evidence suggestive of left atrial and left ventricular hypertrophy. An echocardiography could not be done immediately but was requested.
She was subsequently placed on aspirin, encephabol and regular physiotherapy while angiography was being awaited. She defaulted from follow up and was seen in hospital three months later when she collapsed at school after complaining of heaviness of the right side of the body and inability to walk. Her history revealed that she had stopped her aspirin two days earlier.
On examination, she was conscious, and the blood pressure in both upper limbs was equal and normal (110/70 mmHg). Her pulse was a good volume but irregularly irregular, both legs were cold to the touch, and the dorsalis pedis was barely palpable. A diagnosis of deep-vein thrombosis was entertained.
She was rehydrated and recommenced on aspirin tablets, while vascular ultrasound of both legs showed a deep focal vein clot in the right common iliac vein. A transthoracic echocardiography was finally done and it revealed a mobile mass in the left atrium (myxoma) measuring 3.9 × 2.6 cm impinging on the mitral valve, a dilated left atrium and multiple ectopic beats .>
A diagnosis of left atrial myxoma with intermittent arrhythmia and multiple thromboembolic events was made. Anticoagulation was commenced with heparin and warfarin tablets. She was also referred for surgical resection of the atrial myxoma. Due to financial constraints, surgery could not be done and she died 10 months later while awaiting resection of the cardiac tumour.