A 28-year-old female (body mass index of 20.2 kg/m2) sustained a comminuted, spiral fracture over her right femur in a motor vehicle accident . On physical examination in the emergency room, she was alert and oriented, with a healthy contralateral leg. Initial neurovascular examinations of both legs were normal. The fracture was then treated with closed reduction and stabilization using an 11 × 380 mm intramedullary nail (Targon®; Aesculap, Tuttlingen, Germany). The patient underwent these surgical procedures under general anesthesia, and was kept in a supine hemilithotomy position- the non-operated leg was held by a boot and positioned in 80° of hip flexion, 30° of abduction, and 105° of knee flexion without any leg holders or fixation straps around the knee . Because of technical difficulties in aligning fragments closely as well as in locking distal static screws, it took four hours to obtain a satisfactory fixation .
When the patient regained consciousness, she started to complain a “dead” foot with difficulties in movement and severe numbness in the non-operated leg. There was no swelling, local heat and cyanosis over her left leg. At 24 h after surgery, however, she already had a left drop foot manifesting complete loss of ankle dorsi-flexion as well as impaired sensation below the knee, especially at the dorsum of the foot. In the remaining stay, the motor strength of the involved leg did not improve, although her sensory examination did evolve to a classic common peroneal palsy distribution. With symptoms compatible with a common peroneal nerve palsy, we fitted the patient with an ankle-foot orthosis and administered physiotherapy. Three weeks later, scheduled neurophysiologic studies were performed. The motor nerve conduction velocity (NCV) revealed decreased amplitude in left common peroneal nerve and needle electromyography (EMG) showed no motor unit action potential (MUAP) in left tibialis anterior muscle, which was compatible with left common peroneal neuropathy.
After discharge, she had regular outpatient follow-ups at our rehabilitation department, and was taught home exercises and given electrical stimulation. Both the motor and sensory functions of her left leg showed gradual improvement. At two months after the event she was nearly ready to discard her orthoses, and a complete recovery of the non-operated leg without permanent sequelae was observed at the 3-month follow-up.