The patient was a 64-year-old female, with a history of long-term arterial hypertension, who was brought to the Gastroenterology and Hepatology Clinic of the Niš Clinical Center by the emergency medical services. She was admitted presenting with vomiting of fresh blood, black stools, epigastric pain, suffocation and exhaustion.
The problems had first appeared four days before admission in the form of poorly formed black stools and vomiting of small amounts of black substance. She did not see a doctor about these problems. On the day of admission, after vomiting an excessive amount of black substance, she developed a pain in the epigastric region and then began to vomit fresh blood. It was at this stage that she rang the emergency medical services.
Physical examination showed that the patient was alert, adynamic, tachycardiac and easily dyspneic, and her skin was pale. Her blood pressure was 60/40 mmHg. Auscultation of the heart was normal. Auscultation of the lungs showed baseline crackles on inspiration on both sides. The abdomen was tense, especially in the epigastric area and left hypochondrium, with tenderness in the epigastric area. The liver and spleen were of normal size. Appropriate therapy was administered (one ampoule of prantopazole, a total of about 3000 ml of continuous infusion of saline solution and lactated Ringer's solution). The oxygen saturation was 95%. A urinary catheter was placed for monitoring diuresis. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia.
Because of the findings in the abdomen, an ultrasound examination was performed and this showed a distended stomach filled with a large amount of fluid. No free fluid was found in the abdominal cavity. A nasogastric probe was placed in order to extract the contents and perform esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). After inserting the nasogastric probe, about 1,000 ml of fresh blood was extracted. After the hemodynamic status had improved, esophagogastroduodenoscopy was attempted. Immediately upon insertion of the endoscope into the proximal esophagus, reflux of a large amount of fresh blood was observed; further examination was cancelled. The patient was sent for emergency abdominal surgery. However, she died one hour after the first examination.
The laboratory findings and coagulation factors, which were received subsequently, were within normal values. The blood count showed reduced hemoglobin of 70 g/l (reference values: 115-170 g/l) and increased leukocyte count of 12.0 x 109/l (reference values: 4.0-10.0 x 109/l).
The autopsy showed 650 ml of dark red to black thick fluid content in the right hemithorax and 600 ml in the left hemithorax . The heart size measurements were 110 x 105 mm. The heart weighed 380 g. The thickness of the cardiac muscle of the left ventricle was 18 mm and of the right ventricle, 6 mm. A rupture along the longitudinal axis was found in the esophagus, in the posterior left section of the esophageal wall, 15 mm from the cardia.
The rupture was 30 x 20 mm in size. The esophageal mucosa was smooth and almost completely covered in bloody-black content . There were no foreign bodies in the abdominal cavity. A small amount of blackish liquid was found in the stomach. Numerous small shallow erosions were found in the fundus and body of the stomach.
A mucosal injury of depth 13 mm, covering an area of 20 mm x 15 mm with firm borders and blackish background, consistent with a duodenal bulb ulcer, was observed . The walls were firm and vallum-like and the bottom was partially black. Greenish and black content was present throughout the intestines.
Chemical and toxicological analysis on samples of organ tissues, blood and urine did not reveal the presence of any psychoactive substances or pesticides.
The autopsy report declared that the immediate cause of death was hemopneumothorax due to esophageal injury and a chronic duodenal ulcer.