A 58-year-old European man was referred from a local hospital after a CT-scan revealed an 85 mm symptomatic AAA. He had experienced increasing abdominal and back pain for the last 8 weeks. The last nights before admission, he had trouble sleeping due to the pain. The patient immigrated from the Balkans in the late 1980s; he had a history of smoking and had received treatment for latent tuberculosis in 2011, in advance of planned immunosuppressive treatment for psoriasis. Ulcerative colitis was diagnosed 1 year prior, 5-ASA treatment had been discontinued owning to abdominal discomfort. There were no other cues in his history pointing to tick exposure, other than leisure coastal-based fishing in the summer months. The patient was under no aortic surveillance at this time, even though a previous ultrasound scan in 2011 had revealed a subaneurysmal dilatation of the infrarenal aorta at 28 mm.
On clinical examination, he had a tender pulsating mass in the abdomen. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 158/93 mm Hg, heart rate 74 beats per minute, and a tympanic temperature of 36.9 °C. Initial blood analysis showed slightly elevated inflammatory markers with C-reactive protein 35 mg/L and mild anemia with hemoglobin of 11.7 g/L. CT angiography demonstrated an infrarenal aortic aneurysm of 85 mm in the largest transverse diameter, with typical radiologic features of an inflammatory aneurysm with thickening of the aortic wall (> 6 mm) and perianeurysmal inflammation . Because of the patients relatively young age combined with upper aortic neck anatomy, open aortic repair was preferred over endovascular repair.
The treating physician feared aortic rupture was impending and the patient therefore underwent immediate median laparotomy and surgical repair of the aneurysm. The aneurysm was limited to the infrarenal portion of the aorta with the iliac vessels spared. An 18 mm straight Dacron prosthesis was used as an interposition bypass. Perioperative findings of thickened fibrous aortic wall and duodenal adhesions to the aneurysm wall supported the suspicion of inflammatory etiology. To secure accurate diagnosis, we performed aortic wall biopsies for both histopathological and microbiological investigations (see below).
After surgery, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and had an uneventful immediate recovery. On the third day, he was transferred to the ward and was discharged to a regional rehabilitation facility on the seventh day.
Standard aerobic and anaerobic cultures of the biopsy and blood cultures were negative. Due to suspicion of an infectious etiology and no growth on routine culture, the biopsy was subjected to real-time PCR targeting the V3–V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene, which turned out strongly positive [cycle threshold value (Ct) 20.80]. By DNA sequencing of the PCR product Borrelia afzelii was identified with 99.8% match in GenBank. To further verify the identification, a groEL Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato specific real-time PCR was designed, with minor modification of the primers described by Chiappa et al. . The amplified sequence enables differentiation among various Borrelia species. The primers used were: groEL-F: 5′-ACGATTTCTTATGTTGAGGG-3′; groEL-R; 5′-TCTCAAGAACTGGTAAAAGC-3′. This PCR was positive (Ct 19.58) and DNA sequencing of the 160 bp amplicon showed 100% homology to B. afzelii compared with sequences available in GenBank.
Borrelia IgM and IgG antibodies were present in the patient’s serum by both Chemiluminescent assay (LIAison IgM 46 g/L and IgG 88.1 AU/mL) and by strip immunoassay (recomLine Borrelia IgM antibodies to the Borrelia antigens p41 and OspC, and IgG antibodies to the Borrelia antigens p100, VlsE, p58, p41, p39 og OspC). No treponemal antibodies were detected.
Mycobacterial culture and Mycobacterium tuberculosis PCR were negative.
Microscopic examination of aorta showed loss of normal structure. Only small areas showed preserved elastic fibers. Most of the aortic wall was converted to cell poor sclerotic tissue, with diffuse infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells. Small areas showed follicular lymphocytic infiltrates with germinal centers . Silverstain (Whartin–Starry) showed small threadlike structures compatible with spirochetes.
By the time the diagnosis of borreliosis was affirmed, the patient had already been discharged. Per oral antibiotic treatment with doxycycline 100 mg twice daily was initiated in collaboration with our infectious disease department.
On 6 weeks follow-up at the outpatient clinic, the patient was pain free and had regained his appetite. His only complaint at this point was postoperative erectile dysfunction. CT angiography showed decreasing attenuation in the old aneurysm sac and in the perianeurysmal space . He still had slightly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) at 32 mg/L, but otherwise he appeared well. At 3 months follow-up, both additional sac regression and decreasing attenuation on CTA , combined with CRP normalization, suggested declining inflammatory activity. Doxycycline treatment was discontinued at the 6 months follow-up visit due to complete normalization on CTA .