A 68-year-old Caucasian patient presented in September 2015 due to an elevated prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level. Past medical history included diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, hyperuricemia and mild renal failure. The PSA was 6.67 ng/ml in February 2015 and 9.65 ng/ml in September 2015. Upon clinical examination, a medium-sized prostate was determined, with a palpable induration of the left lobe, clinically classified as a stage T2b cancer. Twelve ultrasound-guided prostate core biopsies were taken in October 2015. All biopsied tissue from both lobes was found to have tumor infiltration by a large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma associated with acinar adenocarcinoma with Gleason score 7(3 + 4), with perineural invasion and without capsule infiltration. Multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging of the prostate in December 2015 showed a prostate that weighed 43 g with a suspicious lesion in the posterior peripheral zone, between the apex and the midgland of the left lobe, classified as Pi-Rads 5/5, without infiltration of seminal vesicles and without capsular invasion or pelvic adenopathy. A bone scan in November 2015 showed no bone secondaries.
Given that the majority component revealed on the biopsies was the neuroendocrine component, a 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography ([18F]FDG PET/CT) was performed in November 2015, showing a prostate metabolic hyperfixation without suspicious distant fixation .
Taking into consideration the rarity of the histological entity and the localized tumor character, we decided to carry out curative surgical treatment by radical prostatectomy with bilateral extended pelvic lymph node dissection. Surgery was performed in January 2016. Operative exploration revealed that the prostate tumor had invaded the bladder neck and trigone. Radical prostatectomy, bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection and partial cystectomy involving the bladder neck and trigone in macroscopically tumor-free limits and bilateral ureterovesical reimplantation were performed.
Based on histology, we was concluded that this tumor was a bilateral mixed prostate carcinoma that had invaded 80% of the gland. The large-cell neuroendocrine component comprised 70% of the tumor and the acinar adenocarcinoma component accounted for the remaining 30%. Gleason score of the adenocarcinomatous component was 7(3 + 4). There was capsular infiltration at the base of the right lobe. The bladder neck and seminal vesicles were invaded as well as the neurovascular bands. There was also perineural invasion and vascular embolus . The large-cell neuroendocrine component was confirmed by immunohistochemistry, with labeling by synaptophysin and chromogranin A, with a strong proliferative activity, as Ki67 expression was at 80% .
All dissected lymph nodes on the right side were negative, and one lymph node of the seven taken on the left side was metastatic, showing invasion by the large-cell neuroendocrine component. The tumor was then classified as pT4 N1 (1/13) R1. Postoperative PSA was 0.01 ng/ml. Following a multidisciplinary medical consultation, it was decided to treat the patient with chemotherapy (etoposide carboplatin [VP16]) as an adjuvant treatment, followed by radiotherapy of the prostatic bed and pelvis.
A [18F]FDG PET/CT scan performed in September 2016 showed the absence of any hyper-metabolic site.
Chemotherapy with etoposide carboplatin (VP16) was started in February 2016, then interrupted in May 2016 following the second cycle due to renal toxicity.
The [18F]FDG PET/CT scan performed in June 2016, 6 months following surgery, showed two left latero-aortic hypermetabolic lymph nodes despite a PSA of 0.01 ng/ml. The [18F]FDG PET/CT scan in August 2016, 4 months after the end of chemotherapy, showed a significant decrease in the metabolic character of the left latero-aortic infracentimetric lymph node and the absence of a second suspicious hypermetabolic lesion; PSA was 0.01 ng/ml. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT; 6 MV photons) of the prostatic bed was performed between November and December 2016, with 70 Gy, given in 35 sessions.
The follow-up was then planned based on the PSA level for the adenocarcinoma component and the [18F]FDG PET/CT findings for the large-cell neuroendocrine component. In July 2017 the patient presented with an elevated PSA of 2.75 ng/ml; in November 2017 the PSA was 4. 77 ng/ml. The [18F]FDG PET/CT scan in November 2017 showed bilateral supracentimetric iliac lymph nodes, poorly hypermetabolic, that were more indicative of the adenocarcinomatous component. Androgen deprivation therapy with the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist triptorelin was started in December 2017. The biological response was favorable; the PSA was 0.01 ng/ml and testosterone was 0.2 ng/ml 3 months after the first injection of triptorelin. The [18F]FDG PET/CT scan in June 2018, 6 months after the initiation of androgen deprivation therapy, indicated a complete metabolic response.
The follow-up was biological, with PSA measurement every 3 months for the adenocarcinomatous component and metabolic imaging with [18F]FDG PET/CT every 6 months for the large-cell neuroendocrine component. Currently, after 54 months of follow-up, the patient is still receiving androgen deprivation therapy with triptorelin with complete biological and metabolic response. At the last check-up in March 2020, PSA was 0.01 ng/ml and the [18F]FDG PET/CT scan showed a complete metabolic response.