A 60-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for examination and treatment of anemia.
After observing transient melena, the patient’s previous doctor conducted a medical examination and detected severe anemia (blood hemoglobin 6.1 g/dL).
The patient had undergone successful treatment of chronic hepatitis C with interferon therapy performed by a previous doctor.
The patient had no history of smoking or drinking alcohol. There was no relevant family history.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.7 °C, heart rate was 81 bpm, blood pressure was 128/80 mmHg. There was conjunctival pallor and no spontaneous abdominal pain or no tenderness.
The blood test revealed hypoproteinemia (serum albumin, 3.4 g/dL), and the serum H. pylori immunoglobulin G antibody level was negative (< 3).
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed marked mucosal thickening of the body of the stomach, with no enlarged lymph nodes around the stomach . Upper gastrointestinal (UGI) radiograph showed giant gastric rugae and translucency of the nodule-aggregating surface in the greater curvature of the lower gastric body . The 99mTc-DTPA-human serum albumin (HSA-D) scintigraphy showed protein loss from the stomach after 24 h .
UGI endoscopy revealed giant rugae in the gastric body, similar to contrast-enhanced radiographic findings . A 40-mm broad-based, protruding erythematous lesion with lobular surface was observed on the giant rugae of the gastric body . UGI endoscopy showed no evidence of atrophic gastritis and intestinal metaplasia.
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) demonstrated the five layers of the gastric wall. In the lesion area, hypertrophy was observed in the first two layers (equivalent to the mucosa and the muscularis mucosae); however, no noticeable structural changes were evident in the third layer (equivalent to the submucosal layer) or deeper . These findings were consistent with early tumor confined to the mucosal layer.
Low-magnification narrow-band imaging (NBI) showed granular surfaces with various sizes/forms and dilated vessels . High-magnification NBI demonstrated irregular microstructures of various forms and tortuous microvessels with changes in caliber .
Histological diagnosis based on endoscopic biopsy was Group 2 (non-tumorous changes suspected, though tumorous lesions cannot be ruled out). Considering the tumor size and high probability of a cancerous lesion based on the endoscopic images, en bloc resection with ESD was performed for definitive diagnosis and treatment . Loupe image showed that the well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma was confined to the mucosal layer, with no lymphovascular invasion (ly0/v0) or ulceration (UL0), and both the lateral and vertical margins were negative .
Histology of ESD specimens also showed proliferation of atypical cells with an irregular glandular structure . Additionally, scattered p53 protein-positive cells were observed . Based on these findings, the atypical glands were diagnosed with early gastric cancer of a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Foveolar hyperplasia and atrophy of the proper gastric glands were observed in the non-tumor areas, a histological image corresponding to Ménétrier’s disease .
Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for MUC5AC and partially positive for MUC6 , and negative for MUC2 and CD10 . H. pylori were not observed in any biopsy or ESD specimens.