A 57-year-old man presented with a sudden onset of mild right upper and lower extremity paralysis. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a left capsular hemorrhage and scattered infarctions in the right middle cerebral artery and the patient was treated conservatively. Magnetic resonance angiography incidentally revealed findings suggestive of ACF dAVF, which was confirmed by cerebral angiography . The dAVF was fed bilaterally from the ophthalmic arteries through the anterior ethmoidal branches. The shunt pouch was formed in the left cribriform plate. Drainage occurred through the arterialization of the left frontal cortical veins to the anterior third of the SSS. The venous drainage patterns were Cognard Type 4 and Borden Type 3, with cerebral cortical venous regurgitation. The patient refused a craniotomy for the surgical interruption of the dAVF and preferred an endovascular approach. We planned TAE with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA); however, precise evaluation of angiograms revealed that the drainage vein had a laminar flow [, yellow arrows], which was the confluence of the normal cortical vein perfused from the left frontal lobe. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed that both merged to form a common trunk that drained into the SSS [, yellow arrows]. If unintentional fragmentation or elongation of the glue cast extends into the confluence, there is a risk of ischemia in the left frontal lobe. Accordingly, we performed TAE in combination with TVE of the origin of the draining vein to prevent the unexpected migration of glue into the normal cortical vein.
The endovascular procedures were performed under general anesthesia using transfemoral artery and transinternal jugular vein approaches . Parent Plus45 at 28 cm (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) was placed into the right internal jugular vein under ultrasound guidance . A 7-French (Fr) introducer was placed in the right femoral artery. After systemic heparinization (intravenous injection at 4000 units, followed by continuous intravenous infusion of 1000 units/hour, to maintain an activated clotting time twice the patient’s baseline level), a 6-Fr guiding catheter (Roadmaster STR [90 cm]; Goodman, Aichi, Japan) was inserted into the right internal carotid artery (ICA). Distal transvenous access was retrogradely obtained across the internal jugular vein, and an intermediate catheter, TACTICS PLUS (Technocrat, Aichi, Japan), was advanced into the SSS and carefully inserted into the left frontal cortical vein . An Excelsior SL-10 (Stryker, Fremont, California, USA) was advanced over the microwire near the foot of the vein. An SL-10 position was positioned immediately adjacent to the fistula. Subsequently, the arterial approach was initiated. A 7-Fr Roadmaster (Goodman, Aichi, Japan) was placed in the right ICA. Following TACTICS PLUS (Technocrat) insertion into the ICA cavernous portion, a microcatheter Marathon (Covidien, Irvine, CA, USA) was immediately advanced adjacent to the fistula [ and ]. Transvenous outlet occlusion was done with a total of 9 cm of three i-ED coils (Kaneka, Osaka, Japan) placed at the foot of the vein [-]. Left internal carotid angiography revealed a still opacification of the draining vein, but the flow was significantly decreasing; therefore, we thought that fragmentation of the NBCA would prevent splattering into the normal veins. A low concentration of NBCA (14%) was injected under careful inspection using continuous fluoroscopy [ and ]. We confirmed the glue penetration of the fistulous point without extending to the confluence of the normal frontal cortical vein and completed the occlusion of the shunt [ and ]. The final left ICA angiograms showed complete occlusion of the ACF dAVF [ and ] with the preservation of the left frontal cortical vein [ and , yellow arrows]. There were no postoperative complications and no venous ischemia was identified on follow-up MRI. The patient was discharged without complications and lived his daily life in a manner similar to that before at the 3-month follow-up visit.