Initially, a 22-year-old man presented with dyspnoea. He was prescribed some sprays by a pneumologist. One year later, pericarditis was suspected. Transthoracic echocardiography showed pericardial effusion, and pericardiocentesis was performed. The cardiologist prescribed colchicine, but pericardial effusion came back.
The young man was referred to an echocardiogram expert, and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a large hypoechoic mass (7.0 × 4.3 cm) with a broad base in the right atrium, expanding from the roof of the right atrium to the tricuspid valve. The tricuspid flow was normal, and a widened inferior vena cava was seen. After admission, transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) confirmed the same findings, however it elucidated that the mass was causing compression on the tricuspid valve. It also revealed another mass in the right ventricle.
The surgical procedure was a week later. A median sternotomy was performed, followed by a pericardiotomy. The large mass was seen in the right atrial wall. Cardiopulmonary bypass was initiated, and the heart was arrested. Complete resection of the tumour was impossible. The mass was resected with the biggest possible margins . A narrow margin (1 cm) of the right atrium was left in place, so that reconstruction by suturing the pericardium patch could be possible. The tumour was found to be extensively infiltrating the right ventricle, the right atrioventricular junction and tricuspid valve. The right atrium was reconstructed using a patch of heterologous glutaraldehyde-preserved pericardium .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. He underwent postoperative TTE 6 days later. It revealed a small hypoechoic mass remaining in the right side of the heart (4.3 × 2.3 cm) compressing the tricuspid valve, but causing no stenosis. The young man was discharged home. Histopathology and immunohistochemistry confirmed the diagnosis of angiosarcoma. The patient was referred to oncology department for further management. He underwent adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy later on. We kept in contact with the patient and his family despite them living in a remote area, and his parent reported his death 1 year and 5 days after the surgery. After a diagnosis of lung and brain metastases, he ended up on mechanical ventilation for 48 h and died.