A 48-year-old Caucasian female presented for evaluation of intermittent chest pain of 6 months duration. Past history included asthma, schizoaffective disorder, bipolar disorder, nephrolithiasis, and diabetes insipidus. Her medications included aspirin, lithium carbonate, methylphenidate, lurasidone, temazepam, alprazolam, desmopressin, fluticasone-salmeterol inhaler and albuterol inhaler. She had tobacco smoking for many years. She denied alcohol or recreational drug abuse. Her vital signs and cardiopulmonary exam upon admission were within normal limits. She was assessed for acute coronary syndrome with serial cardiac biomarkers and serial electrocardiograms (ECG) that were unremarkable. 2D echocardiogram demonstrated normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) without regional wall motion abnormalities at rest. Dobutamine stress echocardiogram was performed to rule out obstructive coronary artery disease. Her baseline blood pressure (BP) was 104/64 mmHg and heart rate (HR) was 60 beats per minute (bpm). Peak dobutamine dose was 40 micrograms (mcg)/kg/minute. In addition, 0.5 mg atropine was administered during the test. After 16 minutes of dobutamine infusion, she complained of intense chest pain. Her BP was 214/100 mmHg and HR was 107 bpm. Stress ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm with transient left anterior fascicular block and run of ventricular bigeminy, which resolved after sublingual nitroglycerin and discontinuation of dobutamine infusion. Stress echocardiogram demonstrated mid-anterior and mid-septal hypokinesis with reduction in LVEF ( and , -). Peak Troponin I (Tn I) level was 0.41 ng/mL. Emergent coronary angiogram demonstrated normal coronaries. LV angiogram in the right anterior oblique projection revealed mid-ventricular ballooning during systole with apical and basal hypercontractility ( and , ). Patient was treated with metoprolol tartrate, lisinopril and methylphenidate was discontinued. Tn I level trended down and her chest pain resolved. Follow-up echocardiogram 24 hours later demonstrated complete recovery of LV systolic function. She was discharged with beta-blockers.