A 50-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted for kidney transplantation. Renal history began at 10 years of age when she was hospitalized for several episodes of ureteral colic due to recurrent stone disease. She was married with four children. During each pregnancy, she was treated for hypertension. At 40 years of age, she was evaluated for severe arterial hypertension. Investigations revealed proteinuria (2 gr/24 h) and an increase in plasma creatinine (12 μmol/dL). Renal ultrasound showed multiple stones in the left kidney and bladder, while the right kidney was atrophied. The diagnosis of primary hyperoxaluria type I was established by the detection of the G170R mutation in the peroxisomal alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) gene. The residual activity of AGT was less than 28% in biopsied liver tissue from our patient. As chronic renal failure progressed, our patient experienced, at 44 years of age, multiple embolic episodes involving the femoral arteries, hypogastric arteries, splenic artery and renal arteries, and requiring surgical thrombectomy. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed an intraventricular thrombus associated with hypokinesia of the apical region and the interventricular septum. Hematological studies including tests for thrombophilia (protein C and protein S deficiency, factor V Leiden, anti-thrombin III deficiency, and anti-phospholipid antibody syndrome) and serum homocysteine concentrations yielded normal results. An electrocardiogram did not reveal any signs of atrial fibrillation or myocardial infarction.
Our patient was discharged with long-term treatment with anti-vitamin K. Terminal renal failure was precipitated by bilateral renal artery embolism requiring the initiation of hemodialysis, which was performed five days per week because of hyperoxaluria. Kidney transplantation was performed two years following the initiation of dialysis, but the graft was rapidly lost at day seven post-transplantation, secondary to thrombosis of the graft vein. Our patient was maintained on periodic hemodialysis for four years, after which she received a second renal transplantation from a cadaveric donor. The immediate course was marked by delayed graft function allowing the deferred use of calcineurin inhibitors. The immunosuppressive regimen consisted of anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) and methylprednisolone therapies. Heparin therapy was started 12 hours following the surgical procedure. A kidney biopsy on day 14 post-transplantation revealed the presence of calcium oxalate crystals in the parenchyma, which led to the start of daily dialysis using a large surface membrane. Diuresis progressively recovered from day 18 post-transplantation but dialysis was continued. On day 22, our patient developed major bleeding with acute anemia, requiring blood transfusion and the termination of heparin therapy. A non-infusion computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed a perigraft hematoma. Three days later (on day 25), she developed thrombosis of her AV fistula. Anti-coagulation treatment with danaparoid sodium (Orgaran) was reinitiated. A tunneled silicone catheter was inserted in the right femoral vein. A revascularization procedure by angioplasty and stent deployment was attempted five days later. A 6 French vascular sheath was placed upstream of the occluded venous arm of the fistula, then replaced by a 9 French vascular sheath to increase the lumen of the occluded vein, after which a 6 French catheter was used to aspirate the clots. However, although the fistula was only partially repermeabilized on the side of the venous anastomosis, it was immediately reused for hemodialysis. While our patient was alert and her status was normal on initiation of the dialysis session (Glasgow Coma Scale 15), three hours later she developed diffuse seizures and became rapidly unresponsive (Glasgow Coma Scale 3), prompting intubation for airway protection. Magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple areas of increased density representing severe ischemia in the vertebrobasilar territory, which result from bilateral occlusion of posterior cerebral arteries .
Our patient was managed in our intensive care department. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) performed two months later revealed a previously unknown PFO with a left-to-right shunt at the interatrial septum . However, contrast echocardiography test was not performed because of the absence of permeable peripheral veins in our patient. The TEE examination did not reveal other embolic sources in the ascending aorta and aortic arch.
Our patient was discharged from the intensive care department with stable renal function (serum creatinine at 15 μmol/dL) two months after admission. The serum oxalate concentration was 2.15 μmol/dL (normal: below 33 μmol/dL). Neurological evaluation six months after the stroke showed the persistence of weakness predominantly in the inferior limbs, as well as dysarthria, anterograde amnesia and hyperemotivity.