A 60-year-old Caucasian female patient consulted our cardiology outpatient clinic for complaint of dyspnea on moderate exertion (New York Heart Association class II) which had lasted for the past few weeks, and which she reported was relieved by rest.
The patient estimated that her symptoms started a couple of weeks prior to presentation and reported increasing frequency in the last couple of days. She denied any chest pain, palpitations, orthopnea, lower leg edema, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, change in weight, or syncope.
The patient is a nonsmoker, known to have a 10-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, essential arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, and untreated asymptomatic stable pulmonary sarcoidosis (diagnosed 5 years prior, according to mediastinal lymph node biopsy findings). Her past medical history also included resected epidermoid carcinoma of the tongue. A coronary angiography given 5 years prior showed a 40%-50% mid-left anterior descending artery stenosis.
Her routine medications included bisoprolol (2.5 mg/d), acetylsalicylic acid (80 mg/d), atorvastatine (10 mg/d), metformin (850 mg twice/d), gliquidone (15 mg/d), and dulaglutide (1.5 mg/wk).
There was no family history of sudden cardiac death, and the patient denied any recent severe illness or respiratory symptoms. A recent abdominal and thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed several infracentimetric mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes.
On physical examination, the patient showed no signs of distress. The vital signs displayed temperature of 37.2 °C, blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg, heart rate of 50 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. There was no jugular vein distention nor carotid bruit. Peripheral pulses were present and equal. No skin lesions were noted. The heart rate was regular, with an occasional premature beat. The first and second heart sounds were heard, and no murmurs, rubs or gallops were noted. The lung and abdomen exams were unremarkable. There was no lower leg edema.
Laboratory work-up was remarkable for an elevated level of glycated hemoglobin, normal levels of potassium and cardiac ultrasensitive troponin, and normal thyroid findings. Angiotensin converting enzyme levels were also within normal range. Notable finding on electrocardiogram was a regular sinus rhythm with prolonged PR interval and a QTc at 450 ms .
Initial cardiac ultrasound showed basal-septal akinesia, with a globally preserved left ventricular systolic ejection fraction by the modified Simpson method, normal left and right chamber sizes, and a normal tricuspid aortic valve associated with a trace insufficiency. The ascending aorta measured 41 mm. No other abnormalities were found.
A submaximal exercise stress test reaching 67% maximal predicted heart rate for the patient’s age stopped due to multifocal ventricular extrasystoles followed by a self-limiting TdP at 2 min, with no syncope or chest pain . The maximal blood pressure was 152/70 mmHg, and the recovery was notable for multiple multifocal ventricular extrasystoles.
We ordered an increase in the patient’s bisoprolol (from 2.5 mg to 5 mg) and stopped the dulaglutide. The patient was admitted to the hospital for a diagnostic coronary angiography, which showed a stable 40%-50% mid-left anterior descending plaque. Cardiac continuous monitoring showed several ectopic supraventricular beats along abundant polymorphic ventricular extrasystoles and intermittent type I second degree atrioventricular block (Mobitz I).
A cardiac electrophysiology study was undertaken, inducing a poorly-tolerated, sustained monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (at a rate of 240 beats/min) and terminated by a burst .
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) showed nondilated and normotrophic left ventricle with basoseptal and mid-septal dyskinesis. The MRI-derived left ventricular ejection fraction was 45%. Delayed enhancement showed patchy transmural fibrosis of the septum and hyperenhancement of the papillary muscles, all in favor of extensive cardiac involvement of sarcoidosis . A whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan showed no myocardial uptake.