An 81-year-old gentleman presented to our ENT department with a two-year-history of a nodular right pinna lesion. There had been no recent increase in size. The patient reported that the lesion had actually decreased in size over the past two months with the use of topical steroids and fusidic acid.
His past medical history included hypertension, transient ischaemic attack, and prostate malignancy treated with transurethral resection. He also wore bilateral hearing aids for presbyacusis. His regular medications included clopidogrel, simvastatin, and antihypertensives. There was no family history of head and neck malignancy. He was a retired police officer with no history of excessive sun exposure. He was an ex-smoker having stopped smoking 40 years ago and a teetotaller.
On examination, he was skin type II on the Fitzpatrick scale. There was a one-centimetre nodular lesion on the right upper pinna . There was no evidence of ulceration or associated cervical lymphadenopathy, and no other skin lesions were noted. The lesion was not tender to palpation, but there was a history of contact bleeding after irritation from his hearing aid.
Two weeks after initial presentation, a wedge excision of the lesion was performed under local anaesthesia with 4-millimetre resection margins . Histological analysis revealed a dermal spindle cell lesion exhibiting marked pleomorphism and brisk mitoses . Immunohistochemically, the lesion showed focal staining with CD68. Other markers (AE1AE3, S100, HMB45, SMA, and CD31/34) were negative. Morphologically and immunohistochemically, the features were consistent with atypical fibroxanthoma. The closest resection margin was found to be 3 millimetres located superiorly. Resected sleeves of cartilage at the inferior and superior margins were found to be free of disease.
One month later, a small fluctuant lesion was noted at the surgical wound site laterally. This was felt to be a small stitch abscess, but needle aspiration yielded no fluid. A decision was made to simply observe this, and the patient was brought back for review six weeks later. At this time, a one-centimetre raised, ulcerative, crusted lesion was seen at the upper margin of the incision site . Three-millimetre punch biopsies were taken which were subsequently discussed at the skin multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting. The histological analysis showed full-thickness infiltration by a well-differentiated keratinising squamous cell carcinoma . There were no lymphovascular space permeation and no associated squamous hyperplasia. Remarkably, when this tumour was compared to the previous lesion (atypical fibroxanthoma), no morphological resemblance was seen. Immunohistochemistry of the biopsy confirmed squamous cell carcinoma (positive with AE1AE3 and p63 and negative with CD10).
The recommendation from the skin MDT (multidisciplinary team) was for wide excision and full-thickness skin grafting. This was performed three weeks later with 5-millimetre resection margins. The underlying cartilage was also excised, and a local full-thickness skin graft was raised from the right neck level II region to cover the skin defect . Subsequent histological and immunohistochemical analyses confirmed moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with no invasion of the underlying cartilage or subcutaneous fat. There was no perineural or lymphovascular invasion, and the lesion was 4.5 millimetres thick . The margins were deemed acceptable following further discussion at the skin MDT meeting, and an ultrasound scan of the neck was organised, which showed normal cervical lymph nodes. To date, no local or regional recurrence has been noted at his most recent 4-month follow-up, and the wound has healed well with successful grafting .