A previously healthy 16-year-old Danish boy presented to our emergency department with diffuse chest pain. Ten days prior to hospitalization he had suffered a blunt trauma to the chest while playing soccer. Closer inspection revealed accentuated vein drawing on the front of the chest and slight direct and indirect tenderness of the thorax. During lung auscultation, ceased respiration sounds on the right side and normal vesicular respiration on the left side were found. A chest X-ray revealed a collapsed right lung and pleural effusion . He was clinically unaffected and the vital parameters were normal.
A pleural drain was established and 2.5L of clear yellow fluid was drained. During the following few hours he went into respiratory distress (saturation 85% on 15L of oxygen), became hypotensive (blood pressure 64mmHg over 40mmHg) and tachypneic (respiratory frequency 24 breaths/minute). We administered 2L of saline solution and continuous positive airway pressure, which briefly stabilized the patient. On suspicion of lung embolism, an acute echocardiography was performed. This revealed pericardial effusion and dilatation of the right atrium. His respiratory and circulatory function became increasingly unstable. He was intubated and transferred to a level 1 trauma centre.
The trauma computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes anteriorly in the mediastinum, bilaterally in the axillae, the throat, and along the aorta down to retroperitoneum. Furthermore, an almost collapsed superior vena cava was revealed . The following day we performed a positron emission tomography computed tomography scan. This revealed increased activity in the area equaling the lymphoid mass . On the suspicion of malignant lymphoma causing superior vena cava syndrome, the patient was transferred from the intensive care unit to the hematological service after 2 days, after he was stabilized and extubated. Excision of a cervical lymph node, a bone marrow biopsy, and analysis of pleural fluid for cytological examination were conducted. Biochemically, a lactate dehydrogenase of 350U/L and leukocytosis of 21.7×109/L was found. His peripheral blood showed normal composition and his bone marrow showed no significant blast accumulation indicating no sign of T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia.
Cytological examination of his lymph node revealed an altered architecture and diffuse infiltration of tumor cells, with cell markers positive for CD3, CD5, CD2, CD7, CD4, Bcl-2, and TDT, and negative for CD23, Bcl-6, cyclin D1, CD34, CD8 CD56, tia-1, granzymB, and CD30, consistent with T–cell lymphoblastic lymphoma.
He started treatment immediately with vincristine and dexamethasone to reduce the tumor burden prior to the initiation of the chemotherapeutic regimen.