On July 25, 2014, a 61-year-old female was referred to our hospital because of a lesion found in the duodenum by a routine health examination in the local hospital. The abdomen was flat and soft with no mass palpable. His family history had no significant disease. Laboratory results were as follows: WBC 2.60 × 109 cells/L (4–10), neutrophils 1.8 × 109 cells/L (2.0–7.0), monocytes 0.06 × 109 cells/L (0.12–1.00). Tumor markers and other laboratory results were normal.
An unenhanced CT scan showed a well-defined mass in the area among duodenum, right liver and kidney, 5 cm in diameter. The mass was mainly low-density, whereas regions of high density were visible, compatible with calcification and/or ossification . Duodenum and pancreatic head were pushed by the mass. On the contrast-enhanced CT, the mass was mildly and inhomogeneously enhanced . On MRI, the mass appeared hypointense on T1-weighted images and inhomogeneous hyperintense on T2-weighted images . According to these imaging results, a retroperitoneal neurogenic tumor was primarily considered.
We performed a laparotomy and found a mass surrounded by a fibrous capsule located in the area among duodenum, front of vena cava, and lower edge of right liver. The mass was linked with the retroperitoneal adipose tissue by a pedicle. We completely removed the mass and intraoperative frozen pathological examination suggested a soft tissue tumor with degenerative changes of hemorrhage, calcification, and ossification.
Macroscopically, a mass with capsule was 6.0 × 6.0 × 4.8 cm in size and yellowish-white in color. Microscopically, some areas of the tumor were calcified, ossified , and hemorrhagic . The tumor mainly consisted of spindle-shaped cells with palisading arrangement. Both hypercellular and hypocellular areas were visible. Atypical cells or signs of malignancy were not shown . Immunohistochemical investigation showed the protein S-100 was strongly positive , whereas smooth muscle actin (SMA), CD34, and CD117 negative. Finally, the tumor was diagnosed as a benign retroperitoneal schwannoma with hemorrhage, calcification, and ossification changes. After surgery, the patient recovered smoothly and left the hospital 6 days later. She was followed up for a period of 21 months, during which she was well with no evidence of tumor recurrence.