A 49-year-old male presented with pain, swelling, and discharging sinus over the proximal phalanx of the third digit of the right hand for 2 years. The patient was apparently asymptomatic 2 years back when he developed pain and swelling of the third digit which was insidious in onset and gradually progressive finally culminating with a discharging sinus 1 year back. There was no history of trauma, cough, weight loss, decreased appetite, and any other risk factors. The patient was previously treated at other centers with incision and drainage followed by antibiotics. On examination, there was a firm, globular swelling at the base of the third digit with a discharging sinus over the proximal phalanx of the third digit of the right hand . No local inflammatory signs were found. The finger range of motion was painful and restricted.
Plain radiographs showed increased bone density, mild periosteal reaction with an osteolytic lesion of proximal phalanx of the third finger . The chest radiograph was normal. Local ultrasonography revealed dense internal echoes measuring about 1.25 × 1.37 ×1.30 cm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was suggestive of tubercular osteomyelitis. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C reactive protein were elevated. Other laboratory parameters were normal. An open biopsy was done through Brunner’s incision over the dorsal aspect of the lesion, sinus tract excised and the samples were sent for histopathology which revealed chronic granulomatous inflammation. Gene-Xpert was done which detected TB and no resistance to first-line drugs was found.
Anti-tubercular therapy was started which included four drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) for 2 months, followed by three drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin, and ethambutol) for 7 months. The patient finger was immobilized for 1 month. The patient responded to the anti-tubercular therapy with complete resolution of the pain, swelling, and discharging sinus was satisfactorily healed. Radiographs of the right hand after the completion of the treatment course at 1 year revealed a decrease in the size of the osteolytic lesion with the resolution of associated sclerosis . At 1 year follow- up, the patient had a full range of motion of fingers with no other symptoms .