A 60-year-old Moroccan man, without a personal history of diabetes or chronic disease, nor any special chirurgical or psychosocial background or toxic habits, and with a familial history of diabetes. He presented with a 3-year history of a progressively asymptomatic nodule of his right index finger. The tumor was voluminous, which motivated the patient to consult in our department. The clinical examination revealed a 2.5 cm purplish painless soft tumor, covered with yellowish and hemorrhagic crusts, involving the first phalanx of the right index finger. This tumor was compressing the nail plate . Our patient did not report any intense pain, cold sensitivity or severe tenderness to palpation of the tumor of his right index finger, and no previous trauma history. A neurologic examination showed no signs of paresthesia or hypoesthesia, and muscular and neurological function was preserved. The dermoscopic examination had revealed polymorphic vessels, in a rainbow pattern with melliciric and hemorrhagic crusts . A general examination showed no other abnormality. The differential diagnosis included angifibroma, pyogenic, granuloma-like Kaposi sarcoma, epidermized pyogenic granuloma, superficial acral fibromyxoma and glomus tumor. No bony lesions were identified on radiographic studies and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was suggestive of glomus tumor by individualizing a 26 × 16 mm low tissue mass signal intensity on T1, marked hyperintensity on T2, and enhancement on T1 after gadolinium injection .
Surgical excision was performed. The approach was direct, respecting the principles of cutaneous incisions and avoiding nerve fiber pathways. The mass was well circumscribed and removed . Histopathologic examination with hematoxylin-eosin stain, demonstrated round to ovoid cells, lacking nuclear atypia and featuring scant, eosinophilic cytoplasm . The cell clusters were traversed by narrow vascular clefts lined with regular flattened endothelial cells . Mitotic activity was absent. Immunohistochemistry with anti-smooth muscle antibody supported the diagnosis of glomus tumor by demonstrating tumoral smooth muscle actin . At follow-up visits, no further radiological investigations were requested and no recurrence was noted. There was complete healing of the finger within 6 months and the nail regained its normal appearance in 10 months.