An 18-year-old young man was admitted with the complaints of epigastric and umbilical pain for 15 days that was insidious in onset and dull aching in nature. The intensity of the pain was mild to moderate. The pain was not related to any specific aggravating factor including food intake. Pain was relieved by taking oral medications. He noticed a gradual increment in the intensity of pain for 7 days. He also complained of fever during the last 7 days that was continuous in nature. It was not associated with chills and rigor. The highest temperature recorded was 101 degree Fahrenheit that decreased with the intake of antipyretic. He did not recall vomiting and did not experience weight loss, cough, hematemesis, malena and jaundice. His bowel and bladder habit was normal. There were no major ailments in the past. He had no medical history of abdominal trauma or surgery and no family history of malignant tumor. He belongs to a poor socio- economic background and maintains satisfactory personal hygiene.
On physical examination, the patient was ill-looking and co-operative with a BMI of 19.92 kg/m2. He presented with an increased body temperature, anemia was not evident, he was non icteric, Virchow's gland and accessible lymph nodes were impalpable. On inspection, the abdomen was flat with centrally placed, inverted and vertically slitted umbilicus, and intact hernial orifices. There was no visible swelling and peristalsis. On palpation, the abdomen was mildly tender over the epigastrium, umbilicus, right hypochondriac and right lumbar region. An ill-defined intra abdominal lump was found involving the right hypochondriac and lumbar region which had a smooth surface, was soft in consistency, partly mobile from side to side but not above downwards, non-pulsatile and not moving with respiration. On auscultation, bowel sound was present which was normal. No bruit was audible. Digital rectal examination revealed no abnormalities. No other systemic abnormalities were observed.
After a thorough history-taking and examination, we proceeded for laboratory investigations, imaging, and histopathology as a part of diagnostic workup. No abnormality was detected in laboratory investigations including Complete Blood Count (CBC), Serum amylase, lipase, electrolytes, creatinine, and Random blood sugar (RBS). Echinococcal antibody was also negative. .
X-ray abdomen was found to be normal. Ultrasonography (USG) showed multiloculated complex cystic mass having septation approximately 13 × 6 cm in size on the right side of the abdomen. We then carried out ultrasonography guided fine needle aspiration cytology of the abdominal mass which showed smears with lymphocytes and foamy histiocytes in a background of thick proteinaceous material. No evidence of malignancy was seen and the findings were compatible with lymphangioma. Contrast enhanced Computed Tomography (CECT) scan was performed and the findings of CECT were consistent with cystic lesion with septations noted at right side of abdomen, measuring about 14.5 ∗ 12.3 cm, compressing the bowel loops towards left. After IV contrast it showed peripheral and septal enhancement. No evident solid component was detected. It showed no abnormality in liver, gallbladder, pancreas and kidneys and was suggestive of mesenteric lymphangioma. Origin of the lesion could not be mentioned .
Following the challenging diagnostic workup, with the patient's informed written consent we concluded the surgical approach to be our definitive modality of treatment. We conducted a thorough preoperative assessment to prepare the patient for surgery. Thereafter, laparotomy followed by partial surgical resection of the mesenteric lymphangioma was carried out along with adhesiolysis and hemostasis. The margin at the base of the lesion could not be cleared. Patient had been placed under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation in supine position (a,b,c,d). The specimen was resected and it was sent for histopathology. A gross overview of which showed specimen consisting of an irregular gray brown cystic structure measuring about 12 ∗ 6.5 ∗ 1.5 cm. Cut surface revealed mostly cystic and partly solid structure. Cut section showed brownish fluid. 3 lymph nodes were also separated from the specimen. The microscopic examination of the sections made from the submitted specimen exhibited a benign tumor composed of proliferation of blood vessels of different sizes lined by endothelium in a fibromuscular stroma. It also revealed areas of hemorrhage. The lymph nodes that were separated revealed follicular hyperplasia. No granuloma or malignancy was evident. Thus, the histopathological findings were compatible with hemangioma.
Our patient had a smooth surgical recovery devoid of any complications and a follow-up after two months of surgery revealed no signs of recurrence .