A 59-year-old woman who did not have any allergic or atopic history was diagnosed with PBC. She was started on ursodiol 500 mg twice daily at the time of her diagnosis. On Day 4 of therapy, she developed full-body hives, chest tightness and dyspnea within one hour of her dose. These symptoms self-resolved within an hour. Subsequently she lowered the dose of ursodiol to 250 mg twice daily at the recommendation of her hepatologist. On Day 2 of re-exposure, she developed similar but more severe symptoms within an hour of her dose. These symptoms resolved without treatment within an hour. Consequently, ursodiol was discontinued by her hepatologist and the patient was referred to the allergy clinic for ursodiol allergy.
At our clinic, we confirmed the history of her systemic reactions to ursodiol. Allergy testing was not done, as there is no validated skin testing or available serum IgE measurement for ursodiol. Patient declined drug provocation test due to fear of reaction. As such, the diagnosis of an IgE-mediated reaction to ursodiol was made based on detailed clinical history. Given the ongoing need for ursodiol, we recommended the patient to undergo desensitization. She declined the procedure due to personal reasons, so was switched to the second-line obeticholic acid for her PBC. In the following year, her PBC continued to progress and she was receptive to desensitization. Her hepatologist re-referred her to our clinic for consideration of desensitization to ursodiol.
A new ursodiol desensitization protocol was developed . A 12-step protocol was chosen based on the published standardized protocols for various drugs . A 45-min interval was used between each step to ensure an adequate gastrointestinal absorption of the medication. The solution was made by our inpatient hospital pharmacy. Patient successfully completed the protocol in the intensive care unit and has remained on ursodiol 500 mg twice daily. Following desensitization, patient initially experienced recurrent pruritus each time after taking ursodiol. A careful evaluation in the clinic did not raise any concerns for an allergic reaction. After a discussion with the patient, she agreed to continue taking ursodiol and pruritus was somewhat reduced with a non-sedating antihistamine. At 1 month follow-up after the desensitization and being on daily ursodiol, patient reported a complete resolution of her pruritus and was able to tolerate ursodiol without any issues. Although she has been discharged from our clinic since, her hepatologist reported that her PBC has remained stable in the following two years while on daily ursodiol.