We evaluated a 20-year-old male patient with a history of progressive dystonia, myoclonic jerks, speech difficulties, and impaired concentration. He was diagnosed with ADEM at the age of 10 in November 2009 and underwent several weeks of intensive medical therapy followed by months of rehabilitation. While initial symptoms (meningismus, encephalopathy, and cranial neuropathy) resolved, dystonic symptoms first appeared in December 2009, manifesting as involuntary movements in his right index finger while writing. Over the course of 3 years, the patient’s motor symptoms progressed beyond dystonia to myoclonic gestures.
On initial examination, the patient presented with involuntary movements of the right arm and face, which were characterised by focal dysrhythmic jerks that were exacerbated by certain postures, movements, and stimuli. He also presented with multifocal dystonia of the right arm and foot. Brain MRI revealed lesions in the pons, cerebellum, thalamus, and periventricular white matter around the lateral ventricles .
Despite the often self-limiting nature of ADEM, we hypothesised an association between focal demyelination in the thalamus and brainstem (, ) and delayed onset of symptoms (,). Especially in secondary dystonia, the time between structural lesions and the onset of symptoms can be several months or even years . In addition, there was no family history of neurological disorders in the entire family.
The patient was thus diagnosed with a secondary multifocal myoclonus-dystonia syndrome following ADEM. Dystonia and myoclonus had remained refractory to anticonvulsants (Piracetam, Levetiracetam) and anticholinergics (Trihexyphenidyl). Following thorough multidisciplinary evaluation, the patient decided to undergo unilateral lead placement in the left GPi using directional leads (Vercise Cartesia™ 2202-02 leads, Boston Scientific Neuromodulation Corporation, Valencia, United States). DBS programming according to monopolar review revealed the largest therapeutic window when the current was steered in the anterior direction of the distal three-segmented ring contact. Using a top-down approach, we gradually increased the stimulation amplitudes to the maximum tolerated voltage while maintaining a frequency of 130 Hz and a pulse width of 60 μs. The patient was allowed to adapt DBS settings according to his preferences and was informed about the known long-term effects in dystonia. He deliberately chose programme 2 [C+ 1−(30%), 2−(35%), 3−(35%), 4 mA, 60 μs, 130 Hz] because it provided the most significant relief of motor symptoms .
During 3 years of follow-up, the patient reported worsening of dystonia and myoclonic jerks. To address these issues, we introduced four new stimulation programmes. In view of reports indicating efficacy of higher stimulation frequencies and pulse widths in the treatment of dystonia , increased pulse width (90 μs) was used in programme 6, higher frequency (185 Hz) in programme 7, and a combination of increased pulse width and frequency in programme 8, allowing the patient to adjust the settings prospectively. In addition, we used an imaging-guided optimisation of DBS parameters (programme 5) by directing the volume of tissue activated (VTA) towards proximal contacts moving from [C+, 1−(30%), 2−(35%), 3−(35%)] to [C+, 2−(10%), 4−(10%), 5−(40%), 7−(40%); avoiding contacts 3 and 6, respectively] in order to maximise the intersection between VTA and the ventral parts of the GPi, which are in close anatomical proximity to the pallidothalamic tract (PTT) . For dystonia, modulation of the PTT has been demonstrated to improve symptoms after pallidal DBS , while relief of myoclonus has been reported after contralateral pallidothalamic tractotomy . For this programme, we set the pulse width to 90 μs and the frequency to 185 Hz. A figure illustrating the changes in active DBS contacts after imaging-guided programming is provided as .
We assessed motor symptoms employing the Burke-Fahn-Marsden Dystonia Rating Scale (BFMDRS) and the Unified Myoclonus Rating Scale (UMRS) with DBS turned off and on. This resulted in predominant improvement in dystonia (OFF: 26, ON: 4) relative to myoclonus (OFF: 85, ON: 60) after imaging-guided adjustments of DBS parameters. See for a timeline of the patient’s medical history.
Magnetic resonance imaging data were acquired 1 day before surgery on a 3 T scanner. The preoperative imaging protocol included b-values of 0 and 1,000 s/mm2 and 30 independent diffusion gradient directions. The DBS lead and VTA visualisation was carried out using the LEAD-DBS software (, ). Specifically, we co-registered preoperative diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to T1 imaging with SPM12 and subsequently used Advanced Normalisation Tools (ANTs) to co-register the results with the postoperative CT scan . The Precise and Convenient Electrode Reconstruction for Deep Brain Stimulation (PaCER algorithm) facilitated the electrode detection including its rotation. Structural connectivity was analysed using the Generalised Q-Sampling method implemented in DSI Studio . The VTA served as a region of interest (ROI) for identifying connected fibre tracts, with an electric field threshold of 0.2 V/mm applied during estimation (, ). Using a finite element model, the stimulation volume was computed by estimating the gradient distribution of the electrical charge in space on a tetrahedral mesh that differentiated four compartments: grey and white matter, electrode contact, and insulation , as implemented in LEAD-DBS.
Utilising the DISTAL Minimal Atlas to define parcellation of grey matter structures , the VTA mostly overlapped with the prefrontal and sensorimotor subregions of the GPi . As expected, our findings showed that the fibre tracts associated with the VTA of GPi DBS were connected to basal ganglia circuits and the superior frontal gyrus (SFG), which was characterised by the A6m region of the Brainnetome atlas . Furthermore, these fibre tracts were found to overlap with the dentato-rubro-thalamic tract (DRT), potentially indicating a modulation of the cerebello-thalamo-cortical network, as identified by the DBS tractography atlas .