A 58-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a 6-month history of frequent watery diarrhea (10-20 times per day), intermittent hematochezia, and a weight loss of 13 kg. Two months after onset of symptoms, he noticed pigmentation in the palms and hair loss. He had a negative family history of gastrointestinal disease and congenital disease. On physical examination, the patient was found to have marked alopecia, brownish macular pigmentation over the palms and soles, and onychodystrophy of the fingernails. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Initial laboratory data showed that his albumin level was 31.2 g/L (normal range 35-55 g/L), serum potassium 3.1 mmol/L (normal range 3.5-5.5 mmol/L) and serum calcium 1.7 mmol/L (normal range 2.1-2.6 mmol/L). Other blood parameters, including thyroid hormones, parathyroid hormone and immunoglobulins, were within the normal range. The chest radiograph was negative. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, video capsule endoscopy and colonoscopy were performed for further evaluation of the gastrointestinal tract and they identified various sizes of generalized gastrointestinal polyps . Histological examination of the biopsy specimens obtained from the stomach and the colon showed adenomatous polyp and inflammatory polyp respectively. Thus, a diagnosis of CCS was made. We started corticosteroid therapy for him with oral prednisone (40 mg per day for 2 weeks and then reduced the dosage to 30 mg per day and lasted it for 10 days), but then we discontinued it because the clinical situation of the patient became better. At the same time, the patient was treated with nutritional supplementation by parenteral and enteral nutrition. His situation improved gradually after two months of treatment. The frequency of diarrhea decreased to 2 times per day, the weight increased by 5 kg, and the hair and fingernails regrew, but the levels of serum calcium (1.9 mmol/L) and albumin (30.6 g/L) were still lower than the normal range. He returned home for home nutritional support by enteral nutrition.
Two months later, he was admitted to our hospital for the second time with frequent diarrhea (7-8 times per day) and a weight loss of 7 kg. Laboratory data showed that his serum albumin level was 28.2 g/L and serum calcium 1.7 mmol/L. His chest radiograph showed fractures of the left sixth and seventh ribs . Since the patient had not suffered from any load or trauma in the chest, this concomitant complication initially led us to presume that there was a possibility of rib metastasis of a malignant tumor. Emission Computed Tomography (ECT) was performed and it showed no increased tracer uptake in the skeletal system. Bone densitometry tests on vertebrae lumbales and caput femoris were normal. Further examination for checking bone metastasis was not performed because of the patient's financial situation, and his examinations and clinical features indicated no definite malignant tumor. Since his nutritional status was poor and he had no complain of pain in chest, orthopedic surgeons and chest surgeons advised us to supply calcium and nutrition for him and to restrict his chest wall movement. After one-month treatment, which was similar to our previous treatment except for the corticosteroid therapy, his clinical condition markedly improved again. His serum albumin level increased to 35.2 g/L and calcium to 1.9 mmol/L. However, the rib fractures persisted.
After one-month of home nutritional support, he was admitted to our hospital for the third time to improve his nutritional status. His chest radiograph revealed aggravating multiple rib fractures . Since he did not complain of chest pain and respiratory distress when walking or resting, we consulted the orthopedic surgeons and chest surgeons again and received the same treatment recommendations. After one-month combination therapy, based on nutritional support, his weight increased by 4.5 kg, but hypocalcaemia (calcium level, 1.9 mmol/L), hypoalbuminemia (albumin level, 30.9 g/L) and multiple rib fractures still persisted.