A 16-year old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) at Al-Mouwasat University hospital on July 12, 2021 with pain, tenderness, and erythema along her back and abdomen after a minor trauma on her left palm on July 9, 2021.
Initially, she suffered from enlarged masses on her cubital fossa followed by pain and tenderness with erythema along her left axilla. The same symptoms developed on both flanks, lower abdomen, and back in the following three days while subsided from the arm.
She had no previous medical illness. On the physical examination, the patient looked tired. Her vital signs were: Body temperature: 36, pulse: 121, respiratory rate: 36, SO2: 98%, blood pressure: 10/7. On inspection: Her skin appeared normal to mild erythematous. No crepitations were palpated. Ultrasonography showed three reactive lesions on the axilla with no lymphadenopathy.
The patient was admitted to the infectious disease department and was treated with empirical antibiotics [clindamycin, vancomycin, ceftazidime, fluconazole] after taking a blood sample for culture for suspected acute cellulitis for 3 days without improvement. Computed tomography (CT) without contrast of the chest and abdomen showed gas and edema extending along the deep fascial planes and superficial muscles of the back and abdomen . After plastic surgery consultation, the patient was prepared to undergo emergent surgery for the management of presumed necrotizing fasciitis.
In the operation room (OR), the plastic surgeons found a foul-smelling purulent discharge and extensive tissue necrosis after appropriate incisions on the lower back and lower abdomen. Blunt dissection is performed easily using the index finger between the subcutaneous tissue and the deep fascia and a wide space was detected extending superiorly from the lower back to the posterolateral thoracic wall and axilla and also from the lower abdominal wall to the umbilical region. The necrotized skin at the lower back was debrided . Pathology of the skin and subcutaneous tissue was consistent with acute inflammation and necrosis.
All the cavities were copiously irrigated with normal saline, debrided, and packed with sterilized gauze after taking a tissue biopsy for pathological and culture and sensitivity studies.
Blood culture on admission revealed multidrug sensitive group A Streptococcus (GAS). Therefore, the internists changed the antibiotic regimen to guide against GAS [Tazopactam/Piperilline, Tigecycline].
The patient showed improvement after the first surgery and was scheduled to perform daily surgical exploration for more debridement and gauze replacement for a week.
On July 24, 2021, we closed the lower abdominal wound and used a bilateral suction drainage system connected to the closed deep fascial plain. One to the right abdomen and the other to the left flank and abdomen. This system consisted of an irrigating tube that was flushed with normal saline every 3 hours and then the flushing liquid was drained through suction drainage in a way we called sealed irrigation technique. We did this procedure for ten days to ensure a clear irrigation solution.
Afterwards, a healthy clean granulation tissue developed along the discovered spaces, and a split-thickness graft was taken from the lateral side of the thigh and meshed to cover opened wound at the lower back. Unfortunately, the graft was lost due to nosocomial pseudomonas infection. We applied acetic acid 3% and polymyxin ointment for a week on the recipient site on the lower back, and a new skin biopsy was performed for culture which was negative. A second split-thickness graft from the lateral side of the same thigh was used to reconstruct the lower back which was successful . The patient and his parents were satisfied with the results and discharged from the hospital and maintained scheduled follow-up visits.