We report on a 46-year-old homosexual man who has been HIV seropositive since 1994, with a history of multiple undiagnosed episodes of osteo-articular pain with no elective localizations and always resolving after the assumption of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The patient's HAART regimen was tenofovir-entricitabine and lopinavir/ritonavir since 2008. He was also treated with fenofibrate and amisulpride at low dosage (50 mg 1 tablet QD). His viral load was undetectable since 2003, and the CD4+ T cell count 466 cells/μL in the last blood test before the time of this report. In April 2011 the patient performed lumbar spine and femoral neck DEXA (Dual-Energy X-ray Absorptiometry) for osteopenia screening. Lumbar spine DEXA showed: BMD = 1.043 g/cm2, T-score = -0.4, Z-score = -0.2; in the femoral neck DEXA: BMD = 0.868 g/cm2, T-score = -0.5, Z-score = 0.2. All of these values were within their normal limits.
Two months later, the patient came to our Clinic after 4 weeks of remittent fever with peaks of 38°C and signs of inflammation and progressive joint pain in the left lower limb. He was hospitalized and we carried out first level examinations: lower limbs x-ray and doppler ultrasound ruled out bone fractures and deep vein thrombosis. Multiple blood cultures resulted negative, while the markers of inflammation were elevated (ESR: 68 mm/h, normal range: 0-15; CRP: 9.24 mg/dL, normal range < 0.50). Interestingly, the x-ray images showed a focal bone loss localized in the left tibia [Figure Panel A]. Subsequently, the following laboratory test were performed: autoimmunity screening panel (Anti-Nuclear, Anti-Ro/SS-A, Anti-La/SS-B, Anti-smooth muscle, Anti-mitochondrial, Anti-liver kidney, and Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies), serologies for HCV, Rickettsiae, Coxiella bruneti, Brucella, Cryptococcal antigen, and Quantiferon TB-Gold. All the blood tests resulted negative. Notably, most of the patient's values of renal and tubular function (creatinine, urine inorganic phosphate levels, urine calcium: urine creatinine ratio) were within their normal ranges. So were most of the markers of bone metabolism (see Table ); only the levels of 25-OH vitamin D3 were below the physiological limits (9.4 ng/mL, normal values > 30 ng/mL).
We then planned a medication wash-out, together with more detailed investigations: I) a lower left limb nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) without contrast enhancement demonstrated focal alterations of the tibial diaphysis, likely linked to an inflammatory process [Figure Panel B]; II) a contrast enhancement NMR of the lower extremities revealed multiple millimetric contrast-enhanced cortico-subcortical abnormalities in the left tibia diaphysis [Figure Panel C]; III) a positron emission tomography - computed tomography (PET-CT) with [18 F] FDG, performed on June 2011, confirmed the presence of multiple areas of increased uptake in the diaphyseal cortex of the left tibia, that were not interpreted as neoplastic lesions but rather as inflammatory results. [Figure Panel D]; IV) multiple bone biopsies (which showed focal necrosis and remodeled lamellar bone tissue with interlamellar spaces occupied by fibrosis and round-oval elements not otherwise specified) were examined by two different and independent pathologists, definitely excluding a malignant disease.
The patient's clinical and biochemical conditions gradually improved, so we decided to reintroduce a new antiretroviral therapy with lamivudine-abacavir and lopinavir/ritonavir, opting for a TDF-free regimen. The patient underwent a biochemical follow-up 4 months after the hospitalization (Table ), but refused further imaging evaluations we proposed. He eventually recovered a good viro-immunological profile and did not complain about any osteo-articular pain thereafter.