A 29-year-old male was admitted on November 4th, 2016, due to recurring left knee pain, swelling and limited activity over 7 months. The patient had a history of being scratched by plants in March 2016 and received a penetrating wound from a thorn on the posterolateral side of his left knee and experienced symptoms of pain, warmth and swelling in the left knee joint. Treatments including antibiotics (cefazolin sodium and levofloxacin), intra-articular puncture with knee fluid aspiration and steroidal injection were performed repeatedly at a local hospital, and the symptoms were recurrent. The patient denied any prior physical diseases or infectious diseases including tuberculosis.
The physical examination showed the left knee was moderately swollen without effusion and the local skin temperature was slightly increase. The range of motion was − 3° to 90°. The floating patella test was positive while the drawer test and patella grinding test were negative. And these tests indicate presence of a knee joint effusion in the absence of meniscal tear. The MR imaging indicated bone marrow edema of the proximal tibia, distal femur and patella, posterior horn tears of the medial and lateral meniscus (III°), and joint effusion that confirmed the clinical diagnosis of purulent arthritis . The laboratory examination results showed that inflammatory markers were elevated: the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 77 mm/h and the concentration of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein was 61 mg/dL. There is no obvious abnormality in the patient’s immune test results, such asabsolute lymphocyte counts, HIV status and hepatitis serologies.
Surgical of the left knee with a synovectomy and meniscus repair under arthroscopy was performed on November 7th, 2016. Intraoperatively, a large amount of white pus was observed in the knee cavity, the synovium was massively hypertrophic and hyperemic, and the white area of the posterior horn of the lateral meniscus exhibited longitudinal tearing and was unstable. The medial meniscus, the crucial ligaments and the articular surfaces appeared normal. The pus and synovium samples were sent to be cultured for bacteria, fungus and tuberculosis. During the operation, the hyperplastic synovium was resected, a meniscus plasty was performed, the knee cavity was irrigated, and a drainage tube was placed.
Postoperatively, the left knee was irrigated with Gentamicin sulfate and other routine treatments were carried out for 5 days. After arthroscopic surgery, repeat MR imaging revealed joint swelling was reduced, the proximal tibia edema was improved, and the left lateral meniscus was repaired, while other conditions were similar to those in the first MR images . The culture results revealed an elevated nucleated cell count (4800 × 106/L) in the synovial fluid, and the results of bacteria and tuberculosis cultures were negative. The patient recovered routinely and was discharged on November 15th, 2016.
At the same time, the laboratory was still in the cultivation and identification of fungi.The process of fungal culture and identification is as follows. Two sabourand’s medium without antibiotics were used for fungal culture at 37 °C and 25 °C. The Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) technology provided by VITEK® ms of biomerie, France, was used for strain identification. Nearly fifteen days later, the clinical laboratory reported that the culture result of the patient’s operative sample revealed a Cryptococcus laurentii infection. The patient was immediately contacted and admitted again on December 12th, 2016, to treat the left knee fungal infection.
A physical examination showed the patient’s left knee was moderately swollen and warm, and more than 5 ml of yellow purulent fluid was withdrawn . The laboratory examination results showed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 24 mm/h, and level of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein was normal. Left knee digital radiography (DR) revealed obvious swelling of the soft tissue, and the bone was loose, indicating osteoporosis , bearing in mind that osteoporosis is associated with a deficiency in bearing the heavy load of the lower limbs.
According to the clear diagnosis of fungal infection and drug sensitivity, we held a consultation with specialists from the pharmacy department and made an initial treatment plan including 200 mg of intravenous (IV) voriconazole every 12 h (q12 h; 400 mg q12 h on the first day), debridement and irrigation of the left knee with amphotericin B until the infection was controlled and 400 mg of fluconazole per os (PO) q24 h maintained for 6 months to eradicate the infection.
The patient was treated with incision, debridement and irrigation of the left knee on December 15th. Intraoperatively, the knee cavity was filled with purulent, bloody liquid, the synovium was moderately hypertrophic and hyperemic, and there was severe inflammatory tissue hyperplasia on the articular surface of the anterior femoral condyle and joint space, but the cartilage appeared normal . Suction, resection and repeated irrigation with iodophors, hydrogen peroxide and normal saline in the knee joint were performed thoroughly, and 2 flushing tubes and 2 suction drainage tubes were placed in the knee joint. Postoperatively, an antifungal regimen was carried out.
After a week of intravenous voriconazole and knee irrigation with amphotericin B, a recheck of the inflammatory markers revealed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 28 mm/h, and the level of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein was 8.5 mg/dL. Then, we discontinued the knee irrigation. Two days later, yellow purulent liquid was drained out in the medial drainage tube, and the tube became obstructed . Considering the poorly controlled infection and the possibility of knee joint adhesion, a secondary incision, debridement and irrigation of the left knee was performed on December 27th. The intraoperative findings were similar to the first operation. A tissue sample was collected for culturing. The results of bacteria culture and drug sensitivity tests were negative, so the antifungal regimen and knee joint irrigation with amphotericin B were continued.
On January 6th, 2017, the skin around the drainage tube on the medial side of the left knee was a mild red color and swollen, the laboratory examination revealed an obviously elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (44 mm/h) and elevated levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (150.9 mg/dL). The drainage tubes were unobstructed and smooth. Considering that the elevation of the inflammatory markers might be associated with a cellulitis, IV clindamycin hydrochloride (0.45 g, q8 h) was administered for a week, and then IV clindamycin hydrochloride was discontinued and replaced with clindamycin palmitate hydrochloride dispersible tablets (150 mg PO qid). The medial flushing tube and drainage tube were removed, but the result of the bacteria culture of the skin sample was negative.
On January 11th, after almost a month of the antifungal regimen, the blood examination was repeated to analyze hepatic function and inflammatory markers. The results revealed that the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (29 mm/h) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein concentration (19.5 mg/dL) were lower than those observed during the previous examination result. The left knee joint irrigation was discontinued, intravenous voriconazole was also discontinued, fluconazole 400 mg IV q24 h was initiated, and the lateral flushing tube and drainage tube were maintained to continue draining the joint liquid. After two weeks of antibiotic treatment, the operative wound of the lateral drainage tube slightly effused a light-yellow liquid, so the liquid sample was sent for culture, and the result revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterobacter cloacae infections. According to the drug sensitivity tests, clindamycin palmitate hydrochloride dispersible tablets were discontinued and replaced with ciprofloxacin lactate (0.2 g IV q12 h). After another week of antibiotic treatment, the symptoms were noticeably improved, the knee joint had no swelling, and the operative wounds were healing without effusion but had some sligh pain , and the joint was able to be moved well.
The patient was discharged on January 30th, 2017, and an antifungal and antibacterial therapy of fluconazole (400 mg PO qd) and ciprofloxacin lactate were continued for 6 months and 3 weeks, respectively. Three months later, a physical examination showed that there was no swelling, pain or warmth of the left knee; the medial, middle and lateral operative wounds were healed well with no infection recurrence; and the range of motion of the left knee was 0–120° .The patient is very satisfied with the curative effect. See Table for details of the schematic representation of the timeline.