A 55-year-old Indian man employed in the armed forces presented to us with a 5-month history of progressive painful swelling of the right wrist and inability to extend his right thumb. The swelling gradually increased in size. The pain, a mild, dull aching, had started insidiously, and gradually worsened with time. There was no associated history of fever, loss of weight or appetite, night sweats, malaise or fatigue. There was no history of trauma, pain in other joints of the body, morning stiffness of the back or hand joints, or continuous use of vibratory tools. The patient had no history of previous illness suggestive of diabetes mellitus, injuries or surgery.
Physical examination revealed a well-looking man with a right wrist swelling. The swelling was non-tender, doughy in consistency, approximately 8 × 5 cm, non-compressible, extending proximal and distal to the wrist with positive cross-fluctuation. It was mobile at right angles to the plane of the wrist joint but not longitudinally present on the dorsolateral aspect of the wrist. Movements of the wrist were only limited and slightly painful at the extremes with crepitation felt in the swelling on movement of the joint. Extension of the thumb with palm down on a table was limited and weak at the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and interphalangeal (IP) joints indicating clinical signs of extensor pollicis longus rupture. There was no clinical evidence of chest infection or other joint involvement.
Laboratory findings showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 32 mm/hour and serum C-reactive protein was 12 mg/dl. A diagnosis of ganglion was established on fine needle aspiration cytology. Findings on chest X-rays were normal. Right wrist joint X-ray showed no significant findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right wrist joint revealed tenosynovitis of the extensor tendons .
The patient was operated on under local anesthestic and a curvilinear incision was made over the prominence of the swelling. Extensive drainage, widespread surgical debridement, irrigation, and synovectomy were performed. During the operation, multiple large melon seed bodies along the extensor tendons with adherent synovitis were found. The tendon of the extensor pollicis longus was found to be attached with a streak of fibrous tissue. The margins of the tendon were freshened and debrided and tendon transfer with extensor indices was performed. A below-elbow slab was applied with the wrist, MCP and IP joints of the thumb, in extension for 4 weeks. Intermittent mobilization with a splint during rest was applied for the following 2 weeks. Subsequently, the patient was freed of splintage and unhindered occupational activity was allowed after 3-4 months when the power in his thumb had reached near normal. Resected synovium and tissue were sent for histopathology.
Biopsy showed hyperplasia of the synovial lining epithelium. The underlying tissue exhibited vascular proliferation, acute and chronic inflammatory infiltrates, fibrin deposits and multiple epithelioid cell granulomas with minimal necrosis . Ziehl-Neelsen stain was positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and a positive culture for AFB was present on microbiological examination. Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive.
Antituberculous treatment was started as soon as the identification of M. tuberculosis was confirmed. The patient was prescribed 300 mg of isoniazid with 10 mg of pyridoxine, 800 mg of ethambutol, 750 mg of pyrazinamide twice daily and 600 mg of rifampicin daily for 2 months. He was evaluated monthly. The lesion was completely stable and no sign of infection was detected. Consequently, treatment with isoniazid and rifampicin was planned for an additional 10 months. Postoperatively, the patient had good extension of his thumb and was able to return to the high occupational demand of the armed forces.