An otherwise healthy 16-year-old Caucasian girl presented with a sudden onset of cramp like pain in the right lower abdomen. After examination, her gynecologist performed laparoscopy and found extreme varicosis of the internal genital tract but without further pathologic findings. To exclude thrombosis and consecutive collateral circulation, postoperative phlebography was done and showed excessive displacement of the inferior vena cava. A retroperitoneal tumor was suspected, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor measuring 14 × 10 × 14 cm in the right abdomen with a craniodorsal shift of the kidney. Laboratory parameters, including tumor markers (24-hour urinary catecholamines and metabolites, dopamine, serum and plasma α-fetoprotein, neuron-specific enolase (NSE), β-human chorionic gonadotropin) were within normal ranges.
Explorative laparotomy was performed, and the retroperitoneal tumor was resected. The tumor weighed 817 g, and macroscopic examination demonstrated a thinly encapsulated neoplasm. The diagnosis of a paraganglioma was confirmed by histologic and immunohistologic examinations. Because vascular invasion and focal infiltration of the fibrous capsule could be shown, it was an R1 marginal resection.
The postoperative course was uneventful, but because of the potential malignant behavior of extra-adrenal paragangliomas, Tc-99-MDP (Tc-99m-methylene diphosphonate) and I-123-MIBG (123 I-metaiodobenzylguanidine) scintigraphy was performed 10 and 21 days postoperatively. An increased uptake in the first lumbar vertebra was noted and MRI showed a lesion in the left dorsal third of the L1 vertebral body . The supposed metastatic paraganglioma was confirmed by computed tomography- (CT-) guided needle biopsy. Chemotherapy was applied using a neuroblastoma protocol (NB 90 of the German Society of Paediatric Oncology and Haematology).
Five months later, combined posteroanterior en bloc resection of the L1 vertebra was performed. Because of partial infiltration of the left pedicle, it was left en bloc with the vertebral body . Reconstruction was performed with posterior transpedicular screw instrumentation and anterior reconstruction using a modular cage filled with autologous morselized rib grafts . Macroscopically, the cut surface of the vertebral body showed a reddish tumor in the left dorsolateral part of the vertebral body . Histologic morphologic features similar to the primary tumor were found, and because of the penetration of the posterior cortex with intact tumor capsule (but microscopic focal infiltration), the resection was considered marginal as well. The tumor cells did not show any response to preoperative chemotherapy as found in the macroscopy and microscopy pathology. The postoperative course was again completely uneventful.
Because of the marginal resection and the poor response to preoperative chemotherapy, postoperative radiation therapy was added with a dose of 50 Gy. Ten years postoperatively, the now 26-year-old female patient is in excellent general condition without signs of local recurrence or further distant metastasis. Concerning instrumented fusion, no signs of lysis around the pedicle screws or signs of cage dislocation have been detected . CT has revealed that the autologous bone within the cage is mineralized and has most probably fused with the adjacent endplates of the T12 and L2 vertebral bodies, as far as this can be evaluated with this or any other imaging technique.