A 27-year-old male patient who suffered from severe lower back pain and left lower extremity pain due to lumbar sprain a month ago. The patient accepted some conservative treatments such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and bed rest. However, the symptoms did not alleviate, or even worsened. He experienced the left lower extremity weakness, and then he could not walk due to progressive symptoms. No further treatment was adopted. The movement was limited, and the patient failed to take part in social activities or even look after himself. Therefore, the patient was admitted to our hospital for treatment. He denied having a similar medical history and a family history of genetic disorders. Physical examination revealed muscle weakness in the left lower extremity, especially left ankle dorsiflexion and great toe dorsiflexion. The left-side straight leg raising and femoral nerve stretch tests were positive. The bowel and bladder functions were normal. Lumbar computed tomography (CT) showed that intervertebral disc herniation, loss of disc height, and osteophyte hyperplasia at the L2–L3 level . Lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated that extruded intervertebral disc, loss of continuity of the PLL, and intradural masses at the L2–L3 level . The masses with T1-weighted and T2-weighted signals equaled to those of intervertebral discs. ILDH was preoperative diagnosis on the basis of medical history, symptoms, physical examination, and radiographic findings. Its differential diagnosis, such as intradural tumor and cyst, still needs to be considered. A laminectomy was performed under general anesthesia. The dura sac in the spinal canal was exposed by removing the ligamentum flavum. Extruded intervertebral disc was not found in the extradural space, but there were tight adhesions between the PLL and the ventral dural sac. A durotomy of the dorsal dural sac was completed and the nerve rootlets were separated. There was a mass revealed disc-like substance in the dura sac . A defect of the ventral dural sac was observed after the mass was removed. The dorsal and ventral dural sacs were sutured continuously. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage was not discovered, and there was no obvious compression of the nerve root and dural sac after careful inspection. Transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion and transpedicular screw fixation were performed to prevent the recurrence of ILDH and spinal instability. Subsequently, the incision was sutured and the drainage was placed. Antibiotics were injected intravenously for 3 days after the surgery. Postoperative radiographs revealed that the extruded intervertebral disc was removed and the position of internal fixation was good . The patient's pain improved significantly, postoperatively. The patient was followed up by outpatient review. Lower extremity weakness gradually improved, and no complications such as infection, cerebrospinal fluid leakage, or epidural hematoma were found during the follow-up period. Eight months postoperatively, the patient could return to normal life, walk freely, and participate in social activities with only slight lower back pain. Physical examination showed the muscle strength of the left lower extremity was significantly improved compared with that before surgery. The left-side straight leg raising and femoral nerve stretch tests were negative. The visual analogue scale score and the Oswestry disability index significantly improved from 7 and 72 preoperatively to 2 and 18, respectively. The patient was satisfied with the efficacy.