A 16 years-old female patient was admitted to the hospital in September 2018. Six months before admission, the patient had been depressed after an argument with classmates at school and had frequent dizziness, slowness, and inattention at home. She could hear someone scolding her out of thin air, felt that her stomach is “talking” and will spread her ideas to her classmates, suspected that her classmates were discussing her affairs, and needed to repeatedly ask others to ensure that her classmates did not hear her swear words. Gradually, she became inattentive, talked to herself, did not take the initiative to communicate with classmates or family members, often felt nervous and afraid, slept poorly at night, and her academic performance decreased significantly.
Since childhood, she had been introverted, sensitive, cared about others’ opinions, and had almost no interests. Her parents divorced 4 years ago, and she lived with her mother; however, the patient had good support from family members.
The patient was in good health, had never smoked or consumed alcohol, and had no family history of mental disorders. She did not report any major adverse life events. Both the patient and her family denied any substance abuse. She had no history of violent, agitated, or suicidal behavior during her illness.
Routine blood tests did not reveal any unusual findings. No abnormalities were found in liver, kidney, and metabolic function; coagulation tests; transfusion; immunity; routine urine examination; and procalcitonin and adrenocorticotropic hormone levels. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed a 2.5 × 1.3 cm hypointense shadow with clear borders in the left middle skull base and compression of the left temporal lobe. There was no ventricular pools enlargement or midline structures displacement. An arachnoid cyst was observed at the base of the left middle skull. After consultation with a neurosurgeon, no special treatment was suggested for the findings. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein levels and white blood cell counts were also examined. The D2R antibody titer detected by cell-based assays in the serum sample showed a ratio of 1:32, whereas the CSF sample showed negative findings. The other 15 autoimmune encephalitis antibodies, including anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) and anti-contactin-associated protein (CASPR), paraneoplastic antibodies, and oligoclonal bands, were negative in both samples. Thyroid ultrasound showed a nodule in the right lobe of the thyroid, which could be nodular goiter. Cardiac, abdominal, urological, and gynecological ultrasonography revealed no abnormalities. Chest computed tomography, electrocardiography, and electroencephalography did not show any abnormalities. The results of hormone examination showed a prolactin level of 13.8 μg/L and estradiol level of 107.4 pmol/L.
The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) score was 92, Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD) score was 8 , Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) score was 9 , and Hypomania Checklist (HCL-32) score was 7 . This suggests that the patient had no obvious symptoms of depression, anxiety, or hypomanic episodes.
The patient was diagnosed with schizophrenia according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) .
After diagnosis, the medications were gradually adjusted to a maximum dose of aripiprazole (15 mg twice daily) and olanzapine (10 mg twice daily) to control the psychiatric symptoms. Modified electric convulsive therapy was administered 10 times during hospitalization. However, the treatment efficacy was poor. At that time, the patient has been titrated to the maximum dosage of medications, yet the therapeutic response remains inadequate. Given this situation, it is imperative to refine the treatment plan. Consequently, genetic testing was considered indispensable for making a well-informed decision regarding the most suitable treatment drugs. Consequently, we proceeded directly with genetic testing to identify the appropriate treatment drugs. The antipsychotic drug metabolism gene test and DRD2 gene test results suggested that the patient might response better to olanzapine, clozapine, risperidone, and aripiprazole; with a low risk of weight gain. Furthermore, the HTR1A gene test results suggested that she had a high chance of improvement of negative symptoms with several of these drugs. Patient DNA was genotyped using Mass ARRAY time-of-flight mass spectrometry (Sequenom Inc., United States) and real-time PCR (ABI VIIA7 real-time PCR Instrument, ABI Inc., United States). The gene test results are presented in and .
Olanzapine and clozapine are mainly metabolized and cleared by CYP1A2 metabolizing enzyme. The CYP1A2 gene test results suggest that the patient was a CYP1A2 fast metabolizer with normal metabolic rate and normal sensitivity to olanzapine and clozapine. The dopamine receptor encoded by DRD2 gene and pentraxin 1A receptor encoded by HTRIA gene are the targets of olanzapine and clozapine. Risperidone and aripiprazole are mainly metabolized and cleared by CYP2D6-metabolizing enzymes. The CYP2D6 gene test results suggest that the patients was a CYP2D6 intermediate metabolizer, with reduced metabolism rate and increased sensitivity to risperidone and aripiprazole, and had an increased risk of neurological adverse effects, suggesting that the drug dose should be adjusted in conjunction with drug quasi-monitoring, and that the patients should be alerted to the occurrence of adverse drug reactions.
The active ingredient of paliperidone is an active metabolite of risperidone. Its pharmacological effect is similar to that of risperidone but it has a more direct effect. Considering the patient’s age and other factors, paliperidone extended-release tablets (3 mg in the morning and 9 mg in the evening) and olanzapine tablets (5 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening) were finally used to control psychiatric symptoms. After continuous drug treatment , the patient’s psychiatric symptoms improved significantly, and her sleep improved. She had occasional verbal hallucinations and sense of insecurity and was discharged in October 2018. The drug plasma level examination results at the time of discharge indicated that the patient’s blood concentration of paliperidone was 48 ng/mL, which falls within the recommended treatment reference range outlined in the consensus guidelines for monitoring drugs used in neuropsychopharmacologic therapy, ranging from 20 to 60 ng/mL .
After being discharged from the hospital, the patient insisted on a monthly outpatient follow-up. During the patient’s continuous follow-up for more than 2 years, her treating physician found an interesting phenomenon. The patient’s symptoms fluctuated every time during her menstrual cycle, and the patient complained that she was “back to the state she was in before hospitalization.” She also had a significant weight gain, gaining 8 kg in approximately half a year after discharge. Her blood test results showed prolactin level of 34.6 μg/L (normal range 4–23 μg/L). The patient complained that she had been taking her medication as prescribed and denied any increase or decrease in the dosage or missed doses. To quantify these symptoms, in addition to blood monitoring for hormone levels (prolactin and estradiol) , we used the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale (PANSS) to assess the severity of the patient’s symptoms at each outpatient follow-up visit. Throughout the treatment period, paliperidone (6 mg twice daily) was used as the main medication in combination with clozapine (50 mg twice daily). The treating physician adjusted the type and dose of medication according to the patient’s symptoms; however, a stable effect was not achieved, and the symptoms fluctuated periodically with the menstrual cycle. The main medications used during the follow-up period after the patient’s discharge from the hospital, with each medication adjusted as a treatment regimen are presented in –.
The patient, an adolescent female diagnosed with schizophrenia, experienced worsening psychiatric symptoms during each menstrual period. The blood concentration of paliperidone ranged from 12 to 18 ng/mL when her menstrual cycle began. However, outside of her menstrual period, the plasma level of paliperidone ranged from 30 to 55 ng/mL. The patient was currently receiving the maximum therapeutic dose of paliperidone as approved by the medication’s label, and the treating physician opted not to further increase the dosage. There were several reasons for this decision. Firstly, the patient and her parents were reluctant to exceed the maximum dose specified on the label. Additionally, the attending physician believed that even with an escalation of paliperidone dosage, achieving the desired plasma concentration during the patient’s menstrual cycle might remain challenging.
Finally, the patient had been taking antipsychotic drugs for a long time, which led to elevated prolactin and significant weight gain. These factors, along with the stigma of adhering to medication during school, may have contributed to the patient’s poor medication adherence. On a follow-up visit in August 2020, her attending physician attempted to adjust her treatment after communication with the patient and her family, and after obtaining informed consent, replaced oral paliperidone with a chemically identical, longer-lasting, and more stable long-acting injection of paliperidone palmitate. The starting dose was 150 mg, and 1 week later, the injection was administered intramuscularly at a monthly dose of 100 mg. After switching to the injectable preparation, the patient’s condition was stable, and so far, no further psychiatric symptoms have occurred for more than 2 years, either at ordinary times or during the menstrual cycle. The blood concentration of paliperidone ranged from 25 to 53 ng/mL. Currently, the patient’s condition is well controlled.
The trend of the patient’s scores on the corresponding PANSS scale over the course of more than 3 years of follow-up is shown in . The scores decreased significantly after the medication was adjusted to paliperidone injectable injection (30 months after discharge), indicating that the patient’s overall psychiatric symptoms were significantly controlled.