The patient is a 3 year old male who experienced intermittent swelling of left knee joint with limp for half a year. The patient had low fever in the afternoon, night sweats, and crying at night. The parents also complained that the patient had significant weight loss in the past 6 months. There is no similar cases in patient’s family. Laboratory test: Blood Regular Test: White Blood Cells WBC:9.98*109/L, Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR): 15 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP): (−), Procalcitonin(−), T-SPOT(−), Anti-tuberculosis antibody (−),Tuberculin purified protein derivative (TPPD): (−), Chest X-ray(−). Ultrasound showed effusion in the suprapatellar capsule of the left knee, X-ray showed the change of the space of the left knee joint , Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed abnormal signal focus in the suprapatellar capsule and the knee joint cavity, a small amount of effusion in the left knee joint cavity, and multiple nodules in the left popliteal fossa .
After been carefully accessment, the patient received surgical treatment . The operation was performed in supine position via anteromedial approach. After knee joint capsule open, a large number of loose bodies overflowed from the suprapatellar capsule and joint cavity. The synovium in the joint cavity was purplish red. The joint cavity was filled with loose bodies and was taken out The degenerative synovium was excised. The size of the loose body was different: (0.3 cm × 0.3 cm × 0.2 cm ~ 2.0 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm) it is white or milky white, the surface is smooth and translucent , the texture is tough, cartilage like and elastic, a few loose bodies are connected with the synovium in pedicle shape, and solid changes can be seen inside the loose body. Postoperative pathological examination present both pathological change of synovial chondromatosis and synovial tuberculosis (Captured by Mshot microscope digital camera MD50 with Logene PathQC imaging software, Fig. e), SC forms loose body in knee joint and synovial tuberculosis shows a tubercular granuloma with Langerhans giant cells and hyperplasia of epithelioid cells . Along with Tuberculosis DNA (TB-DNA) test (+) confirms the coexistence of synovial chondromatosis combined with synovial tuberculosis of knee joint. After surgery the patient was told to receive anti-tuberculosis treatment for 1 year and long-leg splint for 6 weeks. After 6 months follow-ups, knee swelling and claudication get totally recovered and the gait of patient recover back to normal.