The patient was a 60-year-old man with cT2bN2M0 (Sq, 45 mm, LN#4L) . Bronchoscopy showed a tumor protruding from the left lower bronchus and invading the left main bronchus ; however, a tissue biopsy from the second carina was negative. Pulmonary function testing prior to ICRT revealed that the vital capacity (VC) was 3330 ml (%VC: 82.4%), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 2642 ml (%FEV1: 80.2%), and % carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of the lung (%DLCO) was 64.2%. After ICRT (carboplatin/paclitaxel + 40 Gy), he developed moderate radiation pneumonitis and ipsilateral pulmonary artery emboli from deep venous thrombosis, which required medical treatment with oral steroids and a novel oral anticoagulant drug . Re-evaluation of bronchoscopy and positron emission tomography–computed tomography suggested disappearance of FDG uptake by lymph node #4L . Although the preoperative pulmonary function could not be adequately evaluated due to the severe cough caused by radiation pneumonitis, he was considered unable to tolerate pneumonectomy because the 6-min walk test revealed marked desaturation on exercise (lowest oxygen saturation was 85%). Therefore, he was scheduled to undergo left lower lobe sleeve resection rather than left pneumonectomy. Left lower sleeve resection required pulmonary arterioplasty of A6 with side-clamping. After dissection of mediastinal lymph nodes #4L and #7, bronchial anastomosis was performed with 4-0 polydioxanone, and a pedicled pericardial fat pad was interposed between the pulmonary artery and bronchial anastomosis . Pathological examination revealed complete remission (Ef3). The postoperative course was uneventful. Heparinization was restarted plus 5 mg of oral steroids on postoperative day (POD) 1; heparin was replaced by an oral anticoagulant after drain removal on POD 12. Although discharge was planned on POD 17, sudden massive hemoptysis occurred, requiring emergency one-lung intubation with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and muscle relaxants. Enhanced CT revealed a PPA and severe right lung damage due to inhalation of a considerable amount of hemoptysis; as surgical intervention including left completion pneumonectomy was considered high risk, emergency endovascular coil embolization with the use of N-butyl cyanoacrylate was conducted in the sutured A6 branch . Bronchoscopy revealed massive endobronchial occlusion due to thrombi, and ischemic changes and dehiscence of half of the anastomosis site in the left bronchus . Daily endobronchial toileting resulted in gradual improvement of oxygenation, which enabled the removal of ECMO on POD 34. The bronchial anastomosis site gradually regenerated conservatively , but hemoptysis recurred on POD 114. Bronchoscopic examination under ECMO demonstrated that the endovascular coils had partially migrated into the left main bronchus and deteriorated the bronchial healing. The pulsatile pulmonary artery was stuck in part of the bronchial anastomosis site, which suggested impending rupture . We planned a completion pneumonectomy; however, the patient was deemed unable to tolerate pneumonectomy because the considerable amount of hemoptysis had caused further deterioration of the remaining lung, and the ECMO had caused thrombocytopenia and acute renal failure requiring continuous hemodiafiltration. As an alternative to pneumonectomy, palliative endovascular embolization of the left main pulmonary artery was conducted using an Amplatzer vascular plug (St. Jude Medical, MN, USA) to totally disrupt the left pulmonary arterial flow . Although refractory pneumonia with empyema due to insufficient intrapulmonary circulation occurred, this treatment prevented hemoptysis recurrence and enabled withdrawal from ECMO and continuous hemodiafiltration. The patient was discharged to home without oxygen inhalation on POD 359. No late complications due to left pulmonary embolization were seen at 1 year after discharge. His current lung function tests revealed a VC of 1570 ml (%VC: 39.0%), FEV1 of 1360 ml (%FEV1: 41.6%), and %DLCO of 26.7%.