A 94-year-old female was presented at the emergency department after an unwitnessed fall at home. She still lived on her own and mobilized inside her apartment with help of a walking aid. Her medical history reports congestive heart failure, atrial fibrillation, and hypercholesterolemia, for which she used a beta-blocker, an ACE-inhibitor, a coumarin derivative, and a statin. Furthermore, in 2011, she had been diagnosed with hyperuricemia and gout, for which she received allopurinol.
The ambulance reported that at the time of their arrival, the patient was conscious. She had fallen when she was alone at home, and her family was able to reach her by phone after one hour. There was no (witnessed) loss of consciousness; however, she suffered from retrograde amnesia and there was suspected head injury. Due to the initial estimation of a low-energy fall, the patient walked to the gurney with assistance of the ambulance nurses; however, after she started complaining of back pain, it was decided to immobilize the spine by transporting her in a vacuum mattress. During transport to the hospital, blood pressure decreased down to 90/50 mmHg, which initially responded to a fluid challenge with 500 ml of Ringer’s lactate. At the emergency department, she underwent a trauma survey according to the principles of the Advanced Trauma and Life Support. Upon arrival, her blood pressure was normal (112/59 mmHg) with tachycardia (137/min), tachypnea (30/min), and she was fully conscious (GCS 15). Within a few minutes, oxygen saturation and blood pressure significantly decreased to 90% and 82/41 mmHg respectively, whereupon a non-rebreathing mask with 15 L oxygen was applied and fluid resuscitation was started using 2 L Ringer’s lactate under pressure. Blood pressure remained low and her consciousness decreased. Plain radiographs of the chest and pelvis showed no abnormalities that could explain a hypovolemic shock. Laboratory findings showed a decreased hemoglobin of 4.4 mmol/L with an INR of 6.0. Prothrombin Complex Concentrate, vitamin K, and tranexamic acid were administered to attenuate blood loss and two units of packed red blood cells were given. Focused Assessment with Sonography in Trauma (FAST) did not show intra-abdominal free fluid. Neurological examination showed a complete paralysis of the lower extremities. A full-body computed tomography angiography (CTA) scan was performed, which showed a completely unstable Chance-type fracture through both the vertebral body and posterior complex of L2, with significant anterior distraction resulting in hyperlordosis. In addition, a large active bleeding was seen, extending to the retroperitoneum and the epidural space . The extent of the retroperitoneal hematoma caused a mass effect with ventral dislocation of the right kidney . In addition, a significant calcification of the anterior ligament of the spine was observed . No intracerebral or intrathoracic post-traumatic abnormalities were detected.
After CT imaging, her blood pressure kept decreasing despite resuscitation with in total 3 L of Ringer’s lactate and two units of packed red blood cells. The family was called, and it was decided to make a do-not-resuscitate decision. Given the age, prolonged duration of hypovolemia and subsequent hypoperfusion of the brain, in combination with the neurological and CTA findings, further treatment was discontinued. The patient deceased several minutes after discontinuation of treatment. Figure presents a global timeline of events.
The exact origin of the bleeding is difficult to pinpoint, and this degree of bleeding is rare in case of a vertebral fracture. Based on the CT images, no further injury to the abdominal aorta, inferior vena cava, or the lumbar arteries was observed. The location of the bleeding most likely concerned the cancellous bone of the vertebrae, and the severity most probably has been increased by the high INR due to anticoagulant use. In addition, signs of extensive calcifications of the anterior ligament suspected of diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis were seen on both CT and previous conventional lumbar spine imaging in 2016 .