A 35-year-old man with a childhood history of asthma was accidentally exposed to NO2 fumes while cleaning a boiler. He was obese, with a height of 160 cm and a weight of 87 kg. Cough and dyspnea occurred approximately 3 h after exposure. He presented to the emergency department in the previous hospital the next morning, 17 h after exposure.
On admission, he was conscious, but his respiratory rate was 32 breaths/min and oxygen saturation was 87% on ambient air. He was breathing effortfully and coarse crackles were heard in both lungs. Oxygen administration was started immediately, and oxygen saturation increased to 98% at 10 L/min of oxygen. Arterial blood gases showed a pH of 7.39, PaCO2 38.6 mmHg, PaO2 151.4 mmHg, 23.0 mmol/L, and BE −1.5 mmol/L. Chest computed tomography (CT) was performed immediately thereafter, and the CT image showed bilateral ground-glass opacities . Echocardiography showed normal cardiac function. These findings indicated lung injury and ARDS caused by NO2 inhalation. He was intubated and mechanically ventilated due to difficulty in breathing 1 h after arrival at the hospital. The ventilator settings were FIO2 1.0, PEEP 18 cmH2O, inspiratory pressure 42 cmH2O, and respiratory rate 35 breaths/min. The arterial blood gases showed pH 7.20, PaCO2 78.9 mmHg, PaO2 68.4 mmHg, 30.1 mmol/L, and BE −0.7 mmol/L. The post-intubation chest X-ray showed diffuse infiltration throughout all lung fields . Because hypoxemia and hypercapnia were not ameliorated despite ventilator management, the decision was made to introduce V-V ECMO. Our hospital was contacted and an ECMO team was dispatched. V-V ECMO was introduced 6.5 h after the patient's arrival using a MERA centrifugal blood pump system (Senko Medical Instrument Mfg. Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan). A 25 Fr, 38 cm drainage cannula and a 19 Fr, 15 cm return cannula were percutaneously inserted into the right internal carotid vein and left femoral vein, respectively. The initial ECMO flow was 4.5 L/min with an oxygen flow of 6.0 L/min.
He was transferred to our hospital and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), and a neuromuscular blocking agent (NMBA) was continuously administered. The ventilator settings were set to FIO2 0.4, PEEP 10 cmH2O, inspiratory pressure 10 cmH2O, and respiratory rate 10 breaths/min for lung-protective ventilation. Methylprednisolone (mPSL) 1.0 mg/kg/day was also administered. The NMBA was discontinued on days 3 and 4 but was resumed due to high respiratory effort. This was likely a result of inadequate improvement in chest X-ray and dynamic lung compliance. As a response, NMBA was reintroduced, and lung-protective ventilation and mPSL administration were sustained, with the NMBA ultimately discontinued on day 6. The dose of mPSL was reduced to 0.5 mg/kg/day on day 8. The chest X-ray and dynamic lung compliance gradually improved; however, there was an elevated inflammatory response and antibiotics were started for ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) on day 8. The treatment for VAP was successful, leading to further improvement in lung function. Therefore, an ECMO weaning trial was performed on day 10, and the ECMO was weaned off on day 11 without any ECMO-related complications. He was extubated on day 12 and discharged from the ICU on day 15. After rehabilitation, he was discharged home on day 20. Two months have passed without any sequelae. The course of treatment and the laboratory results of the patient at each time point were shown in Figure and Table .