A 57-year-old Chinese man with a past medical history of ESCC presented to our hospital with right side dysfunction of the hand and leg on December 28, 2020. After obtaining a detailed clinical history and reviewing the patient’s medical records, we learned that he was initially admitted to the hospital on May 11, 2019, and diagnosed with ESCC and right adrenal gland metastasis (cT3N1M1, stage IVB, according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer, 8th edition) . After that diagnosis, the patient was treated with multiple cycles of chemotherapy alone or combined with immunotherapy; treatments included docetaxel and cisplatin, gemcitabine, and cisplatin combined with nivolumab, and docetaxel and nedaplatin. During these treatment periods, the patient never underwent radiotherapy. After his presentation to our team, he underwent an MRI, which revealed a solitary brain metastasis located in the left side of the parietal lobe; subsequently, gamma knife radiosurgery was performed. Then, a CT scan was performed and showed thickening of the middle esophageal wall (maximum diameter of ~5 cm), swollen lymph nodes in the mediastinum, and a swollen nodule in the right adrenal gland. Laboratory tests showed an alanine aminotransferase level of 233 U/L and an aspartate aminotransferase level of 95 U/L. To exclude liver metastases, an abdominal MRI was performed; the imaging confirmed right adrenal metastasis. The diagnosis was updated to ESCC with mediastinal lymph node, brain, and right adrenal metastases (rT4bN1M1, stage IVB, according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer, 8th edition) . Because of the sizeable esophageal tumor and the abnormal liver function, we first administered local therapy instead of systemic therapy. The patient received intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) of the esophagus and lymph nodes with planning dose fractionation of 60 Gy in 30 fractions, five days a week. After the 26th treatment, however, the patient refused any additional radiotherapy.
On February 16, 2021, he was admitted to our hospital again. On physical examination, the patient was noted to have a painless 2-cm anterior abdominal wall swelling and a 2-cm swelling of the left posterior chest wall. The swollen skin did not have an abnormal color. An ultrasound scan demonstrated a 1.8×1.0×1.3 cm lesion along the left upper quadrant of the abdomen and a 1.9×1.2×1.5 cm lesion in the left posterior thorax . All the lesions were within the superficial fascia and without dermal involvement. A CT scan confirmed the ultrasound diagnosis and showed a new finding of multiple lung metastases. On excision biopsy, the subcutaneous mass of the left abdomen proved to be metastatic ESCC . The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for CK5/6 and P40, compatible with squamous cell carcinoma . Moreover, the tumor cells were also positive for synaptophysin, which indicated neuroendocrine differentiation . Because the MRI showed progression of the brain metastases, the patient again underwent gamma knife radiosurgery. The patient had previously received docetaxel combined with cisplatin and gemcitabine combined with cisplatin, so he was treated at this time with camrelizumab (200 mg on day 1) and anlotinib (12 mg on days 2–15). Because of progressive backache, a PET/CT scan was performed in March 10, 2021, to confirm whether other organ metastases had occurred; the scan revealed multiple areas of fluorodeoxyglucose uptake and foci in the esophagus, lung, liver, bone, and right adrenal gland, and in the lymph nodes in the mediastinum, abdomen, and bilateral axillary areas. In addition, an intensely hypermetabolic lesion was localized in the left posterior thorax (SUVmax=20.3) . The last time the patient presented to our outpatient service was March 11, 2021, to obtain oxycodone hydrochloride sustained-release tablets; after this time, he was lost to follow-up.