A 24-year-old, previously healthy Sri Lankan male was referred for evaluation of generalized lymphadenopathy. He also had evening pyrexia, weight loss, poor appetite and splenomegaly. Cervical and axillary lymph nodes later developed in to discharging sinuses . Repeated lymph node biopsies showed sheets of macrophages packed with organisms in the absence of granulomata . Ziehl Neelsen , Wade Fite and Giemsa stains revealed numerous red coloured acid-fast bacilli within foamy histiocytes. Grocott stain was weakly positive. However Slit skin smear for leprosy was negative and tuberculosis (TB), fungal and bacterial cultures of the lymph node and bone marrow did not reveal any growth. Tuberculosis interferon gamma release assays and TB Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were also negative. Computerized tomography (CT) scan showed splenomegaly and multiple paraaortic and inguinal lymphadenopathy. Antinuclear antibodies were negative and HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) 1 and 2 antibodies and P24 antigen were 2 times negative in 3 months apart. Due to the unusual presentation, the patient was investigated for possible immunodeficiency with flowcytometry analysis, which showed extremely low T and B cell counts and immunofixation revealed low immunoglobulin levels .
As the condition deteriorated, he was commenced on empirical anti-TB treatment (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyridoxime and ethambutol) with atypical mycobacterial coverage (intravenous amikacin and imipenum for 6 weeks with oral clarithromycin and ciprofloxacin). Although he responded initially, 8 months into treatment he relapsed with recurrence of lymphadenopathy and watery diarrhoea. Colonoscopy revealed multiple small polyps and ulcers throughout the colon extending up to the ileum , which was confirmed to be cytomegalovirus by PCR and successfully treated with ganciclovir. Positron emission tomography scan guided biopsies of the gut and lymph nodes confirmed mycobacterial spindle cell pseudo-tumours. Then we sequenced PCR products from the lymph node biopsies and IS6110 PCR assay was negative and and HSP65 PCR assay was positive. IS6110 is uniquely found in Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex and hsp65 is positive in Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex and nontuberculosis mycobacteria . Later the culture grew Mycobacterium Simiae. After seeking advice from an expert centre, his condition was later diagnosed as adult onset immunodeficiency due to anti- interferon – gamma autoantibodies. Anti- interferon – gamma autoantibodies were measured by Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) method after serially diluting samples from the patient and control and was positive was positive at 1:30000. He is currently on a combination of daily clarithromycin, ciprofloxacin, linezolid with monthly 2 g/kg/intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment, to which, he had a remarkable clinical response with complete resolution of lymphadenopathy and healing of sinuses . The immunoglobulin levels returned to normal levels, except Ig A fraction and CD4 counts improved . Immuno suppressants or biologics (Rituximab) were not considered due to the fear of dissemination of infection. Time line is given in the Fig. .