An obese 63-year-old African American woman presented to our hospital with sudden onset of bilateral facial and tongue swelling associated with progressive shortness of breath. Her medical history included asthma, hypertension, congestive heart failure, obstructive sleep apnea, and obesity. She has minor allergies to certain fruits but no prior history of anaphylaxis. Her initial vital signs were blood pressure 127/67 mmHg, pulse rate 98 beats/minute, and 100% oxygen saturation on 6L nasal cannula with a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute. Immediate therapy in the emergency department included epinephrine, diphenhydramine, and solumedrol for presumed anaphylaxis; intubation; and mechanical ventilation. Extensive laryngeal edema as well as a dilated, unresponsive right pupil were pertinent positive findings on physical examination. An emergent CT scan of her head showed bilateral effaced sulci with both small ventricles and basilar cisterns. These findings were consistent with increased intracranial pressure (ICP) . The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Initial ABG analysis revealed severe respiratory acidosis, which was corrected over the course of several hours . During her initial hours in the ICU, she experienced persistent respiratory acidosis despite being on controlled volume ventilation at a rate of 12 beats/minute. Serial ABG analyses were monitored, and her respiratory rate was adjusted as shown in Table . A neurosurgeon was consulted, agreed with the CT interpretation, and recommended no surgical therapy. She was continued on scheduled methylprednisolone, diphenhydramine, and albuterol in the ICU as well. Mannitol was not administered, as she had no history or laboratory indications suggesting that an osmotic imbalance was causing her edema. Her physical examination continued to show a dilated, unresponsive right pupil with a pinpoint, yet reactive, left pupil. Disc margins were blurred bilaterally without hemorrhages or exudates. She remained unresponsive.
Eight hours after intubation, the patient's physical and neurological findings were unchanged. Nine and one-half hours later the patient's right pupil was noted to be 5 mm in diameter and was now reactive. The left pupil was unchanged. Follow-up head CT performed at this time was normal without cerebral edema. After 24 hours her pupils had become symmetrically equal and reactive. The remainder of her neurological examination remained normal. She awoke and was extubated. MRI of the brain revealed no pathology.
Two weeks following her discharge from the hospital, she was seen in follow-up as an outpatient in our neurosurgery department. She denied having headaches or double vision. Her cranial nerve examination, deep tendon reflexes, and bilateral motor sensory function were normal, as was the assessment of her cognitive function.