A 22-year-old woman with Raynaud’s syndrome, anti-RNP antibody positivity, autoimmune arthritis, and a skin rash was diagnosed with MCTD. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and sulfasalazine achieved insufficient disease control. Thus, she was admitted to a local hospital with a 2-day history of fever, chills, sore throat, and cough and a 1-day history of chest pain on inhalation. She had no contact with persons with coronavirus disease 2019 and had tested negative for the causative virus on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a mildly decreased left ventricular systolic function, with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50%, and small pericardial effusion. Blood tests revealed elevated troponin-I, creatinine kinase, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. Computed tomography revealed mild pulmonary oedema, systemic lymphadenopathy, and hepatosplenomegaly. Cardiac T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging revealed a slightly high signal intensity in the mid-to-apical myocardium. The next day, although clinical symptoms did not change significantly, the LVEF decreased drastically from 50 to 20%; thus, fulminant myocarditis was suspected and she was transferred to our institution.
At admission to our institution, her blood pressure, pulse, and body temperature were 102/68 mmHg, 124 b.p.m., and 37.7°C, respectively. Physical examination revealed erythema on the cheeks, painful mild erosion on the hard palate, and sausage-like oedema on the fingertips. No cardiac and pulmonary murmur, jugular venous distention, leg oedema, hair loss, skin hardening, and ulceration were noted. Electrocardiography showed a narrow QRS sinus tachycardia and no significant ST-T changes. TTE revealed a decreased biventricular systolic dysfunction (LVEF, 26%; tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, 13.0 mm; and tricuspid lateral annular peak systolic wave velocity, 7.3 cm/s), an absence of left ventricular hypertrophy and valvular disease, and a small pericardial effusion (; Supplementary material online, Video S1). Coronary angiography revealed no significant stenosis. Under 3.5γ of dobutamine, Swan-Ganz catheter revealed a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and cardiac index of 3 mmHg and 2.65 L/min/m2, respectively . Right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy revealed mild inflammatory cell infiltration in the cardiac muscle and absence of eosinophils, giant cells, and granulomas. These findings, though consistent with myocarditis, were deemed not severe enough for a fulminant myocarditis diagnosis . Laboratory findings revealed increased levels of troponin-I, creatinine kinase, CRP, hepatic enzymes, ferritin, triglyceride, and sIL-2 receptor, with atypical lymphocyte expression. Tests for anti-nuclear and anti-RNP antibodies were positive, while tests for anti-cardiolipin, anti-DNA, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (C-ANCA and P-ANCA) were negative. Serological tests for viruses, including the Epstein–Barr virus and cytomegalovirus, and PCR test for Respiratory Syncytial Virus, Parvovirus B19, Influenza A and B were also negative . Atypical lymphocytes in the peripheral blood suggested a temporary viral infection or a complication of the haemophagocytic syndrome; hence, we initially avoided steroid treatment to prevent interference with the patient’s condition. However, the bone marrow test was negative for the haemophagocytic syndrome; furthermore, there was little improvement in the fever, chest pain, and tachycardia, and myalgia occurred 2 days after admission. Hence, steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 1000 mg/day) was started.
Despite a 3-day steroid pulse therapy, the LVEF did not improve, and mitral regurgitation became severe. We increased the dobutamine dosage and started diuretics; however, pulmonary congestion progressed, although there was no need for mechanical ventilatory support or oxygenation. On the 6th post-admission day, profuse crying due to stress from the prolonged hospital stay induced a sudden cardiac arrest without ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia. Despite cardiopulmonary resuscitation, spontaneous circulation could not be restored; hence, venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) and intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) were started immediately, followed by normothermia management. There were no signs of mechanical complications of myocardial rupture. Considering the autoimmune pathophysiology of myocarditis, we decided to continue the steroid therapy (prednisolone sodium succinate, 100 mg/day), and started intravenous cyclophosphamide (IVCY; 1000 mg) to restore the cardiac function. Although the LVEF decreased to 5% after the cardiac arrest (Supplementary material online, Video S2), it suddenly improved to 40% after 3 days. Thus, the patient was weaned off of VA-ECMO and IABP. Eight days after the cardiac arrest, the patient was successfully extubated without neurological damage. The steroid dose was reduced early because of steroid-induced psychosis symptoms. A second IVCY course (500 mg) was administered 4 weeks after the first course. Pancytopenia and febrile neutropenia occurred temporarily and were treated successfully with antibiotics and the granulocyte-colony stimulating factor. Although the CRP level was approximately 8 mg/dL on admission, it normalized at discharge. Rehabilitation was continued with assistance from a liaison team; 42 days after admission, she was discharged from the hospital with full walking ability. She has been maintained on mycophenolate mofetil, prednisolone, and beta-blocker, and remains on follow-up with repeat TTE without worsening cardiac function (Supplementary material online, Video S3).
After discharge, a detailed histopathological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed a small number of CD3-positive T-cells and CD68-positive macrophages in the cardiac tissue; contrastingly, IgG and diffuse HLA-DR were observed in the interstitium and vascular endothelium, respectively. Mild interstitial and perivascular fibrosis, multiple CD61-positive micro-thrombi within the intramural coronary arteries, and C4d were found in the adjacent cardiomyocytes, suggesting multi-focal ischaemic micro-circulatory injury.