A 71-year-old female patient was admitted to our emergency department after acute loss of consciousness with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 4/15. Neurological examination revealed anisocoric pupils (right>left), drowsiness, left-sided hemiplegia, and right-sided decerebration. An urgent head CT scan showed third ventricle hemorrhage and a giant extra-axial tumor with associated peritumoral bleeding [ and ]. A second, smaller, and right-sided tumor (2 cm) was detected at the posterior third of the superior sagittal sinus, leading to a radiological diagnosis of cerebral meningiomatosis .
A brain CT angiogram was performed, showing a hypervascularized lesion located at the right frontal convexity, with related mass effect and contralateral midline shift (2.5 cm). A ruptured A2 pseudoaneurysm (93.7 mm × 3.2 mm) was also documented [ and ].
A right frontal craniotomy was performed. After the dura mater was opened, the tumor with the associated perilesional bleeding was exposed. The neoplasm was friable in consistence and was easily aspirable using and ultrasonic aspirator, showing macroscopic features concordant with a typical meningioma presentation. Although the macroscopic vascularization was prone to intraoperative bleeding, it was controlled with bipolar cauterization. After the initial debulking and removal of the peritumoral hemorrhage, the frontopolar artery was exposed through an interhemispheric dissection to reach the A2 segment associated with the bleeding pseudoaneurysm, which was then coagulated. We completed the procedure achieving a radical removal of the tumor and a satisfying hemostasis. Bone flap was replaced, and pathological tissue was sent for histological examination.
The histological analysis reported a fibrous meningioma (WHO Grade I) with diffuse intraparenchymal hemorrhage, without a brain parenchyma infiltration (EMA + and progesterone +).
After surgery, the patient was isochoric, and a further postoperative CT scan demonstrated common postoperative findings, including improvement of the midline shift and right frontal hypodensity related to the malacic brain parenchyma next to the meningioma [-]. Unfortunately, the patient developed ab ingestis pneumonia, probably due to the sudden loss of consciousness, further worsened by mechanical ventilation, and died 5 weeks after surgery.