An 82-year-old female who had prior history of persistent atrial fibrillation, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, valve repair with 30 mm Edwards Physio II ring (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California), hypertension, chronic kidney disease presented with symptoms of heart failure and a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) showed severe MR from the annuloplasty ring failure with a severe medial jet of MR with a proximal isovelocity surface area (PISA) of 1.04 cm2, effective regurgitant orifice area of 0.4 cm2, and a regurgitant volume of 67 mL (Video 1). Patient was not a candidate for transcatheter edge to edge repair therapies because of the high baseline mean gradients of 5–8 mm Hg. The Society of thoracic surgery surgical core was 7.2% hence after the heart team discussion, a valve in ring procedure with 26 mm Edwards Sapien S3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, California) was planned . A post-dilation with an additional 2 ml volume in the 26 mm balloon was performed to reduce the moderate PVL seen on the intraprocedural TEE (, Video 2). One week after the VIR procedure, the patient presented with nausea, visible icterus, and ongoing fatigue and was found to have severe unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia with a total serum bilirubin of 7.6 mg/dL (direct bilirubin of 0.8 mg/dL) (Normal value of total bilirubin: 0.3–1.0 mg/dL), undetectable serum haptoglobin, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 2 923 unit/liter (Normal Value 50–150 U/L) and serum creatine of 2.79 mg/dL (Normal value 0.5–1 mg/dL). A TEE was performed to assess the prosthetic mitral valve in ring showing a mild to moderate PVL at the anterolateral aspect of the valve (Video 3) hence a balloon post-dilation with a 29 mm balloon was performed to expand the valve and reduce PVL. At the end of procedure, the PVL reduced to trace (, Video 4). Patient was readmitted after one week with similar symptoms and additional fatigue and weakness. The LDH was elevated to 2 539 unit/liter, and serum bilirubin to 6 mg/dL. Patient underwent a repeat TEE to assess for a cause of the ongoing haemolysis. This TEE showed only trace PVLs however a flow across the valve frame and collision of blood flow through the valve frame and anterior mitral leaflet was noted (, Video 5). Patients’ hospital course was complicated by ongoing haemolytic anaemia requiring blood transfusions, acute kidney injury from pigment induced acute tubular necrosis and hyponatremia. A detailed work for the haemolytic anaemia at this point was unyielding with a negative Coombs test, peripheral blood smear revealed a small amount of schistocytes and multiple acanthocytes, serum ferritin was elevated to 2 266 ng/mL, serum fibrinogen levels were normal. A repeat TMVR was performed with a 29 mm Edwards S3 prosthesis within the previously placed bioprosthesis to eliminate all flow through the valve frame and avoid any collision of blood flow ( A pre &B post VIV). After the VIV procedure (S3 within an S3) patient’s haemolysis had resolved. On 30 day follow up the laboratory work showed a serum LDH reducing to 624 units/L, serum creatinine improving to 1.49 mg/dL with stabilization of the haemoglobin (, Video 6).