The patient was a 60-year-old man who was admitted to our hospital for an emergency with severe abdominal pain. He did not take any regular medication. He had smoked a packet of cigarettes a day for 10 years and was a social drinker. He had no allergy and no family medical history. The enhanced contrast abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a massive retroperitoneal hematoma around pancreas and a PDA aneurysm on pancreas head (A). A sagittal view of the CT angiography revealed extrinsic compression of the root of the CA by the MAL (B). His diagnosis was determined as MALS with a ruptured PDA aneurysm. His vital signs were within normal limits, therefore, we performed endovascular treatment for a ruptured PDA aneurysm at first. The angiography of the CA showed no antegrade blood flow to the proper hepatic artery (A), and that of the SMA revealed the retrograde flow via the pancreaticoduodenal arcade in addition to the replaced right hepatic artery (B). The ruptured PDA aneurysm was treated by transcatheter arterial coil embolization (C, D). 5 days after the treatment, he was discharged with no complication. Although he had no symptom caused by MALS after the treatment for a ruptured PDA aneurysm, there was always a risk of reformation of the PDA aneurysms. Therefore, we planned to perform elective laparoscopic treatment for MALS without ganglionectomy of the celiac plexus in the hybrid operation room to check blood flow of the CA intraoperatively.
The procedure was as follows: The patient was placed in the supine position with a 30 degree both legs opened. An open method was used to insert a 12-mm umbilical camera port, two 5-mm ports in the left upper abdominal, and a 10-mm and a 5-mm port in the right upper abdomen. After liver retraction, a Harmonic Scalpel®︎ (ETHICON, Tokyo, Japan) was used to divide the avascular region of the lesser omentum, and the left gastric artery (LGA) was identified on the suprapancreatic surface (A). While retracting the LGA, the anterior aspect of the aorta was divided adequately (B). The MAL was identified as a musculoaponeurotic band crossing over the anterior surface of the CA (C). The MAL was resected and the root of the CA was exposed sufficiently, and the celiac plexus was preserved as much as possible (D). Immediately after the MAL release without ganglionectomy of the celiac plexus, the angiography of the CA was performed to check blood flow. Unlike previous angiography, the antegrade blood flow to the proper hepatic artery was clearly depicted (A). The surgical operator had 18 years’ operative experience of general surgery and the duration of surgery was 183 min.
His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on postoperative day 5. The follow-up CT performed 12 months after the surgery revealed no residual CA stenosis (B). He was satisfied with his current condition and had no complaint about our treatment.