A 22-year-old young man presented to the Emergency Department at our hospital with severe left upper quadrant and chest pain, nausea, vomiting, and intermittent obstipation for the past week. He had a history of substance abuse and mental health issues and 2 years ago was stabbed multiple times following an altercation including two in the left lower chest with associated haemopneumothorax requiring exploration and washout. Without follow up, he presented three times to a country hospital and discharged against medical advice every time in the 2 weeks prior to his final presentation at our hospital. The first of these three presentations was triggered by severe left upper quadrant pain and subsequent computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a delayed left diaphragmatic hernia containing the splenic flexure of the colon for which he declined treatment. The next presentation occurred 2 days later when he developed obstipation and was transferred from the country hospital to our hospital but again self-discharged against medical advice while awaiting surgery. The third presentation occurred the day prior to his final presentation but again self-discharged prior to repeat imaging.
On his final presentation at our hospital, he was febrile to 38.9 °C and tachycardic to 140 bpm at triage but remained normotensive and was saturating normally. His abdomen was non-distended but tender and guarded in the epigastrium. White cell count was 18.74 × 109/L, CRP was 89 mg/L, venous lactate was 1.5 mmol/L, and electrolytes were generally deranged (see Table ). An urgent repeat CT scan of his chest and abdomen demonstrated a large left hydropneumothorax with mediastinal shift to the right . Following the scan, he became tachypnoeic with evidence of a tension pneumothorax. A chest drain was inserted and foul-smelling gas with large amounts of bowel contents was drained. The patient was transferred to theatres.
Laparotomy demonstrated a 7–10-cm left diaphragmatic hernia containing the splenic flexure of the colon with a 3-mm perforation causing gross left intrathoracic faecal contamination but no intra-abdominal contamination. The descending colon was mobilised, and a segmental resection of the splenic flexure was performed with primary stapled anastomosis. The left pleural cavity was extensively washout out, two chest drains were placed, and the diaphragmatic defect was closed with an on-lay biosynthetic mesh also placed and secured. A partial splenic infarct was noted at surgery likely due to hilar vessels being included in the hernia. This was conservatively managed. Post-operative recovery was uneventful.