A 71-year-old C6 quadriplegic male with a chronic indwelling SP catheter presented with hematuria and discharge from the SP tube. The patient suffered a traumatic spinal cord injury at age 19 and an indwelling SP catheter has been present for 51 years, changed monthly. Past medical history was significant for urinary tract infections (UTIs) and nephrolithiasis. Patient endorsed a 25-year history of smoking.
Computed tomography (CT) urography was performed and revealed an irregular, infiltrative, and heterogeneous mass arising from the anterior bladder at the level of the suprapubic catheter and extending along the SP tube tract . The mass included peripheral areas of infiltrative enhancing soft tissue extending from the bladder, along the tract, and involving the anterior abdominal wall as well as fluid density components. There was no associated calcification or lymphadenopathy. There were no findings of a urachal remnant, and the mass did not extend toward the umbilicus. Cystoscopy and subsequent biopsy were performed, revealing adenocarcinoma of the anterior bladder and stoma with extensive associated mucin production and a background of acute and chronic inflammation. Patient was referred for definitive surgical management.
Extirpative therapy included cystoprostatectomy, abdominal wall resection, ileal conduit creation, and abdominal wall reconstruction. The surgical defect at the level of the skin was approximately 8 cm in diameter, and there was a 3 cm margin circumferentially around the suprapubic tube tract at the skin level. The umbilicus was superior to the involved abdominal wall, and the suspicion of a primary urachal adenocarcinoma was low based on the clinical presentation and history. As such, the umbilicus was not resected as part of the surgical specimen. The differential diagnosis included urachal carcinoma, but these cancers typically arise in the dome of the bladder and no urachal remnant was identified on imaging or at surgery . Pathologic examination of the bladder revealed an invasive, moderately differentiated 2.7 cm adenocarcinoma with mucinous features arising in a background of extensive intestinal metaplasia. Invasion through the urothelial basement membrane and into the superficial lamina propria was noted. Urethral and ureteral margins were free of tumor and no lymphovascular space invasion was identified. A standard bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection was performed, including the obturator, internal iliac, and external iliac nodal packets, and no evidence of malignancy was found in any lymph nodes. The final diagnosis was a high-grade, T2a/N0/M0 (Stage II) mucinous adenocarcinoma of the bladder based upon WHO/ISUP grading and AJCC/UICC staging. Contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis and chest with either CT or x-ray was performed every 6 months for 2 years and every 12 months thereafter to monitor for local tumor recurrence or metastatic disease. These surveillance intervals are in accordance with the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines . There has been no evidence of tumor recurrence over the previous 5 years.