An 84-year-old Asian male was referred to the emergency department (ED) due to his need for an intensive care room with hemodialysis. The patient was previously treated at another hospital with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) due to COVID-19, septic shock, electrolyte imbalance, uremic encephalopathy, acute chronic kidney disease (ACKD), and diabetes mellitus. The patient was previously treated with a high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC), remdesivir 100 mg once daily for 5 days, meropenem 1 g once daily, moxifloxacin 400 mg once daily, dexamethasone 5 mg once daily, as well as hemodynamic support drugs norepinephrine 0.15 µg/kgBW/minute and dobutamine 3 µg/kgBW/minute. The patient with motor aphasia due to stroke complications since 2016.
At ED, the patient was apathetic, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 13–14, blood pressure was 111/56 mmHg with norepinephrine and dobutamine, pulse ranged from 90 to 100 beats per minute, afebrile, and 97% oxygen saturation with nasal cannula 2 L per minute. On physical examination, crackles were found, especially on bilateral lung bases, peripheral edema was observed in all extremities, accompanied by involuntary movements of the extremities, and fluid overload was detected, with a central venous pressure (CVP) of 11 mmHg and thoracic fluid content (TFC) of 40 (normal value 25–35). The patient’s diuresis was < 0.3 cc/kgBW/hour. On further investigation, atrial fibrillation had normal ventricular response, lactate was 3.0, procalcitonin (PCT) was 162 ng/mL, C-reactive protein (CRP) was 60.8 mg/dL, and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was > 9000, with urea at 281 mg/dL and creatinine at 5.69 mg/dL. Electrolyte examination showed the following: sodium 150 mmol/L, potassium 4.9 mmol/L, and chloride 111 mmol/L. The cardiac echocardiography examination revealed an ejection fraction of 49%, and the computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax presented bilateral pneumonia.
From the physical examination and supporting examination, our patient presented with septic shock due to pneumonia, congestive heart failure with fluid overload signs, electrolyte imbalance, and uremic encephalopathy due to ACKD. We planned fluid removal with continuous furosemide, and hemodialysis with the sustained low-efficiency dialysis (SLED) technique for 6 hours. We did not do hemoperfusion in conjunction with hemodialysis due to hemodynamic concerns. The patient was given piperacillin–tazobactam 4.5 g twice daily and vancomycin 1 g once daily. We continued using norepinephrine and dobutamine for hemodynamic support, with mean arterial pressure (MAP) target of 60–65 mmHg.
During hemodialysis, blood pressure fluctuates with quick blood (qB) of 100–150 mL/hour and ultrafiltration (UF) of 1000 mL/6 hours. After hemodialysis, the clinical condition began to improve, starting with an improvement of consciousness and diuresis. Also, on chest x-ray analysis, the infiltrates in both lung fields were in remission, compared with analysis before hemodialysis . Urine output increased to 0.5–0.8 cc/kgBW using furosemide 2 mg/hour. However, there was an increasing need to increase norepinephrine to 0.5 µg/kgBW/minute, dobutamine to 7.5 µg/kgBW/minute, and vasopressin to 0.03 units/minute. Our expected end point here is a CVP target of 0–4 mmHg; clinically, no signs of peripheral edema were found.
At this point, after escalation, antibiotic therapy failed to decrease vasopressor requirements. Then treatment was continued with hemoperfusion using a Jafron HA330 cartridge, with a modified technique, in the BBraun Dialog+ dialysis machine with blood flow of 150 mL/hour, zero dialysate flow rates, and intermittent heparin bolus at the rate of 500 units every hour. The progress of the patient’s clinical improvement was seen 1 hour after we started hemoperfusion, which was characterized by an improvement in consciousness up to GCS 15, an increase in diuresis up to 1 cc/kgBW/hour, a decrease in vasopressor use with norepinephrine up to 0.2 µg/kgBW, dobutamine up to 2 µg/kgBW and vasopressin up to 0.02 units/hour, and an improvement in patient’s laboratory results . We did not proceed to the next hemoperfusion session due to significant improvements.
We performed non-invasive monitoring of the patient’s hemodynamics before, and 2 hours after, initiating hemofiltration.
We adjusted the dosage of piperacillin–tazobactam to 4.5 g every 6 hours and vancomycin to 1 g every 12 hours after a decrease in creatinine level (2.8 mg/dL). Provision was made for 230 mL packed red blood cell transfusion, with a target hemoglobin (Hb) > 9.0 g/dL. Furosemide 2 mg/hour was still given to maintain a negative target balance with a CVP of 0–4 mmHg.
The use of vasopressors was gradually decreased until it stopped on day 8 of treatment in the intensive care unit (ICU) ; the cumulative balance while in the ICU was −5.6 L and the CVP was 2 mmHg. The patient moved to the intermediate care room and continued the medical rehabilitation. The patient’s condition was still weak; however, he managed to respond to his family’s voice and the doctor’s questions.