A 63-year-old Sinhalese female was admitted to the Teaching Hospital Peradeniya in March 2017 with progressive generalized malaise, fatigue, and shortness of breath on exertion for 1 week. She did not complain of orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, or any previous syncopal attacks. There was no history of tingling sensations of the extremities, recurrent infections, previous miscarriages, or any history suggestive of thrombotic episodes.
She also had a 7-year history of pain and swelling in multiple joints, starting from the right ankle joint and progressing into multiple large joints in a symmetrical pattern associated with morning stiffness, lasting for about 4 hours a day. Simultaneously, she had developed involvement of the small proximal joints of the bilateral hands for 5 years. She had taken some over-the-counter medications, including non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), some local applications, and some native treatments to relieve these symptoms, which she had been using for several years. However, she did not have any history of taking disease-modifying antirheumatoid drugs (DMARDs) before this admission. She had taken some indigenous medicines from time to time for a few years; however, she was not aware of their ingredients. She was working as a housemaid abroad when she developed joint pains and noticed some deformities appearing in her hands towards the end of 2016, when she found it challenging to engage in day-to-day activities.
She did not have any previous history of bleeding manifestations, including melena. She attained menopause at the age of 51, and there was no history of postmenopausal bleeding. She consumed an average Sri Lankan rice-based diet with adequate calories and nutrients with three meals per day.
At the current admission, she was severely pale, and there were boutonniere deformities in the left middle, right middle, and right ring fingers; however, there was no evidence of active joint inflammation in the form of swelling or erythema in the small joints of the hands . There were no skin rashes, photosensitivity, tight skin on the fingers or face, cutaneous bleeding manifestations, oral ulcers, or alopecia, nor did she have any dependent edema. Her vital parameters were stable with a pulse rate of 84 beats per minute, blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, and normal jugular venous pressure without any abnormal heart sounds. Other system examinations were unremarkable.
Initial investigations revealed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 1.8 g/dL (12.1–15.1) with normal mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC). White cell count was 2100/mm3 (4500–11000) (neutrophils 55% and lymphocytes 35%) with a platelet count of 169000/mm3 (150,000–450,000) and a reticulocyte count of 0.09% (0.5–2.5%) with negative direct and indirect Coombs tests. Her random blood sugar level was 5.7 mmol/L. Other investigations revealed erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 55 mm/hour (0–20), C-reactive protein (CRP) 31.68 mg/L (< 3.0), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 115 IU/L (9–32), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 98 IU/L (19–25), total bilirubin 16.4 µmol/L (1.71–20.5), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 223.8 IU/L (44–147), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 79.1 IU/L (8–38), serum albumin 22.9 g/dL (3.5–5.2), and albumin/globulin 0.97 (1.1–2.5). Her serum creatinine level was 65 µmol/L (52.2–91.9). Her blood electrolyte levels were serum sodium 137 mmol/L (135–145), potassium 4 mmol/L (3.5–5.0), magnesium 1.07 mmol/L (0.85–1.10), and corrected calcium 2.4 mmol/L (2.2–2.6). The electrocardiographic findings, 2D echocardiogram, urinalysis, clotting profile, and chest x-ray were normal.
She was then further investigated for an etiology for anemia, where the blood picture showed bicytopenia (leukopenia and anemia) with features more in favor of megaloblastic anemia. Due to the anemia, she was transfused with 6 pints of red cell concentrate (RCC) until Hb > 10 g/dL. Her serum iron level was 268.5 µg/dL (33–199) and total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) was within the normal range. The bone marrow biopsy showed markedly reduced erythroid lineage with increased granulopoiesis and normal megakaryopoiesis, and there was no evidence of lymphoma, leukemia, secondary deposit, or granuloma. Based on these findings, the diagnosis of PRCA was made, and leukopenia was thought to be immune in origin. She improved with corticosteroids and supportive treatments with iron, vitamin B12, and folic acid inward and was discharged, and in the 2-week follow-up she had no new complaints. Unfortunately, she did not attend any further clinic follow-ups.
She got readmitted in September 2017 with right upper limb swelling and was found to have right subclavian vein thrombosis. The lower limb venous duplex was typical, and there was no evidence of pulmonary embolism. The anticoagulation was done initially with enoxaparin and warfarin and subsequently continued with warfarin. The thrombophilia screen was negative with a regular lupus anticoagulant test. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed bilateral axillary, level IV cervical, intercostal, iliac, and inguinal lymphadenopathy. The patient underwent an axillary lymph node biopsy, which showed preserved architecture and appearance consistent with reactive lymph nodes. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies were also done to exclude any evidence of malignancy or any other pathology that can cause blood loss, and both investigations turned out to be as expected. The patient was referred for a hematology opinion, where a bone marrow biopsy was suggested to exclude any hematological malignancy. However, the bone marrow biopsy showed hypercellular bone marrow with normal granulopoiesis, megakaryopoiesis, and absent erythropoiesis, where the possibility of lymphoma was excluded. The patient was treated with corticosteroids and hematinics, and showed a satisfactory response to improve the cytopenias. The upper limb swelling was also resolved after successful treatment with the anticoagulants. Since the patient’s primary concern was the symptoms due to venous thrombosis and cytopenias, the assessment of her joint symptoms was not carried out. She was discharged from the hospital with a follow-up planed in 2 weeks; however, she defaulted on the follow-up.
The subsequent admission was in June 2018 where she was found to have a vasculitic-type rash in the lower limb. A skin biopsy showed perivascular inflammatory infiltration predominantly by neutrophils and lymphocytes, with focal areas of fibrinoid necrosis suggestive of leukocytoclastic vasculitis. The patient was under investigation for secondary causes of PRCA during this presentation, where the human immune deficiency virus (HIV) screening, viral hepatitis screening (Hepatitis B surface antigen and Hepatitis C antibody), and parvovirus b19 serology revealed negative results. However, she fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for rheumatoid arthritis (2) with positive rheumatoid factor level (347 IU/mL; normal range 0–20 IU/mL) and negative antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-double stranded DNA (dsDNA) levels. The anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP) level was not done as it was not affordable. Overall, this patient had transfusion-dependent anemia for 16 months, which warranted transfusion of 36 units of RCC.
A multidisciplinary team meeting was held with the participation of a consultant hematologist, and the diagnosis of PRCA secondary to rheumatoid arthritis was made. After that, she was started with oral cyclosporine A 250 mg daily (5 mg/kg/day), hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice daily, and oral prednisolone 40 mg daily, which was tailed off over 1 month. She was then followed-up at the medical and hematology clinic, where her hemoglobin levels improved and increased without any requirement for further blood transfusions. Her joint pains resolved, and her general wellbeing was markedly improved. The regular monitoring with full blood counts revealed normal white cell counts and hemoglobin levels in 2 months.