A 31-year-old pregnant patient, with a history of two pregnancy losses at first half of pregnancy and no history of autoimmune or thromboembolic diseases, was evaluated at 33 + 4 weeks of gestation. An episode of symptomatic renal lithiasis requiring placement of double J stent at 3rd week of gestation was reported by the patient at admission.
The patient was admitted in local hospital due to dizziness, headache and blurred version,and worsening lower extremity edema 10 days ago. Examination results showed blood pressure 170/100 mmHg, proteinuria 3+ and occult blood 3+ by urinalysis. Immediate caesarean section was taken as diagnosed with severe preeclampsia. After the surgery, laboratory tests displayed elevated liver enzyme levels: peak aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) (1758 u/L and 2158 u/L respectively), decreased platelet count (20 × 109/L) and hemoglobin value (65 g/L), increased white blood cells (WBC) (27.45 × 109/L) and serum creatinine (233 umol/L) and urea (31.6 mmol/L). Symptomatic treatments were ineffective, so the patient was transferred to our hospital with the primary diagnosis of HELLP syndrome and severe preeclampsia.
On admission, the condition of the patient had worsened, and the heart rate was 120 beats per minute, the blood pressure was 138/74 mmHg (controlled by nitroprusside), and the temperature was 36.5 °C. The pitting ankle edema, headache and blurred version had gradually worsened accompanied with abdominal distension and weak chest, and decreased urine output. On physical examination, she appeared to be acutely ill with decreased breath sounds, the results of laboratory tests were not significantly improved than before, accompanied with negative urobilinogen, total bilirubin 25.5umol/L and reduced serum albumin . The ultrasonic images of hepatic parenchyma were abnormal, which may result from blood supply deficiency, and massive hydrothorax and ascites. Based on all above, we diagnosed the patient as HELLP syndrome, but could not fully rule out other diseases with similar symptoms. The therapy including continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT), plasma exchange and other supportive treatments such as red cell transfusion, platelet concentrates transfusions and antihypertensive were provided for the patient immediately.
Three days after admission to our hospital, plain CT scan showed peripheral wedge-shaped inhomogeneous low attenuation in the right hepatic lobes , and the low-density shadow and mottled appearance in the same areas where vessels were seen coursing through them via contrast-enhanced CT scan . Base on CT images, liver infarction was diagnosed. Further tests showed that amylase in plasma and urine was negative, and hepatitis B antigens and antibody, and hepatitis A antibody were all negative, and the levels of glucose and blood ammonia were normal. Therefore, we further confirmed the diagnosis HELLP syndrome with liver infarction.
Then we continued treating the patient with antibiotics, CRRT, drainage of pleural effusion and ascites, and the supportive treatments. Intravenous dexamethasone 10 mg/d for 3 days was initiated. The results of laboratory tests were normalized within 17 days. The damaged areas were recovered on 17th days after admission via the second enhanced CT . She remained asymptomatic and had no complications during 6 months of follow-up.