A 22-year-old male Caucasian patient was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) after he was found on the street in a condition of fluctuating awareness with aggressive behaviour changing to somnolence. He had low blood pressure, tachycardia and laboured respiration. Because of his fluctuating awareness it was impossible to obtain any history from the patient when he was brought to the ICU by the rescue service. On admission, the patient had a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) of six and because of respiratory insufficiency, intubation and mechanical ventilation was immediately necessary. Only intravenous agents were used for sedation (Fentanyl, Midazolam and Etomidate). Furthermore, he was haemodynamically unstable with a shock index of two. He presented with mild muscle rigidity and an excessive, elevated body temperature of 42°C. He carried no personal documents and there was no possibility of identifying the patient or of acquiring any information about his prior medical history. Because antipyretic drugs had no effect on the severe state of hyperthermia we quickly decided to use the non-invasive Arctic Sun 2000® cooling device (Arctic Sun 2000®, Medivance Inc., USA) in order to lower his dangerous temperature.
This system originally was designed to induce mild therapeutic hypothermia in patients after cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The water flushed energy transfer pads were pasted onto the patient's skin and the Arctic Sun 2000® was used in the manual mode by controlling the flushed water temperature. The heat transfer and cooling performance of the system is induced by direct conduction and approximates the performance of water immersion by providing high energy transfer. The water temperature inside the energy transfer pads was set to 10°C and the target temperature of 38.5°C was reached after 120 minutes. For online temperature monitoring computer based monitoring software was used. Adjunctive drug therapy during the cooling therapy was sedation with a benzodiazepine (Midazolam) and an opioid (Fentanyl); however muscle relaxants were not administered. The patient presented initially only with mild muscle rigidity and had no tremor. Thus, we decided to start aggressive symptomatic therapy. Dantrolene was discussed as a further possible option in case symptomatic therapy did not improve the patient's condition. The laboratory results on admission are given in Table . A toxicological screening test was performed on his blood and urine, showing in both only a cannabis metabolite and the benzodiazepine used for sedation. Because of hyperthermia of unknown origin, a cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan and a lumbar puncture were carried out to exclude, on the one hand, any cause of infection and, on the other hand, a cerebral cause for decreased awareness and autonomic dysregulation. The cerebral CT scan and the cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed no pathology explaining the patient's condition. Because of massive rhabdomyolysis, the patient rapidly developed acute renal failure with a need for haemodialysis. An interesting observation was that the hyperthermia was not influenced by any antipyretic drug given to the patient when the use of the cooling device was shortly interrupted. Although the cause of hyperthermia was still unclear, the general condition of the patient improved and the respirator therapy was discontinued on the third day after admission. In the course of time, he was able to give detailed information about his schizophrenia and had been treated as an outpatient with Olanzapine (Zyprexa®) 10 mg daily by his psychiatrist. With regard to the initial clinical findings this neuroleptic drug treatment was the most likely cause of his hyperthermia. He was discharged from ICU and, because of improving renal function, haemodialysis was stopped. The only residual impairment was dysarthria which he declared was new after the phase of hyperthermia. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan showed symmetric multiple contrast agent enhancement in the cerebellum and in one small spot in the frontal lobe (see Figure ). It is hypothesized that these lesions are direct pyramidal cell lesions caused by hyperthermia, as described in the literature in other cases [,,].