A 62-year-old female patient with blurred vision in the right eye for > 3 mo was admitted to the Ophthalmology Department in Lishui Hospital of Zhejiang University.
The patient with blurred vision in the right eye for > 3 mo was admitted to the Ophthalmology Department in Lishui Hospital of Zhejiang University.
This patient was a hepatitis B carrier with cirrhosis of the liver for > 2 years. She reported that she had never smoked tobacco or drunk alcohol.
No specific cancer history was recorded on her pedigree.
Abdominal ultrasound showed intrahepatic hypoechoic nodules, multiple hypoechoic deposits in the spleen, and multiple enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes. The physical examination revealed that she had a palpable tender mass with a smooth surface 4 cm under the left ribcage. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a circular low-density shallow mass (approximately 2.6 cm diameter) on the left intrahepatic leaves; arterial phase lesions were significantly enhanced with a relatively low density in the portal phase, which is typical for liver cancer with fast forward and backward characteristics. Multiple circular low-density shadows were detected in the spleen with clear boundaries (maximum diameter 7.6 cm), and the CT value was 34 HU. The enhancement of the lesion was lightly heterogeneous and had a low density compared with the normal spleen parenchyma. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were detected around the liver portal vein and retroperitoneal space with partial fusion conglobation, which revealed cells suspected for HCC with possible metastasis to the liver portal, retroperitoneal lymph nodes, and spleen.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) markers were HBsAg+, HBeAb+, HBcAb+, serum -fetoprotein (AFP) 1394.3 ng/mL, and HBV DNA < 500 copies/mL. Immunohistochemical staining of the lesion sample was positive for CD20, PAX5, Bcl-2, Bcl-6 and CD10, and partially positive for Mum-1 and Ki67 (70% cells); CD21 staining for follicular dendritic cell network damage was positive, while CD3 and CD45RO were negative.
Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT disclosed an enlarged spleen with multiple confluent mass lesions. Radiation absorption was unusually high with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 16.2 in the spleen. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the neck, left clavicle, axilla, right hilum, mediastinum, liver hilum and peritoneum, lower abdominal cavity, left pelvic wall, and inguinal region. There was increased radiation uptake in those regions with a maximum SUV of 15.9. In the peritoneum, lymph nodes were partly fused, with unclear boundaries and partial pressure on the surrounding .