A 41-year-old woman was re-admitted to our hospital with a history of persistent symptoms of heart failure, including shortness of breath. In her past medical history, she had been diagnosed at birth to have a single ventricle type of cardiac defect, with a hypoplastic right ventricle. She underwent an atriopulmonary connection (APC)-type Fontan procedure at the age of 9 years. Subsequently, due to worsening of the heart failure and new onset of atrial flutter, she underwent total cavopulmonary connection (TCPC) conversion and pacemaker placement surgery at the age of 41 years, 5 months prior to her current re-admission. The chest X-ray image immediately after surgery revealed a significantly elevated left dome of the diaphragm, consistent with a left hemidiaphragmatic paralysis . While she had been mostly asymptomatic for 2 months following the TCPC conversion, the suspension of diuretics and anemia triggered by menorrhea worsened her heart failure, which manifested as lower extremity edema and ascites. The nadir of her hemoglobin level was 6.5 g/dL. Her B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) value gradually increased from 40.4 to 111.8 pg/mL during this period. After the resumption of diuretics and 2 units of red blood cell transfusion, her heart failure entered remission with some fluctuations in her symptom.
The chest X-ray image on the current admission showed a further reduction of left lung volume compared to the one immediately after the TCPC conversion surgery . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed preserved ventricular systolic function with a fractional area change of 46.4% and mild mitral valve regurgitation. The preoperative laboratory data showed a BNP level of 62.5 pg/mL. A cardiac catheterization study revealed increased filling pressures in SVC, IVC, right and left pulmonary arteries, and in the conduit, as compared to the values measured before the TCPC conversion surgery. Consistent with the above, the pulmonary vascular resistance was also significantly elevated . A pulmonary artery angiogram showed remarkably reduced blood flow to the left lung as compared to that before the TCPC conversion .
The reduced left lung volume due to the left hemidiaphragmatic paralysis, plausibly caused by unilateral phrenic nerve damage during the previous surgery, was suspected as being the precipitating factor of her symptom, and therefore, a left diaphragmatic plication surgery was scheduled. Due to the concern of intra-thoracic adhesion because of multiple previous operations, the open thoracic approach was chosen. For better exposure of the surgical field, the surgeon requested OLV during the surgery. Preoperative blood examination did not reveal any significant abnormality except for a reduced platelet count (8.2 × 104/μl). Although the preoperative platelet count was slightly lower than the institutional limit for neuraxial anesthesia (10 × 104/μL), we decided to perform epidural anesthesia, taking into account its beneficial effects on the respiratory function during the postoperative period.
The epidural catheter was placed preoperatively at the epidural space at Th6/7. The general anesthesia was induced with a propofol target-controlled infusion (TCI) set at 2.5 μg/mL and fentanyl (100 μg) and was maintained with propofol TCI. A left-sided double-lumen tube (35 Fr. Broncho-cath, Covidien) was placed for the OLV. To minimize the adverse effects of mechanical ventilation on the PVR, the ventilator was set in the pressure control mode with an FiO2 of 1.0, peak inspiratory pressure of 22 cm H2O at an inspiration:expiration ratio of 1:2.6, and a positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cm H2O. Intraoperative analgesia was achieved with remifentanil infusion and intermittent epidural injection of levobupivacaine. Muscle relaxation was achieved with intermittent rocuronium injections. To prepare for hemodynamic deterioration as a result of OLV, the arterial line at the right radial artery and central venous line at the right internal jugular vein were secured. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) probe was also placed. The pacing rate was set at 70 beats/min in the DOO mode. In case of circulatory collapse during the surgery, a cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) machine and an inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) delivery system, as well as inotropes and vasopressors, were placed on standby for emergent use.
The open thoracic left diaphragm plication surgery was initiated with the patient placed in the right decubitus position. Following the opening of the thoracic cavity, collapse of the lung on the surgical side was successfully achieved. Despite our concern about hemodynamic deterioration, the OLV did not result in any major changes of the central venous pressure, blood pressure, or arterial oxygen saturation . TEE did not show any remarkable changes in the ventricular function either.
The total OLV time was 85 min, and the patient remained hemodynamically stable throughout this period, except for one episode of hypotension that was easily managed a bolus injection of ephedrine. The surgery was completed within 2 h and the patient was successfully extubated in the operating room. The postoperative chest X-ray showed the successful re-expansion of the left lung .
Her postoperative pain was successfully managed by patient-controlled epidural analgesia. Her postoperative course was uneventful, with improvement of the heart failure symptoms, and she was discharged on postoperative day 23.