A 59-year-old female presented with a pancreatic mass that had been identified during a medical examination 10 d prior.
She was asymptomatic and didn’t undergo any treatment at other hospitals.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
Her medical history and family history were unremarkable.
she was 160 cm tall and weighed 64 kg. Her abdomen was soft and nontender with no palpable mass.
The laboratory data were: Alanine transaminase 95.2 U/L ( reference < 40 U/L); aspartate transaminase 67.2 U/L ( reference < 35 U/L); conjugated bilirubin 7.3 μmol/L ( reference < 6.8 μmol/L); γ-glutamyl transferase 91.4 U/L ( reference < 45 U/L); carbohydrate antigen 19-9 46.0 U/mL ( reference < 39 U/mL); and serum ferritin, 423 ng/mL ( reference < 367.1 ng/mL).
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic flaky lesion of maximum diameter 5.2 cm in the head of the pancreas. Subsequent contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 6.4 cm × 6.0 cm near-circular heterogeneous fat-containing lesion (−109 ± 19.2 HU on contrast-enhanced CT compared to 47.9 ± 14.9 HU for the liver) in the head of the pancreas . The borders were indistinct and a few fibroreticular septa were evident within the lesion. The surrounding parenchyma was slightly enhanced, and the lesion was not clearly distinguishable from the pancreas. The adjacent tissues were partially compressed, including the head of the pancreas, the duodenum, and certain blood vessels (the inferior vena cava, portal vein, and superior mesenteric artery/vein). The pancreatic duct and intrahepatic bile ducts were not obviously dilated. By reference to the CT data only, we first considered that the mass might be a liposarcoma derived from the retroperitoneum. On magnetic resonance imaging, the mass was of high signal intensity on T2-weighted axial imaging, being isointense to the subcutaneous and intra-abdominal fat. And the fat-suppressed T1- and T2-weighted images revealed signal intensity losses, indicating that the mass was composed principally of adipose tissue . A few fibroreticular septa were evident within the lesion. The boundary between the lesion and the pancreas was unclear. Thus, the mass was most likely a well-differentiated liposarcoma derived from retroperitoneal fat. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed no dilatation or stenosis of the intrahepatic bile duct or pancreatic duct, but the middle and lower parts of the common bile duct were partially compressed. An abnormal 6.2 cm × 6.0 cm circular mixed/fatty signal emanated from the head of the pancreas . On positron-emission tomography/CT, the lesion had the density of fat, exhibited low fluorodeoxyglucose uptake, excluded evident distant metastasis, and was thus thought to be a non-malignant fat-derived tumor first, but it still cannot be distinguished from a well-differentiated liposarcoma.
Given the huge size and the compression of the middle and lower parts of the common bile duct and important blood vessels, we suggested surgery even if the lesion was benign. We planned total surgical excision, but found that the upper part of the mass was tightly connected to the pancreas and could not be completely excised. We feared that complete removal would increase the risk of injury to the pancreatic duct and superior mesenteric vein, which might trigger a major intraoperative hemorrhage and a postoperative pancreatic fistula that could erode the superior mesenteric vein and cause a massive hemorrhage or other complications. Thus, we switched to a pancreatoduodenectomy.