A 40-year-old Asian female with a known history of PBC underwent an ABO-incompatible LDLT (B to O), with her 31-year-old husband as the living donor. The patient was diagnosed with PBC at the age of 30 and was under treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and pemafibrate for cholestasis and dyslipidemia. Despite treatment, her cholestasis worsened over time. The results of laboratory tests before LT are shown in Table . The Child–Pugh score, the Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score and the Mayo PBC risk score were 9, 12 and 9.98, respectively. She passed all routine preoperative examinations, including cardiopulmonary function tests (chest X-ray, spirometry, electrocardiogram, and echocardiography) and infection screenings. Despite the medication, she had a total cholesterol level of 343 mg/dL (normal range 140–219) and a triglyceride level of 307 mg/dL (normal range 38–149). Both high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol were within the normal ranges. The chronological changes in these parameters and bilirubin are presented in Fig. . On physical examination, typical multiple palpebral and palmar xanthomas were observed. She had no other cardiovascular risk factors, such as smoking history, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or family history of CAD. Her body mass index was 20.1 kg/m2. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) did not show atherosclerotic plaques or calcifications in coronary arteries and abdominal vessels.
LDLT using a left-lobe graft was performed following rituximab induction and went without any serious intraoperative complications. Simultaneous splenectomy was performed for a low graft-to-spleen volume ratio based on our institutional strategy . The operative time was 616 min, and blood loss was 1390 mL. Transfused red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, and platelets were 560 mL, 240 mL, and 200 mL, respectively. The graft-to-recipient weight was 0.63%. The pathological findings of the original liver were compatible with PBC, and there was no evidence of malignancy.
The postoperative course was uneventful until POD 7, when hypotension emerged. She had never complained about chest pain before. Routine procedures, including cultures and contrast-enhanced CT, showed no evidence of infection. Since liver biopsy on POD 7 proved cellular rejection, steroid pulse therapy was immediately started. However, despite intense administration of catecholamine, the hypotension was refractory. On POD 9, poor contrast enhancement in the apex of the heart was noted by the radiologist’s review of the prior CT , and consequent electrocardiogram showed ST elevation in leads V1–4 . Troponin T and creatinine kinase MB (CK-MB) were elevated to 1.050 ng/mL (normal range ≤ 0.014) and 35 U/L (normal range ≤ 25), respectively. The patient was first referred to the cardiologist. As her echocardiogram showed akinesia of the apex and contrastive hypercontraction at the base, the diagnosis of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy was made. Although conservative treatment by fluid loading and vasopressor administration was continued, the response was poor, and symptoms such as nausea and chest pain appeared. On POD 13, coronary CT angiography (CCTA) was performed for further evaluation, and stenoses of the left anterior descending artery and the left circumflex artery were suspected. Troponin T was elevated to 2.750 ng/mL, and CK-MB was 33 U/L. The diagnosis of ACS was made, and emergent percutaneous coronary intervention was performed on POD 13. Emergent coronary angiography demonstrated 90% stenosis of both the left anterior descending artery (#6–7) and the left circumflex artery (#14) . Two drug-eluting stents (DESs) in the left anterior descending artery and one DES in the left circumflex artery were implanted . Dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and prasugrel hydrochloride was subsequently started.
After the above interventions, her blood pressure recovered, and all the symptoms disappeared. No further elevation of cardiac enzymes, including troponin T and CK-MB, was observed. These values gradually normalized over the course of a month (0.056 ng/mL for troponin T and < 5 U/L for CK-MB on POD 35). The patient was discharged home on POD 46 after treatment for cellular rejection. Serum lipids immediately returned to normal levels , and the xanthomas had almost disappeared at the 6-month follow-up . The graft function was good at the 18-month follow-up.