The patient was a 63-year-old male who underwent right hepatic lobectomy for tumor 5 cm in diameter located at the border of segments 8 and 7 of the liver . There were no suspicious findings of extrahepatic metastasis, and pathological examination revealed HCC with moderately differentiated, confluent multinodular type, H2, St-AP 40 mm, pseudoglandular type, e.g., fc(−), fc-inf(−), sf(+), s0, vp1, vv0, va0, b0, sm(−) 30 mm, f1, pT3 (the Japanese classification of primary liver cancer sixth edition). No lymph node metastasis or evidence of intrahepatic metastasis was found. Three years postoperatively, alpha-fetoprotein (preoperative vs postoperative, 656 vs 8.9 ng/ml) was slightly elevated at 36.7 ng/ml in a routine laboratory examination. Due to the elevated alpha-fetoprotein level, abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed and a recurrent lesion was revealed lymphadenopathy with a tendency to increase in size below the right diaphragm. Positron emission tomography (PET) revealed dense fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in a subdiaphragmatic lymph node , an upper mediastinal lymph node , and a right cervical lymph node . The patient underwent an excisional biopsy of the cervical lymph node, and the pathological findings were compatible with those of metastatic HCC, with swollen nuclei and eosinophilic follicles in tumor cells showing a chordate or alveolar pattern . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with recurrent HCC characterized by multiple lymph node metastases. The patient was started on sorafenib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, and the sizes of metastatic right cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes in imaging studies decreased 2 months later. However, the size of the metastatic subdiaphragmatic lymph node gradually increased. After receiving radiotherapy at a dose of 47.7 Gy for the subdiaphragmatic lymph node, the patient was started on lenvatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, following which all metastatic lymph nodes reduced in size and maintained for 15 months . However, because renal function worsened as an adverse effect of lenvatinib treatment, its administration was discontinued. The tumor enlarged rapidly, and the patient died 15 months later. The patient survived 43 months after the detection of recurrence and 79 months after liver resection.