On 15 Aug, 2017, a 57-year-old woman with ulcerative colitis, steroid-induced diabetes mellitus, deep vein thrombosis in the lower part of the left thigh, ecchymotic skin lesions, swelling in the left nose, ptosis (i.e., inability to move eyelids), and facial nerve palsy, was admitted to Shafa Hospital in Sari, north of Iran. She was afflicted with intestinal bleeding after Islamic fasting periods (i.e., Ramadan month).
Ulcerative colitis had been confirmed by clinical manifestations and colon biopsy and was managed with the administration of azathioprine (50 mg/day) and high-dose prednisolone (60 mg/day) for 2 months, prior to hospital admission. Due to prednisolone-induced hyperglycemia, the patient was on treatment with insulin for a month before admission to the hospital. She was also on anticoagulant drugs for the treatment of deep vein thrombosis.
One day after hospitalization, the patient developed progressive periorbital ecchymosis, extensive edema of the nasal area, and nasal ulcer . The eye examination revealed proptosis with 4+ light reaction, evidence of afferent pupillary defect (i.e., Marcus Gunn pupil), no light perception, absolute blindness, ophthalmoplegia, and neurological defects of the cranial nerves 2, 3, 4, and 6.
The results of the laboratory tests and vital signs included a fast blood sugar of 302 mg/dL, white blood cell count of 9460/µl, red blood cell count of 3.53×106/µl, platelets of 60×103/µl, hemoglobin of 8.9 g/dl, blood urea nitrogen of 35 mg/dL, serum creatinine of 2.3 mg/dl, potassium of 2.1 mg/dL, body temperature of 38°C, blood pressure of 120/70 mm/Hg, pulse rate of 80/min, and respiratory rate of 14/min, and glomerular filtration rate of 32. Blood culture and urine culture tests were negative.
On August 18, with regard to the deterioration of the patient's clinical condition and given the high level of suspicion for mucormycosis, the patient was prescribed amphotericin B deoxycholate with a dosage adjustment (0.7 mg/kg/day; 50 mg/day total dosage) coupled with broad-spectrum antibiotics (piperacillin-tazobactam). She was immediately subjected to surgery in which the nasal necrotic tissues were completely removed. The debrided tissues and mucous membranes were immediately sent to the Medical Mycology Laboratory.
The direct examination of the necrotic tissue revealed broad aseptate hyphae with right angle branching compatible to Mucorales . The cultures grew gray-brown colonies with cottony texture in which Rhizopus species was identified by means of microscopic and macroscopic characteristics. DNA was extracted from the tissue of fresh nasal samples with QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instruction.
The diagnosis was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay using two universal primers, namely ITS1 and ITS4, to amplify the internal transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1) and ITS2 regions and the 5.8S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) region of the fungi as described previously [9]. The amplicons were sequenced and compared with the GenBank database using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, and comparative analysis revealed Rhizopus oryzae. The obtained sequences were submitted to GenBank and received the accession number MG946811.
The brain magnetic resonance imaging scan revealed the involvement of the maxillary sinus, ethmoid bone, and left sphenoid sinus with no mass effect. The brain computed tomography scan also demonstrated the involvement of the left maxillary, ethmoid sinuses, and nasopharynx, as well as the destruction of the bone of the medial wall of the left maxillary and ethmoid sinuses .
Given the rapid progression of the disease and the spread of infection to the eyes and brain, the eye removal was recommended. However, the patient’s family refused the enucleation. Consequently, the infection progressed to the eye, and the patient lost her vision. At the same time, severe oral ulcers appeared. Patient’s respiratory and hemodynamic conditions were stable. The dosage of amphotericin B deoxycolate (75 mg/day) increased, and broad-spectrum antibiotics were continued. Eventually, despite antifungal treatment and special care, the patient expired in September 6 due to the rapid progression of the infection to the brain as a result of the refusal of the patient's family regarding enucleation surgery.
The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran (IR.MAZUMS.REC.95.1560). Informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin for each procedure.