An 82-year-old male visited our outpatient clinic for an incidentally detected liver mass discovered on abdominal ultrasonography.
He denied fever, night sweats, weight loss, and abdominal pain.
The patient was on medication for hypertension and diabetes mellitus for 20 and 10 years, respectively. He also had underlying liver cirrhosis of an unknown cause, which was diagnosed 13 years ago.
The patient had no family history.
There were no abnormal findings on physical examination.
The laboratory workup showed the following: platelet count, 510 × 109/L (reference range, 130–450 × 109/L); total bilirubin, 0.63 mg/dL (reference range, 0.22–1.3 mg/dL); aspartate aminotransferase level, 37 U/L (reference range, 10–37 U/L); alanine aminotransferase level, 46 U/L (reference range, 10–37 U/L); albumin level, 4.0 g/dL (reference range, 3.5–5.2 g/dL); and prothrombin time, 0.97 international normalized ratio (INR; reference range, 0.8–1.2 INR). In the serum laboratory examinations for viral hepatitis, the hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C antibody were negative, whereas the hepatitis B core antibody and hepatitis B surface antibody were positive, implying a prior hepatitis B viral infection. The alpha-fetoprotein level was 84.97 IU/mL, and the protein level induced by vitamin K absence-II (PIVKA-II) was 60232 mAU/mL.
Abdominal CT revealed a 16 cm × 11 cm × 10 cm mass with early arterial enhancement and early washout in the delayed phase. Several daughter nodules were found around the main mass. Ascites was not detected . Liver magnetic resonance imaging with Gadoxetate disodium (Primovist®) and enhanced chest CT were performed as the staging workup for the HCC, which showed showed arterial hyperenhancement with washout assessed in the portal venous phase in the enhanced T1-weighted images, and a 7-mm well-defined solid nodule suspected to be a metastatic nodule in the right middle lobe with interstitial lung abnormality (ILA) findings, such as bilateral subpleural reticulation and non-emphysematous cysts with traction bronchiectasis, respectively . Although the patient did not have respiratory symptoms such as dyspnea, pulmonary function tests were performed for ILA evaluation. His forced vital capacity (FVC) and 1-second forced expiratory volume (FEV1) were 1.87 L (52.4% of predicted value) and 1.39 L (63.2% of predicted value), respectively. The FEV1/FVC ratio was 109.7% of predicted value that showed restrictive patterns of lung disease. Because of the suspicious malignant metastatic pulmonary lesions, F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT was performed to thoroughly evaluate the extrahepatic metastasis, which showed multiple hypermetabolic lesions in both iliac bones, lumbar vertebrae, and the right femur . A solid nodule in the right middle lobe also had mild focal hypermetabolic activity compared to the surrounding lung parenchyma with a maximum standardized uptake value of 1.0.