A 59-year-old man was presented in our hospital because of respiratory distress since 3 days before admission, which had been gradually sever. He was admitted with impression of pulmonary edema. He had a history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, systemic hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
On physical examination, he was blind, with blood pressure of 210/140 mmHg, pulse rate about 150 beat/min and respiratory rate about 40 cycle/min. The pulses were equal in upper limbs. Both femoral pulses were equal but weak. There were diffuse moist rhales in both lungs and cardiac examination systolic ejection sound and murmur was audible in the aortic area and with less severity in apex and lower left sternal border.
Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia with complete left bundle branch block. After several hours of aggressive medical treatment, the patient’s condition became relatively stable.
Echocardiography showed sever aortic valve stenosis (mean pressure gradient = 60 mmHg) and sever LV systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction = 25%).
After initial stabilization with conservative treatment, coronary angiography was done and revealed three vessels coronary artery disease.
Cardiac catheterization from right femoral artery showed occlusion of the distal thoracic aorta to the left subclavian artery and angiography from right brachial artery proved interrupted aorta (type A). We were not able to pass through aortic valve to the left ventricle because of valvular stenosis, and it seems that left internal mammary artery plays role in collateralization but we did not engage through it .
The descending thoracic aorta was supplied by extensive collateral vessels from the vertebrobasilar system down to the posterior chest wall and the spine . Successful surgical correction including coronary artery bypass graft and aortic valve replacement and repair of interruption of the aorta was performed without any complication. Three weeks later the patient died due to gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding which was not controllable by aggressive treatment and hospital acquired pneumonia.