A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital with irregularly enlarged prostate; this was found during an examination in which his chief complaints were of abdominal pain and constipation. He had already been administrated leuprorelin acetate as a treatment for SBMA for the past 3 years.
The patient had been aware of arm tremors since age 35, with gradual onset of dysarthria and dysphagia. At the age of 54, a genetic test revealed that the number of CAG repeats in his AR gene was abnormally long (46), and he had been diagnosed with SBMA. His older brother had also been diagnosed with SBMA. At age 55, the patient participated in a randomized controlled trial of leuprorelin acetate treatment, however, he was assigned to the placebo group. At the age of 60, he began receiving the actual drug, and his neurological symptoms stopped progressing thereafter. His serum PSA had never been measured at this point.
After the visit to our hospital, a laboratory test revealed that his serum PSA level was abnormally high at 17.7 ng/mL, even though his serum testosterone level had dropped to the castration level of 0.23 ng/mL (reference value, 1.31–8.71 ng/mL). Contrast-enhanced CT scan showed that his prostate was irregularly enlarged with a diameter of 84 mm, suggesting left seminal vesicle invasion of prostate cancer accompanied by a swelling right obturatorius lymph node . No evidence of distant metastasis was detected by CT scan and bone scintigraphy. Whole-body MRI was not performed. Based on the clinical history, the patient was diagnosed with castration-resistant prostate cancer without distant metastasis (m0CRPC). The patient underwent prostate needle biopsy and bilateral orchiectomies simultaneously, and the pathological results showed adenocarcinoma of the prostate . The Gleason score could not be determined because the patient had already received leuprorelin acetate for several years. For treating m0CRPC, dalolutamide intake and radiation therapy to the prostate were initiated, resulting in a significant decrease in serum PSA levels and reduction in the size of the prostrate . This favorable response was maintained at least 12 months of treatment.