A 63-year-old man visited a local hospital, presenting with dysuria, frequent urination, oliguria and lower extremities oedema. The chief complaint was oedema of lower extremities, abdominal distension, nausea and progressive jaundice for one month. No previous abnormal history. On admission, laboratory investigations revealed jaundice (serum total bilirubin, 133 µmol/L) and hypoproteinemia (serum albumin 27 g/L). Computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple serous cavity effusion (pleural, peritoneal and pelvic cavity effusions) and focal hypodense lesions in the liver, and multiple low-density focal lesions in the spleen. Intravenous contrast CT further revealed uneven enhancement without mass effects in the liver and spleen. Initially, Budd Chiari syndrome was considered following magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, revealing local stenosis and near occlusion of the hepatic segment of the inferior vena cava. At the time of admission in the local hospital, haemorrhagic ascites was observed during abdominocentesis. Due to sudden dropping of blood pressure, emergency laparoscopy was performed, revealing liver and spleen fibrosis with congestion, but no obvious visceral rupture. During the operation, liver biopsy was also performed for diagnosis, and abdominal irrigation and drainage were applied. Liver histopathology showed liver fibrosis. Autoimmune liver disease was also considered, but without ruling out of Budd Chiari syndrome. The patient’s condition continued deteriorating with unstable blood pressure and fast progression of jaundice, as well as, large volume ascites. No specific treatment was able to be offer in the local hospital, due to uncertain diagnosis. Therefore, the patient was transferred to a tertiary teaching hospital for a more appropriate management. The discharge information from the local hospital was multiple serous cavity effusions, ascites (bloody), accompanied with liver damage, possible cause of autoimmune liver disease or Budd Chiari syndrome.
There was no history of fever, asthenia, vomiting, hematemesis, melena, abdominal pain, nor alteration in bowel movement. This patient had right 11th rib fracture, due to blunt injury two months prior to admission. His past medical history was unremarkable, particularly without prior history of liver disease. No history of smoking and drinking.
His mother died of liver disease without confirmed diagnosis. He had no any specific personal or family history of other disease.
Jaundice was obvious at the physical examination. Three abdominal drainage tubes were not clotted. There was mild tenderness and percussion pain in the right upper quadrant abdomen, but no rebound tenderness. Liver was reached 2 cm below the right costal margin with soft edge and mild tenderness. There was oedema of low limbs. No other obvious abnormality was detected.
Laboratory tests were listed in Table . The antibodies were negative against mitochondrial (AMA), anti-nuclear (ANA), hepatitis A, B, C, E, HIV, anti-liver or kidney microsome, and anti-smooth muscle, CMV, EBV and T-SPOT.
Urinalysis revealed that protein-to-creatinine ratio was 72.09 mg/mmol. IgG was 5.43 g/L (8.6–17.4 g/L), κ free light chain 24.2 mg/L (3.3–19.4 mg/L) and λ free light chain 928 mg/L (5.71–26.3 mg/L), as well as, 1294 mg/24 h for protein (reference range negative, 0 g/L). Serum electrophoresis was negative for Ig, monoclonal immunoglobulin (mAb) kappa and lambda light chains. Urine immunofixation showed the deposition of monoclonal free λ light chains. Ultrasound cardiogram demonstrated that contraction activities of left ventricular wall were slightly less than normal and a small amount of pericardial effusion.
The ascites was yellow and turbid, with negative for Rivalta test. Cell count of the ascites was 15 × 106/L, LDH was 42.4 U/L, protein was 4.40 g/L, and adenosine deaminase was 11.6 U/L.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple serous cavity effusion with hepatomegaly without focal liver lesions. No abnormality was detected in intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts. Splenomegaly was also observed (13.4 cm). The second CT in the referred tertial hospital (Ruijin Hospital) confirmed that there was hepatomegaly, splenic infarction, pleural effusion and pericardial effusion, abdominal cavity drainage, oesophageal gastric varices, but no obvious abnormality in portal vein.
To confirm the diagnosis, a well-recognised independent senior pathologist was consulted. The hepatic lobular structure was preserved, and a large amount of amorphous (amyloid) material was diffused in the hepatic sinuses and squeezed the hepatic cord . Importantly, apple-green birefringence was observed under polarized light with Congo red stained . Immunohistochemistry on the liver biopsy revealed that κ chain was heavily deposited in the sinusoid of the liver ; whereas λ chain was more diffused distributed in the liver . Thus, primary liver AL-Amyloidosis was confirmed, in conjunction with the histopathology and Congo red staining.
Following the diagnosis of hepatic amyloidosis, the indexes of the patient's liver, kidney and heart deteriorated sharply, while prothrombin time was prolonged dramatically. The patient and his family refused further invasive examination. Thus, no bone marrow examination was permitted.
This patient was diagnosed with primary hepatic amyloidosis, based on the final pathologist report.
The most critical issue in hepatic amyloidosis is early diagnosis, because any delayed confirmation could cause extremely serious consequence. The condition of this patient, including liver, heart and renal, deteriorating extremely rapidly , showing estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 48 mL/min/1.73 m2; NT-pro BNP, 2976 pg/mL; cardiac troponins, 0.18 ng/mL, and serum free light chain difference (DFLC) was 903.8 (≥ 180) mg/L. Thus, Mayo score 3 for AL amyloidosis was given to this patient . Upon the diagnosis, a haematologist was consulted, and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation was not advised for this patient, however chemotherapy was recommended. This patient declined chemotherapy and elected to be self-discharged back to his hometown for palliative care only. The patient died of multi-organ failure one month after discharge.