A 50-year-old woman with no previous comorbidity and no family history transferred to our institution for further evaluation of VF cardiac arrest. Two hours prior to this admission, she collapsed suddenly with no alarming symptoms and suffered a witnessed cardiac arrest while having lunch. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed by a witness immediately. Shortly thereafter, she transferred to the nearby local emergency department. She was subsequently intubated for airway protection, and her initial rhythm was documented as VF. Therefore, 10 min of CPR and 5 rounds of defibrillation were performed, and return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved. Her post-defibrillation electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a right bundle branch block (RBBB) with ST elevation and Q-waves over V1–V4 . Upon our clinical examination, she had high blood pressure of 160/80 mmHg and was otherwise haemodynamically stable. Her mental status was stupor, and non-contrast head CT showed no evidence of haemorrhage. Auscultation of both lungs revealed a clear breath sound, and no heart murmur was audible. Laboratory evaluation showed an increased white blood cell count (14,980/μL, normal = 4000–10,800/μL), prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (proBNP) (998.1 pg/mL, normal = 0–270 pg/mL), troponin-I (0.054 ng/mL, normal = 0–0.016 ng/mL) and D-dimer (3725 ng/mL, normal = 0–225 ng/mL). The creatinine kinase-myocardial band (CK-MB) (3.69 ng/mL, 0–6.22 ng/mL) and potassium (3.8 mEq/L, normal = 3.5–5.0 mEq/L) were within normal limits.
An ECG performed in our emergency room showed an RBBB with a deep Q-wave over V1–V4 and resolution of ST elevation . Given that her post-defibrillation ECG showed ST elevation on the precordial lead, we planned to perform urgent coronary angiography (CAG) and spasm provocation tests under the suspicion of MI or variant angina. There was no significant stenosis of either coronary artery with anomalous origin of the right coronary artery (RCA). Significant MB on the distal segment of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and diagonal branch was observed . Considering the transient precordial lead ST elevation on ECG, we performed a spasm provocation test. After administration of ergonovine (total dose 50 µq) into the left coronary artery (LCA), no spasm and no ECG changes were observed, and a provocation test on RCA failed because cannulation of anomalous origin RCA was difficult.
Shortly after CAG, she underwent hypothermia treatment for 72 h, after which she gradually regained consciousness without any neurological deficits. On day 4 of hospitalization, she was successfully weaned off the ventilator with good neurological recovery. Subsequently, careful evaluation was performed to identify the cause of VF cardiac arrest.
Given the increased d-dimer level, we performed coronary CT angiogram (CCTA). We could exclude pulmonary thromboembolism and confirm that there was no stenosis on anomalous origin RCA. We also checked for an intra-myocardial course of the distal LAD and diagonal branch, and the lengths of tunnelled segments were 31 mm and 30.7 mm, respectively .
Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated focal mid-septal wall motion abnormalities with an ejection fraction of 52% . Based on this finding of ischaemia, we asked her if she had complained of shortness of breath or chest discomfort before this event, and she said that there had been no specific symptom during her exercise or working out. For further evaluation of ischaemia and elucidation of other causes of cardiac arrest, we performed heart magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). This procedure revealed myocardial wall thinning and subendocardial oedema in the mid ventricular to apical anterior and septal regions, and myocardial late gadolinium enhancement imaging revealed myocardial scarring with > 50–75% transmurality in the same region . In light of these results, we concluded that MB might be the cause of myocardial ischaemia and VF cardiac arrest and that vasospasm might play a role as a trigger factor.
The patient was discharged on day 25 of hospitalization after full resolution of her presenting symptoms with no neurologic sequelae. She was on a calcium channel blocker and angiotensin receptor blocker and was asymptomatic over the 1-year follow-up.