A 61-year-old woman visited the emergency room due to general weakness, nausea, visual disturbance, heat intolerance, and a non-productive cough with dyspnea, which had persisted between 3 and 6 months. The patient had underlying ischemic heart disease and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, for which she was being treated with clopidogrel, pitavastatin, valsartan, rivaroxaban, nicorandil, diltiazem, furosemide, and amiodarone. More specifically, amiodarone was prescribed for 34 months at an initial dose of 200 mg/day for 11 months, and then due to intermittent chest discomfort with palpitation, her cardiologist increased the maintenance dose to 400 mg/day for the next 23 months. The patient was not taking any other medications, including herbal agents, and did not have a history of alcohol consumption.
The laboratory workup showed that the level of the total bilirubin was 0.71 mg/dL (reference range, 0.22–1.3), the aspartate aminotransferase level was 358 U/L (reference range, 10–37), the alanine aminotransferase level was 177 U/L (reference range, 10–37), and the prothrombin time was 1.90 International Normalized Ratio (INR) (reference range, 0.8–1.2). Enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed diffusely increased liver intensity and scattered hyper attenuated nodular consolidations in the subpleural areas of both lungs . To evaluate the possibility of malignancy, positron emission tomography–CT (PET–CT) was performed, and multiple hypermetabolic lesions (maximal standardized uptake values 7.3, ) were examined. To confirm the diagnosis of the lung lesions, transthoracic needle biopsy was performed, and the pathologic examination showed fibrinoid interstitial inflammation with atypical change of type II pneumocytes and intra-alveolar foamy macrophages . Using both the CT and biopsy findings, we could diagnose the amiodarone-induced hepatic and pulmonary toxicity.
Further, to assess the possibility of amiodarone-induced thyroid dysfunction, we examined thyroid function tests. The thyroid-stimulating hormone level was less than 0.008 uIU/mL (reference range, 0.55–4.78), free thyroxine was 4.67 ng/dL (reference range, 0.89–1.76), triiodothyronine was 1.27 ng/mL (reference range, 0.6–1.81), thyroid binding inhibitor immunoglobulin (TBII) was 18.3 IU/L (reference range, 0–1.5), anti-microsome antibody was 139.0 U/mL (reference range, 0–60), and anti-thyroglobulin antibody was 125 U/L (reference range, 0–60). The PET–CT scan of the thyroid showed no metabolic lesion . The thyroid scan (technetium-99 m pertechnetate scintigraphy) showed diffuse homogenous intake of technetium-99 m pertechnetate in both thyroid lobes . Anti-microsomal antibody and anti-thyroglobulin antibody may be detected in Graves' disease (anti-microsomal antibody: 69.2%, anti-thyroglobulin antibody: 23–30%) ; furthermore, with the results of TBII and the thyroid scan results, we diagnosed our patient as having type 1 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis, a form of iodine-induced hyperthyroidism caused by excessive, uncontrolled biosynthesis of thyroid hormone by autonomously functioning thyroid tissue in response to iodine load, which typically develops in underlying latent Graves' disease . After consultation with the endocrinology department, methimazole (20 mg for 17 days followed by 5 mg/d) was used as treatment to manage excessive thyroid hormone synthesis.
The patient persistently complained of blurred vision, and the ophthalmologic exam detected bilateral symmetrical corneal deposits in a vortex pattern , which was compatible with amiodarone-induced vortex keratopathy.
As amiodarone toxicity was considered as the possible cause of disease, amiodarone was discontinued from the first day of admission. As there was neither extensive lung involvement nor hypoxemia, steroid treatment was not immediately initiated. However, serial follow-up chest CT scans showed aggravation of previous lung lesions. After exclusion of lung malignancy via transthoracic needle biopsy, we decided on treatment with a systemic steroid regimen (methylprednisolone 40 mg) for pulmonary toxicity from day 29 of hospitalization. After 1 week of steroid medication, a follow-up CT showed an overall decreased extent of high attenuated subpleural mass-like consolidations and small nodules in both upper lung fields and the right middle lobe, suggesting an improved state of R/O amiodarone-induced pulmonary toxicity. After 4 months of steroid medication, a follow-up CT showed resolution of previous lung consolidations . The laboratory examination showed that both aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase levels were within the normal range after cessation of amiodarone for 1 month without any treatment . Free thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone were within the normal range after 6 weeks of methimazole medication . The patient recovered from her general weakness, cough, and hand tremor 1 month after amiodarone cessation and was discharged after most of the symptoms were resolved.