A 52-year-old woman with no pertinent past medical history presented to the emergency department for vomiting and diarrhea for one week. The patient also experienced fever and abdominal pain over the previous 24 hours. Upon initial evaluation, she was alert, hemodynamically stable, and afebrile. The abdomen was soft and depressible, nontender and nondistended. Laboratory tests showed an increased lactic acid of 2.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 0.5–2 mmol/L), and C-reactive protein of 149 milligrams (mg)/L (<5 mg/L), unchanged hepatic and renal function tests, without other relevant changes. Abdominal-pelvic computed tomography (APCT) revealed marked gastric distension with gastric pneumatosis (GP), parietal thickening of the jejunoileal loops, and air in the portal system .
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no disruption of the gastric mucosa or signs of ischemia. Exploratory laparoscopy was performed showing no evidence of visceral pathology. Subsequently, due to the worsening of abdominal pain and fever, a new APCT was ordered, revealing pneumoperitoneum and peritoneal fluid. Emergent laparotomy was performed, which revealed jejunum perforation with peritonitis. Exploration of the abdominal cavity found neo-formation of the root of the mesentery with infiltration of the small intestine. The patient had a segmental enterectomy and excision of tumor of the mesentery (7 centimeters), which was adherent to the intima of the third portion of the duodenum, the jejunum, and invasion of the superior mesenteric artery.
After operative repair, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to septic shock most likely caused by peritonitis. She had a prolonged hospitalization in the ICU for a total of 24 days, with several surgical revisions, requiring invasive ventilation for 19 days and vasopressor support for five days. Her condition gradually improved, due to antibiotics and surgical revisions, with resolution of organ dysfunctions. Histological analysis of neoformation revealed that it was an intra-abdominal desmoid tumor (DT).
The patient was discharged from the hospital after 45 days and was followed up with oncology consultation. After six months of follow-up, she presented with tumor recurrence and, in discussion with a solid tumors reference center, it was decided to start systemic treatment with tamoxifen and indomethacin.