A 4 years old girl was referred to our hospital for suspected foreign body aspiration. She presented with 3 days history of cough and haemoptysis. The expectorant consisted of fresh bright blood mixed with small clots and mucus . There were 2 previous similar episodes when she was 8 months and 3 years old. Both episodes were treated as Mallory-Weiss syndrome in another hospital and symptoms resolved without further investigation.
On physical examination, she was pink and not tachypnoeic. Her oxygen saturation was 98% under the room air. A grade 2 systolic murmur was detected over the right upper sternal border. There was reduced breath sound over the right lung field. Other organ system examination was unremarkable.
Chest radiograph showed ambiguous situs (abnormal liver and stomach position), mesocardia and a mass over the right para-cardiac region. Both lung fields were clear. The complete blood count, coagulation profile and renal function were normal.
The initial chest CT performed at referring hospital revealed an intratracheal linear structure suspicious of foreign body.
An urgent flexible bronchoscopic evaluation was performed under general anaesthesia. No foreign body was detected but a prominent vertical mucosal fold was seen above the carina which explained the initial CT finding. The right main bronchus was significantly smaller in calibre compared to the left with mucosal hyperaemia, oedema and variceal engorgement of submucosal blood vessels .
Transthoracic echocardiogram was performed as part of the workout for heart murmur. It revealed left atrial isomerism and dextroposition of the heart. The right pulmonary artery was hypoplastic and the right pulmonary veins could not be traced. Otherwise, the rest of the intracardiac anatomy was normal and there was no evidence of pulmonary hypertension.
Cardiac CT angiography confirmed the final diagnosis of right unilateral pulmonary vein atresia. The posterior left atrial wall at the expected site of right pulmonary veins entrance were completely smooth . The right pulmonary artery was significantly smaller than the left with general paucity of right lung vasculature . The right lung volume was small with interlobular septal thickening and mosaic attenuation . In addition, there was a small systemic-to-pulmonary collateral artery from the coeliac artery supplying the lower lobe of the right lung . The CT also revealed a right diaphragmatic hernia containing part of the liver and complete viscerocardiac left isomerism (bilateral morphological left atrial appendages, bilateral hyparterial bronchi, interrupted inferior vena cava with azygous vein continuation and polysplenia) .
A multidisciplinary team meeting was held to discuss on the best treatment strategy. In view of self-limiting nature of each haemoptysis episodes, absence of serious complications such as recurrent severe respiratory infections or pulmonary hypertension and potential long-term sequelae of pneumonectomy in a young growing child, a conservative management approach with watchful follow up was adopted.
At 6 months after discharge, the patient remained symptom free.