A 75-year-old Chinese woman was admitted to the hospital with symptoms of progressive oedema of the lower limbs. On physical exam, her head exam revealed a normocephalic, atraumatic head with no palpable or visible masses. A neck exam revealed no lymphadenopathy, jugular venous distention, or carotid bruits. A cardiovascular exam was significant for abnormal S1 and S2 but no murmurs or thrills on auscultation. Breath sounds were clear and symmetric bilaterally, without any crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi. Her abdomen was soft, non-distended, and non-tender, with normal bowel sounds and no organomegaly.
The patient underwent mechanical mitral valve (GK-3 tilting disc, 27 mm, made in China) replacement surgery on mid-June, 2007. She had a history of hypertension for 15 years. At this time, she was admitted to our hospital again because of right ventricular dysfunction. The patient was discharged after symptoms of shortness of breath, leg swelling had been improved with diuretic therapy.
We found that the patient had been taking 0.625 mg warfarin per day since one month after surgery, but due to excessive anticoagulation, she suffered from skin purpura without bleeding and neurological complications. Therefore, she had stopped taking warfarin and other anticoagulant treatments since she experienced excessive anticoagulation. Interestingly, her INR had always remained in the range of 2.0–2.5 until now without any anticoagulants. Follow-up interval for her will be half a year in the future.
Repeat echocardiography showed a normal-functioning mechanical mitral prosthesis . On 29 September 2019, transthoracic echocardiography showed right ventricular enlargement and normal left ventricular function , and the mitral valve was working well without any vegetation (Videos 1 and 2). There was no thrombosis in the heart valve or left atrium. The preoperative PT and INR of this patient were 22.5 s and 2.02, respectively. Warfarin-related genes were tested . These genes were normal. We found that the patient suffered from factor X (FX) deficiency . Therefore, we considered that this patient, without any anticoagulants, did not have thrombo-embolic complications due to the FX deficiency.