A 59-years-old Turkish woman who had undergone modified radical mastectomy for a stage IIB (T2N1M0) infiltrating ductal carcinoma of left breast. After modified radical mastectomy of the left breast, she had a disease free period of four years. Afterwards disease free survival, the patient suffered from menorrhagia. On pelvic examination, an enlarged uterus, the size of which was similar to that at 12 weeks' gestation, was noted and ultrasonographic examination revealed a leiomyoma of the uterus. The patient had underwent a diagnostic laparotomy for a suspicion of leiomyoma. During the evaluation total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and appendectomy was performed. The uterus was symmetrically enlarged, weighed 650 gr, and measured 13 cm × 12 cm × 6 cm. Uterine tumor measuring 9 × 7 × 5 cm with central necrosis, and there was no obvious disease involving the bilateral ovaries, lymph nodes or omentum The result of pathology was a leiomyosarcoma of the uterus without any metastatic lesion. There was no evidence of uterine serosal and pelvic lymph node involvement. No adjuvant treatment, such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy, was arranged after the surgery.
Sixteen months later the patient had undergone cholecystectomy and incisional hernia repair. During laparotomy there was no evidence of metastasis. Afterwards these operations, during routine controls a metastatic lesion in the lomber vertebraes was found. While the patient was receiving radiotherapy for this metastatic bone lesion. She admitted to the emergency room for abdominal discomfort. Physical examination revealed tenderness and rigidity also labaratory tests were as follows; hemoglobin 9.7 g/dl, white blood count 17 500 mm³, chest and abdominal plain radiography were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed fluid collection in the pelvis.
Then the patient had undergone an emergency surgical operation. A solid necrotic tumoral mass 4 × 5 cm in diameter was found 2 inches proximal to the ileocecal valve. There was also a perforation in the small bowel with generalized peritonitis. The tumoral segment was resected with tumor free margin and also with regional lymph node dissection was performed.
Microscopically the tumoral invasion was observed all through the intestine wall from mucosa into the serosa. There was areas of necrosis with spindle cells in an interlacing or fascicular patern . Histopathological findings of the tumoral mass was similar to the one which was resected two years ago . There was a moderate degree of cellular atypia. Mitotic activity ranged from 7-17 per 10 high-power field. The tumor cells showed a strong positive reaction to α-smooth muscle actin and vimentin. Whereas there was no reaction with keratin, desmin, S-100, myoglobyn, EMA, NSE, CD 31, CD 34, CD 68 and CD117. The diagnosis of leiomyosarcoma was performed according to these reactions. There was no lymph node metastasis the resection margins free of tumor cells.
After 10 months disease free survival the patient admitted to hospital with low gastrointestinal bleeding. During evaluation; a metastatic lesion was evaluated in transverse colon. The patient rejected any kind of medical assistance and died after a short period of time.