An 88-year-old man presented to the emergency department with sudden-onset chest pain. He had a history of hypertension and atrial fibrillation without prior syncope or stroke. He had no family history of HCM or sudden cardiac death and no history of cigarette smoking, alcohol abuse, or illicit drug use. He denied any history of chest trauma, recent MI, congenital heart disease, or catheter ablation procedures. In addition, he had no preceding flu-like symptoms. Pre-admission medication included azelnidipine (8 mg/day), olmesartan (10 mg/day), and cilostazol (50 mg/day). On admission, the patient's vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 148/109 mmHg; heart rate, 77 beats/min; and body temperature, 36.6 °C. Physical examination revealed normal breath sounds and a grade 4/6 systolic murmur at the cardiac apex. No jugular venous distension, gallops, or leg edema was observed. Our initial concerns were acute MI and its mechanical complications, such as ventricular septal rupture and acute mitral regurgitation caused by papillary muscle rupture.
Chest radiography was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed atrial fibrillation and poor R-wave progression but no remarkable ST-T changes or negative T-waves . Notably, premature ventricular beat of a right bundle branch block with superior axis morphology was observed, suggesting a LV apex origin. His initial laboratory results showed mild anemia and elevated levels of C-reactive protein and brain natriuretic peptide . The cardiac biomarker levels were within normal ranges. Echocardiography revealed a mild LV wall thickness and reduced chamber size with normal LV contraction. Sigmoid-shaped interventricular septum and mid-ventricular obstruction (MVO) coexistent with LV outflow tract obstruction were also recognized (A and C; and ). Color Doppler echocardiography revealed a significant intraventricular pressure gradient (IVPG) between the apical and basal chambers of the left ventricle, and secondary mitral regurgitation (B and D; and ). No remarkable intracardiac shunts were observed. Notably, a well-circumscribed small LV apical outpouching with a moderate amount of pericardial effusion was observed (E and F; and ).
Potential diagnoses of LV apical outpouching included LV true aneurysm, LVP, diverticulum, cardiac hydatid cyst, and sub-epicardial cyst. Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) further characterized the morphology of the LV apical outpouching (A–D). CCTA revealed normal coronary arteries, but the presence of contrast-filled LV outpouching at the apex that protruded significantly during systole, with a maximum diameter of 5.4 mm, narrow orifice of 2.5 mm, and orifice-to-maximum diameter ratio of 46%, strongly suggested LVP. Notably, a moderate amount of pericardial effusion was observed. These findings along with the patient's symptoms were suggestive of LVP with impending cardiac rupture.
The patient initially refused our proposed urgent surgery because of his advanced age. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring. Lacking irrefutable evidence for HCM, we believed that chronic pressure overload within the MVO caused by the sigmoid septum and reduced LV chamber size resulted in an LVP at the LV apex. Preload reduction and tachycardia were risk factors for LV cavity narrowing, further increasing the IVPG in the MVO and promoting LVP expansion. After admission to the ICU, intravenous fluid replacement with 0.9% normal saline and continuous intravenous landiolol at a dose of 2 μg/kg/min were initiated to alleviate the load on the LVP by ameliorating the IVPG. Follow-up echocardiography revealed improvement of IVPG in MVO to 25 mmHg followed by reduced cardiac murmur on auscultation. The multidisciplinary team concluded that given the nature of LVP, which predisposes to cardiac rupture, and the superior long-term outcome of surgical intervention compared to that of conservative management even in older patients, surgical repair of the LVP was required. The patient finally underwent a semi-urgent surgical repair of the apical aneurysm on day 3 after admission.
A median sternotomy with moderate hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass using aorto-bicaval cannulation with aortic cross-clamping was performed. Eventually, the aneurysm was not adhered to the pericardium and was accompanied by serous pericardial fluid. The aneurysmal wall, approximately 7 mm in diameter, was vulnerable to thinning; however, there were no obvious signs of cardiac rupture (A and B). The apical aneurysm was repaired using vertical mattress sutures and reinforced with Teflon felt.
Pathologic examination of the excised specimen revealed transmural myocardial tissue depletion replaced with a thin fibrous membrane consistent with a pseudoaneurysm, and the adjacent LV myocardial tissue consisted of severe hypertrophy and disarrangement of myocytes with severe perivascular fibrosis (C–E), suggestive of HCM. Therefore, a final diagnosis of HCM-related LVP was made.
Immediately following surgery, profound hypotension and tachycardia occurred because of preload reduction, which quickly resolved with intravenous fluid bolus administration of normal saline, and infusions of dopamine (10 μg/kg/min) and noradrenaline (0.5 μg/kg/min). A follow-up echocardiography revealed hyperkinetic LV contraction with a narrowed LV cavity, resulting in a significant MVO, presumably provoked by tachycardia and the need for continuous intravenous landiolol (5 μg/kg/min). Close hemodynamic monitoring of arterial pressure continued in the ICU. The patient was hemodynamically stable thereafter. On postoperative day 3 (hospitalization day 6), the patient experienced nausea and vomiting. He developed shock with a systolic blood pressure of 70 mmHg, requiring intravenous administration of isotonic saline solution and noradrenaline (0.5 μg/kg/min). In addition, the patient developed severe hypoxemia with a SpO2 of 88%, requiring tracheal intubation for respiratory insufficiency. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed severe acidemia (pH 7.248, pO2 53 mmHg, pCO2 55 mmHg, BE -3.7) with an increased serum lactate level of 5.5 mmol/L (reference: 0.5–1.5 mmol/L). Abdominal distention was observed. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography suggested acute small bowel ischemia characterized by a severe functional ileus, raising suspicion of non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia (NOMI). Although we strongly recommended emergent abdominal surgery, the family refused our proposal. Selective angiography of the superior mesenteric artery was performed. Digital subtraction angiographic images revealed severe diffuse narrowing of the superior mesenteric artery and its branch vessels, with a reduced number of mesenteric vessels, suggesting vasospasm (data not shown). A constellation of clinical features, exclusion of embolic mesenteric artery occlusion, and radiographic findings fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for NOMI . To reverse mesenteric vasoconstriction, prostaglandin E1 was administered as an initial bolus of 10 μg and a subsequent continuous intra-arterial infusion of 80 μg/day. In addition, supportive care, including intravenous broad-spectrum antimicrobials (ceftriaxone, 2 g twice daily) and insertion of a nasogastric tube to achieve gastric decompression, was provided. The patient's condition worsened thereafter and was complicated by multiple organ failure . Eventually, the patient died despite intensive treatment. shows a timeline of the patient's clinical course.