A 37-year-old Portuguese Caucasian man diagnosed with Val30Met FAP 12 years previously presented with painless, rapidly progressive visual loss in his left eye (LE). He also had sensory-motor polyneuropathy, gastrointestinal dysmotility and bradyarrhythmia which stabilized after pacemaker implantation and liver transplantation at the age of 30. He was medicated with prednisolone (5mg/day), tacrolimus (3mg/day), sirolimus (2mg/day), mycophenolate mofetil (1500mg/day), ursodeoxycholic acid and pantoprazole. There was no other relevant past medical history. His visual acuity was 20/20 in his right eye (RE) and 20/200 in his LE. Slit lamp biomicroscopy was normal and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 15mmHg in both eyes. A fundus examination after pupillary dilatation was normal in his RE, whereas two dot-blot hemorrhages near his superotemporal vascular arcade, slight optic disc edema as well as macular edema were identified in his LE (Figure ). No vitreous opacities were observed and his retinal periphery was normal bilaterally. Fluorescein angiography (FA) confirmed LE optic disc edema and showed vascular fluorescein leakage and vessel wall staining in the posterior pole and mid-periphery, without capillary exclusion zones or evidence of neovascularization. LE macular edema was also evident on FA. Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed a normal morphology in his RE and cystoid macular edema in his LE (Figure ).
A primary extensive work-up for systemic infectious, autoimmune, neoplasic and inflammatory conditions was performed including complete blood profile, chest X-ray, serologic tests (toxoplasmosis, syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis, cytomegalovirus) and other investigations for tuberculosis (purified protein derivative skin test and sputum analysis), fungi, acid-alcohol resistant bacilli and bacteria. No clinically remarkable findings were observed. Liver function tests were also unremarkable (aspartate aminotransferase 27U/L, alanine aminotransferase 30U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase 26U/L, alkaline phosphatase 132U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 421U/L, total bilirubin 1.30mg/dL, albumin 4.40g/dL). Brain and orbital magnetic resonance imaging results were also normal.Prednisolone dosage was increased to 60mg/day but no clinical improvement was observed. This was followed by two intravitreal injections of bevacizumab, which resulted in slight but fugacious clinical and functional improvement. At this time his visual acuity was 20/20 in his RE and 20/200 in his LE. FA and OCT revealed only a slight reduction in macular edema and perivascular exudation in his LE (Figures and
). The authors then decided to perform an intravitreal injection of triamcinolone in his LE and obtained a substantial improvement in macular edema which, however, recurred 6 weeks after the injection. Given the positive response to intravitreal triamcinolone, dexamethasone intravitreal implant 0.7mg (Ozurdex®; Allergan, Irvine, CA, USA) was performed, followed 2 weeks later by laser panretinal photocoagulation (LPP) in his LE. One month after completing LPP, his visual acuity was 20/20 in his RE and 20/50 in his LE. The IOP was 16mmHg in his RE and 30mmHg in his LE; the control of IOP was further achieved with a fixed combination of 2% dorzolamide/0.5% timolol. Macular OCT revealed a complete resolution of macular edema at this stage (Figure ).