A 51-year-old male patient was first admitted to our hospital on May 2002 because of a severe vertigo attack accompanied by right sensorineural hearing loss. This patient had suffered from fluctuating right sensorineural hearing loss with vertigo since 1994. Audiogram revealed a severe sensorineural hearing loss at 35.0 dB, with a predominance of low frequency impairment in the right ear . The vertigo improved with conventional steroid injections given for one week, but hearing loss did not improve. Thereafter, oral betahistine, adenosine triphosphate disodium (ATP), and isosorbide were prescribed, and vertigo disappeared. Since April 2004, however, a few times per month the patient has experienced vertigo spells that were intractable to conventional medical therapy . Head CT, MRI, and MRA were normal. After four months, we inserted a tympanic ventilation tube into the right tympanic membrane. His vertigo did not improve in the following 15 months. In June 2006, the patient received intratympanic injection of dexamethasone three times within six weeks. Dexamethasone treatment, however, was not effective. An audiogram performed in October 2006 revealed that the patient's right-side hearing level deteriorated to 62.5 dB . We recommended alternative therapies including Meniett therapy and intratympanic gentamicin injection; however, he refused.
In addition to vertigo spells, the patient suffered from insomnia, tinnitus, and anxiety. Tranquilizers such as benzodiazepine and antidepressants such as serotonin selective re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) did not appreciably alleviate these symptoms. Brotizolam (0.25 mg) slighted ameliorated the insomnia.
Since conventional medical therapy failed to improve his symptoms, we referred him to our psychologist for psychological evaluation and therapy. Although the patient initially declined our referral, he eventually complied, and on December 2006, he began psychological counseling with a psychotherapist. The results of the psychological examination were as follows: Self-rating Depression Scale (SDS), 51; State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) – Trait Anxiety, 64 (IV); STAI – State Anxiety, 57 (V); Japanese version of the Cornell Medical Index (CMI), IV; Yatabe-Guilford personality test (Y-G), type E. These results indicated that only slight depression was present, but a high degree of anxiety was confirmed. We decided to focus on treating the patient's anxiety, which was addressed by the psychologist. Psychotherapy consisted of one 45-minute session every three weeks. The first session began with a brief introduction to general background information about the cognitive approach, after which the patient was instructed on how to perform AT. The patient performed AT in a relaxed sitting position on a chair for 10 minutes three times a day. No self-monitoring was used. The patient was instructed to perform slow and deep abdominal breathing at the beginning of AT and regular breathing during AT. He diligently and regularly continued this AT routine three times a day in his home according to a written timetable. Astonishingly, on the same day the patient began AT, his insomnia disappeared completely. His insomnia, tinnitus, and vertigo disappeared in a few weeks. He learned all six standard formulas of AT in six psychotherapy sessions. After only four psychotherapy sessions, the patient was free from drugs, including tranquilizers. No additional treatment was performed. When we examined him six and nine months later for follow-up, the patient was free from vertigo and insomnia.