A 47-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with progressively exacerbated chest tightness after activity and echocardiographic suspicion of PH. Her body weight was 50 kg with the height of 150 cm. She was born prematurely at week 28. The patient had no similar family history, but her younger brother was also small and slight in stature. Her chest computed tomography (CT) five years ago showed no significant abnormalities. Four months before this admission, she experienced aggravating dyspnea. Lung function test indicated severe restrictive ventilation dysfunction and reduced diffusion capacity [forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 36%pred, forced vital capacity (FVC) 34%pred, FEV1/FVC 111%, single-breath carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of the lungs (DLCO SB) 47%pred] . Re-performed chest CT showed linear opacities, consolidation and nodules. Echocardiography was unavailable at that time. After antibiotics treatment, the symptom of dyspnea was improved while edema in both lower limbs gradually appeared. Meanwhile, she was diagnosed with hypertension (180/100 mmHg at highest) and received antihypertensive agents. Echocardiography two months ago showed mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, which may indicate underlying PH without obvious changes in the structure of the heart. Venous thromboembolism was excluded after CT pulmonary angiography and ultrasonography of the lower extremity veins. However, she had an enlarged main pulmonary artery of 34 mm in diameter. Symptomatic and supportive treatment did not bring significant improvement. One month ago, she was hospitalized again due to aggravated symptoms. The echocardiography indicated massive tricuspid regurgitation, mild right cardiac enlargement and suspicion of PH with an estimated pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (sPAP) of 76 mmHg, lack of signs of left heart disease. Arterial blood gas analysis (ABG) showed a partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 60 mmHg and a partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 57 mmHg. She received antibiotics, expectorants, bronchodilator and symptomatic treatment. The edema reduced but the chest tightness did not show significant improvement.
On admission, the patient presented with cyanosis and difficulty in neck flexion. She was afebrile, with a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute and a blood pressure of 122/75 mmHg. Heart rate was 109 beats per minute with a loud pulmonic component of the second heart sound. Her bilateral lower extremities were moderately edematous and muscle strength was mildly decreased in grade IV−, which defined as being able to engage in activities against light resistance. The admission electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, right axis deviation, and negative T waves in leads V1-V3. The patient presented with hypoventilation, type II respiratory failure and a special phenomenon of hypoxia in the supine position. ABG while breathing room air revealed a PaO2 of 38 mmHg in the supine position, but 52 mmHg in the sitting position . Lung function test indicated that the residual volume of single breath (RV-SB) was 1.42 L and total lung capacity of single breath (TLC-SB) was 2.39 L. The DLCO/alveolar ventilation (VA) was 1.45 mmol/min/kPa/L, which was 82.4% of the predicted value. Supine FEV1, FVC, FEV1/FVC ratio and the percentage they occupied of the predicted value measurements were all lower than the sitting measurements . Lower extremity ultrasound and echocardiography were repeated with similar results to previous examinations. D-dimer in plasma was 1.23 mg/L. Ventilation-perfusion scan was performed and excluded pulmonary embolism, while the simultaneous chest CT indicated scattered patchy and linear shadows in bilateral lungs, and an elevation of the right diaphragm . RHC indicated that the mPAP was 38 mmHg, pulmonary arterial wedge pressure was 7 mmHg, cardiac output was 4.99 L/min, and pulmonary vascular resistance was 6.21 Wood’s Unit. It revealed severe precapillary pulmonary hypertension, and concurrent acute vasoreactivity testing was negative. Advanced right heart contrast echocardiography showed no shunts. It was less likely to be PH associated with left heart disease, congenital heart disease, or chronic pulmonary artery obstruction. The cause of PH was more likely chronic lung diseases and/or hypoxia. Combining the supine hypoxia phenomenon and restrictive ventilation dysfunction, diaphragmatic ultrasound examination was performed and then revealed reduced mobility of bilateral diaphragm. Specifically, the left diaphragm showed an excursion of 1.0 cm both during quiet breathing and at maximum inspiration, with a diaphragmatic thickening fraction of 26%. On the right side, the diaphragm had an excursion of 1.7 cm during quiet breathing and 1.8 cm at maximum inspiration, with a diaphragmatic thickening fraction of 14%. The red blood cell count, hemoglobin and hematocrit on admission were 5.71 × 1012/L, 109 g/L and 44.2%, respectively. In conjunction with anemia-related testing, iron-deficiency anemia was considered and treated. Polysomnography indicated that the patient experienced hypoventilation during nocturnal sleep, with a hypopnea index of 119.6 times per hour. The longest duration of hypopnea lasted 63 s, and the average blood oxygen saturation (SO2) during sleep was only 73% . Hypoventilation syndrome was definitively diagnosed.
Except for weak positive for anti-TIF1γ antibody and antinuclear antibody (1:80), other immune-related antibody spectra were negative. The creatine kinase (CK) was mildly elevated with a value of 394 U/L. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral thigh muscle changed consistent with myositis . According to the consultation of the rheumatologist, the muscle biopsy was performed on the left biceps brachii and revealed the pathological features of central core disease .
Thus, we conducted genetic susceptibility gene whole exome sequencing, using the blood sample. The sequencing revealed a missense mutation in the RYR1 gene (exon33 c.C4816T), which was associated with congenital myopathies. Taking all factors into consideration, the patient was diagnosed with RYR1-related myopathy. We initiated non-invasive ventilation (NIV) therapy (Spontaneous-Timed mode, inspiratory positive airway pressure was 14cmH2O, expiratory positive airway pressure was 4cmH2O, respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute) to improve her ventilation, while closely monitoring her symptoms, breathing pattern and SO2. We used an in-laboratory overnight polysomnogram to titrate NIV in this patient. An oral-nasal mask was chosen for NIV. After regularly using non-invasive positive pressure ventilation at night, her chest tightness and cough significantly improved, so did her exercise tolerance and heart function. In addition to oral diuretics and long-term NIV therapy, we recommended home rehabilitation exercises upon discharge.
After 10 months, she no longer experienced chest tightness or shortness of breath and her muscle strength was better. ABG while breathing room air indicated a higher PaO2 of 68 mmHg and a lower PaCO2 of 52 mmHg in the supine position. The lung function test suggested an improvement in ventilation function compared to before . Repeated echocardiography showed mild tricuspid regurgitation, with a sPAP of 32 mmHg. The red blood cell count, hemoglobin and hematocrit were 4.00 × 1012/L, 121 g/L and 36.6%, respectively. Repeated polysomnography indicated improved hypoventilation during nocturnal sleep, with a hypopnea index of only 1.2 times per hour. The longest duration of hypopnea decreased to 51 s, and the average SO2 during sleep rose to 96%. We recommended the patient to continue home NIV treatment and rehabilitation, and have regular outpatient follow-up visits.