A three-month-old, caucasian boy infant was referred to our observation due to decreased sweating, dry skin and absence of hair on the scalp. Family history for inherited diseases was unremarkable. The facial features, hair, teeth, skin and nails of the mother appeared to be normal. He was the second child of healthy non-consaguineous parents. The first child was a healthy female.
He was born by spontaneous delivery after normal pregnancy, with no birth-related and perinatal complications. Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. Birth weight was 2390 g (4th centile), length 47 cm (12th centile), and head circumference 33 cm (19th centile).
Physical examination showed scaphocephaly, prominent forehead, forehead bumps, rings under the eyes, hypertelorism, epicanthic fold, everted nose, depressed nasal bridge and prominent lips. Both the upper and lower eyelids showed sparse eyelashes. The hair on the scalp and the eyebrows were absent. The skin was thin, pale, dry and exfoliating with eczematous dermatitis widespread, especially in the scalp. The skin from around the eyes and mouth showed linear wrinkled and was hyperpigmented . The parents reported dryness of eyes. Neuromotor and mental development index score of Bayley II scale were normal.
Abdominal and cerebral ultrasound screening did not detect anomalies and routine ECG and echocardiogram evaluation were normal.
Molecular genetic studies were performed on genomic DNA extracted from peripheric blood, through Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). A multigene Ectodermal dysplasia panel, that included EDA, EDAR, EDARADD, EDA2R, TRAF6, NFKBIA, CDH3, WNT10A, was performed. The analysis revealed the hemizygous variant, NM_001399.4: c.1142G > C (p.Gly381Ala) in EDA gene located on the X chromosome. The variant was tested for familial segregation showing heterozygous maternal state. The mother did not show any sign of HED.
The same variant was not found in the father of the proband and the sibling. Pedigree analysis showed an X-linked pattern of inheritance .
We analyzed the variant in silico by using software Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT), DANN, DEOGEN, MutationTaster, for the prediction of possible deleterious variants in human proteins. Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD), another algorithm used to help assess the potential pathogenicity of a variant, display scores for this variant of 26,9.
We established a multidisciplinary follow-up: ophtalmologic evaluation, hearing screen and visual evoked potentials were normal at 5 months.
The following physical examinations showed delayed teeth eruption: only two small, conical canines were present at 15 months.
The last clinically evaluation was performed at 24 months of age, with persisting poor weight gain (3th centile), reduced ability to sweat, heat intolerance, chronic eczematous rash especially on the face, wrinkled periorbital skin with Dennie-Morgan infraorbital fold.
Intraoral examination revealed severe oligodontia with only two conical anterior teeth eruption previously described and a wide midline diastema .
Orthodontic management was planned in order to improve the limited chewing function ability.
Neuropsychomotor follow-up and mental development index score of Bayley II scale were in the normal range for the age.