A 53-year-old female was referred to our spine clinic with complaints of chronic neck pain and stiffness; the left arm pain which radiated down the radial aspect of her arm, forearm, and hand; fixed kyphotic posture of the neck; and difficulty swallowing. She reported sustaining a traumatic neck injury 6 years prior when she was an unrestrained front seat passenger in a stolen car. Apparently, she and the driver of the vehicle were under the influence of methamphetamines when they crashed the vehicle into a tree. Both fled from the scene and did not seek medical treatment for fear of legal consequences. She developed immediate neck pain and neck stiffness. Shortly after, she developed electric-like left arm pain which radiated down the radial aspect of the upper extremity. She was homeless, uninsured, and she feared criminal prosecution as she was injured in the act of committing a felony. She began self-medicating to control her neck pain, using heroin, street bought oral opiates, and alcohol. She purchased a soft cervical collar from a local pharmacy and wore it exclusively for several months. Approximately 6 months after the injury, she noted progressive flexed cervical posture with difficulty maintaining forward gaze. Less than1 year after the accident, she was incarcerated in a local correctional facility for repeated drug convictions. The duration of incarceration was for 10 months with an additional court-ordered 6-month inpatient drug rehabilitation program. During this incarceration, the patient was evaluated for a high degree of global neck pain and deformity. Although imaging was performed in this evaluation, this patient’s cervical subluxation was not diagnosed. On completion of her rehabilitation, she was able to acquire government-assisted health insurance. At that time, the patient sought care from a primary care physician regarding her neck pain and stiffness. Initial attempts at physical therapy were unsuccessful. Outpatient plain cervical radiograph revealed a deformity and the patient was then subsequently referred to our spine clinic. On examination, she had a fixed flexion posture of her neck with limited axial rotation. She had no upper motor neuron signs nor did her exhibit weakness in upper or lower extremities. Sensory examination was normal. She had a markedly positive Spurling’s maneuver which recreated electric-like pain radiating down the left radial arm, forearm, and hand.
Full-length plain spine radiographs revealed regional kyphosis from C4 to C6 measuring 50°, but a normal SVA . There was 3mm of anterolisthesis of C4 on C5, bony ankylosis of C5/6 at the disc level and posteriorly at the facets. Cervical CT confirmed the sagittal cervical malalignment and fusion of the C5/6 level. Cervical magnetic resonance imaging revealed multilevel cervical disc degeneration, focal kyphosis in the mid-cervicalspine, and mild-to-moderate central stenosis (worst at C4/5) and multilevel mild foraminal stenosis.
The patient was taken for elective circumferential surgery. Initial procedure was an anterior C5 and C6 corpectomy, anterior placement of an expandable titanium cage from C4-C7 and this construct was augmented by anterior plating from C4-C7. The posterior procedure comprised posterior cervical decompression from C4-7 along with lateral mass instrumentation and fusion.
She was hospitalized for 3 days and was subsequently transferred to inpatient rehabilitation for 10 days. After her rehab stays, she was discharged to her daughter’s home. She wore a hard collar for 6 weeks and she also stopped smoking. She noted immediate improvement in her cervical posture in that she could achieve a forward gaze. Her dysphagia improved and left cervical radiculopathy resolved within weeks. At 2-year post-operative follow-up, her overall neck pain was improved, but she still required low-dose narcotics (Norco 5 mg every 12 h) to control this pain to an acceptable degree. The patient gave written informed consent for print and electronic publication of this report, as well as for reprint in foreign editions of this journal. The authors have no financial, or other, conflicts of interest to disclose.