A 71-year-old Japanese woman, non-smoker, with a history of cholelithiasis, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia, was referred to our hospital for evaluation of nephrotic syndrome. The patient had been diagnosed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 6 months previously.
On physical examination, the patient was 155.0 cm tall. She weighed 46.0 kg and showed a systolic ejection murmur from the left sternal border to the apex and pitting leg oedema. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. On blood analysis, hypoalbuminemia (1.7 g/dL), proteinuria (4.5 g/gCr), and serum IgG M-protein were detected. Serum free light chain (SFLC) assay showed an increase in free lambda chain with a decreased kappa/lambda ratio (kappa SFLC: 7.8 mg/L, normal 3.3–19.4 mg/L; lambda SFLC: 70.5 mg/L, normal 5.7–26.3 mg/L; kappa/lambda ratio: 0.11, normal 0.3–1.3). On the other hand, SAA (5.6 μg/mL) and immunoglobulin were within normal limits. Creatinine (0.8 mg/dL), brain natriuretic peptide (325.8 pg/mL), and carcinoembryonic antigen (6.4 ng/mL) were elevated. Chest radiography showed a nodule, 2.1 cm in diameter, in the right upper lung field. Computed tomography revealed a nodule with marginal irregularity and bronchodilatation in the right upper lobe, hilar mediastinal lymph node enlargement, slight bilateral pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, and ascites .
Pathological examination of transbronchial biopsy samples of the lung nodule yielded a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma . In addition, interstitial deposition of amorphous material that stained positively for Congo red with apple-green birefringence in the polarized view, and an amyloid P component was found in the tissues surrounding the tumour and in the subcarinal lymph node . Enlargement of the subcarinal lymph node was not due to cancer metastasis. In addition, biopsy samples of gastric and duodenal mucosa, bone marrow, and cardiac muscle stained positively for Congo red with apple-green birefringence in the polarized view, and amyloid P component . Only the subcarinal lymph node and the cardiac muscle stained positively for anti-lambda light chain antibodies. Furthermore, positive staining for RAGE was detected only in the lung tumour cells . The bone marrow demonstrated a normal population of plasma cells with slight atypia.
Finally, the case was diagnosed as lung adenocarcinoma, Stage IA (cT1bN0M0), and primary systemic AL amyloidosis with nephrotic syndrome and cardiomyopathy.
Because the patient displayed rapidly worsening edema and cardiac amyloidosis with elevated brain natriuretic peptide, she was given a poor prognosis rather than that expected with early-stage lung adenocarcinoma and was treated with dexamethasone (20 mg/day) and diuretics. The oedema, mainly due to the nephrotic syndrome with severe proteinuria, pleural effusion, and brain natriuretic peptide levels were not responsive to treatment. The patient died after 3 months despite dexamethasone and bortezomib treatment in another hospital.