A 48-year-old gravida 2, para 2 (vaginal delivery) Japanese woman presented with a history of severe pelvic pain. She was 13 years old at menarche, had a regular menstrual cycle, and presented with dysmenorrhea. She had no previous history of hormone therapy, including oral contraceptives. She had undergone laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) when she was 42 years old for her right- and left-sided ovarian tumors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 4.4-cm-diameter solid and cystic ovarian tumor of the right ovary with significant gadolinium enhancement and a 3.6-cm-diameter endometrial cyst of the left ovary . Levels of the tumor markers, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) and CA-125, were 57 U/ml (reference < 37.0 U/mL) and 66 U/ml (reference < 35.0 U/mL), respectively. Laparoscopic findings showed the presence of bilateral ovarian tumors with severe adhesions around the cul-de-sac due to the development of endometriosis . After laparoscopic BSO, a residual endometriotic lesion suspected to be a DIE lesion was detected in the left uterosacral ligament .
The pathological diagnosis of the right and left ovaries was atypical proliferative endometrioid tumor and ovarian endometrioma, respectively. Histopathological findings of the right ovarian tumor showed complex glandular proliferation with stratified, enlarged nuclei and clear chromatin surrounded by fibrocollagenous stroma. Stromal invasion was not evident . A direct transition from a non-atypical endometriotic gland to an atypically proliferative lesion was observed . The tumor was limited to the right ovary, and the capsule was intact.
With the right ovarian tumor being diagnosed as a borderline malignancy, we suggested a staging laparotomy with definitive completion surgery to the patient, as she did not desire to retain childbearing function. However, the patient declined, and she was instead carefully followed up quarterly. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed every 6 months during the 5-year postoperative follow-up period, with no recurrence of disease. Six years after the operation, ascites was identified in the pelvic cavity along with a solid tumor, localized to the left side of the cul-de-sac. There was no lymph node swelling or peritoneal dissemination . She underwent an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) examination. The PET/CT revealed an abnormal accumulation of FDG at the tumor site . The levels of tumor markers CA19-9 and CA-125 were 81 U/ml (reference < 37.0 U/mL) and 45 U/ml (reference < 35.0 U/mL), respectively. Therefore, recurrent ovarian tumor with borderline malignancy was suspected. To assess the feasibility of cytoreduction, diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. Laparoscopic findings showed that the tumor in the cul-de-sac was buried and firmly attached to the sigmoid colon with no apparent ascites or peritoneal dissemination . A peritoneal lavage cytology was performed. The tumor was found at the site of the DIE lesions that were present 6 years before the initial laparoscopic surgery. The tumor buried in the cul-de-sac was removed through laparoscopic surgery .
We also performed a hysterectomy, partial omentectomy, and retroperitoneal pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy by laparotomy. Macroscopically, the tumor was localized in the left parametrium . Histologically, it was a well-differentiated endometrioid carcinoma with a papillary-cribriform structure, in which cancerous glands with stratified and enlarged nuclei and stromal invasion were found . At the edge of the tumor, an ectopic endometrial gland of the DIE was directly connected to the cancerous glands . Therefore, a pathological diagnosis of endometrioid carcinoma arising from the DIE lesions was made. The peritoneal lavage cytology was negative, and no lymph node metastases were identified. The final diagnosis was a primary peritoneal carcinoma of stage IIB based on the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging system. The patient received six courses of monthly paclitaxel and carboplatin as adjuvant chemotherapy for her peritoneal cancer. There was no evidence of recurrence for 2 years after treatment. The patient has provided informed consent for publication of the case.