An 83-year-old man presented with a 6-month history of dull pain in the right abdomen. Serological examination revealed that he was negative for hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C virus antibodies. On computed tomography examination, irregular and slightly low-density (∼26 HU) shadows were observed in the right lobe of the liver, near the top of the diaphragm, representing a tumor measuring 29 × 23 mm with clear boundaries . Serological tests revealed that the patient had a carcinoembryonic antigen level of 5.38 µg/L (normal range, 0–5.0 µg/L), alpha fetoprotein level of 3.36 µg/L (normal range, 0–20 µg/L), carbohydrate antigen 19–9 level of 36.97 µ/ml (normal range, 0–37 µ/ml), and cancer antigen-125 level of 11.42 µ/ml (normal range, 0–35 µ/ml).
During the operation, the tumor was found to be located in the eighth segment of the right lobe of the liver; thus, the right hepatic lobe was partially resected. The tumor was a grayish-yellow mass (2.5 × 2 × 2 cm) located under the liver capsule with a clear boundary from surrounding tissues. Microscopic observation revealed that it was moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma with a cord-like, trabecular structure and a pattern of local pseudoglandular growth. Some tumor cells were translucent, and multiple satellite nodules were found around the main tumor nodule . An area of liver tissue (∼0.3 cm) located 0.5 cm from the main tumor had a benign-appearing follicular thyroid structure . The lesion was too small to appear on CT images. The follicles contained colloid tissue and were lined with low cuboidal cells with scant cytoplasm; lymphatic tissue was also present in the area.
Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of the hepatocellular carcinoma revealed hepatocyte antigen positivity, cytokeratin-19 negativity , and glypican-3 (GPC-3) positivity . Epithelial cells in the area with a follicular thyroid structure showed no atypia; they were negative for hepatocyte paraffin 1 (Hep Par-1) and positive for thyroglobulin (TG) , PAX8 , and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1; ).
The patient had no history of a thyroid tumor, and thyroid function test results were normal. Thyroid hormone levels were in normal ranges (triiodothyronine, 1.27 ng/mL; thyroxine, 10.5 g/dl; free triiodothyronine, 3.84 pmol/L; and free thyroxine, 17.76 pmol/L).
Ultrasound examination showed no primary thyroid tumor. The final diagnosis was moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma with heterotopic thyroid tissue in the liver. One month after surgery, all of the patient's serological markers were normal; no tumor recurrence or metastasis has been detected for 7 postoperative months.