62-year-old female admitted to Riga East University Hospital, Oncology Centre of Latvia, Department of head and neck surgery with complaints about right-sided neck mass over the past three months that gradually increased in the size. Physical examination of the patient revealed semi-mobile neck mass in upper 1/3 of the right side of neck about 2.5 cm in diameter. Further radiological examinations as ultrasound and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan indicated well-defined partly cystic visually malignant neoplasm of carotid sheath 2.3 × 2.5 × 4.3 cm in upper 1/3 of the right side of neck with no signs of cervical lymphadenopathy (, ). Other physical and instrumental examination of the patient was completely normal. Patient did not have any other significant accompanying medical conditions as well no physical or anamnestic data of NF1.
Surgery was performed. Excision of solid and well-defined mass of the right side vagus nerve with safe and radical margins was done. About 6 cm long vagus nerve defect was identified. Excised mass was sent for frozen section pathology. Frozen section result was suspicious to Schwannoma. For this reason no additional surgical modalities (e.g. nerve reconstruction) was done during the surgery. Pathological examination revealed the tumor of the size of 4x3x2cm. The tumor consisted from spindle cells with hyperchromatic, thin, wavy, or focally buckled nuclei, some epithelioid cell, with fascicular growth pattern with focal necrosis up to 5 %, moderate mitotic activity up to 10–12 mitosis per 10 high powered field at magnification ×400, with hypocellular and hypercellular areas with perivascular accentuation, hemosiderin deposition, without lymphovascular invasion. The immunohistochemistry demonstrated that tumor cells were focally positive for S100 and SOX-10, Ki-67 index was 15 %, CD99 showed focal positivity. The tumor cells were negative for CD34, ERG, CD117 and DOG- .
In first postoperative day patient complained about voice hoarseness and throat discomfort. Laryngoscopy revealed partial paresis of right vocal cord. Chest X ray showed normal state of diaphragmatic cupola. Soon patient complaints intensified, additional symptoms as spontaneous non-productive cough appeared. Spontaneous cough, especially during the night time and voice hoarseness were the most disturbing symptoms. Patient complained about mild symptoms of dyspnea during physical activity, hiposensitivity of right auricle, periodic belching, nausea and vomiting after cough, heartburn, periodic mild swallowing difficulties.
To improve the quality of the life and restore the functions of the vagus nerve, additaional surgery was planned. Right vagus nerve reconstruction surgery with right sural nerve graft was performed . Even in the early postoperative period patient noticed decrease of cough episodes. On 24 hospitalization day patient was discharged from the hospital. Subseqently patient received adjuvant thirty 2.0 Gy fractions of stereotactic body radiation therapy of right neck region. Also myofunctional training course was done.
No data of local recurrence or metastases were found during the one year follow-up period.
Patient experienced various symptoms after vagus nerve tumor excision surgery. Voice hoarseness and spontaneous cough patient marked as most disturbing. Right after the reconstructive surgery and on regular follow up visits patient was asked to evaluate vagus nerve impairment symptoms by using visual analogue scale to estimate nerve graft surgery results and evaluate patients quality of the life. On 3-month follow up patient did not noticed any significant improvement of previous symptoms, however at 6 months as well as one year after surgery patient reported significant improvement of main symptoms - cough episodes became less frequent, voice hoarseness was less intensive as well as other symptoms became milder or disappeared at all.
On one-year follow up visit patient filled up Voice Handicap Index with score 20, that describes her voice handicap as mild. Subjectively patient evaluated her voice as strongly disturbed in first post-operative months, moderately disturbed on 6-months follow up and as mildly disturbed on 1-year follow up.
According to above-mentioned information, authors evaluate nerve graft surgery result as positive, with good impact on patient's voice and overall long term quality of the life.
Now patient continues to undergo regular head and neck surgeon check-ups.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.