A previously healthy 42-year-old Caucasian male presented to the emergency department of a tertiary care center complaining of a 3-week history of headache, malaise and low-grade fevers. He returned to Canada after spending 28 days living in a trailer 100 km outside of Hobbs, New Mexico, working on the oil rigs. He recalled exposure to live and dead rats in his trailer as well as multiple insect bites. His travel history was significant for a trip to Panama two years prior with his wife and children. He denied any ingestion of raw meats, raw seafood or unpasteurized dairy.
The patient had developed sudden onset fever, myalgias and severe headache while he was in New Mexico. His headache was persistent with waxing and waning features accompanied by photophobia/phonophobia, presyncope and nausea. He returned home 15 days after symptoms began. On day 21, he presented to the emergency department complaining of non-resolving headaches, fevers and vomiting.
On admission to hospital, he was febrile at 38.0 °C and diaphoretic. He had difficulty with complex cognitive tasks such as word finding and recall [mini mental status exam (MMSE) of 24/30]. He had no rash, no focal neurologic abnormalities and no signs of meningismus. The remainder of his physical examination was unremarkable. His CBC, electrolytes, creatinine and CRP were all within normal range. Imaging included a normal computed tomography (CT) head with IV contrast and a normal CT of his chest with no lymphadenopathy. Empirically, he was treated for both viral and bacterial meningitis . A lumbar puncture (LP) was performed and all antimicrobials were discontinued following the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) results .
Following initial resolution of fevers and improvement in his headache, on day 26 of symptoms the patient began to deteriorate. He developed progressive confusion and subsequent decreasing level of consciousness. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain was performed . Based on the MRI changes, empiric meningitis treatment to cover both tuberculous (TB) (isoniazid 300 mg daily, rifampin 900 mg daily, ethambutol 1600 mg daily, pyrazinamide 2000 mg daily, dexamethasone 8 mg IV q8h) and fungal etiologies were initiated (liposomal amphotericin B 200 mg IV daily) . An external ventricular drainage (EVD) catheter was placed on day 30.
The patient’s serum and CSF were tested for the presence of IgM and IgG against Coccidoides using a commercial enzyme immunoassay (Premier®). The serum IgM was negative, IgG positive and CSF was positive for both IgG and IgM. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using pan-fungus primers targeting ribosomal RNA genes and internal transcribed space (ITS) sequences, was positive for Coccidioides posadasii .
The patient defervesced and experienced rapid clinical improvement. On day 34 of symptoms the EVD was removed. The anti-TB therapy was discontinued. His course was complicated by acute kidney injury thought to be associated with liposomal amphotericin B and therapy was changed to high dose fluconazole 800 mg PO daily. He was discharged home on day 37 of symptoms.
He continued to have improvement of his cognitive status and his headaches resolved. Repeat MRI revealed resolving leptomeningeal enhancement. Indefinite Fluconazole therapy was initiated. His course was complicated by limb and trunk alopecia related to his fluconazole, which resolved after decreasing his fluconazole dose to 400 mg PO daily. At 18 months following his initial diagnosis he continues to have significant short-term memory deficits, has not returned to his full baseline functional status and has been unable to return to work.