We report a case of a 55-year-old Indian woman, a housewife who presented in a tertiary care academic hospital in November 2021 with swelling on the right side of the neck for a 2-year duration. When she had similar swelling two years ago, she underwent a wide local excision in the general surgery department. Histopathology first revealed a granular cell tumor extending to the excision margin. She was lost to follow-up since the initial wide local excision two years back due to the financial difficulties in traveling for scheduled follow-ups. She has moderately controlled Type 2 diabetes mellitus using metformin and glimepiride. She has a history of thyroidectomy for colloid goiter years back. Her medical history shows she is normotensive and free of cardiovascular disease. She does not smoke or drink alcohol. There is no family history of this or any other type of cancer. She consulted the plastic surgery department to address the swelling on the right side of her neck.
The bulge gradually grew to 3 x3cm in length, nodular, mobile, and firm consistency . There was no movement of swelling on protrusion of the tongue and deglutination. There were no similar swellings anywhere in the body. All the systemic examinations were within normal. Routine hematological investigations showed Hemoglobin, 12.1 g/dL, Total white blood cell count: of 8000 per mm3, Polymorphs: of 70 %, and Lymphocytes: of 30 %. Biochemical tests for blood sugars were Fasting Blood Sugar of 166 mg/dL and Post-Prandial Blood Sugar of 179 mg/dL. History, clinical findings, and a previous histopathology report of granular cell tumors reaching up to the resection margin raised high clinical suspicion of the recurrence of the granular cell tumor. In the plastic surgery department, she underwent wide local excision of the tumor on the right side of the neck in November 2021.
On gross examination, the skin and attached nodular tissue measured 4.5x2x1.3 cm. Surface skin measured 2.4 × 1.3 cm . Surface skin showed a nodular lesion measuring 2.4 × 1.3 × 0.5 cm, situated 0.4 cm from the superior margin, 0.3 cm from the inferior margin, 0.7 cm from the lateral margin, and 1.2 cm from the medial margin. In addition, the cross-section identified a yellowish homogenous lesion corresponding to the surface nodularity situated 0.7 cm from the base with similar serial sections. In addition, there was skin with fibrofatty tissue that measured 2 × 0.8 × 0.2 cm cross-section of grey-white with no definite lesions.
On microscopic examination, the section from the skin had papillomatous hyperplasia of the epidermis, with the dermis showing an infiltrating neoplasm composed of cells arranged in diffuse sheets and nests (, ). The Individual cells were polygonal in shape with indistinct cell borders. The cells had abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm. There were round to oval vesicular nuclei with clumped chromatin and a few with conspicuous nucleoli . There was no abnormal mitosis or necrosis, and the tumor cells were infiltrating subcutis. All these histopathological features are consistent with granular cell tumors. In addition, all margins, including the resection base, are neoplasm-free with a clearance of 0.7 cm. Unfortunately, we could not perform immunohistochemical analyses because of insufficient resources.
After this, she consulted the oncology department for further advice. Because of margin negativity and the benign nature of the disease, after an interdisciplinary discussion, we decided to keep her on close follow-up. As a result, she is being followed up in the oncology department every three months with a history and physical examination, with no evidence of disease recurrence during this short-term interval. In addition, the last follow-up visit on February 2023 for a general history and physical inspection of the local area was without any evidence of disease .