A 41-year-old African woman weighing 72 kg and 169 cm tall, with American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status class I, was referred to our hospital because of tumefaction of the neck. Her clinical examination revealed an isolated parotid mass without associated lymphadenopathy. She had no pain or peripheral facial nerve palsy. The magnetic resonance imaging results were in favor of a pleomorphic adenoma , and the patient was scheduled for a parotidectomy with general anesthesia.
The results of the patient’s cardiovascular examination were normal, with a noninvasive blood pressure of 131/71 mmHg and a heart rate of 79 beats/minute. Her respiratory examination revealed no dyspnea or snoring. Her oxygen saturation was 98 % on room air. An examination of her upper airway demonstrated good opening of the mouth and good mobility of the cervical spine (Mallampati class I). Her laboratory test results were a urea plasma concentration of 0.18 g/L, a creatinine level of 6 mg/L, blood glucose level of 0.99 mg/dl, hemoglobin concentration of 15.1 g/dl, platelet count of 213,000/mm3, prothrombin time of 12.9 seconds, and international normalized ratio of 1.2. Her chest x-ray and electrocardiogram (ECG) were unremarkable.
After written informed consent was obtained from the patient, it was decided to use general anesthesia during the procedure. Upon the patient’s arrival in the operating theater, intravenous access was established and standard anesthesia monitoring (three-lead ECG, peripheral oxygen saturation, noninvasive blood pressure) was instituted.
Neuromuscular monitoring was performed using acceleromyography. Following calibration, the ulnar nerve was supramaximally stimulated with a square pulse of 0.2-ms duration delivered as train-of-four (TOF) pulses at intervals of 15 seconds. The resulting contractions of the adductor pollicis muscles were quantified by using an acceleromyographic monitor (Infinity® Trident® NMT SmartPod®; Dräger, Lübeck, Germany). The TOF ratio and time interval from injection of the reversal agent to TOF ratio 0.9 were recorded.
Before induction of anesthesia, midazolam 2 mg was administered intravenously as premedication. After 5 minutes of adequate preoxygenation, anesthesia was initiated with fentanyl (2.5 μg/kg) and propofol (3 mg/kg) without significant hemodynamic changes. To facilitate tracheal intubation, rocuronium (0.5 mg/kg) was administered after effective mask ventilation. Once there was no twitching in response to TOF stimulation (1 minute, 45 seconds), the patient’s airway was successfully secured after the first attempt with a 7.0-mm endotracheal tube. The endotracheal tube was connected to a closed “low-flow” anesthetic breathing circuit. Ventilation was controlled to maintain normocapnia with a tidal volume of 8 ml/kg, a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/minute, and peak inspiratory pressure of 20 cmH2O. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane (1 %) in a mixture of oxygen and nitrous oxide (50 %:50 %). The end-tidal concentrations of anesthetic and carbon dioxide were measured continuously using a multiple gas monitor. The depth of anesthesia was monitored by bispectral index (BIS), and body temperature was maintained using heating blankets. The patient was placed in supine position and with slight Trendelenburg tilting of the table and the patient’s head turned to the left side. A bolus dose of fentanyl was administered before starting the skin incision to maintain a BIS score between 40 and 60. After the surgical incision was made (15 minutes after induction), there was no response on the basis of TOF ratio. Neuromuscular block was reversed with sugammadex (4 mg/kg). The TOF reached 0.9 after 5 minutes. No hemodynamic or respiratory changes were noted. We stopped the neuromuscular transmission (NMT) monitoring after obtaining a TOF ratio above 0.9 in three consecutive measurements.
The inspired isoflurane concentration was gradually increased to 1.8 % to prevent movement during critical phases of the surgical procedure after reversing neuromuscular blockade. The parotid gland was carefully dissected under magnification with facial nerve monitoring. The facial nerve was identified using the NIM 2.4 nerve integrity monitoring system (MEDTRONIC-XOMED, Jacksonville, FL, USA), and after 1 h surgical conditions were good for the removal of the tumor.
The patient was extubated when fully awake after a smooth emergence from anesthesia. Her oxygen saturation was 99 % with 2 L/minute of supplemental oxygen. Her postoperative course was uneventful, and no evidence of facial nerve paralysis was noted in the postinterventional surveillance room. The patient was discharged to home after 5 days of hospitalization.