A 74-year-old Caucasian man with a 20 pack-year smoking history but no significant past medical history presented with chest pain and shortness of breath found to have an non-ST elevation myocardial infacrction requiring percutaneous coronary intervention with placement of five bare metal stents. He was incidentally found to have a 3.5 cm right lower lobe mass on chest radiography. He underwent PET-FDG which confirmed a 2.2 cm right lower lobe mass without evidence of metastases. The patient then discussed a right lower lobectomy with lymph node dissection with cardiothoracic surgery. However, because he was recently status post placement of five coronary artery stents and would need to continue antiplatelet therapy, decision was made to delay the intervention. Observation 3 months later with CT-imaging revealed that the mass had enlarged to 3.4 cm, now with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
The patient subsequently underwent endobronchial biopsy of mediastinal lymph nodes. The initial specimen, derived from station 7 and 12R lymph nodes, showed the following morphologic findings on direct smear preparations and cell block sections: abundant foci of small malignant cells demonstrating pleomorphism and high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios. The cells displayed scant cytoplasm and finely granular chromatin along with irregular nuclear membranes and infrequent nuclear molding. Nucleoli were inconspicuous or absent . Immunohistochemical studies were further performed on the cell block material. The immunohistochemical analysis was carried out in a routine pathology laboratory setting with clinically accredited antibodies and standardized methodology. It demonstrated tumor cell reactivity with antibodies to synaptophysin and CD56, and no significant reactivity with antibodies to cytokeratin AE1/AE3, TTF-1, chromogranin A, p40, and CD45. The Ki-67 index was 90-100%. Flow cytometry results were negative for lymphoproliferative processes. Thus, the histopathology was consistent with small cell carcinoma presumably of lung origin.
He initiated chemoradiation with 4 cycles of cisplatin and etoposide with radiation to the right lower lobe and right hilum. Checkpoint inhibition was not included as this was still considered limited stage SCLC. Unfortunately, 2 months after completing chemoradiation therapy, MRI of the brain revealed new solitary right frontal lobe metastases. PET-FDG showed hepatic and bone metastases. Additional areas of metastatic progression included mediastinal/retroperitoneal lymph nodes and lung. Clinical dermatologic examination revealed a new chest wall lesion .
Biopsy of the chest wall lesion was performed which showed malignant cells extensively invading into adipose and connective tissue. Similar to the previous biopsy, these cells had scant cytoplasm, fine nuclear chromatin, and pleomorphic nuclei were observed. Small nucleoli were also visible. This biopsy is primarily distinguished from the previous lymph node samples by the presence of myxoid stromal change and the prominence of foci with a golden-brown pigment associated with melanin. The unique coloration of the cells supported a possible diagnosis of malignant melanoma, as opposed to the initial diagnosis of small cell carcinoma.
Immunohistological testing revealed tumor cell reactivity with antibodies to synaptophysin and CD56, and no significant reactivity with antibodies to cytokeratin AE1/AE3, TTF-1, chromogranin A, p40, and CD45. The Ki-67 index was 90-100%. Given the overlapping but somewhat distinct appearance of this sample, immunohistochemical studies were again performed, this time demonstrating positive tumor reactivity to antibodies for synaptophysin, S100, SOX10, and FLI1. Focal positivity for MITF was also observed. No tumor cell reactivity was observed with cytokeratin AE1/AE3, TTF-1, chromogranin A, CD45, OSCAR, EMA, CK7, CK20, MART-14, HMB45, neurofilament, desmin, h-caldesmon, myogenin, CD34, or CD99. Further immunohistochemical studies revealed positivity for PRAME, focal positivity for INSM1, and no reactivity with BRAF V600E, NRAS, Q61R, or c-kt. Additional tests on the initial lymph node biopsy were also performed, exhibiting positivity for S100 and SOX10. Review of the initial material, including close examination of the cell cytoplasm on negative control slides stained with hematoxylin only, allowed recognition of a small percentage of cells exhibiting fine, brown pigmented material in the cytoplasm, compatible with melanin .
PD-L1 (Dako 22C3 pharmDx) tumor proportion score (TPS) was 0%. FoundationONE CDx (F1CDx) comprehensive genomic profiling of the chest wall lesion revealed an elevated tumor mutational burden (TMB) of 21 mutations per megabase with stable microsatellite status. Additional genomic alterations were detected including: BRAF G469E, loss of CDKN2A and CDKN2B, HGF amplification, NF1, PALB2, and TERT promoter. Based upon the combination of morphologic and immunohistochemical findings in the two specimens as well as genetic profiling, a diagnosis of malignant melanoma with neuroendocrine differentiation was made.
Given this new diagnosis of malignant melanoma with neuroendocrine differentiation, the patient was started on nivolumab 1mg/kg and ipilimumab 3mg/kg q3W for three cycles. The patient experienced Grade 3 liver function testing (LFT) elevation and the fourth cycle of ipilimumab was omitted. The patient’s LFT abnormalities resolved with a short course of glucocorticoids and he was continued on nivolumab maintenance (480mg IV q4W).
Interval reimaging has demonstrated marked and durable radiographic response with significant reduction in disease burden. The previously noted innumerable hypoenhancing metastatic lesions in the liver has all decreased in size with the largest now measuring 1.7 cm (baseline 3.7 cm). The patient’s previously noted intrathoracic and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy as well as right lower lung nodule have resolved. No further progression in osseous metastasis was noted with stability in previously identified sclerotic lesions involving right humeral head, right L4, left S1, and right ilium. .