A 34-year-old male presented to the Emergency Department with a reduced level of consciousness and hearing loss 21 h after ingesting a 40 mg methadone tablet in a suicide attempt in front of his family after a serious conflict with his father. The family denied any history of a psychiatric disorder or prior methadone use. Prehospital emergency service administered 0.4 mg of naloxone due to apneustic breathing and miotic pupils, which resulted in a marked improvement in the patient’s breathing. He and his family denied any specific drug abuse history. He smoked cigarettes but did not use alcohol. Before this suicide attempt, he was healthy without any significant past medical history and did not have any known auditory deficits.
On admission to the Emergency Department (ED) the patient was lethargic, had miotic pupils and the following vital signs: blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, heart rate 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, temperature 37 C, oxygen saturation while receiving 8 l oxygen per minute by nasal cannula 89%. At the time of admission to the ED and he complained of bilateral hearing loss. His urine was noted to be dark, and a rapid urine toxicology screen test was positive for methadone but was negative for amphetamines, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, cocaine, morphine, phencyclidine, and tetrahydrocannabinol. Blood acetaminophen, salicylate, and ethanol assays were negative.
Initial laboratory studies showed a mixed metabolic and respiratory acidosis (pH 7.11, PCO2 41.8 mmHg, HCO3 13.5 mmol/l), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 1417 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 1125 U/L, BUN 85 mg/dL, Cr 4.1 mg/dL, international normalized ratio (INR) 2.24, and Platelet count of 66,115 /mm3 . The microscopic examination of his peripheral blood smear was normal.
Initial treatment consisted of the administration of intravenous fluids and sodium bicarbonate. Twelve hours post-admission, the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), where he received a naloxone infusion for 3 days.
On admission to the ICU, SPO2, while using an oxygen mask at 8 l/minute was 97%, and his arterial blood gas assay showed: pH 7.33, PCO2 43.1 mmHg, and serum HCO3 23 mmol/l.
On the following day, he was alert and breathing normally with a leukocytosis of 14,116 cells/microliter (mcl) , but no evidence of infection or fever. No antibiotics were administered. His creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was found to be 97,231 U/L. He continued to demonstrate hearing impairment and audiometry showed a bilateral sensorineural hearing loss .
By the third day of admission, the patient complained of myalgia and had a urine output of approximately 100 ml/24 h, a BUN of170 mg/dL, serum creatinine of 7.1 mg/dL, and a serum uric acid 11 mg/dL. Non-heparinized hemodialysis was initiated. Kidney sonography was suggestive of parenchymal kidney disease and acute tubular necrosis. He required hemodialysis for 11 days.
During 10 days of admission to the ICU, his hepatic transaminases and CPK gradually normalized .
The patient was transferred to the internal medicine ward on day 11. During the 5 days of hospital stay in the internal ward, the patient’s hearing loss continued despite the normalization of his laboratory studies. He was discharged after 15 days of hospitalization. After 2 years of follow-up, his hearing loss persisted.