A 63-year-old woman of Asian Indian ethnicity presented with complaints of biliary colic, which was worsening over a period of six months. She denied jaundice, fevers or weight loss. She had a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus and ischemic heart disease; she had received coronary angioplasty and stenting two years prior to the presentation. She was on 81 mg of aspirin and 75 mg of clopidogrel daily. Significantly, she had no previous hormone use and no history of deep vein thrombosis. On clinical examination, our patient was afebrile, anicteric, had normal body habitus and a benign abdomen; examination of other systems was largely unremarkable.
Ultrasound examination of her abdomen confirmed the clinical suspicion of cholelithiasis, however, there was no evidence of acute inflammation and her bile ducts appeared normal. All associated structures, including her liver and portal vein, were found to be normal. Her laboratory investigations included complete blood count, renal function tests, liver function tests (LFT) and coagulation profile, which were all within normal limits.
She was scheduled for an elective laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) two weeks later. Her pre-operative instructions included cessation of anti-platelet drugs five days before surgery.
Our patient underwent an uneventful procedure which lasted for 25 minutes. Her gallbladder was categorized as Class I and the insufflation pressures of pneumoperitoneum was never higher than 12 mmHg intra-operatively. She was discharged on the first post-operative day with instructions that included restarting her aspirin and clopidogrel on the same day.
Our patient returned to the hospital on the fourth post-operative day with intractable nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. Notably, fever was absent. She had mild-to-moderate dehydration and was admitted for rehydration therapy and further investigation. Laboratory reports showed elevation of liver enzymes and a platelet count of 16,000/μL. She was hemodynamically stable and showed no other signs of sepsis syndrome. There were no symptoms or signs of upper gastro-intestinal bleeding and hence no endoscopy was undertaken. An ultrasound of her abdomen revealed normal bile ducts and ascites. A computed tomography (CT) scan with dual contrast confirmed the presence of minimal ascites and additionally demonstrated a thrombus in the portal vein Figure .
With the diagnosis of PVT, anticoagulation was contemplated but withheld owing to her thrombocytopenia. Dengue is endemic to Trinidad, and so on admission - based on her clinical presentation and a high index of suspicion - dengue viral antibody titers (IgG, IgM) were sought for, which returned positive. This diagnosis reinforced the decision not to anticoagulate. She was treated conservatively with intravenous fluids, antibiotics and careful observation, which included daily laboratory investigations. With this treatment regimen, she showed gradual improvement of her clinical symptoms as well as her laboratory values. LFT's normalized and her platelet count started to improve. The trends of the various hematological and biochemical parameters during her hospital stay are shown in Table .
On the 10th post-operative day, six days after her diagnoses of PVT and dengue viral infection, her symptoms completely ameliorated and her platelet count had risen to 125,000/μL. She did not have any complications of PVT such as variceal bleeding. At this time, 40 mg per day of enoxaparin was started. Repeat ultrasound done at this time revealed resolution of the PVT. She was discharged on day 14 after being placed on 5 mg of warfarin daily for three months. She is currently off the anticoagulation; aspirin and clopidogrel have been restarted and she has no residual clinical sequelae pertaining to PVT and/or dengue infection.