A 74-year-old male was transferred to our hospital with acute respiratory failure. He had been diagnosed with RA at the age of 57 years and had been treated with 12 mg per week of MTX, 1000 mg of sulfasalazine, and 100 mg of bucillamine at another hospital. RA disease activity had been maintained at a low level according to composite indices: the most recent simplified disease activity index and clinical disease activity index were 9.28 and 5.4, respectively. Previous radiography of the hands approximately 13 months before admission showed ulnar deviation of the left fingers as well as joint-space narrowing of the radiocarpal joint of the right hand . Chest computed tomography (CT) 11 months previously showed two solitary nodules in the right lower lobe and mild subpleural honeycombing in both lung fields . His previous medical history was significant for bladder cancer at the age of 56 years, which was treated by surgical resection and had not recurred thereafter. He also underwent arthroplasty of the left wrist at the age of 70 years and developed RA-related organizing pneumonia (details unknown). He was an ex-smoker (60 pack-years) with no environmental exposure. He suddenly developed breathing difficulties following a sore throat and fever of 39.0 °C and was transferred to our hospital.
On admission, body temperature was 39.6 °C, blood pressure 117/78 mmHg, and heart rate 130 beats per minute. Oxygen saturation while breathing 6 L of oxygen through a reservoir mask was approximately 92%. Pulmonary crackles were audible in whole lung fields. Joint deformities were noted at the bilateral fingers and wrists, while neither swelling nor tenderness was evident in any joint.
A laboratory examination upon admission was shown in Table . Our patient’s RF and anti-CCP antibody levels were 60.0 IU/ml (< 15 IU/ml) and 75.7 U/ml (< 4.4 U/ml), respectively. Serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 and surfactant protein-D levels were 930 U/ml (< 499 U/ml) and 33.0 ng/ml (< 109.9 ng/ml), respectively. His ß-D glucan value was 12.9 pg/ml (< 20.0 pg/ml) and the aspergillus and cryptococcus antigens were both negative. An arterial blood gas analysis (6 L of oxygen through a reservoir mask) showed a pH of 7.539, PCO2 30.9 mmHg, PO2 80.4 mmHg, HCO3 25.8 mmol/L, and oxygen saturation 95.6%. Smears and cultures from sputum specimens for bacteria and mycobacterium were negative. Blood cultures did not yield any pathogen including bacteria and fungi. A polymerase chain reaction from the same specimens for tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium complex, and Pneumocystis jirovecii were also all negative.
Chest radiography showed diffuse ground-glass opacities and chest CT on admission revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities superimposed with a subpleural reticular shadow and honeycombing. Multiple nodular lesions were detected in the bilateral lung fields and liver , and ranged in size from 15 to 45 mm. All medications, including MTX, were suspended and combined antibiotic therapy, including ceftriaxone, piperacillin-tazobactam, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, was immediately initiated. However, respiratory failure was suddenly exacerbated on the 4th hospital day, and the patient was intubated and managed by mechanical ventilation. A re-examination of chest CT before intubation showed the deterioration of ground-glass opacities and the foci of traction bronchiectasis inside of lesions. Pulmonary nodules became larger than those detected on admission . Based on a diagnosis of the AE of RA-related ILD, pulse methylprednisolone was initiated at 1000 mg/day for 3 days, followed by a tapering dose of 60 mg/day of prednisolone and 750 mg of intravenous cyclophosphamide. Ultrasonography of the liver showed tumors in S3 (45 × 33 mm) and S4 (30 × 26 mm) and liver biopsy obtained on the 7th hospital day revealed extensive coagulation necrosis with granulation tissue, but did not lead to a definite diagnosis. On the 11th hospital day, the patient was successfully weaned from ventilatory support and extubated. Repeated chest CT, obtained at the 12th and 19th hospital days, confirmed synchronous improvements in the diffuse interstitial shadow and multiple pulmonary and liver nodules .
On the 21st hospital day, while taking 40 mg per day of prednisolone, respiratory failure suddenly worsened and the patient was reintubated and managed by mechanical ventilation. Chest CT revealed the deterioration of ground-glass attenuation and pulmonary nodules in the right lung field . Pulmonary lesions progressed despite a second course of methylprednisolone pulse therapy and intravenous cyclophosphamide with the addition of cyclosporine, and the patient died due to respiratory failure on the 39th hospital day. Blood cultures on the 39th hospital day later yielded Cryptococcus neoformans.
At autopsy, the cut surfaces of both lungs were fibrotic and there were multiple nodules up to 40 mm in diameter predominantly at the peribronchial parenchyma in both lower lobes . There were also solitary nodules in liver and right kidney . Microscopically, multiple nodules in the lungs, liver, and kidneys consisted of a focus of central necrosis surrounded by a palisading granuloma , which was consistent with RNs. The majority of alveolar septa adjacent to the pleura were thickened and densely fibrotic, which caused frequent subpleural honeycombing . There were scattering areas of interstitial changes composed of relatively mature fibrosis and fibroblastic proliferation along with a moderate degree of mononuclear cell infiltration. Alveolar epithelial cells were detached from alveolar septa and squamous metaplasia was detected in a few areas, all of which were consistent with organizing diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) . A pathological diagnosis of organizing DAD on the back of UIP-like RA-related ILD was established. At a higher magnification, round and pale organisms, which were positive for Grocott’s staining, were mainly detected in alveolar spaces in a relatively diffuse manner. They were found in the pulmonary parenchyma adjacent to one RN. Pathological findings were compatible with pulmonary cryptococcosis. Cryptococcal infection was not detected inside RNs or in other organs.