An 85-year-old female presented with symptoms of progressive exertion dyspnea, on a background of a known long-standing LADD to PA fistula . Given concerns for a possible high flow shunt with associated steal phenomenon on a recent diagnostic catheter angiogram, she was referred for endovascular embolization. There were two large in-line flow related aneurysms measuring 14 mm and 12 mm respectively, with an additional supply to the second aneurysm from a small septal branch. There was high flow shunting into the pulmonary artery. A multidisciplinary approach was taken between Interventional Neuroradiology and Interventional Cardiology teams.
Under conscious sedation and local anaesthetic an 8 French common femoral artery sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted. Diagnostic angiography was performed using an 8 French Judkins catheter (Cordis, CA, USA) with super-selective angiography and characterization of the fistula compartments using a dual lumen Scepter XC balloon microcatheter (Microvention, CA, USA) over a 0.014 in. Synchro standard microwire (Stryker Neurovascular, CA, USA). The fistula feeders and aneurysmal compartments were selectively interrogated with intermittent balloon inflation to further understand the morphology of the lesion and identify additional arterial supply. A dominant feeder was seen to supply a large flow related aneurysm which arose from the LAD. A second flow related aneurysm arose from a minor septal branch from the LAD. Following this, multiple Target 360 neurovascular coils (Stryker Neurovascular, CA, USA) were used to embolise the flow related aneurysms and occlude the fistula via a Headway 21 microcatheter (Microvention, CA, USA). Larger framing coils were used to occlude the ostium of the first aneurysm from the dominant arterial feeder from the LAD. The small septal supply was sacrificed in order to fully exclude the second aneurysm. Post-interventional angiography demonstrating adequate coil obliteration of the fistula is demonstrated in Figs. and . Both pre and post intervention fractional flow reserve (FFR) measurements were unremarkable (0.89 pre-intervention versus 0.82 post-intervention). As such no additional intervention was performed. The procedure was well tolerated and there were no complications. The groin was closed with a 6 French Proglide (Abbott, IL, USA).
The patient was well at 1 month clinical review with improvement in symptoms and no further delayed complications.