A 56-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with recurrent periumbilical pain, hemafecia and vomiting for 4 months and gradually worsened over a month. The patient accepted an appendicectomy about 20 years ago, and he had smoked one pack of cigarette per day for about 40 years. He denied any hereditary disease in his family and had no psychosocial history and other medical treatments history.
On physical examination, his body temperature, blood pressure, respiratory rate and pulse were 36.6 °C, 124/86 mmHg, 20 bpm, 80 bpm respectively. Multiple petechiae and ecchymoses lesions could been found around the eyelids, on the oral mucosa and the neck bilaterally . Other pertinent findings included hypoactive bowel sounds and abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness especially in the right lower quadrant.
Laboratory tests showed a mild anemia and an increased value of erythrocyte sedimentation rate with an elevated C-reactive protein. A normal albumin level and an increased creatinine were revealed in liver and kidney function tests. Coagulation parameters, serum electrolytes, glucose and lipid profile and hyperthyroidism series were all within normal limits. Other tests such as microbiologic and parasitologic analyses of the stools, T-SPOT.TB, bone biopsy and Bence-Jones protein test were all negative. N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) reached the level of 2269.4 pg/ml while troponin and myocardial enzymes were normal.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed pelvic ascites with segmental intestinal wall thickening at terminal ileum, which was about 12 cm in length . Enteroscope found stricture at terminal ileum caused by semi-annular ulcers .
Considering all these available data, the patient received symptomatic and supportive treatment. However, his symptoms were aggressive and he had active gastrointestinal bleeding necessitating an exploratory laparotomy and resection of pathological ileum. Histological examination of the resected specimen revealed amorphous, pink deposits in mucosa and vascular walls with a positive Congo red staining and characteristic apple-green birefringence under polarized light . Moreover, the deposits were positive for Congo red staining after potassium permanganate pretreatment . According to all available information and the analysis of this patient, we made a tentative diagnosis of AL amyloidosis.
Further investigations were performed to make it more explicit. Urine protein electrophoresis revealed increased concentration of β2-microglobulin (4.68μg/ml, norm 0.039-0.169μg/ml) and λ light chains (84.89 mg/l, norm5.71-26.3 mg/l) and a decreased concentration of κ light chains (0.01 mg/l, norm 3.3-19.4 mg/l). Nephrotic range proteinuria of 216 mg (norm: 0-150 mg/day) occurred in 24-h urine collection. Immunofixation demonstrated it as lambda type monoclonal protein in serum specimens. Bone marrow biopsy didn’t reveal any abnormalities.
Biopsy specimens from both the stomach and skin proved the presence of amyloid deposits in the Congo Red staining or under polarized light . Further immunohistochemistry of gastric specimens detected both λ and κ light chains.
Biopsy from the kidney revealed some brick red deposits in walls of several small blood vessels with Congo red staining. In addition, a small amount of amyloid materials which are ~10 nm in diameter was showed by electron microscopy . The echocardiographic study disclosed left ventricular thickening and a small amount of excessive pericardial fluid .
The final diagnosis was primary systemic AL amyloidosis. He was treated with a chemotherapy regimen (Melphalan, dexamethasone and thalidomide) and received a good clinical response.