A 43-year-old female initially presented to her general practitioner with rigours and a red, swollen right ankle joint. She was treated with oral antibiotics. She rapidly deteriorated, became confused, pyrexial and developed a diffuse erythematous rash of her extremities. She was admitted to the Intensive Therapy Unit (ITU) and required intubation due to profound shock, cardio-respiratory failure and renal failure. Streptococcus pyogenes (b-haemolyticus Group A) was isolated from blood cultures and aspirate of the right ankle joint. A diagnosis of Streptococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome was made and she was started on high dose intravenous antibiotics.
She was referred for ophthalmology assessment on day 36 of her admission to ITU as her right eye appeared injected and her right pupil was unresponsive to light. The visual acuity was reduced to hand movements (HM) on the right and was 6/6 on the left. The right eye was comfortable despite significant ciliary injection. She was examined by the bed side using a hand held slit lamp. On examination, the anterior chamber was deep and appeared quiet. The corneal surface appeared irregular with three distinct zones of sub-epithelial opacification. There was no corneal staining with 2% fluorescein. The right iris appeared atrophic and paler in colour. The pupil was fixed in mid-dilation with extensive posterior synechiae at 360 degrees . There were no transillumination defects or evidence of rubeosis iridis. There was no hypopyon. The intraocular pressure was elevated measuring 24 mmHg in the right eye. On indirect ophthalmoscopy the view of the fundus was clear with no evidence of inflammatory membranes in the vitreous. The retinal vessels appeared normal and there were no areas of intraretinal haemorrhage or pallor. The right optic disc was pale. The left eye was normal except for a small cotton wool spot above the left optic disc. A diagnosis of right optic atrophy in association with post-streptococcal uveitis was made and she was commenced on g maxidex hourly, g. cyclopentolate tds and g Timolol 0.25%. On day 48 the vision was perception of light (PL) in the right eye. Thinning of the superior sclera was noted and she was maintained on topical steroids . By this stage she had undergone extensive limb amputations including two below-knee amputations and bilateral amputations of all digits due to extensive vasculitic necrosis. The medical team were reluctant to treat her with oral steroids due to the risk of secondary infections in the healing wounds.
By the fourth month a large anterior staphyloma had formed in the right eye between 11 and 4 o'clock positions . The eye remained comfortable and she was treated with g.maxidex qid and g timoptol 0.25% bid. At the last review, six months after presentation, the eye was comfortable. The vision remained PL on the right and 6/6 on the left. The intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg on g timoptol 0.25% b d on the right. Specific immunological tests conducted 5 months following the septicaemia showed normal levels of IgA, IgB, IgC, CD19/B cells and CD16/K cells. Pneumococcal antibodies were noted to be below the normal range.