A 12-year-old 25 Kg male child referred to us for bilateral cortical sparing laparoscopic adrenalectomy. He complained of pain abdomen for six months, reduced appetite, and easy fatigability. General physical examination and systemic examination findings were unremarkable except for a high blood pressure of more than 160/100 mmHg for which oral nifedipine 5 mg (Depin, Zydus Cadila) twice daily was started and further evaluation was pending.
On further investigations including complete blood counts, serum calcium, electrolytes, urea, and echocardiography (ECHO) results were normal. Ultrasound examination (USG) of the abdomen showed multiple heterogeneous bilateral adrenal lesions that were confirmed on computed tomography (CT) scan . Suspicion of bilateral pheochromocytoma was confirmed when 24 hr urinary normetanephrine was markedly elevated (4.424 mcg/day; Normal 0-600 mcg/day). Blood pressure prior to planned surgery was stabilized with prazosin (Prazopress, Sun phrama) 10 mg/day (2 mg-3 mg-2 mg-3 mg), nifedipine 5 mg Bid, and atenolol (Adbeta, Zuventus) 12.5 mg Bid. Volume expansion was achieved by increased oral salt intake and intravenous fluids during three days prior to surgery.
The child was premedicated with midazolam 1 mg (Midosed, Sun Pharma) intravenously and was transferred to the operating room on an infusion of normal saline 60 mL/hr and hydrocortisone 10 mg/hr (Cort-S, Neon Laboratories Ltd) according to the endocrinologist’s advice. After instituting electrocardiogram (ECG), noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP), and pulse oximeter (SpO2) monitors, the child was pre-oxygenated and anesthesia was induced with propofol 2 mg/Kg (Diprivan, AstraZeneca) and fentanyl 2 mcg/Kg (Verfen, Verve Health Care Ltd). Endotracheal intubation was facilitated with vecuronium 0.1 mg/Kg (Norcuron, Organon). Left subclavian vein and left radial artery were cannulated for continuous invasive pressure monitoring. An 18G epidural catheter was inserted in T8-T9 interspace for analgesia. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane 0.5-1.5% in air-oxygen mixture. Intraoperative blood pressure surge during the tumor dissection was controlled with titrated infusion of esmolol (Esocard, Samarth Life Sciences Ltd) and sodium nitroprusside (SNP) (Pruside, Troikaa). Estimated blood loss was about 300 mL, which was replaced by crystalloids to maintain adequate urine output throughout the procedure.
Paradoxically, the child still required SNP infusion for control of hypertension post bilateral adrenalectomy. Postoperatively, the child was ventilated and transferred to PICU with SNP infusion. Analgesia was managed with epidural infusion of 0.0625% bupivacaine (Anawin, Neon Laboratories Ltd) with 2 mcg/mL of fentanyl at 5 mL/hr. The child also received supplemental doses of intravenous morphine. Persistent hypertension postoperatively required SNP infusion initially and subsequently. The child received prazosin 1 mg sixth hourly, atenolol 12.5 mg OD, and nifedipine 5 mg Bid to control hypertension. Residual or extra-adrenal tumor was suspected in view of persistent hypertension and repeated 24 hr urine normetanephrines were 3480 mcg/day. As the metaiodobenzyl guanidine (MIBG) scan was inconclusive , a whole body positron emission tomography (PET) scan was ordered. PET scan revealed metabolically active enhancing nodule in the right suprarenal region that confirmed the suspicion of residual tumor . Hence, a repeat surgery via laparoscopic approach for removal of residual tumor was planned three weeks later.
During the second surgery the child was induced with thiopentone (Thiosol, Neon Laboratories Ltd) and endotracheal intubation was facilitated with atracurium. Right subclavian vein and left ulnar arteries were cannulated for invasive pressure monitoring. Epidural catheter was not employed since the child had refused placement. Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane 0.5-1.5% in air-oxygen mixture. Blood pressure changes during tumor handling were controlled with titrated infusion of nitroglycerine (NTG) (Nitrovir, Chandra BhagatPharma). Following removal of residual tumor, NTG was rapidly tapered. The child was extubated and transferred to PICU. The child remained hemodynamically stable postoperatively and analgesia was achieved with intravenous paracetomol and morphine. Post-operative blood glucose level remained normal. Serum cortisol level examined two weeks later and the result was normal (13 mcg/dL).The child had an uneventful postoperative course and was subsequently discharged. In the follow up after three months, the child had normal blood pressure and serum cortisol level.