A 74-year-old Japanese man was referred to his primary care hospital for the investigation and treatment of gross frequent urination in April 2019. He had a history of completely cured colorectal cancer (laparoscopic transverse colectomy; high-grade tubular adenoma, 2014), gastric cancer (laparoscopic total gastrectomy; pT1b, 2012), esophageal cancer (ESD; pT1a, 2011), and tonsil cancer (partial glossectomy; pT1, 2009). PSA level was 1.62 ng/mL within the normal range. Neuron-specific enolase level was normal (13.3 ng/mL; normal <16.3 ng/mL). Soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) was elevated (647 ng/mL; normal <582 ng/mL). Multiparametric MRI showed enlargement and marginal irregularity in prostate (PI-RADS score 5). The suspected malignant lesion showed infiltration of the seminal vesicle and bladder neck .
The patient underwent transrectal prostatic needle biopsy, and pathological examination revealed pure SCC of the prostate. Hematoxylin and eosin staining showed nests of differentiated squamous carcinomatous cells. These squamous carcinomatous cells showed a formation of intracellular bridges and individual keratinization in the central part .
Immunohistochemically, tumor cells appeared positive for CK5/6 and p40, but negative for GATA3, uroplakin2, prostatic serum acid phosphate, and PSA. On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with pure SCC of the prostate . Serum SCC was 6.1 ng/mL (normal <1.5 ng/mL). FDG-PET showed FDG accumulation in the whole prostate and multiple pelvic lymph nodes in the region of the obturator nerve . The patient was treated with volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) (total, 78 Gy in 39 fractions) to the whole pelvis and prostate. After radiotherapy, the patient received four cycles of DCF chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil at 600 mg/m2 administered as a continuous infusion for 5 days from day 1, docetaxel at 50 mg/m2 on day 2, and cisplatin at 60 mg/m2 on day 2; interval: 4 weeks).
DCF chemotherapy has been already approved by a new medical technology review committee in Kochi Medical School Hospital (approved number: 2019–13). PET/CT and MRI after four cycles of DCF chemotherapy showed a marked response. The whole prostate generally shrank to normal size and marginal irregularity disappeared on MRI . FDG accumulation in pelvic lymph nodes disappeared and no lymph node swelling was apparent in the region of the obturator nerve . Serum SCC was within the normal range (0.9 ng/mL) after radio-chemotherapy. As adverse events during DCF chemotherapy, myelosuppression (neutropenia, Grade 4) and stomatitis (Grade 2) were observed. The patient was judged to be in complete remission on imaging and as of the 6-month follow-up remained in complete remission.