A 14 years-old male presented at emergency department (ED) of Sant’Andrea Hospital in Rome in December 2020 for four limbs weakness acutely occurred in the night.
Upon arrival at ED the boy was alert and talkative, vital parameters were normal. On physical examination he showed generalized muscle weakness with diffusely reduced osteotendinous reflexes. No cranial nerves or autonomic dysfunction was detected.
Anamnestic interview revealed that he had a carbohydrates-rich meal the previous evening and that a similar episode occurred one week before with spontaneous resolution of symptoms within 2 hours. He was fully vaccinated and his personal medical history was unremarkable but he reported a familiarity for muscle weakness – never investigated – referred to two maternal uncles and one first cousin .
Initial laboratory tests in ED showed mild hypokalemia (3 mmol/L; normal: 3.40–4.70 mmol/l) with normal other serum electrolytes, blood count, coagulation tests, renal function and liver function. Brain CT scan, cervicodorsal spine MRI and cerebrospinal fluid exam and colture were negatives.
Anamnestic history, clinical presentation and negative instrumental and laboratory test except of hypokalemia oriented us for a first episode of hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HOKPP, MIM # 170400). Therefore, we started on intravenous administration of potassium chloride, under electrocardiographic monitorization and we admitted him to the Pediatrics department. Symptoms progressively resolved and serum potassium value tested 12 hours later was normalized (4.40 mmol/L). Further investigation including CPK level, morning cortisol, ACTH, aldosterone, 24 hours urine collection, PTH, creatinine, thyroid function and abdomen ultrasound were performed in order to investigate the etiological nature of the disease. All these investigations were negative. EDX studies revealed normal sensory and motor nerve conduction studies (NCSs), needle electromyography (EMG) and short-exercise test for muscle channelopathies were normal. Conversely, the long-exercise test showed a progressive smaller cMAP up to about 40% of initial amplitude consistent with a pattern V of HOKPP. The diagnosis was genetically confirmed by the identification of the c.1583G > A (p.Arg528His) heterozygous variant in the CACNAS1 (RefSeq: NM_000069.3) gene by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS). The same variant was detected in the asymptomatic mother by Sanger sequencing. Unfortunately, segregation analysis could not be extended to the affected maternal relatives for poor compliance. The patient was discharged with oral potassium chloride supplementation and dietary and behavioral indication.
Unfortunately, one month later the boy came back to our attention because of a new episode of acute weakness. The evening before the onset of the symptoms he had a carbohydrate-rich meal and weakness occurred during physical activity. Physical examination was comparable to the previous access, he was unable to walk independently. Laboratory tests showed severe hypokalemia (1.60 mmol/L), without electrocardiographic anomalies. An intravenous potassium chloride infusion was started again and potassium values normalized after 30 hours (4.60 mmol/L) with consistent remission of the symptoms.
Dietary and behavioral rules were reiterated and the patient was discharged with an increased dosage of potassium chloride supplementation.
Currently, after 15 months, the boy is fine and no new flare-ups are reported.