A 41-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with shortness of breath for about 24 hours. There was no significant past medical or surgical history except for the fact that she experienced a painful hyperextension of the spine the previous morning, during routine physical exercise. A subsequent chest x-ray showed enlargement of the cardiac silhouette .
A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a large pericardial effusion, with right ventricular collapse consistent with cardiac tamponade physiology. An urgent therapeutic pericardiocentesis was performed and 1200 ml of milky fluid was removed and an 8 Fr drain was left in place. The laboratory results of the fluid revealed the following: triglycerides 550 mg/dl, cholesterol 110 mg/dl, total proteins 4.6 g/dl, glucose 85 mg/dl. The diagnosis of chylopericardium was established. Cytology stains and cultures were all unremarkable. Blood tests for rheumatologic, endocrinologic and autoimmune disorders were normal. Tests for bacterial, fungal, mycobacterial and viral infections were also conducted and found negative. Chest, abdomen and brain scans were normal. No evidence of lymphadenopathy was noted. Despite the absence of severe symptomatology concerning the spine injury a magnetic resonance imaging of the thoracic spine was ordered and was consistent with a disruption of the anterior longitudinal ligament and anterior protrusion of the intervertebral disc .
A daily output of 350 ml of pericardial fluid led us to start total parenteral nutrition, subcutaneous octreotide and no oral feedings for 7 days. These conservative measures proved to be unsuccessful because the rate of the pericardial drainage did not decrease. The patient also underwent, a bipedal lymphangiography which showed no anatomic abnormalities of the thoracic duct and no leakage. Under these circumstances the patient was addressed for thoracic surgical evaluation. The patient finally underwent a video-assisted supradiaphragmatic mass ligation of the thoracic duct and creation of a pleuropericardial window through a low right mini thoracotomy. Ligation of the thoracic duct together with all the adjacent soft tissue between the esophagus, the azygos vein and the aorta was performed. The patient was recovered uneventfully for both spine injury and tamponade. There has been no recurrence of the pericardial effusion for 12 months.