A 41-year-old white man was admitted to our Emergence Surgery Department with a diagnosis of acute appendicitis and probable saccate peritonitis. He presented with a history of abdominal pain of 1 week which was localized prevalently in his right iliac fossa. At admission he was subpyretic. A clinical examination showed slight pain to abdominal palpation at right iliac fossa and flank, where a mass was appreciable, without signs of peritonism; peristalsis was preserved. Laboratory examinations showed little enhancement of inflammatory indexes (PCR 2.10 mg/dL, fibrinogen 471 mg/dL) without leucocytosis or any other relevant alteration. An abdominal ultrasonography was performed; it revealed evidence of an oval lump of 72 mm diameter with hyperechogenic structure and hypoechoic-anechoic areas and septa in its contest, near to two similar less voluminous areas . This report was erroneously interpreted as a zone of saccate peritonitis complicating acute appendicitis.
Because the evidence from our clinical examination and ultrasonography was unclear, an abdominal CT was performed, which confirmed the presence of an oval formation of 61×42 mm with fluid-overfluid content in direct contiguity with cecal fundus and fluid effusion in pouch of Douglas and along the right parietocolic recess until the punta hepatis . Some subcentrimetic lymph nodes near the mass were signaled.
The patient then underwent a further abdominal echography with contrast mean and aspiration of some cloudy dark fluid from which a specimen was taken for a culture and for chemical, physical, and cytological examination. The examinations showed that the fluid was an exudative inflammatory effusion without any significant cytological alteration.
Three days after admission, the patient underwent surgery because of the persistence of symptoms and the lack of a definite diagnosis. An explorative laparotomy was performed. At the access to his peritoneal cavity we found conspicuous serohematic effusion and the presence of a grape-like multicystic mass of gelatinous consistence, localized between his cecum and right parietocolic recess, adherent to the wall of his cecum and proximal ascendant colon and parietal peritoneum. On his omentum we found another similar formation that appeared as a cyst with a necrotic perforated wall . This lesion was first removed and an intraoperative pathological examination was requested: it excluded the presence of neoplastic cells in a pseudocystic formation with fibrous wall, chronic inflammatory infiltration and stratification of fibrinous material above inner surface. We performed an appendicectomy and complete excision of the mass, with cauterization of the abdominal wall to which the neoplasm was adherent, abundant douching of the peritoneal cavity and the removal of all small jelly-like visible cysts disseminated in his abdomen . No other macroscopic pathological lesions to the explored organs were found.
Definitive histological diagnosis demonstrated the presence of cystic formations, lined by mesothelium, with thin fibrous wall constituted of tissue of granulation with inflammatory infiltration, compatible with benign peritoneal multicystic mesothelioma . The omental mass was of the same nature, with evidence of limited adenomatoid areas. Acute catarrhal appendicitis was confirmed with fibrino-leucocytic perivisceral inflammation.
No relevant complications occurred during the postoperative period and the patient was discharged home 8 days after surgery. One year after surgery no evidence of recurrence or residual pathology was observed.