A 55 years old female obese patient with Body Mass Index (BMI) of 42 kg/m (120 kg, 1.70 m) with past medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, arthritis. She had also a past surgical history of open appendectomy, incisional hernia treated with intraperitoneal mesh, complicated with right colic erosion and fistula requiring right colectomy. She arrived from another hospital with multiple median and transverse abdominal scar incisions and recurrence of an enormous incisional hernia in her right iliac fossa . No tobacco or alcohol intoxications were noted. Preoperative upper fibroscopy revealed BE along 2 cm in height without dysplasia on biopsy. A multidisciplinary team decided to perform SG initially followed by incisional hernia repair. Open SG was performed. No intraoperative complication occurred. Two weeks later a gastric leak appeared requiring surgical reoperation and drainage by Kehr tube. Fistula was dried up six months later.
Seventeen months after SG and a 40 kgs weight loss, the median and right iliac hernias were repaired with pre-aponeurotic polypropylene mesh along with abdominal dermolipectomy. The latter operation was complicated with cutaneous dehiscence, which required treatment by vacuum therapy. One year later, a supraombilical incisional hernia was repaired successfully using a preaponeurotic subcutaneous polypropylene mesh .
Three years following SG, the patient presented with complaining of persistent vomiting over several months. Upper digestive tract opacification showed lacunar image on the lower esophagus . Endoscopy revealed 5 cm pseudo-polyp neoformation located 30–35 cm from the dental arches. Upper endoscopic ultrasound described a supra-cardial pediculate hypoechoic lesion of 2 cm in diameter without peritumoral lymph nodes. After multidisciplinary discussion, endoscopic mucosectomy was done . Biopsy showed well-differentiated intra-epithelial adenocarcinoma arisen in BE with safe surgical margins and without lymphatic embolus or perineural sheathing; classified as pT1 with negative HER2 expression. Work up being negative for hepatic or extrahepatic disease, close supervision and follow up of the patient with serial gastroscopy were suggested later on.