A 32-year-old Caucasian woman presented with pyrexia and headache lasting one week to our Emergency Department. She gave no history of diarrhea or other symptoms to account for her high temperature. She was not taking any medication. She was pyrexial (38°C), tachycardic (110bpm) and hypertensive (160/110mmHg). Her fundoscopy revealed grade IV hypertensive retinopathy. She had mild pretibial and periorbital edema, with oliguria (450mL/day).
An evaluation of her medical history revealed that she had hypertension, proteinuria and edema during a pregnancy one year previously, which she had successfully completed to term. No laboratory investigations were undertaken at that time. Her mother had died in her early 30s with a clinical picture consistent with a TMA .
Her laboratory evaluation showed microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin: 6.6g/dL; unconjugated bilirubinemia: 2.1mg/dL; lactate dehydrogenase: 1610U/L (<480U/L); haptoglobin: 10mg/dL (41 to 165mg/dL); schistocytosis: 5%; negative Coombs test; reticulocytes: 3.68%), thrombocytopenia (120×10/L), albumin 3g/dL and elevated serum creatinine (12.65mg/dL). Her urinary examination showed +++ proteinuria and the presence of eight to ten erythrocytes and two to three leucocytes; 2.4g protein excretion in a 24-hour urine sample. Viral serologic markers for hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV were negative.
A stool culture was negative for Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli. Her ADAMTS13 activity was within the normal range (73%), and she was negative for ADAMTS13 auto-antibodies (13UI/L). Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-extractable nuclear antigens and anti-double stranded DNA antibodies were negative. Her C4 level was normal (280mg/L) but her C3 level was low (80mg/dL (85 to 200mg/dL)). An ultrasonography of her abdomen revealed a normal right kidney but left kidney agenesis precluded a renal biopsy.
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal failure and a likely family history in the setting of normal ADAMTS13 activity led us to the diagnosis of aHUS, and plasma exchange (40mL/kg fresh frozen plasma per exchange) was immediately instituted. Hemodialysis was also required because of hypervolemia as evidenced by tachypnea, dyspnea, jugular venous distention and intractable hypertension, and pulmonary congestion on her chest X-ray.
Plasma exchange initially improved the biochemical and hematological markers of disease and treatment continued. After 22 sessions of plasma exchange, her LDH level increased to 869U/L and her platelet count fell to 85×10/L, and it was decided to institute eculizumab therapy .
Following vaccination against Neisseria meningitides, eculizumab was introduced at 900mg weekly for the first four weeks, followed by 1200mg for the fifth dose one week later and then 1200mg every two weeks thereafter. Her LDH level normalized and no further plasma exchange was required. She had remained dialysis-dependent throughout her treatment, but following two months of eculizumab treatment her renal function improved to the extent that renal replacement therapy was not required. At 20 months into eculizumab treatment her creatinine level was 1.50mg/dL, with no evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. The drug was well tolerated, with no significant adverse effects.
While management proceeded, genetic analysis was undertaken to screen for predisposing aHUS risk factors as previously described. A heterozygous CFH rare genetic variant in exon 21 was found (c.3454T>A; p.C1152S), with no other genetic risk factors identified. This resulted in low levels of circulating CFH 0.32g/L (0.35 to 0.59g/L). She was negative for factor H autoantibodies.
A factor H analysis of her father (I:1) and sister (II:5) revealed that they did not carry the variant, but her three brothers (II:2, II:3, II:4) carried the same mutation. The brothers’ renal function was normal and their urine analysis was unremarkable. It is therefore probable that the CFH mutation was inherited from her mother, and that the clinical syndrome which led to her death was aHUS; DNA was not available to confirm this hypothesis.