A 30 year old, right-handed woman was admitted with a two week history of word finding difficulties. There was subtle expressive and receptive dysphasia alongside acalculia, agraphia, finger agnosia and left-right disorientation (Additional file ), and right-sided homonymous hemianopia.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head demonstrated a large heterogeneous lesion associated with focal cystic changes in the left occipito-temporal lobes with partial restriction on diffusion weighted MRI (DWI) and heterogeneous gadolinium enhancement . No spinal cord lesions were detected. Long echo time proton MR spectroscopy (MRS) of the lesion revealed an n-acetyl aspartate (NAA)/creatine (Cr) ratio of 1.17, a choline (Cho)/Cr ratio of 2.64 and an inverted lactate doublet curve . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal cell count (white cells <1, red cells <1), protein of 0.39 g/L, IgG of 21 mg/L, negative microbiology screen, however oligo-clonal bands predominantly in CSF compared to serum.
She was treated with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone (MP), 1 g daily for three consecutive days with no clinical effect. Two weeks later the patient developed severe headache with intractable vomiting. Repeat MRI head revealed increase in size of the previously detected lesion and three new lesions .
Given the diagnostic uncertainty – disease progression despite treatment with IVMP – needle biopsy was undertaken of the large left parietal lesion. The biopsy demonstrated frequent perivascular cuffs of T lymphocytes, macrophages and fewer B lymphocytes. Sheets of macrophages with foamy cytoplasm were evident in the neural parenchyma admixed with frequent GFAP positive reactive appearing astrocytes many of which showed abundant cytoplasm and peripherally placed nuclei (inlet in D). Occasional Creutzfeldt cells (inlet in E) were also identified, which is a characteristic albeit not specific feature of inflammatory demyelination. Visible on haematoxylin-eosin stained section and further highlighted on luxol fast blue special stain for myelin was the relatively sharp margin between well-myelinated areas and regions with near complete absence of myelin. Axons, however, were well-preserved throughout. Furthermore, immunostaining for mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 protein harbouring R132H mutation, which is present in a large proportion of diffuse gliomas , was negative in the whole specimen. Hence, there was no evidence of underlying glial neoplasm. In addition, neither T lymphocytes nor B lymphocytes showed cytological atypia thereby providing no support for a neoplastic lymphoid proliferation. The Ki67 proliferation index was mildly increased in keeping with reactive proliferation of the macrophages within the lesion.
Following histological confirmation of demyelination, and six weeks after first presentation, treatment with natalizumab 300 mg IV once every four weeks was started. As part of her peri-operative care, she was also given oral dexamethasone, initially in a dose of 4 mg bd, tapered in steps of 1 mg bd every two weeks. The last dose of dexamethasone was taken one week prior to her first follow-up MRI four weeks after commencing natalizumab. At this time point improvement in language fluency and content was recorded, underpinned by MRI evidence of reduction in size of all lesions, and no new lesions . After the fourth natalizumab infusion mini mental state examination score was 27/30 (pre-treatment score = 18) and Addenbrooke’s cognitive examination (ACE-R) score 82/100 (pre-treatment score = 61). The second video illustrates the improvement of the patient’s cognitive function (Additional file ). No further relapses were observed after 16 months of clinical follow-up and 14 months after commencing natalizumab treatment (MRI Figure O-Q). However, two complex-partial epileptic seizures occurred six and eight months after disease onset. After starting treatment with lamotrigine 25 mg bd no further seizures occurred.