A 56 year old Indian male patient was admitted for post-traumatic avascular necrosis of the head of the femur leading to degenerative arthritis of his left hip joint . He was a known case of hypertension on medication and a chronic smoker as well as an alcoholic. A cemented total hip arthroplasty was performed through the Southern Moors (posterior) approach . Immediately following the surgery, his pulses were felt but had been feeble. However, three hours post-operatively the resident doctor noticed that the patient’s left lower limb had become cold and the dorsalispedis artery, popliteal artery, and femoral artery pulsations were absent on the left side. There were no ankle movements. Since the patient was on epidural anesthesia, the patient did not complain of any pain. An emergency Doppler scan suggested narrowing of the left iliac and left common femoral vessels with monophasic flow. A C T angiogram revealed complete occlusion of the left common femoral artery .
With an urgent opinion from cardiothoracic and vascular surgery, the left femoral artery was exposed and a thrombus was noticed . Angioplasty was carried out using Forgarty’s catheter and the vessel was recanalized . On passing the catheter proximally, one layer of thickened intima was removed followed by clots. Good blood flow was established on removal. When the catheter was passed distally, not many clots were present. After removal of the occluding thrombus measuring 2.5 cm in length and intimal plaque of one cm length confirmed by histopathological examination , the artery was closed using 6-0 prolene sutures . Peripheral pulses were felt. After 12 hours, there was active movement of the limb. A post-operative Doppler scan showed good flow of blood within the affected vessel . Though a postoperative CT angiogram would have further affirmed the successful findings, it was not performed due to the financial constraints of the patient. The patient was started on anticoagulants for a course of three weeks. Since the remainder of the post-operative period was uneventful the patient was discharged 17 days later and advised to return for a follow-up and repeat Doppler scan after one month. He was also strictly advised to stop smoking.