A 30-year-old young male, employed as a manual laborer in Middle East, presented with complaints of low back pain(VAS8) for the past 6 months with restriction of his spinal movements. He also complaints of numbness and paresthesias in the right lower limb. He had a recent history of trauma following which his pain had significantly increased and prevented him from being gainfully employed. No history of fever, weight loss, night sweats, and loss of appetite was reported. Medical history was insignificant.
Physical examination revealed an antalgic gait with localized tenderness over the lumbosacral junction and limitation of lumbar spine movements. Neurological examination revealed hypoesthesia over right L5 dermatome and S1 with weakness of the right extensor hallucis longus and extensor digitorum longus (Medical Research Council – 4/5).
Laboratory tests revealed elevated ESR (33mm/h) and CRP(43mg/L). Rest of the hematological investigations including complete blood count, liver function tests and renal function tests were within normal limits.
Plain radiograph of lumbosacral spine revealed lytic, non-expansile lesion with pathological fracture at L5 vertebral body . CT scan showed a well-defined osteolytic lesion involving the entire L5 vertebral body with pathological fracture and intact posterior elements. There was no reactive osteoblastic activityobvious on CT scan. MRI scan showed hypointense signal changes in TI sagittal and hyperintensesignal changes in T2 sagittal images with normal disc at L4-5and L5-S1 levels. PET scan showed metabolically active lesion involving L5 vertebral body and right ischium. No obvious primary lesion could be localized on PET scan.
On the basis of clinical and diagnostic investigations, a working diagnosis of a neoplastic lesion of L5 vertebra with pathological fracture and 5 radiculopathy was promulgated.
A CT-guided biopsy performed by interventional radiologist from L5 vertebral body. Unfortunately, the reports were inconclusivein histopathology in view of inadequate sample received. The patient was planned for posterior stabilization, laminectomy, decompression and transpedicular biopsy.
After ETGA, the patient was positioned prone and a standard midline approach was used to perform posterior stabilization L4-S1 and L5 laminectomy and the decompression of the dural sac and L5 nerve roots bilaterally. Transpedicular biopsy was done and sent for frozen section. The frozen section showed no evidence of infection and revealed features suggestive of atypical neoplasia. However, the nature of neoplasia, whether benign or malignant, could not be concluded from the frozen section. Intraoperatively, the decision was made to do L5 anterior corpectomy, excisionbiopsy, and reconstruction using Harms cage filled with cement strut. The patient was positioned supine and anterior retroperitoneal approach was used to reach the pathologicalL5 vertebra. After adequate vascular mobilization and securement, completeL5 corpectomy was done until the anterior dura was decompressed. The empty corpectomy site was reconstructed with appropriate size titanium Harms cage wedged into lordosis and filled with cement .
Histopathological examination of the biopsy sample showed proliferation of Langerhans cells in sheets and associated with others cells such as eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells and it was reported to be probably LCH.
Immunohistochemistry subsequently confirmed the presence of LCH with positive reaction for S100 and Cd1a.
Immediately post-surgery,his low back pain and paresthesias in the right lower limb decreased significantly. He was mobilized with lumbosacral belt on the next day after surgery. Since he was having unisystemic bifocal LCH and since he had already undergone compete excision of L5 lesion, the hemato-oncologists opted to treat him with high-dose steroids. The patient came at regular follow-up at the 3rd month, 6th month, and 1 year and 2 years following the surgery. Repeat PET scan done at the 3rd month showed complete resolution ofischial lesion with no tumor uptake at L5 vertebra. At the end of 6 months, implants were holding well without any collapse, recurrence, or any other complications. Final follow-up at the 2nd year showed that the reconstruction was stable with no evidence of loosening or recurrence.