A 45-year-old female patient presented with blurred vision for 13 months and was initially diagnosed with papilledema at the ophthalmology department of another hospital. With no effective treatment, her condition deteriorated over the next 2 months. Consequently, she was admitted to the neurology department of our hospital. No other symptoms of ICH (headache, nausea, vomiting) or any other neurologic deficits were present on admission. The medium-build patient had no previous medical history or family history of venous thromboembolism or hematological diseases, and she denied any drug history including the use of oral contraceptive pills.
Physical examination revealed a slower light reflex of the left eye, decreased visual acuity of bilateral eyes (more severe on the left) and left nasal hemianopsia. On neurological examination, no neurological localizing signs were observed. Fundus examination showed bilateral papilledema. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no occupying lesions, only mildly dilated ventricles . Lumbar puncture (LP) revealed a significantly elevated pressure of 330 mmH2O. Laboratory examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) indicated a normal cell count of 4 × 106/L (normal range 0–8 × 106/L) and a significantly increased protein level of 382.6 mg/dL (normal range 0–43 mg/dL). Given the other negative results of CSF ink stain, blood T-SPOT tuberculosis, and normal computed tomography (CT) scan of the lung, the neurologists excluded intracranial tuberculous and cryptococcal infection. Meningeal carcinomatosis was also not considered due to the slow progression, though CSF cytology was not investigated.
A diagnosis of cranial venous sinus thrombosis (CVST) was then suspected and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance venography (CE-MRV) was performed. The examination showed relatively thin transverse sinus on both sides but no obvious evidence of CVST. Considering the possibility of elevated CSF protein caused by extracranial, and not intracranial, tumors, the neurologists planned for lumbar MRI but failed to perform the examination because of a metal intrauterine device (IUD). Instead, a lumbar CT scan was performed, revealing no abnormalities . Still, evidence supporting secondary ICH was insufficient. Hence, a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed which showed an obvious stenosis localized in the area of the right transverse sinus, and the venous pressure gradient near the stenosis reached 28 mmHg, which confirmed venous sinus stenosis . She was then diagnosed with IIH and transverse sinus stenosis (TSS).
A few days later, the patient received a percutaneous intracranial right transverse sinus stent implantation. DSA showed that the well-dilated stent was in position, and venography identified a smooth venous reflux . However, her symptoms did not improve. Two days later, a repeat LP revealed that the pressure was still high at 305 mmH2O. Further examinations were suggested but the patient refused and was discharged.
One year later, the patient returned to our hospital due to an exacerbated condition. Her vision had worsened and she had been experiencing severe headaches accompanied by frequent nausea and vomiting for over 1 month. A brain MRI revealed obvious hydrocephalus, which was much more serious than that 1 year ago . She was admitted to our department and was scheduled to receive shunt surgery. Physical examination showed much slower light reflex of the left eye and worsening visual acuity than before. No neurological localizing signs were found on neurological examination. Ophthalmological examinations revealed severe papilledema and deficits in bilateral visual fields . Surprisingly, an LP performed the next day revealed an opening pressure of 320 mmH2O with fast-flow leakage of CSF at first, which slowed to no leakage within a short time. Repeated adjustment of the puncture needle was not successful and the Queckenstedt-Stookey test was positive. The CSF test showed a significantly increased protein level of 384.5 mg/dL. By then we highly suspected an intraspinal obstruction, or more precisely, a spinal tumor. Since the patient’s metal IUD had been taken out, a total spinal MRI examination was soon arranged. Imaging indicated an intramedullary tumor at the L1–L3 level and no abnormalities in the cervical or thoracic vertebrae .
One week after admission, the patient underwent resection of the L1–L3 tumor . The surgery was successful and pathologic evaluation confirmed schwannoma. On the first postoperative day, her headache was prominently relieved. However, her poor vision was not resolved, which may be caused by optic atrophy due to long-term suppression of ICH. A postoperative head CT scan showed a smaller ventricle than that observed in preoperative imaging. After approximately 2 weeks of recovery, the patient was discharged. A telephone follow-up 1 year later revealed that there had been no further deterioration in her symptoms, though her vision had still not recovered.