A 60-year-old Asian (Chinese) woman complained of discovering a cervical pulsatile mass. She also complained of dysphagia and dyspnea symptoms. She has a history of Meniere’s disease.
When admitted in the vascular surgery ward, her vital signs were stable and she complained of dizziness. A solid pulsatile 4 × 4 × 5 cm mass could be palpitated at the right cervical and supraclavicular fossae. There was no tenderness of the mass. The pulse of her right carotid artery and right branchial artery were normal. Her body temperature was 36.7 °C, heart rate was 108/minute, respiration rate was 20/minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% at administration. Bilateral upper extremity blood pressure was equal at 132/70 mmHg. The laboratory findings were white blood cells (WBC) 10.01 × 109/L and neutrophils 6.92 × 109/L; a liver function test revealed: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 10.8 μmol/L, albumin 39.7 g/L, and D-dimer 0.92 μg/mL. There was no special family history or other genetic information of our patient. She has no history of smoking tobacco and alcohol consumption. There was no special prior social, employment, and environmental history of this patient.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed a pseudoaneurysm at the right cervical area . Contrast came from the initial location of right common carotid artery. The rupture was located on bifurcation of right common carotid artery and right subclavian artery. The diameter of the pseudoaneurysm was 4 cm. Her esophagus and trachea were slightly compressed by the pseudoaneurysm. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) confirmed that the rupture area of the pseudoaneurysm came from innominate artery bifurcation. The artery tear lesion had a diameter of 0.5 cm .
Before the intervention, a monitor was used to make sure our patient’s vital signs were stable. Cardiac type B ultrasound evaluated that her cardiac function was normal. No special drug was given to her. After the preoperative preparation, the endovascular treatment was arranged in the catheter theater of our hospital. She was in a supine position. We successfully punctured her right femoral artery and right branchial artery. Then two through accesses were built using Amplatz guidewires: one was from right femoral artery to right carotid artery and the other was from right branchial artery to ascending aorta. In order to keep right carotid artery and right subclavian artery patent, two covered stent grafts from guidewire accesses were placed into innominate artery bifurcation. The two Fluency® Plus covered stent grafts (Angiomed GmbH &Co Karlsruhe, Germany) of 12 mm × 6 cm and 12 mm × 8 cm were pre-positioned in innominate artery partially, also in right carotid artery and right subclavian artery partially. A “roadmap” angiography made the delivery process precise. The two pre-positioned stent grafts were delivered and they were partially “kissing” in innominate artery. The other part of the two stent grafts was in distal site of right subclavian artery and right carotid artery separately. Balloon expansion was performed in both stent grafts. DSA after the stent grafts deployment showed the pseudoaneurysm was repaired, no contrast went into the pseudoaneurysm anymore.
Two weeks later, CTA showed that the two stent grafts were in satisfactory position, both the right carotid artery and the right subclavian artery were patent . No contrast went into the pseudoaneurysm. No pulse of the cervical mass could be palpitated after the procedure was finished. There was no need to resect the mass because the compressive symptoms had disappeared. No infection was noted at the lesion area when she came back 1 month later. Her symptoms of dysphagia and dyspnea were relieved 1–2 weeks later. She was alive and well at 1-year follow-up. She had no special complaints and she refused another CTA when we communicated with her by telephone.