A 36-year-old Caucasian woman presented with vision loss and metamorphopsia in her right eye. She was 21 weeks pregnant and reported a previous uncomplicated pregnancy that progressed to full term. Her prior medical and ocular history were unremarkable. On examination, visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/125 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, with a − 3 D myopic correction in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in both eyes. Slit lamp biomicroscopy was unremarkable. In the right eye, fundus examination showed the presence of a juxtafoveal CNV along with juxtafoveal hemorrhages nearby, and multifocal yellowish RPE changes temporally surrounding the lesion area. The fundus of the left eye was normal.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT - Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed hyper-reflective material in the subretinal space above the RPE with subretinal fluid, consistent with type 2 CNV . Multiple hyper-reflective, vertical, finger-like projections extending from the area of the CNV into the outer retina were detected, resembling the tines of a pitchfork, and thus suggestive of the “pitchfork sign” typical of inflammatory CNV . Moreover, RPE and ellipsoid zone (EZ) disruption was detected in the site of the CNV while choroidal hypo-transmission was found under the lesion, features indicative of neovascular tissue .
Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed multiple hyper-autofluorescent spots surrounding the temporal side of the CNV area, corresponding to the RPE changes detectable upon fundus examination. OCT scans across these spots demonstrated a disruption at the level of the outer retinal layers .
The patient refused fluorescein and indocyanine green angiography because she did not want to undergo any potential risk from intravenous dye injection during pregnancy. Therefore, OCT angiography (OCTA - Zeiss Angioplex, Carl Zeiss Meditec Inc., Dublin, CA) was performed, confirming the presence of a neovascular network with corresponding structural scan (B), confirming the presence of a neovascular network).
Based on the clinical features and multimodal imaging, the patient was diagnosed with inflammatory CNV. Multiple potential treatment options were discussed, including intravitreal injections of anti-VEGF, intravitreal injections of steroids, oral corticosteroids, or a combination thereof. The patient did not want to assume any potential risk from the use of intravitreal drugs, nor from orally administered corticosteroids. Therefore, a retrobulbar injection of triamcinolone acetonide was proposed, which was accepted by the patient after an extensive explanation of the procedure.
The patient’s eye was prepared with povidone-iodine and draped, and a topical anesthesia was applied. A 25-gauge cannula was inserted through the Tenon’s into the retrobulbar space in the infero-temporal quadrant, and 80 mg (1 ml) triamcinolone acetonide was injected (Tajoftal, Sooft, S.p.A.).
No increase in intraocular pressure (IOP) was found upon the one-day and one-week visits after the injection, nor throughout the entire ensuing follow-up (FU).
At the two-week visit after the procedure, BCVA had improved to 20/32 along with a significant reduction in metamorphopsia. OCT revealed a regression in subretinal fluid and a contraction of the neovascular lesion . A reduction in the neovascular network was discovered on OCTA . Regression of the hyper-autofluorescent spots at the temporal side of the CNV area was detected on FAF, along with the corresponding OCT defects at the level of the outer retinal layers .
Two months after the injection, the patient returned complaining once again of vision loss and metamorphopsia in the same eye. OCT showed a CNV recurrence . Juxtafoveal hemorrhages were visible next to the lesion, and BCVA had decreased to 20/80. Therefore, intravitreal anti-VEGF injections were recommended. However, the patient refused intravitreal treatments, and, consequently, a second retrobulbar triamcinolone injection was performed.
One month after the second injection, OCT demonstrated both a subretinal fluid regression and CNV size reduction . BCVA in the affected eye remained stable at 20/80.
No adverse events occurred for either the mother or the baby during pregnancy and after delivery. No additional recurrences were detected until the last FU visit was performed 6 months after delivery.