A 49-year-old previously healthy man was admitted for fever, typical angina chest pain 3 d prior to presentation, and newly onset left lower limb pain.
No history declared.
No relevant medical history.
This patient declared no smoking or alcohol history or any other noteworthy family medical history.
The heart sounds were tachycardic without any pathological murmurs. The left leg was cold and cyanotic, with no palpable pulse of the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries but with preserved sensibility and active movements.
Troponin I and creatine kinase-MB levels were elevated. Severe thrombocytopenia, anemia and elevated D-dimers were also present. The blood urea nitrogen level was elevated. Summary of laboratory data are shown in Table . The laboratory data included serological testing for markers of hepatitis B infection, human immunodeficiency virus status as well as hepatitis C virus. The results were negative, and thus we excluded a viral causative agent of TTP. We also performed specific tests for some of the most common bacteria cited in the literature such as Brucella melitensis, Campylobacter jejuni, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Salmonella typhi, all results being negative. Unfortunately, testing for Arcanobacterium pyogenes could not be performed. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with marked ST-elevation and Q waves in DI and aVL and r waves in V1-V3.
Transthoracic echocardiography depicted a mildly hypertrophied left ventricle (LV), with akinesia of the apical third of the interventricular septum, the apex, and the antero-lateral wall. The LV function was moderately depressed, with an ejection fraction of 40%. The apex was occupied by two thrombi, one adherent, 15/18 mm, and the other one very mobile, tongue-shaped, 18/9 mm .
Venous Doppler ultrasound showed occlusion of the left popliteal artery.
Abdominal computer scan revealed several other thrombotic sites: subocclusion of the superior mesenteric artery (approximately 40 mm), thrombosis (70% stenosis) of the posterior aortic wall, with several irregularities, spleen infarction (superior pole), renal infarction (inferior pole) as well as distended bowel with air-fluid levels and widespread edema, and areas of ileum necrosis .