A 54-year-old female patient (body weight 58 kg; height 162 cm; ethnicity: the Han nationality) with a 2-year history of ALS was scheduled for hemorrhoidectomy and hemorrhoidal artery ligation due to hemorrhoids. There were symptoms of muscle weakness of the right lower limb for 3 years that had aggravated for 1 year and inflexibility in both hands for 1 year. She was diagnosed with ALS 1 year ago. She was also diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment according to the Minimum Mental State Examination (MMSE) score. Physical examinations showed that her pulmonary function was normal, and she had no difficulty speaking or swallowing. There was no sensory abnormality. To avoid possible damage to neuromuscular function and respiratory depression, we decided to administer real-time ultrasound-guided sacral plexus block combined with mild sedation for anesthesia.
After transferring the patient into the operating room, standard monitoring was established, including noninvasive arterial blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring. The patient was placed into the prone position. Real-time ultrasound was used to confirm the location of the sacral plexus. First, the ultrasonic probe was placed at the midpoint between the greater trochanter of the femur and the posterior superior spine of the iliac, with the lower margin of the inner half level. At this time, an oblique linear high-echo shadow of the ilium was seen on the ultrasound image. The probe was then slid inward and downward to see the image of the inner sacrum and the outer ilium, and the high-echo sacral plexus was located between the ilium and the sacrum ; 15 mL of 1% lidocaine was injected with an in-plane technique guided by real-time ultrasound on both the left and right sides. The procedure was performed by an experienced anesthetist using aseptic techniques. The patient was then placed into the supine position. Intravenous infusion of dexmedetomidine was administered for sedation at 1 µg/kg/hour for 10 minutes and continued at 0.3 µg/kg/hour along with 2 L/minute O2 via a face mask. The operation began after confirming that the perineum area had no pain response.
The operation time was 30 minutes. There was no pain or discomfort intraoperatively. In case of the occurrence of anesthesia-associated complications, the patient was monitored in the post-anesthesia care unit for 1 hour after the surgery. The patient was discharged on the fifth day after the surgery. There was no obvious deterioration of ALS symptoms after the surgery or 3 months after the patient was discharged.