A previously healthy 53-year-old Chinese male farmer was admitted to the hospital due to his “abnormal behavior for one day” on August 28, 2019, with the presentation of repetitive behavior, confusion, and irritability. He had a history of drinking raw stream water, flood sewage exposure and transient fever 1 week before admission. He was healthy before this episode and no medication history or drug abuse could be traced. There was no history of chronic diarrhea. Physical examination on admission revealed normal vital signs with a temperature of 36.8 ℃, respiratory rate of 20/minute, pulse of 74/minute, and blood pressure of 128/85 mmHg. He was in a sedative condition due to the application of sedative drugs in an external hospital. After the patient regained consciousness from sedatives, he presented with speech disorder, confusion and irritability. The Brudzinski sign and Kernig sign were negative.
Routine workup of blood to rule out other differential diagnosis, including metabolic disorder or endocrine disorder, were normal (see Supplementary Table , Additional File ). Investigations for infection indicators, such as procalcitonin, serum human immunodeficiency virus antibody, syphilis rapid plasma reagin and herpes simplex virus antibody, were all normal. Tests for autoimmune antibodies and tumor markers of serum were negative (see Supplementary Table , Additional File ). Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was normal. No abnormalities were found in electromyography and electroencephalogram. Lumbar puncture showed that the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure was 120 mmH2O with normal leukocyte and protein (see Supplementary Table , Additional File ).
In order to identify whether the patient had central nervous system (CNS) infection or autoimmune encephalitis, the patient’s CSF and peripheral blood samples were sent to the laboratories for metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) (BGI Gene Technology Company, Shenzhen, China) and autoimmune encephalitis related antibodies testing (Kindstar Global Medical Technology Co., Ltd, Beijing, China), respectively. mNGS revealed 53 sequencing reads of Leptospira interrogans in his CSF (method regarding mNGS was shown in Additional File and Supplementary Table and Table ). Penicillin with a dose of 4.8 million units per 6 h was immediately initiated upon receiving mNGS report on September 1st, 2019. Olanzapine and risperidone were successively prescribed to relieve his psychiatric symptoms. But no improvement was observed in the following four day’s therapy. A real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assay targeting lipL32 (T033, Xi’an Tianlong Technology Co., Ltd, Xian, China) for detection of pathogenic Leptospira spp and specific Leptospira IgM and IgG antibodies test (ELISA kits, ESR125M, ESR125G, Virion-Serion, Germany) on peripheral blood were performed on September 5 (on the 9th day of admission, before prescribing of methylprednisolone), but they both revealed negative (methods were shown in Additional File ).
A DPPX IgG antibody detection kit (MT193-16, MYBiotech, Shanxi, China) with cell-based assay (CBA) was applied to capture IgG autoantibodies (protocols were shown in Additional File ). And a report of positive IgG against DPPX both in blood (1:32) and CSF (1:1) was received two days after the result of mNGS. Tests for other antibodies associated with tumors or autoimmune inflammatory disorders were all negative (see Supplementary Table , Additional File ). The patient was eventually diagnosed with neuroleptospirosis combined with autoimmune encephalitis associated with DPPX-Ab. In addition to continuing with high-dose penicillin for 2 weeks, high-dose intravenous corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 1 g) for 5 days with subsequent slow dose tapering of prednisolone and immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg per day) for a period of 5 days were also initiated on September 5, 2019. His mental symptoms relieved 2 days after the initiation of immunotherapy. After 20 days of treatment, his neurologic symptoms had substantially improved, and IgG against DPPX turned negative both in serum and CSF . The neuropsychiatric features completely resolved within 1 month after discharge. During the following 4-year follow-up, the patient had neither residual neurological symptoms nor recurrence.