A 29 year-old Vietnamese pregnant woman, gravida 0 parity 0, was transferred to our hospital to perform a routine fetal anatomy scanning at 24+6 weeks of gestation. There was no remarkable history of chronic diseases and congenital abnormalities in the couple’s family. Both pregnant woman and her partner are healthy and identified as Southeast Asian and belonged to the “Kinh” ethnicity in Vietnam.
The routine first trimester screening with non-invasive Prenatal test (NIPT) results showed no chromosomal aberration for trisomy 13, 18 and 21.
Prenatal ultrasound at 24+6 weeks of gestation revealed flatting of the forehead and micrognathia , small and anteverted nostrils , mild dilated ventriculomegaly (10.25 mm) with a normal corpus callosum , normal cistern magna and nuchal fold , clubfeet and clenched hands. A diagnosis of Chiari malformation was suspicious, and the couple underwent a genetic counseling, but they declined an amniocentesis to evaluate the fetal karyotype due to religious faith.
The pregnancy continued to be monitored in the private antenatal clinic. Fetal anatomy and development were checked every 4 weeks, and there was no further abnormal findings detected. Baby was born at 38 weeks of gestation after 6 h of spontaneous labor through the vaginal delivery. The boy had normal growth with a birth weight of 3200 g, birth length of 50 cm, head circumference 33 cm, and thorax circumference 32 cm. He was presented in cyanic asphyxia status and seizure at birth. APGAR’s score was 3 at 1st minute, then increased 7 at the 3rd minute and 8 at 5th minutes after an emergency resuscitation. Baby’s facial malformation and limbs deformities (clenched hands and clubfeet) were consistent with prenatal diagnosis .
The neonatalist recognized no additional anomaly at birth. A heart and abdominal ultrasound showed in normal range. MRI was performed on the 10th day afterbirth and detected mild ventricular dilatation (14 mm), micrognathia, mild dilatation of cortical fissure without brain injury. There was no sign of protruding cerebellar tonsils into the foramen magnum.
A targeted next-generation sequencing (xGen Inherited Diseases Hyb Panel, IDT, USA) and bioinformatics with QIAam DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen) and Genome Analysis Toolkit were used to identify the newborn’s gene mutation. After applying an expanded carrier screening with a panel of 540 genes, the newborn’s karyotype was determined 46, XY and the NFIA gene mutation was also detected. Compound heterozygous NFIA genes were found in chromosome 1 with two variants NM_001134673.4: c.1255-2A > C (p.?) and NM_001134673.4: c.1255-1G > C (p.?). These variants are pathogenic type. Newborn’s parents were invited to have the target next-generation sequencing for NFIA and both results were negative.
Baby’s breathing has been assisted with the ventilator machine in the NICU and he still is in a critical condition.