Evan (not his real name), a 50-month-old male, was born prematurely on March 2010 at 36-week of gestation, with his birth weight of 3600 grams. During his first week of life, he experienced jaundice. He was breast-fed and formula-fed during the first 6-month of life because of reduced breast milk supply, then ceased breastfeeding completely at around 6-months. No feeding difficulties were reported during the infant period or at his current age. Physically, his weight and height are appropriate for his age, and he also looks taller than other children at his age. The only concern that his mother and teacher reported was his unclear speech. Dribbling sometimes occurs involuntarily during his speech. Mom reported a speech delay of 6-months, as diagnosed and assessed by the speech pathologist.
In March 2013 (aged 3), Evan’s mother had referred him to a speech pathologist due to unclear speech as he was not speaking as much as other children at his age. Evan was assessed using the Diagnostic Evaluation of Articulation and Phonology (DEAP) (Dodd et al., ). It was found that his speech is relatively clear at the single word level, but when he tries to sequence sounds to say longer words and put words together, the clarity of his speech diminishes and becomes very difficult to understand. For example, he said: “hou” for a house, “sli” for slide and “muni” for “monkey”. Dribbling and low oral muscle tone result in difficulty to precisely make and sequence the tiny movements necessary for connected speech (Rosemary & Usha, ). The speech pathologist reported that poor motor control in his mouth and motor planning component becomes the issue to his imprecise speech. There were no other issues in developmental skills at the time, as she found Evan’s play, attention and social skills, and receptive language were appropriate to age. Evan will become a successful verbal communicator if he has regular exercise on speech motor tasks, such as teaching precise movements for different speech sounds and sequencing sounds together to form words and sentences. In addition, she also recommended referring Evan to Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) specialist to find out any structural issue which may impact his oral motor skills. The Speech Pathologist advised having a hearing test with an audiologist to find any hearing issues that may be impacting his processing of speech sounds. She also advised the mother to include Evan in the Early Entry Preschool Programme where he attended in July 2013 until now, in one of the well-known Adelaide Kindergartens.
The kindergarten principal said that she had made a referral to the Department of Education and Child Development to get support service, but to date, there has been no response. The family paid for private therapy as a result. After following all the recommendations from the speech pathologist, it concluded that he had not had any issue with hearing or structure disorder in his mouth. Currently, one teacher participates regularly in teaching different speech sounds as suggested by the speech pathologist. Since February’14, the focus has been on the speech of words ending with n, ch, f and c/k. Evan shows many improvements in his speech, as reported by the teacher and his mother.
During observation in the kindergarten, it was noted the teachers and his best friend (Nivedh) relatively understand what Evan’s says, but it is likely difficult for other friends or adults who are unfamiliar with him. During free play, he pretended to be a spiderman with Nivedh excitedly. He can show others something that interested him, imitates others, join in a group if requested, seek adult assistance, and respond to questions. He also plays like others either inside (craft, puzzle, draw, and storytelling) or outside (climb the rungs, swing and slide). However, his unclear speech made the play assessment to some point hard for the assessor. For example, his verbalisation about the play scenario is hard to understand. In addition, the mother reported that he does not have any friends at home because there is no other child his age nearby. He usually plays with his little sister (Asley, 15-month-old) and his mother, who was not working at that time. Since starting Kindergarten, Evan was not attending other settings for early childhood programme, such as child care.