A 6-month-old male infant was hospitalized in a local hospital with recurrent fever and cough for 1 month. The presence of E. coli was detected by using a blood culture test. After 14 days of ceftazidime treatment, his temperature returned to normal, and the blood culture test results turned negative. However, he soon developed high fever and cough again with shortness of breath and was transferred to the West China Second University Hospital of Sichuan University. It was found that the child had developed Klebsiella pneumoniae septicemia during the neonatal period and pneumonia at 2 months of age. The newborn screening test results of the child were negative, and there was no evidence of any abnormalities or anomalies in the family history of close members of the child, in birth history, or in environmental history. Upon admission, a physical examination revealed a high body temperature of 39.5°C, a pulse rate of 180 beats per minute, a respiration rate of 70 per minute, and a blood oxygen saturation rate of 70%. Moist rales and wheezing were found bilaterally.
The detailed timeline of this patient is shown in . Upon admission, laboratory auxiliary blood routine examination revealed an increased white blood cell (WBC) count (16.9 × 109/L) and decreased lymphocyte absolute value (0.69 × 109/L), with an absolute value of monocytes of 0.30 × 109/L, absolute value of neutrophils of 15.24 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 19 mg/dl, and procalcitonin (PCT) of 8.0 ng/mL. Cellular immune response revealed a lymphocyte absolute value of 0.34 × 109/L, absolute value of T lymphocytes of 0.02 × 109/L, absolute value of B lymphocytes of 0.28 × 109/L, and absolute value of NK lymphocytes of 0.02 × 109/L. The results of culture tests performed using blood, sputum, and cerebrospinal fluid were negative. The result of the PCR test for influenza A/B virus, parainfluenza virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia, respiratory syncytial virus, metapneumovirus, rhinovirus, Bocavirus, adenovirus, and coronavirus was negative. The G test result for fungi was also negative. Lung computed tomography (CT) showed inflammation with decreased light transmittance, which was evident in the lower lobe of both lungs, as well as an exudation shadow and strip shadow . No thymus shadow was found . The results of sputum culture and two blood culture tests were also negative.
After admission, the patient received invasive ventilator therapy, anti-infective treatment with vancomycin (15 mg/kg, q6h) plus meropenem (40 mg/kg, q8h) and micafungin (4 mg/kg, qd), and gamma globulin infusion (1 g/kg). Considering the previous medical history (E. coli septicemia, K. pneumoniae septicemia, and pneumonia), lymphopenia, and the absence of thymus, congenital immunodeficiency, and opportunistic bacterial infection could not be ruled out. mNGS of blood was applied for rapid detection of pathogens. Meanwhile, whole-exome sequencing was performed in samples collected from the family members. The mNGS test results revealed 133 specific nucleic acid sequences of P. jirovecii, suggesting an infection with this pathogen (PCP). Trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole was added to the treatment regimen. After 5 days of treatment, the patient's condition improved, but he still needed ventilator support. The patient's parents requested a discharge due to financial reasons and declined the provision of any further treatment for the child. A day after discharge, the child died of respiratory failure. The result of whole-exome sequencing suggested an X-linked immunodeficiency. A hemizygous mutation c.865c > t (p.r289*) was detected in the IL2RG gene, which was inherited from the mother (heterozygous state). The family also declined an autopsy for the child, and therefore, an anatomical diagnosis could not be obtained.