A 46-year-old North African man with history of five hospitalizations in the space of 3 years for hypertriglyceridemia-induced acute pancreatitis presented to our emergency department with epigastric and left lumbar region pain that had been evolving for 10 days (T = 0).
On medical interrogation, the patient did not report other comorbidity nor excessive alcoholic consumption or drug abuse. No surgical history was mentioned. The patient had no significant family history and comes from an economically disadvantaged background. He was not adhering to the recommended regimen and was noncompliant with the prescribed hypertriglyceridemia treatment, was tolerating oral, and refused smoking cessation.
The patient’s physical examination showed that the pain was indistinct in nature and radiated to the left flank and left hypochondrium. The patient was febrile with a normal volume pulse. His hemodynamic state was stable. The abdomen was tender upon deep palpation.
White blood cell count was elevated (14.2 × 103/μL), hemoglobin was within normal levels (13.3 g/dL), and C-reactive protein was found to be elevated (298 mg/L, normal values < 6 mg/L). The other blood chemistry levels, in particular serum lipase and amylase, levels liver function tests, and serum creatinine, were within normal range. Bacteriological examination of urine was negative.
An abdominal computed tomography (T = day 1) revealed a 40 × 25 mm left renal abscess and a retroperitoneal 68 × 50 mm pancreatic pseudocyst .
The patient was admitted to our urology department for the treatment of his renal abscess.
Fluid resuscitation and probabilistic antibiotic treatment with intravenous cefotaxime and gentamicin was administered.
The patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous drainage of renal collection (T = day 2).
The fluid was amber colored, and bacteriological and biochemical examination showed high level of amylase (384 UI/L) and turned positive to Escherichia coli, which was more in favor of an infected pancreatic pseudocyst.
The patient’s fever subsided under antibiotics, and blood analysis showed a decrease of the white blood cell count and C-reactive protein when the patient completed 15 days of cefotaxime treatment.
A follow-up CT Scan was performed (T = Day 10) , which showed a clear regression of the upper pole renal collection, which measured 20 × 18 mm.
On day 16, he was discharged and transferred to the visceral surgery department to care of the retroperitoneal pseudocyst, with a favorable evolution.
A follow-up ultrasound was performed after 1 month showing total regression of all pseudocysts.