A 44-year-old woman was referred to an orthopedic clinic in a city hospital, complaining of low back pain (LBP) of several years duration. Her severe sciatalgia had exacerbated since 6 months before admission. The diagnosis of L5/S1 disc herniation compressing S1 root on the left side was made and she underwent operation. It was a no-contrast standard lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). At operation, L5 and partial S1 laminectomy followed by bilateral S1 foraminotomy, and bilateral L5/S1 discectomy was performed. Two weeks after the operation, the patient's symptoms exacerbated and paresthesia appeared in the left buttock. Paresthesia of the perineal region and urinary incontinency were also added to her previous complaints. On admission to our department, the muscle forces of the lower limb were intact both proximally and distally, but pin prick sensation was disturbed in S1, S2, and S3 dermatomes, and Achilles tendon reflex was absent in the left side. However, anal sphincter tone was intact. Re-evaluation of the previous preoperative lumbosacral MRI revealed that in addition to the L5/S1 bulged disc, there was an extradural dorsally located mass at S1, S2, and S3 levels. The new contrast-enhanced MRI revealed a 3 × 2 × 2 cm extradurally located tumor, extending from lower edge of S1 down to S2/S3 interspace. The tumor was hypointense in both T1 and T2 images and enhanced homogenously after contrast material injection. Scalloping of the posterior aspect of the S2 vertebra was also detectable [Figure –]. In the second operation, the previous laminectomy was extended from lower edge of L5 down to S3. A reddish gray tumor located in the extradural space, extending from S1 root axilla down to the S3 root, could be excised totally. There was neither tumor invasion to the dura or intradural space, nor any bone involvement detectable under microscopic observation. Histopathologic examination revealed a highly cellular neoplasm composed of diffuse sheets of tumor cells having monomorphic, round to oval, finely vesicular nuclei and occasional nucleoli with indistinct cytoplasmic border. Delicate fibrovascular septae surrounded the tumor mass along with intra tumoral extensions. In some foci, tumor cells gathered in groups around small vessels (pseudo-rosette appearance). There were nerve bundle entrapments within the tumor nests. Several groups of mitotic figures were noted, but no necrosis was detected [Figure and ].
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that the tumor cells stained positively for neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin, and chromogranin, suggestive of neuronal differentiation of the tumor. Tumor cells also expressed CD99, consistent with the diagnosis of ES/PNET . Ki-67 proliferative index showed about 10–15% proliferative activity. Other markers such as leukocyte common antigen (LCA), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cytokeratin (CK), desmin, smooth muscle actin (SMA), and myogenin were negative. Fluorescence in situ hybridization and chromosomal study were not performed.
The postoperative course was uneventful and all her symptoms including radicular pain and sphincter problems improved rapidly. The patient was referred for radiotherapy as the adjuvant therapy. In the last re-evaluation of the patient after 18 months, there was no sign of tumor recurrence in MRI.
After our wide search using Tehran University of Medical Sciences electronic resources and motor searches of Pubmed, Ovid, and EBSCO using the key words, spinal primitive neuroectodermal tumor and spinal extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma, 106 abstracts were found in the form of case series and case reports, which reported 141 cases of primary intraspinal EES/pPNET. Full texts of all the articles were collected from different electronic and paper archives including English, French, Spanish, and Italian articles. The earliest articles were published by Smith et al. and Tefft et al. in 1969 and the latest by Gollard et al. in Feb 2011. Patients’ information including age, sex, clinical signs and symptoms, duration of symptoms, family history, location of the tumor, metastasis, recurrences, therapeutic methods, duration of follow-up, and eventual outcome were all extracted from resources. As the articles were reported from various clinical departments (e.g. Neurosurgery, Orthopedics, Radiology, Oncology, Pathology, Pediatrics), different aspects of the disease were reviewed in each, and this led to neglecting some other aspects resulting in missed values regarding some subjects. In some of them with missing data about the mode of therapy, final outcome, or follow-up of the patients, the authors were contacted via e-mail directly for the required information. In spite of sending e-mail to 20 authors, only one reply was received.
After collecting and classifying the information, the data were analyzed utilizing SPSS version 13.0.
For analysis of the numeric variables such as age, Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to evaluate normal distribution of the data upon which we could decide to utilize parametric versus non-parametric tests to compare the data. Chi-square test (χ2) was used when comparing two nominal or ordinal variables such as 1-year survival in patients receiving different therapies. Independent sample t-test was used to evaluate numerical variable among two populations (e.g. age in different subgroups). P-values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.