On March 8, 2023, an 82-year-old postmenopausal woman was admitted to our Department of Gynecology with abdominal distention. She had no other physical complaints.
The patient’s symptoms started about 2 weeks before admission.
The patient’s past medical history included tonsillectomy and minilaparotomy tubal ligation about 40 years before this presentation.
There was no relevant family history of the disease.
General examination of the patient revealed a body temperature of 36.1°C, pulse rate of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 cycles per minute, and a blood pressure of 159/96 mmHg. Auscultation revealed slightly diminished breath sounds in both lungs, which were dull to percussion. The cervix was atrophic; neither the uterus nor the adnexae were palpable.
The patient’s hematology, urinalysis, and biochemistry results were normal. The serum CA125 concentration was 1040 U/mL (normal, 0–35 U/mL); the results of carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, CA153, CA199, and HE4 were unremarkable. A drainage tube was placed in the left pelvic cavity, and a total of 3650 mL of ascites was withdrawn. The ascites was yellow and transparent, with no blood detected and a white blood cell count of 180 × 106/L (95% lymphocytes and 5% neutrophilic granulocytes). The biochemical analysis of the ascites revealed the following findings: total proteins 41.2 g/L, alkaline phosphatase 23.0 U/L, sialic acid 34.9 mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase 95.0 U/L, adenosine deaminase 4.0 U/L, and amylase 35 U/L.
Combined transvaginal and transabdominal ultrasonography showed massive pelvic ascites and a large irregular mass (13.1 cm × 8.2 cm) with hypoechoic features on the left side of the pelvic cavity ( and ). Chest computed tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of bilateral pleural effusions . Abdominal CT revealed a pelvic soft tissue mass (10.9 × 8.2 × 14.3 cm) with clear boundaries, heterogeneous density, no obvious enhancement, and an artery originating from the left ovarian artery ( and ).
The patient underwent pelvic mass fine-needle puncture and drainage of ascites guided by abdominal ultrasound; cytologic analysis of the fluid samples from these procedures found no tumor cells present in the ascites and identified the pelvic mass as a spindle-cell, sex-cord stromal tumor. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that vimentin, α-Inhibin, CD56, CR, and WT-1 were all positive; SF-1, Melan-A, CK, S-100, CD34, P53, and SMA were all negative; and the positivity rate of Ki-67 was approximately 3%.
A postmenopausal woman with a pelvic mass, ascites, pleural effusion, and a high level of CA125 could easily be misdiagnosed as having an ovarian malignancy. The differential diagnoses for our patient included ovarian cancer, ovarian fibroma, and ovarian thecoma. Clinicians should have a high index of suspicion of malignancy, but they should be fully aware of the range of differential diagnoses and assess adequately before operating. To further clarify the diagnosis, in view of a comprehensive preoperative evaluation, our patient’s diagnosis had to be confirmed histopathologically. Furthermore, coronary angiography revealed multiple coronary artery lesions with varying degrees of stenosis, as well as mixed plaques in the proximal tube wall of the left anterior descending branch with moderate to severe luminal stenosis. So, we invited cardiologist to assist us in the preoperative evaluation. After the exclusion of absolute surgical contraindications, the patient was scheduled for an exploratory laparotomy.
Regardless of whether the patient’s pelvic mass is benign or malignant, surgical removal of the pelvic mass is the mainstay of treatment. Therefore, an exploratory laparotomy—including total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, and pelvic drainage—was performed under general anesthesia. The surgical findings were as follows: The volume of faint yellow ascites was approximately 200 mL; the left ovary was enlarged to approximately 13 cm × 11 cm with an irregular surface, hard texture, and complete capsule; the left fallopian tube, the right adnexa, and the uterus did have any obvious morphological abnormalities. There were no other obvious findings in the comprehensive surgical exploration. Histopathologic examination of the intraoperative frozen tissue section of the suspected left adnexal ovarian fibrothecoma later confirmed a final diagnosis of left ovarian fibrothecoma .
The patient recovered well postoperatively and was discharged on postoperative day 7. Outpatient follow-up evaluation 2 months after the surgery included chest CT revealing that the pleural effusion had resolved . The ascites had also resolved, the CA125 level returned to normal, and the full workup and physical examination detected no obvious abnormalities.