A 50-year-old, right-handed, female housekeeper presented trauma to the right hand as a result of a motorcycle accident. An initial diagnosis of proximal interphalangeal dislocation of the fifth finger was made, which was reduced and immobilized with dynamic finger splint . X-ray of the hand was taken , which shows a shortening of the fifth metacarpal, an alteration of the cascade of the metacarpal lines, a disruption of the M line, a loss of the relationship between the base of the fifth metacarpal with the hamate toward the ulnar aspect, and an overlapping of the base of the fifth metacarpal with the hamate. In the lateral and oblique x-ray, the base of the metacarpal dislocated palmar was observed, with the intermetacarpal angle at 10°. A diagnosis of ulnopalmar carpometacarpal dislocation of the fifth finger metacarpal was made. A computed tomography scan of the hand was made .
As treatment, the patient was taken to an open reduction and internal fixation. A dorsoulnar approach of the wrist was performed. Fibrous tissue was observed at the level of the articular surface which was removed. Reduction of the luxation was performed, an adequate carpometacarpal reduction was verified under direct vision and fluoroscopy, and the fifth metacarpal was fixed to the fourth metacarpal with a Kirschner wire placed transversely to the axis of the metacarpal. The intermetacarpal ligament and the carpometacarpal ligament were pulled out, without the possibility of repair. The fixation was done with an internal brace (Arthrex, Naples FL) fixed at the base of the fifth metacarpal, the base of the fourth metacarpal and the hamate, achieving an adequate restitution of the articular relationship between the fifth metacarpal and the hamate, and an ulnar gutter was placed .
Postoperatively, the patient was left with a splint for 4 weeks, followed by a brace. At the 8th week, the pin was removed. There was no sign of infection, the patient with a less pain. At the 4th week, rehabilitation was started, and by the 6th week, the patient was without pain and with adequate tolerance to physical therapy, though the range of motion of the metacarpophalangeal joints of all fingers was limited; the little finger showed passive flexion of 30°, and extension 20° 9 weeks after surgery, the patient was asked to start using the hand for daily activities. At this time, the small finger had full passive and active extension of the metacarpophalangeal joint, proximal interphalangeal joint extension of 30° and flexion of 100°, and the middle and distal interphalangeal joints without limitation; however, a boutonniere deformity was observed in the small finger, for which a joint jack splint was indicated. At 28 weeks after surgery, the patient was pain free, was using the joint Jack splint at night, and performing her daily life activities. QUICKDASH 6.8, MAYO WS 100, she had grip strength in the right hand of 20 Newtons and left hand 28 Newtons. The little finger had a deformity in flexion of the proximal interphalangeal, the active flexion at the metacarpophalangeal level was 45°, and she was able to perform full extension, the proximal interphalangeal achieving a maximum flexion of 100°, and active extension of 64° .