A 54-year-old woman with a past medical history of severe OUD, major depressive disorder, and cervical radiculopathy was referred to the hospital’s SUD bridge clinic from the ED for help stopping heroin/fentanyl use. She reported a 16-year history of OUD with a previous trial of buprenorphine-naloxone that was only partially effective for cravings, prior episodes of methadone for inpatient opioid withdrawal management only, and extended periods of abstinence including eight years without any medication for OUD (MOUD), which preceded her 8-month relapse in the setting of significant stressors. Current substance use included one gram of nasal heroin/fentanyl daily with last use 15 hour prior to presentation and occasional smoked cocaine and cannabis. She reported one prior opioid overdose. Family history included severe OUD in her son and her sister, who died of a fentanyl overdose.
She was highly motivated to re-engage in treatment. Because of incomplete craving control on buprenorphine in the past, she requested methadone treatment for the first time. She reported opioid withdrawal symptoms including body aches, nausea, and malaise. On exam, her vital signs were within normal limits. She was restless during the visit with pupils 5 mm and observed rhinorrhea. A Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS) score was not formally assessed but estimated to be ≥ 12 based on documented symptoms and exam findings. Laboratory results, including a comprehensive metabolic panel and HIV and viral hepatitis serologies, were unremarkable.
The bridge clinic team contacted a local OTP and scheduled an intake appointment for two days later. Based on the patient’s history and presentation of acute opioid withdrawal, she was administered a single observed oral dose of methadone 20 mg in the clinic from the hospital pharmacy.
The patient returned to clinic the next morning as instructed for ongoing emergency withdrawal management. In the interim, she reported abstinence from all illicit drugs and alcohol and persistent opioid withdrawal (COWS score approximately 11). She was administered an increased observed dose of methadone 40 mg. The bridge clinic team also connected her to a recovery coach and arranged transportation for her OTP intake appointment. On day three, the patient successfully completed intake and admission procedures to the OTP, where she received a 40 mg dose of methadone. Three months after her first bridge clinic appointment, she continued to maintain excellent adherence to her daily methadone dose of 80 mg and reported satisfaction with this treatment.