The patient was a 66-year-old Japanese woman who had immigrated from Okinawa, the only subtropical region of Japan. She presented with a chief complaint of bleeding tendency and had pancytopenia and serositis. HTLV-1 was positive, but adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma (ATLL) had not developed. Anti-ds-DNA antibody was positive, and both protein and occult blood were present in urine samples. Renal histopathology showed the LNIV type, and SLE was diagnosed. The patient received immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) and tacrolimus (Tac), including high-dose intravenous steroid therapy, and her nephritis, hypocomplementemia and pancytopenia improved.
Two months after the start of immunosuppressive therapy, she developed nausea and abdominal pain, and 1 month later she visited our hospital. On admission, she also had severe leg edema and diffuse abdominal tenderness. Laboratory tests showed thrombocytopenia, elevated levels of C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and alkaline phosphatase, and no eosinophilia. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) pp. 65 antigen was markedly elevated and stool culture tests was negative. Her nephritis had not worsened and pancytopenia had not recurred. Computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the walls of the ascending colon, colon, and small intestine, an increase in the density of the surrounding adipose tissue, and a fine nodule in the middle lobe of the right lung. Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy demonstrated redness, edema, and erosion from the cecum to the descending colon, but multiple stool culture tests using simple direct smears and the Harada-Mori filter paper culture method were negative.
On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed as having cytomegalovirus enteritis. MMF and Tac were discontinued, ganciclovir was administered, and she was managed by fasting. Despite a temporary improvement in her abdominal symptoms, they became aggravated again. Her respiratory condition then worsened 8 days after admission, necessitating intubation. Because bacterial pneumonia and pneumocystis pneumonia were considered as differential diagnoses, broad-spectrum antibiotics and antifungals were administered, but her respiratory status did not improve, and CT demonstrated diffuse infiltrative shadows and exacerbations.
A paracentesis histopathology specimen of the cecum demonstrated CMV-positive cells and S. stercoralis worms . Although repeated stool and sputum examinations revealed no eggs or worms, viable S. stercoralis worms was detected in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid collected by bronchoscopy . Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed as having strongyloidiasis infection syndrome and received 200 μg/kg ivermectin daily starting at 15 days after admission. Though 400 mg albendazole daily was additionally administered after 31 days of hospitalization, the patient developed consciousness disturbance thereafter. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed an increase in the protein level and cell count, but no S. stercoralis worms. The patient died 38 days after admission.