The patient was a 62-year-old man. Twelve years previously, he had undergone CABG for angina pectoris and a bypass between the right coronary artery and the RGEA had been constructed. Six years previously, he had been referred because of difficulty swallowing. He was diagnosed as having achalasia and treated with nicardipine hydrochloride and balloon dilatation in the Gastrointestinal Medicine Department of our hospital. He was referred to our surgical department again because he remained symptomatic, and we were consulted about surgical treatment for achalasia. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed dilatation of the whole esophagus and food residues within it . A barium esophagogram showed dilatation and meandering of the esophagus and delayed flow of barium into the stomach . Enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed also dilatation of the esophagus and meandering of the lower esophagus . Three-dimensional CT angiography showed the right gastroepiploic artery running to the right coronary artery . Esophageal manometry showed failure of the lower esophageal sphincter to relax and absence of the first peristaltic wave . Based on these findings, a decision was made to perform surgery.
We discussed the surgical procedure with cardiac surgeons preoperatively and ordered them to back up, considering the possibility of re-anastomosis at the time of the damage of the graft and the onset of cardiovascular complications. Additionally, we prepared papaverine hydrochloride against the graft spasm.
We also discussed the operative procedure in detail. It was expected that there is adhesion of intraperitoneal tissue because of the previous surgery. We could not deny presence of adhesion of the RGEA bypass graft and abdominal wall through the preoperative examination. Therefore, we decided to perform laparotomy in view of a risk of the graft damage at the time of the port insertion. Additionally, because it took time to cope with damage of the graft in laparoscopic surgery, we selected laparotomy after discussion with cardiac surgeons.
An oblique incision was made below the left costal arch in order to avoid the adhesion because of the previous surgery. The extent of adhesion was mild. Searching intraperitoneal at the time of laparotomy, we identified the RGEA graft wrapped by soft tissues due to palpation. The RGEA graft ran along the left edge of the round ligament of the liver and reached to the heart via the ventral and lateral side of the liver. We performed surgical procedure so as not to damage this graft while checking the graft beats by palpation appropriately. Especially when we operated the cardiac region, we performed carefully because we needed to retract the liver to secure the visual field. The second assistant dedicated to observation around the graft. After dissecting around the hiatus esophagus, the abdominal esophagus was pulled up by using a vessel tape and as much dissection as possible was performed around the cranial esophagus. The dilated esophagus was then pulled caudally and straightened under observation by gastrointestinal endoscopy (GIS). The vagal nerves, including the hepatic branch, were preserved. Myotomy was performed for 6 cm on the esophageal side and 2 cm on the gastric side (Heller myotomy) and dilation of the narrow segment observed via GIS. Having recognized that the fornix was mobile, a Dor fundoplication was performed. Additionally, two shoulder stitches were placed in the crus of the diaphragm. Finally, straightening and dilation of the esophagus was confirmed by GIS. The RGEA was not damaged during the procedure, and no fluctuation in circulatory dynamics or electrocardiographic changes occurred. On postoperative day 3, he started drinking water and on day 5 started feeding. His postoperative course was good, and he was discharged on day 12. Two months later, a barium esophagogram showed that the failure of the esophagogastric junction to relax had improved and barium was flowing smoothly into the stomach after deglutition. Postoperative esophageal manometry showed the stillness pressure of the esophagogastric junction had decreased, confirming the therapeutic effect of the operative procedure. At present, his symptoms are adequately controlled.