A 41-year-old male patient, 174 cm tall and weighing 85 kg, was admitted to our hospital with the chief complaint of "left lower limb pain for more than 7 mo and worsening over the previous 20 d".
The patient developed left calf pain due to fatigue for more than 7 mo with numbness of his left hip and foot and limited mobility. The symptoms gradually worsened. Bed rest, physical therapy and drug therapy brought no relief. The above symptoms had worsened during the 20 d prior to admission.
The patient had a 2-year history of hypertension for which he usually received "amlodipine besylate tablets" (5 mg po. qd.).
The patient was a 41-year-old Chinese man, non-smoker with a blood type O and rhesus positive.
Oral history revealed poor spirit, poor sleep, average diet, stool dysfunction and regular urination. Physiological curvature of the lumbar spine was present without kyphosis, scoliosis or lordosis and with a reduced degree of motion. Left lower limb muscle strength was a level 4, and right was a level 5. The muscle tension of both lower limbs was normal. The patient reported feeling weakness in the left hip, left calf and left foot while the right limb was normal. The left knee-tendon reflex was weaker while the right was normal. The left Bragard sign was positive while the right was negative. Babinski’s sign was negative on both sides. There was no edema in either lower limb and normal blood supply.
Coagulation function test: Prothrombin time (PT): 11.30 s; PT%: 93.00%; international normalized ratio (INR): 1.04; fibrinogen C (FC): 3.5 g/L; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT): 39.80 s; thrombin time (TT): 15.69 s and fibrin (original) degradation product (FDP): 1.04 μg/mL. These results were all within normal ranges.
X-ray examination showed that the intervertebral space of the 4th/5th lumbar vertebrae had shrunk . Computed tomography (CT) scan indicated a herniated disc of the 4th/5th lumbar vertebrae . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a herniated disc of the 4th/5th lumbar vertebrae .