A 22-month-old Caucasian female twin presented with leukocoria and poor vision in the left eye (OS). Birth and family history were unremarkable. Visual acuity was fix and follow in the right eye (OD) and no fix or follow OS. Examination under anesthesia revealed normal findings OD and a mass in OS. Superotemporally OS, there was posterior synechiae of the iris overlying a gray-white ciliary body mass with slight sub-luxation of the cataractous lens and subtle lens notch . There was no evidence of iris neovascularization or glaucoma. Intraocular pressures were 22 mm Hg OD and 18 mm Hg OS. There was no view of the fundus OS secondary to dense cataract. Transillumination disclosed a focal 12 mm round ciliary body shadow superotemporally abutting the limbus . Ocular ultrasonography and ultrasound biomicroscopy displayed a solid, dome-shaped, 10 mm thick ciliary body mass with numerous intratumoral cysts and areas of calcification. There was no evidence of extrascleral extension. Based on the clinical triad of leukocoria, lens changes, and a white cystic ciliary body mass in a young child, ultrasonographic, and transillumination features, the lesion was diagnosed as a non-pigmented ciliary epithelial medulloepithelioma.
After informed consent, enucleation was performed. Gross examination of the sectioned globe revealed a white mass arising from the ciliary body with multiple cystic areas. Patent hyaloid artery inserting into Bergmeister papillae over the optic disc was also noted . Histopathological examination revealed interlinking and interweaving bands and cords of neuroepithelial cells with scant cytoplasm in the bulk of the tumor . There were prominent foci of hyaline cartilage, an area of calcification, scattered rosettes, a few foci of sheet-like proliferation of neuroepithelial cells resembling retinoblastoma, and no extrascleral component . The diagnosis of malignant teratoid medulloepithelioma of the non-pigmented ciliary epithelium was confirmed. There was no evidence of tumor recurrence or systemic metastasis at three years follow-up.