We present the case of a 9-year-old boy who received prolonged ECMO support after suffering cardiac arrest and eventually underwent double LT successfully. The patient was diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) at 4 years of age and was considered a non-responder to vasoreactivity testing. He had initially received sildenafil as part of a randomized controlled trial, with some beneficial effects. However, the family relocated. He was brought to our clinic at 7 years of age. Because of progression of symptoms (fatigue, dyspnea) and an unsatisfactory hemodynamic profile, bosentan was added to his therapy. After an initial improvement in response to the combination therapy, the child showed continuous deterioration. Echocardiography showed severe right ventricular (RV) dysfunction with massively dilated RV compressing the left ventricle. Prostacyclin treatment was suggested to the family, who preferred intravenous to subcutaneous prostacyclin administration.
A Broviac® catheter was inserted to facilitate continuous prostacyclin infusion. Although we recommended insertion under local anesthesia, the family opted for general anesthesia (GA), even after receiving an explanation of the risks associated with GA. GA was administered using a mix of ketamine, etomidate, and midazolam for induction, along with sevoflurane and fentanyl for maintenance. Cardiac catheterization performed simultaneously showed a pulmonary arterial pressure of 170/126 mmHg (mean 140 mmHg), a systemic arterial pressure of 98/62 mmHg (mean 74 mmHg), right atrial pressure of 26 mmHg, and cardiac index of 1.8 L/min/× m2.
A permanent catheter was inserted; the procedure was uneventful with stable hemodynamics. However, following extubation in the operating room, the child developed laryngospasm followed by a severe pulmonary hypertensive crisis that led to cardiac arrest, unresponsive to maximal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), including the use of inhaled nitric oxide.
Arterial blood gas analysis showed severe acidosis with pH 6.9, PCO2 5kPa, HCO3 6.9 mmol, BE -24.6 mmol/L, and lactate 15 mmol/L. Decision was taken to start ECMO. After femoral veno-arterial cannulation with retrograde perfusion of the femoral artery, ECMO was started 60 minutes after CPR had been initiated. Abdominal compression and head cooling were used during CPR to ensure brain oxygenation. Immediately after the initiation of ECMO, spontaneous cardiac activity was restored.
ECMO was first initiated as a bridge to LT. An atrioseptostomy was performed and intravenous prostacyclin was started to allow for potential weaning from the support when possible.
The patient developed several complications related to prolonged CPR: transient acute renal failure; left anterior leg compartment syndrome requiring emergency fasciotomy; and an unresolving anterior medullary syndrome at the level of L4 - L5 immediately after medullary ischemia, without evidence of brain damage on cerebral computed tomography. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging was not possible as the patient was on ECMO. After 2 days of CPR, the child was kept on mild sedation; he showed normal brain function but developed complete paraplegia. Evoked potentials of the lower limbs were absent, consistent with anterior medullary ischemia at the thoracic or lumbar level. Five days after the event, he showed absence of abdominal cutaneous and lower limb reflexes along with flask paraplegia. Proprioception was preserved. This sensori-motor dissociation was in favor of an anterior spinal cord ischemia.
After a long discussion with the transplant team and the ethics committee, and because of the strong desire of the family to pursue LT despite the peripheral neurological damage, he was transferred to the national LT center on ECMO. After 5 weeks of the triple combination therapy including sildenafil, bosentan, and prostacyclin, he could be weaned off ECMO. He developed recurrent lung atelectasis, secondary to bronchial compression by the dilated pulmonary arteries that prevented extubation. A tracheostomy was therefore performed only 6 weeks after several unsuccessful attempts of extubation. He underwent successful LT 12 weeks after the event. Prophylactic ECMO support was used for 48 hours and thereafter was weaned off without starting any cardiotonic support. Ventilation was completely weaned off 25 days after LT. He was discharged 61 days post-LT to a secondary care hospital, which was close to his home, where a re-education program was initiated. Echocardiography showed progressive and rapid recovery of RV function.
At 4 years post-transplant, he has minimal problems. His medullary syndrome has partially alleviated, but the bladder dysfunction exists. He is back to school and can walk with aids!