The patient was born at term to a 29-year-old Caucasian mother after uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery. At 6 months of age, she was evaluated for noisy breathing with a reassuring echocardiogram, chest radiograph, and nasal endoscopy. She then presented at 15 months of age for ongoing developmental motor delay, hypotonia, and failure to thrive. Labs at that time were notable for elevated lactate at 4.6 mmol/L (normal: 0.7–2.0 mmol/L), low bicarbonate of 13 mmol/L (normal: 20–30 mmol/L), elevated anion gap to 19 (normal: 2–15 mmol/L), and elevated pyruvate to 0.21 mmol/L (normal: 0.03–0.10 mmol/L). Initial ammonia was elevated at 66 mcmol/L (normal: 5–50 mcmol/L) but normalized on repeat labs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed multiple foci of bilateral and symmetric diffusion restriction in the sub-thalamic nuclei, brainstem, and upper cervical spine . Additional laboratory studies revealed elevated CSF lactate of 7.5 mmol/L (normal: 1.1–2.3 mmol/L), and pyruvic acid of 0.31 mmol/L (normal 0.03–0.11 mmol/L) with lactate/pyruvate ratio of 24 (normal: 10–30). She was started on a mitochondrial cocktail (coenzyme Q10, biotin, riboflavin, thiamine, alpha lipoic acid, and creatinine) along with sodium bicarbonate. A combined mitochondrial genome and mitochondrial nuclear gene panel revealed a pathogenic variant in the MT-ND5 gene, designated as m.13513G > A;p.Asp393Asn with heteroplasmy of 69%, confirming the diagnosis of Leigh syndrome.
Her overall clinical course had been notable for Wolf-Parkinson White (WPW) syndrome, obstructive sleep apnea, global developmental delay, hypogammaglobulinemia, strabismus, and proximal renal tubular acidosis (RTA), for which she established follow up with nephrology. Her renal ultrasound was unremarkable except for two 2 mm cortical cysts in the right kidney. She was started on bicarbonate supplementation, initially sodium bicarbonate, which was later switched to Polycitra, Cytra K™. Her renal involvement had been limited to proximal RTA and mild elevation in urine protein/creatinine ratio until her presentation with malignant hypertension at 3 years of age.
The proband presented to the Emergency Department with tachycardia in the 170 s BPM for 3 days associated with insomnia and irritability. She was found to be hypertensive to 170 s/120 s mmHg and was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for hypertensive emergency. She was initially treated with as needed intravenous labetalol and responded well. Workup was notable for a urinalysis with a urine protein/creatinine ratio of 1.2 mg protein/mg creatinine and 1+ glucose attributed to proximal tubular dysfunction. Repeat renal ultrasound revealed findings of increased echogenicity of the kidneys bilaterally. Serum sodium ranged 130–138 mmol/L potassium 3.9–4.1 mmol/L, chloride 95–100 mmol/L, CO2 23–31 mmol/L, BUN 22–23 mg/dL, and creatinine 0.16–0.22 mg/dL on day before and after urine studies and renal ultrasound were obtained. In the setting of stable serum creatinine and stable serum electrolytes, ultrasound findings were thought to be non-specific, and not indicative of acute kidney injury.
She was started on clonidine 2 mcg/kg q 8 hours with improvement in her hypertension but remained tachycardic and ultimately required the addition of low-dose oral labetalol. Given the severity of her hypertension, further workup included serum thyroid stimulating hormone, free T4, renin, aldosterone, and spot plasma metanephrines . At the time plasma metanephrines were obtained patient was stable with BP ranging 118–122/50–83 mmHg and heart rate 110–140 bpm. Labetalol was stopped on admission given concern for pheochromocytoma and potentially causing the elevation via beta-blockade causing unopposed alpha-adrenergic activity. A computed tomography scan of her abdomen and pelvis with contrast did not show any concerning masses.
She was discharged home after 11 days in the PICU on clonidine 14 mcg/kg/day, and doxazosin 0.06 mg/kg/day. After her discharge, she underwent MRI of chest, abdomen, and pelvis which did not reveal any masses concerning for malignancy or pheochromocytoma and was therefore restarted on labetalol 1.2 mg/kg/day to better control her blood pressure. After initiation of beta blocker and subsequent titration at home, she had an acute decompensation with altered mental status and was admitted second time to the PICU. Her exam was again notable for tachycardia (150 s -160 s) and malignant hypertension (BP 166/136), defined as systemic blood pressure greater than the 95th percentile plus 12 for age and height or greater than 140/90 with symptoms of end organ damage. Serum electrolytes during her second admission were as follows: sodium 140 mmol/L, potassium 5.2 mmol/L, chloride 103 mmol/L, CO2 23 mmol/L, BUN 25 mg/dL, and creatinine 0.23 mg/dL. Electrolytes remained stable and BUN and creatinine had normalized to 16 mg/dL and 0.18 mg/dL by day two of admission respectively. A repeat echocardiogram showed new mild dilation of her left ventricle and mild mitral regurgitation with slightly decreased left ventricular systolic function. Repeat serum metanephrines and normetanephrines were again elevated, higher than her first presentation . This potentially explained her decompensation and worsening hypertension. Given her acute presentation and worsening clinical status, a repeat brain MRI revealed development of new acute infarcts in the posterior pons and medulla, in addition to chronic infarcts in the basal ganglia, both consistent with progression of Leigh syndrome . She was managed with a continuous nicardipine infusion and transitioned to a regimen of oral amlodipine (0.48 mg/kg/day), clonidine (14 mcg/kg/day), and atenolol (1 mg/kg/day) by hospital discharge. On this regimen, her hypertension has been well controlled below her 90th%ile for height and age.