A 66-year-old Arab male patient with diabetes was referred to the Maxillofacial Surgery Department with a chief complaint of a dome-shaped nodule with a smooth, shiny surface and a central crateriform ulceration with a keratin plug in the form of a horn-like projection. Skin papules were present in the right lateral canthal area and extended to the lateral border of the lower eyelid, measuring 1.3 cm. On palpation, the lesion was firm, movable, and tender. It was secondarily infected and had a history of rapid progression over the last 5 weeks.
The patient had a history of the same lesion at the vermillion border of the lower lip that was diagnosed as SCC at another medical center 6 years previously. The SCC was surgically treated by a V-wedge resection of the lower lip at that time. One and a half years later, the same lesion reappeared in the left lateral canthal area and extended over the lower eyelid. The patient did not seek medical treatment. He claimed that the psychological impact of the lip resection prevented him from seeking medical treatment. The patient stated that this lesion spontaneously disappeared after 5 months. One year later, a similar lesion reappeared on the right nasolabial fold and soon disappeared within a few weeks.
At the present presentation, the same lesion was observed in the right canthal area, extending to the lower eyelid. The patient was now seeking treatment because of pain secondary to infection of the lesion. The preliminary diagnosis of the lesion was a secondarily infected KA, and the differential diagnoses included SCC, verrucous carcinoma, and metastatic skin carcinoma.
A clinical decision was made to approach the case surgically. Ectropion was considered as a possible postoperative complication. Excisional biopsy was performed under local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine and 1:100,000 epinephrine. The infraorbital and zygomaticofacial nerves were anesthetized. The patient was informed about all possible complications and provided written consent to undergo simple surgical excision and primary closure without the use of a local flap. A simple elliptical incision was created with a 3-mm safe margin, and local tissues were bilaterally advanced for closure [Figures and ]. The wound was closed primarily using Vicryl 4–0, and postoperative prophylactic antibiotic and analgesic medications were prescribed. The patient underwent suture removal 7 days later, and no complications were observed.
Histopathological examination of the biopsy specimen showed well-differentiated squamous epithelium with only a mild degree of pleomorphism from the basal layer to the surface keratin. However, dyskeratosis (abnormal or premature keratin production) was present as evidenced by individually keratinizing lesional cells and keratin pearls identical to those of well-differentiated SCC.
The correlation among the history, clinical picture, and histopathological findings strongly suggested KA. The patient was followed up for 6 months without recurrence.