A 62-year-old male with a curatively resected renal cell tumor had a head injury 45 days prior. The patient, without wearing a helmet when he stood up, hit his head in the left frontal region against the arm of a stopping power shovel. He had not experienced any pain or skin damage in the area of trauma before the incident. Following the trauma, he noticed a small protuberance which looks like after a mosquito bite, but after a while, the pain caused by the bruise disappeared, although the painless bump gradually grew larger. He visited a nearby clinic complaining that the bump did not get smaller even though more than 6 weeks had passed. He underwent echosonography (picture was not available) and suspected a depressed skull fracture in the clinic.
He was referred to our hospital the same day the echosonography was performed. On arrival, there was no neurological deficit, but a soft and firm swelling was palpated in his left frontal lesion approximately 3 cm in diameter. CT revealed a mass lesion with osteolytic changes in the frontal skull [ and b], which made us suspect a fast-growing tumor. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogeneous mass approximately 2 cm in diameter, extending through the calvarial defect with an extracranial soft-tissue component. It did not appear in contact with the cerebrum and no definite invasion of the dura mater was observed [ and d], although the tumor had not been evaluated by contrast MRI examination due to a poor renal function of the patient.
Echosonography, the GE LOGIQ e ultrasound system (General Electric Healthcare, Waukesha, WI, USA) using an L4-12t probe, conducted preoperatively revealed that the mass penetrated the dura mater and was in contact with the cerebrum , and in addition, a relatively large vessel passing his cerebrum surface continuous with the mass under the dura mater .
Under the diagnosis of a frontal bone origin tumor, such as a metastatic tumor or meningioma, the patient underwent a craniotomy to acquire a pathological diagnosis and remove the mass together with the related dura mater. A curved skin incision was made along the hairline to reflect the scalp anteriorly. The tumor connecting the subcutaneous tissue was easily exposed as it was not tightly adherent to the overlying tissue. The lesion appeared as a firm, grayish, and vascular-rich mass that destroyed the frontal bones. The skull around the tumor was drilled with a ≥10 mm margin . We made a circular dural incision to surround the tumor and dissected the intradural component from the brain surface with the sacrifice of cortical veins involved in the tumor using microsurgical tools . The lesion was resected with the surrounding bone and dura mater; Simpson Grade I was achieved [ and d]. We replaced the dural defect with a collagen-based dural graft matrix (DuraGen®; Integra Life Sciences Corp., Princeton, NJ, USA), and the extent of the skull defect was reconstructed with an implant that was prepared before the procedure.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and histopathological examination confirmed an atypical meningioma according to the WHO 2016 classification with a Ki-67 proliferation index of 40% [-].