A 58-year-old, white heterosexual Greek man with a clean medical record and no history of abdominal operation presented to the emergency department with a 2-week history of gradually worsening abdominal pain. Though the patient had been experiencing flatus daily, he reported no bowel movements over the last 5 days. Furthermore, the patient had worsening nausea and vomiting as well as abdominal distention leading to inability to tolerate oral intake.
Physical examination revealed a well-nourished, mildly febrile patient (37.5°C). He was hemodynamically stable and his abdomen, though soft, was distended and tender in the hypogastrium and right lower quadrant. No hernia was apparent. Bowel sounds were scarce and rectal examination showed heme-positive stools. Laboratory tests revealed a peripheral leukocyte count of 4080/μl with a normal differential count and a hematocrit of 30%. Electrolytes, liver biochemistry and amylase levels were normal.
Plain abdominal radiographs showed multiple air-fluid levels in distended small-bowel loops and air in the colon indicating partial small bowel obstruction . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen revealed dilated loops of the small intestine and a transition point to decompressed loops at the level of the mid-ileum, as well as a typical 'target sign' of intussusception .
Though serologic tests for HIV infection are not routinely performed in our department for patients with intestinal obstruction, it was our awareness of the association of intussusception with various AIDS-related conditions of the bowel, as well as the patient's clean medical and surgical records that made further screening necessary. Surprisingly, the patient was seropositive for HIV infection and had a cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4) cell count of 274/μl and viral load of 129,000 copies/ml.
Laparotomy was performed 3 days later only to confirm the diagnosis of small-bowel invagination due to a 4 cm polypoid growing intraluminal tumor . Pathologic examination of the specimen revealed a diffuse high-grade B cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged from hospital on the 6th postoperative day.