A 31-year-old male farmer visited a health center in his vicinity after a day of vague abdominal pain and one episode of vomiting. As it was understood from his referral paper, after clinical history, physical examination and stool examination, he was sent back home with oral analgesics and ciprofloxacin for the stool examination that showed many pus cells. On the second day as part of his attempt to get relief, he went to contact religious fathers for the holy or blessed water. On the third day of his complaint, he revisited the health center for no improvement. At this time, he was referred for a better workup.
During his evaluation at the hospital, he had a colicky abdominal pain, nausea and two episodes of vomiting. He had no fever, groin swelling, abdominal distension or trauma, or known chronic illnesses like diabetes mellitus and hypertension. He passed loose stools and reported to have a previous surgery at the age of 25 for a right groin protruding mass. A review of his clinical chart revealed that he had an elective repair of right indirect inguinal hernia six years back. The procedure done was modified Bassini’s repair which is a tissue-based hernia repair with no application of mesh. The intra-operative findings at the time were omentum and a short loop of distal ileum in the sac. His three-day hospital stay and subsequent two post-operative follow-up visits were uneventful. Findings of the physical examination done at the emergency outpatient department were as follows: vital signs (PR = 116, Temperature = 37.8°c, RR = 24, and BP = 115/70 mmHg), full abdomen, old right inguinal oblique surgical scar and tenderness limited to the right inguinal region. No inguinal mass or skin changes.
Complete blood count showed a white blood cell count of 14,100 cells/µL and hemoglobin concentration of 12.7 g/dl. An erect plain abdominal x-ray was taken and read to show distended central bowel loops and rectal gas shadow with a final comment of partial small bowel obstruction. An abdominal ultrasound examination identified a fascial defect of 2.3 cm size as well as an entrapped bowel in the right inguinal region with no blood flow.
He was admitted to the emergency department, resuscitated with intravenous crystalloid fluids and counselled and prepared for right inguinal exploration. After securing an informed written consent, the right inguinal canal was explored under general anesthesia and the intra-operative finding was a gangrenous anti-mesenteric border of distal ileum trapped in the deep inguinal ring with an imminent rupture, a Richter’s type of recurrent indirect inguinal hernia . The inguinal ring was laterally widened and the hernia sac opened. A loop of ileum containing the gangrenous part was pulled out, and resection of the gangrenous segment and end-to-end ileo-ileal hand sewn anastomosis and narrowing of the deep inguinal ring were done. After a thorough irrigation of the surgical wound with normal saline, the abdominal wall layers were approximated. A mesh repair was not attempted because it was a gangrenous bowel. He was given intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole for three days which was changed to oral ciprofloxacin and metronidazole for seven days. His post-operative course was smooth and uneventful. He was discharged after staying in the hospital for seven days. No complications were noticed during his subsequent post-operative follow-up visits at two weeks, a month, and two months after the date of discharge.