A 38-year-old woman living in a village in Indonesia reported to the hospital after a fall in which her inguinal area hit a steel floor. She was experiencing worsening pain in the vulvar area after the fall, but was still mobile and was not experiencing vaginal bleeding. In the emergency department, the doctor on duty evaluated the condition and noted that the hemodynamics were stable. Due to a lack of facilities and gynecologists, the patient was referred to a tertiary hospital in the second-largest city in Indonesia.
The patient arrived at the emergency department of the tertiary hospital 8 h after the incident. She had no history of allergies, drug use or any other medical disorder. Upon arrival, she was stable with a blood pressure of 131/74 mm Hg and a heart rate of 92 beats per minute. Evaluation of the external genitalia revealed a large hematoma and ecchymosis in the right labium majus . No bleeding was observed, and the urethra and vagina appeared normal. The hematoma was growing and the patient was administered with 200 mg of ketoprofen rectally to manage the pain. Her hemoglobin level was 13.9 g/dL with a white blood cell count of 7540/μL. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed a large localized hematoma in the right labium majus having a diameter of 7.02 × 3.24 cm . Sagittal and coronal CT scans also revealed that the hematoma was localized in the vulvar area, and did not extend to the pelvis. The pelvic structures appeared normal.
Patient was consented and incision of the hematoma under local anesthesia was performed by an experienced gynecologic oncologist in the operating theatre. Lidocaine was injected in the right labium majus for local anesthesia, and a 3-cm incision was made at the border between the mucosa and the skin . The blood clot was evacuated, and active bleeding points were observed around the clitoris and the perineum, which were stitched using rapid vicryl 2.0 (Johnson & Johnson, USA). The cavity was irrigated to clean the clot and evaluate whether all bleeding points had been managed . The incision was closed with a running suture, and a 1-cm hole was left open for drainage. The patient was given oral amoxycillin/clavulanic acid for 7 days and hospitalized in the gynecologic ward for observation after the procedure. On day 1 after the procedure, the urethral catheter was removed and urination function was normal. The condition of the vulva one day after the incision is shown in . The patient was not experiencing pain and had complete mobility. No bleeding was observed from the incision site. The patient was discharged from the hospital on day two after the procedure in good condition. The outcome of the simple incision of the large vulvar hematoma under local anesthesia in this patient was good as expected. Patient was very happy, the large vulvar hematoma was managed successfully with a simple procedure. A two-week follow up revealed recovery. From the patient's perspective, large vulvar hematomas should be managed in a tertiary hospital with experienced specialists and complete facilities so that other women with the same condition can be managed safely. The patient described here provided written informed consent for this report. This case has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .