The male 18-days-old Caucasian newborn was admitted to our department for ineffective breastfeeding and failure to thrive. He was born at term from spontaneous delivery, small for gestational age to non-consanguineous parents . Pregnancy was uneventful except for a delayed intrauterine growth restriction detected during the last month of gestation. External genitalia were of normal appearance, prepubertal, with testicular volumes of 1 ml. Blood tests showed a severe hyponatremia (Na + 110 mEq/l; NR 136–146 mEq/l), hyperkalemia (K+ 7.5 mEq/l; NR 3.5–5.30 mEq/l), hypochloremia (Cl- 81 mEq/l; NR 97–110 mEq/l) and metabolic acidosis with increased lactate. Glycemia was within the normal range for age (68 mg/dl); urinary sodium loss was also detected (Natriuria 16 mEq/l).
Endocrinological tests revealed low plasmatic aldosterone levels (38.6 pg/ml; NR 50–300 pg/ml), dramatic increased renin (44,100 μU/ml; NR 4.4–46.1), elevated levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH, 91.4 pg/ml NR 4,3–52) and normal plasmatic cortisol (13.7 μg/dl NR 6.7–22.6). Skin pigmentation was normal except for mild pigmentation of the external genitalia. Neonatal screening for 17-OH-progesterone was within the normal range. Electrolytes replacement first intravenous and then oral, and therapy with Fludrocortisone (50 μg/die) and salt integration were started with normalization of clinical and hormonal conditions. Treatment revealed to be effective and the newborn started growing properly, with normal electrolytes. Cerebral ultrasounds and cerebral magnetic resonance (MRI) were normal, as well as the elettrocardiogram (ECG) and chest X-rays. Abdominal MRI showed normal size of the adrenal glands. A diagnosis of Primary Hypoaldosteronism was entertained and genetic analysis of the CYP11B2 gene (encoding aldosynthase) was requested.
During the follow up after the first 5 months of life, ACTH levels started increasing again although there was a good treatment compliance, normal electrolytes, good weight and length gain and slightly low basal cortisol levels, within the normal range for age .
At 9 months of age the result of the CYP11B2 gene sequencing did not show any mutation. The parents refused to accomplish a short synacthen test (SST), however basal ACTH was 300 pg/ml and 24-h urine collection pointed out low levels of urinary cortisol (20 μg/24 h, NR 58–403 μg/24 h) with normal Na/K urinary ratio. Moreover, normal serum 17-OH-progesterone was found, ruling out the hypothesis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH).
Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) were found, respectively, of 1 IU/l and 2.2 IU/l, and Testosterone of 0.2 ng/ml, being to the highest levels of the normal range for age.
A diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency was made and replacement therapy with Hydrocortisone (10 mg/m2/day), joint to already in use Fludrocortisone therapy (100 μg/day) and salt integration, was started. An abnormal development of adrenal glands rather than an enzymatic defect was hypothesized. Adrenal antibodies and very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) were negative. DNA analysis performed by Sanger sequencing identified a novel in frame indel mutation in the NROB1 gene (c.848_849delinsCC or p.(Gln283Pro)), confirming the diagnosis of AHC. As expected the same mutation was carried by the mother as hemizygous (see Fig. ).