A 28-year-old, previously healthy man was referred from the ward of otolaryngology, to our thoracic surgery department with dysphagia, muffled voice and swelling at his right sub mandibular area, 3days after blunt neck trauma. He complained from, dyspnea, dysphagia and pain in his right sub mandibular area and neck following falling of heavy bag (50 kg cement pocket) on his posterior neck. On clinical examination, swelling and subcutaneous emphysema was seen on admission day. He had not any dizziness or visual disturbance and his consciousness was normal. The first day after accident he had not serious symptoms except a moderate pain and tenderness on his neck but the pain and tenderness were increased, 24 h latter.
He did not have a history of a mass in his neck, dental abscess, diabetes mellitus, alcohol consumption, smoking or drug abuse.
On Physical examination: he had a blood pressure of 80/60 mm Hg, a Pulse rate of 130 beats/min, axillaries temperature of 38.4 °C, Respiratory rate was 35 breaths/min with dyspnea.
Tenderness, edema, erythema and emphysema was seen in the anterior of neck, but it was more significant in the right angle of mandible and para tracheal rather than the left.
Breath sound was diminished in both lungs fields but significantly was decreased in the right lung. The remainder of the examination revealed no pathologic findings.
Direct laryngoscopy, flexible bronchoscopy and esophagoscopy were performed showing no particular lesions.
Laboratory tests showed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) = 30,600/μl, low Hemoglobin (10.6 g/dL) and was elevated platelet count = 587 000 mm3. BUN = 50 mg/dL, Cr = 2.2 mg/dL, Na = 140 mg/dL, K 4 mg/dl, BS = 110 mg/dL, Urinalysis was normal but urine volume was diminished. An arterial blood gas analyzed in ICU with o2 supplement was as follows: pH = 7.36, PaO2 = 80 mmHg, PaCO2 = 50 mmHg and SaO2 = 90%. The electrocardiogram was normal, HIV test also was negative. Empirical broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotic (imipenem 500 mg/8 h + Ciprofloxacin 400 mg/12 h iv. and Metronidazole 500 mg/8 h) were prescribed till the results of culture to be obtained.
Coronal and sagittal reformat view of chest CT-scan of neck and thorax showed: pneunomomediastinum and emphysema in cervical space, extensive subcutaneous emphysema of the neck, around the right ramus of the mandible and right masseter muscle that extended into the left side of the neck and tracked down into the anterior mediastinum . Computed tomography of thorax also revealed bilateral pleural effusion, more predominant at right side with loculated empyema. Cervical and dorsal vertebrae were intact . The diagnosis of DNM was made on base of clinical findings, severe cervical and pharyngeal infection and radiologic features of mediastinitis on CT scan.
First, a 32 F chest tube was inserted in the right pleural cavity, approximately 500cc pus was drained and a sample for antibiogram was obtained. The patient was resuscitated and prepared for surgery after adequate urine output was achieved.
A right poster-lateral thoracotomy, through 5th intercostals space with endo tracheal general anesthesia was performed. During thoracotomy loculations and infected septa were disrupted and evacuated, the pleura of the upper esophagus was excised and the para esophageal planes opened until distal of esophagus. The mediastinum entirely was exposed, extensive debridement of necrotic tissue, irrigation of the paravertebral and para esophageal planes was done.
At the same time the neck was explored, copious amounts of pus and necrotic tissue in the submandibular triangle, parotid region, retro mandibular and pharyngeal spaces as much as possible was removed and irrigated with normal saline adequately, drainage was attained with three latex Penrose drains in different locations, then the patient was transferred to ICU with oral intubation. During18day of the post-operative period, the patient’s status despite of given high dose, antibiogram matched antibiotics and revealed signs of sepsis and pulmonary insufficiency. Bed side echocardiography showed pericardial thickening and effusion, repeated chest CT scan showed loculated empyema in left side with pericardial thickening (7 mm) without massive effusion or tamponade . According to this finding, a left postero-lateral thoracotomy, through the 5th intercostal space was done and all of the loculations and infected spaces in pleura and mediastinum were evacuated.
Extensive debridement of the empyema and necrotic tissue was done in the same manner as on the right side, pericardia tap revealed serous fluid which was sent for culture. Recovery was relatively rapid after the 2th operation, the General condition improved rapidly, temperature became normal on the 4th post-operative days and the patients was extubated on the 6th post operative days.
The total duration of management was longed 29days. We also performed an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy but there were no pathological findings. Smear and culture from the pericardia tap were negative.
Culture of pleural fluid, revealed Poly microbial infection we did not perform a tracheotomy and weaned the patient from ventilator on 24th admission day then liquid diet began. The patient had no complaints of hoarseness or dysphagia after extubation.
Before the patient’s discharge from the hospital, a control thoracic CT-scan showed relatively complete resolution of the pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema.
Outcome was favorable, during 90 days follow up, the pericardial thickening became normal and no evidence of tracheal stricture was seen. A written informed consent was obtained from the patient for possible publication including images for this case report.
SCARE compliance: this work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .