A 48-year-old white female with end-stage renal disease due to adult polycystic
kidney disease was admitted for deceased donor kidney transplantation in April 2015.
She had started renal replacement therapy with hemodialysis 7 years before and was
in good general health with no significant co-morbidities. The donor was a
2-year-old female who suffered anoxic encephalopathy. At organ retrieval, donor
serum creatinine was 0.58 mg/dL. Donor and recipient presented 4 HLA (ABDR)
mismatches, cross matching was negative and no anti-donor specific HLA antibodies
were found in the recipient’s serum. The kidneys were implanted “en bloc” and the
transplant was performed after 18 hours of cold ischemia in static preservation on
Euro-Collins solution. Immunosuppressive regimen consisted of Basiliximab®
induction, tacrolimus, sodium mycophenolate, and steroids. The graft presented
immediate function and the patient was discharged at post-operative day 36 (POD).
During hospitalization, she presented a urinary tract infection and was submitted to
antibiotic treatment for 10 days. The blood tacrolimus level three weeks before
discharge was 15 µg/mL (receiving tacrolimus 7 mg twice daily orally). The dosage
was immediately reduced to 5 mg twice daily, and three days after dose adjustment
the blood level was 11.4 µg/mL; a new dose adjustment to 4 mg twice daily was done.
At discharge, serum creatinine was stable at 1.6 mg/dL and blood tacrolimus level
around 10 µg/mL. On the 19th POD, sodium mycophenolate was replaced by azathioprine
due to severe diarrhea not responsive to dose fractioning and reduction.
Three days after discharge she was admitted to the emergency room complaining of
severe headache, visual blurring, and confusion. Blood pressure was 180/100 mmHg,
axillary temperature 38°C, and the general physical examination revealed no
abnormalities. On neurological examination, she was confused, hallucinating, and
disoriented. She presented transient visual alterations and left hemianopia without
signs of meningeal irritation. Laboratory work up revealed stable graft function
(serum creatinine 1.53 mg/dL), anemia (hemoglobin 7.7 g/dL) with normal white blood
cell counts, slightly increased C reactive protein (10 mg/dL) and 10.3 ng/mL
tacrolimus blood level. She received iv esmolol for blood pressure control and
empiric iv antibiotics until cultures results. A brain CT scan disclosed extensive
hypo-density at the sub cortical white and gray matter of the parietal and occipital
lobes. Erasure of the cortical sulci, most evident on the cerebral hemispheres
recesses, was also present, and PRES was considered in the differential diagnosis
. The magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) showed hyperintensity on T2/FLAIR of the temporo-occipital and fronto-parietal
regions in the upper convexity, without diffusion or bleeding signals .
Tacrolimus was discontinued from immunosuppressive therapy. In the next two days, the
patient had complete reversal of neurological symptoms. Cyclosporine was started at
100 mg twice a day reaching a blood level of 146 ng/mL. The graft function remained
stable and at two years after transplantation, the patient is enjoying good general
condition and good graft function (serum creatinine 1.2 mg/dL), protein-creatinine
ratio on random urine sample of 0.35 mg/mg, without new episodes of altered mental
status or other neurologic signs.