This is a case of a 54-year-old man who was referred to a tertiary health facility, with a five-day history of: (i) generalized body stiffness, (ii) mutism, (iii) urine incontinence, (iv) drooling of saliva, (v) tongue protrusion and (vi) an elevated blood pressure.
Reportedly, he was doing well until three weeks prior to admission into the tertiary health facility (referral hospital) when he presented to a nearby health unit (health center III) with a one-week complaint of seeing things not seen by others, such as snakes and beasts trying to take his life. He was also seeing and feeling insects crawling all over his body, and he was seen on several occasions trying to remove them. With these fears, sleep was disturbed, and he started talking more than usual, especially about the trauma he was going through. When people were not agreeing with what he was telling them, he became angry and was more irritable than usual. Responding to his experiences, he started packing things and telling his wife to shift away to an area without demons and witchcraft from the people of in his village. However, he was taken to church by the family members, where they prayed for him; but this just fueled his irritation, and he turned aggressive and violent towards most of the church members.
With no improvement following the prayers, he was taken to a nearby health center III (HC III). At the HC III, he was commenced on intramuscular (IM) diazepam at a dose of 10 mg, and IM chlorpromazine at a dose of 100 mg. Instant improvement was observed after the initial doses, but after waking up he continued to be aggressive, and repeat doses of diazepam 10 mg and chlorpromazine 100 mg were added. The doses were repeated every time the patient woke up aggressive or became talkative. After 4 days at the HC III, his wife reported that he suddenly became mute, he could no longer swallow any food and the mouth remained wide open. He became stiff starting with his jaws, then progressively the stiffness involved the neck and later his extremities. Fortunately, his breathing remained normal. But the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate, and on the 7th day at a HC III, he was referred to a health center IV, which has a general practitioner doctor, for further investigations and management.
On arrival at the health center IV (HC IV), he was maintained on the same treatment from the HC III for 2 days as they initiated the investigations for a possible cause of his symptoms. Human immunodeficiency virus antibody and p24 antigen, Treponema pallidum var. pallidum haemagglutination test, complete blood count and malaria tests were performed, and negative results found for these tests. However, that time, he had an elevated blood pressure 193/135 mmHg with a normal body temperature of 37.2 °C. With the suspicion of neuroleptic malignant syndrome, he was immediately referred to a tertiary health facility for further investigations and management by specialist psychiatrists.
At the tertiary health facility, examination revealed a sick middle-aged man with severe body stiffness and lead-pipe rigidity characterized by a triple flexion posturing, inability to stand, mutism, asymmetrical head and neck position, tremors of large amplitude involving the head, and protruding of the tongue. He was sweating profusely, drooling saliva, and appeared dehydrated. He had a urinary catheter in situ with 150 mL of urine. Patient had a normal body mass index of 19.3 kg/m2, mid upper arm circumference of 20.9 cm. He had a tachycardia of 112 beats per minute, tachypnea of 26 breaths per minute, but normal blood pressure of 129/79 mmHg, oxygen saturation 98%, random blood sugar 3.7 mmol/L, and euthermia 36.5 °C. In addition, he had a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 8/15 (eye opening 4, verbal response 1, motor response 3), normal reflexes, reduced power of all the limbs (3/5). There were no obvious cranial nerve lesions, and he had a negative Kernig’s sign but obvious neck rigidity. The rest of the physical examination was normal. The laboratory findings for liver function, renal function, cerebral spinal fluid, urinalysis and blood cultures were not suggestive of a particular etiology. Unfortunately, computed tomographic scan of the brain, serum creatinine phosphatase, urine and blood drug screen, blood level metabolites for antipsychotics were not performed due to their cost and availability in the country.
Based on collateral history from the patient’s wife, he neither had any features of anxiety, history of trauma, epilepsy, suicidal ideation, suicide plan or attempt, nor vomited more than usual prior to admission at HC III. But he was reported being a daily alcohol drinker in his early 20s, and was found drunk most days. To the extent of waking up to a drink every morning, he was unable to perform any normal life activities without drinking. Fortunately, he stopped the drinking habit when he became a born-again Christian. In the past 20 years, he was reported being a responsible man able to take care of his family as well as performing community duties and responsibilities. After being stable, recently in the past 2 years, the patient started using a local-made herbal energy beverage, “Akandi Juice”. The “Akandi Juice” has a hierarchy of energy levels with a commensurate manner of containing higher alcohol concentrations in the higher-level doses, that is unknown to most of the users (not advertised). He started with the number of 1, then went to number 2 and recently number 3 and 4. However, after stopping the use of the juice for about 4 days due to several complaints from people about a significant reduction in his functionality similar to when he was drinking over 20 years back, he developed hallucinations and illusions and had the above presentation prior to hospitalization at HC III.
Based on the above presentation, the psychiatry team at the tertiary institution made a diagnosis of EPS with predominantly severe dystonia following management of psychosis due to alcohol withdrawal in a patient with alcohol use disorder based on DSM-V. He was commenced on an anticholinergic agent, benzhexol 5 mg twice daily, daily intravenous (IV) fluid consisting of 1 liter of dextrose 5% and 1 liter of Ringer’s lactate for 3 days. He was also given IV diazepam 20 mg daily for 2 days. The extrapyramidal symptom rating scale (ESRS) was used to monitor the improvement of the symptoms. As presented in , by the 8th day at the tertiary health facility, he had no more symptoms. On discharge from the tertiary facility, the patient was given counseling about the use of commonly available beverages with unknown components. He was reported doing well with no major effects 3 months after discharge as found in the routine follow-ups.