A 57-year-old Chinese man presented with repeated lumbago, chest congestion, and dyspnea on exertion for more than 6 months. The patient was found to have a left renal AVF by color Doppler ultrasonography 2 years ago. A pulsatile abdominal mass was palpable. No history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, calculus of kidney, renal biopsy, abdominal operation or trauma. No family history. Both renal arterial computed tomography angiogram (CTA) and color Doppler ultrasonography showed a high-output IRAVF and dilated, tortuous renal artery and vein. Based on renal arterial CTA, the maximum diameter of an abnormal vascular mass in the left renal hilum was 6.2 cm and the left renal arterial trunk was 1.3 cm . Ultrasound cardiogram revealed an enlarged left ventricle with myocardial hypertrophy, and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 57%.
Puncture and catheterization were performed in the right femoral artery under local anesthesia. The fistula was shown by superselective arteriography. The guidewire was inserted into the draining vein directly through the fistula. Then, a catheter was successfully introduced into the left renal vein and the drainage vein of the fistula via the right femoral vein. The guidewire could also enter arterial end against the direction of blood flow through the draining vein of the fistula.
The right internal jugular vein was successfully punctured and a 14 French sheath was implanted after dilation. A Lunderquist ultrahard guidewire (COOK®, Bloomington, IN, USA) was delivered into the feeding arterial segment of the left renal AVF via the right internal jugular vein, inferior vena cava, and left renal vein, successively. Then, a 14 French conveying device of the ASDO (26 mm in diameter, Shanghai Shape Memory Alloy Material Co., Shanghai, China) was introduced into the draining vein of the AVF via the left renal vein. The transported ASDO was placed in the dilated segment of the drainage vein of the AVF at the point of its maximum diameter. A remarkably reduced blood flow velocity in the AVF was observed without any indications of escape of the ASDO.
An 8 French guiding catheter (Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was introduced into the drainage vein through the right femoral vein, and three vascular plugs (16 mm in diameter, AMPLATZER Vascular Plug II) were placed over the proximal end of the ASDO. Then, a 5 French Simmons catheter (Terumo LECo., Tokyo, Japan) was introduced and a detachable elastic coil (14 mm in diameter, Boston Scientific Co., Natick, MA, USA) was placed into the gap of the vascular plugs . Left renal arteriography manifested that the blood flow in the AVF was stagnant, the shunt disappeared, and blood flow of the normal renal artery was unobstructed.
Abdominal aortic angiography demonstrated an enlarged left renal arterial trunk with increased blood flow velocity and volume. A dilated branch of the renal artery was directly pouring into the drainage vein, the left renal vein, and the inferior vena cava. The diameters of the abdominal aorta and left renal artery were 2.2 cm and 1.3 cm, respectively. On left renal arteriography, the left renal artery and vein displayed almost simultaneously and the feeding artery of the fistula was uniformly dilated and tortuous. The fistula was measured as 1.4 cm in diameter . The digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the feeding artery and the drainage vein of the fistula showed that the drainage vein was tortuous and not uniformly dilated; the maximum diameter of the segment approaching the fistula was up to 2.2 cm.
The patient had no chills, fever, vomiting, or other symptoms postoperatively. No obvious abnormalities were found on urinalysis and renal function testing (creatinine, Cr: 85 μmol/L; range 53–123 μmol/L).
The patient’s symptoms of lumbago, chest congestion, and dyspnea on exertion completely remitted 3 months postoperatively. No obvious abnormalities were found in blood pressure and renal function (Cr: 82 μmol/L). Renal arterial CTA showed that the diameter of the renal artery reduced remarkably to 1.1 cm. Formation of intravascular thrombus within the renal AVF was observed . Color Doppler ultrasonography showed that no obvious blood flow signals were found in the vasculature of the AVF. LVEF was 60% postoperatively. No postoperative complications, such as pulmonary embolism and shifting of occluders, occurred during the last 2 years of follow-up. Emission computed tomography revealed that the left renal glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 35.3 mL/min and the right renal GFR was 23.6 mL/min. The serum creatinine was 100.3 μmol/L, the LVEF was 67% at 2 years postoperatively.