A 65-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital for multiple abscesses. Two weeks before admission to our hospital, the patient presented with an abscess in his left palm. Four days later, three more bumps were found on his right and left thighs and his backside with mild distending pain. Five days prior to admission, as his palm abscess enlarged, he presented to the outpatient department of our hospital. He was treated with levofloxacin (100 mg, intravenous [iv], qd), and his palm abscess was removed by surgical drainage. However, his symptom worsened quickly. He developed fever, headache, gait instability, and dysarthria. The bumps in his thighs and his backside became larger, with severe distending pain in these places.
On admission, the initial physical examination showed a body temperature of 38.5°C, respiratory rate of 19/min, pulse rate of 85/min, and blood pressure of 120/73 mmHg. The cardiovascular and respiratory systems were normal. Abdomen examination did not show tenderness or hepatosplenomegaly. In addition, bumps were found on his left thigh (21 cm × 13 cm) , right thigh (22 cm × 12 cm) , and backside (7 cm × 3 cm) with tenderness and fluctuation. The local skin temperature was higher than that of the surrounding skin. Motor weakness of the left upper limb (muscle strength grade 4) and right lower limb (muscle strength grade 2) with bilateral hypotonicity of the upper extremities was observed. There were no signs of hyperreflexia or meningeal irritation. Both sides of the Babinski sign were negative. The patient denied any disease that can influence the immune system, such as tumors, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), hematological diseases, autoimmune diseases, or diabetes mellitus. He also denied the administration of any immunosuppressive agents or steroid drugs. His lymphocyte count was 1.31 × 109 cells/L, the percentage of CD3+ and CD4+ lymphocytes was 31% (normal range 27–51%), and the percentage of CD3+ and CD8+ lymphocytes was 35% (normal range 15–44%). The presence of antibodies of the human immunodeficiency virus was also negative.
Computed tomography (CT) of both lower extremities showed the presence of multiple hypodense lesions, which indicated multiple muscle abscesses in the right vastus intermedius, left vastus lateralis muscle, and left adductor magnus . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed rim-enhancing lesions with perilesional edema that indicated bilateral brain abscesses in the frontoparietal lobe, right temporal occipital lobe, and right cerebellar hemisphere . Brain MRI also showed heterogeneously thickened dura with peripheral rim enhancement, which indicated dura empyema on the right frontoparietal lobe . Diffusion-weighted MRI shows a hyperintense signal within these lesions . A lumbar puncture was performed, which showed an intracranial pressure of >300 mmH2O (normal range: 80–180 mmH2O). The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was clear and colorless. The CSF analysis showed the following results: leukocyte count, 99,000 cells/mL; glucose levels, 3.6 mmol/L (normal range: 2.5–4.5 mmol/L); and protein levels, 1,113.9 mg/L (normal range 150–450 mg/L). Based on these findings, a diagnosis of multiple abscesses in muscles and the brain with dura empyema was made, and empirical antibiotic treatment of meropenem (1.0 g, iv drip, q8h) and linezolid (600 mg, iv drip, q12) was started. Anaerobic and aerobic cultures of blood samples and aerobic culture of CSF samples were both performed. CT-guided percutaneous catheter drainage of abscesses was performed in both thighs, and brown fetid pus was aspirated . The pus sample was used to find the etiological agent using methods of traditional aerobic culture and mNGS test. Stereotactic puncture drainage of brain abscesses was proposed but not performed because the patient refused any type of intracerebral surgery.
PACEseq mNGS test (Hugobiotech, Beijing, China) using a pus sample from the right thigh abscess was performed to identify the causative pathogens. A QIAamp DNA Micro Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used for DNA extraction, and a library of total DNA was built with QIAseqTM Ultralow Input Library Kit for Illumina (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Qubit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were used to access the quality of the DNA library. The qualified library was finally sequenced on a Nextseq 550 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). After sequencing, adapters and short, low-quality, and low-complexity reads were removed from the raw data. Human DNA was also filtered out by mapping to the human reference database. The remaining reads were finally aligned to the Microbial Genome Database.
Porphyromonas gingivalis (60,853 specific reads), Bacteroides heparinolyticus (892 specific reads), and Tannerella forsythia (317 specific reads) were detected on day 3 . Blood and CSF samples were also used to detect pathogens using the method of the PMseq mNGS test (BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China). Porphyromonas gingivalis was detected both in the blood (489 specific reads) and CSF (587 specific reads) samples on day 2 and day 4 as negative results were obtained with the traditional culture of these samples. The blood, pus, and CSF samples were incubated in BACTECTM FX BC systems (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany) for 5 days, but no positive signal appeared. As a result, the anaerobic and aerobic cultures of the blood sample and the aerobic cultures of pus and CSF samples were negative.
As P. gingivalis was detected, the antibiotic regimen was changed to meropenem (1.0 g, iv drip, q8h) and metronidazole (1 g, iv drip, q8h) on day 3. Chest and abdominal CT and cardiac ultrasonography were performed to identify the source of infection, but no positive result was found in either examination. A dental examination was performed, which revealed moderate oral hygiene with loss of all teeth and chronic gingivitis. We did not find any periodontal abscess. The antibiotic regimen of meropenem and metronidazole was continued until he was discharged from the ICU. The pigtail catheters were left in both legs to allow for continuous drainage with daily flushing by metronidazole. On day 9, the drainage volume was <10 ml of serous-like liquid, and the patient’s white blood cell count was back to normal levels. CT of both legs revealed a remarkable reduction in the size of the abscesses in the right vastus intermedius, left vastus lateralis muscle, and left adductor magnus. The drainage tube was removed on day 18. The size of the bump in his backside was reduced to 3 cm × 2 cm. His neurological function was improved partially. He could speak fluently, but the muscle strength of his right lower limb was still weak (muscle strength: grade 2). As his symptoms improved and his vital signs stabilized, he was discharged from the ICU on day 23 to a rehabilitation medical center. The patient was followed up for 4 months. No abscesses re-appeared, and the remaining abscesses in his backside and both legs were completely absorbed. His muscle strength improved significantly. He returned to normal health. At the time of generating this report, the patient could speak and walk around freely and had no evident neurological deficits. The timeline of the treatment is shown in .