A 76-year-old caucasian female was presented to the emergency department unconscious and with possible aspiration with some vomit in the oropharynx. The differential diagnosis included postanoxic encephalopathy, a metabolic disorder, infectious cause, nonconvulsive status epilepticus, intoxication, meningitis, and conversion.
The patient looked neglected and underweight. Vital signs showed a heart rate of 105/minute, blood pressure 150/80 mmHg, respiratory rate 21/minute, SpO2 98% with nonrebreathing mask, and temperature 36.9 °C. The patient was unresponsive, with a Glasgow Coma scale of 3, pupils were 6 mm in diameter, equal and reactive to light. She was immediately intubated for airway protection and mechanically ventilated. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was negative for signs of aspiration and pressures were within normal range.
Laboratory results: hemoglobin (Hb) 7.0 mmol/L, platelets 151 × 10 9/L, white blood cells (WBC) 6.5 × 10 9/L, creatinine 91 μmol/L, urea 12.5 mmol/L, C-reactive protein (CRP) 114 mg/L, Na 138 mmol/L, K 3.4 mmol/L, Ca 2.24 mmol/L, Mg 0.84 mmol/L, creatine kinase (CK) 20 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 17 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 15 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 51 U/L, albumin 33.5 g/L, ammonia 11 mmol/L, glucose 9 mmol/L, arterial blood gas pH 7.30, pO2 9.44 kPa, pCO2 6.72 kPa, HCO3 24.1 mmol/L, and base excess 2.7 mmol/L. Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an intraventricular conductive disorder .
Qualitative analyses for drugs of abuse (Syva RapidTest d.a.u., Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Ltd., Frimley, Camberley, UK) in the urine were negative for cannabis, opiates, (methyl)amphetamines, methadone, benzodiazepines, and cocaine. Paracetamol plasma concentration was < 10 mg/L. A computed tomography (CT) angiography of the head showed no signs of recent ischemia nor significant intracranial vessel occlusions.
She was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed diffuse nonspecific nonepileptiform background slowing . This is commonly observed in patients with an encephalopathy or induced by a drug intoxication .
The next morning, the patient’s family clarified that the patient had complaints of anxiety and depressive thoughts, suffered from significant weight loss, and had a poor performance status. She had gone to bed at around midnight in fair condition and was found comatose by her daughter next morning at 11:00 AM. There were no signs of a deliberate overdose, for example no empty medicine strips were found. Contact with her general practitioner revealed that amitriptyline had been prescribed intermittently from 2014 to September 2019. However, amitriptyline had not been prescribed in the year prior to her admission. Therefore, the patient was believed to have resumed medication on her own initiative.
This would also explain her ECG changes, mydriasis due to anticholinergic effects, and her comatose state. Because of the suspicion of a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA) intoxication, plasma levels were determined. An amitriptyline plasma concentration of 1030 μg/L and a nortriptyline (active metabolite) plasma concentration of 380 μg/L were found, resulting in a sum concentration of 1410 μg/L (therapeutic range sum 100–300 μg/L) . Plasma concentrations of amitriptyline and nortriptyline higher than 500 μg/L are considered to be potentially toxic.
Sodium bicarbonate was administered to lower the free fraction of amitriptyline . In addition, symptomatic treatment was initiated, using diazepam for convulsions and extended cardiac monitoring. Since concentrations were high and comatose state persisted, impaired clearance was suspected. Analysis of genetic variations in cytochrome (CYP)450 isoenzymes, which play a major role in metabolism of amitriptyline, was performed. Genetic variations in CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 were determined by real-time PCR (validated TaqMan StepOnePlus assay). DNA sequence analysis was used to validate the genotyping procedure. The patient was found to be a CYP2D6 poor metabolizer (homozygous CYP2D6*4 and homozygous CYP2D6*10) and a CYP2C19 extensive metabolizer (CYP2C19*1/*17). CYP2D6 poor metabolizer status leads to reduced degradation of nortriptyline, increasing the concentration of this metabolite.
Three days after admission, her Glasgow Coma score (GCS) started to improve to an E2M4Vt and was back to normal on day 7. ECG changes gradually resolved . She was extubated on day 5. Psychiatric evaluation showed no signs of a deliberate overdose or attempted suicide. She was discharged in a reasonably good condition 10 days after admission.