A 56-year-old man without a history of NF-1 was admitted to our hospital because of nonspecific abdominal pain for 1 day and a history of hepatitis B without treatment. The detection value of hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA was 14,400 IU/mL. Tumor marker levels revealed only an elevated level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP: 5304.0 ng/mL). Liver dysfunctions, including AST 134 U/L and ALT 116 U/L, were detected. Other laboratory findings, including serum creatinine levels, leukocyte and platelet counts, hemoglobin levels and blood coagulation, were within normal ranges.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an extremely large mixed-density mass measuring approximately 13 * 10.1 * 9.2 cm and located in the right liver (mainly in segment VIII) with intratumoral hemorrhage invading the right anterior branch of the portal vein. An enhancement pattern, such as fast-in or fast-out, was also observed (,). Furthermore, magnetic resonance (MRI) confirmed the presence of the lesion, which was hyperintense at T2 and had significant uneven enhancement . Moreover, multiple abnormal small nodules were observed in the arterial and venous phases, indicating the possibility of intrahepatic metastasis. According to the NCCN Guidelines’ recommendations for diagnosis of HCC, a diagnosis of HCC can be made. When the diagnosis is established by imaging criteria, patients can be treated and biopsy confirmation is not needed. Because of the possibility of HCC with intrahepatic metastasis, the patient underwent transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) combined with 8 mg of lenvatinib orally once daily as well as intravenous pembrolizumab every 3 weeks. In addition, he received antiviral treatment (entecavir) for HBV. Then, he underwent close follow-up, which was performed an average of once a month. However, his AFP level significantly decreased. CT (,) and MRI (after 3 months) revealed a large mass in the right lobe of the liver, with a length of approximately 120 * 83 * 82 mm. Most of the lesions were necrotic, with iodine oil deposition and slight local enhancement . The level of AFP decreased to 5.9 ng/mL . At 3 months, a partial response (PR) was observed according to the modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (mRECIST; ). After multidisciplinary discussion, the hepatic cancer and adherent part of the diaphragmatic pleura were resected. The patient recovered well after surgery, without any postoperative complications.
Interestingly, histopathological examination revealed a high-grade spindle cell tumor, with rhabdomyoblasts and focal cartilaginous components accompanied by tumor-like bone tissue (,). Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the fusiform cells were positive for myogenic markers (MyoD1 and myogenin), CD34, EMA and Desmin, as well as the loss of H3K27me3 (–). Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining was negative for the S100, SMA, Syn, CgA, SOX10, AFP and SALL4 proteins. The overall features of the lesion supported those of an MPNST with rhabdomyosarcoma differentiation (also known as “MTT”).
Due to the effect of neoadjuvant therapy, the patient received single TACE and 6 months of lenvatinib plus PD-1 inhibitors after surgery. The patient was followed up at the hospital with no signs of recurrence for 30 months after hepatectomy.