A 39-year-old, left-hand-dominant female, presented in 2017 with a history of recurrent atraumatic anterior dislocation of the left shoulder after three unsuccessful surgical attempts.
The patient described numerous episodes of atraumatic dislocation of the left shoulder. At the age of 14 (1993), she underwent arthroscopic capsulorrhaphy, with no persistent benefit; 2 years later (1995) she underwent an open capsulorrhaphy, with satisfactory regain of stability and functional recovery. Both interventions were performed in a different institution. However, in 2015, the patient reported a new episode of dislocation after having lifted a heavy object, followed briefly by further episodes of atraumatic dislocations. In 2016, the patient underwent a Latarjet procedure in a different institution with immediate unsatisfactory results due to persistent instability.
Following this event, the patient began to complain of an occasional sensation of instability and nearly constant pain localized in the anterior region of the shoulder. She also reported three episodes of dislocation . The patient presented to author’s orthopedic department in 2017. During the physical examination, she showed positive apprehension at 90° of abduction and the Jobe Relocation Test and Anterior Drawer Test were positive. She demonstrated positive apprehension with the arm in 90° of abduction during the physical examination. The Relocation Test, Anterior Drawer Test, and Sulcus sign were also positive. The evidence of characteristic signs of generalized ligament laxity was identified such as: hyperextension of the metacarpophalangeal joints, hyperabduction of the thumb, and recurvatum of the knees and elbows. The calculated Beighton score was 8. The upper extremity did not show any sign of motor or sensory deficits.
Pre-operative CT scan images showed adequate placement (flush) of the coracoid transfer without any sign of reabsorption . After an intensive rehabilitation cycle lasting 6 months, due to the persistence of symptoms with impaired quality of life, an open revision surgery treatment was proposed to the patient.