A 58-year-old man who received aortic valve replacement 4 years ago due to aortic regurgitation was referred to our hospital in March 2020 since he experienced syncope 1 d before.
The patient experienced syncope 1 d before when he was watching TV on bed. And the consciousness recovered after 5 min and the patient visited our emergency center. In our emergency center, the patient received amiodarone at a dose of 200 mg three times per day until hospitalization.
The patient received aortic valve replacement 4 years ago due to aortic regurgitation. The patient had no other illness in the past, such as arterial hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia, chronic heart failure, and renal dysfunction.
The patient had a long history of heavy smoking.
The physical examination revealed no significant abnormalities.
The laboratory examinations revealed no significant abnormalities. The detailed results of the laboratory examinations can be seen in Table .
The Holter monitor showed paired ventricular premature contraction and paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia . A computed tomography scan of the head showed no signs of cerebral hemorrhaging. Echocardiography revealed no mitral stenosis or regurgitation present at that time . The LVEF was 65% and the function of the aortic bioprosthetic valve was normal.
The electrophysiology study and RFCA were performed using a 3-dimensional mapping system (CARTO UNIV; Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA). The three-dimensional geometries of the left ventricle (LV) and the papillary muscles were reconstructed by intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) (SOUNDSTAR; Biosense Webster). An ablation catheter (NAVISTAR Thermocool Smart Touch, Biosense Webster) was introduced into the aortic valve, where no potential was recorded on it. The transseptal approach was used to place the ablation catheter into the LV since it was difficult to do so by the transaortic approach. Detailed activation and pace mapping were performed in the anterolateral papillary muscle (ALPM) area of the LV. A 0.05-Hz high-pass filter and a 500-Hz low-pass filter were used with virtual unipolar electrograms while a 30-Hz high-pass filter and a 500-Hz low-pass filter were used with virtual bipolar electrograms. The local fractional potential at the base of ALPM preceding the onset of surface QRS at 10 ms was recorded with a “QS” pattern in the unipolar mode. Pace morphologies were not satisfactory at the septal sides of the APLM . The most optimal pace score of these three sites with pace mapping software (PASO) was 0.891 (, pace 1). Tentative RFCA at these sites was performed using 40 W with an irrigation flow rate of 30 mL/min. When acceleration or reduction of ventricular tachycardia (VT) was observed at the beginning of the application, RFCA current delivery was continued for an additional 180 s. The VT turned into bigeminy of premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) after repeated ablation . Another eight rounds of circumferential ablation at the base of the ALPM was performed with a total RFCA time of 14 min 23 s, mainly considering the possible origin of VT in ALPM. However, the PVCs returned to VT again several minutes after ablation.
The extensive pace and activation mapping were performed as a next step. The perfect pace-map site with a 0.995 PASO score was identified at another top of ALPM . The ablation catheter on this site also recorded a complex fractional prepotential preceding the onset of surface QRS complex at 20 ms. And a QS pattern was recorded by a local unipolar lead during the PVCs at this site . Therefore, ablation on this site of the papillary muscle was performed under electroanatomic map guidance combined with real-time ICE. The RFCA current was delivered in power control mode, starting at 40 W and gradually raised to 45 W with an irrigation flow rate of 30 mL/min. The VT rate slowed down and was successfully eliminated during ablation at this site . Three times of additional RFCA was performed for consolidation with a total RF time of 6 min.
After RFCA, the patient was monitored for 20 min. During the monitoring period, no ventricular arrhythmias were induced even after programmed electrical stimulation with isoproterenol infusion. No complications such as steam pop, pericardial effusion, or mitral valve injury were observed . We reanalyzed using a Holter monitor and found no presence of ventricular tachycardia after the operation. The patient was then discharged from the hospital 1 wk after the operation with no symptoms.
Approximately 1 wk later (2 wk after RFCA), the patient experienced dyspnea and revisited the hospital. Echocardiography showed severe mitral valve prolapse .