A 42-year-old Korean male patient visited our clinic with persistent and aggravating low back pain. Five years ago he had a DIAM® (Medtronic Sofamor Danek Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) interspinous process soft-stabilization system placed at the level of L4 to S1 . Current imaging revealed focal disc protrusion at the level of L4/5 and diffuse protrusion at the level of L5/S1 . We decided to perform an L-PEN at the lesion sites to relieve the sustained pain.
During the procedure, dural adhesion was suspected at the previously operated level, and the neuroplasty catheter was malpositioned into the intradural space on the first attempt . After repositioning the epidural catheter and confirming its position, the scheduled epidural neuroplasty was completed. The total dose of contrast administered during the procedure was less than 3mL. Our patient had no definite abnormal neurological signs.
One day after the procedure, our patient complained of severe headache with sustained high blood pressure of over 190mmHg systolic and 110mmHg diastolic. But, neurological disorientation was not observed (Glasgow Coma Scale = 15). A CT of his brain showed a SAH-like appearance with intracranial air . Diffuse sulcal effacement, obliterated basal cisterns and hyperdensity in the interhemispheric fissure and perichiasmatic, perimesencephalic and sylvian cisterns were also suspected . A sequential angiography and subtractional MRI were performed, but no definite intracranial vascular malformation or intracranial hemorrhage was observed . A lumbar puncture showed normal opening pressure. Examination of his cerebrospinal fluid revealed the following: leukocytes 0 cells/mm3; erythrocytes 3 cells/mm3, without xanthochromia; and normal protein and glucose levels. His headache disappeared and no neurological aggravation was observed after conservative management. A follow-up CT scan after one day revealed no definite intracranial hemorrhage , and our patient was discharged with improved low back pain without neurological deficit. He remained neurologically asymptomatic with improved low back pain during three months of follow-up.