A 60-year-old man was referred to our hospital after a suspected liver tumor was identified using abdominal ultrasonography. The patient did not exhibit any symptoms at the referral, although he was receiving medication to manage hypertension and hyperlipemia. Laboratory test results revealed normal findings for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, 10.7 ng/mL) level, cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9, 33.1 U/mL) level, and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (26 mAU/mL) level. Abdominal ultrasonography showed an irregularly shaped tumor in segment 5 (S5) of the liver, with a hyperechoic core (size 20 mm) in the intrahepatic area and peripheral to the hypoechoic area. The hyperechoic area was even more intense at the posterior aspect of the tumor . Abdominal dynamic computed tomography (CT) revealed an irregularly shaped and enhanced tumor in S5 of the liver during the arterial phase . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) revealed a filling defect from the origin of the right area to the periphery and severe dilation of the S5 branch of the bile duct . ERC showed a mucus discharge from the ampulla of Vater; however, we were not able to confirm adenocarcinoma via brushing cytology from the bile duct, doubting the presence of a mucus-producing tumor (especially IPNB). Therefore, we decided on surgery, performing segmentectomy for the S5 lesion. We decided to perform segmentectomy because the result of the rapid diagnosis made based on the bile duct stump during surgery was negative. The resected liver showed the papillary and nodular tumor in the dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct . Microscopically, complex papillary or tubular proliferation of atypical columnar or cuboidal cells with focal fine vascular stroma was observed in the dilated intrahepatic bile ducts . Most of the tumor was composed of high-grade atypical cells with enlarged nuclei, whereas low-grade dysplasia components were focally observed . The tumor focally invaded into the stroma of the portal area in mucinous trabecular or tubular fashion but without invasion to the liver parenchyma . Immunohistochemically, MUC1 and MUC5AC were diffusely positive, and MUC6 was focally positive; however, MUC2 was negative . From these histological features, we diagnosed as IPNB associated with invasion (pT1aN0M0 stage IA, the 8th edition of UICC). From the tumor, mainly composed of high-grade atypical cells with complex papillary or tubular structure, and immunohistochemical pattern of MUC expressions (MUC1+/MUC2-/MUC5AC+/MUC6+), the subtype was considered as pancreatobiliary. In addition, because the tumor was located in the intrahepatic bile ducts, and histological features were similar to pancreatic intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm, we considered it IPNB type 1. There was no lymph node or distant metastasis. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not provided because we observed no histopathological evidence of residual tumor.
The patient remained in good condition until CT revealed recurrence in the right hepatic duct at 9 months after the surgery . ERC revealed a filling defect in the origin of the right bile duct, and intraductal ultrasonography (IDUS) revealed a papillary tumor . We diagnosed the patient with intrahepatic recurrence of IPNB and performed right hepatectomy. Macroscopically, the papillary and nodular tumor projected into the dilated intrahepatic bile duct . Microscopic examination showed papillary or tubular proliferation of atypical columnar or cuboidal cells in the dilated intrahepatic bile duct . Immunohistochemical patterns showed MUC1, MUC5AC, and MUC6 positive and MUC2 negative . These findings were similar to the first resection. From these findings, we diagnosed IPNB recurrence. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not re-administered on the basis of our judgment that curative resection has been achieved. The patient underwent follow-up CT examinations every 3 months for the first 2 years after the second surgery, and then underwent follow-ups every 6 months using CT and testing for serum tumor markers (CEA and CA19-9).
Forty-two months after the first resection, a 5-mm-sized frosted glass shadow was recognized in the right lung apex . In addition, we found a 5-mm-sized node from the left superior mediastinum to the ventral pleura . Tumor markers did not increase, although we had followed up by taking chest CT scans every 4 months because we suspected inflammatory changes and/or tumor. The tumor on the right lung changed to a nodule and grew to 10 mm . We suspected lung metastasis or primary lung cancer; however, because the left lung node disappeared , we viewed it as inflammatory changes. Because of its increasing size, we strongly suspected malignant tumor . Serum tumor marker testing revealed elevated CEA (8.1 ng/mL) level but normal CA19-9 (33.5 U/mL) level, squamous cell carcinoma antigen (2.3 ng/mL), neuron-specific enolase (15.4 ng/mL), cytokeratin fragment (1.4 ng/mL), and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide (40.5 pg/mL). Brush cytology and biopsy on bronchoscopy revealed adenocarcinoma with negative thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) expression. From the cytohistologic features and clinical history, we presumed it to be lung metastasis from IPNB, resected in two separate procedures on the 54th month after the first resection. The size of both tumors had increased to 20 mm right before resection . Whole microscopic views showed nodular and cystic tumors in both tumors resected from the right and left lungs . A small daughter lesion near the main tumor was also noted in the left lung. Microscopically, both tumors showed papillary, tubular, or lepidic proliferation of atypical columnar cells . Immunohistochemistry revealed positive expression of MUC1, MUC5AC, and MUC6 but negative expression of MUC2 and TTF-1 in both lung tumors. Although primary invasive mucinous carcinoma of the lung was a differential diagnosis, based on the similar histological features to previous IPNB, multiple tumor lesions in the lungs, imaging findings, and clinical history, we diagnosed it as pulmonary metastasis from IPNB. After both resections were completed, adjuvant chemotherapy was administered using tegafur (S-1) based on the recurrent lesions that we had detected. The S-1 regimen involved a dose of 120 mg/day for 4 consecutive weeks and then a 2-week break. The patient is currently alive (64 months after the first resection and 12 months after the lung resections), has completed four cycles of the S-1 regimen, and is continuing follow-up with monthly blood tests and CT evaluations every 3 months.