A 59-year-old man complaining about right lower limb pain and swelling was transferred to our institution for an ascending aortic mass which had been found incidentally in local hospital. Extremity ultrasound confirmed deep vein thrombosis in his right lower limb, which was responsible for his suffering. He had a past history of massive pulmonary embolisms, which were reduced obviously after 5-month course of oral anticoagulant. Except smoking, he had no other risk factors like hypertension, diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia and he took no medication at that time. The thoracic contrast-enhanced computed tomography(CT) showed a low-density defect with no enhancement in the left anterior wall of AA and the 3-dimensional reconstruction displayed a more detailed spatial location of the mass. Apart from this, no evidence of aortic dissection, atherosclerotic change or intramural hematoma had been observed. Coronary computed tomography angiography was performed due to its peculiar location, having the potential to block the coronary ostium. Although no coronary ischemia was been found, it confirmed the presence of the non-floating mass. The normal result of positron-emission tomography(PET) and tumor biomarkers reduced the possibility of a malignant tumor. Both the blood clotting tests including fibrinogen, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, thrombin time and international normalized ratio and the activity detection of clotting factors II, V, VII ~ XII showed no abnormal findings, while the D-dimer level(4400 μg/L) was much higher than the normal range(80-500 μg/L). Additionally, the nucleic acid test for COVID-19 was negative.
Given that the large thrombus in the AA with high risks of fatal thrombotic complications, surgical removal was executed. The surgery was performed through a median sternotomy and then cardiopulmonary bypass was established by cannulation of the right axillary artery and right atrium. After AA cross clamped, it was incised under cardiac arrest and a sessile mass located on the left anterior wall was identified . The mass was resected completely with the involved segment of AA, which was replaced with a 26 mm-diameter Dacron graft subsequently. The mass was approximately 3.0 × 1.5 × 2.2 cm in size and gray-yellow substance could be seen after section (lower right in Fig. B). There was no atherosclerotic lesion on the excised aortic wall even at the implant site. Histopathological examination confirmed the mass was a white thrombus with intima exfoliation and no evidence of malignancy had been found. He had an uneventful recovery and discharged 14 days after surgery. Heparin and aspirin were applied as anticoagulant therapy during hospitalization, which changed to 3-month course of rivaroxaban when he was discharged.