On August 12, 2021, a 13-year-old girl presented to our hospital with persistent left shoulder pain for more than 2 months, which was accompanied by left chest pain for 2 days. She denied the history of any familial diseases, recent chest trauma or having anticoagulant drugs. Physical examination revealed reduced respiratory movement and decreased breathing sounds in the left lung field. Percussion sounds of the left chest were solid. Besides, blood hemoglobin levels on admission was 108 g/L(reference range, 110–150 g/L) and clotting parameters were also normal. Chest CT demonstrated a left pleural effusion associated with passive atelectasis of the lung and a 2 cm long spear-shaped osseous proliferation originating from the visceral side of the left sixth rib . The osseous proliferation showed medullary continuity with the parent rib-bone which prompted the probable diagnosis of osteochondroma. For further diagnosis and treatment of the pleural effusions, the patient underwent ultrasound-guided thoracentesis, and 350 ml of dark blood fluid was aspirated in the intrathoracic cavity, which was indicative of hemothorax. Subsequently, a contrast-enhanced multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) scan of the thorax ruled out potential pulmonary vascular malformation and neoplasms. The osseous projection abutted the left diaphragm downward , but there was no visible extravasation of intravenous contrast in the left intrathoracic cavity.
Surprisingly, the patient's hemoglobin level dropped to 88 g/L at the interval of 1 day, a clue of mild anemia from the probability of chronic active bleeding. After homotypic packed red blood cells of 2U were given, the patient was hemodynamically stable. Based on the shape and growth pattern of the bony protrusion on CT and relevant clinical data by now, the hemothorax was probably associated with this costal lesion. Therefore, surgical intervention was necessary to clarify the cause of hemothorax and certain diagnosis of costal lesion.
On August 25, 2021, exploratory VAT revealed that a bony protrusion spanned from the medial aspect of the left sixth rib toward the chest cavity, in close contact with the diaphragm. The diaphragm had been lacerated by the bony protrusion and was locally covered with residual clotted blood and fibrin layers, suggesting the aetiology of bloody pleural effusion. There was no obvious injury to the visceral pleura, but heavy adhesion of pleural space was noticed. Then the bony protrusion was excised along with partial anterior sixth rib through limited thoracotomy with the aid of VAT. After the closure of wounds, a chest tube was inserted and left until the postoperative 7th day. The gross specimen consisted of rib part and an attached bony protrusion . Pathology confirms the osseous proliferation consistent with an osteochondromatous proliferation with no signs of dysplasia or concern of malignancy, namely osteochondroma. The patient was discharged home on postoperative 8th day in good clinical condition. At a 6-month follow-up, there was no evidence of any residual or recurrent exostosis.