A 45-year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) 12 years before and was prescribed anti-diabetic drugs. Because glycemic control gradually worsened, insulin treatment was started 6 years before. He noticed symptoms such as difficulty taking off his ring and having a larger shoe size at that time. He visited a local doctor because he experienced sudden headache and vertigo. Because a pituitary tumor was identified on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. In his head and neck region, typical acromegalic features were observed, such as frontal skull bossing, cranial ridges, enlargement of the nose and lips, and macroglossia. However, typical cushingoid features, such as moon face, buffalo hump, central obesity, and purple striae, were not observed.
Biochemical analyses were performed at admission. Hemoglobin A1c (NGSP) level was 11.0% and poor glycemic control was noted (fasting/2 h after meal: blood glucose, 161/298 mg/dL). An increase in GH and IGF-1 basal plasma levels was observed (78.5 ng/mL and 525 ng/mL (+5.8 SD), respectively). Furthermore, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level was above the reference range. The ACTH, cortisol, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels were 47.8 pg/mL, 13.6 μg/dL, and 247 μg/dL, respectively. Other thyroid dysfunction or gonadal axis abnormalities were not observed .
After adequate glycemic control (fasting/2 h after meal: blood glucose, 87/119 mg/dL), a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed, but GH secretion was not suppressed appropriately. In addition, as shown in Table , to evaluate the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis we performed the following analyses. The patient showed no circadian variation in ACTH or cortisol secretion. The urine cortisol was 114.3 μg/day, indicating the increased cortisol secretion. In a low-dose dexamethasone (DEX) loading test (0.5 mg) as described previously , ACTH and cortisol secretion was not suppressed; however, ACTH and cortisol secretion was suppressed with high-dose (8 mg) DEX loading . In response to an intravenous administration of corticotrophin-releasing hormone loading test, ACTH was increased approximately 2.8 times (vor: 38.9 pg/ml, 15 min: 113.0 pg/ml) and cortisol responded (vor: 15.0 μg/dL, 30 min 21.0 μg/dL). Good glycemic control was observed during evaluation of the HPA axis.
MRI of the brain: a tumor 31 × 20 × 22 mm in diameter was found spanning the inside of the sella turcica to the upper part of the sella . The pituitary stalk was displaced to the right side (slightly upward) and was adjacent to some parts of the optic chiasm on the right side. The tumor extended into the left cavernous sinus and engulfed the left internal carotid artery indicating grade 4 of the Knosp classification.
The patient was diagnosed with acromegaly according to these clinical and laboratory findings. The abnormal ACTH-dependent cortisol secretion was considered to be associated with SCD. Long-acting repeatable formulation of octreotide (Sandostatin® LAR Depot) was administered monthly for 3 months before the surgery. After an approximately 23% tumor reduction effect was obtained with octreotide, transsphenoidal surgery was performed in the neurosurgery department. During the surgery, a white soft tumor was found in the inner left side of the sella turcica. Infiltration of the tumor to the cavernous sinus was observed, but gross resection was attempted to the extent possible .
Pathological examinations showed that hematoxylin-Eosin staining of the resected tumor sample revealed monotonous multiplication of acidophilic small round cells, mainly in a well-developed small blood vessel, which was in accordance with the diagnosis of pituitary adenoma . On immunohistochemical staining, most of the tumor cells were strongly stained by GH antibody, while some cells showed positive staining for PRL. Also, some tumor cells were strongly positive for ACTH but sparse , similarly to a previous report .
The patient was discharged without any post-surgical complications. However, because the postoperative basal plasma GH and IGF-1 levels were not normalized, another examination was performed 2 months after the surgery. Contrast MRI showed that the pituitary adenoma was resected, but it was difficult to evaluate the residual lesion in detail. To exclude the effect of hyperglycemia on hormones, a 75-g OGTT test was conducted after glycemic control was stabilized. The GH level was reduced to one-tenth or lower than that before the surgery, but it stayed at 10 ng/dL in the presence of elevated blood glucose levels, which did not meet the criteria for remission. In addition, the paradoxical response of GH to LHRH and TRH loadings was improved but remained. Thus, OCT-LAR (10 mg/mo) administration was started as posttreatment medication under non-remission status. Because the GH and IGF-1 control were insufficient, the octreotide dose was increased, with careful monitoring for blood glucose level and insulin secretion. Then, gradual decreases in GH and IGF-1 levels were observed. Considering a potential reoperation, we carefully monitored the patient response to the octreotide treatment.
Regarding the HPA axis, while the levels of GH and IGF-1 decreased with octreotide administration, ACTH level was still high and cortisol was not suppressed by DEX loading test, suggesting the possibility that ACTH-producing cells were in the residual tumor . In addition, the ACTH level was not associated with blood glucose control or the reduction of the GH and IGF-1 levels.
Cultured cells were transferred to 8-well PLL-coated slide-chamber. After 48 h incubation, they were fixed with methanol and were blocked with gout serum. After blocking, the ACTH and Pit-1 protein was detected by incubation with anti-ACTH (2F6, sc-69,648, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, USA), anti-Pit-1 antibody (X-7, sc-442, Santa Cruz) at 4 °C overnight. Bound primary antibodies were detected by incubation with Alexa 488. Immunofluorescent signals were observed by confocal microscope (Zeiss, Germany).
Paraffin embedded tissues were sectioned at 10 μm. After deparaffinized and unmasking step, the ACTH and GH protein was detected by incubation with anti-ACTH、anti-GH antibody (A0570, Dako, Calfornia, USA) at 4 °C overnight. Bound primary antibodies were detected by incubation with Alexa 584 and 488 respectively. Immunofluorescent signals were observed by confocal microscope (Zeiss).
Total RNA was isolated from tissues of the pituitary tumor using the RNeasy Minikit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was reverse transcribed by using SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Quantitative PCR was performed using an ABI PRISM 7500 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Quantitative PCR was conducted using primers for GH, Pit-1, POMC, Tpit, and NeuroD1, as noted in Table .
Dissected pituitary tumor was incubated with collagease 1 mg/ml for 60 min at 37 °C. Extracted cells were filtered through nylon filter (100 μm), then they were centrifuged by 1500 rpm for 5 min. Pellet was suspended with condition medium (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium, penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin sulfate (100 μg/ml; Invitrogen), and 10% fetal bovine serum). Cells were plated in a PLL-coated 6-well plate in condition medium.
In vitro analysis was performed to analyze hormone production ability (GH and ACTH) beyond the lineage in the pituitary tumor. Each surgical obtained pituitary-tumor samples, whose patients diagnosed with non-functioning and Cushing disease respectively, showed null cell type and ACTH-positive densely-granulated type pathologically, which were consistent with non-functioning and ACTH-producing adenoma respectively. These samples were used for comparison. First, total RNA of the resected tumor tissue was extracted. A quantitative gene expression analysis was performed using the real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction method. GH and Pit-1 mRNA showed higher expression in the tumor tissue than nonfunctional adenoma (NFA) or Cushing’s disease (CD) . Moreover, POMC, Tpit, and NeuroD1 mRNA showed higher expression in the tumor tissue than NFA, but lower expression than CD, suggesting that expression of 2 types of transcriptional factors might be associated with clinical manifestation .
An immunohistological study was performed using a paraffin tissue sample and cell staining from the primary culture of the neoplastic cells derived from the resected tumor tissue. Double immunostaining for ACTH and GH demonstrated coexistence of ACTH-positive cells (GH-negative) among the GH-positive tumor cells in the tumor . Additionally, Pit-1 expression was reduced in the ACTH-positive from the tumor tissue primary culture . Considering the fact that Tpit determines alternate fates during pituitary cell differentiation, Tpit would be involved in the pathophysiology of ACTH positive cells in this tumor of presented case . These results suggested a heterogeneous mixture of 2 types of cells with different functional lineages in the tumor (bimorphous), indicating that these different cells in the tumor secreted GH and ACTH autonomically.