A 22-year-old, single girl presented at the emergency room with localized hypogastric colicky pain that was started a week prior. She studied in the university. Her menstrual cycles were regular and her last menstrual period was 2 weeks before admittance. She stated that she experienced intermittent episodes of low-level fever for the past 3 days. She did not use any drugs. No history of familial genetic diseases was reported by her and her parents. On physical examination, the patient was mildly tachycardic (PR: 94) but was not febrile or hemodynamically unstable. Her abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the lower left quadrant and hypogastric area. Laboratory tests including complete blood count (CBC), beta HCG, urine analysis, and blood sugar (BS) as well as abdominal ultrasonography were requested with suspicion of ovarian torsion.
The sonographic evaluation revealed a normal uterus and right ovary and a 90 × 96 mm mass with heterogeneous echogenicity was observed with a high suspicion of left adnexa and ovarian torsion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also requested. This further assessment revealed a 71 × 99 mm necrotic mass which made malignancies and ovarian torsion the more probable causes .
After consulting with an oncologist gynecologist, she underwent a laparotomy by a gynecology oncologist. During the surgery with a midline incision, a necrotic 12 × 94 mm mass in the posterior Cul de Sac with adhesion to the intestines was seen. She underwent a left salpingo-oophorectomy. The adhesion bonds from the intestine to the ovaries were resected and the samples from abdominal fluid and omentum were obtained for further analysis. In the abdominal explore, no significant abnormalities were detected except the tip of the appendix which was also inflamed and an appendectomy was performed either.
The histopathological evaluation of the morphology of the sample was challenging and was finalized by a team of pathologists working in the field of gynecological oncology. They stated hypercalcemic small cell carcinoma as a diagnosis. The images of the pathology slides are listed in .
Serum tumor marker result is listed in . No malignant cells were found in the cytology of abdominal fluid. Although the sample from the appendix turned out to be free from the tumor the one from the omentum was involved. The immunohistochemistry (IHC) result is listed in .
The case was consulted with the tumor board of the university and also with gynecooncologists from USA and UK. While some believed that the patient should undergo another surgery, other consultations suggested chemotherapy since small cell carcinoma of the ovary is associated with a poor prognosis and the medical treatment should not be delayed. The patient also stated that she would choose chemotherapy over surgery. The disease relapsed during chemotherapy with severe side effects that made her stop treatment and be observed and received palliative therapy. Unfortunately, the general condition and symptoms made worse and she died 6 months after the initial diagnosis.
This report was written based on the SCARE 2020 Guideline for reporting the surgical case report . This study has approval by institutional review board affiliated to Tehran University of Medical Sciences.