A previously healthy, 66-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department of Xiangya Hospital on February 2, 2020 (day 2 of illness onset) with a 1-day history of dizziness, nausea and diarrhea. There were no background of pulmonary problems and impaired physical capacity. She underwent a quantitative Real-time Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR) test for SARS-CoV-2 and a chest computed tomography (CT) examination because of a travel history from Wuhan City within 14 days. The results showed positive to SARS-CoV-2 and multiple GGOs in the right lower lobe . Consequently, she was referred to the Changsha Public Health Center for isolation and hospitalization (day 3).
On admission, physical examination showed a body temperature of 37.3°C, a level at 98% of resting finger oxygen saturation without additional oxygen supplement, overweight with a body mass index (BMI) of 25.3 kg/m2, and moist rales in bilateral lower lungs. The laboratory examination results were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count was 2.79 × 109/L, with a lymphocyte percentage of 22.2%, the procalcitonin concentration was 0.054 ng/mL, the level of C-reactive protein was 65.7 mg/L, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 106 mm/h, the ferritin level was 505.5 ng/mL. The serum β-(1,3)-glucan, galactomannan, RT-PCR results for influenza A and B viruses were normal. A reviewed chest high resolution CT taken on February 3 (day3) presented new and progressive, diffuse, peripheral GGOs in the right upper lobe, right middle lobe and left lower lobe, and consolidation in the right lower lobe , typical of acute COVID-19. She was diagnosed with COVID-19 (common type) according to the Chinese Clinical Guidance for COVID-19 Pneumonia Diagnosis and Treatment (4th edition) , and received oral antiviral drugs Arbidol and low dose intravenous methylprednisolone hemisuccinate. From day 9, she developed progressive hypoxemia due to suspected co-bacterial infection and COVID-19 aggravation. She was treated with empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics (moxifloxacin, piperacillin tazobactam, meropenem), intravenous immunoglobulin convalescent serum and supported by non-invasive high concentration oxygen. On day 31, she became critically ill and invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) was conducted because of refractory hypoxemia and progressive lung shadows. Immediately, she was commenced on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) on the next day after IMV. The antibiotics were adjusted to polymyxin B sulfate combined with linezolid, based on a report of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid metagenomic next-generation sequencing which detected 2,55,418 sequences mapped to Actinomyces odontolyticus and 3,897 sequences mapped to Staphylococcus aureus. Her hypoxia was improved on day 37. She was weaned off ECMO support, meanwhile, de-escalation of antibiotic therapy was conducted. On day 89, she was extubated and freed from IMV.
Chest CT scanned on day 61 showed diffuse interstitial changes, with extensive areas of subpleural and peribronchovascular septal thickening, subpleural reticular abnormalities, traction bronchiectasis, and honeycomb-like changes under the subpleura in both lung fields, which manifested as interstitial lung disease (ILD) , and she started taking pirfenidone (Initially 600 mg per day, after 1 week maintain 1,800 mg per day). After 2 months of therapy, her dyspnea and pulmonary fibrosis improved , and subsequently, the patient was discharged on day 130, with a level of modified Medical Research Council Dyspnea Scale (mMRC) at 4 . The patient maintained long-term pirfenidone therapy at home without any liver function damage and hematological complications, and she was followed up on the 7th (1 year after onset) and 20th (2 year after onset) month after discharge. The patient's symptoms and physical capacity had improved with the mMRC scores improved from 4 to 2 and 6-min walking test distance (6-MWD) recovered to 309 meters from 188 meters during treatment. Similarly, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), Athens Insomnia Scale (AIS), and Chinese vision of the 36-Item Short Form Health Survey questionnaire (SF-36) all improved on 2 year after initial insult. Pulmonary function tests showed improvement in restrictive ventilatory and diffusing function, with FVC improved from 1.98 liters to 2.30 liters, total lung capacity (TLC) improved from 61.7% of predict to 72.3% and diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) improved from 30.3% of predict to 47.9%. Reticular abnormalities, interlobular septal thickening and honeycomb-like changes were reduced in bilateral lung fields on chest CT screened on day 758 . The patient gradually returned to activities of daily living, with self-care on the 7th month and physical activity on the 20th month after discharge.