A 32-year-old female presented to the emergency room with a chief complaint of marked edema of 5 days' duration. Past medical history included: Bipolar disorder, panic disorder, hypothyroidism, and hidradenitis suppurativa. Her daily home medications included lithium carbonate 900 mg, synthroid 75 μg, cymbalata 60 mg, nortryptiline 30 mg, cipralex 30 mg, gabapentin 600-900 mg, and ibuprofen 200 mg. The patient had been on a stable dose of lithium for approximately 5 years experiencing no side effects. She presented to the hospital with a 5-day history of severe fatigue, migraine-like headaches, lethargy, and significant anasarca. Associated with these symptoms were upper extremity tremors as well as polyuria and polydipsia. She denied chest pain, shortness of breath, constitutional symptoms, and any urinary symptoms. Social history included 10-pack year history of tobacco.
On admission, the patient's vital signs were: Blood pressure 115/61, heart rate 61 beats/min, respiratory rate 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation 96% on room air. The patient was afebrile. There was generalized + 2 edema of lower extremities, upper extremities, and periorbital regions. Minimal bibasilar crackles were appreciated. The remainder of the cardiovascular and abdominal examination was unremarkable.
Blood work showed a plasma creatinine level of 119 μmol/L (baseline 69 μmol/L) and a blood urea of 10.4 mmol/L. Urine dipstick showed a specific gravity of 1.016, pH 7.5, and 4 + protein; and was negative for glucose, ketones, and nitrites. Microscopy revealed oval fat bodies and free fat droplets. The urine albumin to creatinine ratio was 973.4 mg/mmol and 24-h urine protein was 15.69 g. On admission, serum lithium level was 2.66 mmol/L (therapeutic 0.50-1.50 mmol/L). Serum sodium was 130 mmol/L, potassium 4.5 mmol/L, chloride 105 mmol/L, and bicarbonate 27 mmol/L. A complete blood count demonstrated hemoglobin 106 g/L, white blood cell count 9.46 × 109 /L, and platelet count 234 × 109 /L. Serum albumin was low at 20 g/L; but all liver enzymes, total bilirubin, and coagulation studies were within normal limits. Thyroid-stimulating hormone was 18.90 mU/L and free T4 8.2 pmol/L. Serology for hepatitis B and C, anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies, ribonucleoprotein, Sjogren's syndrome, scleroderma, inflammatory myositis, and Smith antibody were all negative. Antinuclear antibody was slightly positive on admission. Chest radiographs revealed nonspecific bibasilar infiltrates. Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated normal kidneys with no renal calculi or hydronephrosis.
Lithium treatment was discontinued immediately and the patient was treated conservatively with fluids. Initially the patient refused renal biopsy. Once stabilized, she was discharged from the hospital and lithium remained discontinued. At 2 months follow-up, the patient experienced worsening anasarca, significant acute kidney injury (AKI; serum creatinine 209 μmol/L), and persistent proteinuria. She was readmitted to the hospital and subsequently underwent a renal biopsy, when at the time her creatinine peaked at 348 μmol/l. On light microscopy, there was no global sclerosis, crescent formation, or necrotic lesions capillary wall thickness was normal. There was evidence of moderate focal interstitial fibrosis . Immunofluorescence did not demonstrate any immune deposits. Electron microscopy revealed widespread fusion of podocyte foot processes affecting more than 75% of the surface of glomerular capillary loops . No electron dense deposits were evident. A diagnosis of MCD secondary to lithium use was established and the patient was started on high dose corticosteroids, initially intravenously, but changed to oral prednisone 80 mg daily on discharge. Over the next 2 months of follow-up, the patient's creatinine, proteinuria, and edema all decreased significantly and she was tapered to oral prednisone 40 mg. At her 4 months follow-up, her albumin/creatinine ratio had decreased to 220 mg/mmol and she remained on oral prednisone 40 mg daily. Her edema as well as AKI had resolved. The progression of renal and glomerular failure is illustrated in .