A 57-year-old female, who underwent at the age of 3 a below-knee amputation of the left lower limb for post traumatic ischemia, was taken to the emergency room for homolateral hip trauma. She tripped and fell from standing height striking the lateral aspect of her left hip on the ground. She was diagnosed with a grade IV femoral neck fracture, according to Garden’s classification .
Physical examination did not reveal any vascular or neurologic complications. No history ofvascular or neurological diseases was found.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned on her right side with the spine parallel to the operating table. She underwent a cemented total hip arthroplasty with a trans-gluteal lateral approach: the arthroplasty included a modular metallic femoral implant with a 28mm head, and a polyethylene retentive cup Post-operatively, antibio prophylaxis for 72 hours as well as sub cutaneous anticoagulation was prescribed to prevent thrombo-embolic and infectious complications.
The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient was allowed weight bearing using his prosthesis, and progressive ambulation with two crutches on the third post-operative day
Physical therapy included isometric strengthening of the hip abductors and flexors, as well as active range-of-motion exercises.
At the last follow-up (thirty-six months), no dislocation episode or infectious complication were noted. The operative wound was healed and dry. The patient had a satisfactory range of motion: her hip flexion was 90°, external and internal rotation was 30°, abduction was 40° and adduction was 20°. The patient was painless, able to walk with only one cane and to undertake all premorbid activity independently, using her usual prosthesis ( & )
The functional outcome was good with a Harris Hips score at 87/100, and a Paustel-Merle-DAubigné at 16/18. The left hip radiographs did not reveal any signs of loosening or migration of the femoral and acetabular implants, neither signs of polyethylene wear (, & ).