A 47-year-old Latino man with poorly controlled diabetes developed neovascular glaucoma in both eyes (OU) with maximal IOPs in the 40mmHg range OU. His past ocular history was significant for proliferative diabetic retinopathy, s/p panretinal photocoagulation lasers OU and multiple Avastin® (bevacizumab) injections by the retina specialist. The patient was on maximal medications. He had undergone glaucoma drainage devices OU with Baerveldt® 101–350 (Abbott Medical Optics, Inc.) to his right eye (OD) and left eye (OS) 5 months later. His IOP OD elevated again despite an addition of five glaucoma medications and oral acetazolamide, so a second glaucoma drainage device was placed OD in the inferotemporal quadrant.
One year later, his IOPs were 8mmHg OD and 16mmHg OS. His visual acuity OD was 20/200. He was taking maximal medications OU again. His visual acuity OD worsened to count fingers vision OD. He underwent cataract extraction OD, which improved his visual acuity to 20/125. His IOPs were maintained in the mid-teens range; he refused further glaucoma surgery until his visual fields worsened to 3° OD and 6° OS. Oral acetazolamide 500mg twice a day was added. He continued to refuse surgical intervention despite worsening visual fields.
Six months later, he developed iris bombe OD. He underwent laser iridotomy, which lowered his IOP to 12mmHg. Two weeks later, his IOP OD increased to 80mmHg. He had a flat anterior chamber, with iris enveloping both the superotemporal and inferotemporal glaucoma tubes. Neither cycloplegia nor YAG capsulo-hyaloidotomy OD helped to lower his IOP or deepen his anterior chamber. He underwent emergent pars plana vitrectomy OD with removal of the anterior hyaloid that evening. His anterior chamber deepened significantly, and his IOPs lowered to 12mmHg. He was placed on topical steroids every 2 hours and was stable for 2 weeks with a patent iridotomy. His IOP rose again to 80mmHg with a flat anterior chamber despite a patent iridotomy. He underwent rerouting of both glaucoma tubes into the pars plana cavity that evening. The next day, his IOP was 11mmHg with a deep anterior chamber . His IOP has remained stable since then with the addition of glaucoma medications and cycloplegic agents; however, his visual acuity had decreased to hand motions.