A 76-year-old right-handed male with a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and coronary artery disease suffered from repetitive transient ischemic attacks due to severe progressive stenosis, which had been diagnosed 5 years before. He underwent a percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stenting with Wingspan 4.5 mm*15 mm (Stryker, MI, U.S.A.) of a cavernous-petrous portion of the right ICA [ Three weeks after the procedure, he developed blurred vision in his right eye and diplopia, and magnetic resonance imaging revealed fungal sinusitis in the sphenoid sinus. The β-d-Glucan serum level was 46 pg/ml (upper limit of normal: 19 pg/ml). Based on the pathological analysis of the fungal ball, the sinusitis was found to be due to an Aspergillus species . Therefore, following the operation, the patient was prescribed oral voriconazole. Five weeks after the debridement of the fungus ball, he developed massive epistaxis with hemorrhagic shock and was referred to our emergency unit.
A fiber endoscopy revealed that the source of bleeding was from the sphenoid sinus. Tentative hemostasis was achieved by a posterior tamponade with hemostatic balloon and gauze. However, soon after the hemostatic instrument had been removed, he suffered from massive epistaxis. A blood transfusion and urgent hemostasis were required. A retrospective review of the endoscopic hemostasis procedure revealed pulsatile projection on the roof of the sphenoid sinus , and cerebral angiography showed an irregularly shaped de novo aneurysm at the medial side of the cavernous portion of the right ICA, the tip of which was projecting into the sphenoid sinus [ and ]. Furthermore, the retrospective review of the computed tomography before the first stenting intervention revealed the gap of bony structure around the aneurysm, which suggested that the direct invasion of Aspergillus adjacent to the cavernous ICA had been already occurred. To treat the bleeding and further invasion of the distal ICA wall, obliteration of the flow to the aneurysm and the parent artery using a coil or clip was considered. However, his medical history of the right hemispheric ischemia suggested a high risk of cerebral infarction after the occlusion of the parent artery. Furthermore, due to the length of time after the Wingspan deployment (8 weeks), antiplatelet drug withdrawal for direct surgery would result in-stent thrombosis. Furthermore, by the time of the endovascular procedure, the serum β-dGlucan levels had continued to decrease close to the normal limit (23 pg/ml). Therefore, preservation of the parent artery seemed to be an acceptable strategy.
To achieve urgent hemostasis, we chose stent-assisted coil embolization to preserve the blood flow of the ICA. First, a microcatheter for coil embolization was navigated into the aneurysm. Then, we deployed LVIS BLUE 4.0 mm*28 mm (Terumo, Tokyo, JAPAN) in the ICA from just proximal to the posterior communicating artery. The coverage of the stent was increased at the protruding part, to the cavernous portion overlapping partially into the Wingspan stent. After that, we packed the aneurysm with a coil using the jailing technique [-].
Immediately following the procedure, his blurred vision and diplopia completely resolved. Subsequently, he continued oral voriconazole, and his serum β-d-Glucan levels returned to a normal level within 3 months. The patient never experienced epistaxis or neurological deterioration postoperatively. Furthermore, we regularly conducted magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and digital subtraction angiography in every 3 months, and there was no recurrence or the appearance of the de novo aneurysm in the downstream of the right ICA. Moreover, three-dimensional rotational ICA angiography revealed no recurrence of the aneurysm after 6 months . Oral voriconazole was stopped after 12 months following the confirmation of no aneurysmal relapse in MR angiography , no abnormal sphenoid sinus findings with endoscopy , and a normal serum β-d-Glucan level. He has survived without any complications for 3 years after the endovascular procedure so far.