A 75-year-old woman presented with a 4-month history of worsening headaches along with progressive weakness, dizziness, and lightheadedness mainly when going from supine or sitting to standing. On neurological examination, the patient was noted to have mild resting tremor in the left hand and horizontal diplopia when attempting to look to the left, along with impaired convergence. The patient was also noted to have gait unsteadiness and poor balance.
Computed tomography (CT) of the head without contrast showed a mildly hyperdense large extra-axial mass at the upper aspect of the premedullary cistern extending mildly to the inferior left cerebellopontine angle with compression of the brainstem . The mass was closely associated with the adjacent vertebral arteries and basilar artery. Posterior fossa cisterns were noted to be crowded by the mass. No evidence of osseous skull base involvement/ destruction was observed.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with/without contrast of the brain showed a T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), well-circumscribed, hyperintense mass in the left cerebellopontine angle and premedullary cistern . There was local mass effect on the brainstem without associated edema. The sagittal T1-FLAIR image showed isointense mass .
A left retrosigmoid craniotomy was performed for neuroenteric cyst fenestration/biopsy with the use of operating microscope and use of Medtronic Stealth neuronavigation. A yellowish cyst was identified which was opened using an arachnoid knife and yellowish fluid immediately returned . This was copiously irrigated. A small section of the cyst was removed using scissors and sent for histopathological evaluation.
Microscopic examination of the tissue sections demonstrated a benign fibromembranous cystic lesion lined by pseudostratified, ciliated columnar epithelium, and providing a histopathological diagnosis of neurenteric cyst. depicts the photomicrographs of hematoxylin and eosin (H and E) stained tissue sections.
Postoperatively, the patient recovered well, and post-operative CT of the head without contrast showed no residual mass . Headache and dizziness resolved post-operatively and patient was symptom-free at 5-month follow-up. However, the patient was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease on a neurology consultation, likely responsible for her resting tremor noted on initial presentation.