A 52-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine due to "coughing and expectoration for 1 year and aggravation of these symptoms accompanied with shortness of breath for 1 mo".
One year before admission, the patient had little cough and sputum with no obvious cause, and occasionally dull pain under the xiphoid process, lasting about 10 s and relieving itself. She occasionally felt hot flashes and night sweats. One month before hospitalization, the patient was still coughing with white foamy sputum. The amount of sputum was small and it was not easy to cough up.
The patient had no specific past medical history.
There was no family history of the disease.
Percussion with auscultation was performed, with normal sounds in the left lung and dull sounds and decreased breath sounds in the right lower lung. The vaginal anterior wall had slight prolapse, the cervix was hypertrophic, and the mucous membrane was smooth. The uterine morphology and appendages were impalpable. There was a palpable pelvic mass with a size of approximately 10 cm × 12 cm, a hard texture, and an unclear border, but no tenderness. Chest X-ray and chest computed tomography showed a modest volume of pleural fluid with pleural thickening in the right lung .
The blood gas analysis indicated hypoxemia. The CA125 concentration was 150.8 U/mL (normal, 0-35 U/mL); the results of carcinoembryonic antigen, CA153, CA199, autoimmune antibody tests, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody tests were unremarkable. A drainage tube was placed in the right pleural cavity, and a total of 3760 mL of pleural fluid was withdrawn. Routine analysis of pleural fluid showed no clots in the bloody, slightly turbid pleural fluid, a white blood cell count of 630 × 106/L, a red blood cell (RBC) count of 66000 × 106/L, a percentage of monocytes of 90%, a percentage of multinucleate cells of 10%, and mucin (++). The biochemical analysis of the pleural fluid showed total proteins of 42.9 g/L, albumin of 31.6 g/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 97 U/L, and adenosine deaminase of 4.0 U/L.
The thoracoscopic examination revealed nodules and a neoplasm with a fish meat-like appearance in the parietal pleura and nodules with a ‘string of beads’-like appearance in the diaphragm, accompanied by hyperemia and a brittle texture. The biopsy of the parietal pleura suggested chronic inflammation associated with hyperplasia of the mesothelial cells. Exfoliative cytology of tumor cells in pleural fluid showed that RBCs, lymphocytes, and mesothelial cells were observed in the pleural fluid, and no tumor cells were observed. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a pelvic mass with heterogeneous signal intensity and multiple hypointense separations, a small amount of fat, characteristic signals of hemorrhage, and vessel signs . Therefore, mass effect, malignant tumor of ovarian origin, and pelvic effusion were considered.