A 2 year and ten months old girl was referred to our hospital due to developmental delays and speech impairment. The mother realized that her child had developmental delays at 18 months and was referred to our hospital seven months later. She was the first child of non-relatively healthy parents with normal prenatal and birth history. She has a younger sister with normal development. The patient was born at 37 weeks of gestation, with a birth weight of 3,500 g, length of 50 cm, and head circumference of 33 cm. She showed mild developmental delays in the first year of life: head control at three months, sitting at seven months, and crawling at nine months. At almost three years old, she could only walk 2–3 steps and tended to fall backed due to truncal hypotonia.
She tends to laughed easily, had a happy demeanor, hyperactive behavior, and attention deficits. The patient often experiences absence seizures for about <5 seconds and 1–2 times per day since 2.5 months old. The patient had a sucking disorder since the age of 3 months, drooling excessively, and a habit of putting inedible things into her mouth. She had a good appetite and did not show any feeding problems. She also acted very interested in water and had sleep deprivation.
The child had a normal nutritional status, microcephaly, wide mouth, protruding tongue, wide-spaced teeth, strabismus, hypopigmented skin, and hair according to a physical examination. Typical facial features in Angelman syndrome were shown in . Characteristically, she kept his hands uplifted, flexed arm position, especially during walking with valgus-positioned ankles. During the examination, she was very happy and had a social disposition. She also liked to observe and play with objects around her with constant interest. Neurological examination revealed significant intellectual impairment, ataxia, unsteady gait, receptive and non-verbal communication abilities superior to her verbal communication abilities, hypertonus of the limbs with hyperactive deep tendon reflexes, and truncal hypotonia.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) with the characteristic pattern for AS is showed in a. The brain's Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) is shown in b with microcephaly, corpus callosum dysgenesis, and heterotopia grey matter on the bilateral lateral ventricle. The brainstem evoked response audiometry test was normal.
Blood sample was collected from the patient to obtain genomic DNA. xGen Exome Research Panel v2 caught all exon regions of all human genes (22,000) (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, Iowa, USA). Novaseq 6000 was used to sequence the capture areas of the genome (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The raw exome sequencing data, including alignment to the GRCh37/hg19 human reference genome, variant calling, and annotation, was performed using open-source bioinformatics tools and custom software. To prioritize variations based on ACMG guidelines, in-house created software, EVIDENCE, was used to automatically interpret variants and each patient's phenotype. This technique consists of three primary steps: variation filtering, categorization, and rating of patient phenotypic similarity. Finally, the potential variations and diseases that they are connected to will be manually analyzed [,].
WES showed a pathogenic variant identified as a heterozygous mutation in exon 9 of the UBE3A gene, c.1513C > T (p.Arg505Ter). Parents were counseled, and child was offered multipronged therapy. Since having absence seizures, the patient was given valproic acid (15 mg/kgBW/day). The patient had received walking physiotherapy and speech therapy for three months but had not shown significant improvement.