A 41-year-old Caucasian female from Argentina attended to our department complaining of bilateral painful visual loss, associated with headache and tinnitus.
Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.4 in her right eye (RE) and counting fingers in her left eye (LE). The anterior chamber showed perikeratic hyperemia, moderate anterior chamber flare, and 1+ Tyndall phenomenon in both eyes. Fundus examination evidenced bilateral disc edema and multifocal serous retinal detachment with foveal involvement. Fluorescein angiography revealed late pinpoint hyperfluorescence. Optical coherence tomography showed multilobulated retinal serous detachment. Lumbar puncture revealed pleocytosis with polymorphonuclear cells .
High-dose oral steroid treatment was started (1 g daily of methylprednisolone for 3 days), followed by gradual tapering of oral prednisone, achieving a significant improvement of BCVA (0.6 and 0.4). Three months later, a new episode of posterior uveitis was evidenced, decreasing VA to 0.05 in her RE and 0.02 in her LE. Due to this exacerbation, treatment with new high-dose oral corticosteroid dose, bilateral intravitreal injection of ranibizumab and dexamethasone and adalimumab (Humira®) every 15 days was performed. However, a new relapse of anterior and posterior inflammation occurred, so cyclosporine (200 mg daily) and methotrexate (17.5 mg weekly) were added to the treatment . Despite this combination therapy, further constant recurrences of anterior chamber inflammation, retinal fluid relapses, tinnitus, and headache were registered; thus, infusion of 1 g of rituximab was performed (15 months after onset of symptoms). BCVA at this moment was 0.2 in her RE and hands motion (HM) in her LE. Three additional infusions of 1 g each were administered, 1, 6, and 16 months later.
We obtained an optimal response with definitive control of inflammation, without further relapses, since rituximab was administered with no more decrease of BCVA at 34 months follow-up .