A 56-year-old female presented to the department of ultrasound with recurrent MTC.
The patient was diagnosed with sporadic MTC at the age of 51. She presented a hypoechoic solid nodule that was approximately 0.5 cm × 0.4 cm in the left thyroid gland with no pain, diarrhea, flushing or any other specific symptom. The preoperative serum calcitonin was 1165.97 pg/mL. The patient was then treated with total thyroidectomy with central neck dissection and modified left lateral neck dissection. The nodule was pathologically confirmed to be MTC. Nine of fourteen metastatic lymph nodes were found in the excised lymphoid adipose tissue at the left cervical level II-IV, VB and VI . Three months after surgery, the serum calcitonin dropped to 11.86 pg/mL .
After the initial treatment, the patient was followed up with neck US, serum calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen every 3-6 mo. During the follow-up, an enlarged lymph node (0.4 cm × 0.3 cm) with no visible hilum at left level VI was detected by the neck US in the 9th mo. A similar lymph node (0.5 cm × 0.4 cm) appeared in the left supraclavicular fossa in the 44th mo. In addition, many lymph nodes at the right cervical level II-III and left level V became enlarged. Serum calcitonin jumped to 198.17 pg/mL in the 44th mo. Afterwards, serum calcitonin remained at a high level, which was significantly higher than the reference . The serum carcinoembryonic antigen level had been relatively stable since the initial surgery. The abdominal and lung computed tomography scan revealed no suspicious metastasis.
She presented with no lump or tenderness in the neck. Trachea was in the middle of the neck.
After the recurrent signs occurred, the patient visited our department for further diagnosis and treatment in the 54th mo. Serum calcitonin was increased at 92.18 pg/mL (normal range: < 15 pg/mL).
We performed the neck US on the patient, finding six morphologically suspicious lymph nodes. To identify the lymph nodes that harbored metastatic lesions, we conducted US-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) on these six nodules. The results of FNA-cytology and FNA-calcitonin are displayed in Table . Four of the nodes turned out to be reactive hyperplasia nodes, whereas the other two revealed suspicious malignancy. Moreover, the FNA-calcitonin values of these two suspicious lymph nodes were significantly higher (2000 pg/mL) than the others indicating metastatic lesions.