A 54-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency unit for acute pain localized in the left abdominal quadrants, since the day before, associated with nausea. The patient reported no fever, vomit, neither change in bowel habits. The patient had a non-contributory past medical history, apart from a suspected irritable bowel syndrome. She reported no allergies nor drugs taken at home regularly.
Physical examination revealed mild dehydration with minimal abdominal distension and tenderness in the left bottom quadrant. The vital signs including temperature, pulse, blood pressure, and respiratory rate were within normal limits. The blood tests revealed mild hypokalemia, which was intravenously corrected, and analgesics were administered, with mild relief.
Plain radiography of the abdomen revealed an isolated air-fluid level in mesogastrium, with diffuse impacted stools. Consequently, an abdominal CT was performed, which showed a wall thickening and hyperemia of a proximal ileal segment, with a typical “target sign” as for ileo-ileal intussusception . The coronal reconstruction showed a “sausage-like” mass; no obvious lead point was identified, nor significant proximal bowel distention was detected. Moreover, some mesenteric lymphadenopathies were observed.
Initially, a conservative treatment was adopted, both because of a relief in symptoms and substantially normal blood test results (white blood cell count: 8.86 × 10∧9/L, hemoglobin: 128 g/L, creatinine: 0.65 mg/dL, CRP: 2.1 mg/L, ABG lactate: 0.8 mmol/L).
Then, after 24 h, the abdominal CT was repeated because of persistence and worsening of symptoms: an increase in the ileum segment involved in the intussusception was documented and free pelvic fluid was observed. As a consequence, an urgent laparoscopy was performed, and a twenty-centimeters-long ileo-ileal invagination was detected (, ). No further lesions were documented by abdominal inspection. An umbilical mini-laparotomy, ~5 cm in length including the umbilical port site, was performed. The affected ileum was easily retracted and therefore the intussusception was reduced. Intraoperatively, the intussusception seemed to be caused by an intra-mural tough lesion with a diameter of about 3 cm. The affected ileum was resected, it was excised with a mesenteric lymph-node, and a hand-sewn side-to-side isoperistaltic anastomosis was performed.
No major complications occurred during the hospital stay. The patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.
This case report has been described in accordance with SCARE criteria and PROCESS guidelines (, ).