A 47-year-old man was transferred to our emergency department 9 h after attempting suicide by stabbing himself in the abdomen with a knife. His medical history was unremarkable, and he had not previously received psychiatric care. He had a 3 cm puncture wound in his upper abdomen, and his omentum had prolapsed. His blood pressure and pulse rate were 76/58 mmHg and 117 beats/min, respectively. Focused assessment with sonography for trauma was negative. Tracheal intubation was performed, and the infusion raised his systolic blood pressure to 120 mmHg. After his vital signs stabilized, CT was performed. CT showed that a knife had penetrated the lateral segment of the liver, with the tip reaching near the inferior vena cava (IVC) . There was no active extravasation or HPA. His blood test showed a white blood cell count of 21,000/μL, hemoglobin level of 12.4 g/dL, total bilirubin level of 0.34 mg/dL, alanine aminotransferase level of 28 U/L, and aspartate aminotransferase level of 75 U/L. The diagnosis was an abdominal stab wound with part of the knife remaining in the body. The possibility of IVC injury could not be ruled out.
Emergency surgery was performed immediately. A cardiovascular surgeon also participated in the surgery in case the IVC was damaged. Penetrating wounds were observed in the lateral segment of the liver and the upper gastric body. The knife, with a missing handle, had penetrated the lateral segment of the liver and reached the hepatoduodenal ligament; it was removed manually . There were no large vascular injuries, including injury to the IVC. Penetrating gastric wounds were closed using the Albert–Lembert technique with 3–0 absorbable braid and 3-0 nonabsorbable braid threads. Penetrating liver wounds were sutured using single nodal sutures with 1-0 absorbable braid threads. Drainage tubes were placed under the liver, under the right diaphragm, and in the pelvic cavity. Bleeding was controlled, and transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was not performed after surgery. Bile leakage from under the liver drainage tube was observed on POD 0. On POD 3, the pelvic cavity drainage tube also showed bile, and the patient developed lower abdominal pain. Therefore, the patient underwent reoperation for a bile leak on POD 3, as bile leaked from the penetrating wound in the lateral segment of the liver. The penetrating liver wounds were sutured using single nodal sutures with 1-0 absorbable braid threads. No bile leakage from the drainage tubes was observed after reoperation. CT on POD 12 showed a small amount of fluid in a penetrating wound in the lateral segment of the liver . Residual bile leakage was suspected, but it remained intrahepatic, and conservative treatment was continued. There was no HPA .
The patient had a persistent fever in the 37 °C range, and CT was performed on POD 25 to search for the source of the fever. CT revealed that the fluid within the lateral segment of the liver was decreased and there was no cause of fever, such as surgical site infection or an intra-abdominal abscess, but it did show HPA in the lateral segment of the liver . On POD 32, the patient underwent coil embolization of the HPA that had developed in the branch of the left hepatic artery . He was discharged on POD 40 with no complications. One year after embolization, the patient had no HPA recurrence or medical problems.