A 67-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with a complaint of "low back pain for 10 years, aggravated with right lower limb pain for 10 d".
The patient had recurrent low back pain for 10 years and had not received surgery. The pain had worsened in the past 10 d, accompanied by the symptoms of right lower limb pain due to spinal cord compression.
The patient had a series of conditions, including old spinal fractures (unknown reason), kyphosis, lumbar disc herniation, lumbar fusion, hypertension, cerebral infarction, chronic gastritis, dynamic sclerosis, lung disease, etc.
The patient was a 67-year-old Chinese woman, a non-smoker with a blood type of B rhesus positive, and her body mass index was 25.0 kg/m2 (height 155 cm and weight 60 kg).
The patient presented with the following conditions: Spinal kyphosis with apex at L1; lumbar spine movement restriction; local tenderness, percussion pain, centered on the lumbar vertebral body; grade 5 left lower limb and grade 4 right lower limb muscle strength; normal sensation on the left leg, but decreased sensation on the right leg; negative straight leg raise test for the left lower limb, and positive straight leg raise test for the right lower limb; negative Babinski sign bilaterally; no edema in both lower limbs; and normal peripheral blood supply. The patient rated 7 scores on the preoperative pain visual analog scale and a D degree for the Frankel spinal cord score.
Laboratory exam results were all within normal range.
Preoperative X-ray showed an OVCF of the first lumbar vertebra, with compression on the anterior edge of the vertebral body . Preoperative computed tomography indicated that the first lumbar vertebra body had collapsed and that there was a bone block behind the vertebral body, which compressed the spinal cord . Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the first lumbar vertebral body was collapsed, and that the spinal cord was compressed by a bone block of the fractured vertebral body . These results demonstrated that the patient had first lumbar OVCF, corresponding horizontal dural sac compression, and spinal stenosis. The imaging examination was conducted with the patient lying supine because of her inability to assume standing position during the examination.