A 71-year-old man presented to the emergency department of a Swiss university hospital with a three-day history of general weakness, malaise and fever. Symptoms occurred three days after administration of a first dose of cemiplimab for treatment of a recurring locally advanced basal cell carcinoma of the left cheek. Due to a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor with liver metastasis, the patient was currently under palliative treatment with everolimus and somatostatin receptor-targeted radionuclide therapy. A routine transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) prior to the start of immunotherapy had shown signs compatible with cardiac amyloidosis and coronary artery disease (CAD). The patient was a retired farmer, still living on a cattle farm in Switzerland.
On presentation ear temperature was 38.6 °C, blood pressure 79/44 mm Hg, heart rate 89 beats per minute, respiratory rate 27 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation 88% on ambient air. He was somnolent, but no focal neurologic deficits were observed. The heart sounds were regular, with a systolic murmur at the third intercostal space, left lower sternal border. Auscultation of the lungs was unremarkable. The ulcerating basal cell carcinoma, measuring 3 × 5 cm, was visible on the left cheek, without signs of inflammation. Examination of the skin and joints was otherwise unremarkable. Laboratory workup showed a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 96 mg/L (normal < 5 mg/L), with normal leucocytes of 5,5 × 109/L (normal range 3 to 10,5 × 109/L), and thrombocytopenia of 107 × 109/L (normal range 150 to 450 × 109/L). Chest X-ray demonstrated signs of mild pulmonary venous congestion. A computed tomography (CT) of the head showed no evidence of soft tissue abscess in the area surrounding the basal cell carcinoma. After collection of blood cultures, empiric treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g every eight hours) was initiated for suspected sepsis of unknown origin in an immunocompromised patient. The patient initially required hemodynamic stabilization with norepinephrine in the intermediate care unit.
In both pairs of blood cultures growth of T. pyogenes was detected. The species was identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI Biotyper® system, Bruker-Daltonics, Germany). Time to positivity (TTP) was 29 h for the aerobic culture, and 26 h for the anaerobic culture. Blood cultures collected 72 h after initiating antibiotic treatment remained positive. In the wound swab of the basal cell carcinoma growth of Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans were noted, but not of T. pyogenes. TTE showed new evidence of mild mitral valve stenosis and tricuspid valve insufficiency. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed two vegetations at the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve with a size of 9 × 8 and 15 mm, respectively . Additionally, mild mitral valve insufficiency and moderate tricuspid valve insufficiency were documented.
The persistently positive blood cultures with isolation of T. pyogenes in consecutive samples, the echocardiographic evidence of mitral valve vegetations, and the presence of fever were consistent with two major and one minor modified Duke Criteria, respectively . Furthermore, somnolence, thrombocytopenia, hypoxemia, and arterial hypotension corresponded to a Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) Score of 6 points . A diagnosis of sepsis due to mitral valve endocarditis with T. pyogenes was made.
The antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam was deescalated to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid intravenously (2.2 g every four hours) and was switched to targeted treatment with penicillin G (4 million units every four hours) upon receipt of antibiotic sensitivity testing results (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for penicillin G 0,016 mg/L). The case was discussed at the multidisciplinary endocarditis board, and despite the size of > 10 millimeters of one of the vegetations and increased risk of embolism, a decision against surgery was made . This was based on the rapid clinical stabilization, the mild degree of mitral valve insufficiency, and the patient’s comorbidities. Additionally, it took into account the patients’ aversion against surgery and a prolonged hospital stay. Under antibiotic treatment with penicillin G, the patient’s condition gradually improved. Blood cultures drawn ten days after start of the antibiotic treatment remained negative. Clinical signs of septic emboli did not occur at any time.
The patient was discharged after 13 days, receiving an outpatient parenteral antibiotic therapy (OPAT). As he declined treatment with continuous infusion therapy, the antibiotics were switched from penicillin G to ceftriaxone (2 g every 24 h). A follow-up TEE three weeks after diagnosis showed a reduction in size for both vegetations and an unchanged mild insufficiency of the mitral valve. The antibiotic therapy was terminated after a total of six weeks. Blood cultures drawn two weeks after stop of the antibiotic treatment remained negative.