A 61-year-old Caucasian woman with a diagnosis of synovial sarcoma in the right lung apex initially presented with a six-month history of increasing scapular pain, for which she was undergoing physiotherapy. During this time, a neck mass developed which progressed to vocal hoarseness, right-sided Horner's syndrome and arm swelling. She was an otherwise well woman with no significant medical history or drug history.
She underwent a computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy, which led to the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma. Staging investigations confirmed a 10 cm × 8 cm × 9 cm mass extending from the carina to the right side of the neck and causing tracheal deviation and compression of the internal jugular vein. There was no metastasis seen on the staging CT scan or on the positron emission tomography (PET) scan.
The localized but extensive tumor was clearly inoperable, and the treatment plan was to initiate chemotherapy and subsequently consolidate this treatment with radiotherapy or surgery. She was commenced on the standard chemotherapy combination of ifosfamide at 3 g/m2/day for three days and doxorubicin at 20 mg/m2/day for three days. Her body surface area was 1.6 m2, so she received a total of 4800 mg/day ifosfamide infused over four hours. Other medications co-administered with the chemotherapy regimen were dexamethasone, ondansetron and metoclopramide as anti-emetics and mesna for the prevention of urothelial toxicity.
Within 24 hours of completing the three-day treatment, the patient became drowsy and complained of hallucinations. This occurrence was thought to be a manifestation of ifosfamide neurotoxicity, a well-established side effect. Methylene blue at 50 mg three times daily was administered intravenously as the standard antidote.
Despite this treatment, her confusion persisted and blood tests revealed that at day one after finishing chemotherapy, she had developed a dramatic deterioration in her liver function tests, with a 250-fold rise in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) as well as abnormal liver synthetic function and renal function . The development of encephalopathy within seven days of the onset of jaundice constitutes hyperacute liver failure. She had a modestly elevated ammonia level at 77 μM/l (normal, < 50) accompanying the encephalopathy. These findings were attributed to ifosfamide use on the basis of the temporal relationship and the subsequent normalization after drug withdrawal. Apart from her mental state, her clinical examination was unremarkable. In particular, there was no fever, rash or arthralgia to suggest a hypersensitivity drug reaction. The clinical features of drug-induced liver failure are difficult to differentiate from acute liver failure of other etiologies.
To exclude other causes of acute liver failure, a full liver screen was carried out, all of which produced negative results (ceruloplasmin, auto-antibodies, ferritin, viral hepatitis screen, α-fetoprotein and paracetamol levels). An ultrasound of the liver showed normal venous flow with no focal lesions, fatty infiltration or underlying chronic liver pathology. A brain CT scan excluded intracerebral causes of acute confusion and showed a normal brain without significant cerebral edema, which may be associated with higher grades of hepatic encephalopathy.
All concurrent medications were stopped. These drugs included cocodamol 30/500 (a combination of codeine phosphate and acetaminophen), Oramorph (oral morphine sulfate) and amitriptyline to prevent any additional sedative effects. The patient also regularly took pantoprazole and multivitamins, which were withheld. Proton pump inhibitors have been reported rarely or very rarely to produce jaundice and hepatitis. However, the patient had not previously experienced any deleterious effects from taking these medications.
The patient was treated with N-acetylcysteine at 150 mg/kg over 16 hours, which commenced on the second day post-chemotherapy for a total of four days until her hepatic function and enzyme tests improved. Although N-acetylcysteine is the antidote for paracetamol overdose, there is evidence for its use in other forms of drug-induced acute liver failure to reduce mortality . She was also given lactulose regularly at 20 ml twice daily to reduce encephalopathy. She remained hemodynamically stable throughout this period and did not require high-dependency care or mechanical ventilation.
She had biochemical improvements after commencing treatment (and stopping the offending chemotherapy agent). Her level of encephalopathy gradually receded to mild somnolence, and by about 10 days post-treatment she felt completely back to normal. Of note is that her transaminase levels had not yet normalized and her alkaline phosphatase level had not peaked at that point.
After recovery, the patient subsequently received chemotherapy with doxorubicin alone and experienced no further derangements in liver function. She received the same regimen of anti-emetics as for the first cycle (dexamethasone, ondansetron and metoclopramide), so although ondansetron has been associated with transient elevation of liver enzymes as a rare side effect, these medications were not thought to be to blame for the hepatotoxicity observed. Mesna, which was not required with the omission of ifosfamide, has no reported side effects on the liver recorded in the British National Formulary or in a survey of over 100 participants in controlled trials .
The patient demonstrated a good partial response after six cycles of doxorubicin treatment and then underwent consolidation radiotherapy to the right lung apex. She is being followed up every three months with alternating chest X-rays and chest CT and is symptomatically well.