A 62-year-old female patient was transferred to our hospital with massive PE discovered during hospitalization due to enteritis. She had a history of seven spontaneous abortions and complained of worsening dyspnea for 6 days. Her vital sign was stable, and 97% oxygen saturation was noted on 2 L/min nasal cannula. On chest CT, multifocal PE was observed in the bilateral lobar pulmonary arteries and its segmental branches . In addition, a 9 by 6 mm sized solitary simple PAVM with a 3 mm diameter feeding artery was identified in the right lower lobe superior segment . The patient did not show any other symptoms, signs, or family history that could suggest HHT other than a PAVM. Meanwhile, the acute thromboembolus was extended to the segmental artery where the feeding artery originated . Subsequent duplex ultrasound showed no evidence of deep vein thrombosis in both lower extremities. Using enoxaparin, the patient’s dyspnea gradually improved, but on the fifth day of hospitalization, she complained of a sudden onset of left sided weakness. Brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed an acute infarction in the right lateral thalamus and occlusion of the right posterior cerebral artery P2 segment. In such complicated situation, if PAVM embolization was immediately performed, the possibility of thrombus migration during catheter manipulation was expected to be high. After a multidisciplinary discussion, it was decided to embolize the PAVM after sufficiently resolving the PE with anticoagulants. Anticoagulation for a total of 4 months was performed as follows. While monitoring the INR level, the patient took 5–7 mg of warfarin per day for 15 days; then, on an outpatient basis, this was changed to 30 mg of rivaroxaban per day for 21 days and 20 mg per day for the rest of the period. Then, subsequent follow-up CT showed a complete resolution of PE. There were no new-onset neurologic complications during this period. An endovascular treatment was decided, and the patient was referred to the angio suite. After a right common femoral venous access, a 6-Fr guiding catheter (Flexor Shuttle Guiding Sheath; Cook Medical, Bloomington, Indiana) and 5-Fr catheters (Torcon NB Advantage, MPA and Headhunter type; Cook Medical, Bloomington, Indiana) were used to select the right main pulmonary artery. On angiography, the PAVM with a feeding artery arising from the superior segmental artery of the right lower lobe was observed, and no residual PE was noted . Then, a microcatheter (Masters Parkway Soft; Asahi Intecc, Tokyo, Japan) was advanced into the venous sac , and 10 mm- to 4 mm-sized 11 detachable coils (Concerto; Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota) were used to embolize the venous sac and feeding artery. Completion angiography showed an occlusion of the shunt flow . After 5 months, follow-up CT showed a significant reduction in the draining vein and feeding artery diameter, and no recurrence of PE . With the suspicion of antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) because of the patient’s history, antibody testing was performed during hospitalization and outpatient follow-up, and she was finally diagnosed with APS, with a strong positivity for anti-β2 glycoprotein 1 IgM.