A 68-year-old man was admitted to the Qilu Hospital of Shandong University on November 17, 2014 for urinary irritation, dysuria and haematuria. The patient’s condition was good, and weight loss, night sweats and recent fever did not present. Urinalysis showed red and white blood cell counts of 61.4/μL and 313.8/μL, respectively. Cystoscopy showed scattered cauliflower-like neoplasms located at 11°-1° of the narrow bladder neck, with a maximum diameter of 1.5 cm. A biopsy was then conducted and the pathological examination revealed that the neoplasms were high-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. CT scanning showed a thickened anterior bladder wall, without enlarged pelvic lymph nodes. Transurethral resection of the bladder tumour (TURBt) was conducted after a definitive diagnosis was made. Several villous tumours were found on the neck of the bladder during the operation. The postoperative pathological examination showed that the surgical specimens were high-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma accompanied by differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. This carcinoma also involved the prostate. Haematuria and dysuria symptoms disappeared after TURBt. Therefore, the patient’s family refused further treatment and the patient was discharged.
The patient was referred to our hospital again on March 27, 2015 because of vomiting, progressive gait imbalance and Haematuria for the previous five days. Neurological examinations revealed ataxic gait and bilateral coarse nystagmus. Slight dysmetria was confirmed by finger-to-nose and heel-knee-shin testing. Haematuria led to the performance of a urinalysis showing red and white blood cell counts of 554/μL and 6748/μL, respectively. Further cystoscopy revealed that bladder mucosa located at 11°-1° of the bladder neck suffered hyperaemia, edema, and erosion of the asperous surface. The biopsy showed a high-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma and squamous differentiation.
Further laboratory and radiographic evaluations were conducted to clarify the relationship between bladder cancer recurrence and emerging cerebellar ataxia. A brain MRI was performed to exclude brain metastases from bladder cancer . The MRI revealed no obvious morphological change of the cerebellum . The abdominal and pelvic CT scans revealed that the bladder wall was thickened, especially at the neck . The above radiographic findings suggest little possibility exists that nervous symptoms were triggered by brain metastases from bladder cancer.
Further laboratory examinations were conducted to validate the cause of neurological symptoms. Nine common types of paraneoplastic antibodies were all negative in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Details of the paraneoplastic antibodies are shown in Table . The CSF examination revealed an elevated level of protein (58.6 mg/dl, normal: 15–45 mg/dl), IgG (39.5 mg/L, normal < 34 mg/L), and albumin (391 mg/L, normal < 350 mg/L). Pandy's test of CSF was positive, while CSF cell counts were normal. Tumour markers showed that squamous cell cancer antigen (SCC) and non-small cell lung cancer antigen (CYFRA21-1) serum concentrations were elevated (SCC: 6 ng/ml, normal: 0.1–0.3 ng/ml; CYFRA21-1: 3.5 ng/ml, normal < 1.5 ng/ml). The thyroglobulin serum concentration was low (<0.04 ng/ml, normal: 1.4-78 ng/ml). The examination of rheumatic antigens revealed no positive results. The electroencephalogram revealed no epileptogenic activity.
Based on these findings, we suspected that the patient suffered from PCD. The patient initially received a 5-day course of methylprednisolone (500 mg intravenously daily) without significant clinical improvement. Considering the first postoperative pathological examination revealed the bladder cancer involved the prostate and recurred, the patient underwent laparoscopic radical cystectomy (LRC). The postoperative pathological examination revealed that the surgically removed bladder was urothelial CIS and well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma . This finding was in accordance with the changes in serum SCC and CYFRA21-1. The squamous cell carcinoma was dispersed in the bladder mucosa and accounted for approximately 5 % of all carcinomas. Neurological symptoms disappeared, and basic daily living activities were obviously improved, according to Barthel score , after LRC. The patient remained asymptomatic and there was no evidence of recurrence after the followup period of 11 months.