This is the case of a 31-year-old Caucasian male with a clef lip anomaly followed by repair at a young age and a known CDH1 mutation; presenting for prophylactic total gastrectomy and D1 lymphadenectomy. Due to a strong family history of CDH1 mutation, the patient underwent genetic testing that showed a deleterious loss of function of the corresponding protein. His paternal aunt and uncle died of HDGC and his other paternal aunt had prophylactic total gastrectomy for management of CDH1 gene mutation 5 years ago and now is suffering from lobular breast carcinoma. The patient reports no concerning gastrointestinal symptoms and no systemic symptoms such as fever, night sweats, or weight loss. Vitals were normal upon presentation. Laboratory tests were unremarkable. A gastroscopy reaching the duodenum and a total colonoscopy reaching the ileum were unremarkable and several random gastric biopsies did not show any sign of malignancy. PET scan showed no areas of increased activity suggestive of malignancy or metastatic disease.
A decision for laparoscopic prophylactic total gastrectomy with D1 lymphadenectomy was made. Patient underwent a total gastrectomy with negative frozen section of the distal esophagus and proximal duodenum for gastric mucosa. An End-to-side esophagojejunostomy (EJA) was performed mechanically using an Orvil device inserted in the distal esophageal end, while an EEA stapler was utilized in the jejunal limb. Additionally, Roux-en-Y jejunojejunostomy was performed to prevent bile reflux.75 cm was allocated for the biliary limb and 100 cm for the alimentary limb. D1 lymphadenectomy was done for proper surgical oncological management.
Gross examination of the specimen did not show gross polyps or ulcerations. On histopathology, random sections from the gastric wall revealed few foci of up to 2 mm poorly cohesive carcinoma or signet cell carcinoma (WHO classification) or diffuse type gastric adenocarcinoma (Lauren classification) . The signet ring cells exhibited PASD and Alcian Blue positive cytoplasmic mucin vacuoles and were expressing strongly the cytokeratin cocktail antigen by immunostaining , invading the lamina propria, so classified as pT1a. Three microscopic foci were involving the anterior walls of the cardia, body and antrum. HER2/cerbB2 oncogene overexpression was negative by immunohistochemistry. Proximal esophageal and distal duodenal margins were negative for tumor. Twenty-four lymph nodes collected were negative, so classified as pN0.
Post-operative stay was uncomplicated. On day 5 post-operatively, gastrograffin upper gastrointestinal series showed no leak, normal transit, no reflux and no stenosis. The patient was started on liquid diet and was discharged on day 6 post-operatively. Patient was referred to an oncologist for the appropriate follow-up and was advised to undergo yearly breast ultrasound for the associated lobular breast carcinoma with HDGC with no chemo or radio therapy interventions.