A 74-year-old, right-handed, male smoker was taken to an outside hospital after he became confused at a gas station. This episode was preceded by 1 month of cognitive decline, personality changes, and urinary incontinence, as well as self- reported clear rhinorrhea while eating. His neurologic exam was notable for a flat affect and a relative paucity of speech.
A head computed tomography (CT) was obtained and demonstrated a large, hyperdense left frontal extra- axial mass along the floor of the anterior cranial fossa, with bony erosion into the frontal sinus . A subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 7.0 cm×5.0 cm×4.9 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass with intrinsic T1 shortening, suggestive of prior hemorrhage, and subacute blood products posterior to the tumor margin, abutting the frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle. T1 postcontrast imaging revealed a dural tail and T2-weighted images demonstrated a partial cerebrospinal fluid cleft around the periphery of the lesion; both findings suggested that the mass was extra-axial in origin . Given the aggressive appearance of the lesion and the patient’s smoking history, there was a concern that the lesion was a dural-based metastasis from an unknown primary. Therefore, a metastatic workup was completed, including a contrasted CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The CT scans revealed multiple small, hypodense liver lesions concerning for metastases as well as pulmonary emboli.
An inferior vena cava filter was placed, and the patient was subsequently taken to the operating room for resection of the intracranial tumor. A two-piece bifrontal craniotomy was performed since the tumor was noted to invade both the frontal sinus and the superior sagittal sinus on the preoperative imaging. The lesion was of mixed consistency, with both firm and soft components. There was significant hypervascularity, which was controlled with bipolar electrocautery. The involved portions of the superior sagittal sinus and frontal sinus were removed. The frontal sinus was subsequently obliterated with an abdominal fat graft and reconstructed with a combination of methyl methacrylate and titanium plates. Intraoperative frozen section analysis was consistent with a high-grade neoplasm (SFT/HPC vs. anaplastic meningioma vs. metastasis). A gross total resection (GTR) was achieved. The patient tolerated the procedure well; his speech and affect improved postoperatively. A postoperative MRI confirmed GTR.
The pathological assessment revealed that the left frontal tumor was a SFT/HPC. The tumor was histologically characterized by a proliferation of relatively small cells with round to oval nuclei, some with small nucleoli, and scant or indistinguishable cytoplasm. The cells were arranged haphazardly among staghorn-like vessels. There were >5 mitotic figures in 10 high-power microscopic fields and foci of tumor necrosis, and thus, the neoplasm was designated as anaplastic (WHO Grade III). Immunoperoxidase stains demonstrated nuclear expression of STAT6 by many of the neoplastic cells indicating fusion of the NAB2 and STAT6 genes . Three weeks postoperatively, a CT-guided biopsy of one of the liver lesions was performed. Histologic sections revealed neoplastic cells that were morphologically similar to those in the intracranial tumor specimen and immunohistochemistry confirmed the NAB2/STAT6 fusion .
The patient underwent adjuvant CyberKnife stereotactic radiation therapy to the intracranial resection cavity. He received a total dose of 50 Gy (in 25 fractions). In addition, stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) was used to treat the liver lesions: a segment 6 liver lesion was treated with 40 Gy in one fraction and a segment eight liver lesion was treated with 60 Gy in five fractions.
Sequential surveillance MRIs of the brain and abdomen were obtained following the completion of radiation treatment. MRIs of the brain remained stable, with no evidence of disease recurrence at 18 months postoperatively . An MRI of the abdomen obtained 6 weeks following liver SBRT demonstrated mild growth of the previously noted lesions. These were initially observed; subsequent MRI 2 months later demonstrated persistent, but stable hepatic tumors. Given the abdominal MRI findings, the patient was offered additional treatment with chemotherapy. Two regimens were discussed: (1) pazopanib (800 mg daily) versus (2) temozolomide (150 mg/m2 on days 1–7 and 15–21/28-day cycle) and bevacizumab (5 mg/kg on days 8- and 22/28-day cycle). The patient ultimately opted to proceed with temozolomide and bevacizumab, and he completed 6 cycles and was then placed on observation. Follow-up abdominal MRIs over the next 6 months have demonstrated partial regression of the liver lesions. The patient is now 18 months from initial diagnosis and is alive and doing well, with no evidence of disease progression. He is on observation, with surveillance MRIs of the brain and abdomen obtained every 3 months.