A 46-year-old man was admitted to our clinical center with symptoms of bent spine. He initially complained of back and neck pain 3 months ago, and gradually had trouble in standing upright 2 months ago, while the symptoms would mildly alleviate when he had a rest. At the same time, he felt numbness in limbs and around lips. All of the symptoms gradually became more severe. Two weeks ago, he completely lost the ability to hold his trunk upright, and had difficulty in raising his head. The patient had no obvious symptoms of limb weakness, tremor, ataxia, and muscle cramp. He denied any family history. Neurological examination revealed a posture of bent spine and dropped head when standing up. Neck extensor strength was 2/5 (MRCS, grades 0–5); Iliopsoas muscle strength was 5-/5; proximal muscle strength of lower limb was 5/5; and distal muscle strength was 5/5. Deep tendon reflexes can not be elicited. Impairment of light touch and pain sensation were found in hands, feet, and lips around, while deep sensation was intact. Serum creatine kinase (CK) was 568 IU/L (normal 25-175 IU/L). Urinary organic acid analysis showed elevation of glutarate, 2-hydroxyglutaric acid, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, glyceric acid, and 2-hydroxyadipic acid. Blood acylcarnitine analysis revealed a combined elevation of short- (C6), medium- (C8, C10), and long- (C14) chain acylcarnitines, which was consistent with the metabolic disturbance of MADD. Other routine blood tests were normal.
Electrophysiology showed that no sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) were elicited in any nerves except the left ulnar nerve, which had decreased sensory conduction segmental velocities of 33 m/s across the left forearm (normal >60 m/s), and a decreased amplitude of 2.8 millivolt (mV) in the left ulnar nerves (normal >7 mV). In contrast, the results of motor nerve conduction studies were almost normal, except that compound muscle action potential (CMAP) slightly decreased in some nerves, as follows: 1.6 mV and 1.2 mV (normal >2.5 mV) in bilateral peroneal motor nerves, respectively. The electromyogram parameters of proximal and distal limb muscles were within normal limits.
Cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a few abnormal high signals infiltrating into cervical paravertebral mucles in T1 and T2 weighted images . Lumbosacral MRI showed a lot of high signals diffusing around musculi multifidus, musculi longissimus, and iliopsoas in T1 and T2 weighted images . Lower limb MRI showed normal patterns of musculi biceps femoris, musculi quadriceps femoris , and gluteus maximus . After a written consent was signed by patient in compliance with the bioethics laws of China, open left quadriceps femoris and lumbar paravertebral muscle biopsies were performed. Hematoxylin & eosin (HE) staining revealed a lot of small vacuoles in paravertebral muscle fibers, but a few small vacuoles in quadriceps femoris. The oil red O (ORO) staining showed a significant increase of lipid droplets in paravertebral muscle fibers , but a mild increase in quadriceps femoris . No neurogenic features were observed in acid and alkaline ATPases staining.
Genetic screening was performed in the alpha ETF (ETFA), beta ETF (ETFB), and ETF dehydrogenase (ETFDH) genes. A common mutation C.770A>G (p.T257C) in Chinese population was identified in exon 7 of the ETFDH gene . A novel mutation 920C>G (p.S307C) was found in exon 8 of the ETFDH gene . Substitution p.S307C is predicted to affect protein function with a score of 0.01 in Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant (SIFT) software and a score of 1.0 in Polyphen2 software . Blast software revealed that the mutant residue had highly evolutional conservation . The novel mutation was not found in 100 health Chinese.
After administration of riboflavin (60 mg/d, for 3 weeks), the symptoms of bent spine and dropped head were completely resolved; the abnormal signals almost disappeared in musculus semispinalis cervicis , transversospinales and erector spinae ; the muscle strength of neck and limbs reached 5/5. The numbness in distal limbs and around lips showed no any signs of improvement, when the patient was interviewed after 3 weeks. However, he reported a mild alleviation of numbness after persistent administration of riboflavin (30 mg/d), CoQ10 (100 mg/d), and Vitamin B12 (500 ug/d) for 6 months.