A previously well 49 year old homosexual man was referred to the on-call medical team with fever and a rash over his left loin. The patient believed that the rash had resulted from an insect bite which had occurred 9 weeks previously. It began as an erythematous patch but had since ulcerated, and was increasing in diameter despite 2 weeks of oral flucloxacillin and topical silver-nitrate dressings. The patient was previously fit and had no significant past medical history. He did not smoke and denied illicit drug use. No other risk factors for immunocompromise were identified.
Examination revealed a 3 cm by 4 cm ulcerated lesion over his left loin. The base was a mixture of yellow slough and healthy-granulation tissue and the edges were well circumscribed . Further examination revealed a temperature of 39.1°C, dry mucous membranes and oral Candida. The remaining general and neurological examination was normal. The patient was admitted for intravenous fluid resuscitation and antibiotics.
Initial blood tests showed a mild microcytic anaemia (Hb 11.7 g/dL, MCV 76.0 fL) and lymphopaenia (WBC 2.78 × 109 L-1, Lymphocytes 0.44 × 109 L-1). HIV antibody titres at 3 days were positive. Chest radiograph on admission was abnormal; showing a 3.8 cm area of nodular shadowing in the right upper zone which prompted computed tomography (CT) imaging of the chest .
The patient developed worsening headache associated with vomiting and mild altered mental status 4 days following admission. Urgent CT and Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the head showed mild cerebellar tonsil herniation through the foramen magnum but no contra-indication to lumbar puncture. This was performed and revealed an opening pressure of 33 cmH2O and cloudy cerebrospinal fluid. India ink staining and cryptococcal antigen testing of the cerebrospinal fluid was positive. This in conjunction with immunocompromise secondary to HIV confirmed the diagnosis of disseminated cryptococcosis.
The patient was treated with intravenous amphotericin B (1 mg/kg/day) plus flucytosine (100 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks followed by fluconazole (400 mg/day) for 10 weeks. Daily therapeutic lumbar puncture was performed for 3 days until the opening pressure was less than 20 cmH2O. The patient was commenced on Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) and discharged with outpatient HIV specialist team follow up.
The patient remains well on HAART 12 months after initial presentation with no adverse neurological complications and no further episodes of opportunistic infections.