A 41-year-old female patient was diagnosed with undifferentiated connective tissue disease in 2008. Since then, this patient received low doses of prednisone . Because of facial erythema and a decrease in blood complement in 2016, hydroxychloroquine was added to 400 mg/d, and the dosage of prednisone was increased to 10 mg/d . This patient had a loss of weight of approximately 3 kg by March 2018, as well as proteinuria and weakness. The patient was admitted to our hospital in April 2018.
The patient had a history of hypertension. There was no relevant family history.
There were a few of ulcers in the mouth.
The results of laboratory examinations are as follows: White blood cell count, 4.7 × 109/L; 24-h urine protein, 1120 mg and urine red blood cells, 28/µL; routine fecal tests and occult blood test, normal; blood albumin (ALB), 33.40 g/L; serum creatinine, 58 µmol/L; positive antinuclear antibody (ANA), 1/80+; anti-histone antibody, +/-; anti-nucleosome antibody, +/-; negative anti-dsDNA antibody, ANA and anti-GBM antibody; complement C3, 0.58 g/L; complement C4, 0.09 g/L ; erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein, normal.
Color Doppler ultrasound of the kidneys indicated a right renal nodule.
Renal biopsy was performed to evaluate nephropathy. A light microscopic examination of paraffin-embedded sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid–Schiff, and Masson’s trichrome showed that glomerular visceral epithelial cells were diffusely enlarged with vacuolar degeneration, but segmental sclerosis and crescents were not observed in glomeruli. The mesangial matrix and cellularity were normal. Renal tubular epithelial cells presented granular degeneration without obvious atrophy. An infiltration of several inflammatory cells could be seen in the renal mesenchyme, but fibrosis was hardly found. Arterioles appeared to be thickened and narrow.
Immunofluorescence analysis revealed mild staining for IgM. Immunostaining for IgA; IgG; ALB; complement factors C3, C4, and C1q; and fibrinogen was negative.
Electron microscopic analysis with toluidine blue staining showed that glomerular visceral epithelial cells were swollen. Many vacuoles with dense lamellated structures were present in the cytoplasm of podocytes. A number of secondary lysosomes and foot process fusion could be seen in the cytoplasm of podocytes. Arterioles, mesangial matrix and cellularity were normal. Renal tubular epithelial cells manifested vacuolar degeneration. Some inflammatory cells had infiltrated the renal mesenchyme.
In conclusion, the renal biopsy demonstrated glomerular visceral epithelial cells containing zebra bodies and myelin figures.
A genetic evaluation of the patient and her family members was performed, and mutations of the GLA gene were not detected.