A 4-year-old female (DOB: 2015) with left sided hemiparesis.
She presented in June 2019 with left sided hemiparesis and recurrent focal motor seizures.
Her history was significant since October 2017 for repeated attacks of loss of consciousness (LOC), sudden falls without LOC, convulsions or body discoloration. There were also attacks of dysarthria or speech arrest or deviation of the angle of the mouth to the left side which lasted for 20-30 min. The mother noticed that excessive crying could provoke sudden falls and hot water bath could result in drowsiness for few minutes. Her neurological examination and computed tomography (CT) of the brain were unremarkable. She was diagnosed as having epilepsy and treated with sodium valproate (VPA), an anticonvulsant drug but she discontinued treatment after few months.
In September 2018, she developed recurrent motor seizures starting in the right perioral area followed by the right upper and lower limbs. She was re-treated with VPA. In October 2018, she developed motor seizures on the left side of the body. There was no impaired awareness during the attacks and her neurological examination and repeated CT scan of the brain were normal. The treating physician prescribed VPA in a dose of 200 mg every 12 h and levetiracetam (LEV), another anticonvulsant drug, in a dose of 100 mg every 12 h. The seizures subsided with medications. In January 2019, she developed two attacks of generalized tonic-clonic convulsions (GTC) without regaining consciousness in between the attacks. She was admitted to the hospital. On admission, her oral temperature was 38.0 °C. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. Her electroencephalography showed diffuse delta slowing. Her routine laboratory investigations and chemistry analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were unremarkable.
MRI (Siemens machine, 1.5 Tesla) of the brain was performed. It showed bilateral abnormal signal intensities involving both frontal lobes (with gyral pattern) being hypointense in T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and hyperintense in T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), fluid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR) views and diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (i.e. restricted diffusion). There was no mass effect or perilesional edema . Treatment was started with ceftriaxone, an antibiotic, and acyclovir, an antiviral drug, for concern of being an attack of encephalitis/meningoencephalitis. Intravenous LEV was also prescribed. The patient regained consciousness within days but found to have left sided hemiplegia. She was discharged after few days on oral LEV (200 mg every 12 h).
There was no history of traumatic head or neck injuries. There was no comorbid medical or surgical condition. There was no history of risk factors in temporal relation with disease onset (e.g. infection/inflammation, vaccination, etc.).
Her body weight was 18 kg. She was a product of normal pregnancy and delivery and had normal development, speech and intelligence. She was an active girl. Her detailed history, comprehensive investigations (hematological and metabolic laboratory testing) and medical and cardiac evaluations excluded an underlying diseases or predisposing factors as a cause of stroke. There was no family history of similar condition.
Neurological examination at presentation (June 2019) revealed left spastic hemiparesis (muscle power was 3/5), left upper motor neuron facial paralysis, exaggerated left deep tendon jerks and left Babinski sign. Her fundus examination was normal.
They included complete blood cell count, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, antinuclear, anticardiolipin and antiphospholipid antibodies, protein C and S, serum lactate and pyruvate, sickle cell preparation, serum amino acids, triglycerides, cholesterol. electrocardiogram and echocardiogram. No genetic testing was done.
This will include genetic testing with special emphasis to RNF213 gene variants.
In October 2019, she did follow-up MRI of the brain and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the cerebral vessels. MRA was performed using three-dimension (3D) technique and maximum intensity projection images (MIP) were obtained. MRI showed bilateral abnormal high signal intensities in the frontal and parietal gray and white matters in T2WI, FLAIR and diffusion/perfusion weighted imaging views which did not contrast enhanced. There were ex vacuo dilatation of the frontal horns and bodies of lateral ventricles with relative prominence of the overlying sulci. There were variable sized hypointense foci with near CSF intensity within the right frontal white matter indicating frontal gliotic changes and cystic encephalomalacia in brain areas supplied by ICAs/MCAs . MRA showed complete occlusion of the supraclinoid portion of both ICAs. The ACAs and MCAs were not visualized. The basilar artery (BA) and PCAs had normal sizes and calibers. Collaterals were predominantly from the posterior circulation .
In January 2021, follow up pre- and post-contrast multi-slice CT of the brain and CT angiography (CTA) and CT venography (CTV) on the cerebral vessels were done. CT of the brain showed bilateral frontal subcortical and slightly cortical hypodense lesions with CSF density. There were dilated ventricular systems, and prominent cortical sulci and basal cisterns . CTA showed non-visualization of right and left ACAs and MCAs, the left ICA ended blindly before the siphon, non-visualization of the left posterior communicating artery (PCoA) and attenuation of the distal parts of the right vertebral artery (VA) (compared to its proximal part) and BA. There was dominance of the posterior circulation with extensive bilateral collaterals (compared to early MRA findings) and prominence of the dilated basal perforating vessels (moyamoya vessels) . CTV showed normal opacification of the dural venous sinuses with no filling defects. The superficial and deep cerebral veins were normal.