Cough and sputum for one week, and fever, chest pain, and chest tightness for one day.
A 25-year-old man underwent allogeneic kidney transplantation in May 2020 for ESRD secondary to chronic glomerulonephritis. The kidney was obtained from a brain-dead donor. His immune-induction regimen was basiliximab and anti-human T-cell porcine immunoglobulin, and his immunization maintenance regimen was tacrolimus (0.5 mg, bid), mycophenolate mofetil (0.5 g, bid), and methylprednisolone (16 mg, qd). One month after surgery, the patient experienced acute rejection, which improved after steroid pulse therapy, and he did not experience delayed graft function. Postoperatively, cotrimoxazole was given to prevent Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, voriconazole to prevent fungal infections, and ganciclovir to prevent viral infections. The other medications he took were nifedipine and irbesartan. One week prior to admission, the patient presented with symptoms of cough and sputum; the sputum was pink and foamy, and the cough was worse at night when lying flat. He attended the local hospital, which thought it was “influenza” and gave him some medication (details unknown). The patient subsequently developed fever with chills, with a maximum temperature of 39.0 °C, followed by chest pain and chest tightness. Immediately, a chest computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed a right-sided fluid pneumothorax and a right lower lung abscess. The outpatient diagnosis was pleural empyema, and he was admitted to our department for treatment on February 22, 2022.
The patient had a history of hypertension with blood pressure levels of up to 182/90 mmHg managed through the long-term use of controlled-release nifedipine and irbesartan tablets. He denied any history of diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, or tuberculosis.
The patient was a smoker for 5 years, but had now quit smoking and had no history of alcohol consumption. He denied any history of exposure to tuberculosis. He also denied any recent contact with farm animals such as horses, pigs, and cows and had not recently visited any farm. He did not have any clinically relevant family history.
The initial checkup indicated that the temperature was 38.2 °C, pulse 112/min, respiration 23/min, and blood pressure 144/112 mmHg. Physical examination showed that his general condition was poor: Respiratory movements were slightly rapid, right lower lung fibrillation was weakened, there was no pleural friction, turbidity was noted on percussion in the right lower lungs, right lung respiratory sounds were low. Cardiac and abdominal examination showed no abnormality, and both lower limbs were mildly swollen.
White blood cell count, 9.79 × 109/L; neutrophil percentage, 77.8%; absolute lymphocyte value, 1.27; lymphocyte percentage, 13.00%; absolute monocyte value, 0.88; and monocyte percentage, 9.00%. Furthermore, serum creatinine was 526.40 μmol/L, procalcitonin was 3.40 ng/mL, and ultrasensitive C-reactive protein was > 20 mg/L.
Chest CT suggested the following: Right-sided pneumothorax with multiple fluid within it; right lung with multiple exudates, and right lower lobe abscesses .