A 21-year-old woman was struck by a car from behind while riding a bicycle and was referred to our emergency center. The clinical examination showed loss of normal shoulder contour and mild bruising around the right scapular spine. There was no evidence of associated injury and the neurovascular examination of the injured upper limb was normal. Shoulder radiographs revealed fractures of the coracoid process, the acromion, and the distal clavicle . Further three-dimensional CT reconstruction revealed a minimally displaced acromion fracture extending into the spinoglenoid notch, a displaced coracoid base fracture, and a distal clavicle fracture . The coracoclavicular distance was normal. Considering the patient's age and the radiographic evidence of significant fracture displacement, the decision to perform surgery was made after discussing the treatment options and risks with the patient.
Surgery was performed under general anesthesia 2 days after the injury. The patient was placed in the beach-chair position with the injured limb draped free for movement during the operation. The acromion fracture line extended to the scapular spine. First, an 8-cm incision was made along the scapular spine. After retraction of the posterior deltoid laterally, the acromion fracture was exposed. It was located at the junction of the acromion base and the lateral scapular spine, extending inferiorly into the spinoglenoid notch with minor displacement. The acromion fracture was fixed with a 3.5-mm reconstruction locking plate (Trauson, Changzhou, China) . A second incision was made along the distal clavicle extending 2.0 cm lateral to the AC joint, after which the distal clavicle and the AC joint were exposed. The lateral part of the clavicle fracture was connected with the acromion by the intact AC capsule. After reduction of the clavicle fracture, a 2.0-mm Kirschner wire was used for temporary fixation. The AC joint remained untouched. Then, the clavicular hook plate (Trauson, Changzhou, China) was applied. The hook was inserted under the acromion to elevate the acromion and the plate was placed along the clavicle to depress the migrated clavicle . The coracoid base fracture was addressed percutaneously. The entry point at the junction area of the superior and inferior coracoid pillar was identified and the guide wire was advanced under fluoroscopic guidance through the coracoid base to the scapular neck. After the guide wire position was confirmed, the depth of the guide wire was measured. A 4.0-mm cannulated titanium screw (Trauson, Changzhou, China) was inserted along the guide wire and the coracoid base fracture was fixed .
Postoperatively, the arm was supported in a broad arm sling for 2 weeks. Gentle passive range of motion activity under analgesic was encouraged from the second day postoperatively. The rehabilitation program consisted of Codman exercises and passive shoulder range of motion exercises for 4 weeks, followed by active range of motion exercises, which progressed to resistive exercises after 6 weeks. The patient was instructed to restrict her active elevation below 90° until the hook plate was removed, 5 months after the operation.
However, the patient was lost to further follow-up. One and a half years later, she returned with an asymptomatic shoulder with a full range of motion. The final Constant–Murley score was 82. X-rays showed that the fracture had healed in anatomical position and the hardware was intact . Her only complaint was occasional discomfort around the AC joint. The hook plate was removed in another hospital. The postoperative X-rays showed evidence of acromion erosion around the hook tip.