A 95-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department after being incidentally diagnosed of a large pericardial effusion in an echocardiogram performed by the cardiologist in the ambulatory setting. Relevant medical history revealed the implantation of a dual-chamber pacemaker 4 months before. Vital signs showed a heart rate of 70 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, pulse oximetry of 96% breathing room air and axillary temperature of 36 °C (96.8 °F). Physical examination showed a lucid, comfortable and collaborative patient. She was asymptomatic for dyspnea or chest pain. Respiratory examination showed a reduced vesicular breath sound in the basal aspect of both hemithorax. Cardiac examination showed muffled heart sounds, no jugular vein distention, minor edema in both legs and no signs of hypoperfusion. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Chest X-ray showed a “water-bottle” cardiac silhouette and interstitial infiltrates in the right lung; blunted costophrenic angles were noted on both sides. Dual-chamber pacemaker generator was seen in the left side below the clavicle, with atrial and ventricular leads placed in an adequate position. Surface electrocardiogram depicted atrial and ventricular pacing spikes with appropriate sensing and capture; QRS complexes were of normal amplitude (left bundle-branch block morphology). Blood sample analysis was entirely normal. While an ultrasound machine was available in the emergency department, the attending physician (without skills in point-of-care ultrasound), based on the echocardiogram report, decided to perform a blind diagnostic pericardiocentesis via the subxiphoid approach. After failed four attempts (“dry taps”), the procedure was stopped and the patient was derived to the general ward for cardiac consultation. The next day, the patient was transferred to the high-dependency unit (HDU) for monitoring and to continue the diagnostic workup of the pericardial effusion.
On patient’s admission to the HDU, clinical status did not show changes compared with the previous day. A point-of-care echocardiogram showed a large circumferential pericardial effusion with an asymmetric distribution, being larger along the lateral wall of the left ventricle with the patient supine . Systolic function of both ventricles was normal. No diastolic ventricular collapse was noted; pacing leads were in the correct position (one in the right atrium; one in the right ventricle). Lung ultrasound showed a moderate pleural effusion with fibrin strands was noted on the left hemithorax , while a mild pleural effusion was also depicted on the right side. To aid in etiological diagnosis and given that no clinical signs of cardiac tamponade were present, a left-sided thoracocentesis was performed, draining 500 ml of a citrine pleural fluid with transudate features on chemical analyses; microbiological study was normal while no neoplastic cells were detected on pleural fluid cytology. The next day, given the etiologic uncertainness, an ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis under local anesthesia was performed via the apical approach. To best do that, given the thin thoracic wall of the patient, a linear probe was used to best define the site of insertion and the path of the needle, while avoiding the pleura . A single needle puncture under real-time ultrasound guidance allowed to easily enter the pericardial cavity, freely obtaining a hematic fluid . With the Seldinger technique, a 14G-30 cm in length catheter was placed in the pericardial cavity . No periprocedural complications were detected. A total of 1300 ml was drained in the first day. After confirming that the pericardial effusion was completely evacuated by serial point-of-care echocardiogram, the catheter was retired on day 3. Cytological analysis of the pericardial fluid did not reveal neoplastic cells, while microbiological study was negative as well.
A benign pericardial effusion related to pacemaker implantation was the most plausible explanation and the patient was sent back to the general ward to further care.