Our patient is a 15-year-old girl, who presented with chronic bilateral knee instability resulting in recurrent falls. There was no prior history of trauma. Clinical examination revealed bilateral mild genu valgum. Both knees demonstrated positive Lachman test with no end point. There was no limb length discrepancy. There was full range of movement of the knee.
Radiographical measurements on long leg films revealed the following measurements on the more symptomatic right lower limb :
Lateral proximal femoral angle (LPFA) of 820 Lateral distal femoral angle (LDFA) of 850 Medial proximal tibial angle (MPTA) of 950 Posterior proximal tibial angle (PPTA) of 640 Lateral distal tibial angle (LDTA) of 900
The fibula was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both knees demonstrated absence of ACL and hypoplastic tibial eminences . The PCL and both meniscus were normal.
Based on the deformity analysis, the proximal tibia was the main contribution of deformity, with minimal contribution from the distal femur. Deformity correction of the proximal tibia was performed based on the center of rotation of angulation (CORA) method. The CORA lies approximately 5 cm distal to the joint line in the coronal plane and approximately 3 cm distal to the joint line in the sagittal plane of the proximal tibia. The proximal tibial osteotomy was performed using the CORA of the coronal plane. To enable correction of the high posterior tibial slope, a resultant posterior translation of the proximal fragment was necessary.
Gradual correction with a hexapod frame was chosen over an acute opening wedge biplanar correction as the latter is technically difficult with higher risk of peroneal nerve injury . The gradual correction was based on a proximal tibial Taylor Spatial Frame (TSF) module with the proximal ring as the reference ring. The following parameters were used: Proximal ring (2/3 ring, 180 mm), distal ring (full ring, 155 mm), and struts (FastFX medium size).
A concomitant 8 mm of lengthening was programmed during the simultaneous valgus and posterior slope correction to prevent fragment impingement during the correction process. A distraction rate of 1 mm/day was utilized. The distraction was carried out over 20 days.
Immediate postoperatively, the patient was kept on non-weight-bearing of the operated limb with use of crutches or wheelchair mobilization. On post-operative day 7, adjustments of struts were initiated and distraction confirmed on radiographs. She was kept on non-weight-bearing until gradual correction was completed and was allowed touch down weight-bearing. Progression to full weight-bearing was allowed when there was radiographic evidence of adequate bridging callus on three cortices. Pin sites were dressed regularly with antiseptic dressings. No strut change was required. demonstrates the final correction at 4 weeks post-surgery. The mechanical axis of the right lower limb was corrected to lie between zone 1 and 2. The post-operative MPTA was 89 degrees and PPTA was 770 (, ). There was a soft end point on the Lachman’s test. Her International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score improved from 48 preoperatively to 79 postoperatively. At 2 years post-surgery, her symptoms of instability had resolved without the need for an ACL reconstruction. She is planned for a similar surgery on the contralateral left side.