A 56-year-old man with a history of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus was referred to the surgical department because of the onset of lower back pain and hematuria that occurred the previous day. The patient was not a smoker and denied alcohol consumption; his family history was unremarkable and there was no other complaint. The ultrasound of the left kidney revealed the presence of stones in the renal pelvis causing obstruction of the ureteral meatus and consequent dilatation of the upper calix. During the examination, the presence of a solid neoplasm was noticed that involved the renal medulla reaching the hilum area without signs of hilar infiltration. For further investigations, the patient underwent CT (computed tomography) and MR (magnetic resonance) that showed the slight enhancement and extensive necrotic areas of the lesion and the existence of a solid nodule with same features in the left lung, likely due to metastases . A lombotomic total nephrectomy was performed, and the patient had an uneventful post-operative recovery.
Grossly, the kidney presented irregular profile due to a hilar lesion measuring 4 cm × 2.5 cm. On cut sections, it was highly hemorrhagic, soft, and reddish with infiltrating borders . The tumor was extensively sampled. Microscopic examination was performed on paraffin-embedded sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin . Histopathological examination showed a proliferation of canalicular structures of various sizes, sometimes with some degree of cystic changes, lined by atypical cells with epithelioid features, deeply invading the renal parenchyma and the perinephric fat. Many of these structures contained red blood cells giving the idea that it was a vascular lesion. In some fields was observed an almost solid growth pattern with erythrocytes trapped in thin spaces between neoplastic cells. Marked cellular pleomorphism, enlarged and hyperchromic nuclei, irregular nuclear contour, prominent nucleoli, and frequent mitotic figures were also evident. In the context of this lesion, few fields showed a quite different morphology consisting of spindle cells arranged in palisading fashion without cellular atypia or invasive features. An immunohistochemical study was performed on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue block to define the histogenesis of the lesion. Pre-diluted antibodies produced by Ventana-Roche were used, directed against pan-cytokeratin (clone AE1/AE3/PCK26; mouse monoclonal), CD34 (clone QBEnd/10; mouse monoclonal), factor VIII (rabbit polyclonal), Ki67 (clone 30-9; mouse monoclonal), S100 (clone 4C4.9; mouse monoclonal), EMA (clone E29; mouse monoclonal), and CD10 (clone SP67; rabbit monoclonal). The malignant population was reactive for pan-cytokeratin, CD34, factor VIII, partially positive for Ki67 (positivity in about 40 % of neoplastic cells) and negative for S100, EMA and CD10, therefore was consistent with epithelioid angiosarcoma. Otherwise, the benign spindle cells population was positive for S100 and negative for Ki67 and epithelial and endothelial markers. It was so interpreted as residuals of pre-existent schwannoma. In view of these morphological and immunohistochemical findings, a diagnosis of primary renal epithelioid angiosarcoma probably arising in schwannoma was made. A CT-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology of the pulmonary lesion was subsequently performed that showed CD31-positive atypical epithelioid cells in the context of numerous erythrocytes, confirming the diagnosis of lung metastasis of angiosarcoma. During the post-operative period, the patient has not been subjected to antineoplastic therapy because of poor general health and he came to exitus a few months after diagnosis, because of a massive hemothorax caused by lung metastasis.