A non-English speaking 63-year-old Chinese man with a medical history significant for smoking presented to the emergency department complaining of chest pain. Symptoms had begun 2 hours prior to hospital admission, and consisted of a sharp, stabbing, substernal pain, starting shortly after a meal, and progressing gradually since then. The pain radiated to the patient's back, jaw and left arm. It was also pleuritic in nature as well as worse on swallowing and talking. The medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
On physical examination the patient appeared restless. His blood pressure was 116/86 on the right side and 96/56 on the left, pulse was 60 beats/min and regular, respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min and oral temperature was 36.8°C. His examination also revealed normal jugular venous pressure and normal breath sounds over both lung bases. The chest pain could not be reproduced on palpation. Heart sounds were distant, and peripheral pulses were normal. The remainder of the examination findings were unremarkable.
The ECG performed on hospital admission showed normal sinus rhythm with concave ST-elevation in V2 and V3. The initial creatinine phosphokinase concentration was 329 ng/mL (normal reference range, 30 to 220 ng/mL), the MB isoform fraction was under 3%, and troponin T concentration was under 10 ng/mL which is also within the normal reference range. The WBC count was 7700 cells/μL with 50% neutrophils.
The chest radiograph obtained showed no abnormalities. 4 hours after admission the patient became hypotensive (systolic blood pressure was 80) and bradycardic (50 beats/min). Due to concerns for an underlying aortic dissection, a CT spiral angiography was ordered.
The CT spiral angiography ruled out aortic dissection. However, multiple linear calcific densities were seen in the oesophagus and in the small bowel on the non-contrast phase of the study. One of the linear calcific densities was in a transverse orientation and seen tenting the oesophagus. The patient gave a history of ingesting fish half an hour prior to the onset of pain. The diagnosis of fish bone ingestion mimicking aortic dissection was made. Rigid endoscopy was performed and a fish bone was removed from the oesophagus approximately 20 cm from the incisor. No bleeding or ulceration was seen. Postoperative vitals were of a pulse of 72 beats/min and blood pressure of 125/70. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed that left and right ventricular function was normal, and that there was no apparent valvular disease. Serial troponin tests were negative. The patient had an uneventful recovery with intravenous antibiotic cover and was discharged home on Day 3 following admission.