A 51-year-old male presented with a 1-month history of penis pain during erection. He had a slight painful urination, no frequent urination, urgency, hematuria. His BMI is 21.1. There is no such disease in his family. He had not received any relevant treatment. Examination of his genital area revealed the left of the penile base had a fixed mass which was hard, with unclear boundary, tenderness, measuring approximately 7.0 cm in diameter. There were no palpable enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral inguinal region. Hemoglobin level was 123 g/L, microscopic urine analysis was normal, as were radiological examinations of the chest and abdomen. Doppler ultrasonography showed deep perineal solid mass with irregular shape and visible blood flow signal inside. Computed tomography (CT) scan of abdomen and pelvis showed the presence of a well-defined, irregular, and heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue mass arising from the proximal part of the penis, and measuring 3.2 cm in width by 7.2 cm in length, no enlarged lymph node was seen in the groin and pelvis . CT value of the mass was about 33 HU and 40–48 HU after enhancement. Urethral cystoscopy suggested that the mucosa of urethra and bladder was normal. At that time, we diagnosed that it might be a penile sarcoma (cT2N0M0) with poor prognosis, and recommended him penectomy if the intraoperative frozen section diagnosis was sarcoma or other malignant tumors. Influenced by traditional Chinese male culture, he and his family refused penectomy. Unfortunately, the frozen pathological section indicated sarcoma. So, we recommended penectomy again during the operation, but his family rejected it for the second time. Then we had to perform local excision. We saw a hard tumor on the left side of the corpus cavernosum in the surgery, and had to remove part of the Buck fascia because of the adhesion, then stitched the tunica albuginea . The frozen section of the base was negative. The postoperative pathological section, which consistent with moderately differentiated fibrosarcoma, showed sheets of spindle-shaped, solidly packed cells arranged in bundles, with the involvement of surgical margins . We recommended him to undergo adjuvant radiotherapy (DT50-60 Gy) or 3 cycles of a chemotherapy regimen consisting of docetaxel and gemcitabine after surgery, but he rejected and was discharged from the hospital on the 7th day of postoperative. About 3 months later, he was admitted to the hospital again due to recurrence. CT showed that a mass could be seen on the left side of the proximal part of the penis, measuring 3.5 cm in width by 9.7 cm in length, and CT value was the same as before, inguinal and pelvic lymph nodes metastasis . Considering the recurrence of the tumor and the difficulty of resection, the patient was transferred to the department of oncology for chemotherapy. 3 weekly cycles of a chemotherapy regimen consisting of docetaxel and gemcitabine were begun, to shrink the tumor. After the chemotherapy, CT showed that the size of the mass was about 13.5 cm long and 4.7 cm wide, and it had invaded the internal muscle of bilateral obturator foramen and pelvic floor fascia, damaged the pubic bone and ischial bone, and multiple metastases occurred in the lung and liver . When we were ready to adjust the chemotherapy plan, he refused further treatment and died 10 months after surgery.