A 64-year-old, Caucasian male white-collar worker, without a history of trauma, was referred to our department in August 2020 with a complaint of coccygodynia and a verbal report of mild perianal numbness. He had experienced pain in this region over the previous 2 months, and it was typically aggravated by sitting or lying on his back, but was not associated with neurological symptoms. There was no history of difficulty in defecation or micturition. The patient’s body mass index was 23 kg/m2 (specifically, 178 cm in height and 73 kg in weight). His lumbar spine range of motion was normal, with mild pain, especially in end range active flexion and extension, without exacerbation by overpressure or repeated movements. No motor deficits were noted after testing the muscles of the lower extremity, Lasegue’s and femoral stretch test were negative bilaterally, and deep tendon reflexes were negative and comparable bilaterally. The overlying skin was normal, however there was mild tenderness localized to the sacrococcygeal joint. The patient reported a medical past of hypertension and hyperlipidemia, both under medication. Besides degenerative changes at level L5-S1, no abnormalities of the coccyx could be identified on plain X-ray. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the coccyx was performed, which revealed a disc herniation .
Conservative treatment which included the use of oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), (naproxen 500 mg) twice a day for a period of 2 weeks was applied, along with seat cushions, and the avoidance of provoking activity, (avoidance of any positions or movements that might exacerbate his symptoms). The patient was also referred for physiotherapy, which included heat and cold application over the site, manual manipulation, massage of the levator ani muscle or the coccygeus muscle, and extracorporeal shockwave therapy, education focused on proper sitting posture, core stabilization, stretching and strengthening of the piriformis and iliopsoas muscles, thoracic mobilization, and pelvic floor muscle rehabilitation (diaphragmatic breathing, perineal bulges, intrarectal manual therapy). After two months of conservative management, with 3 visits per week, his symptoms were relieved and the patient was in good condition with no further symptoms at the follow-up date one year after his initial complaint.