A 65-year-old woman with a history of laparoscopic DG with lymph node dissection for early gastric cancer 6 months earlier had a 40 mm splenic tumor that was growing. During laparoscopic DG, lymph node dissection around the common hepatic artery and ligation of the left gastric artery, right gastric artery, and left and right gastroepiploic arteries were performed. Pathological diagnosis of gastric cancer was pT1bN0M0 StageIA (UICC 8th TNM). The splenic tumor with 30 mm large in the lower pole of the spleen was incidentally detected before DG with enhanced computed tomography (CT). It was diagnosed as a benign tumor with well-defined margins and homogeneous enhancement . The splenic tumor was observed for 6 months without resection after DG. Intraoperative biopsy of the splenic tumor was not performed during DG due to the risk of complications such as bleeding. However, in the subsequent enhanced CT suggested the tumor increased in size to a diameter of 40 mm and positron emission tomography showed abnormal 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake in the splenic tumor with a possibility of being a malignant splenic tumor such as malignant lymphoma or metastasis. Three-dimensional CT angiography showed that the PGA and LIPA had become more developed to supply the remnant stomach .
We planned to perform laparoscopic splenectomy without resection of the remnant stomach in case of adequate preservation of the blood supply to the remnant stomach after SGA resection. During laparoscopic splenectomy, we resected the SGA, so the arterial blood supply to the remnant stomach depended on the PGA and LIPA. We examined the blood supply to the remnant stomach with intraoperative ICG fluorescence imaging using a near-infrared camera system after clamping the splenic artery and vein at the splenic hilum, the planned transection line. First, 5 mg of ICG in 2 mL of saline was gently injected through a peripheral vein. ICG fluorescence imaging was illuminated with a near-infrared laser beam in the laparoscopic system. Imaging was generated using the 1588 AIM Endoscopic Near Infrared Visualization camera system (Stryker Corporation, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). Within 45 s after ICG injection, blood flow from the greater curvature spreading to the lesser curvature of the remnant stomach was visualized with ICG fluorescence (/Fig. 4). The remnant stomach did not show any perfusion defects, suggesting adequate blood supply from the PGA and LIPA, allowing for splenectomy with remnant stomach preservation. Total operative time was 143 min. Intraoperative blood loss was 5 mL.
The final pathological diagnosis of the splenic tumor was sarcoidosis. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 without complications. Two years after surgery, gastric cancer and sarcoidosis have progressed without recurrence.
This work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .