A 46-year-old male patient presented with a conjunctival infection and probable Reis-Bücklers dystrophy (clinically characterized by superficial corneal opacities, recurrent erosions and significant visual impairment), and multiple antimicrobial treatments showed no improvements. At admittance to our institution, the patient reported a headache and moderate pain in the bilateral orbitofrontal region radiating to the occipital region. He had a history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus type 2 for 3 years and poor treatment compliance. A physical examination revealed fever, chills, and general malaise, with moderate bilateral ocular pain, nasal congestion, dehydrated nasal mucosa, odynophagia, cough, dyspnoea, hemoptysis, bilateral blepharoedema, and corneal opacity in the left eye . A black eschar was seen on the palate .
The patient was evaluated in the Ophthalmology Department, where a lacrimal gland biopsy was performed, and acute inflammation of the orbit of unknown origin was observed. A facial CT scan was performed and revealed pansinusitis with deformation of the left ocular globe, luxation of the crystalline, maxillary affectation, and deformation of the floor of the bilateral orbital bone occupied by both maxillary sinuses. The recommended starting treatment was liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day) and the initiation of glycaemic control due to probable mucormycosis. A biopsy was taken, and surgical debridement was performed with total maxillectomy and exenteration of the left orbit; a microvascularized femur graft was obtained to reconstruct the left orbit . During surgery, necrosis of the whole maxilla as well as the orbit floor, including the nasal septum, was observed. Samples of the maxillary tissue, ocular globe, and nasal septum were sent for histopathological analysis.
Haematoxylin-eosin and Grocott-Gomori staining allowed the observation of wide hyphae with irregular contours , and a direct mycological study with KOH 10% revealed hyaline, coenocytic, long and wide filaments, compatible with members of the order Mucorales. No mycological culture was performed.
Molecular identification was performed by the amplification and sequencing of DNA fragments containing the 18S rRNA gene, the internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS1, 5.8S gene, and ITS2), and the 5′ end of the 28S rRNA gene. Genomic DNA was isolated from the maxillary tissue using a DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Ventura, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For polymerase chain reaction (PCR), a set of primers previously reported for fungal species (ITS1–5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3′ and ITS4–5′-TCCTCCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′) was used [, ]. The amplicon was purified, and the nucleotide sequence was determined in both directions with Taq FS dye-terminator cycle-sequencing fluorescence-based sequencing and analysed on an Applied Biosystems 3730 xl DNA sequencing system. A PCR product of approximately 730 bp was amplified from the maxillary sample. The PCR product was purified and sequenced in both directions using the same primers. A consensus sequence homology search was performed in the GenBank database (nucleotide BLAST); the obtained sequence showed 100% homology with the Apophysomyces ossiformis UTHSC 04–838 strain, 99% homology with the A. ossiformis UTHSC 07–204 strain, and 94% homology with the A. thailandensis SDBR-CMUS219 and A. trapeziformis DUM101.13 strains.
Afterward, the patient was kept in the intensive care unit for 7 days and then transferred for continued hospitalization with an antibiotic regimen of piperacillin-tazobactam IV 4.5 g/6 h and liposomal amphotericin B (10 mg/kg/day). On day 15, the patient requested to return to the General Hospital of Tlaxcala to continue treatment. The patient died 9 days after admittance due to complications associated with his poorly controlled diabetes. Pneumonia caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae was present.