A 66-year-old white female presenting with a history of headache, blurred vision, and syncope 3.5 h after undergoing varicose vein sclerosing therapy. At presentation to the emergency department (ED), she was haemodynamically stable. A neurologic exam revealed a flaccid left upper extremity, increased tone of the left lower extremity, and left-sided hemi-neglect. Her cardiovascular exam revealed a regular rhythm with a heart rate of 81 b.p.m.; no murmurs were present. An electrocardiogram was normal sinus rhythm with occasional premature ventricular contractions.
The patient reported a past medical history of thyroid cancer and osteoporosis. Levothyroxine was her only home medication. She was a non-smoker and drank alcohol twice weekly. At the time of presentation, the differential diagnosis included acute ischaemic or haemorrhagic CVA, atypical migraine, hypertensive encephalopathy, hypoglycaemia, or electrolyte abnormalities. Labs from the emergency room revealed a normal comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, and coagulation labs. A high sensitivity troponin level was 10 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L).
She underwent computed tomography angiography of the head and neck, which revealed an occluded right distal M1 middle cerebral artery (MCA) and limited flow in the M2 superior division . The contents of the occlusions were thought to be air and thrombus. She was immediately taken for endovascular intervention. Clot retrieval in the distal right M1 MCA was performed. Final pathology revealed laminated blood consistent with a thromboembolism. The retrieved clot contained amorphous material composed of an exogenous agent. This was consistent with the polidocanol foam, which was used during her vein sclerosing procedure . As part of her stroke work-up, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and transoesophageal echocardiogram were performed and she was found to have a PFO.
The decision was made to perform percutaneous closure of the patient’s PFO. A diagnostic right heart catheterization was initially performed showing an oxygen saturation of 70% at the superior vena cava and 70% oxygen saturation at the main pulmonary artery (PA). The calculated Qp:Qs was 1, indicating no shunt. Right-sided pressures, PA pressure, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, and left atrial pressures were normal . Intra-cardiac echocardiogram (ICE) showed the known PFO with right to left-right shunt throughout the cardiac cycle (Video 1). A NobleStitch™ EL device (HeartStitch, Fountain Valley, CA, USA) was used to close the PFO (Video 2). Repeat ICE and bubble study showed no residual shunt (Video 3).
The patient was seen for outpatient follow-up at 34 and 219 days post-procedure. A follow-up TTE at 209 days revealed a small residual interatrial shunt, significantly improved from baseline. She reported doing well with no further neurologic symptoms suggest of stroke or TIA after undergoing intense physical therapy. She will remain on low-dose aspirin indefinitely.