A 28-year-old woman on her 30th week of gestation (gravida 2, para 0) was presented at the Sanggye Paik Hospital with whole abdominal and right lower quadrant pain via a local obstetric clinic.
The abdomen was distended because the uterus was enlarged at 30-week gestation. A physical exam showed no abdominal or rebound tenderness. Laboratory findings showed: hemoglobin 13.1 g/dL, white blood cells 10,600/µL, platelets 266,000/µL, and C-reative protein < 0.3 mg/dL. Urinary analysis was negative for nitrites and red blood cells.
Ultrasound examination identified breech presentation, an amniotic fluid index of 27.18 cm, placentation in the anterior uterine wall, and an estimated fetal weight of 1580 g . The mother had undergone a laparoscopic right ovarian cystectomy due to endometriosis 5 years earlier. Cardiotocographic monitoring revealed an intermittent variable deceleration, a reassuring fetal heart rate pattern, and the absence of uterine contraction . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed in the Department of General Surgery of our institution ruled out acute appendicitis. Several hours later, we noticed that the amniotic sac was protruding through a large uterine defect , and ultrasound examination also showed protrusion of the amniotic sac . The patient was subjected to an emergency cesarean section, which enabled the delivery of a male neonate (1860 g and 40 cm) without fetal compromise. His Apgar scores at 1 minute, 5 minutes, and 10 minutes were 4, 6 and 8, respectively, and an umbilical arterial gas analysis indicated a pH value of 7.253, a partial pressure of oxygen of 43.4 mm Hg, a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 48.6 mm Hg, an concentration of 21.5 mmol/L, a saturation of oxygen of 88.1%, and a base excess of -5.7 mmol/L. During the cesarean section, multiple myometrial defects and thinning of the uterine wall were uncovered. Notably, these myometrial wall defects extended anteroposteriorly via the uterine fundus to the left uterine wall , and a uterine wall reconstruction did not suffice to restrain the bleeding from the flaccid uterus . A pulse rate of 140 to 150 beat per minute also persisted. Cesarean hysterectomy was performed . Packed red cells of 5 pints and 4 pints of freshly frozen plasma were transfused during the operation to compensate an estimated blood loss of 2000 mL. The mother and neonate did not develop complications during their subsequent puerperal and neonatal periods, respectively, and the boy has, thus far, 3 years after birth, exhibited normal neural development. It was only after completion of the cesarean hysterectomy that we were informed that, while undergoing a laparoscopic right ovarian cystectomy, the mother had also been subjected to a combined laparoscopic electromyolysis.