A 68-year-old man was referred to the Department of Reconstructive Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at Iwate Medical University School of Dentistry on May 15, 2017, for diagnosis and treatment of an ulcer on the right side of the tongue. He had first noticed the ulcer about 1 month earlier. The patient’s medical history included loss of consciousness resulting from dysautonomia at the age of 32. There was no history of traumatic injury or radiotherapy. Family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed facial pallor. In the oral cavity, an ulcer measuring 28 × 18 mm was present on the right edge of the tongue . The ulcer was indurated on palpation. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. The results of blood testing are shown in Table . Serum electrolytes were within the normal range.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed with a 3.0-Tesla system (MR750; General Electric Company, Boston, MA, USA). On T1-weighted axial images, the mass on the right edge of the tongue was isointense relative to muscle. On T2-weighted images, slightly increased signal intensity was noted within the mass. On gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images, the mass was homogeneous and highly enhanced.
Positron emission tomography was performed with a Discovery PET/CT 600 scanner (General Electric Company, Boston, MA, USA). The image showed abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose on the right edge of the tongue at the location of the mass. There was no abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the lymph nodes or any other organ.
The patient was hospitalized on May 26. On the basis of a clinical diagnosis of tongue cancer (cT2N0M0), biopsy was performed under local anesthesia. During the same procedure, several teeth that were mechanically stimulating the lesion were extracted. The serum sodium concentration was 132 mEq/L on the day of biopsy. Three days after biopsy, the patient developed nausea and vomiting, and his serum sodium had fallen to 124 mEq/L. In addition, laboratory examinations showed high serum TSH, low free triiodothyronine (FT3), and low free thyroxine (FT4). Because antithyroid peroxidase antibodies and antithyroglobulin antibodies were confirmed as positive, a diagnosis of Hashimoto thyroiditis was made. Administration of levothyroxine sodium (LT4) was started. However, nausea and vomiting were not controlled. The findings of low serum cortisol, low serum sodium, and high urine osmolality raised suspicion of acute adrenal insufficiency. The patient was transferred to the medical department and administration of dexamethasone at 0.25 mg per day was started instead of LT4. The plasma ACTH concentration (8.8 pg/mL) was within the normal range. On June 7, ACTH stimulation testing was performed. The plasma cortisol concentration before the test was 1.8 μg/dL. Plasma cortisol concentrations 30 and 60 min after administration of corticotropin (250 μg) were 4.0 μg/dL and 4.8 μg/dL, respectively. On the basis of these findings, we suspected secondary adrenal insufficiency. On June 13, administration of LT4 was restarted for the treatment of hypothyroidism. To investigate the cause of secondary adrenal insufficiency, MRI of the head was performed, which revealed pituitary gland atrophy . The results of pituitary anterior lobe hormone-stimulation tests are listed in Table . These results were compatible with hypopituitarism. The patient’s severe consciousness disorder, which scored 3 on the Glasgow Coma Scale 14 days after biopsy, gradually improved, with full recovery on day 20 after biopsy. Thirty days after biopsy, partial tongue resection was successfully performed under general anesthesia with perioperative hydrocortisone supplementation. The histopathological diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue. The postoperative course was uneventful. The perioperative clinical course is summarized in Fig. .