Our patient is a 20-year-old female, left-handed, with a known case of epilepsy that was diagnosed 11 years back. Her history started at the age of 9, After being seen in a local hospital and starting treatment, the patient showed improvements with seizure frequency decreasing. The patient was following in a local hospital where her brain MRI was reported as normal. She was admitted to the epilepsy monitoring unit (EMU) in our tertiary hospital few months ago. Her current seizures are focal blurred vision, then head turns to left side, rarely with secondary generalization, which lasts for a few seconds, two to three times per month. No risk factors of epilepsy were recognized and she had unremarkable neonatal, developmental, past medical, and surgical history. She had an unremarkable physical examination.
During the EMU admission, the patient underwent basic laboratory work, including complete blood count, electrolytes, liver and renal function test, thyroid profile, and carbamazepine level, and all were within normal limits. Her long term video EEG showed normal background: 9 Hz bilaterally and symmetrically in the parieto-occipital regions with good reactivity to eye opening and closure. She had normal sleep EEG features in the form of vertex sharp waves, K complexes, and bilaterally symmetric synchronous sleep spindles; however, these were intermixed with frequent runs of moderate-to-high amplitude generalized synchronized spike-poly-spike and slow wave complexes, ranging from 1-4 Hz, lasting from 2 seconds up to 6 seconds, and not associated with a clinical event ( and ). The patient was seen and assessed by a neuropsychology team. Her assessment showed cognitive dysfunctions on tests that rely on the temporal lobe, including short-term memory, working memory, learning and verbal long-term memory tests; however, she scored within normal ranges on language, visual memory, visuo- construction, and executive function tests. She also underwent brain MRI, which showed focal subependymal gray matter heterotopia noted along the inferolateral aspect of the trigone of the right lateral ventricle with cortical thickening noted along the depth of the right collateral sulcus. ( and ).
In addition, she underwent MEG study that revealed occasional bilateral inter ictal discharges over the right parietal and left temporo-parietal MEG sensors.
The results of the standard single equivalent current dipole analysis, together with the IED topography, indicated the involvement of multiple epileptic brain generators. Therefore, multiple equivalent current dipole (MECD) source analysis was also performed. MECD revealed two tight clusters of dipoles, were localized in the: left posterior lateral/Sylvian fissure and posterior part of the right superior temporal sulcus (inferior parietal lobule).
The orientations of the IED source dipoles within both clusters were uniform and perpendicular to the nearest cortex (, ). She was discharged home.