A 22-year-old male patient, with no prior medical history, was admitted to the trauma ward of the Department of Surgery after suffering an electric shock by the guitar combo amplifier. The patient suffered a full-body spasm for a few seconds, after which he unplugged the amplifier and asked his mother to call an ambulance. The patient remained conscious and did not have a fall after the electric shock.
Clinical examination revealed a second-degree burn on the fifth finger of the right hand (3 × 5 mm) and a minor burn on the thumb of the left hand. The patient reported pain in the interscapular region but the clinical examination did not reveal any other pathologies. X-ray, however, revealed compression fractures of Th3–Th5 . Following these findings, a CT scan was performed confirming the presence of compression fractures of the aforementioned vertebrae; the spinal cavity was intact . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed no pathology.
Following the radiological findings, neurological and neurosurgical consultations were performed. The neurosurgeon recommended MRI to rule out injuries to the spinal cord and ligaments. MRI revealed a compression fracture of the 3rd (T3: A3; according to AO thoracolumbar classification system), 4th (T4: A3), 5th (T5: A1) and 6th (T6: A1) thoracic vertebrae. In addition, MRI detected also a small compression of the 2nd thoracic vertebra (T2: A1) and lesions of interspinous ligaments Th2–Th5 . Based on the MRI results, conservative treatment using a cervico-thoracic support corset (Miami JTO) was prescribed. The posterior ligamentous complex (PLC) was, according to MRI scans, intact. Neurological examination did not reveal any neurological deficit (N0). The analgesic therapy along with rehabilitation resulted in verticalization of the patient on day + 11 after a standing X-ray proving no deterioration of fractures nor progression of kyphosis. The patient was discharged on day + 12.
At the follow-up visit 1 month after the injury, the patient complained of moderate pain in the back; an X-ray was performed but no kyphotisation was present. MRI scan at 2.5 months was confirmed the reparative changes of the Th2–Th6 fractures without any sign of a spinal injury; therefore, a decision was made to withdraw a corset and commence rehabilitation, which lasted for 2.5 months and resulted in the full restoration of the movement and eased the pain.