A 57-year-old overweight woman presented with long-standing history of syncopal TLOC, which began in adolescence as sporadic (every 3–4 months) but worsened over time (up to daily). Most syncopal events occurred in standing position anticipated only by brief prodromal symptoms which included nausea, sweating and pallor. Occasionally she reported urinary incontinence related episodes. She also suffered from migraine-like headache attacks which began at the age of 23 increasing in frequency over time up to a chronic pattern (> 20 headache days per month). Headache worsened in the lying position and could present at night, awakening the patient early in the morning. Tinnitus, dizziness, sporadic vertigo attacks and occasional transient diplopia were also reported. Syncopal events were mostly independent from the presence or intensity of migraine-like pain.
Neurological examination was normal. Ocular fundoscopy was performed by an expert ophthalmologist, with no evidence of papilledema. Cardiac causes of syncope were excluded after extensive cardiological evaluation. Supine and standing blood pressure measurements did not show orthostatic hypotension and carotid sinus massage was negative. Tilt test was executed at admission, reporting a VASIS 2b response (cardioinhibitory response with asystole of more than three seconds) and therefore the patient was proposed for a pacemaker implantation. MR Venography (MRV) was performed, showing bilateral sinus stenosis, and, precisely, a transverse and sigmoid sinus hypoplasia on the right and two apparent flow gaps on the left at the junctions between Superior Sagittal Sinus (SSS) and left Transverse Sinus (TS) and between left TS and left Sigmoid Sinus. Apparent flow gaps are linked to a segmental flow velocity increase by focal sinus compression . Brain MR showed a mild distension of optic nerve sheets associated with a defined ocular bulb flattening; dilated Meckel’s cave and a concave shape of superior profile of pituitary gland . We performed a lumbar puncture (LP) in recumbent position. Opening pressure (OP) was 22.3 cmH2O, dropping to 8 cmH2O after 42 ml of CSF subtraction. Therefore, a diagnosis of IIHWOP was made accordingly to the Modified Dandy Criteria [, ]. After the LP the patient experienced the sudden resolution of both headache and vestibular symptoms. On the day after, a new tilt test showed a VASIS 1 response (mixed-type reflex syncope), withdrawing the pacemaker indication. The patient was finally discharged at home with a diagnosis of IIHWOP associated with mixed-type reflex syncope and was commenced acetazolamide (up to 750 mg per day).
Follow-up visits during the first year confirmed the disappearance of both syncopal episodes and chronic headache. Then symptoms progressively recurred with frequent migraine-like headaches and pre-syncopal or syncopal events. Again, syncopal events were independent from presence or intensity of migraine-like pain.
A second LP, performed after 18 months, showed 20.3 cmH2O OP, dropping to 10.2 cmH2O after 36 ml CSF withdrawal. On the following day, the patient reported on the resolution of the headache and a new tilt test confirmed VASIS 1 response. At two and six-months follow-up the patient reported the absence of syncopal episodes and only sporadic migraine-like attacks.