A 67-year-old Malay male who worked as a rubber tapper presented with a two-week history of recurrent left epistaxis. He also complained of left-sided nasal blockage over the past 30 years, worsening over the past eight months. He started to notice a mass in his left nasal cavity eight months ago, associated with anosmia and ageusia. The nasal mass spread to the oral cavity, causing shortness of breath and dysphagia. He also had progressive left cheek fullness and left eye proptosis for four months. Nevertheless, his left eye vision was good, and there was no diplopia. He was already diagnosed with papillary thyroid carcinoma with spine metastasis the previous year, and was planned for a total thyroidectomy at that time, however, he refused surgical intervention. He did not take any drugs and did not have any allergy histories. He was an active cigarette smoker but did not take alcohol. Family history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, a fleshy mass was seen protruding from the left nasal cavity, with left cheek swelling and left eye proptosis (A). Intraorally, there was an exophytic mass seen arising from the left upper gum, extending posteriorly to the soft palate (B). There was also a fleshy mass seen at the posterior pharyngeal wall extending from the nasopharynx. Nasoendoscopy showed fleshy mass occupying both nasal cavities. In addition, multiple matted neck nodes were found on the right side of the neck at cervical level II to IV. Clinically, he was initially diagnosed as sinonasal carcinoma with upper airway obstruction, with differential diagnosis of metastasis from papillary thyroid carcinoma. Tracheostomy was immediately done by the otorhinolaryngologist under local anaesthesia to relieve upper airway obstruction.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the paranasal sinus and neck revealed heterogenous opacification of the left maxillary sinus, bilateral nasal cavities, bilateral ethmoid, sphenoid, and frontal sinuses (A). The soft tissue extended to the nasopharynx posteriorly and inferiorly to the alveolar ridge of the maxilla (B). There was an obliteration of medial extraconal space of the left orbit causing proptosis of the left eye and displacement of the left optic nerve.
Histopathological examination of the left nasal and gum mass showed tumour tissue composed of haphazardly arranged spindle-shaped cells of variable cellularity and spindled to oval nuclei with mild pleomorphism (A). There was occasional mitotic activity detected, which was 2 mitotic figures in 10 high power fields. The tumour cells were embedded within loose collagenous stroma with hyalinized blood vessels (B) with some areas exhibiting stellate to staghorn blood vessels and foci of tumour necrosis. The immunohistochemical (IHC) studies showed diffuse positivity for BCL-2 (C), STAT6 (D) and focally positive for CD34. The tumour was negative for S100, cytokeratinAE1&AE3, desmin, smooth muscle actin and cyclin D1. The tissue morphology and immunohistochemistry supported a diagnosis of a solitary fibrous tumour. According to the risk stratification of Demicco system, the patient had an intermediate risk for metastasis (10% risk of metastasis at 10 years).
A multidisciplinary team discussion was held between otorhinolaryngologist, oral and maxillofacial surgeon, ophthalmologist, radiologist and pathologist, and the patient was planned for surgical resection of the tumour. He was referred to a dietician for optimization of nutrition and to an anaesthetist for pre-operative assessment. However, he sadly refused the operation and was lost to follow-up.