A 73-year-old man who had undergone total gastrectomy for pathological T4aN2M0 gastric cancer according to UICC-TNM classification 8th edition followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 and docetaxel for 10 months developed liver metastases 1 year after gastrectomy. The tumors were located in segment 6 (17 mm in diameter) and segment 7 (27 mm in diameter). He was then enrolled in a phase 2 clinical trial of lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab and received the study treatment (20 mg oral lenvatinib once daily and 200 mg intravenous pembrolizumab every 3 weeks) for 5 months . He had grade 2 oral mucositis and proteinuria according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE version 4.03) during the study treatment . Thyroid function tests revealed transient hyperthyroidism, which promptly returned to normal. He continuously achieved a partial response with the study treatment, and liver metastases were decreased in size to 8 mm in segments 6 and 11 mm in segment 7 .
Since the tumors were judged to be systemically under control due to decrease in size of liver metastases and no new lesions by positron emission tomography/computed tomography images, they came to be considered resectable. Four weeks after the last dose of pembrolizumab and 2 weeks after the last dose of lenvatinib, the patient underwent laparoscopic partial hepatectomy for segments 6 and 7. The operation time was 152 min, and blood loss was 109 mL .
On the 1st postoperative day, his body temperature was elevated to 40.4 °C. The patient complained of general fatigue, which seemed to be unproportional to the physical stress caused by laparoscopic resection of tiny lesions. Fasting blood glucose level remained 80–90 mg/dl, which was slightly lower than that before the surgery. His serum sodium and potassium levels were within the normal ranges. On the 4th postoperative day, laboratory examination for irAE was performed, and prednisolone (100 mg/day) was empirically started for possible adrenal insufficiency. His body temperature and fasting blood glucose levels promptly returned to within a normal range, and general fatigue disappeared. Laboratory data on the 4th postoperative day revealed hypothyroidism (thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 11.56 μIU/ml [reference value: 0.50–5.00 μIU/ml], Free-T3 0.94 pg/ml [reference value: 2.30–4.30 pg/ml], Free-T4 0.94 ng/dl [reference value: 0.90–1.70 ng/dl]) and hypopituitarism (adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) < 1.5 pg/ml [reference value: 7.2–63.3 pg/ml]), Cortisol 2.75 μg/dl [reference value: 6.24–18.00 μg/dl]). Considering the transient hyperthyroidism during lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab administration , we diagnosed hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism caused by lenvatinib plus pembrolizumab.
After the diagnosis of combined hypothyroidism and hypopituitarism, he received hydrocortisone (40 mg/day) first on the 9th postoperative day. Then, his fever, general fatigue, or any abnormality of fasting blood glucose level dissolved, and he was discharged on the 12th postoperative day. Following recovery of adrenal insufficiency, he received levothyroxine on the 14th postoperative day. He was alive without recurrence of gastric cancer and his laboratory data for thyroid and pituitary function remained stable while receiving hydrocortisone and levothyroxine for 2 years and 5 months.