A five-hour-old female baby was referred to our centre due to non-progressive abdominal distension since birth. This baby was born by caesarean section at term. The reason for C/section is unknown as the mother was unavailable at the time of admission. Birth weight at delivery was 2.4 kilograms and the APGAR score was 8 and 9 in the 1st and 5th minutes respectively. Antenatal history was uneventful and ultrasound done during pregnancy was normal. This is the first-born child to both parents. There are no reported cases of renal or malformations in the family.
Examination on admission showed the baby was sick looking, in respiratory distress and pink on oxygen therapy saturating at 97%. Her temperature was 36.9 °C, respiratory rate was 58 breaths/minute and Silverman Anderson score was 7. Her random blood glucose on admission was 5.8 mmol/L. In her respiratory system examination she had marked lower chest indrawing, nasal flaring and grunting with coarse crepitations throughout. Her abdomen was distended, soft with palpable kidneys bilaterally and the digital rectal exam was normal. On her central nervous system examination, she had a wide anterior fontanelle communicating with the posterior fontanelle with present reflexes. She had rocker bottom feet on musculo-skeletal examination.
Her abdominal pelvic ultrasound showed bilaterally enlarged echogenic kidneys with loss of cortico-medullary differentiation and multiple tiny cystic spaces. The right kidney was 8 х 3.3 cm and the left kidney was 7.4 х 3 cm. The rest of the findings were unremarkable. An echocardiogram showed patent ductus arteriosus and moderate tricuspid regurgitation with mild pulmonary regurgitation. Her blood workup showed a normal serum sodium level of 136.8 mmol/L, potassium of 5.6 mmol/L, urea of 3.74 mmol/L, serum creatinine of 133 µmol/L, AST of 28.3 U/L and ALT of 154.0 U/L, total protein of 58.0 g/L and albumin of 33.93 g/L. Serology for HIV was negative. We reached a diagnosis of polycystic kidney disease, early onset neonatal sepsis and acyanotic congenital heart disease. We started the baby on IV fluids of 10% dextrose 140 mL in 24 hours (we gave 75% of the maintenance fluid due to the underlying cardiac lesion), IV ampicillin 240 mg twice daily and kept the baby on CPAP.
The next day after admission during morning rounds this baby was still very sick looking, with coarse crepitations all over the chest and had passed only 10 mL of urine in the catheter. We gave intravenous furosemide 2 mg once daily. Unfortunately, seven hours later the baby changed condition and stopped breathing. She was resuscitated but it was unsuccessful and death was certified.