A 23-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with lower abdominal pain. He showed no symptoms such as fever, weight loss, night sweats or anorexia. He did not smoke cigarettes and had not had any contact with patients with TB. His prior history was unremarkable and a physical examination was normal. His superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. The results of common blood cell counts and blood chemistry were within normal limits. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 36mm/h and his serum level of C-reactive protein was 0.95mg/dL (normal range: 0 to 0.3mg/dL). A QuantiFERON-TB (Cellestis International Pty Ltd., Chadstone, Victoria, Australia) test was positive. Examination of his sputum revealed no atypical cells and no microorganisms. A chest radiograph showed no abnormal findings. Chest and abdominal CT revealed enlarged mediastinal and abdominal para-aortic lymph nodes. Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed hot spots in his right cervical, mediastinal and para-aortic lymph nodes, suggesting a lymphoma (Figure
).
A laparotomy was performed to obtain a sample to make a pathological diagnosis of his lymph node swelling. The biopsy specimen showed necrotizing lymphadenitis with epithelioid cell granulomas, which was consistent with Mycobacterium infection (Figure
). Acid-fast bacteria were not found in either staining or culture of the biopsy specimen, and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, M. avium and M. intracellulare were negative. Our patient was treated for lymph node TB with rifampicin 300mg, isoniazid 300mg, pyrazinamide 1200mg and ethambutol 750mg once a day. Two months later, his regimen was modified to rifampicin, isoniazid and ethambutol.
Three months after the start of treatment, our patient’s right supraclavicular lymph node appeared enlarged and he complained of low grade fever that lasted for about a month. A PCR test of aspirated fluid from his lymph node was positive for M. tuberculosis. However, acid-fast staining was negative and M. tuberculosis was not cultured from the fluid. Six months after the start of treatment, the enlargement of his supraclavicular lymph node improved and the anti-TB regimen was reduced to isoniazid and rifampicin.
Nine months after the start of treatment, our patient complained of right flank pain with radiation to his right hip and right thigh. A neurological examination was normal. Common blood cell counts and urine analysis were normal. His serum level of C-reactive protein was 0.95mg/mL. An abdominal CT revealed a large low-attenuation mass in his right psoas muscle and an enlarged para-aortic lymph node adjacent to the muscle (Figure
). No enlargement of any other lymph node was found. The size of the abscess was 7.0cm×6.0cm×15.0cm and his para-aortic lymph node was approximately 3.0cm in diameter. CT-guided percutaneous drainage of the psoas abscess was performed, obtaining 280mL of a dense, purulent fluid. Acid-fast bacteria staining of the fluid was negative and PCR tests for M. tuberculosis, M. avium and M. intracellulare were negative. No bacteria or fungi were isolated from the fluid. The level of adenosine deaminase in the fluid was elevated to 245IU/L. After drainage, his right flank pain improved. However, the pain recurred a month later, and an abdominal CT showed that the abscess had relapsed. Drainage was performed again, obtaining 210mL of fluid of a similar consistency.
After repeated drainage, the psoas abscess subsided to 4.5cm×3.0cm×9.0cm and the lymph node to 1.5cm in diameter. As a result, anti-TB drugs were continued for 13 months. Two months after the end of treatment, the disappearance of both the abscess and the lymph node swelling were confirmed by abdominal CT. Our patient improved and his post-treatment period was uneventful. No sign of relapse had been detected 15 months after the end of treatment.