A 16-year-old girl presented to our outpatient department after having a syncopal episode 18 h ago, along with abdominal pain and vomiting.
The patient had been picked up from her high school playground, where she had collapsed from exhaustion during a running race. She had visited the gastroenterology clinic earlier that day, and computed tomography scans of her brain and abdomen revealed no abnormalities. She also reported symptoms of an upper respiratory infection 3 wk before the event.
The patient had a healthy previous medical history. She had no cardiovascular risk factors and was taking no oral medications at the time.
The patient had no family history of inherited diseases or premature coronary heart disease.
On arrival, her vital signs included blood pressure 103/59 mmHg, heart rate 96 beats/min, oxygen saturation 98% on room air, respiratory rate 20 beats/min, and normal physical examination.
On admission, the laboratory findings were as follows: High-sensitivity troponin T was elevated to 1511 ng/L (cut-off > 50 ng/L), N-terminal (NT)-pro hormone BNP (NT-pro BNP) value was 1535 ng/L, alanine transaminase level was high, at 61.3 U/L, as was aspartate transaminase level, at 67 U/L, serum uric acid level was 399.5 µmol/L. Her blood count, blood biochemistry results, C- reactive protein, Creatine Kinase, Creatine Kinase-MB and indicators of blood coagulation function demonstrated no obvious abnormalities .
Her initial chest X-ray showed no sign of pulmonary edema. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed left lateral, anterior and posterior ventricular wall hypokinesis; minor mitral insufficiency; and a mildly reduced ejection fraction of 50%. An initial electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus rhythm with poor R wave progression in leads V1 through V3 . Considering the young age, low coronary risk profile and atypical symptoms, the patient was initially diagnosed with suspected acute myocarditis after upper respiratory infection. She had continuous ECG monitoring, while a low dose of β-blocker was used to lower her heart rate. Then she was scheduled for cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and coronary computed tomography angiography after 2 d. However, fifteen hours after admission, the patient experienced chest pain and sweating. The ECG indicated greater than 1 mm ST segment elevation in the anterolateral leads and broad ST depression in leads II, III, avF, V1, and V2 . When she was free of pain, the repeated ECG showed that the ST elevations were lesser . Twenty minutes later, she experienced intense chest pain. Repeated ECG indicated ST-segment elevation in leads V3 to V5 . After treatment with nitroglycerin, she did not complain about any discomfort, and the chest pain was substantially relieved. The ECG indicated that the elevation of the ST segment disappeared in multiple leads . Suspecting myocardial infarction, we then performed emergent coronary angiography, which demonstrated almost total occlusion at the ostium and the proximal segment of LMT . IVUS during angiography identified intramural hematoma severely compressing the true lumen which extended from the LMT to the ostium of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) suggesting SCAD .