Our patient was a 77-year-old Azerbaijani man from Urmia, a city in northwestern Iran. He was admitted to our hospital following a scalp wound sustained in a car accident. The result of his initial clinical examination was normal, and his brain computed tomographic scan was negative for traumatic intracranial hemorrhage and skull fractures. Some of his lab results in admission were as follows: hemoglobin A1c 7.4%, blood sugar 265 mg/dl, high-density lipoprotein 35 mg/dl, low-density lipoprotein 71 mg/dl, cholesterol 142 mg/dl, and triglycerides 75 mg/dl. His medications included carvedilol 3.125 mg, Nitroglycerin 6.4 mg, aspirin 100 mg, Lantus insulin 10 units, and atorvastatin 40 mg. He had a history of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. He had atherosclerosis and had undergone angiography and stent implantation 12 years ago. He had a family history of diabetes, hypertension, and coronary artery disease. He is a smoker who smoked one pack per day. He denied addiction to any kind of drugs or alcohol. The patient was hospitalized with an extensive scalp wound and underwent reconstructive surgery for the scalp wound on April 20, 2019. The scalp wound became infected, and he developed scalp necrosis 4 days after the surgery . The patient received saline wound irrigation and wet-to-dry dressing twice per day. He had no improvement despite receiving conventional treatments, and he was referred to the wound management team. In the first step, necrotic tissues were removed by autolytic debridement, and the skull was exposed . Then, we used MDT for further debridement and disinfection of the wounds from bacterial infections as well as tending to increase granulated tissues on the wound. The edges of the wound were stimulated because of the larval secretion. This process helps maggots to immediately start their activity and increase their output. Sterile maggots for this case study were prepared in the Laboratory of Medicinal Flies in the Department of Medical Entomology, School of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. The maggots were L1 larvae of Lucilia sericata (Diptera: Calliphoridae). The maggot therapy procedure included preparation of the wound, release of the larvae on the wound, and dressing and removing of larvae after 48 hours. Next, larval therapy may be done immediately after removing third-instar larvae or after some time gaps. The peripheral area of the wound was prepared with zinc oxide to prevent irritation that may be produced by secretions of larvae . After two treatments with larval therapy, all the necrotic tissues were totally removed, and granulation tissues appeared . After four treatments with MDT in 3 weeks, silver-containing dressing and NPWT were applied to the wound for 7 months in order to make granulation tissue grow faster and promote the healing process . AMG was used to accelerate epithelialization of the wound in the last month of treatment . The scalp wound recovered well and totally closed . The patient was discharged to home in good condition and is enjoying life with the healed wound . No adverse effects were reported during or after therapeutic intervention.