An 8 years old boy presented with complaint of painless visual deterioration in both eyes (BE) since early childhood. On examination, the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye (RE) was 6/18, N18 and in the left eye (LE) was counting finger at 10 cm, N60 with nystagmus in BE. Supero-nasal subluxation of the lens was present in BE. Applanation tonometry was normal in BE. Fundus examination of BE showed normal optic disc with generalized attenuation of vessels with retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) atrophy and pigmentary alterations in the retina. A reddish-orange hue was seen at the fovea and atrophic maculopathy was noted. There were characteristic multiple off -white relatively well defined lesions, which were more marked along the arcades in the RE with a single lesion located on the inferonasal retinal quadrant in the fellow eye .
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) depicted sub-foveal thinning with RPE atrophy in the RE . Scans passing just over the lesion revealed a hyperreflective dome shaped mass within the nerve fiber layer (NFL) along with a posterior optical shadowing associated with the disorganization of inner retinal layers . SD-OCT scans of the fellow eye revealed similar features in the LE .
SS-OCT (Swept-Source Optical Coherence tomography) through the fovea of RE showed an opaque lesion arising in the NFL with a smooth transition from retina and posterior shadowing. All other retinal layers appeared compressed along with mild thinning of choroid beneath the tumorous lesion . However, SS-OCT of LE could not be performed due to nystagmus and poor fixation. OCT-A over the retinal tumor showed a feeder vessel with an abnormal network of capillary plexus emanating from it . Autofluorescence (AF) was inconclusive in BE. Infra-red imaging (IRI) showed numerous hypo reflectance lesions in BE corresponding to RAH at the posterior pole . ERG showed markedly extinguished responses with both photopic and scotopic stimuli .
Systemic evaluation by a pediatrician revealed no signs of Tuberous sclerosis or any associated syndrome. There were no systemic features of renal or hepatic dysfunction, neurological deficit, phacomatoses or deafness. MRI (Magnetic resonance imaging) cranium and abdominal ultrasound was normal along with normal renal functions. Gene mapping could not be performed due to limited financial resources.
His pedigree charting revealed a high refractive error in his sister. She was also assessed for any associated syndromes. She was 11 years old, and her BCVA was 6/9, N6 with normal slit-lamp biomicroscopic findings in both eyes. Fundus evaluation revealed some pigmentary alteration in BE with normal macula . An isolated retinal hamartoma was noted in far periphery in the RE.
Based on the above clinical findings of severe visual loss, nystagmus, hyperopia, amaurotic pupils, abnormally pigmented fundi and macular atrophy and with detailed systemic investigations, a diagnosis of presumed non- syndromic LCA with RAH was made. Since multiple alleles have been associated with LCA, gene therapy is highly costly and since RAHs are known to have a benign natural course , we preferred to observe them with a follow-up every 6 months.