A male famer aged 68 years old was admitted to our institute for a tumor in his lower lip. This patient has a history of smoking (30 pack-year) and consuming alcohol for more than 30 years (approximately 200 ml per day). He was diagnosed as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 20 years ago and had been treated with methylprednisolone for 17 years. For the last three years, his SLE status has been stable and thus, he discontinued the SLE treatment.
The patient reported that the tumor in the middle of his lower lip had appeared for a year and gradually increased in size without any pain or bleeding. He did not receive any treatment because of his financial issue. For the last few months, the tumor had rapidly grown, bled and become painful, so that he could not eat or clean his teeth.
On examination, there was a 3 x 4 cm, raised, ulcerous, and bleeding tumor, developing in the lower lip and expanding to 1/3 external upper lip . The submental lymph node was around 2 cm in diameter, firm, and hardly moveable. Ultrasound revealed a suspected metastatic submental lymph node with absent echogenic hilum. MRI Scan demonstrated a lesion in lower lip with size of 13 x 31 mm, which increased in T1W signal and T2W signal, strongly enhanced after contrast and did not invade surrounding tissue. A 2 cm and round lymph node was also identified . The fine needle aspiration (FNA) result of the lymph node presented a metastatic squamous cell carcinoma and the biopsy result of the tumor confirmed squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). No abnormality was detected by a metastatic work-up. Therefore, the clinical staging of this patient was cT2N1M0. In addition, other para-clinical tests including full blood count, biochemistry profile, ds-DNA, ANA were normal, which indicated a stable status of SLE.
The patient underwent surgery including a complete removal of the lower lip and 1/3 external of upper lip, and dissection of the bilateral cervical lymph nodes. The lower lip was reconstructed with V-Y advancement flap . This operation, performed by a team of head and neck surgeons, was proceeded within 4 h. Patient was discharged after 14 days without any complications. Final pathology presented SCC .