A 31-year-old Mestizo woman was admitted to the emergency room of Hospital de la Universidad del Norte. The patient and relatives confirmed she arrived from a different hospital where she remained for approximately 5 hours before voluntarily checking out against medical advice. When admitted to our ER, the patient’s chief complaint was acute pain in left hypochondrium and epigastrium, radiating to her back. Vitals at arrival were within normal ranges, but the patient showed signs of mild respiratory distress. Thorax and abdominal auscultation at arrival were normal, according to medical records. There is no record of oxygen saturation levels. Patient also complained about nausea and reported three emetic episodes. No history of abdominal or thoracic trauma was reported by the patient. The patient denied past surgical history or recent use of drugs. However, the patient and her relatives reported a previous diagnosis of asthma with low bronchodilator responsiveness. After triage, the patient reported an increase in pain and showed paleness, tachycardia, tachypnea, abdominal distension, and timpanism. At this moment, an acute abdomen was diagnosed, and the patient was prepared for hospitalization. Pancreatitis and perforated hollow viscus were considered as differential diagnoses. Laboratory analyses requested included hemogram and blood levels of amylase, total and direct bilirubin, plasma chloride, lipase, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), liver enzymes [aspartate transaminase (ALT) and alanine transaminase (AST)], and creatinine. Imaging studies requested included abdominal ultrasound and x-rays. Additionally, intravenous saline, hyoscine butylbromide (20 mg, intravenous), tramadol hydrochloride (50 mg, intravenous), and oxygen by nasal cannula (low flow) were prescribed. During catheterization, the patient entered cardiorespiratory arrest (asystole); therefore, no blood sample was collected for the laboratory analyses requested, and no imaging analysis was possible. Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) was initiated, and endotracheal intubation was performed. Ventilation and chest compressions were performed according to protocol for 45 minutes. An ultrasound scan was performed because of the high resistance encountered while inserting the endotracheal tube, the marked abdominal distension, and the presence of subcutaneous emphysema in the neck and inguinal regions that developed during resuscitation. Tension pneumothorax was ruled out, but evidence of a large volume of intraintestinal gas was found.
The declaration of death was done 1 hour and 40 minutes after her admission to our hospital. Patients’ relatives were informed, who requested a necropsy to determine the cause of death.
A clinical autopsy was performed in the pathology service of Hospital de la Universidad del Norte. An external description and general characterization of the body was carried out, followed by an internal examination. Photographic evidence was collected at each step. At first sight, it was obvious to the examiner that abdominal viscera were present within the thoracic cavity, predominantly in the left hemithorax. Fibrous adhesions between pleura, thoracic wall, and the viscera were observed. Abdominal viscera, mostly stomach and a portion of duodenum, were found to protrude to the thorax through a diaphragmatic hernia of approximately 10 cm in diameter located on the left side of the diaphragm . Stomach within the thorax showed extensive areas of ecchymosis. Left lung was found collapsed because of pressure exerted by the stomach, and a clear deviation of mediastinum to the right was observed . In addition, a sternal fracture was found, most likely caused by resuscitation. Although we did not find costal fractures, it is likely that trauma secondary to chest compressions could explain the subcutaneous emphysema described above.
In the peritoneal cavity, there was distension of the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, colon, and cecum with edematous and pale walls. Multiple fibrous adhesions between intestinal loops were also observed. Incidentally, it was also found that the patient had a bilateral duplicated collecting system. No evidence of intestinal perforation was found. Due to the localization of the diaphragmatic hernia, a diagnosis of BH was considered. Tissue samples of various organs as well as from different segments of the diaphragm, including the vicinity of the hernia, were collected for further histopathologic analyses.
Tissue samples of less than 1 cm2 in volume were obtained, with subsequent preservation in 10% neutral buffered formalin at room temperature. Tissue samples were processed in a Donatello automatic tissue processor (DiaPath, Italy), and sequential 4-μm-thick cuts were done in a HistoCore Arcadia H semiautomated microtome (Leica, Germany), followed by routine staining with hematoxylin and eosin for subsequent histopathological analysis and photographic documentation.
The samples of the diaphragm collected from the vicinity of the hernia contained abundant fibrous connective tissue, showing congestion and edema. It was possible to observe mixed inflammatory infiltrate where polymorphonuclear lymphocytes and neutrophil were identified among the scattered areas of fibrosis. Notably, the amount of muscle fibers within these samples was abnormally low or completely absent . Patients’ normal diaphragmatic tissue samples were taken for comparison purposes. These diaphragmatic muscle fibers showed normal histological characteristics, although mild congestion and edema were also observed in these areas .
In the left lung (collapsed by the abdominal content), congestive pulmonary parenchyma with areas of rare focal anthracosis and hemorrhage was observed. Large atelectasis and enlarged alveolar septa with chronic inflammatory infiltrate and fibrotic zones were present. The right lung showed areas of emphysematous appearance with marked congestion as well as the presence of chronic inflammatory infiltrate and signs of hemorrhage in the alveolar septa. The examiner concluded that, given the macro- and microscopic findings, the patient was suffering from previously undiagnosed BH.