A 56-year-old Hindu male, known case of coronary artery disease (CAD), presented to our emergency department with a complaint of loss of consciousness (LOC). It was sudden in onset, lasting for a few minutes, and was preceded by sweating. There was a history of two episodes of LOC. It was not associated with any position or activity. There was no history of chest pain, palpitation, headache, weakness, abnormal body movements, fever, trauma, frothing at mouth, up rolling of eyes, tongue bite and tinnitus. He was non-smoker and non-alcoholic. There was no any relevant family history significant to the patient condition.
On clinical examination, he was hemodynamically stable, with normal blood pressure on supine (126/90 mmHg), and standing position (110/88 mmHg). There was no significant postural drop in blood pressure, ultimately ruling out postural hypotension. The general and systemic examinations were unremarkable. He was admitted in medical ward for further evaluation.
The baseline laboratory investigations are shown in .
On etiological workup for syncope, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of head showed a small locus of blood degradation product in the right frontal lobe. The electroencephalogram (EEG) showed normal background activity and was reactive to eye opening and closing. The carotid doppler showed normal scan. And, 2D echocardiography showed a reduced ejection fraction of 40% with no any outflow tract obstruction. These were the investigations done for etiological workup for unexplained syncope. At first, the etiology of syncope was considered to be coronary artery disease (CAD).
While the etiology for the syncope was in dilemma, an incidental carotid sinus massage resulted in sinus pause for more than 3 s in continuous electrocardiogram (ECG) monitoring. Carotid sinus massage (CSM) was performed sequentially over both left and right sides. It was performed both on supine and upright position for 5 s. The demonstration for sinus pause during CSM in ECG is shown in . And reversion to the normal rhythm after CSM is shown in . The differential diagnoses such as vasovagal syncope (VVS) and orthostatic hypotension (OH) were ruled out as the syncope was not associated with specific position or emotional and stressful events. He was then diagnosed as carotid sinus hypersensitivity (CSS). He was kept under medications as shown in .
Supplementary video related to this article can be found at
The following is/are the supplementary data related to this article:
The definite treatment performed for CSH was dual chamber pacemaker placement. It was done in a heart center as the facility of cardiac catheterization was not available in our center. The pacemaker was placed through transvenous access via subclavian vein under local anesthesia. During the course on hospital, he was hemodynamically stable. He accepted the treatment and was recovering well. He was discharged on above mentioned medications after a week of stay in the hospital.