An Iranian (Asian) pregnant women aged 32 years old with a primary complaint of preterm uterine contraction and vaginal bleeding presented the obstetric ward of Yas Hospital (Tehran-Iran, January 2021). She was a multi-para woman (Gravida: 3, Para: 2, Living: 2, Abortion: 0) with a gestational age of 30 weeks. She did not report any prenatal complications and had received corticosteroid therapy 2 days prior to hospital admission. Upon presentation, magnesium sulfate was immediately administered but she was transferred to the operation room for repeat Cesarean section due to progressive cervical dilation. A preterm male newborn with a first-minute Apgar score of 7 and birth weight of 1190 g was born. Physical examination after birth showed a notable frontal bossing, acrocyanosis, and diffuse head, neck, hand, and leg ecchymosis. Anterior and posterior fontanelles were normal. No congenital anomaly or abdominal organomegaly was observed. Peripheral pulses were palpable and heart sounds were normal without any abnormal sounds. His reflexes were normal, but limb movements were hypotonic. Due to an increase in his respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) score from 4 to 7 and signs of respiratory distress (inter- and subcostal retraction, grunting, and decreased breathing sounds), resuscitation measures were initiated. He was then given nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) in the operation room that was subsequently switched to mechanical ventilation in the NICU. Intratracheal surfactant and intravenous antibiotic therapy were also initiated in the NICU. Under mechanical ventilation with synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) setup, his O2 saturation, blood pressure, and heart rate improved to > 94%, 70/35 mmHg, and 160 beats per minute, respectively. On day 3 post-NICU admission,, a PICC line (Premicath; 1Fr/28 G; VYGON, Écouen, France; Code 1261.080) was also inserted from the auxiliary vein of the right upper extremity for intravenous therapy, delivery of medications, and parenteral nutrition. A chest X-ray showed that the tip of the PICC line was in the appropriate place in the superior vena cava (SVC) . Mechanical ventilation was discontinued 72 h post-NICU admission because of improved respiratory condition and normal automatic breathing. After extubation, low-flow oxygen therapy was continued and low-volume feeding was initiated based on his tolerance. His weight gain was acceptable and the clinical situation improved, including a gradual increase in the feeding volume and respiratory support. On day 10 post-NICU admission, he suddenly developed hypotonia, apnea, hypoxia, and bradycardia. He was gasping, had hypotension, and there was an absence of peripheral pulses. In the first minutes after the alarm signs, resuscitation was initiated and ventilation support provided, together with administration of inotropic drugs (1–3 minutes). Despite the high-frequency setup of the mechanical ventilator, the endotracheal tube was checked for displacement or obstruction due to his persistent critical condition (hypotension and shortness of breath). Pneumothorax and equipment failure were also ruled out. Several medical measures were initiated (approximately at minutes 3–4), including nothing by mouth (NPO), high-dose antibiotic therapy, emergency echocardiography, brain ultrasound, arterial and venous blood sampling, blood cell count, and arterial blood gas analysis.
Echocardiography was performed over the next 5–7 minutes , and the results showed SVC perforation caused by the catheter, severe pericardial effusion, right atrial collapse, ventricle dysfunction, and tamponade. The ejection fraction value was 40%, and there was no evidence of atrial septal defect (ASD), pleural effusion, or patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). A peripheral venous catheter was inserted, and the PICC was removed at the same time. Urgent pericardiocentesis was performed through subxiphoid cannulation guided by echocardiography and 10 ml of the pericardial fluid was aspirated (over the next 7–15 minutes) (Electronic Supplementary Material file : Video S1). The aspirated fluid was sent to the laboratory for tests, with the results showing severe acidosis (pH 6.80) and hyperglycemia . To improve the hyperglycemia and metabolic acidosis, the patient was hydrated with low glucose solution and bicarbonate was initiated. Respiratory support was continued and antibiotics covering Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-negative bacteria were administered. Brain sonography was also performed, which was normal. The workup sequence is shown in Table .
Under mechanical ventilation the respiratory parameters improved gradually; pericardial drainage and PICC removal occurred concurrently. O2 saturation increased to 95%, blood pressure elevated, and vital signs remained stable. Analysis of the aspirated pericardial fluid showed a hyperglycemic fluid . A dramatic improvement in the neonate's clinical responses (after pericardial drainage and PICC removal) was suggestive of PICC displacement, pericardial perforation, and cardiac tamponade. Echocardiography was repeated (× 3) every 12 hours to ensure no further pericardial effusion was present. On day 40 after birth, the patient was still in the hospital but showed weight gain; he was in good condition without requiring respiratory support.