The patient was a healthy 37-year-old man, without any past medical history, who had participated in semi-professional training for bicycle marathons for over 10 years. During the previous 5 years, he took part in ultra-trail running events, which requires endurance training for 3 h per day.
The patient’s brother, at age 26 years, was referred to a cardiologist for an asymptomatic abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG). Features of his ECG included sinus bradycardia, incomplete right bundle branch block, ST-segment elevation from V2 to V6 and T wave inversion in leads I, avL, and V6. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) showed a dilated left ventricle (LV) with a moderately depressed ejection fraction (EF 41%), hypertrabeculation that did not meet the criteria for non-compaction cardiomyopathy (NCC) and patchy late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the anterolateral wall. He was diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy with a moderately depressed EF related to myocarditis with no active myocardial inflammation and not meeting NCC criteria and was prescribed an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. This examination also led to a diagnosis of Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL), for which he underwent chemoradiotherapy with total disease regression. He subsequently underwent genetic testing for alterations in genes associated with NCC (TAZ and LDB3) and dilated cardiomyopathy (MYH7, ACTC1, TNNT2, and TPM), as well as tests for GM1 gangliosidosis, Morquio B and Fabry disease, but all were negative. Four months after his last evaluation and 3 years after being cured of HL, he collapsed in ventricular fibrillation during his regular jog and subsequently died. His last treadmill stress test (TST) showed excellent functional capacity and increased PQ interval duration (320 ms) during the recovery period. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a normal LV, an EF of 48% and a global longitudinal strain of −15%. He did not undergo a follow-up CMR and a post-mortem analysis was not performed. Possible causes of death were ventricular arrhythmia due to myocardial fibrosis identified on initial CMR or coronary artery disease due to previous exposure to chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Following his brother’s death, our patient underwent a thorough cardiac evaluation. Cardiovascular and respiratory examination were unremarkable. A resting 12-lead ECG showed sinus rhythm with a first degree atrioventricular block (AVB) of 360 ms . Ambulatory 24 h Holter registration showed a maximum PQ interval of 630 ms with multiple episodes of Type I second degree AVB . Multiple Type II second degree AVB was observed during the daytime, and two periods of type 2:1 advanced AVB at night. The patient was always asymptomatic during follow-up.
The patient underwent an electrophysiology evaluation, and detraining was recommended. He was totally compliant with detraining and underwent regular 24 h Holter registration. Treadmill stress test showed a normal increase in heart rate during exercise and no abnormal AV conduction or arrhythmias. Transthoracic echocardiography was normal, and CMR showed normal cardiac morphology and function with no evidence of LGE. His blood cell counts; liver, renal, and thyroid function tests; and toxicology tests were normal. He was negative for the LMNA gene. Sarcoidosis was unlikely because of his normal CMR and normal blood levels of angiotensin conversion enzyme. After 1 year of deconditioning, there was clear regression of higher forms of AVB .