A 42-year-old woman was admitted to our department because of elevated blood glucose and blurred vision. This patient was diagnosed with diabetes in a local hospital during pregnancy 7 years ago, then developed blurred vision and extremity numbness. She was treated with metformin and underwent a cardiac mass surgery in our hospital 3 years ago. Postoperative histologic assays indicated this patient may have suffered a “left atrial mucinous adenocarcinoma”. In addition, the patient had a history of hypertension for over 10 years and was treated with enalapril maleate. Her menarche was at the age of 15, having a menstrual period and cycle of 5–7 and 27–30 days, respectively. She had been experiencing menstrual disorders 1 year prior to this admission, manifested as a longer menstrual cycle (2–4 months) and decreased menstrual flow (2–3 days). The patient denied having relatives with a similar medical family history.
A physical examination revealed typical features of Cushing syndrome (centripetal obesity, buffalo hump, mild facial plethora and purple striae on the lower abdomen) and spotty pigmentation of facial skin and lips . Laboratory findings are detailed in Table . Adrenal and brain computed tomography (CT) scans are shown in Fig. D-F and Fig. G-I, respectively. A cardiac ultrasound revealed tricuspid regurgitation. A thyroid ultrasound revealed a 6 × 6 mm slightly hypoechoic nodule in the right thyroid, classified as 4a by the thyroid imaging reporting and data system (TI-RADS), whilst another 8 × 5 mm hypoechoic nodule in the right thyroid, as TI-RADS classification 4b . Thyroid fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy was suspicious for right papillary thyroid carcinoma, Bethesda V . A breast ultrasound showed a hypoechoic nodule in the right breast suspicious for tumor-like hyperplasia with a breast imaging reporting and data system (BI-RADS) classification of 4a; double breasts with multiple hypoechoic nodules with a BI-RADS classification of 3 . Furthermore, a vaginal ultrasound showed a cystic mass in the left ovarian attachments and cervical Nessler's cyst. The bone mineral density of the lumbar vertebrae (L1, L2, L3, L4) of the patient was measured by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). The Z values (compared with a population of the same race, gender and age group) of the lumbar vertebrae were -3.2, -2.4, -3.1 and -2.4 for L1, L2, L3 and L4, respectively, and the total Z value of the lumbar vertebrae was -2.8, clearly indicating the presence of osteoporosis.
Consented by the patient, her peripheral blood was collected and sent to the Maikino Medical Laboratory (Beijing, China). Mutation in PRKAR1A was detected by the whole exome sequencing and verified by the Sanger sequencing using the forward (5’-TCGTCAGAAATCACCTATTCTTCTC-3’) and reverse (5’-GCTAAGCTGGGCTTAATGCAA-3’) primers. A known pathogenic germline mutation of the PRKAR1A gene (c. 682C > T) in exon 7 was found. This point mutation introduced a premature stop codon that substitutes the arginine (Arg) codon (p. R228X) in PRKAR1A. Consequently, the mutated PRKAR1A can only translate a C-terminus truncated loss-of-function PRKAR1A polypeptide in CNC. However, children (son and daughter) of this patient did not carry this mutation . The cardiac tumor that occurred 3 years ago was rechecked and finally confirmed as "left atrial adenomyxoma" via Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining and immunohistochemistry . All the pathology images were taken using Leica DM6B upright microscopes and the Leica Application Suite as the acquisition software. The resolution of each original image is 300dpi and there is no downstream processing or averaging that enhances the resolution of the image.
The patient was then transferred to the surgery department of our hospital for radical thyroid surgery undergoing right thyroid gland lobe removal, isthmus and central lymph node dissection plus right recurrent laryngeal nerve exploration under general anesthesia. The postoperative histopathology indicated papillary carcinoma of the right thyroid . Based on the clinical symptoms, physical examination and relevant laboratory results, the patient’s adrenal lesions were considered to be PPNAD-associated Cushing syndrome and bilateral adrenalectomy was recommended. However, due to personal reasons, she refused any further surgery. Adrenal steroidogenesis inhibitors, including ketoconazole, metyrapone, and osilodrostat, are recommended for medical therapy when surgery is not feasible . However, these drugs are not available in China. Additionally, the glucocorticoid receptor blocker mifepristone can also improve key clinical features associated with hypercortisolism, specifically hyperglycemia and weight gain . However, it is only used as an abortifacient in the first months of pregnancy in China. Therefore, the appropriate treatments were given to protect against Cushing syndrome-related complications, including glycemic control (Metformin 2.0 g/d and Acarbose 150 mg/d), blood pressure control (Enalapril Maleate 10 mg/d, Metoprolol Succinate Sustained-release Tablet 23.75 mg/d), and osteoporosis management (Calcium Acetate 0.6 g/d and Alendronate Sodium/Vitamin D3 combination Tablet, 1 tablet/week). The patient was followed up 1 year later, and some relevant results are shown in Table and Figure S. She was perimenopausal at that time. Despite a previously suspected malignant nodule in the right mammary gland, a re-examination via ultrasound considered the nodule to be benign .