An otherwise healthy 78-year-old Caucasian male patient who did not smoke cigarettes presented to our Ear, Nose and Throat outpatient clinic with the complaint of nasal obstruction. A physical examination revealed a smooth surfaced mass occluding his left nasal orifice with rightward deviation of his nasal septum. Paranasal computerized tomography (CT) revealed a well-circumscribed solid mass originating from his anterior nasal septum and obstructing his airway (Figure ). A histopathologic evaluation of a specimen obtained via an incisional punch biopsy identified mucosal infiltration by lymphoid cells with small round nuclei and nucleoli and a ‘starry sky’ pattern of small, undifferentiated, tightly packed lymphocytes interspersed with large pale histiocytes (Figure ). Following oncology consultation, a final diagnosis of stage 3 (Ann Arbor Staging System) BL was made and verified by immunohistochemical studies. BL, regardless of subtype, typically expresses monotypic surface immunoglobulin M and pan-B-cell antigens, including cluster of differentiation (CD)19, CD20, CD22 and CD79a, and co-expresses CD10, B-cell lymphoma 6 protein, CD43 and protein 53, but not CD5, CD23, B-cell lymphoma 2 protein, CD138 or terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase. A test for human immunodeficiency virus revealed that our patient was seronegative for the virus; a titer for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was also negative and his lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated.
Eight scheduled cycles of chemotherapy as a first-line treatment with a combination of doxorubicin, vincristine, cyclophosphamide and prednisone were administered. Our patient received no radiotherapy sessions because control positron emission tomography imaging performed after the chemotherapy revealed no pathological findings. Post-treatment controls revealed a loss of overall tumor mass with no obstruction in both his nasal orifices. Due to identification of the well-circumscribed anterior mass, the control CT was not considered necessary. Our patient had a good clinical outcome after the chemotherapy and has reported no problems to date in the second year of follow-up.