A three-year-old boy with a history of liquid diarrhea for a couple of days, several times a day, with intermittent vomiting and without blood on stools or fever, was first seen by a primary care physician. At physical examination, the child was found to be hydrated, without abdominal pain or distention, and was able to take oral fluids and medication. He was diagnosed as having acute gastroenteritis and was advised to take oral hydrate solution and to return to the primary care center if the symptoms worsened. Fourteen days later, the child returned and the mother complained that he had been suffering from intermittent diarrhea, vomiting and abdominal distention. At examination, he did not show any weight loss, was hydrated and had an overall good clinical condition. At this point, the diagnosis was persistent diarrhea and he was advised to start a lactose-free diet, take albendazole for five days and collect parasitological stool samples.
There was no short-term follow-up on this case by the primary care team because the family requested a second opinion from a different general pediatrician. The second physician made the interpretation that the child possibly had lactose intolerance and ordered a lactose intolerance test with blood analysis. When the patient returned to the original primary care center, two months after the initial onset, he was still presenting aqueous diarrhea three to six times a day, abdominal distension, intermittent vomiting and now weight loss. Parasitological stool samples were negative and blood analysis suggested an iron deficient anemia. The lactose intolerance test was not available at that moment. The diagnosis at this point was chronic diarrhea with probable malabsorption. The child was referred to a tertiary gastroenterology center for further investigation, with upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, serum xylose tests and stool analysis for fat and pH.
Abdominal ultrasound was performed and identified an onionskin image of part of the small bowel , suggestive of intussusception. On the day of the ultrasound, the patient presented a distended but soft palpable abdomen without abdominal pain and was referred for hospital admission. After hospital admission, laparoscopic intervention demonstrated dilation of the proximal small bowel, without any mass or enlarged lymph nodes.
The intraoperative findings showed that the intussusception had resolved spontaneously. During the hospital stay, further investigations on chronic diarrhea and malabsorption were conducted, and the most relevant results were the following: low albumin of 3.2 g/dl; increased international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.95, which resolved after vitamin K administration; low serum sodium (Na) of 133 mEq/l; high presence of fat in stools (12 g of fat in 161.7 g of stool after 72 hours) and normal stool pH of 6.0; low serum xylose of 6.08 mg/dl, suggestive of malabsorption; negative HIV serological test; normal immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibody level of 247 mg/dl; and normal sweat test (Na of 44.01 mEq/l and Cl of 35.6 mEq/l). All of these laboratory and reference values are shown in . To investigate malabsorption, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, and macroscopic evaluation showed a mosaic pattern of mucosa suggestive of celiac disease. On microscopic evaluation, inflammation of the duodenum mucosa was observed along with atrophic intestinal villi and crypt hypertrophy, compatible with Marsh III celiac disease, which was further confirmed by elevated tissue transglutaminase antibody concentration of 200 U/ml.
The child was then administered a gluten-free diet and his weight, stool consistency and stool frequency recovered completely, thus resolving the abdominal distention. He was discharged after a month in hospital, with body weight of 16.1 kg. One month later, at an outpatient visit, he was weighing 17.4 kg. One year after admission, his weight had increased to 19.8 kg.