A 30-year-old female patient was presented to the emergency department with lower abdominal pain. She reported no past medical history, nor or psychiatric history. On admission, the patient was pale, her blood pressure was 80/50 mm Hg, and her heart rate was 120 bpm and with cold and clammy extremities.
A pelvic echography revealed an empty uterine cavity with fluid in the pouch of Douglas. Her hemoglobin level was 4.7 g/dL. A ruptured ectopic pregnancy was suspected. During the laparotomy, about 3 L of blood was suctioned. The left tube was successfully resected. The patient received four units of red blood cells. She was then transferred to the Intensive Care Unit. The hemoglobin level was controlled at 10.6 g/dL.
The evolution was initially favorable, then, after 12 hours, the patient developed a shortness of breath. Physical examination showed tachypnea and tachycardia. Oxygen saturation decreased on room air. Cardiac auscultation was normal but pulmonary auscultation revealed bilaterally dispersed crackles. A chest radiography showed an air space opacification in a batwing distribution. The patient's respiratory state kept on deteriorating which eventually led to her reintubation. Inotropic support was initiated secondary to hemodynamic alteration.
The diagnosis of volume overload secondary to rapid transfusion of blood was initially evoked.
The ECG revealed sinus tachycardia, with a prolonged corrected QT interval at 502 ms.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction with mid-basal segments akinesia and hypercontractility of the apical segments. Ejection fraction of the LV was estimated at 25% (Supplementary Video 1).
Biology has shown mild elevated troponin and NT-pro-BNP levels which led to perform a coronary angiography. It showed no angiographic stenosis (Supplementary Video 2). A left ventricle angiography evoked the diagnosis of inverted-TS ( and Supplementary Video 3), confirmed by a total inter-TAK diagnosis score of 80 which refers to a probability of 97.3% of a TS.
Since the patient was under catecholamine inotropes, we decided to initiate a treatment with Levosimendan. After obtaining oral consent from the patient's husband, a continuous infusion with 0.2 µg/kg/minute for 48 hours was administered to the patient. Weaning of the catecholamine inotropes was possible by the second day of treatment with Levosimendan and the patient was successfully extubated. Clinical evolution was favorable. TTE was performed after 1 week and showed an improvement of the LV systolic function . As it is shown in , mild hypokinesia persisted at the basal segments. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit. Ad-integrum recovery was achieved 3 weeks after this episode where TTE showed good contractility of all LV segments.