A 46-years-old man came with sudden onset of bilateral hip pain with no history of trauma. It was started with difficulty in moving the left lower limb since February 2020 and after about 1-month period patient got right hip pain which made the patient completely bedridden. He also complained of yellowish discoloration of eyes associated with weight loss, malaise. No history of tremors in hand. No history of seizures.
He was a known case of diabetes mellitus on antidiabetic medications for the past 5 years and known habit of drinking alcohol for many years. Patient was admitted for fracture bilateral neck femur in our hospital. There was a curiosity to find the cause of this spontaneous fracture which resulted in subjecting the patient to multiple invasive as well as non-invasive tests which has been shown below.
On examination, there was striking feature of icterus and anemia.
Investigation revealed Hb of 9.1 g%, PCV 26%, Platelets count 1 lakh.
Liver function tests (LFTs) were deranged with total serum bilirubin of 5.6 mg/dL (n = 0.3–1.2).
SGOT and SGPT were high. A/G ratio reversed −2.0/4.2.
Se calcium was raised 12 (9–11 mg/dL).
Se 25 OH VIT D was low 7.0 (n = 20–50 ng/mL).
Se vit D 1,25-Dihydroxy found to be low <5.00 (n = 19.9–79.3 pg/mL).
Se PTH was low 11.1 (n = 15–68.3 pg/mL).
Same time malignancy was ruled out by doing.
Bone marrow aspiration which showed emperipolesis by megakaryocytes with mild hyperplasia of myeloid series and mild shift to left. No evidence of malignancy.
Ct scan thorax and abdomen revealed features of cirrhosis of liver and likely to represent metabolic bone disease like osteomalacia rather than metastasis. It also revealed old healed fractures of dorsal vertebrae and rib fractures.
In our setting, there was no bone mineral density test done in our hospital and since patient was not affordable could not get it done from private.
Other investigation like ECG, 2DECHO, and ABG was normal.
Patient was diagnosed as spontaneous bilateral neck femur fracture secondary to chronic liver disease and Vitamin D3 deficiency.
Treatment was started with medications for liver disease and doses of Vitamin D3. Following which LFTs started improving and Serum ca came to normal. As a result, with endocrine consultation, we did not start any PTH hormone replacement therapy and patient was not affordable too.
Finally, decision of B/L Hemiarthroplasty was taken and patient was operated on March 25, 2020, under combined spinal epidural anesthesia.
Patient was operated one hip at a time in lateral position with cemented bipolar prosthesis, followed by other hip with change in position with cemented bipolar prosthesis in same setting.
Following post-operative day 1, patient was put on LMW enoxaparin subcutaneously, Vitamin D3 dose and injection zoledronic acid dose was given.
Physiotherapy was started with static quadriceps exercises and full weight bearing was started on post-operative day 4 as patient tolerated pain.
Patient was discharged after stitch removal (post-operative day 14) and called for follow-up after 1 month. After 3 months of time, patient came to OPD walking without walker. In august, patient resumed back to his work. Patient was follow-up for further time period at 6 months, 12 months, and 24 months with minimal symptoms but with symptomatic treatment, he was able to do his work.