A previously healthy 35-year old male was referred from the emergency department (ED) of a primary care hospital to the ED of a level-1 hospital for one episode of massive UGIB.
On admission, he presented signs of hypovolemic shock with paleness, sweating, low blood pressure (BP of 100/50 mmHg), tachycardia (105 bpm) and acute anemia (hemoglobin level of 9.9 d/dL on first check, and of 8 d/dL on second one). A previously placed nasogastric tube showed drainage of 300 cc of blood.
No significant past medical history was recorded as well as drugs intake or alcohol abuse.
Intensive treatment including fluids challenge, blood transfusion of one unite of red blood cell, broad spectrum antibiotic and proton pump inhibitor intravenous (IV) therapy was started.
An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed in emergency setting, with a standard gastroscope (Olympus Medical System® GIF-Q160). Endoscopy showed the presence of a non-pulsatile bulging at the proximal third of greater curvature/ posterior wall of the corpus of the stomach . The gastric bulging measured among 3 cm in diameter and presented a small erosion on its surface with a visible vessel, but no active bleeding at the moment of the examination, despite the gastric cavity was quite full of fresh blood. An endoscopic cyanoacrylate glue injection was performed (n-Butyl 2-cyanoacrylate, Glubran®2, GEM, Italy): The glue was delivered into the lesion through a 23-gauge injection needle catheter (Cook-Medical Inc.), followed by injection of 1.2 cc of sterile water. No other lesions of the upper GI tract were detected during the EGD.
The clinical scenario and the finding of such uncommon gastric lesion in a healthy young man with negative past medical history led us to perform an urgent contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) after the EGD.
At the CT angiography , the middle and distal third of the splenic artery were fully replaced by a giant aneurysm (10.5 cm in maximum diameter); it was packed to the posterior wall of the stomach, with a plugged fistula. No active bleeding was noted, confirming that EGD treatment was successuful. The opacification of the aneurysm was partial, because of its large volume and low pressure. Two small aneurysms (< 2 cm in size) of the left gastric and ileocolic artery were also detected.