This patient is a 45-year-old male patient who was previously well and immunocompetent. He had a new onset of generalized tonic-clonic convulsion. He denied having head trauma, fever, previous similar attacks, contact with sick patients, and malignancy. Neurological examination was normal without papilledema. Initial blood investigations showed a slightly abnormal raise in white blood cells: 11.53 × 10^9/L (normal range: 4–10 × 10^9/L) and also slightly abnormal elevation erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 21 mm/hour (normal range: 0–15 mm/hour); otherwise, the rest of laboratory results were within the normal range including electrolytes and C-reactive protein . The human immunodeficiency virus test was negative, and the routine chest X-ray was normal .
Computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain without contrast showed a hypodense signal in the right frontal lobe involving the gray and white matter without mass effect or sulcal effacement that was not enhancing post-contrast administration . Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the brain post-gadolinium demonstrated an ill-defined enhancing meningeal-based lesion [ and ]. The preoperative diagnosis was en-plaque meningioma. The lesion was explored through a right frontal craniotomy, and the overlying bone was normal. Intraoperatively, the lesion was avascular and firm yellowish-white mass that was in adherence to a thick dura. Total excision of the mass with the attached dura was performed, along with coagulating overlying bone. The bone flap was replaced after duraplasty. The wound was closed in layers after achieving a good hemostasis. Histological examination of the lesion revealed diffuse granulomatous inflammation with focal caseous necrosis consistent with TB . The postoperative recovery period was uneventful. The purified protein derivative (PPD) test was negative. The patient was discharged from the hospital in stable condition on anti-TB medications and phenytoin.
At three months of follow-up visits, MR imaging of the brain showed total resection of the tuberculoma without recurrence, and the patient was well .