A 61-year-old Western European man applied to our neurological outpatient clinic complaining about swollen hands for 8 weeks, myalgia dependent on physical activity in the lower and upper limbs for 3 months, general muscular weakness, and a hoarse voice without dysphagia. The clinical neurological examination revealed mild dysarthria, hypertrophy of bilateral calf muscles without tenderness on palpation, and hypo-/areflexia with pallhypesthesia of the lower limbs. In addition, the patient reported about paresthesias in the first three fingers and the radial forth finger of the right hand with a positive Phalen’s sign suggestive of carpal tunnel syndrome. Except for mild edema of the limbs the cardiovascular and respiratory system showed no abnormality.
CK was significantly elevated (64 µmol/l*s, normal < 3.2), and electromyography (EMG) showed spontaneous activity (positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials) in the muscles (right tibialis anterior and left gastrocnemius muscle) but no signs of chronic denervation and no myopathic changes.
Thus, the patient was subjected to our neurological ward at Jena University Hospital. Nerve conduction study showed bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome but no signs of polyneuropathy. Magnetic evoked potentials were normal. The most important finding was an elevated TSH up to 30.5 mU/l (normal range: 0.27–4.20 mU/l), the level of T3 was under 1.50 pmol/l (normal range 3.10–6.80 pmol/l) and the T4 level under 1.30 pmol/l (normal range 12.00–22.00 pmol/l). Thus, manifest hypothyroidism was diagnosed. Anti-thyreoglobulin-antibodies (5671.0 U/ml, normal < 60 U/ml) and anti-TSH-receptor-antibodies (5.4 U/ml, normal < 1.8 U/ml) were increased, and Hashimoto thyroiditis was diagnosed . Myoglobin was elevated to 248 µg/l (normal range 28–72 µg/l). Blood count showed a mild normocytic, normochrome anemia, the liver enzymes were elevated (ALAT up to 1.94 µmol/l*s, normal < 0.83 µmol/l*s; ASAT up to 2.75 µmol/l*s, normal < 0.85 µmol/l*s). Renal function did not show any significant abnormalities. Cerebrospinal fluid showed cytoalbuminologic dissociation without evidence of infection. Rheumatologic parameters, hepatitis serology, lipid profile, and vitamins revealed no pathologic findings.
Electrocardiogram, cardiac ultrasound and pulmonary function testing demonstrated no pathologic findings. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a muscular hypertrophy of the lower limbs , but no signs of myositis or myopathy (no gadolinium enhancement, no edema, no fatty degeneration).
Consequently, replacement therapy with levothyroxine (LT4), was initiated starting with 75 µg per day. Myopathic symptoms improved over six months but there was no complete remission of the symptoms. Especially the bilateral calf hypertrophy persisted. Signs of chronic denervation evolved in EMG with elevated amplitudes of muscle unit action potentials (right and left tibialis anterior, left gastrocnemius, and right vastus lateralis muscles), positive sharp waves were still detectable in the right tibialis anterior muscle. Muscle ultrasound revealed a normal to slightly increased echogenicity of the calf muscles . The patient reported about a good clinical recovery of muscle strength and decreased myalgia. CK and myoglobin decreased significantly .