A 59-year-old female with multiple myeloma was admitted to the Department Of Internal Medicine at Dicle University Hospital for ABMT.
The BMT unit was equipped with HEPA system. The patient had fever episodes after ABMT and empirical therapy with meropenem and vancomycin
was started according to the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommendations for high-risk patients which required hospitalization .
The patient also suffered from generalized petechiae, abundant diarrhea, orbital erythema, and vision loss in her left eye. It should be noted that
the eye symptoms began the day after hospitalization. Orbital examination revealed conjunctival hemorrhage, orbital edema, and necrosis in the nasal
area. Moreover, there was no growth in nasal tissue culture. Results of abdominal computerized tomography revealed diffuse edema in the abdomen.
Fluconazole and metronidazole were added to treatment for persistent fever, considering anaerobic or yeast infection.
It is noteworthy that the patient had diabetes mellitus for 20 years. The laboratory tests revealed pancytopenia; besides, white blood cell, red
blood cell, platelet, and hemoglobin counts were 120/Μl (4,600-10,200), 2790/µl (4,040- 6,130), 35040/µl (142,000-424,000), and 5.58 g/Dl (12.2-18.1),
respectively. It should be mentioned that neutropenia continued until the death of the patient. In addition, C-reactive protein, sedimentation,
and procalcitonin levels were high as 28.7mg/dl (0-0,5), 70 mm/h (0-20), and 40 ng/ml (0-0, 12), respectively.
After persistent fever episodes, fluconazole was switched to anidulafungin. Blood samples were cultured in BACTEC Plus Aerobic/F bottles
and processed by the BACTEC FX (manufactured by Becton Dickinson, USA) automated system. Subcultures were performed on 5% sheep blood agar (SBA),
and Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) media after positive signaling and microscopic examination of the BACTEC bottles.
White to cream cottony colonies grew after 24 h of incubation on SBA and SDA. Gram staining of the colonies revealed septate and
branched hyphae and arthroconidia (, , ).
The isolate was identified as S. clavata (G. clavatum) by MALDI Biotyper 3.1 (manufactured by Bruker Daltonics, USA)
with a score of 2.34 (≥2 scores are reliable at species level). Anidulafungin (50mg/day) was switched to liposomal amphotericin B(300mg/day) after
fungal identification. Indirect tests of mannan, beta-D-glucan, galactomannan could not be performed for IFI monitoring as they were not available in our laboratory.
Antifungal susceptibility test (AFST) of the isolate was performed by gradient test method using E-test strips (manufactured by Hi Media,
India) on Roswell Park Memorial Institute agar. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of amphotericin B, fluconazole, voriconazole,
posaconazole, and anidulafungin were found to be 4, 3, 0.125, 0.125, and >32 mg/dl, respectively . The patient died
of sepsis and multiple organ failure before the determination of the sensitivity test results.