An 18-year-old healthy male was brought to the emergency room, Sylhet M.A.G Osmani Medical College Hospital with a history of attempted suicide by ingestion of about 30 ml of an unknown poison, later revealed to be Paraquat 20 SL. He was initially managed at a local health complex with gastric lavage, intravenous fluids, antiemetic, and H2 blocker, and referred to this tertiary hospital for further management. On admission, he had vomiting, difficulty in opening his mouth and inability to drink or swallow. He was conscious and oriented and had mucosal erosion of tongue , palate, and lips with some mucosal bleeding having poisoning severity score (PSS) grade one. His heart rate was 78/min and regular, blood pressure was 100/60 mm Hg, respiratory rate was 20/min and temperature 98°K. Pupils were normal and reacting to light. Oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. Both lung fields were clear on auscultation. Other systemic examinations were normal.
Laboratory investigations revealed high serum creatinine (PSS grade 2). Complete blood count, serum ALT and electrolytes were within normal limits . Chest radiograph was also normal .
To rule out OP poisoning, atropine challenge test was performed which was negative. He was managed conservatively and was soon able to swallow liquids. He was discharged on day 10 when his renal function settled .
On day 15, he developed irregular fever, shortness of breath and non-productive cough and as these symptoms progressed, he consulted with a local physician. Chest radiograph revealed diffuse consolidation and he was prescribed a 14-day course of antibiotics. But his condition deteriorated and he had to get admitted to the hospital on day 30. The lesions on his chest radiograph showed bilateral diffuse alveolar shadowing and a high-resolution CT scan of chest was obtained, which revealed bilateral pulmonary fibrosis .
He was started on cyclophosphamide and methylprednisolone and his condition was static. There was no further deterioration during his stay. (Additional file )