We report a case of a 42 years-old Caucasian male presenting with 2-weeks of crampy lower abdominal pain, and frequent non-bloody diarrhea associated with urgency, tenesmus, and nocturnal episodes. Additional symptoms included 6 days of subjective fevers, chills and rigors, with no resolution despite regular acetaminophen and ibuprofen. He presented to the emergency department (ED) on day 16 of this episode, where laboratory investigations were significant for an isolated elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 280 mg/L [< 8 mg/L]. A CT-scan of his abdomen demonstrated mural thickening of the large bowel from the ascending colon to the distal descending colon, with sparing of the sigmoid colon, as well as reactive retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy . The patient remained in the ED with concern over infectious versus drug reaction etiologies, and was discharged home on day 17 with a plan to follow up stool analysis with his family physician. He returned to the ED on day 19 with 24-h of frequent, small volume, rectal bleeding with mucous at which time the Gastroenterology service was consulted. He did not report any nausea or vomiting, arthralgias, oral ulcers, or eye pain. There was no recent travel history, sick contacts, dietary indiscretions, or antibiotic use. There was no past history of gastrointestinal bleeding, or change in bowel habits. His family history was notable for a possible diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease in his mother. He had a 20 pack-year smoking history, but quit 5 years previous.
The patient’s past medical history was notable for chronic plaque psoriasis, manifesting as palmoplantar disease without joint involvement. Over the past 15 years, flares were managed with 2 to 4-week courses of acitretin and systemic cyclosporine. His treatment was optimized to regular use of these medications over the past year for refractory symptoms. Subsequently, the patient was switched to subcutaneous injections of Ixekizumab, for long term management of his moderate psoriasis. His presenting symptoms manifested approximately 2 days after completing the 12-week induction period.
On physical examination, the patient was hemodynamically stable (Blood Pressure: 135/85 mmHg, Heart Rate: 67 beats/minute) with a low-grade fever (Temperature: 37.5 degrees Celsius). The patient did not look toxic, but was in obvious pain that was exacerbated by truncal movement. Abdominal exam revealed a soft abdomen with tenderness in the left lower quadrant upon palpation, and evidence of rebound tenderness. There were no palpable masses and no hepatosplenomegaly. Digital rectal exam showed a normal external exam, with dark stool, but no bright red blood. Laboratory investigations revealed a drop in hemoglobin from 152 g/L to 134 g/L [130–170 g/L], and a rise in CRP to 291 mg/L [< 8 mg/L] over a 72 h period from the first ED visit. The patient had a very low albumin at 23 g/L [35–50 g/L]. The remainder of blood work, including white blood cell, platelet count, liver enzymes and kidney function were normal. Stool samples for cultures of bacterial pathogens, ova and parasites, viral serologies, Clostridium difficile toxin (C. diff) and fecal white blood cells were negative. Colonoscopy images were grossly indicative of severe Crohn’s colitis in the cecum, ascending colon and transverse colon, with deep punched-out circumferential ulcers in the transverse and descending colon. There was relative sigmoid and rectal sparing, with noticeable loss of vascular pattern . The ileocecal valve was not intubated as it was noted to be very friable and erythematous. Biopsies were negative for viral cytopathic effect and cytomegalovirus (CMV) stain negative, tissue architecture was consistent with severe colitis with rare mucosal granulomas present.
On history and physical examination alone, we considered a differential diagnosis for his abdominal pain, fever and rectal bleeding including infection, inflammatory bowel disease, drug-induced colitis, ischemic colitis, and diverticulitis. These were sequentially ruled out following negative infectious screening tests, abdominal imaging and colonoscopy findings most suggestive of active Crohn’s colitis.
Histopathology from index colonoscopy suggested chronic mild to moderate pancolitis involving the ascending, transverse, descending colons and rectum. Repeat biopsies 2 weeks later showed severe pancolitis with no viral cytopathic effect with rare granulomas. After careful consideration of the entire clinical picture, a tentative diagnosis of Crohn’s colitis was made.
Immediately post index colonoscopy and once infectious causes were ruled out, the patient was started on intravenous steroids (Solumedrol 40 mg IV, daily). Over the next 24 h, the patient remained afebrile and hemodynamically stable. Symptomatically, he reported minimal rectal bleeding and abdominal pain, and was able to tolerate a full fluid diet. His hemoglobin continued to decline (115 g/L), however his CRP trended down slightly to 236 mg/L and with some improvement in his albumin. The patient remained in hospital, with a partial response to steroids demonstrated by his improved clinical status, CRP and albumin.
Ultimately the patient received total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and after 9 days of IV steroids, was induced using an anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) neutralizing antibody (infliximab 10 mg/kg) with accelerated dosing 1 week later. Clinical and endoscopic improvement in his colitis was evident on endoscopy 4 days after his second infusion . Histopathology from his third colonoscopy (4 months post initiation of infliximab) revealed no evidence of active or chronic injury in all segments that were sampled. The absence of features of chronicity on biopsies suggests that the colonic inflammation was more in keeping with a drug-induced acute event as opposed to preexisting inflammatory bowel disease exacerbated by the interleukin-17 monoclonal antibody. The patient received a total of 7 doses of infliximab, 3 during accelerated induction (weeks 0, 1 and 5) and every 4 weeks for 4 months. Unfortunately, the patients’ plaque psoriasis deteriorated clinically while on infliximab. In concert with the patients’ dermatologist, a decision was reached to bridge the patient onto an anti-IL12/23 neutralizing antibody with a phosphodiesterase type 4 (PDE4) inhibitor (4 week infliximab washout period). We anticipate that the use of ustekinumab will provide therapeutic coverage of the patient’s Crohns colitis and plaque psoriasis. Patient is presently asymptomatic from his IBD, CRP is 4 (< 8 mg/L) pending endoscopic reassessment. The patient will continue to be followed by Gastroenterology and Dermatology with monitoring of the patient’s clinical status, CRP and albumin.