The patient, an 86-year-old woman with hypertension and bilateral internal carotid artery stenosis, presented with a several-day history of dyspnoea on exertion. She had a harsh ejection murmur on cardiac auscultation and bilateral pitting oedema of her legs. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed significant stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending artery, and transthoracic echocardiography showed severe aortic stenosis (Vmax 4.3 m/s and mean transvalvular gradient 43 mmHg without a high flow state). Pulmonary function tests were normal. Her status was vulnerable with clinical frailty scale of 4 and Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) score of 5.23%. After considering her advanced age, frailty, and intermediate surgical risk, the heart team decided to perform transcatheter aortic valve implantation after percutaneous coronary intervention with a drug-eluting stent. Preprocedural contrast-enhanced CT findings were as follows: annulus diameter calculated from the area (360 mm2) and perimeter (67.3 mm), 21.4 mm for both; Valsalva diameter calculated from the area (667 mm2), 29.1 mm; sinotubular junction diameter calculated from the area (429 mm2), 23.4 mm; and bilateral femoral artery diameter, <5.5 mm. The coronary heights of the left and right coronary arteries were 15.7 and 15.1 mm, respectively. After successful percutaneous coronary intervention with a drug-eluting stent, the heart team decided to implant an Evolut R valve (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) because of her femoral artery narrowing. The risk of coronary obstruction seemed to be relatively low with the adequate height of the coronary ostium and no bulky calcified nodules on the coronary leaflets, although the sinuses of Valsalva were slightly small. Admission medications included aspirin, prasugrel, candesartan, rosuvastatin, and vonoprazan. A 26-mm valve was implanted via the left femoral access using an EnVeo R InLine sheath (Medtronic). Post-procedural angiography showed that the left coronary artery ostium was patent and that the valve was placed at the optimal position . Seven days later, the patient was discharged from hospital without any symptoms.
Three months later, the patient re-presented with chest pain at rest. An electrocardiogram showed global ST-segment depression in the inferior and precordial leads, and transthoracic echocardiography left ventricular dysfunction in the anterior to lateral wall. Emergent coronary angiography showed no stenosis in the right coronary artery, and the guiding catheter failed to reach the left coronary artery. A cusp shot of the neo-Valsalva showed TIMI-2 flow in the left coronary artery . We initiated intra-aortic balloon pumping to treat cardiogenic shock, after which her haemodynamic state became stable, but her chest discomfort did not resolve completely. We performed balloon angioplasty between the valve frame and the left coronary cusp using a semi-compliant balloon (4.0 mm × 15 mm) , after which her ST-segment depression improved, and her chest discomfort resolved ( and Videos 1 and 2). Regardless, the instantaneous wave-free ratio dropped significantly from the left coronary artery ostium to the neo-Valsalva.
Contrast-enhanced CT showed a commissural post of the supra-annular valve overlying the left coronary cusp . We performed emergent off-pump coronary bypass grafting using a saphenous vein graft for the left anterior descending artery by median sternotomy because there were no stenotic lesions in the proximal left anterior descending and left circumflex arteries and the saphenous vein graft had a flow demand that was enough for the left coronary artery.
Two months after the surgery, however, she had recurrent chest pain at rest, and myocardial perfusion imaging revealed widespread redistribution at the antero-lateral site. We then performed off-pump coronary bypass grafting using a saphenous vein graft for the left circumflex artery by left anterior small thoracotomy. After the second surgery, she underwent physical therapy at a rehabilitation institution without any symptoms on exertion.
Four months after the first surgery, the patient had recurrent chest pain, and contrast-enhanced CT showed a graft occlusion in the left anterior descending artery. Shortly afterwards, she died of sudden cardiac arrest.