A 57-year-old woman presented with a 1-week history of progressive left eyelid swelling, erythema, and pain. The patient reported a history of blunt eyelid trauma without skin damage 2 weeks prior. She had no significant medical history and was not on any routine medications. On ophthalmic examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20, in both eyes. Her intraocular pressure, extraocular movements, and pupillary reaction were within normal limits, in both eyes. External examination revealed swelling of the left upper and lower eyelids with erythema and warmness . In addition, fluctuation and tenderness were present on palpation. Because small skin wounds were observed in the center of the swollen lower eyelid, the patient’s history was reviewed again. She mentioned that she made punctures at specific points on the lower eyelid, known as acupuncture points to try to treat the eyelid swelling and bruising that had occurred after trauma. She self-administered acupuncture at home using a non-disposable needle without an adequate skin disinfection.
Computed tomography images showed soft tissue swelling in the left periorbital area . No orbital fracture was identified. The clinical manifestations and radiologic findings were consistent with abscess. The patient was admitted and intravenous antibiotics (metronidazole, ceftriaxone, and amoxicillin) were started. Despite the treatment, the lesion progressed. On hospital day 2, incision and drainage was performed and a KOH smear with pus culture was conducted. C. albicans was isolated and a final diagnosis of facial candidal abscess was made . The laboratory test revealed 350 mg/dl random serum glucose level and 9.2% of hemoglobin A1c. An additional workup of complement and immunoglobulins was normal. A consultation was scheduled at the Department of Endocrinology and she was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
For the treatment of facial candidal abscess, 400 mg intravenous fluconazole was prescribed once a day. During the admission period, the patient underwent five more incision and drainage cycles due to recurrence and the development of new lesions. While maintaining the antifungal treatment and diabetes mellitus management, the lesion gradually improved. Her serum glucose level was well controlled using insulin. After 3 weeks of treatment, the patient’s symptoms and signs resolved, thus, the intravenous fluconazole was changed to oral fluconazole. However, on the third day, the lesion recurred. She underwent incision and drainage followed by 1 additional week of intravenous fluconazole treatment, she was then discharged. Oral fluconazole was given as a maintenance medication for 4 weeks. There was no recurrence at the 6-month follow-up.