A 69-year-old Italian Caucasian woman arrived at the emergency department presenting with sudden onset of lower left limb pain. The patient reported no dyspnea, chest pain, weight loss, nausea, abdominal pain, hematuria, myalgias, or arthralgias. Her medical history was notable for type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic atrial fibrillation. She had no history of coronary heart disease, hypertension, or dyslipidemia, and she did not smoke. Her medications included digoxin and repaglinide, but not anti-thrombotic drugs.
The patient's physical examination revealed that she appeared to be in good condition, but she reported discomfort due to pain in the left leg. The patient's blood pressure was 125/85 mmHg, and her heart rate was 80 beats/minute and irregularly irregular. Her respiratory rate was 22 breaths/minute, her oxygen saturation was 98% while the patient was breathing ambient air, and her body temperature was 36°C.
In her left leg, femoral, popliteal, and tibial pulses were absent, with pale and cool feet and with slow capillary return. Her right leg was absent of tibial pulse. Her Ankle Brachial Pressure Index was 0 on the left and 0.4 on the right. The motor and sensory functions of the legs were preserved.
A transesophageal echocardiogram revealed enlargement of the left atrium with a thrombus in its appendange and enlargement of the right atrium. She had no signs of atrial shunt or detectable atherosclerosis in the proximal aorta. A diagnosis of embolizing non-valvular atrial fibrillation was confirmed, and the patient underwent lower left limb Fogarty thromboembolectomy, that successfully restored distal blood flow. The patient was discharged after two days to a low molecular weight heparin regimen as bridging therapy for a warfarin regimen.
After one week, the patient returned to the emergency department with acute ischemic symptoms in her left leg. Angiography was performed, which showed an apparently normal wall of the abdominal aorta, right iliac and femoral artery branches, obstruction of the left external iliac artery and total obstruction of the left femoral artery branches, and obstruction of the right popliteal artery and of the tibial-peroneal axes on both sides. Urgent embolectomy was again performed with subsequent restoration of blood flow, and the patient was discharged under warfarin therapy.
After four weeks, the patient returned with left leg pain at rest. A search for a hypercoagulable state revealed normal thrombin, pro-thrombin, and partial thromboplastin times; normal anti-thrombin III, protein S, and protein C antigens; and a normal protein C pathway, activated protein C resistance, and homocysteine level. Screening for anti-cardiolipin antibodies and lupus anti-coagulant were negative, and her anti-nuclear antibody test was negative. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 8 mm/hour. Her blood cell count revealed normal amounts of red and white cells, and her platelet count was 850,000/μl.
Transesophageal echocardiography showed resolution of the atrial thrombus; however, an intra-luminal pyramidal lesion (1.4 cm×1.5 cm in size) with an irregular surface was seen on the anterior wall of the descending aorta . Computed tomography with contrast medium confirmed the presence of a mural aortic thrombus in the anterior wall of the descending aorta extending 1.5 cm distally, a mural thrombus in the left pulmonary artery localized in close proximity to the aortic thrombus, a lung infarction in the inferior left lobe, an infarction in the spleen, sparse atherosclerotic plaques in the abdominal aorta and the right femoral artery, occlusion of the left external iliac artery, and occlusion of the right internal iliac artery. There were no signs of venous thrombosis.
The patient underwent surgical treatment consisting of an endovascular exclusion of thrombus with a Zenith 32 mm×80 mm endoprosthesis (Cook, Inc., Bloomington, IN) implanted just after the emergence of the left anonym subclavian artery, a subsequent thromboembolectomy of the left external iliac artery, and a femoro-popliteal bypass. The patient was discharged after a few days under a low molecular weight heparin regimen as bridging therapy for a warfarin regimen, as well as aspirin. Additional therapy included β-blockers and hydroxyurea, an anti-neoplastic drug acting on nucleic acid synthesis to reduce her platelet count. Her platelet count decreased to 300,000/μl.
Two months later an echocardiographic Doppler study revealed the patency of the bypass and the left femoral axis, which previously had been treated by embolectomy. Two months later the patient presented with left leg pain while she was being treated with warfarin. An echocardiographic Doppler scan showed obstruction of the popliteal bypass. Therapy with aspirin, clopidogrel, and warfarin was initiated. Out-patient follow-up was arranged, and eight months later the patient did not report any further embolization.