A 34-year-old Chinese woman (gravida 9, para 0, abortion 8) underwent first- and second-trimester routine ultrasound screening that did not reveal any pathological findings. However, prenatal sonography at 32 gestational weeks revealed a well-defined, solid 2.4 × 2.2 × 2.0 cm-sized mass in the right hepatic lobe that was peripherally hypoechoic and centrally hyperechoic. During fetal breathing movement, the mass showed synchronized movement with the liver. Color Doppler imaging of the lesion revealed prominent vascularity both within the lesion and surrounding it. The peak systolic velocity (PSV) of the feeding artery was 1.35 m/s, and the resistance index (RI) was 0.46 . No arteriovenous fistula was observed in this lesion. There were no signs of fetal heart failure, hydrops, or anemia as the PSV of blood flow in the middle cerebral artery was 46 cm/s, and the blood flow spectrum of the umbilical artery and ductus venosus were normal. Fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a clear, hypointense T1-W and hyperintense T2-W solid hepatic mass originating in the right hepatic lobe . The parents received thorough counseling concerning the mass and its uncertain prognosis. Considering their poor obstetric history, the parents decided to continue the pregnancy. Serial ultrasound assessments revealed regular growth of the lesion in the following weeks, as shown in Table .
A female infant weighing 3,140 g was spontaneously delivered vaginally at 36 weeks and 5 days, with Apgar scores of 9 at 1 min and 10 at 5 min. Postnatal sonographic examination confirmed the presence of a hepatic mass measuring 5.5 × 4.6 × 3.8 cm . There were multiple echogenic foci with acoustic shadowing within the mass, suggesting calcifications. Elastography revealed the mass with low stiffness and compressibility. Both postnatal MRI and computed tomography (CT) were indicated to further characterize this lesion, which showed a heterogeneous early peripheral enhancement of the mass after intravenous contrast injection . At 2 months and 8 days, the infant presented with mild anemia (hemoglobin 89 g/L) and normal coagulation. In addition, initial blood tests revealed normal liver function. However, serum Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) levels were higher than normal (normal reference value < 20 ng/ml ) and fluctuated .
Ultimately, because imaging and laboratory studies could not conclusively rule out a malignancy, under the advice of a pediatrician, a laparotomy was performed postnatally at 2 months and 10 days, and the mass was resected. The mass was dark red and contained mixed areas of necrosis. Histopathological examination of the mass showed hepatic sinusoidal dilatation and congestion, and hepatic cord hyperplasia (2–3 layers of cells), but no obvious cell atypia. Combined with immunohistochemical results showing CD34 ( +), CD31 ( +), SMA (-), D2-40 (-), ERG ( +), and Glut-1 (-), a diagnosis of congenital hemangioma was ultimately considered . The patient had a good prognosis after one year of follow-up.