A 17-year-old Iraqi male presented to the emergency department with a 2 day history of right iliac fossa pain, vomiting and a few episodes of diarrhoea. A clinical diagnosis of appendicitis was made and he was treated with intravenous antibiotics and underwent an appendicectomy, the histology of which was normal. At the time of the operation, the surgeon noted the right colon appeared to be inflamed. The patient had no prior medical history and his family history was nil of note.
A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed postoperatively which showed thickening of the ascending colon with some submucosal oedema in the caecum with associated local regional lymph nodes. However the patient’s condition improved enough to be sent home the day after his operation.
Two days later he returned to hospital with bloody diarrhoea up to ten times a day, with associated fever and a tender abdomen. Baseline admission investigations are shown in Table . Initial stool cultures were negative including for Escherichia coli 0157 (E. coli), and the patient was started on intravenous cefuroxime and metronidazole. An abdominal radiograph did not reveal colonic dilatation. A colonoscopy was performed which showed patchy pan-colitis, maximal in the ascending and descending colon.
Given the age of the patient and location of his symptoms, plus the initial findings on the CT scan, a diagnosis of inflammatory bowel disease was considered. The other main differential was an infective colitis caused by Campylobacter, Shigella, E. coli or Clostridium difficile. Tuberculosis (TB) was another possibility and although the patient was originally from Iraq there was no recent history of foreign travel or relevant contact history of TB exposure. The appearances at colonoscopy were most suggestive of Crohn’s disease so the patient was commenced on intravenous hydrocortisone. Colonic biopsies were taken with the histology results shown in Fig. .
Despite 24 h of steroid therapy, the patient still had on-going bloody diarrhoea although his pain had now settled. His renal function had declined from a normal baseline to a serum urea of 11.3 mmol/L and a serum creatinine of 170 μmol/L, and despite being adequately hydrated with intravenous fluids he became anuric. He was also noted to be thrombocytopenic with a platelet count of 81. Additionally, the patient became anaemic and his blood film showed Red cell fragments: 10 fragments per × 40 objective field, indicating haemolysis. Clinically the patient became disorientated and agitated and he rapidly deteriorated developing partial-complex seizures. This rapid deterioration required intubation and he was promptly admitted to the intensive care unit (ITU). A diagnosis of typical Haemolytic Uraemic Syndrome (HUS) was made following the history of gastrointestinal illness coupled with an acute kidney injury and thrombocytopenia. His levels of ADAMTS13 were normal, making a diagnosis of Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura (TTP) less likely. The patient received haemofiltration and plasma exchange with fresh frozen plasma but showed little signs of improvement so after 10 days he was commenced on Eculizumab a monoclonal antibody. He remained on the ITU for a further 35 days and spent a further 28 days on renal high-dependency unit during which time he gradually improved. He remained seizure free with normalisation of his platelets and biochemical profile and was discharged well from hospital.