A 31-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with an open fracture, classified as Gustilo IIIa, of the tibia and fibula on the right leg 2 weeks after a road traffic accident (A). The patient had no comorbidities, no history of musculoskeletal disease, and no notable medical history and reported not smoking or consuming alcohol.
Previously, in a tertiary hospital, the patient underwent debridement and was later referred to our hospital, where we performed open reduction internal fixation (ORIF) surgery (B). The patient had otherwise remained healthy, and the surgical wound healed flawlessly without any active infection in any system. Nevertheless, on Day 2 postoperatively, he received 3 units of blood via transfusion and began mobilization.
Upon being admitted to the hospital, the patient was administered 1 g of antibiotic cefuroxime intravenously 3 times per day until receiving none on Day 8 postoperatively. Although discharged to his home 8 days after the operation, he returned 20 weeks after surgery with complaints of implant exposure at the wound site and a fever of 101.3 °F for 4 days. From the outside, the wound appeared tenderness to palpation, although exposed implants measured 2 cm long and 1 cm wide .
The patient underwent radiological examination, and the results showed new bone thickening that formed a sheath, or involucrum, covering the sequestrum and infected tissue (A). Considering the symptoms, physical examination, and radiological examination, the most likely preoperative diagnosis was stage 4 chronic osteomyelitis, according to the Cierny–Mader staging system .
When the elevated temperature persisted, debridement was performed, and when pus was observed, the internal fixation was replaced (B). Cultures taken from bone lesion revealed Staphylococcus epidermidis and Enterococcus faecalis. Except for S. epidermidis, the other infection agents are rarely found in our department and hospitals.
When the patient's body temperature rises to 103.2 °F, treatment proceeded with the intravenous antibiotic cefazolin due to the patient's allergy to penicillin and surgical debridement in an effort to control the infection and maintain internal fixation until the fracture fused. As a postoperative outcome, the patient showed satisfactory progress at 6- and 12-month follow-up.