One patient, a 68-year-old man from China, presented to the hospital’s emergency department after suffering from dull abdominal pain, profuse sweating and a pale complexion during the two-hour workday.
Symptoms started 2 h before presentation with complaints of dull abdominal pain, profuse sweating and a pale complexion during work.
The patient didn’t have any remarkable history.
The patient denied having a family history of any malignant tumors.
Using a physical examination, the results showed the following vital signs: Blood pressure, 118/69 mmHg; body temperature, 36.4 °C; heart rate, 81 beats/min; respiratory frequency, 18 breaths/min. Furthermore, total abdominal tenderness, plate-like abdomen, and liver dullness disappeared, with weak abdominal breathing and bowel sounds.
Laboratory tests showed normal liver function, alpha-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and carcinoembryonic antigen. No abnormality was found in routine blood and urine analyses. Primary laboratory data upon admission are summarized in Table .
CT with multi-plane reconstruction revealed scattered exudation, effusion and free gas in the abdominal cavity, indicating gastrointestinal perforation complicated with acute peritonitis . Curved planar reconstruction of CT images revealed an abdominal Monopterus albus biting the mesentery, suggesting a Monopterus albus outside the intestinal cavity . The outer margin of wall of the mid-rectum was rough and raised, and exudation and free gas were detected in the surrounding mesentery, suggesting a perforation of the mid-rectum . Volume reconstruction of CT images showed clear and complete eel bone morphology in the abdominal and pelvic cavities .
The patient consented to laparoscopic surgery. Laparoscopic exploration revealed abundant cloudy yellow fluid and small amounts of feces-like fluid in the abdominal and pelvic cavities, and a large perforation was detected in the mid-rectum, with a diameter approximating 1.5 cm , alongside a small amount of stool. It could be observed that the Monopterus albus has completely entered the abdominal cavity and has tightly bitten the mesentery of the small intestine . During the operation, the dead Monopterus albus was extracted, and was about 40 cm long .