A 78-year-old man was referred to our department for suspected left upper lobe lung cancer (cT1cN0M0 stage IA3). He had a history of percutaneous coronary intervention for angina pectoris, and internal carotid artery stenosis and hypertension for which he was receiving medical treatment. He had been a heavy smoker. The Brinkman Index was 1000. On chest auscultation, fine crackles were heard on the back bilaterally. Blood tests showed no abnormal findings other than a high carcinoembryonic antigen concentration (7.2 ng/mL). Pulmonary function tests showed an obstructive disorder as evidenced by a forced expiratory volume 1.0% (FEV 1.0%) (G) of 68.8%.
A chest radiograph and chest computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor of maximum diameter 30 mm in the left lung S1 + 2 segment , emphysema of the upper lobe, and fibrosis of the left lower lobe. The patient was diagnosed as having combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema . Additionally, an accessory fissure (aberrant fissure) was identified between the S1–3 and S4 + 5 segments . Bronchoscopy had been performed at the referring institution and was not repeated in our department. Bronchoscopic images were not viewed preoperatively and no bronchial abnormalities were mentioned in the report of the referring institution’s bronchoscopy. No histological diagnosis had been obtained by bronchoscopy.
In consideration of the patient’s age, his combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema, and the presence of an accessory fissure between S1–3 and S4 + 5, left upper division segmentectomy by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was selected as the procedure of choice. V1–3 was identified on the ventral side of the mediastinum and dissected . The branches of A3, A1 + 2a, A1 + 2b + c were identified and divided by reaching the pulmonary arterial wall from the accessory fissure of S1–3 and S4 + 5. Subsequently, the IPV and V1 + 2b, which joined the IPV, were identified on the dorsal side of the mediastinum, and V1 + 2b was divided . B1 + 2 + B3, which were on the dorsal side of the left main pulmonary artery, were identified and divided . Incomplete lobulation was noted dorsally between the upper and lower lobes. Therefore, to secure sufficient tumor margins, part of S6 was included in the upper lobe and the incomplete lobulation was divided with a stapler. S1–3 was then excised . The operation time was 4 h and 49 min and amount of bleeding was 30 mL.
Three-dimensional reconstructed images of the pulmonary artery and vein had been prepared preoperatively, whereas images that also included the bronchi were only prepared postoperatively. The latter showed the following: B1 + 2 + B3 was branching from the left main bronchus, followed by a bronchus that corresponded to the middle bronchial trunk of the right lung, and B4 + 5 and the lower lobe bronchus ; the left main pulmonary artery was on the ventral side of B1 + 2 + B3 and did not cross the dorsal side of the left main bronchus; and V1 + 2b joined the inferior pulmonary vein (IPV) on the dorsal side of the pulmonary artery . In addition, when the image of the sagittal section was reviewed again postoperatively, the above listed features were visible on plain CT .
Additionally, postoperative review of available bronchoscopic images revealed an abnormal bronchial course .
Pathological examination of the resected specimen resulted in a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma with metastases in the mediastinal lymph nodes and of pathological stage pT1cN2M0 stage IIIA. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8. No recurrence had occurred by 1 year after surgery.