A 61-year-old female had a history of primary central nervous system lymphoma (PCNSL), diagnosed histologically as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) . We treated her with four cycles of chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone, and high-dose methotrexate (M-CHOP), and sequential whole-brain irradiation (40.5 Gy). After a 3-year remission of the PCNSL, the patient’s lymphoma recurred as gastrointestinal lesions . We then performed 18F-FDG-PET/CT, which revealed multiple nodular lesions of recurrence in her stomach, small intestine, liver, intraceliac lymph nodes, and bones . Cranial MRI detected no aberrant signals as a recurrent lesion of the primary site.
We performed salvage chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide, high-dose AraC, methyl-prednisolone, etoposide, and rituximab (CHASER). The patient then complained of occasional slight abdominal pain after eating, but the symptoms did not disturb her food consumption. She did not need any analgesia for her abdominal pain. The patient was afebrile through until day 9 of this treatment course. On day 10 of the chemotherapy, gastrointestinal perforation was suspected because of abdominal rebound tenderness. Her vital signs on day 10 were as follows: blood pressure 94/56 mmHg, heart rate 68/min, body temperature 36.0 °C. An abdominal X-ray did not reveal free air. An immediate CT scan depicted an enhancement defect of the intestinal wall , which indicated transmural ischemia of the intestine. The patient had multiple intestinal involvements of DLBCL, but other infiltration sites of the intestine revealed an enhancement effect of intestinal wall, which had been thought to be intact.
We stopped her oral intake, and we started administering meropenem from day 10. From day 14, spike fever 38.1–39.5 °C was observed, with blood pressure 102/52 mmHg and heart rate 75/min. An elective surgery was conducted on day 18 after the patient’s white blood cell count had risen to >10,000/µL, and we performed a partial resection of the small intestine at 10 cm (anal side) from the Treitz ligament. We used contrast-enhanced (CE)-CT to estimate the surgical indication and optimal timing of surgery. The pathological findings elucidated the elimination of the majority of lymphoma cells and concomitant partial necrotic tissue .