An 8-year-old female who presented with left rib pain, hematuria and fever was admitted to our hospital. The maximum temperature reached 39.9 °C, with no chills or rash. She was administered cefepime and azithromycin for 1 day, cefotaxime for 5 days, and methylprednisolone for 1 day. On physical examination, her general condition was poor, with eyelid and lower limb edema; coarse respiratory sounds and auscultation of blisters of both lungs were noted, and no other abnormal findings were present at that time. Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell count 6.32*109/L, neutrophil 0.48, lymphocyte 0.42, red blood cell count 3.40*1012/L, hemoglobin 93 g/L, and platelet count 48*1012/L. Her urine revealed 363.69 red blood cells/high-powered field (hpf), protein 3+, 5.1 white blood cells/hpf, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 135 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) 25.2 mg/L, albumin 17.6 g/L, total cholesterol 7.21 mmol/L, and urinary protein 3.2 g/24 h. Other laboratory findings included activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 138.7 s, direct antiglobulin test positive, ferritin 358.4 μg/L, D-dimer 4937.00 μg/L, and FDG 33.8 μg/ml. Serum showed C3 0.92 g/L (0.9–1.8), C4 0.17 g/L (0.1–0.4), ANA:anti-SSA-60 ±, anti-nRNP/Sm positivity, homogeneous 1:3200 positivity, dsDNA 1:10 positivity, antinucleoome antibody positivity, antimitochondrial M2 positivity, anticardiolipin IgM 12 U/ml (0–10), and anti-β2GPI 223 U/ml (0–20). Bone marrow biopsy revealed secondary anemia, and globular red blood cells accounted for 5.5%. However, respiratory pathogens, myocardial enzymes, mycoplasma pneumoniae/chlamydia antibodies, procalcitonin, folic aci, vitamin B12, reticulocytes, bacterial cultures of blood, stool, tuberculosis spots, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, ANCA were all negative. Hematuria location: urine abnormal red blood cell 60%, urine uniform red blood cell 40%. Bronchoscope results showed inflammation of the endobronchial membrane. Pulmonary CT revealed patchy high-density shadows in all lobes of the lungs, especially in the lower lobes of the lungs . Color Doppler ultrasonography of the lower limbs ruled out deep vein thrombosis. Abdominal color ultrasound revealed abdominal effusion. Echocardiography showed a kind of round moderate echo with a diameter of approximately 2.0 cm that could be seen at the bottom of the right atrium near the opening of the inferior vena cava. The patient was diagnosed with right atrial thrombus . Renal pathology using light microscopy revealed 52 glomeruli in the renal tissue; there were 52 glomeruli in the renal tissue, with slight proliferation of mesangial cells and mesangial matrix, swelling and slight proliferation of segmental foot nuclear endothelial cells, slight thickening of glomerular basement membrane and a large amount of phenophilin deposition in subepithelial cells. No microthrombi or crescents were observed, and a small amount of inflammatory cell infiltration dominated by neutrophils was found in some glomeruli. There was slight edema in the renal interstitium, and there was no renal tubular atrophy and obvious inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis. No obvious abnormalities were found in the arterioles. Immunofluorescence analysis was positive for IgA, IgM, IgG, C3, C4, and C1q deposited along the glomerular capillary wall and segmental mesangial area. The above features were consistent with membranous LN with mesangial proliferative LN (consistent with types V and II LN) . Nephrotic syndrome is a common disease in children that is characterized by edema, massive proteinuria (>50 mg/kg.24 h), hypoproteinemia (<25 g/l) and hypercholesterolemia (>5.7 mmol/l). Our patient’s disease characteristics were consistent with those of nephrotic syndrome . We continued to track the etiology of nephrotic syndrome, and the child had no family history of renal disease; therefore, we investigated secondary factors, including serology results that were positive for ANA and anti-dsDNA with low C3 levels. Although her platelets and hemoglobin levels were significantly lower than normal, she had no rash, arthralgia, photosensitivity, oral ulcer, or butterfly erythema, so a renal biopsy was performed, which suggested LN. The patient was finally diagnosed with SLE and LN. She was treated with pulse methylprednisolone for 3 days and IV diuretic with albumin, followed by oral steroids 1 mg/kg.d after 3 days, with rapid resolution of edema. Anticardiolipin IgM of 12 U/ml and anti-β2GPI of 223 U/ml were consistent with secondary APS. What was the cause of the space-occupying mass in the right atrium? At this point, as no clear etiological evidence was found, a repeated echocardiography indicated that the nature of the right atrial mass was a thrombus. The mass was reduced by anticoagulant therapy with heparin for 2 weeks. By 3 weeks, proteinuria decreased to 1.0 g/day, and by 16 weeks, she was in complete remission with < 0.5 g proteinuria. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient has remained in complete remission, but 2.5 mg of prednisolone is administered each day.