The patient, a 63-year-old woman from Sichuan, China, arrived at our hospital in October 2015, who complained of anal swelling, with no special past medical history. Then she had primary debulking surgery after being diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Rectal invasion was identified during the initial surgery, which included an abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, and omentectomy, thus the upper rectal focus was then resected. Histopathological diagnosis was high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) and the patient was staged as having stage IIIC ovarian cancer according to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics criteria. According to the NCCN guideline, we gave the patient post-operative chemotherapy, and the timeline of the treatment process is shown in . No tumor was detected by CT after 6 cycles of TP/TC therapy (175 mg/m2 paclitaxel plus 75/mg2 cisplatin, or 175 mg/m2 paclitaxel plus carboplatin area under the curve (AUC) 5), so she was considered to have achieved complete clinical response (CR). Regrettably, the patient discontinued treatment and was not followed up regularly.
The patient was readmitted in January 2019 with vaginal bleeding and lower abdominal pain. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) –positron emission tomography (PET) showed that there was a mass on the right side of the vaginal stump and the right posterior rectal wall, accompanied by increased glucose metabolism . Local pelvic recurrence of ovarian cancer was considered. Platinum-based chemotherapy (paclitaxel combined with carboplatin) is again selected according to platinum-sensitive relapse when satisfactory tumor reduction surgery could not be performed. After four courses of TC, a partial response (PR) was observed and chemotherapy was discontinued because it was poorly tolerated. After a 9-month platinum-free interval, the patient suffered from vaginal bleeding again, this time along with enlarged vaginal stump lesions. Five cycles of paclitaxel liposomes in conjunction with carboplatin were administered, with a result graded as stable disease (SD). Afterward, the efficacy was considered to be PR when we added bevacizumab to the original treatment for the other 6 cycles.
Unfortunately, the patient’s condition deteriorated again after two months of platinum-free treatment, including maintenance therapy of bevacizumab. Considering platinum-resistant relapse, doxorubicin liposomal was given in a clinical trial in December 2020, but halted after only one cycle due to the side-effects such as Grade III myelosuppression and intestinal obstruction. Given this situation, we administered the patient albumin-paclitaxel-based palliative chemotherapy (125mg/m2 d1.8.15 q28d, lasted 2 cycles) in January 2021. Then, the treatment scheme was altered to the combination of bevacizumab and gemcitabine due to the inadequate retraction of the focus on imaging. After 4 cycles of therapy, the focus was significantly reduced and reached PR. Considering the recurrence of the same isolated pelvic lesion, the radiation oncologist of our hospital performed interstitial brachytherapy (BT) of right sacrococcygeal residual lesions in July 2021 with a prescription dose was 2500cGy. shows the three-dimensional conformal dose assessment for interstitial brachytherapy. Following the completion of radiotherapy, the patient received individual therapy with PARP inhibitor (olaparib) for maintenance due to homologous recombination deficiency (HRD). Currently, the patient remained in CR at the last imaging follow-up in July 2022, even though tumor markers (serum CA125 and HE4) had started to slowly increase . At the same time, the patient did not experience any substantial radiation damage, such as radiation proctitis or radiation cystitis. In , we display the radiographic changes occurred in our patient during treatment.