A 64-year-old man was admitted to our hospital on September 2, 2018 because of abdominal pain with low fever for more than 2 months. The patient had a history of NF1. At the age of 14 years, subcutaneous nodules began to appear in the elbow and gradually began to appear throughout the whole body. The patient had no history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes, etc. Physical examination revealed café-au-lait macules of varying sizes and multiple subcutaneous nodules and skin fibromas. Colonic endoscopy revealed that the mass was located in the ascending colon near the ileocaecum, and the surface of the tumour was erosive. Pathological examination of a colon tumour biopsy revealed moderate differentiated adenocarcinoma. Blood tests showed mild anaemia (HB 101 g/L), and tumour markers and coagulation indicators were normal. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed irregular thickening of the ascending colon walls and inhomogeneous enhancement, consistent with colon cancer CT performance. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed around the tumour. CT also revealed multiple jejunal masses, and the clinical impression may be GISTs . The clinical diagnoses were ascending colon cancer (cT4aN + M0), NF1, and multiple jejunal tumours (GISTs?). None of his family had a similar performance.
During laparoscopic exploration, a tumour was found in the ascending colon, which manifestly invaded the serous membrane, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes were observed around the tumour. Additionally, multiple small intestine masses were observed in the jejunum within the range of 10–50 cm from Treitz’s ligament. The largest mass was approximately 3 cm, and the smaller masses were approximately 0.5–2 cm in diameter. Subsequently, the ascending colon and jejunal tumours were excised under laparoscopy.
Pathology and whole exon sequencing were performed on the ascending colon and multiple jejunal tumours.
Pathologically, the resected ascending colon tumour was a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with one lymph node metastasis (1/18) – pT4a pN1a cM0 stage IIIB according to the TNM staging of AJCC Guidelines Version 3.2018.
The IHC results for colon cancer: wt-p53, CK818+, MLH1+, PMS2+, MSH2+, MSH6+. Furthermore, immunohistochemistry results suggest that NF1 is over-stained. The pathological result for jejunal tumours indicated low or very low risk GIST (< 5/50 HPF; 3.7 cm, 2.5 cm, 0.5 cm), positive for CD117, Dog-1, CD34, SMA, negative for desmin, CK818. Immunohistochemistry results indicated that NF1 was positive. .
The whole-exome sequencing (WES) results of colon adenocarcinoma revealed mutations in 29 genes, including KRAS, PIK3CA, APC, SMAD4, etc. The WES results for stromal tumours showed an NF1 mutation, and no PDGFRA or KIT mutation. The specific characteristics of colon cancer and GISTs are shown in Table .
The patient recovered smoothly and was discharged on the 7th day after surgery. Because the risk level of jejunal GISTs was low and very low, and imatinib was not administered after surgery. We continued follow up. To date, the patients have undergone 12 cycles of chemotherapy (FOLFOX regimen). No recurrence was observed in the 12-month follow-up period.