The patient was a 14-year-old Japanese boy who sustained a traumatic brain injury during a motor vehicle accident at the age of 6 years. The physical sequelae of this injury included partial damage to the right frontoparietal lobe and left frontal lobe, right enophthalmos, left hemiplegia, and loss of vision in the right eye . He developed unconsciousness following generalized seizures at the age of 10 years and was diagnosed with secondarily generalized tonic–clonic seizures. His seizures were not stopped by levetiracetam, sodium valproate, lamotrigine, clobazam, zonisamide, perampanel, phenobarbital, clonazepam, or lacosamide treatment. The frequency of seizures was recorded monthly. At 13 years of age, when carbamazepine was administered, brief muscle contractions of the upper limb occurred, and these seizures continued after carbamazepine was discontinued. Interictal electroencephalography (EEG) showed high-amplitude spikes or spikes and waves located in the left frontal pole to the frontal region . On video EEG monitoring, the ictal EEG revealed generalized rhythmic spike bursts preceded by a spike wave in the left hemisphere, followed by slow-wave bursts with left hemisphere dominance corresponding to his habitual seizures, which were characterized by turning his head to the left and left upper limb flexion along with muscle contraction in a sitting position after a fall backward and unawareness lasting 5 seconds . The seizures were diagnosed as focal seizures. In addition to the aforementioned drugs, oral administration of rufinamide and clorazepate did not reduce seizure frequency. After obtaining informed consent, ACTH therapy (synthetic ACTH, a zinc hydroxide suspension of tetracosactide acetate; Cortrosyn-Z [Daiichi-Sankyo, Japan]) was initiated at 10 months after video EEG monitoring. ACTH was administered as daily intramuscular injections (0.0125 mg/kg) for 2 weeks and was then gradually tapered off over 1 week. On day 10 of ACTH therapy, although his habitual seizures before ACTH therapy disappeared transiently, he developed new focal seizures characterized by left arm contractions followed by movements of touching things with his right hand and writhing and rocking his body left and right and back and forth as automatisms. On video EEG monitoring, the ictal EEG of the newly developing focal seizures showed generalized low-voltage fast waves followed by high voltage in the left hemisphere only, which was then followed by high-voltage slow-wave bursts with left hemisphere dominance . The focal seizures clustered for 40 minutes and disappeared after suppository administration of 10 mg diazepam. Interictal EEG at 4 days after the development of the new seizures showed spikes located in the left frontal region . These focal seizures did not reoccur after more than 2 years of follow-up. No new lesions were identified on brain computed tomography after the onset of focal seizures. On day 10 of ACTH therapy, his habitual seizures before ACTH therapy disappeared transiently; however, they reoccurred on day 14 after ACTH therapy and subsequently returned to daily frequency.