A 29-year-old male married for the last two years presented with complaints of primary infertility at Sir JJ Hospital, Mumbai, India in January 2019 despite consummative marriage. On clinical examination, he was phenotypically male with bilateral undescended testis which was previously undiagnosed. He had a normally developed penis, normal in length and width. On evaluation, he had azoospermia on semen analysis. On ultrasonography, he had bilateral undescended testes with right testicle in intra-abdominal location and the left near the deep inguinal ring. Hormonal evaluation showed LH of 19.51 IU/L (Normal), FSH of 41.81 IU/L (Raised), prolactin of 6.21 mIU/L (Normal), and testosterone of 384 ng/dL (Normal).
Left orchidopexy was done for him. During the surgery, a uterus like structure attached to the left gonad was seen; hence, the procedure was abandoned, and patient was subjected to further evaluation. Left gonad biopsy was taken which showed testicular maturation arrest.
In postoperative period, MRI of the abdomen and pelvis showed right intra-abdominal testis superomedial to bladder and left testis in the left iliac fossa with uterus like structure of size 6× 2.4×2 cm with left fallopian tube which was herniating to the left inguinal canal. Uterus continuing as cervix and upper vagina in the pelvic region was found . There was a calculus in ejaculatory duct/seminal vesicle. He underwent karyotyping which showed male 46 XY geno-type and his AMH was low, ie 0.730 (2–16.5 ng/ ml). The karyotype was not done prior to the first surgery as there was no clinical feature or radiological investigations which could suggest PMDS.
In his second surgery, the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy with hysterectomy and bilateral orchidopexy (–) (Fowler-Stephens orchidopexy on right side with testicular biopsy and conventional orchidopexy on the left side). After 3 months of follow up, on clinical examination and Doppler ultrasound, his both testes were in scrotal sac and viable.