The patient originally presented as a 33 year-old Caucasian female with no significant medical history with the exception of generalized anxiety disorder who presented in an afterhours orthopedic clinic with a chief complaint of the right ankle pain and edema after a fall at a wedding 2 days prior. Over a 48 h course, her edema had increased and migrated proximally to involve her right leg. Elevation, range of motion of her ankle, and weight-bearing exacerbated her pain. The patient did complain of paresthesia throughout her entire foot. The patient denied any associated fever, chills, shortness of breath, or systemic symptoms. Initial X-rays are obtained in (, ). No evidence of acute osseous pathology or soft-tissue gas was noticed.
Patient’s original physical examination was as follows – significant edema and erythema of the right foot and leg, tenderness to palpation along the entirety of the right lower extremity distal to the knee, large amount of ecchymosis over the lateral malleolus, compartments firm but compressible, mild pain with passive stretch, triphasic dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial artery pulses, sensation intact but diminished as compared to the left lower extremity in a global nerve distribution distal to her ankle joint, motor function intact for gastroc-soleus complex, extensors, and flexors.
The patient was referred to the emergency department where subsequent venous duplex ultrasound showed no evidence of deep venous thrombosis. Initial vital signs and laboratory work are shown in (, ). The patient was admitted to the emergency room observation unit where serial compartments checks were performed. The patient initially had improvement in the emergency room; however, 12 h after admission, the patient became hypotensive and tachycardic necessitating an emergent trip to the operating room for compartment releases. A dual incision fasciotomy was carried out on the right lower extremity as well as two incisions on the dorsum of the right foot. During the fasciotomy, dishwater fluid was encountered as well as weakened fascia. A 1 × 1 cm tissue biopsy from the leg and the dorsal foot was sent to pathology. The fasciotomy sites were copiously irrigated and a wound VAC was placed at the fasciotomy sites of the leg. The patient was immediately transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) requiring norepinephrine pressors.
After transfer to the SICU, the patient’s blood cultures were reported positive for Gram-positive cocci and broad-spectrum antibiotics of vancomycin, clindamycin, and penicillin were started by guidance of infectious disease. In the SICU, the patient continued to deteriorate, becoming further hemodynamically unstable and requiring addition of vasopressin. Reevaluation 5 h post-operative revealed a necrotic right foot, as shown in . In addition, our biopsy results revealed “Acute inflammation and necrosis of deep subcutaneous tissue and focal skeletal muscle necrosis, consistent with necrotizing fasciitis.” Due to the patient’s clinical status, biopsy results, and right foot, the patient was again taken to the operative room as an emergent case. The right dorsal foot revealed complete necrosis of the fascia, subcutaneous fat, and muscle leading to a through tibia guillotine amputation. However, the patient’s muscle, fat, and fascia appeared necrotic at this amputation level. A 5 cm incision was then made over the medial thigh, which also revealed an ascending infection, necrotic muscle, fat, and fascia. A guillotine amputation was performed through the mid-thigh.
Postoperatively, the patient stabilized and was managed on ceftriaxone 2 weeks postoperatively. The patient returned to the operative room for a repeat irrigation and debridement 1 day post-operative of the guillotine above-knee amputation and had a finalized above-knee amputation 3 days post-operative of initial presentation. Eight months postoperatively, the patient is doing well, ambulating with a prosthesis. Her final X-ray is shown in .