A 3-year-old female child presented to us with untreated bilateral clubfeet. The mother had an uneventful full-term institutional normal delivery. The baby also had a lumbosacral closed MMC with neurological deficit below knee .
No attempt for MMC and clubfeet correction was done before reporting. On examination, the baby was conscious, oriented and had weakness in bilateral tibialis anterior (1/5), extensor hallucis longus (1/5), extensor digitorum longus (1/5), peroneal muscles (1/5), tibialis posterior (3/5), flexor hallucis longus and digitorum longus (3/5), gastrosoleus (3/5), and sensory loss in L4-S5 region. Her Pirani score was 3 on the right and 2.5 on the left side. (Posterior crease 0, Emptiness of heel 0, Rigidity of Equinus 1, Talar head 1, Medial Crease 0, Curvature Lateral Border of foot(1 right/0.5left). Both tibiae were in intorsion. She had callosity on dorsolateral aspect ofthe right foot as she was walking on deformed foot. Pre-plaster X-rays showed abnormal talocalcaneal relation and malrotation of talus in the right foot while moderate in the left foot. She was enrolled for Ponseti weekly casting regimen but due to financial and family affairs, she reported every 2nd week. On fifth visit, after removal of cast, we found that distal third left leg was deformed, swollen,and non-tender. The left ankle was in valgus and skin breakdown on posterior aspect of the left heel was also noted(, ).The right foot was well corrected. We got radiographs of both ankle with leg and found anterolateral epiphyseal displacement of the left distal tibia and extensive periosteal reaction along tibia .
The displaced distal tibial epiphysis was manipulated posteromedially for correction and long leg cast was applied for 3 weeks. After cast removal, X-ray showed persistent epiphyseal displacement with lots of subperiosteal bone formation along tibia .
The leg was clinically better. Bilateral tendoachilles tenotomy was done and long leg cast was done. Post-correction ankle foot orthosis was given and followed up for 1 year. Now, she has plantigrade feet without limb length discrepancy(, ).