A 42-year-old G0 female was referred to the gynecology oncology outpatient clinic for evaluation of symptoms and imaging findings concerning for ovarian cancer. She reported six months of abdominal discomfort and distension, night sweats, fever, and weight loss. Her previous gynecologic history included a ruptured ovarian cyst five years prior, but medical records were not available for review. She had no chronic medical conditions and did not take any medications. She had been born and lived in Brazil until moving to the U.S. three years prior to the current presentation. In Brazil, she had worked in a public health clinic that provided tuberculosis care; she had never been evaluated for M. tuberculosis infection or tuberculosis. On physical examination, she was generally well-appearing. The abdomen was distended but soft and nontender to palpation. External genitalia, vagina, and cervix had normal appearance; the uterus and cervix were deviated to the right on exam, and rectovaginal examination was normal. There was no thrush, peripheral lymphadenopathy, or lower extremity edema; heart and lung exams were normal.
CT with contrast of the abdomen and pelvis showed a moderate volume of free fluid throughout the abdomen with diffuse nodularity throughout the omentum, enlarged right retroperitoneal lymph nodes measuring 1.4 and 1.2 cm in the short axis diameter, and a bilobed right ovarian cyst measuring 6.5 cm at maximum diameter . A transvaginal ultrasound showed a hypoechoic lesion with low-level internal reticular echoes within the right ovary, consistent with a hemorrhagic cyst (which resolved based on follow-up ultrasound examination); an 0.8 cm hypoechoic structure in the endometrium; and cystic structures throughout the myometrium. A test for antibodies to HIV-1 and HIV-2 was nonreactive. Complete blood count and metabolic panel were normal. Blood CA-125 level was 1289 U/mL (normal ≤ 38.1 U/mL).
Paracentesis was performed and showed rare benign mesothelial cells. Endometrial biopsy showed secretory endometrium without evidence of malignant cells. A CT-guided omental biopsy showed granulomas without evidence of neoplasm; mycobacterial and fungal stains and cultures were negative. Diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. Upon inspection, there was diffuse studding of intraperitoneal surfaces with 1-2 mm tan nodules, and the omentum was adherent to the anterior abdominal wall . There was an enlarged uterus with multiple fibroids, and the ovaries were without masses. Pathology of the omental and abdominal wall biopsies showed benign fibroadipose tissue with necrotizing and nonnecrotizing granulomas but without acid fast bacilli seen on modified Ziehl-Neelsen staining; mycobacterial cultures using the Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) liquid culture system and Lowenstein-Jensen solid media were negative, and nucleic acid amplification testing was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Due to unknown cause of intraperitoneal granulomas, she was referred to an infectious disease physician and to the local health department. CT of the chest showed a 4 mm left lower lobe nodule and biapical mild pleural parenchymal scarring. A tuberculin skin test showed 10 mm induration, and a blood QuantiFERON-TB Gold Plus interferon-gamma release assay (Qiagen) was positive. Due to concern for peritoneal tuberculosis, treatment was initiated with isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. Within four weeks of treatment, the CA-125 had decreased to 74 U/mL, and she had substantial clinical improvement including resolution of fevers, reduction in abdominal discomfort, increased appetite, and weight gain. At eight weeks after tuberculosis treatment initiation, her abdominal pain was entirely resolved, weight had increased from 56.6 kg at presentation to 62.1 kg, and CT abdomen and pelvis showed resolution of omental caking, ascites, and lymphadenopathy. A clinical diagnosis of tuberculosis peritonitis was made, and standard tuberculosis treatment was administered for a total of 6 months.