A 12-month-old boy presented to the emergency department (ED) with three days of fever. The mother was concerned for the development of right-sided facial swelling approximately three hours prior to presentation, increased irritability, and decreased oral intake. There were no reported gastrointestinal losses. The boy had an uncomplicated term birth and was vaccinated as appropriate for his age. Two weeks prior, he had completed a seven-day course of amoxicillin for acute otitis media . One day prior, the boy had visited a different ED with a complaint of “fever.” He had a urinalysis not suggestive of a urinary tract infection. After receiving antipyretics, he was discharged with supportive care.
On evaluation, the patient’s core temperature was 101.2° Fahrenheit (F), the peripheral pulse rate was 182 beats per minute, the respiratory rate was 36 breaths per minute, and pulse oximetry was 97%. He was a well-appearing and playful child in no acute distress and with slight right-sided facial swelling along the parotid region involving the mandible without fluctuance, crepitus, or cutaneous findings. His bilateral tympanic membranes were normal. His cardiorespiratory evaluation was grossly normal except for tachycardia, which was concordant with his fever. A soft-tissue head and neck ultrasound demonstrated bilateral submandibular lymph nodes, the largest measuring 2.7 × 1.5 × 1.5 centimeters (cm) on the right and 2.4 × 0.9 × 0.9 cm on the left without organized fluid collection, cavitation, or abscess. Such findings were presumed to be viral in etiology, and the patient was diagnosed with uncomplicated viral lymphadenitis and discharged with supportive management instructions.
The patient returned to the ED on his fourth day of illness with parental concern about worsening irritability, new avoidance of right-sided neck movement, and persistent fever. In addition, he had decreased oral intake without choking, vomiting, or respiratory distress, with resultant decreased urine output. His vital signs were as follows: temperature 102°F; blood pressure 118/75 millimeters of mercury, respirations between 28–35 breaths per minute, and pulse 140–156 beats per minute. His physical exam showed new and worsened right submandibular, submental, and cervical lymphadenopathy with decreased neck range of motion. However, he had a clear oropharyngeal exam and was protecting his airway. On otoscopy, he had a right-sided serous accumulation behind the tympanic membrane.
The basic metabolic panel was normal. His white blood cell count was 14.9 × 109/microliters (μL) (reference range 5.5 × 109/μL – 18 × 109/μL), hemoglobin 10.2 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (10.5–13.5 g/dL), platelets 315 × 109/μL (133 × 109/μL – 450 × 109/μL), with 72.2% neutrophils (15.0–40.0%). The whole blood lactic acid level was 1.5 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.5–2.2 mmol/L), while procalcitonin was elevated at 0.78 nanograms ng/mL (normal high 0.10 ng/mL).
A chest radiograph was grossly unremarkable. Most notably, computed tomography (CT) of the neck and soft tissues with intravenous (IV) contrast revealed suppurative versus necrotic lymph nodes along the right upper neck, retropharyngeal phlegmonous/inflammatory changes, and fluid tracking inferiorly toward the mediastinum concerning for early mediastinitis . Initial IV antibiotic management included vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole. The patient underwent a venous Doppler of the bilateral upper extremities in which the right IJ was not visualized. Complete echocardiography demonstrated a normal cardiac structure and no concerns for vegetations or pericardial effusion.
The patient was admitted to an inpatient step-down unit. Phlegmon and mediastinitis were managed operatively with incision and drainage by otorhinolaryngology (ENT). Wound cultures grew methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), and blood cultures demonstrated no growth.
Two days later, the patient acutely developed a worsening induration along the neck and a new fever, prompting another IV-contrast CT image of the neck and chest. Concerning findings included a right paratracheal abscess, supraclavicular and paratracheal lymphadenopathy, and an occlusive clot intracranially from the right sigmoid sinus that continued to the right IJ, right facial vein, and into the superior vena cava.
The patient went to the operating room emergently with ENT and cardiothoracic surgery for exploration. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole was added to his care based on the recommendations of infectious diseases consultation. The team drained a purulent accumulation (5–7 mL) from the upper mediastinum and placed a transsternal, vacuum-assisted wound closure. Despite the extensive inflammation of surrounding structures, there was no cardiac or vascular involvement. The patient received multiple combinations of IV antibiotics during his hospitalization. Ultimately, the sensitivities of MRSA detection determined that vancomycin provided sufficient coverage.
A repeat venous Doppler ultrasound examination on the same day as his second surgery revealed a persistent lack of flow in the right IJ. The patient was started on heparin infusion and eventually transitioned to low-molecular-weight heparin with plans for a three-month anticoagulation therapy. Hypercoagulable workups did not identify other causes of thrombus.
Three months after discharge, a magnetic resonance venogram and Doppler ultrasound showed normal blood flow. Approximately eight months following his admission, he had a repeat CT chest with IV contrast and CT angiography of the head and neck that demonstrated full resolution of disease. Since then, the patient has not experienced any complications.