An 11-year-old boy was admitted to a suburban general hospital due to blunt abdominal trauma (caused by a bicycle handlebar) and was transferred to our department five hours after the initial injury due to worsening abdominal pain. On arrival, the patient showed right upper quadrant and epigastric abdominal pain with cutaneous swelling, and was alert and afebrile, with a pulse rate of 110/min. Laboratory tests showed an increased WBC count (20.35 × 10 e3/uL - N-91 % with a reference range of 4.0–10.0 e3/uL). Abdominal US was negative, but due to his worsening overall condition, the patient underwent a contrast-enhanced CT scan that showed a suspected duodenal perforation in the II portion of the duodenum, with free air in the retroperitoneum and free fluid in the peritoneal space, wall thickening, and duodenal haematoma (a and b). The patient immediately underwent an exploratory laparotomy that showed a diffuse haematoma of the second portion of the duodenum, with a laceration of the peritoneal attachment and a perforation of the anterior surface of the duodenum near the junction of the 2nd and 3rd duodenal tract, which opened into the peritoneum with biliary leakage (II type laceration – AAST-OIS) . Following a careful Kocker manoeuvre to examine the entire 2nd and 3rd portion of the duodenum, the perforation was repaired with a single stitch suture and omental patch; duodenal bulb, biliary tree and pancreas were intact. Two drains were left in the peritoneum, the first close to the perforation and the second in the pelvis. A percutaneous central catheter was also inserted through the right internal jugular vein. The patient was admitted to the ward in good condition and with TPN. 48 h later, biliary fluid began to appear in the drain, with no abdominal sign of peritonitis, nor worsening of the patient’s overall condition. A new contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a small amount leakage in the I-II portion of the duodenum, and conservative treatment was started. The amount of fluid increased over the following 24 h, reaching a volume of around 800 mL/day. On the suspicion of a failure of the previous suture, the patient underwent an endoscopy to insert a biliary drain. The test showed a new perforation in the duodenal bulb, and a guidewire was introduced . The subsequent laparotomy showed a single perforation on the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb (II type laceration – AAST-OIS), immediately after the pylorus , while the previous perforation was perfectly closed, as seen at the previous endoscopy. The perforation was repaired with a single stitch suture and omental patch, and a new drain was left in place. After 48 h in ICU, the patient was readmitted to the ward in good condition and on TPN. After three days without any biliary leakage from the drain, the patient began presenting with biliary vomiting. X-ray showed an intestinal obstruction, prompting a new laparotomy which showed an ileal obstruction due to peritoneal adhesion. The post-operative period was uneventful, and the drain was removed on the 5th post-operative day. He was gradually returned to oral feeding and was discharged on the 10th post-operative day in a good condition. At three months’ follow up, the patient is completely recovered.