Our patient was a 49-year-old Caucasian man who's educational history showed he had completed primary school only. He had been employed in a professional capacity as a metalworker and welder for many years. His somatic history mentioned only slight hypertension, for which he was treated with 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide daily. He was referred for paranoid ideation, thoughts of reference, sleep disturbances and bizarre behaviors. A provisional diagnosis of acute paranoid psychosis was made and our patient was subsequently treated with 2 mg risperidone daily. Within two weeks the psychotic symptoms gradually disappeared and the dose of risperidone was lowered to 1 mg daily. Physical and neurological assessments did not reveal any abnormalities. Routine hematological and biochemical tests, including hemoglobin, lipoprotein profile and fasting glucose, were all within normal ranges. Borrelia and lues serology results were negative. Use of medications including over the counter preparations and illicit drugs were excluded by systematic evaluation.
Since there was no personal psychiatric history or family history of psychiatric diseases, a central nervous system disorder was suspected. Subsequently, MRI scanning of the brain was performed that demonstrated high T1 signal intensity of the globus pallidus bilaterally . Analysis of lumbar cerebrospinal fluid showed no abnormalities. Based on the MRI findings, the serum concentration of Mn was measured, which appeared to be increased (52 to 97 nmol/L, reference values: 7 to 20 nmol/L; Laboratories of Clinical Pharmacology, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands). A definite diagnosis of an organic psychotic disorder due to Mn intoxication was made. As a consequence, DAT-SPECT was performed that showed a normal uptake. Electrocardiography and X-ray of the thorax as well as ultrasonography of the liver displayed no abnormalities.
At three months after the initial referral, a follow-up MRI of the brain again showed enhanced T1 signal intensity in the same areas, but clearly to a lesser extent. The serum Mn concentration had decreased to high normal levels (31 to 36 nmol/L). On neuropsychiatric evaluation, our patient presented with a flat affect and mental dullness. There was a marked discrepancy between his appearance and his stated age. A detailed neurological examination disclosed, apart from a sluggish and indifferent attitude, no abnormalities, especially no signs or symptoms indicative for a parkinsonian syndrome. With respect to psychopathology, using the elements of the Comprehensive Psychiatric Rating Scale his thinking was slow and rigid and, apart from irritability and impulsivity, no formal psychiatric disturbances could be detected. His behavior was dominated by loss of interest in daily activities and social withdrawal as well as a lack of concern about his personal life and intentions. A neuropsychological assessment demonstrated a total IQ of 62 (Kaufman Adult Intelligence Test), which is in agreement with the estimated pre-morbid total IQ of 57 (National Adult Reading Test). There was a slow speed of information processing and a marked cognitive dysfunction with respect to attention, memory (learning and retrieval) and executive functioning (flexibility and shifting).
At follow-up after six months, a further neuropsychiatric examination disclosed findings similar to those obtained previously and treatment with risperidone was discontinued. His wife reported that the changes in his behavior, mood and interests had started insidiously several years before the first psychotic symptoms. A final diagnosis of apathy syndrome caused by chronic overexposure to Mn was formulated. Subsequently, psychosocial supportive therapy was given and our patient will be re-examined twice yearly in order to monitor the potential development of parkinsonian symptoms.