A previously healthy 13-month-old Caucasian girl, accompanied by her mother, presented to the emergency department of a local hospital in Saxony, Germany due to sudden onset of left arm weakness that started on the same day of presentation. One week prior to this, the child had a febrile gastroenteritis that subsided after 4 days. The left arm weakness however persisted in the local hospital, leading to a referral to the pediatric orthopedic department of our tertiary institution 2 days later. After clinical examination, the child was discharged with the recommendation of close observation and control.
Following no improvement of the left arm paresis, the child was readmitted to the pediatric orthopedic unit. Initially, there was a suspicion of a pulled elbow, but this was later excluded as no subluxation or dislocation could be seen on magnetic resonance tomography of the shoulder and arm. There was also no further diarrhea or vomiting since the initial gastroenteritis. The mother however reported a slight reduction in fluids intake by the child, albeit with normal feeding. There were also no abnormalities in the child’s urination. The child’s development had been regular as expected with no prior medical conditions nor history of regular medication use by the child. The child lives with her parents and goes regularly to a creche.
The general, cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examinations were all non-significant. The initial neurologic examination revealed a left arm paresis with the left arm lying in a pronation position. Pressure-pain could be elicited in the left shoulder and handgrip was present. The biceps and triceps tendon reflexes were reduced in the left arm as compared with the right arm. All other neurologic findings were non-significant.
Native and contrast medium-enhanced magnetic resonance tomography (MRT) of the skull and cervical vertebra were all without pathological findings and no malformations or demyelinations could be seen. Nerve conduction studies (nerve conduction velocity and somatosensory evoked potentials tests) revealed regular motor and sensory electroneurography and no signs of axonal or demyelinating neuropathy. Blood count results showed thrombocytosis (649 Gpt/l) and increased hemoglobin counts (8.4 mmol/l). All other hematological and biochemical parameters were non-significant. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a disruption in the blood–brain barrier permeability with an increased CSF/serum albumin ratio (5.1 × 103) and an increase in the number of diverse cells in CSF (+16%). All other CSF data were no-nsignificant.
Bacteriological and mycological CSF cultures were negative, serological analysis for Borrelia spp. and Mycoplasma pneumoniae in CSF as well as their respective antibody indices were negative. Viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2, enterovirus, and varicella zoster virus in CSF were all negative. Reverse-transcriptase PCR for enterovirus in stool was however positive.
The CSF sample was also reviewed by the pathology department of our hospital, where an assessment of lymphocytic inflammatory changes was made. Also there was no presence of tumor cells belonging to the non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma group or to leukemia. Considering the whole constellation with acute onset of left arm weakness in the child, history of febrile gastroenteritis, neurological examination findings of decreased deep tendon reflexes, CSF pleocytosis and positive PCR finding of enterovirus in the child’s stool sample, a suspected diagnosis of enterovirus-associated acute flaccid paralysis was made.