A 35-year-old male with no known comorbidity presented first time in the emergency department with a 24-h history of generalized abdominal pain, which initially started around the umbilicus. He also complained of nausea, 6 episodes of bilious vomiting, and inability to move his bowel during this period. His past medical and surgical history was unremarkable and had never complained of similar symptoms ever before. He was a chronic smoker and was taking one pack per day for 10 years.
On presentation to the emergency room, he was anxious but alert. He looked extremely dehydrated with a heart rate of 132 beats per minute and blood pressures of 96/76 mm of hg. His focused abdominal examination showed generalized distention and tenderness with rebound tenderness in the right lower abdomen suggestive of focal peritonitis. The initial clinical assessment suggested that he is in hypovolemic shock showed with focal peritonitis in the right iliac fossa likely because of a perforated appendix.
In the emergency room, he was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, antibiotics, antiemetics, and analgesics. Nasogastric tube and transurethral Foley’s catheter were passed. His initial serology workup showed blood urea nitrogen of 13 mg/dl and creatinine of 1.1 mg/dl and white blood cell (WBC) count of 22.4 per cubic millimeter and arterial lactic acid of 3.8 mmol/L. He responded to fluid resuscitation and his heart rate came down to 105 beats per minute. Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) of the abdomen was performed which showed a cluster of small bowel loops in the lower abdomen and the pelvic region anteromedial to the mesocolon with a surrounding sac that appeared to protrude through the defect in the mesocolon on the right side of the midline. The small bowel loops distal to this herniated sac as well as the large bowel loops appeared collapsed. These findings raised the possibility of strangulated internal hernia with small bowel ischemia .
Based on the above findings he was planned for the exploratory laparotomy with the possibility of bowel resection and anastomosis or stoma. However, exploratory laparotomy revealed contrary findings as the entire small bowel was clumped together within a sclerosing membrane like a cocoon . Part of the small bowel loops was grossly dilated, but there was no zone of transition. The entire sclerosing membrane was removed with sharp dissection, which was resulting in obstruction. A small part of the small bowel measuring 30 cm near terminal ileum appeared to be hypoperfused initially, but later became well perfused with the administration of fraction of inspired oxygen (FIO2) 100% and application of warm pads. There was no need for resection of the bowel and an entire small bowel run was performed with adhesiolysis from duodenojejunal (DJ) flexure to ileocecal junction. Postoperatively, he was shifted to special care. His initial complaint was of ileus which later settled and was progressed to liquid diet on post-op day 4 and to soft diet on 6th day postoperatively.
He was discharged on the 6th day postoperatively on a soft diet and had normal bowel movements. He was followed up in the clinic on the 12th postoperative day and was doing well, tolerating a regular diet with normal bowel movements. His skin staples were removed and he was asked to follow-up after 3 months. Histopathology of the sclerotic tissue was reported as fibro-collagenous and adipose tissue exhibiting dense areas of hyalinization and fibrosis. There were scattered fibroblasts, mild inflammatory infiltrate comprising predominantly of lymphocytes and occasional plasma cells as well consisting of finding of sclerosing peritonitis or cocoon abdomen syndrome .