A 41-year-old Japanese female was referred to our department because of severe hyphema in the right eye for two days, and anterior uveitis that had persisted for two weeks. She had a history of chickenpox in early childhood, right HZO without ocular involvement at 11 years of age, and ovarian cyst. She had a headache and feeling of fatigue starting at the onset of ocular symptoms.At presentation, the best-corrected visual acuity (expressed in decimal scale) was counting finger at 30 cm OD and 1.0 OS. Intraocular pressure was 8 mmHg OD and 12 mmHg OS. Slit lamp examination of the right eye revealed ciliary injection and severe hyphema filling almost one-half of the depth of the anterior chamber . Due to the severe hyphema, there was no view of the fundus. However, no apparent abnormality was detected in B-mode echo examination. There was no rash on her face. She was receiving topical treatment with 0.1% betamethasone, 1% atropine, and anti-glaucoma agents, because intraocular pressure in the right eye was 30 mmHg when measured at the previous clinic before hyphema developed. Routine blood tests showed no abnormalities including blood cell counts, C-reactive protein, immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA, and IgM), and rheumatoid factor. Only anti-VZV IgG measured by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) (negative: < 2.0) was elevated to 116. Anti-herpes simplex virus IgG tested by EIA and tuberculin skin test (Mantoux test) were negative. Carotid ultrasound was performed to exclude the possibility that hyphema was caused by ocular ischemia, but there was no obstruction. There was no difference in blood pressure measured in two arms, which would exclude ocular ischemia caused by Takayasu disease. Since the presence of anterior inflammation was evident at presentation, subconjunctival injection of betamethasone (2 mg) was given and the topical medications prescribed by the former clinic were continued.
Two weeks after presentation, hyphema filling one-third of the anterior chamber persisted. Acetazolamide (500 mg/day) was started because intraocular pressure in the right eye increased to 28 mmHg and subconjunctival injection of betamethasone (2 mg) was given twice for persisting anterior inflammation. Four weeks after presentation, hyphema was approximately one-quarter of the depth. Visibility of anterior chamber was improved, and segmental iris atrophy that is one of the characteristic ocular manifestations of herpes zoster uveitis was visible. However, no facial skin lesion was observed. Detailed history taking revealed that she had hypersensitivity at the right forehead just before ocular symptoms appeared. Therefore, ZSH was suspected.
Because anterior inflammation with ciliary injection and hyphema with fresh bleeding from atrophic area of the iris persisted, oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) and valaciclovir (3000 mg/day) were started. After starting these medications, ciliary injection improved and bleeding from the iris stopped. Then prednisolone and valaciclovir were gradually tapered. Oral medications were continued for 6 weeks and stopped, when ciliary injection became very mild and hyphema completely disappeared.At three months after presentation, visual acuity was 0.9 OD, and ocular pressure was 9 mmHg OD and 17 mmHg OS. Inflammation and hyphema were almost resolved . Ophthalmoscopic examination revealed 1+ cell in the anterior chamber, pigmented keratic precipitates, segmental iris atrophy and posterior synechiae from 12 to 8 o’clock position, corneal opacity corresponding to the area of iris atrophy, and broad anterior synechiae extending to posterior cornea . These observations were consistent with herpes zoster uveitis. Also, cataract developed but fundus seemed to be normal. Topical medication with 0.1% betamethasone was continued.
We then performed an anterior chamber paracentesis, since hyphema was resolved. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was conducted using the aqueous humor sample to detect viruses including VZV, herpes simplex virus, and cytomegalovirus. No viral DNA was detected. However, serial measurements of serum anti-VZV IgG showed a gradual decrease in level . At 9 months after presentation, we measured anti-VZV IgG level (EIA) in aqueous humor and serum samples, and the levels were 269 and 20.3, respectively . ZSH was thus confirmed.
There was no recurrence of severe inflammation, but mild ciliary injection and a few cells in the anterior chamber persisted, and cataract gradually increased in severity. Twenty-two months after presentation, visual acuity was hand motion at 30 cm due to cataract. The patient underwent cataract operation. The surgery was uneventful. Corneal endothelial cell count was 989/mm3 before surgery, and remained almost the same after surgery. Visual acuity in the right eye improved to 1.0 after surgery. However, intraocular pressure fluctuated between 5 and 30 mmHg after surgery, and macular edema developed which was resolved by subtenon injection of triamcinolone.