A 13-month-old male patient was admitted to the hospital in June 2019 due to chronic diarrhea and malnutrition.
The patient’s symptoms started a year ago with recurrent diarrhea and malnutrition. His diarrhea had been worsened the last 4 h (10 watery bowel movements).
The patient is the second live-born child of nonconsanguineous and healthy parents and was born at 35 wk of gestation by spontaneous vaginal delivery. The newborn had a birth weight of 2.15 kg and was hospitalized as a premature infant. The family history was negative for inherent diseases.
At the age of 1 mo, the patient had refractory diarrhea (up to 10-15 watery bowel movements per day) and scattered eczema. Therefore, he was hospitalized on several occasions at a local hospital and given hydrolyzing protein formula milk and supportive care to improve gastrointestinal symptoms. The eczema gradually disappeared in May after birth, but diarrhea did not significantly improve.
Upon admission to the hospital, the patient had a weight of 6.4 kg, head circumference of 40.5 cm, and length 70 cm, failure to thrive, and moderate-severe dehydration. Abdominal subcutaneous fat thickness was less than 4 mm, and bowel sounds were active, approximately 7 per minute.
The laboratory results showed a normal eosinophil count and hemoglobin concentration; a high white blood cell count (23.25 × 109/L); normal immunoglobulin A, IgG, and IgM levels but markedly elevated IgE levels (1970 IU/mL); high triglyceride (3.74 mmol/L); and decreased complement C3 (0.25 g/L), complement C4 (0.1 g/L), and albumin (29.1 g/L). The endocrine test showed normal antithyroid peroxidase (aTPO), antithyroglobulin (aTG), and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), and high free triiodothyronine (FT3, 2.20 pmol/L) and free thyroxine (FT4, 10.49 pmol/L) . Multiple urinalyses indicated proteinuria (+ to +++). Multiple stool analyses were unremarkable. The patient was allergic to eggs, peanuts, and milk. Endoscopy (gastroscope and colonoscopy) found duodenal anterior wall erosion, and the immunohistochemical staining for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and in situ hybridization for EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER) were negative. Flow cytometry showed a slightly higher proportion of CD25+FOXP3+ Tregs in CD4+ T cells (13.0%) .
The patient had early refractory diarrhea, malabsorption, high immunoglobulin E, hypothyroidism, and nephrotic syndrome. The diagnosis of IPEX was confirmed by whole exome sequencing, which revealed a pathogenic site in exon 5, c.542G>A (p.Ser181Asn) mutation of the FOXP3 gene. Subsequently, the same heterozygous mutation was found in the mother, who was a carrier, but his father and older brother were normal . The family pedigree of the patient is shown in Figure .