A 63-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with progressing abdominal distention for 3 months and oliguria for 2 months. The patient underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy for gallbladder stones 3 months ago. Laboratory data before laparoscopic cholecystectomy was albumin, 32.7 g/L; prothrombin time 13.1 s. Preoperative abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan indicated a small amount of effusion around the liver and no evidence of cirrhosis and splenomegaly was observed. Twelve days after surgery, the patient complained of abdominal discomfort and distension. Abdominal CT identified abdominal effusion. Then, the patient received abdominocentesis and the volume of slightly turbid yellow ascites averaged 1500–2000 ml per day. Gastroscopy revealed no esophageal and gastric varices. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed no biliary fistula. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography did not show any abnormal findings. After conservative treatment of diuretics, albumin administration, and repeated drainage for ascites, decreased urine volume, increased serum creatinine, and persistent ascites occurred. The patient was referred to our hospital with abdominal drainage tube for further clarifying the etiology.
The patient used to drink 300 mL red wine daily. She had taken an herbal weight loss product 10 years before. Systematic physical examination revealed a grossly distended abdomen with dilated collateral veins on the abdominal wall and severe bilateral lower extremity pitting edema. Shifting dullness was positive. Liver and spleen were untouched.
Laboratory test results were as follows: white blood cell counts, 10,830 /μL; hemoglobin level, 13.4 g/dL; platelets, 364,000 /μL; albumin level, 25 g/L; alanine aminotransferase, 37 IU/L; total bilirubin, 6.4 μmol/L; creatinine, 171 μmol/L; urea, 24.39 mmol/L; triglycerides, 1.34 mmol/L; prothrombin time, 14–20 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 30–47 s; fecal occult blood testing, negative; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 4 mm/h; purified protein derivative, negative; T cell enzyme-linked immune-spot assay, negative; hepatitis B surface antigen, negative; hepatitis C virus antibody, negative; anti-nuclear antibody, negative; type IV collagen, 167 ng/ml; hyaluronic acid 888 ng/ml. Ascites analysis revealed that the gross appearance was straw-colored , white blood cells was 3727 /μL (multinucleate cell, 89.7%), albumin was 11–14 g/L, serum-ascites albumin-gradient (SAAG) was 11–12 g/L, triglycerides was 0.91 mmol/L, total bilirubin and amylase were within normal limits. Ascites culture was positive for Enterococcus faecalis, Enterobacter cloacae, Acinetobacter pittii and Pseudomonas stutzeri. No fungi or Mycobacterium tuberculosis were present in the ascites culture. The cytological evaluation of the ascitic fluid showed no evidence of malignant cells.
Liver transient elastography demonstrated the liver stiffness was 53.1 kPa. Abdominal CT scan showed thickening of the peritoneum, a large amount of ascites, a decreased liver volume compared to pre-operation . Computed tomography angiography showed the main trunk of the portal vein was 14 mm wide at its widest point. No abnormal findings were observed by the lymphangiography. Lymphoscintigraphy found there was a small amount of radioactive filling in the abdominal cavity . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with chyle leak following laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
We gave her simultaneous administration of human albumin solution, diuretics, and abdominal drain. After the ascitic fluid culture results turned negative, the volume of ascites did not decrease. Meanwhile, terlipressin and midodrine were administrated to the patient to improve renal function. Considering the possibility of the presence of chyle leak, the patient received laparotomy. During the operation, light yellow lymph fluid overflowed continually on the surface of the hepatoduodenal ligament. Methylene blue solution was injected into the subcapsule of the liver margin and was observed at the leakage of the lymphatic vessel of hepatoduodenal ligament. Then, ligation of abdominal lymphatic fistula was performed and the lymphatic fluid leakage was significantly reduced after suture.
After the operation, the patient's ascites disappeared, blood pressure stabilized, and urine output recovered. During the 12-month follow-up, she was in good condition.