A 58-year-old woman who did not have a recent history of injury presented to our orthopaedic clinic with a tender palpable soft tissue mass in the anterolateral aspect of the left knee and acute reduced range of motion (ROM). The patient had a history of hyperuricemia for nearly 30 years and experienced knee trauma approximately 20 years ago. She complained of recurrent swelling and pain in the knee, which may have been misdiagnosed as gouty arthritis at the local community hospital because of similar symptoms. The advised treatment based on the symptoms, including colchicine and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, partially relieved the patient’s symptoms. The physical examination showed moderate, recurrent swelling of the left knee without surrounding warmth, as well as a tender mass growing slowly in the anteroinferior aspect of the left knee. Because of pain, the patient’s ROM in flexion had decreased considerably (30° – 70° in the left knee, compared with 0° – 110° in the right knee). The results of the laboratory tests for both trioxypurine and infection were within the respective normal limits. The MRI examination of the left knee revealed a massive intraarticular soft tissue lesion (measuring 58 × 32 × 46 mm) that replaced the normal Hoffa fat pad and extended through the lateral patellar retinaculum . Moreover, the lobulated mass had a well-circumscribed margin and exhibited focal heterogeneous hypointensity representing the blooming artifact from haemosiderin , which is regarded as the pathognomonic appearance of PVNS on MRI. Only mild degenerative changes and joint effusion were observed, without tophus or bone erosion.
Based on the MRI findings, it was considered impossible to completely remove the mass lesion. Therefore, open excision was selected as the surgical treatment. A 13-cm median incision was made, and synovectomy was performed successfully. A bright brown inflamed lobulated synovium was observed intraoperatively . Neither bone erosion nor diffuse soft tissue lesions were observed, suggesting a diagnosis of LPVNS. The final diagnosis was further confirmed by postoperative histological analysis, the results of which were consistent with LPVNS: multinucleated giant cells with no atypical features and an abundance of macrophages loaded with haemosiderin.
Postoperatively, the patient was satisfied with the substantial improvement of knee ROM (5° – 100°). At the 1, 6 and 18-month follow-ups, the patient had no pain and exhibited full restoration of knee ROM, with neither complications nor radiological recurrence .