A 50-year-old Asian male was admitted to Stroke Green Pathway due to “sudden disturbance of consciousness with left limb weakness for 11 hours”. The patient was drowsy at admission, and the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 13 (consciousness 1 + gaze 1 + facial paralysis 2 + left upper limb 4 + left lower limb 2 + sensory 1 + language 1 + articulation 1). The risk factors were found in this patient through inquiry. His parents both had high blood pressure (BP), and his father died of stroke; the patient himself smoked for at least 30 years, about 20 cigarettes per day; the homocysteine content was 33.16 μmol/L; the patient underwent right posterior communicating artery aneurysm clipping and ventriculostomy due to subarachnoid hemorrhage 2 years ago.
An emergency head and neck computed tomography (CT) was done. The plain CT scan revealed postoperative changes in the intracranial aneurysms and large low-density lesions in the right cerebral hemisphere with an Alberta Stroke Program Early Computed Tomographic Score (ASPECTS) value of 2 (. A). CT angiography indicated low contrast signals at siphon and occlusion of the C6 segment in the right internal carotid artery (ICA), the right middle cerebral artery (MCA), and the right posterior cerebral artery (PCA) were sparsely branched, the anterior communicating artery was small, and the bilateral embryonic posterior cerebral arteries and basilar arteries (BA) had uneven thicknesses and segmental occlusions (. B). CT perfusion showed extensive hypoperfusion in the right cerebral hemisphere (. C), and RAPID software calculated that the ischemic infarct core volume (cerebral blood flow <30 %) was 190 ml, the mismatch volume (Tmax > 6s volume minus core volume) was 167 ml, and the mismatch ratio (Tmax > 6s volume/core volume) was 1.9 (. A).
The family agreed to EVT after careful consideration after fully communicating with the patient's family about his condition and the benefits and risks of EVT. Balloon dilation of the C6 segment of the right ICA was performed under local anesthesia. The EVT process was as follows: door to puncture was 30 minutes. After the successful puncture, 3000 U of heparin was injected intravenously, and 15 ml of tirofiban was injected intravenously, followed by a micro pump (10 ml/h). Angiography showed occlusion of the C6 segment (. B1), minor compensation of the intracranial blood supply by the right ophthalmic artery through small vessels at the base of the skull, partial compensation of the blood supply by the left anterior cerebral artery (ACA) through the anterior communicating artery to the right ACA and the right MCA, minor compensation of the blood supply to the posterior circulation by the left PCA through the P1 segment, and occlusion of the BA. A Synchro 0.014 in x 300 cm micro guidewire guided an Echelon-10 microcatheter through the occlusion segment to the right MCA-M1 segment (. B2). Microcatheterography confirmed that Echelon-10 was in the vascular lumen and that the micro guide wire was retained in the right MCA-M2 segment. Then, the microcatheter was removed; angiography showed right ICA-C6 segment stenosis greater than 90 %, slow forward blood flow, good visualization of the right ACA and right MCA, and intermittent intra-arterial bolus injection of tirofiban was performed. After 30 minutes of blood perfusion, a Gateway 2.0 × 15 mm balloon was used to slowly pressurize (6 atm/120 s) the balloon. Follow-up angiography showed approximately 80 % stenosis in the right ICA-C6 segment and improvement in the forward blood flow, and the right PCA, right ACA, and right MCA were well visualized. Seven minutes later, the Gateway 2.0 × 15 mm balloon was slowly pressurized (12 atm/120 s). The follow-up angiography showed approximately 70 % stenosis in the right ICA-C6 segment, and good forward blood flow and the right PCA, right ACA, and right MCA were well visualized, and a small branch of the right MCA-M3 was occluded (. B3); thrombolysis in cerebral infarction was grade 2C. Intermittent intra-arterial bolus injections of tirofiban and intermittent repeated angiography were performed. After 30 minutes of observation, the follow-up angiography showed approximately 70 % stenosis in the right ICA-C6 segment, good forward blood flow, and right PCA, right ACA, and right MCA were well visualized (. B4); the thrombolysis in cerebral infarction was grade 2C. During the operation, 1000U heparin was added, and 8 ml of tirofiban was injected intra-arterially.
Dexmedetomidine sedation and sufentanil analgesia were continued after the operation. Immediate postoperative CT scan showed large low-density lesions in the right cerebral hemisphere with a midline shift (. A). Vital signs and level of consciousness were closely monitored, and the airway, blood pressure, body temperature, blood glucose, blood sodium, and nutrition were controlled in the neurological intensive care unit. The patient was pharmacologically sedated and received protective endotracheal intubation, ventilator-assisted respiration, continuous infusion of tirofiban (8 ml/h), heparin (300 U/h), strong dehydration to lower intracranial pressure (3 % hypertonic salt q6h, mannitol q6h, human serum albumin, and furosemide bid), and strict blood pressure control (110–120/70-80 mmHg). Two hours and 15 hours (. B) after the operation, CT showed low-density lesions on the right side, and the brain tissue was swollen. Transcranial Doppler (TCD) monitoring showed a high flow rate in the MCA on the affected side, indicating high intracranial pressure and a high risk of hemorrhagic transformation. The family was fully informed, and decompressive craniectomy was considered while closely monitoring the patient. Daily routine bedside TCD was conducted, changes in blood flow rate were observed, the blood pressure control range was adjusted based on test results, and bedside rehabilitation therapy was actively provided. The patient was switched to antiplatelet drug (aspirin, 100 mg/d; ticagrelor, 90 mg/d) treatment on the 4th day; the patient was conscious and underwent off-line training on the 5th day. On the 7th day, the patient was off-line, and on the 8th day, he was extubated. Head CT was performed at 32 hours, 60 hours (. C), 85 hours, 133 hours, 10th days (. D), and 16 days. Head and neck CTA was reexamined 10 days after the operation (. E), and the siphon segment of the right ICA was stenotic (70 %). The patient was discharged 16 days postoperatively. The NIHSS score was 7 points (facial paralysis 2+left upper limb 2+left lower limb 1+sensation 1+language 1). Magnetic Resonance Angiography showed right ICA patency with 50 % lumen stenosis, and the right MCA was well visualized. In the following 2 years, the patient continued to visit the outpatient department without interruption and insisted on taking antiplatelet drugs and statins, which effectively prevented the occurrence of ischemic stroke and ischemic events. A professional neurologist assessed the mRS score; the patient's mRS score was grade 2 at the 2-year follow-up (. F). Although the patient cannot continue working, he can handle his basic needs independently without assistance.