A 40-year-old Caucasian man reporting pain, swelling, and functional reduction without severe effects on the range of motion was evaluated. Fourteen years ago, the patient had been diagnosed with medial femoral condyle OCD, which was treated under arthroscopic osteosynthesis with three Herbert screws. Four years after the first intervention, and reporting unsatisfactory clinical progress, the patient underwent a valgus osteotomy of the tibia and an exploratory arthroscopy in which two of the three screws of the medial femoral condyle were removed. In spite of the latter treatment, the knee pain and swelling lingered, so we assessed the size of OCD by obtaining cartilage-specific axial computed tomographic (CT) scan sequences, which evinced a cartilage defect 1.83 cm deep and 1.52 cm wide in the medial femoral condyle associated with a mobile fragment. We made the decision to perform an open knee surgery using an osteochondral allograft (OCA) assisted with PRP.
PRP was prepared according to Endoret®(pgrf®) technology (BTI, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain) . Before inducing anesthesia and starting prophylactic antibiotic treatment and saline, 80 ml of peripheral venous blood was withdrawn into 9-ml tubes containing 3.8% (wt/vol) sodium citrate as anticoagulant. Blood was centrifuged at 580 g for 8 min at room temperature. In each tube, the 2-ml plasma fraction located just above the sedimented red blood cells was collected in a tube without aspirating the buffy coat. This PRP contained 1.5 to 2.5 times the concentration of platelets compared with peripheral blood and an absence of erythrocytes and leukocytes. The activation of PRP was carried out by adding calcium chloride (10% wt/vol). Some of the liquid was incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in a glass dish, which allowed a fibrin membrane to form. The rest of the liquid PRP was infiltrated during surgical intervention as follows.
An arthrotomy was performed following the previous incision made to conduct the valgus osteotomy. The plaque and screws of the valgus osteotomy were removed as well as the Herbert screw, which protruded from the hyaline cartilage. A debridement, spongialization, and reaming of the osteochondral wound bed was performed in order to achieve a defect of 2 cm in diameter as the allograft . Then, Pridie-type drilling microfractures followed by infiltration of 4–5 ml of activated PRP into subchondral bone was carried out. Afterward, we placed the fibrin membrane obtained as described above into the wound bed . Once the 1.25-cm deep femoral plug OCA was infiltrated with PRP , we press-fit it into the reamed area and sealed the interface around the allograft with activated PRP . When surgery was completed, we carried out an intra-articular infiltration of 8 ml of activated PRP. A further three intra-articular infiltrations of 8 ml of activated PRP were conducted on a weekly schedule during the postoperative period on an outpatient basis. Assisted walking with crutches and a minimal initial load was recommended during the first 4 weeks postintervention. A rehabilitation program with passive mobility and avoiding axial movements was initiated 2 weeks after the surgery. After week 4, partial support and resistance-free cycling, together with swimming pool exercises, were allowed.
The CT scan taken 1 year after the surgery revealed an area of abnormal signal intensity that was reduced in CT scans obtained 2 years later. In addition, the CT scan obtained 2 years later showed a clear reattachment and incorporation of the graft in an asymptomatic patient . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans obtained 3 years after the surgery and examined by an experienced radiologist showed that the fragment remains well integrated, and the cartilage line under the graft was perceived . Seven years after the surgery, the allograft was still incorporated into the joint without signs of failure. The patient resumed a daily routine without any recurrent symptoms of pain or swelling and with a suitable range of motion from 0 degrees of extension to 130 degrees of flexion.