A 22-year-old male patient was referred to the Oral and Maxillo-Facial Surgery Service at Federal University of Paraná after occasional finding on a routine panoramic radiograph. The patient experienced no symptoms. A computed tomographic (CT) was requested and showed a well-defined hyperdense mass showing a hypodense center inside the left maxillary sinus measuring approximately 15 mm × 10 mm situated in a posterior position of this anatomical space . It was observed that this calcified mass was associated with the roots of the impacted third molar. Treatment proposed was the complete excision of the lesion through an intraoral approach and Caldwell-Luc access to reach the maxillary sinus.
Under general anesthesia, an incision from the superior left first molar extending to retromolar area, with anterior and posterior relaxant incisions, was conducted to provide a sufficient access to the region of interest without causing gingival tissue tension. Osteotomy of the lateral maxillary sinus wall was conducted in order to expose its membrane. Once the sinus membrane was exposed, it was carefully detached from the bone without it disrupting until the calcified mass was reached . The third molar with calcified mass associated with the roots was removed.
The chosen postoperative drug therapy was cefazoline-oral (500 mg) each 8 hours during 7 days, nimesulide (100 mg) each 12 hours during 5 days, and dipyrone (1 g) for each 6 hours during 3 days. Patient experienced no infection symptoms and drug therapy showed to effective in swelling and pain control.
Pathological mass removed was stored in 10% formalin and sent as excision biopsy for further histopathological investigation. It was fixed in 10% neutral formalin, subjected to decalcification in formic acid, bisected in a mesiodistal direction, and then processed for light microscopic examination. Histopathology showed that the calcified tumor mass was composed of sheets of cementum-like tissue with lack of interstitial tissue. The middle part of the tumor was found to be more mature and the peripheral part is more cellular. Multinucleated giant cells and blastic cells were found within the margins of the mineralized mass. The pathological mass was also associated with the yet not totally formed maxillary third molar root, corroborating the benign cementoblastoma diagnosis .
Postoperative orthopantomogram radiography shows the success of the tumor removal . One-year follow-up shows no recurrence and absence of symptoms.