An 80-year-old male complained of intermittent chest pain for three weeks. During this period, he had been diagnosed with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). The patient had a past medical history of hypertension (treated with amlodipine and ramipril), type 2 diabetes mellitus (treated with glargine, aspart, and voglibose), and a two-year history of chronic kidney disease (stage 4). Due to the concern of deteriorating kidney function, he was given medical therapy before transferring to our hospital. He was treated with aspirin (100 mg per day), clopidogrel (75 mg per day), and isosorbide mononitrate (20 mg per day) for three weeks before admission.
On admission, hematologic findings showed normal hemoglobin (12.3 g/dL), leukocyte count (7.85 × 103/mm3), neutrophil count (5.13 × 103/mm3), and platelet count (183 × 103/mm3). His baseline creatinine level was 3.35 mg/dL and his estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 16.42 mL/min/1.73 m2. Before the scheduled PCI, a loading dose of 300 mg clopidogrel and 300 mg aspirin were administered. During the procedure, two stents were placed in the left anterior descending artery, and two stents were placed in the right coronary artery. The patient received a maintenance dose of clopidogrel 75 mg per day and aspirin 100 mg per day after the procedure. Considering his low glomerular filtration rate (GFR), we administered intravenous isotonic normal saline 24 h pre-procedure and post-procedure, respectively, and the dose of contrast for PCI was 150 mL. Due to low urine output and elevated creatinine (from 3.35 to 4.81 mg/dL), the patient was given intermittent venovenous hemofiltration (IVVHF) for six times in all . His hemoglobin dropped from 12.3 to 6.5 g/dL, which was most likely due to renal causes and blood loss during IVVHF, and he was given a three-unit red blood cell transfusion. In the meantime, his white blood cell and neutrophil count were in the normal range. On the 10th day after the PCI procedure, his urine output increased to 1590 mL and creatinine level decreased to 3.16 mg/dL , and we stopped hemofiltration by then. He was then discharged with a back-to-baseline creatinine level of 3.37 mg/dL and a normal leukocyte count of 7.5 × 103/mm3. His discharge medication lists included clopidogrel (75 mg per day), aspirin (100 mg per day), isosorbide mononitrate (30 mg per day), atorvastatin (20 mg per day), carvedilol (6.25 mg twice per day), furosemide (20 mg per day), and erythropoietin (10,000 IU three times per week subcutaneously).
On the 51st day of clopidogrel therapy, the patient went to the clinic for follow-up with no symptoms other than anorexia, and his complete blood count demonstrated a leukocyte count of 2.5 × 103/mm3 and a neutrophil count of 1.0 × 103/mm3. The patient was instructed to come to the clinic for close follow-ups of complete blood count. On the 55th day of clopidogrel treatment, he came to the emergency department complained of fever and chills with a temperature of 39.0 °C. He was somnolent but arousable. Vital signs showed that heart rate was 110, respiratory rate was 22, blood pressure was 99/58 mmHg, and O2 saturation was 100%. Complete blood count indicated leukopenia (0.84 × 103/mm3) and severe neutropenia (0.13 × 103/mm3). Since neutropenic fever is a potentially life-threatening condition, our priority was the initial assessment and prompt management of febrile neutropenia. Intravenous normal saline and supplemental oxygen were given. Two sets of blood cultures were drawn prior to intravenous empiric broad-spectrum antibiotics (imipenem/cilastatin). Subcutaneous granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) was administered due to the critical condition of this patient. Given the possibility of drug-induced neutropenia, clopidogrel was no longer used and was replaced by ticagrelor (90 mg twice per day). Further blood tests showed normal electrolytes and liver function tests, a creatinine level of 3.96 mg/dL, and elevated C-reactive protein of 18 ng/dL. We performed several laboratory tests and imaging studies to identify potential pathogen and source of infection. Two sets of blood cultures both came out positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and antibacterial susceptibility tests proved the pathogen was susceptible to imipenem. Common viral studies were negative (CMV, EBV, influenza, HIV, hepatitis virus). As for the source of infection, the patient had no indwelling catheters, no skin breakdown, no abnormalities during oropharyngeal and perirectal exams, and complained no abdominal pain or diarrhea. Urine analysis was negative for white blood cells. Crackles were heard on auscultations, and chest X-ray and chest CT scans showed ground-glass opacities in the right lower lobe. Thus, the primary source of infection was most likely caused by pulmonary infection which later developed into sepsis.
We performed a thorough differential diagnosis of potential causes of neutropenia. Further laboratory evaluations were obtained, including vitamin B12 and folic acid levels, autoimmune antibodies, peripheral blood smears, and abdominal ultrasound (to rule out splenomegaly), and all of them showed no abnormalities. Common etiologies of neutropenia in the elderly includes infection, medication, nutritional deficiencies, hematologic malignancies, and autoimmune disorders . Nutritional causes were ruled out since vitamin B12 and folic acid levels were within the normal range. Autoimmune disorders were unlikely due to negative autoimmune antibodies. As for hematologic causes, this patient’s rapid response to treatment and normal peripheral blood smears made hematologic malignancies less likely, and abdominal ultrasound showed a normal-sized spleen which ruled out hypersplenism. As for infections, viral serologies (CMV, EBV, influenza, HIV, hepatitis virus) were negative, but positive blood cultures demonstrated that Pseudomonas sepsis might be a potential cause of neutropenia. On the other hand, drug-induced neutropenia was another plausible explanation. Among all the medications he had used, clopidogrel, aspirin, and furosemide might lead to neutropenia. However, clopidogrel was the only medication started using for the first time within the past three months, which made other drugs unlikely to be the cause of neutropenia. Among these two plausible causes, the patient had no fever or symptoms of infection when neutropenia was first detected on the 51st day of clopidogrel treatment. Therefore, it was more likely that neutropenia occurred before sepsis rather than the opposite. Moreover, according to a monocentric cohort study, 34% of patients with drug-induced agranulocytosis primarily presented with septicemia or septic shock , and the percentage increased to 64% in elderly patients , indicating septicemia was not uncommon for patients with drug-induced neutropenia. Applying Naranjo ADR (adverse drug reaction) probability scale to this patient, we reached a score of 5, which indicated that clopidogrel was the probable cause . That made clopidogrel the most likely primary culprit of neutropenia in this patient, and acute sepsis caused by inadequate bone marrow reserve might further exacerbate the progression of neutropenia.
During hospitalization, we continued monitoring his vital signs, complete blood count, inflammatory markers, and cardiac biomarkers . The change of white blood cell and absolute neutrophil count was shown in Fig. . After four days of G-CSF and imipenem/cilastatin treatment, he was clinically stable with a normal temperature and white blood cell count, and his absolute neutrophil count had recovered to 3.53 × 103/mm3. Therefore, G-CSF and imipenem/cilastatin were discontinued, and antibiotics was switched into oral moxifloxacin, which was used for another four days. The patient’s clinical status, temperature, neutrophil count, and inflammatory markers were normal since then. He was discharged after 10 days of hospitalization, and was instructed to monitor complete blood count periodically. He came for follow-ups after using ticagrelor for 23 and 68 days, respectively, and his complete blood count was within the normal range. The patient reported no adverse effects associated with ticagrelor use.