We report the case of a 52-year-old Caucasian man of medium build who had had moderate hypertension for three years. He referred to no other noticeable symptom. His hypertension was pharmacologically treated. The patient came to our hospital to undergo abdominal ultrasonography during a clinical checkup. US showed the presence of a large hyperechoic mass with non-well-defined boundaries that made it difficult to measure its exact size. It seemed to be 20 cm in diameter. The mass was interposed between the spleen and the left kidney. The left kidney was displaced downward. A probable myelolipoma of the left adrenal gland was diagnosed. Contrast-enhanced CT was proposed to confirm the diagnosis. The abdominal CT scan confirmed the presence of an expansive lesion largely occupying the left hemiabdomen. Such a lesion rising from the left adrenal gland had frankly fat content, with delta numbers equal to a mean of -130 HU. It had sharp, regular boundaries with starlike central calcifications. It was suggestive of a giant left adrenal myelolipoma. The spleen was pushed against the costal wall and slightly displaced cranially, while the left kidney was pushed downward and the left renal artery and vein were stretched. The compression exerted on the vein caused a dramatic ipsilateral spermatic varicocele. The pancreatic gland at the tail, the splenic artery and vein as well as the left colonic flexure were displaced anteriorly. Preoperatively, his routine biochemistry was normal (hemochrome with formula, liver and kidney function), while his serum cortisol level was increased (cortisol at 10 a.m. = 743 nmol/L, cortisol at 2 p.m. = 637 nmol/L, cortisol at 6 p.m. = 649 nmol/L; ranges, 7 a.m. to 10 a.m., 171 to 536 nmol/L; 4 to 8 p.m., 64 to 327 nmol/L). His glucose level was 122 mg/dL (range, 60 to 110 mg/dL). His urinary catecholamines were normal.
A surgical left adrenalectomy was performed. The surgically removed myelolipoma showed it to have an oval shape (about 25 cm × 20 cm × 20 cm), and it weighed 4.4 kg. Sectioning revealed areas representing well-differentiated fat. The histological examination revealed the presence of adipose tissue with hematopoietic elements without signs of cellular atypia, thus confirming the initial diagnosis. The patient's postoperative course was altogether uneventful.