A 57-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with sudden otalgia in her left ear that was noticed by her daughter. Five minutes later, the patient had an acute onset of speaking difficulties and left-sided headache. These symptoms were not precipitated by coughing, straining, or Valsalva's maneuver. There was no history of head trauma, surgery, or ear infection. Neurological examinations revealed solely a motor aphasia and the other neurological functions were normal. The otological examination was completely normal.
The computed tomography (CT) showed a hypodense space-occupying lesion (–1000 Hounsfield units) compatible with air in the white matter of the left temporal lobe, of approximately 4 cm diameter . Similar findings were found on plain radiographs of the skull .
A high-resolution CT using a bone algorithm demonstrated a close relationship of the air bubble with air cells of the mastoid, which were highly pneumatized . The temporal bone was fluid free and showed no signs of fracture, acute or chronic inflammatory changes.
Magnetic resonance (MR) showed the large intraparenchymal pneumocephalus in the white matter of the left inferior and middle temporal gyrus with minimal perilesional edema . No pathological gadolinium enhancement indicative of an underlying tumor was present.
We performed a left temporal craniotomy for decompression and to seal the presumed temporal bone and dura defects. After opening the dura, the cortex was pressed out and a puncture of pneumocephalus was carried out at the level of the second temporal sulcus, with high-pressure evacuation of the air collection and consequent brain relaxing. Later, an extradural approach to the tegmen tympani showed a 5-mm bone defect in close relationship with an underlying dural hole, through which output of cerebrospinal fluid was observed [ and ]. Other six smaller bone defects (2 mm) were also found at the level of tegmen tympani, but without any dural defects.
A watertight closure of the dura with temporalis muscle fascia and fibrin glue was performed. All bone defects were closed with autologous bone and fibrin glue.
After the operation, the patient's symptoms gradually improved, and the further postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged home 5 days after the operation with minimal speech problems, which were treated with speech therapy. The follow-up examination 1 month later revealed normal speech and absence of pneumocephalus on CT and MR .