A 71-year-old white woman presented with a one-year history of dry coughing, progressive dyspnea, 5 kg weight loss, nocturnal diaphoresis and six months of neck discomfort and hoarseness. She had a previous medical history of hypertension, which was under treatment with amlodipine (5 mg daily), and hypothyroidism treated with levothyroxine (50 mcg daily). She had had an episode of pneumonia, treated five years earlier. She had never smoked. She was anxious but looked well.
On physical examination, she presented reduced breathing sounds in both lungs, without any other remarkable finding. Renal and liver function tests, hemogram and lactic dehydrogenase levels were normal. Her beta 2 microglobulin level was 1.5 mg/l (upper limit of normal values: 1.31 mg/l). Chest x-ray showed a slight tracheal deviation, and lung function tests showed a mild obstructive picture. Bronchodilators and corticosteroids only attenuated the symptoms. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed irregularities and narrowing of the mid-trachea. Bronchoscopy showed a friable infiltrative lesion involving all the walls of the trachea, starting 4 cm from the vocal cords and extending for 5 cm towards the carina, and stopping 2 cm away from it.
The initial biopsy showed reactional lymphoid hyperplasia. Only after the fifth endoscopic procedure with biopsies was the anatomopathological diagnosis made. The morphological and immunohistochemical features confirmed the presence of a low-grade non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphoma with plasmacytic differentiation, suggestive of MALT lymphoma. The immunohistochemical panel revealed that the lymphoma cells were positive for CD20, lambda and, rarely, CD138 and negative for CD43, cyclina and CD5 . A bone marrow biopsy was normal.
Treatment consisting of rituximab (375 mg/m2 once a week for four weeks) and prednisone (20 mg/day) was ineffective with no clinical response and worsening of the symptoms. R-COP immunochemotherapy was then started with the following doses: improved after vincristine was withdrawn in the second cycle. Bronchoscopy after the seventh cycle showed only a scar lesion, and this was confirmed in an anatomopathological sample. Eight cycles were completed with complete remission of symptoms.