The case recruited in this study was a 79-year-old male with a history of multiple diseases, including heart disease and myocardial infarction, who experienced long-term bedridden status after a heavy stroke. He was admitted to a nursing home because of left-sided hemiplegia and the need for positional changes. Although he was conscious, he could not express himself verbally, so he sometimes made grunting sounds to notify staff for diaper changes. In nutrition, 2100 kilocalories were given daily. Six bottles of Ensure® and 600 cc-800 cc of high protein drinks were administered through a nasogastric tube with four equal doses per day. His body mass index was 24 kg/m2.
On admission, A PI developed on his sacrum with a size of 6.5 × 3.5 × 3 cm3, and his PI was classified as Stage 4 according to the NPUAP The Braden scale was used to evaluate the risk of PI concurrently. In the Braden Scale his sensory perception, nutrition, and moisture were all scored 3, but friction and shear, activity, and mobility were scored 1 by the nursing staff. As a result, the total score was 12, indicating a high risk of PIs . Moreover, the Pressure Ulcer scale for Healing (PUSH) was used to evaluate the healing status of PI . The sub-score for the length x width was 9, for exudate amount was 3, and for tissue type was 4. The total score of PUSH was 16. In addition, the staff reported several eczemas on the resident’s back and the resident moaned most of the time. Three major strategies were identified as the routine for PI care in this nursing home: first, changing position every 2 h allows for a decrease in pressure caused by being bedridden; second, the diaper and clothes were checked every two hours and changed if needed to ensure a relatively dry condition for the skin. Finally, a wet dressing wound change with antibiotic ointment is done once a day.
Improvement of his PI was one of the major concerns for admitting him to this nursing home, so a traditional APAM was used to relieve the pressure of being bedridden. Five months later, the wound size had decreased to 2.5 × 2 × 3 cm3.The PUSH score was down to 11 but no further improvement was observed. Consequently, an air mattress with the AI application was used to replace the traditional APAM; wound dressing and repositioning remained as before. The size of the AI mattress was similar to that of the traditional APAM but had an active pressure sensor array that ensured the accuracy of positioning. The pressure redistricting process is a dynamic process; this AI mattress can be programmed to automatically detect and calculate the pressure every second. The AI device uses the result from the first-time scan as the baseline or compare the aforementioned data to locates the areas of bony prominences and showed in a 26-colored schematic . The red portion indicated the area with highest risk to develop PI. As a result, the pressure would be redistributed by the AI mattress.
Therefore, Fig. (A) to (C) are demonstrating how different colors were used to highlight the pressure level in different positions, with red indicating high pressure and thus a higher risk of PI development, while white indicated a lower pressure. Figure (D) to (F) are displaying the redistributed pressure once the risk area was identified. Figure (A) shows the body supine, Fig. (B) shows the resident lying on his left side, and 3(C) shows the resident lying on his right side. A sensory array was used to scan and record the pressure data and connected to each cell. AI was set to automatically calculate skin pressure and presented in colored schematic. Figure (C), (D), and (E) show that the AI mattress automatically redistributed pressure as AI compared with the aforementioned data and identified risky areas.
The case used the AI mattress for 4 weeks. Figure shows that repositioning by the nursing home staff occurred every 3.10 ± 0.25 h. In total, the time lying on the bed increased from 5.79 ± 2.95 h per day in the first week to 9.89 ± 2.21 h in the 4th week . Regarding the total time spent on the bed in different positions, the time spent supine or sitting up at 30° was the highest (8.89 ± 2.36 h/day), followed by the left side (8.57 ± 1.79 h/day) and right side (6.50 ± 0.78 h/day). Due to the use of the AI device, no new PIs developed, and the size of the original PI decreased. Interestingly, left-sided pressure in the scapula and hip was significantly higher than right-sided pressure (p <.05) during both day and night . Photographs of the PI wounds were taken and measured weekly. The size of the wound was 2 × 2.5 × 3.2 cm3 at the start of using the AI mattress. Four weeks later, the size had reduced to 2 × 1 × 1.2 cm3 (stage 2), and the score of the PUSH was down to 6.
According to the NPUAP, repositioning every 164–240 min, is recommended to prevent PIs [, , ]. However, the reposition routine in this nursing home and most health institutions in Taiwan still remains with a frequency of every 2 h. In Fig. , the AI data showed that the average time between repositioning was 3.11 h, much longer than the required 2 h in this nursing home. Over these 4 weeks in which the AI mattress was used, the average time for lying supine or sitting on the bed at 30° (with a stuffed pillow behind the resident’s back) was always longer than 3 h; the average time for lying on the right side was approximately 3 h, but lying on the left side was always less than 3 h.