A 10-day-old Sri Lankan Tamil neonate born in a tertiary care center was referred to Lady Ridgeway Hospital for further evaluation of ambiguous genitalia at birth. He was the first child born to nonconsanguineous healthy young parents following uncomplicated antenatal and perinatal periods at term via normal vaginal delivery, with a birth weight of 2.385 kg.
Neonatal examination revealed bifid scrotum, perineal urethra, 2 cm phallus, and palpable bilateral small testis. In addition, he had some dysmorphic features such as hypertelorism, upslanting palpebral fissures, flat occiput, and mild webbing of the neck. His length and occipital frontal circumference (OFC) at birth were 47 and 32 cm, respectively. During the hospital stay, the baby was well fed and his serum electrolyte levels and serum calcium levels remained normal throughout. Moreover, there were no documented hypoglycemic events or neonatal jaundice.
Subsequent investigations on day 14 of life showed normal levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), testosterone, and 17-OH progesterone (17-OHP), with elevated serum follicle-stimulating hormone level suggesting gonadal failure . Ultrasound of abdomen and scrotum revealed normal adrenal glands with no evidence of persistent Müllerian structures. There was no radiological evidence of radio ulnar synostosis. Karyotyping demonstrated chromosomal aneuploidy of 49XXXXY syndrome. Parents were advised to register the sex of the child as male and advised regarding follow-up and the need for hormone replacement therapy during puberty.
The child was followed up at the endocrinology clinic at 3 months to assess growth and development. Surgical referral was done at 6 months of age for correction of perineal hypospadias, and surgery is planned for 1 year and 3 months of age.
At age 1 year, the child’s growth parameters included weight below the 3rd centile (6.8 kg) and length between the 3rd and 15th centile (72 cm) according to WHO growth charts. His development at the age of 1 year was delayed, and he was commenced on physiotherapy, occupation therapy, and speech therapy at the local hospital. Follow-up ultrasound (USS) of abdomen and pelvis at 1 year was normal except for nonobstructive right-side renal calculus of 3.5 mm.