A 49-year-old man suffered from posterior circulation ischemic stroke presenting with diplopia, slurred speech, and difficulty swallowing and walking 3 years prior to admission. Only mild dysarthria and unsteady gait remained after weeks of treatment and physical rehabilitation, which did not affect his daily life. More than two years after the ischemic stroke event, the patient developed a feeling of aggravated imbalance and walking instability. The symptoms aggravated gradually in the past 7 months, and he was not able to run or ascend stairs independently on admission. The patient had no other medical history or regular medication use. He had smoked 8 cigarettes a day for 40 years and stopped smoking for 3 years. No significant family history was recorded.
Neurological examination demonstrated dysarthria, horizontal nystagmus, bilateral cerebellar ataxia, and 2–3 Hz rhythmic contractions of the soft palate and upper larynx (Video). His gait was clumsy.
The routine laboratory examination (including autoantibody spectrum, paraneoplastic antibodies, vitamin B12, folate, etc.) revealed no specific abnormalities. Cerebrospinal fluid examination was normal. The results of pressure, cell counts, protein, glucose, oligoclonal band, immunoglobulin g index, AQP4, MOG and MBP antibody were all negative or normal. 1.5T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain performed approximately 10 days after ischemic stroke onset 3 years prior to this admission showed an acute midline lesion in the midbrain exhibiting a remarkable “heart appearance” on diffusion weighted imaging. 3T-MRI after this admission revealed T2 and FLAIR hyperintensity with hypertrophy of the bilateral inferior olivary nucleus, and no other abnormalities were detected .
The patient was finally diagnosed with bilateral HOD resulting from a midbrain heart-shaped infarction and Wernekinck commissure syndrome 3 years prior to admission. Adamantanamine 100 mg/day was administered to improve motor function, and B vitamins were administered for neurotrophic treatment. Rehabilitation training was also performed. The medication was discontinued by the patient after discharge, and rehabilitation training was also discontinued due to the COVID-19 pandemic. One year later, the symptoms of this patient neither improved nor were aggravated. We suggested this patient continue rehabilitation.