A 65-year-old woman presented with the left facial spasm of 7 years duration. Her symptoms were initially well controlled with botulinum toxin injections. However, the duration of symptomatic relief decreased over time, necessitating more frequent treatments. Her symptoms were aggravated by eating, chewing gum, conversation, as well as anxiety. She indicated that she had a sister as well as a cousin who underwent surgery for HS. A preoperative MRI confirmed the presence of a vascular conflict on the facial nerve . She then underwent a left retrosigmoid suboccipital craniotomy and microscopic dissection was performed while monitoring the facial nerve using the nerve integrity monitoring system (NIMS, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). The cerebellomedullary cistern was entered and the flocculus elevated, exposing choroid plexus, and the facial root exit zone . The anterior inferior cerebellar artery was identified compressing the root exit zone. This was carefully dissected away and several Teflon (polytetrafluoroethylene) felt pledgets were placed between the offending vessel and the VII nerve exit zone .
Postoperatively, the patient reported significant improvement of her symptoms for the first 3 months. Unfortunately, her symptoms gradually returned, until they became constant 6 months following her initial surgery. An MRI was obtained that revealed indentation and posterior displacement of the VII-VIII complex due to the pledgets.
Ten months after her initial surgery, after failing to improve with conservative management, the patient opted for reoperation and exploration through the same incision and craniotomy. Intraoperatively, the VII-VIII complex was distorted, and displaced dorsally and medially by the generous Teflon pledgets . This required the removal of approximately half of the Teflon sponges. Some pledgets were found to be densely adherent to the nerve complex and were left behind. Facial nerve monitoring was carried out throughout the entire procedure.
One year later, she has remained spasm free, subjectively, and objectively. She has no evidence of facial nerve palsy and is very pleased with the results of her reoperation and wished to return to work.