A 59-year-old Vietnamese male presented to the Atlanta Medical Center complaining of severe posterior neck pain, right-sided hemiparesis, and right sided paresthesia. This began 4 months ago when he noticed difficulty writing and using the right hand. He had rapidly deteriorated to the point of being unable to walk or move his right arm. He had a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) done in Vietnam, which had showed an abnormal mass in the cervical spine, which is what brought him to Dr. King at the Atlanta Medical Center.
The patient's ability to speak English was limited, but his son provided translations as necessary. The patient was alert and oriented to person, place, and time, and not invisible distress. The neurological physical exam showed significantly decreased strength in the right upper and lower extremity, as well as decreased proprioception, and light touch sensation on the right. The patient was unable to walk without assistance. Palpation of the posterior neck produced pain and paresthesia. The rest of the exam, including the complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel were within normal limits.
A repeat MRI with and without contrast showed an exophytic homogenously enhancing mass beginning at the C2 vertebral body level, and extending to the C2–C3 disc space, with surrounding edema within the cervical spinal cord . The mass measured 13 mm × 14 mm × 22mm in size .
The cervical spine showed normal alignment, and the rest of the spinal cord was unaffected. The differential provided by radiology was primary cervical spinal cord glioma versus metastatic lesion versus schwannoma versus neurofibroma.
A laminectomy and resection were planned with possible stabilization. This would be a joint surgical procedure done by a neurosurgeon and orthopedic surgeon, using a microscope to better observe the relevant area. Risks and complications including quadriplegia, paraplegia, and respiratory dependence were explained to the patient and family.
The patient was taken to the operating suite and laid prone on the operating table with appropriate preoperative protocol directions and in a sterile fashion. An incision was made from the sub-occipital region down to C5 and then deepened down to the nuchal ligament with subperiosteal stripping of C1, C2, C3, and C4 bilaterally. The soft tissues from the remaining portions of the spine were then removed, and laminectomies were performed on C1, C2, C3, and C4. A drill was used to burrow through each side of the midline, and Rongeurs and Kerrison punches were used to complete the laminectomy. The spinous processes of C2, C3, and C4 were cut using Horsely bone cutters. Once the facet complexes were laterally removed, the dura was then palpated and opened with an 11-blade and tacked to the dural leaves to get a good retraction.
A mass was noted on the right side pushing the spinal cord and compressing it toward the left side. It was an orange pinkish mass with multiple blood vessels surrounding, and nerves were attached to the inferior lateral portion of the mass . The surface of the mass was bipolar coagulated and then cut into using an 11-blade and a specimen was taken for biopsy. The tumor was then internally de-bulked until an interface was seen between the tumor and the spinal cord, using bipolar coagulation to cut away any attachments. The tumor was removed, and hemostasis achieved by placing a padded gelfoam. The gelfoam was then removed, and irrigation along with SurgiFlo was placed for complete hemostasis.
The dura was then closed in running fashion with a 5.0 Prolene stitch, and Evicel was placed over the dura, along with a drain in the epidural space to remove excess fluid. The wound layers were closed with vicryl and staples were placed on the skin. There were no obvious complications noted, and the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) .
The patient remained in ICU for 7 days and then transferred to a regular floor where he stayed for 5 days. He was extubated after his 2nd day in the ICU without complications. Day by day, the patient's strength in the right arm was improving, along with sensation, and strength in the right leg. The physical therapists commented on the rapid progression seen in this patient's recovery. Toward the end of his hospital stay, the patient had resolved all neurological deficits present before surgery. The patient could walk, dress himself, and feed himself with both hands. He had regained almost the entire strength of his right arm. He was discharged shortly after and returned to Vietnam.
An intraoperative frozen consultation was done first. The limited amount of tissue prevented adequate results, but some spindling was seen, as well as other rounded cells. Some pigment was noted, representing hemosiderin. The initial differential provided was a spindle cell lesion such as meningioma or nerve sheath tumor (neurofibroma or schwannoma) versus a glial neoplasm. A nerve sheath tumor was most likely based on the location of the tumor.
Further examination of the resected tumor under a microscope showed a spindle cell lesion, with Antoni A and Antoni B are as with verocay bodies. There was no significant atypia. Glial fibrillary acidic protein stains were negative, and S100 stains were positive. These features were consistent with a schwannoma.