The patient is a 42 year old previously healthy man presented with history of 2 weeks abdominal pain. Pain was in the epigastric and left upper quadrant regions aggravated by eating, concomitant with nausea and 2 times vomiting. After a few days of outpatient medical therapy his abdominal pain became intolerable and he was referred to our medical center for surgical consult. The patient reported some fever and anorexia too. He did not have any known history of diabetes, chronic liver disease, corticosteroid use, immunodeficiency states, diarrheal disease or important surgical history. He was a chronic oral opium user.
On admission it seemed he was ill with mild tachypnea (respiratory rate of 24 per minute) with an oral temperature of 38.0˚ centigrade. He had poor dental hygiene. Abdominal examination revealed generalized abdominal guarding, tenderness and rebound tenderness. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis of 11,500/fl with 75% neutrophil and normal serum biochemical tests.
Midline laparotomy with diagnosis of acute abdomen which was done revealed malodor pus in the peritoneal cavity. The abdominal cavity was explored for any possible sites of visceral gangrene or perforation but all of the abdominal viscera were intact. With further exploration, a 2x2 cm defect in the left hemi-diaphragm with flow of thick pus from the top of the left pleural cavity to the peritoneal cavity was found. One thoracostomy tube was placed in the left hemi-thorax for drainage of empyema and abdominal cavity was closed after vigorous washing. Closure of diaphragmatic defect was postponed till the total control of abdominal and thoracic sepsis. Punctual history taking after operation revealed a prior history of pneumonia presented with fever, cough and left pleuritic chest pain. Then patient developed full blown signs of peritonitis. Culture of pus showed positive culture for Morganella morganii. Antibiotic susceptibility testing showed susceptibility to ampicillin, cefepime, cephtazidime, ciprofloxacin, co-trimoxazole, gentamycin, meropenem, and piperacillin- tazobactam. The organism showed no resistance to any antimicrobial disc. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Abdominal ultrasound was normal.
Chest radiograph showed left hydropneumothorax with consolidation in the underlying lung . Chest radiograph showed clearance of fluid after 10 days of chest tube drainage but pneumothorax persisted . So the patient was scheduled for negative pressure appliance to chest tube for expansion of the underlying lung. Chest high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) after abdominal surgery showed infiltration and consolidation in left lower lobe along with pneumothorax and a small subpleural parenchymal cavity which can be proposed as the possible explanation of pyopneumothorax .
Bronchoscopy at 11th day of surgery showed normal bronchial tree with pus coming out of the left main bronchus. Bronchial lavage fluid analysis showed acute inflammatory exudates with negative smear and culture for fast and slow growing microorganisms (including acid fast bacilli).
The mainstays of treatment in the patient included peritoneal lavage and pleural drainage. Also he received a 14 days course of parenteral antibiotics (meropenem 1 gr IV q 8 h, ciprofloxacin 400 mg IV q12h and vancomycin 1 gr IV q 12 h). Patient showed marked improvement after control of thoracic sepsis. His leukocyte count was 5.300/fl at the time of discharge.