A 19-year old male had a twisting injury to his left knee with a popping sensation when landing during a basketball game. The patient was otherwise healthy, but his history was notable for epistaxis lasting more than 30 min since he was 4 years old. This had been evaluated by an otolaryngologist without abnormality and there was no family history of bleeding or clotting disorder. A coagulation test revealed normal prothrombin time (13.4 s; reference interval: 11.0–14.5 s), international normalized ratio (1.05) and activated partial thromboplastin time (40.7 s; reference interval: 32.0–45.1 s). Physical examination including Lachman test, anterior drawer, and pivot shift indicated an acute ACL injury and an MRI confirmed the diagnosis without concomitant injuries. An arthroscopically assisted ACL reconstruction with hamstring tendon autograft was delayed approximately 1 month to allow swelling to subside and to regain range of motion.
A tourniquet was inflated to 280 mmHg prior to the surgery. A longitudinal 3-cm incision for the harvest was made 2 cm medial to the medial edge of the tibial tubercle, centered over the palpable pes tendons. The distal end of the semitendinosus was whipstitched with no.2 sutures (Ethibond, Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) and detached from tibia. When releasing expansions of the semitendinosus tendon, the scissors were remained opened and pushed proximally to avoid accidental cutting of the tendon tissue. We performed circumferential palpation around tendons to confirm full release. A closed end tendon stripper is then passed with slow steady force in line with the tendon’s trajectory with the knee flexed. The graft is carefully moved from the harvest site to the back table for graft preparation. A two-portal arthroscopic technique was performed with independent tibial and femoral tunnel drilling. The 4-strand hamstring graft was secured with an endobutton on the femur and Bioscrew on the tibia. Hemostasis was achieved throughout the procedure. After incision closure, the tourniquet was deflated without abnormal bleeding being noted and the tourniquet time was 105 min. He was then discharged uneventfully.
Large ecchymosis around his posteromedial knee with focal swelling and tenderness was observed on the sixth postoperative day at the outpatient department. He reported no throbbing pain or pulsatile mass. Physical examination revealed intact distal pulses and there was no pain on passive stretching of his ankle. Deep vein thrombosis was ruled out by a negative D-dimer test and Doppler ultrasound image. Bleeding or a pseudoaneurysm formation within the sartorius was impressed on the computed tomography image .
Due to the persistent symptoms, he was readmitted to our ward for further management . A repeated Doppler ultrasound showed a compressible pseudoaneurysm over the posteromedial aspect of the knee . It was confirmed at the saphenous branch of the descending genicular artery in angiography . Coil embolization was chosen over open ligation or excision due to the terminality of this arteriole. Devascularization of the pseudoaneurysm was achieved by placement of two micro-coils (TORNADO 3–2 mm; Cool Medical; Fig. ). Open debridement with drainage through a new 1-cm incision centered over the ecchymosis was then performed and 600 mL of hematoma was removed.
No sign of arterial insufficiency or edema was observed after the procedure. At 1 year follow up, the International Knee Documentation Committee Subjective Knee Form score had improved from 6.9 preoperatively to 66.7, and the stability recovered well with negative Lachman and pivot shift tests. He has continued to play basketball recreationally. Mild paresthesia over the posteromedial calf was noted due to the compression injury of the saphenous nerve by the hematoma.