A 52-year-old female with past medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and bilateral cataract surgery was transferred to our ED for further evaluation. She initially presented to the outside ED for seven days of worsening right eye pain, redness, swelling, and worsening vision, which progressed to complete right-sided vision loss five days prior to her initial presentation. She also noted three days of fever but no recent symptoms of upper respiratory infection, dental infection, eye trauma, or recent surgeries. Vital signs were unremarkable. On examination, the right periorbital soft tissues were significantly swollen and erythematous with chemosis of the conjunctiva, cloudy anterior chamber, and exophthalmos of the right eye. Right eye intraocular pressure was 40 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) (normal 10–21 mm Hg) with painful extraocular movements. The left eye was normal.
Point-of-care ultrasound performed in the ED showed loculated echogenic material within the vitreous humor, posterior vitreous detachment, and fluid in sub-Tenon’s space (potential space between the capsule of the eye and choroid) consistent with endophthalmitis. It also showed soft tissue thickening of the eyelid, edema in the orbital fat, and a hypoechoic fluid collection next to the lateral aspect of the globe consistent with orbital cellulitis and orbital abscess (, ). An orbital computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a right orbital abscess (18 mm × 5 mm × 12 mm) along the lateral and inferolateral margin of the right orbit with preseptal and postseptal cellulitis without osseous involvement .
Ophthalmology was consulted and a bedside intraocular aspiration and intravitreal injection of antibiotics was performed. The patient was admitted to internal medicine for broad-spectrum antibiotics. Her intravitreal aspirate grew coagulase negative staphylococcus, and the inciting event was thought to be syphilitic uveitis and vitritis complicated by staphylococcal infection given her positive syphilis serology. The patient did not have any other physical findings of secondary or tertiary syphilis, such as rash or gummas. She was discharged on hospital day 12 on three weeks of intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and vancomycin and two weeks of oral metronidazole. She was scheduled for a vitrectomy at another facility.