The patient was a 71-year-old woman with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, congestive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation who presented to the Emergency Department (ED) after 1 day of severe headache. The headache was acute in onset and associated with one episode of vomiting. No history of trauma, loss of consciousness, visual changes, seizure activity, language deficit, or motor weakness was elicited. The patient had a blood pressure of 116/59 and the neurological examination was nonfocal. Initial laboratory studies showed an INR of 3.0 consistent with her history of daily warfarin therapy for atrial fibrillation. Noncontrast head computed tomography (CT) revealed symmetric IVH with moderate blood in the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles [Figure and ]. No parenchymal or subarachnoid blood was present. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) revealed a 4-mm right-sided middle cerebral artery (MCA) M2 segment aneurysm which was thought to be an unlikely source of the hemorrhage given the absence of adjacent parenchymal or subarachnoid blood.
Warfarin was withheld and initial pharmacological therapy included intravenous administration of 10 mg vitamin K and 4 U fresh frozen plasma (FFP) to reduce the INR below 1.5. Because the patient remained neurologically intact and had no evidence of hydrocephalus, no extraventricular drain was required. Catheter cerebral angiography was performed revealing the hemorrhage source to be a 4 × 2.6 mm aneurysm of a distal medial lenticulostriate artery arising from the proximal A1 segment of the right anterior cerebral artery (ACA) [Figure and ]. Diagnostic considerations included pseudoaneurysm, mycotic aneurysm, or degenerative lesions such as a Charcot–Bouchard aneurysm. Additional angiographic findings included two saccular right-sided MCA aneurysms (4 mm and 2 mm), one fusiform aneurysm of the right-sided MCA posterior temporal branch (1–1.5 mm), and fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) of the extracranial carotid and vertebral arteries . Further clinical evaluation including echocardiography and blood cultures to rule out septic embolism secondary to endocarditis was unrevealing.
As the distal location of the ruptured aneurysm within the ventricular wall made it a poor candidate for surgical or endovascular treatment without arterial sacrifice, conservative management was thought to be the most appropriate. The patient remained neurologically stable in the Neurological Intensive Care Unit (NICU) and did not develop hydrocephalus. Repeat catheter angiography 5 days after initial presentation showed no evidence of the previously noted distal medial lenticulostriate aneurysm . The patient was discharged 8 days after initial presentation with an intact neurological exam. The medicine consult service recommended treatment of her atrial fibrillation with aspirin 325 mg daily and discontinuation of anticoagulation with warfarin. A follow-up noncontrast head CT performed 2.5 months after discharge showed no stigmata of the IVH [Figure and ].