A 31-year-old woman in week 15 of pregnancy with pre-existing hyperemesis gravidarum complained of epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting. The patient had undergone a laparoscopic rt. ovarian cystectomy at 30 years old. The patient was hemodynamically stable with a temperature of 36.5 °C, pulse rate of 85/min, respiratory rate of 16/min, blood pressure of 101/52 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. The patient’s consciousness level was normal. The palpation of the abdomen revealed moderately hard and tender with rebound tenderness at the right upper quadrant. Laboratory examination demonstrated leukocytosis at 12,000/μl, 87% neutrophils, and normal hemoglobin, electrolytes, creatinine, AST, amylase, and C-reactive protein. The patient was first diagnosed with severe hyperemesis gravidarum and was admitted.
Thereafter, the patient was commenced on trial of conservative treatment, including intravenous rehydration, antiemetics, and antibiotics. However, the patient presented with persistent abdominal pain. Thirty hours after the admission, laboratory examination demonstrated leukocytosis at 18,000/μl, 93.5% neutrophils, C-reactive protein of 13.7 mg/dl, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products at 12.2 μg/ml (normal range, 0.0–5.0 μg/ml), D-dimer levels of 4.7 μg/ml (normal range, 0.0–1.0 μg/ml), base excesses of − 4.5 mmol/l (normal range, − 2.5–2.5 mmol/l), and nearly normal hemoglobin, electrolytes, creatinine, AST, and amylase. CT imaging of the abdomen revealed dilated small bowel loops with multiple air-fluid levels; in the right mid-abdomen, there was a large part of air containing cavity connected to the small intestine, which was considered a dilated bowel loop . As acute peritonitis and strangulated ileus were diagnosed, an emergency laparotomy was planned. The peritoneal cavity was filled with a seropurulent fluid. Further exploration revealed a black and gangrenous MD, with axial torsion, measuring 11 × 8 × 5 cm, located 2 cm proximally to the ileocecal valve . The ileocecal resection including MD was performed . Postoperative histopathologic examination confirmed gangrene of MD without neoplasms. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on the 16th postoperative day. At 40 weeks gestation, she had vaginal delivery of a normal baby.