The 34-year-old man was in good health until he failed to hit a ping-pong ball accurately one morning. Blackish dots appeared in the nasal upper visual field, and flashes blocked the vision in front of his left eye. He was myopic with −11.0 diopter (D) in the right eye (OD) and −15.0 in the left eye (OS), and he underwent LASIK surgery seven years ago. He visited our emergency department, where visual acuity (VA) revealed 20/20 (OD) and 20/32 (OS). No cells were noted at the anterior chamber (AC) or vitreous. His fundus seemed normal under dilated fundoscopy.
On the next day, vision decreased significantly to 20/25 (OD) and 20/63 (OS). Visual field (VF) examinations demonstrated bilateral enlarged blind spots and altitudinal defects . FA showed hyperfluorescence (OS) and inflammation of retinal small vessels . OCT examinations revealed parafoveal loss of the photoreceptor IS/OS junction . ERG revealed decreased amplitude of the b wave in both eyes . According to his symptoms and examinations, AZOOR was diagnosed. We gave systemic corticosteroid (dexamethasone 6 mg once a day) on the next day after day of onset. Nevertheless, his vision didn’t improve after dexamethasone treatment for 9 days, so we tapered dexamethasone to 4 mg and prescribed calcium channel blocker (amlodipine 5 mg once a day). However, his VA did not improve for 3 weeks. Intravitreal injections (IVI) of Ozurdex (OS) was suggested and arranged. The next day after IVI of Ozurdex, his VA improved to 20/32 (OS). The course was smooth. Follow-up OCT showed improvement of the IS/OS junction disruption two weeks later . VA (OS) improved to 20/20, and the VF defect improved significantly as of one month after IVI. Owing to the appearance of the high myopia tilting disc and deep vertical enlarged cupping, the VF defects might be a summation of different components, AZOOR and myopia related glaucoma. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was elevated to 28 mmHg initially after IVI; however, IOP remained within normal range after 2 weeks of bimatoprost (Lumigan) treatment. At the recent follow-up after 13 months of the episode, his best corrected VA (OS) was 20/20. There was no cataract nor IOP elevation; meanwhile, OCT showed no sign of IS/OS junction disruption .