A 38-year-old nulliparous woman, G1P0 (Gravida 1 Parity 0) at 29 weeks gestation of an in vitro fertilization (IVF), presented to the emergency department with chest pain. Her medical history was pertinent for gestational hypertension, migraines, iron deficiency, and a prior abdominal myomectomy for fibroid removal. She was visiting from out of state and earlier that night she was changing her clothes when she experienced a substernal crushing chest pain that radiated to her left arm associated with diaphoresis. It did not improve despite two doses of sublingual nitroglycerin. She was hospitalized 1 week prior for similar chest pain and was treated conservatively for a clinical diagnosis of SCAD with beta blocker and aspirin. At that time echocardiogram was unremarkable and electrocardiogram (ECG) did not reveal any specific abnormalities. High sensitivity troponin peaked at 13,449 and subsequently down-trended.
On presentation in the emergency department, she was afebrile with a heart rate of 90, blood pressure 102/61, respiratory rate 20, with normal oxygen saturation on room air. Physical exam was consistent with a female at 29 weeks gestation, but was otherwise unremarkable. Initial ECG showed sinus rhythm without signs of ischemia . High sensitivity troponin was 85 ng/L (< 15 ng/L normal), repeat was 88 ng/L and subsequently it down-trended to 28 ng/L. Her chest pain persisted for another 2 h without any significant improvement despite repeated nitroglycerin and labetalol administration. The patient was admitted for telemetry monitoring in the cardiac care unit and the obstetric team followed closely for recommendations.
Transthoracic Echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 59%, with impaired diastolic filling and hypokinesis of the apical lateral segment. The following day she experienced a recurrent episode of chest pain lasting 40 min. ECG at that time revealed sub-millimeter ST elevations in V1 and V2, and T-wave inversions in V1-V3 . Given the patient’s recurring chest pain coronary angiography was performed. A spontaneous coronary artery dissection of the mid to distal left anterior descending artery was found with TIMI grade 3 flow into the distal part of the vessel . The presentation of a long diffuse smooth section of intraluminal narrowing with 90% stenosis was consistent with Type 2a SCAD. No stent(s) were placed, and conservative management was elected which included continued daily aspirin and up-titration of Metoprolol. The next day the patient was transferred to the obstetrics service for further monitoring where she received two doses of intravenous betamethasone. Fetal growth ultrasound revealed normal and appropriate fetal growth, and the patient was observed for another 3 days. She remained asymptomatic from a cardiac stand-point and the rest of her hospital course was uneventful. The patient was discharged home in stable condition with strict precautions to return if chest pain were to recur.