A 36-year-old male USMC F/A-18 aviator instructor with 15 years of flying experience had a severe episode of acute LBP without radiation or neurological deficit. The patient did not recall any specific traumatic incident that initiated the pain, but he did have a history of multiple LBP events, some of which included radiation into the legs. When the LBP began he immediately consulted the squadron flight surgeon and was prescribed naprosyn, diazepam and hydrocodone/acetaminofen for pain control, confined to quarters to rest and imaging was obtained. The pain worsened, resulting in hospitalization later that day. He was observed for 24 hours and given a methylprednisone dosepack. Upon discharge from the hospital, he was confined to quarters for 72 hours and not allowed to return to flying until cleared by the flight surgeon. The flight surgeon cleared the patient to fly and ordered consults to neurosurgery and physical therapy for further evaluation and treatment.
Plain film radiographs showed mild narrowing of the L4–L5 intervertebral disc space and mild sclerotic changes of the posterior elements of L5. MRI demonstrated a loss of normal height and signal involving the L4–L5 disc and a broad-based left paracentral disc bulge contacting the thecal sac and causing mild narrowing of the central spinal canal at the L4–L5 level with mild to moderate left neural foraminal narrowing and L5 nerve root contact . A lesser degree of L5-S1 disc degeneration was present with a broad-based disc bulge causing no central canal or neural foraminal narrowing.
The flight surgeon coordinated the ordering and follow up of the patient's various clinical consults. The flight surgeon instructed the patient to take the anti-inflammatory medication as needed and gradually returned him to non-impact exercise, including walking and working out on an elliptical machine to pain tolerance.
Following neurosurgical evaluation the patient was provided concurrent consultations with the hospital physiatrist and physical therapist. The physiatrist provided osteopathic manipulation and home exercises, including prolonged prone lumbar extension and hip adductor stretching, which provided some pain diminishment. Acupuncture was attempted once, wherein he reported an increased sensation of lumbar muscle spasm. Acupuncture was discontinued.
The physical therapy regimen was begun 2 weeks after hospitalization and included McKenzie exercises (standing and prone repetitive standing lumbar extension), stretching (hamstrings, single knee-to-chest, quadriceps, gluteals, hip flexors) and an educational self-treatment booklet. The patient experienced some relief with the McKenzie exercises, hamstring stretching and self mobilization/stretching of the gluteal muscles and spine by drawing his leg over to the opposite side of his trunk. His pain and range of motion improved approximately 50%. A course of moist heat packs and mechanical lumbar traction (15 min, supine position with hips and knees flexed 90 degrees, intermittent pull for 15 s, starting at 10 lbs greater than 50% body weight and increasing 10 lbs each treatment) was attempted to further his progress. He continued doing the prescribed exercises and noted some improvement but pain elimination was refractory. At this time, the physical therapist discussed the case with the chiropractor, who is located in the same clinic at the air station, and subsequently ordered a consultation for chiropractic.
During the chiropractic consultation, the patient's pain was located in the lumbar region bilaterally, described as "intense spasm", and without any radiation or symptoms of neurological involvement. His pain was consistently worse in the morning; he reported that it would take up to 10 minutes for him to get out of bed due to stiffness and pain. He was concerned because this episode of LBP was of longer duration (4 months) than any prior episodes. He had discontinued his regular Marine Corps fitness training (running, sit-ups, pull-ups) because of pain exacerbation. He experienced increased pain after basic fighter maneuver flights, reporting that it would take as long as 15 minutes to get out of the jet and climb to the ground after flying. He stated that even though he was on flying status he would sometimes ask to be removed from the flight schedule because his back hurt too much to fly; on these days he would stay at work and perform other tasks. He rated the severity of pain at 1.5 cm on a 10 cm visual analog scale , 7.1 cm upon waking and (in retrospect) 9.5 cm on the visual analog scale as the pain experienced during hospitalization. His modified Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire score was 5 out of 24 functional disability indicators. Lumbar spine active ranges of motion were full with pain at the end range of flexion and extension and when returning to a neutral posture from these end ranges. Hamstring length was approximately 60 degrees bilaterally and the gluteus medius had approximately 50% of its normal passive length. Trigger points were palpated in the right gluteus medius and bilateral lumbar paravertebral and quadratus lumborum muscles. There were no indicators of lumbosacral nerve root or cord compression (ie, negative Valsalva, Kemp's test, straight leg raise). Lower extremity sensation, motor and deep tendon reflex testing were normal. Given his age, nature of the clinical findings, and the imaging results, it was assumed that he was experiencing phase II spinal degeneration (clinical instability) as described by Kirkaldy-Willis .
The chiropractor and flight surgeon discussed the case to insure that the flight surgeon was informed of the course of care. The chiropractor and the physical therapist discussed the case to insure that the care that the patient was receiving was complimentary and that any duplicate home exercises were planned redundancy. Thus, at this point in time, the patient was receiving care from the flight surgeon, physical therapist, and chiropractor and had 1 follow up visit scheduled with the physiatrist.
The 3 goals of chiropractic care were: 1) pain control; 2) ability to continue flight duties and USMC fitness training; 3) maintenance of aerobic fitness. Table summarizes the chiropractic treatment interventions and outcome measures at periodic reassessments. Details regarding treatment are presented below. Directions of force for chiropractic manipulation were selected by identifying areas of tenderness, asymmetry, restricted planes of active and passive range of motion, motion palpation, tight musculature and other indicators as described by Bergman and colleagues . Chiropractic manipulation of the thoracolumbar junction, L5-S1 level and the sacroiliac joint typically involved a side-posture high-velocity, low-amplitude short lever maneuver . Grade IV mobilization was used on several occasions when joint endfeel was not extremely stiff or if the patient was unable to tolerate a high velocity force. Active myofascial release treatment and ischemic compression as described by Barnes and Leahy were used to treat tight muscles and trigger points [,]. These muscles and surrounding joints were also stretched using the proprioceptive neurological facilitation maneuvers of post-contraction stretch and post-isometric relaxation . The patient was instructed to self-administer trigger point ischemic compression to the gluteus medius by lying in the lateral recumbent position on top of a tennis ball and to stretch the muscle immediately afterward. He was instructed to continue the helpful stretches provided by the physiatrist and physical therapist, to stretch his low back before flying and to see his flight surgeon if his pain worsened.
By the 5th chiropractic treatment the patient reported there were no episodes of sharp "muscle spasm" pain in the previous week but periodic stiffness was experienced upon waking in the morning or after long periods of time in the jet. He was on regular flying status and he had discontinued taking any medication. The patient reported that the physiatrist had provided him with a home TENS unit for pain control, which provided relief at the end of long days in the jet or after prolonged sitting. At this point in time he was released from care by both the physiatrist and physical therapist and instructed to continue his home exercises and to return for care if symptoms worsened. Functional spinal stability was assessed by the chiropractor at the fifth office visit and the patient exhibited difficulty stabilizing his spine when asked to perform simple non-weight bearing movements called dead bug exercises . He had no pain while performing a static crunch core endurance exercise. Treatment was modified to include core stabilizing exercises .
Subsequent chiropractic office visits focused on furthering the patient's torso function and insuring coordinated care between the flight surgeon and the chiropractor. These office visits were supplemented with some form of manipulation/mobilization as deemed necessary. Therapeutic exercises were made more difficult and targeted strength, endurance and proprioception of the lumbar extensors, oblique abdominal muscles and other torso stabilizers . Tight psoas muscles were also addressed with home-based stretching . Summarily, the patient had 15 chiropractic office visits where he received care over a 26 week period. Office visits progressed from passive pain control techniques to active functional rehabilitation procedures and included the following treatments (frequency): high-velocity, low-amplitude manipulation (10); grade IV mobilization (8); proprioceptive neurological facilitation (6); myofascial release/ischemic compression (14); therapeutic exercise (7); moist heat pack application (2).
At a follow-up visit 1 month after his last treatment he was pain free and had full function. He was flying multiple training missions per week including high G flights and sorties of several hours in duration and had passed his required physical fitness test (100 sit-ups in 2 minutes, 3 mile run in less than 29 minutes and a minimum of 3 pull-ups) the week prior with no pain. He felt that the only provocative factor for minimal LBP at that time was flying the jet. The physical examination was normal; he was released from care and encouraged to maintain his core stabilization and overall fitness program.