A 67-year-old man was monitored for a right-sided aortic arch and Kommerell diverticulum . There was no significant medical history other than the right-sided aortic arch. He had a smoking history of at least 50 pack-years and currently smoke. The patient was symptom-free, and there were no remarkable findings on physical examination. The tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen, CYFRA, and pro gastrin releasing peptide and spirometry were within normal limits. Echocardiography revealed no cardiac abnormalities. The most recent chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 20-mm × 18-mm solid nodule in the right S1 . The nodule was suspected to be malignant based on the increase in lesions over time on CT scans. A systemic CT, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and bone scintigraphy examination revealed no other lesions. There were no anatomic variations in the pulmonary vessels or bronchi . Right upper lobectomy with ND2a-1 under uniportal VATS was performed as stage IA2 right upper lobe lung cancer was suspected. Using a soft tissue retractor, a 4-cm incision in the 6th intercostal space at the medial axillary line was made as the main manipulation port. The operative findings confirmed the presence of a right descending aorta that runs on the right ventral side of the vertebral body and that narrows the space of the dorsal hilum. After dividing the interlobar fissure with a stapler (Endo-GIA Ultra Universal Staples; Medtronic plc., Dubin, Ireland), the V1 + 2+3, A2b, and A1 + 3 were detached and divided sequentially . After dissecting the right upper lobe bronchus, due to the right descending aorta, handling of a stapler (Powered Echelon Flex GST System 45; ETHICON Endo-Surgery, inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA) used to staple the right upper lobe bronchus located on the dorsal hilum was challenging . This issue was resolved by manipulating the staple over the azygos vein toward the inferior margin of the aortic arch . The diagnosis of the intraoperative frozen section was carcinoma. During lymph node dissection of the upper mediastinum, the right vagus nerve was identified at the cranial side of the azygos vein . Next, dissection was performed in the caudal direction. The right recurrent laryngeal nerve was found to branch from the right vagus nerve just beneath the right-sided aortic arch , and the mediastinal lymph node was subsequently dissected . The operative time was 325 min, and the volume of blood loss was 59 mL. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 without any complications such as hoarseness. The pathological diagnosis was small cell lung cancer. The tumor had a diameter of 21 mm × 14 mm with histopathological features of pm0, pl0, ly0, and v1. Four #2R+#4R lymph nodes, one #11 lymph node, and six #12u lymph nodes were retrieved, but there was no #10R lymph node. No lymph node metastasis was detected. After 8 months of adjuvant chemotherapy for the stage IA3 tumor, no recurrence of lung cancer was observed by positron emission tomography-CT and brain MRI.