A 24-year old black female, G4P3, at 29 weeks gestation, was
presented to a local hospital complaining of facial swelling
. The patient's only significant medical
history included history of anemia and sickle cell trait. She
described that her pregnancy had been proceeding without
difficulty, except for a three-day history of lower left quadrant
tooth pain, and a one-day history of fever and chills. On
presentation, her vital signs were the following: temperature
38.5°C, blood pressure 115/44, pulse 118/min,
respiratory rate 18/min, oxygen saturation on room air
96%, and white cell count of 16800/μL. Her clinical
presentation included large soft tissue swelling under her
mandible, extending bilaterally to the angles of the mandible and
inferiorly approximately down to her hyoid bone. Because of her
severe impending airway deterioration, she was flown by helicopter
to a tertiary medical center for definitive care. In the Emergency
Room of the University of Florida Shands Hospital, the diagnosis
of Ludwig's angina was made. It was difficult to perform an
adequate oral exam secondary to pain, swelling, and severe trismus which allowed her to open her mouth to
only 15 mm (average range 40–45 mm). The patient was
having difficulty maintaining her own salivary secretions because
of dysphagea but denied dyspnea. Since in similar situations
patients can desaturate very quickly, even though her oxygen
saturation was recorded to be 96% on room air, she was given
supplemental oxygen and a pulse oxymeter was placed on her right
index finger because of possible impending quick respiratory
difficulties. Of note, although not used, an emergent
cricothyrotomy kit was available at the patient's bedside at all
times. The Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (OMFS)
formally consulted the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology
(Ob/Gyn) and Anesthesiology. Understanding that in administering
medications and/or undergoing any surgical treatment in pregnancy,
one must consider the risks and the benefits both to the mother
and the unborn, it was determined that the benefits of proceeding
with emergent and immediate surgical intervention outweighed the
risks. An emergent CT-scan showed fluid collections in the left
lateral pharyngeal space extending to the
level of the valleculae. Securing an airway via an awake
fiberoptic nasal intubation was risky: a fiberoptic tube inserted
into the pharynx might puncture an abscess and cause pus
aspiration or swallowing. Therefore, an awake tracheostomy was
performed using a 60-nonfenestrated Schiley endotracheal tube. At
that time general anesthesia was administered and the patient was
placed in slight left lateral decubitus position to decrease
uterine aortocaval compression pressure. After usual sterile
preparation, lidocaine with epinephrine was infiltrated for local
anesthesia. An incision was made at the submental and bilateral
submandibular areas and blunt dissection to the lingual inferior
border of the mandible was carried out. Through the submental
incision, the blunt dissection continued through the mylohyoid
muscle to the sublingual areas to access all abscesses. Tooth
number 17 (lower left third molar) was then extracted since it was
believed that this grossly carious and partially impacted tooth
was the primary source for the infection. Upon removal, purulence
was expressed through the extraction socket. Five additional
grossly carious teeth were then extracted. Intraoral blunt
dissection to gain access into the lateral pharyngeal space
followed for drainage of another pus collection. Numerous Penrose
drains and red rubber catheter drains were left in place to
maintain drainage of pus and facilitate daily irrigation
. Upon admission to the Surgical Intensive
Care Unit, the Department of Ob/Gyn continued following up on the
patient by frequent monitoring of the fetal heart rate. The
patient was extubated after 6 days and remained in the hospital
until discharge the following day. On discharge, the patient's
progress was monitored by the Departments of OMFS and Ob/Gyn.