A 32 day old male infant was referred to our department, from another hospital, with acute respiratory distress syndrome and suspected congenital pulmonary malformation. The baby (fourth child of nonconsanguineous caucasian parents) was born by vaginal delivery at 37 weeks’ gestation, with a weight of 3140 g. The first month of life was unremarkable. The family had no history of genetic or metabolic diseases or congenital disorders.
At admission, the physical examination confirmed respiratory distress, general hypotonia due to respiratory failure and fatigue, bilateral inguinal hernia and deformities of the lower limbs (pes tortus congenitalis and hip dysplasia).
A chest X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan showed severe hyperinflation of the apical segment of the left lung and mediastinal shift to the right. A presumptive diagnosis of congenital lobar emphysema (CLE), including the lower lobe was made. After the stabilization of the subject’s respiratory conditions (non invasive respiratory support, fluid and electrolyte management, broad spectrum antibiotics, bronchodilatator), considering the inclusion of the superior lobe and the upper part of the lower lobe we decided to proceed with observation.
Two months later, the child’s condition deteriorated with worsening in respiratory distress; the child was unable to maintain saturation even with oxygen support. CT-angiography was ordered and revealed a severe lobar emphysema of the anterior to the apicoposterior segment of the left upper lobe, with displacement of mediastinal structures to the right and compression of the right structures. A subsegmental atelectasis and areas of air trapping in the apicoposterior segment of the left lower lobe were also noted. Angiography showed peripheral pulmonary vascular attenuation and central pulmonary artery enlargement.
Surgery included a left upper lobectomy and segmental resection of the left lower lobe. The histopathology report was consistent with a generalized lung growth abnormality with alveolar enlargement and simplification.
Following surgery, multiple attempts to extubate the infant failed and he had a persistent oxygen requirement. Chronic respiratory failure ensued with progressive worsening of the ventilatory performance, necessitating continuous mechanical ventilation, with gradual support parameter adjustments and tracheostomy at age 12 months.
After prolonged multidisciplinary discussion, the decision to perform a surgical thoracoscopic lung biopsy was made in order to obtain additional data on the pathological pulmonary features for prognostic predictions and therapeutic decisions. Histopathology revealed alveolar enlargement, perivascular and interstitial fibrosis and intra-alveolar hemorrhages .
Genetic testing was performed during the course of clinical care, after obtaining informed consent. Next generation sequencing on genomic DNA was performed using the NimbleGen SeqCap Target Enrichment kit (Roche) designed to capture several genes involved in pulmonary surfactant protein deficiency and skeletal abnormalities. A library was prepared following the manufacturer’s instructions and subsequently sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq550 instrument. Sequence data were carefully analyzed and the presence of all suspected variants were checked in the public databases (dbSNP, 1000 Genomes, and Exome Aggregation Consortium). The identified variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing, following a standard protocol (BigDye® Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit,Life Technologies). No potentially causative variants were found in genes associated with cystic fibrosis, pulmonary surfactant protein deficiency or mutations in the SETBP1 gene associated with Schinzel–Giedion syndrome (a rare autosomal dominant disorder that results in facial dysmorphism and organ and bone abnormalities).
Sequencing analysis showed a new mosaic frameshift variant, NM_001456.3: c.7391_7403del, p.Val2464Alafs*5 in the FLNA gene that was not present in the maternal blood DNA. This variant has not been previously reported in individuals with FLNA-related disorders, but can be classified as likely pathogenic (Class 4) according to the ACMG guideline and it is expected to cause disease. It is not present in any public databases, dbSNP (, 1000 Genomes Project , EVS , ExAC and can be considered as a private variant.
The same mutation was identified in DNA from salivary and pulmonary mesenchymal stem cells of the patient .
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) depicted PVNH , although the patient was not suffering from any neurological symptoms at this stage.
At 14 months follow-up, the patient requires mechanical ventilation and artificial nutrition to maintain his growth. Epilepsy and other neurological manifestations were not recorded.