A 56-year-old Caucasian Slovenian man, who worked as a farmer and was a non-smoker, was treated for bronchopneumonia in the right upper lobe in 1970 and 1974. The infiltrate resolved after antibiotic therapy with penicillin. He also had symptoms of chronic bronchitis, but he did not require therapy.
In 1996, our patient presented with persistent cough, dyspnea and sweats. He had no fever. A general practitioner prescribed him a macrolide antibiotic, but there was no response to this treatment and our patient was referred to a pneumologist. A chest radiograph showed an infiltrate with cavitation in the right lower lobe. Sputum testing for tuberculosis was negative. Tuberculine testing was positive and our patient received tuberculostatic therapy without any improvement over the following four weeks.
On admission to our hospital, he was afebrile and eupnoic. No lymphadenopathy was found. At the auscultation, prolonged expiration and weaker lung sounds over the right basal field were heard. A chest radiograph showed the infiltrates with cavitation in the right lower lobe and in the middle lobe with consolidation of the latter . Laboratory data showed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 66 mm/h and a normal white cell count. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated from the sputum and our patient was treated with ciprofloxacin. Pulmonary function tests showed reduced forced vital capacity (FVC) of 2900 mL (-36%), reduced forced expiratory volume in the first second (FEV1) of 1900 mL (-40%), with the Tiffeneau index of 65%. Arterial blood gas analysis showed only mild hypoxemia (pO2 9.5 kPa). We also performed fiberbronchoscopy and found a necrotic and purulent mass in the middle lobe bronchus that had practically closed the lumen. Cytological examination of the material obtained with bronchial brushing disclosed numerous eosinophils, Charcot-Leyden crystals and fungal structures morphologically corresponding to Aspergillus spp. . There were no malignant cells. Histological examination of the bronchial biopsy specimen showed chronic inflammatory changes in bronchial mucosa with mononuclear cells and focally granulocytes infiltration. Control fiberbronchoscopy after one week revealed inflammatory infiltration of mucosa in the middle lobe bronchus. Histopathology showed non-specific inflammatory changes of bronchial mucosa. Cutaneous testing for the A. fumigatus antigen was strongly positive. Total serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) concentration was elevated (505 IU/mL), specific IgE against A. fumigatus were strongly elevated (27.9 IU/mL). Serum precipitating antibodies were elevated, specific IgG against A. fumigatus (55 IU/mL) and against A. flavus (51 IU/mL). Metacholine bronchoprovocation testing showed bronchial hyper-responsiveness with the reversibility of obstruction after the bronchodilator. Our patient received methylprednisolone, 32 mg daily. The dose was gradually tapered during the subsequent months.
Pulmonary function tests improved: FVC from 2900 mL to 3100 mL and FEV1 from 1900 mL to 2200 mL. Total serum IgE concentration fell to 186 IU/ml, specific IgE against A. fumigatus to 6.1 IU/ml, specific IgG precipitating antibodies against A. fumigatus and A. flavus fell to 30 IU/mL and 32 IU/mL, respectively. The chest radiograph disclosed that the infiltrate in the middle lobe resolved, but in the posterior segment of the right lower lobe a cavitary pulmonary lesion with the diameter of 3 cm and with an air crescent was formed. The radiological appearances of this lesion were characteristic of an aspergilloma . Itraconazole 200 mg daily for two months was added to methylprednisolone.
Subsequent controls showed further clinical improvement. The chest radiographs and chest computed tomography (CT) showed that the aspergilloma became smaller, measuring 2 cm in diameter, and was partially calcified. Fibrotic changes in the right lower and middle lobes were present. Chest CT also showed tram-line shadows of bronchial wall thickening and cylindrical bronchiectasis in the middle lobe . Specific IgE against A. fumigatus remained elevated (9.4 IU/mL) while specific IgG precipitating antibodies against A. fumigatus and A. flavus normalized (7 IU/mL and 19 IU/mL, respectively). Our patient receives inhalatory steroid and short-acting β2-agonist. He is being followed over a five-year period with no signs of recurrence.