A 34-year-old woman underwent left lower lobectomy for a pulmonary carcinoid tumor (pT1bN0M0-stage IA). Postoperatively, there was no pulmonary fistula or bronchial stump fistula, and her clinical course was favorable. She had been doing well for 8 years after completing therapy until 42 years of age when she visited a clinic with the chief complaints of fever and sputum. Chest plain radiography showed left-sided pneumonia, for which antibiotic treatment was initiated. Although the blood test result showed improvement of inflammatory markers, chest plain radiography showed no improvement in pneumonia; therefore, she was referred to our hospital.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a tumorous lesion nearly obstructing the bronchial lumen and the extension of pneumonia into the residual left lung . Recurrence of the bronchial stump was suspected based on her medical history. Subsequently, flexible bronchoscopy was performed and showed the presence of a mass, a fibrous suture material, that was completely obstructing the left second carina. Results of the biopsy revealed only fiber without evidence of malignancy . The sputum, blood, granuloma, and biopsy fiber cultures were negative.
Considering the risk of hemoptysis and bronchial stump fistula, the suture material obstructing the bronchial lumen was removed using a flexible bronchoscope with the patient under general anesthesia 1 week later . Little granulation tissue was observed at the site of the removal. Although there was some minor oozing of blood from the same site, hemostasis was achieved with argon plasma coagulation therapy. The procedure was completed without removing the small amount of granulation tissue because the bronchial lumen opened after removal of the suture material.
According to a copy of the 2010 operating report, the bronchial stump was sutured with five stitches using an absorbable monofilament suture (4–0 polydioxanone suture [PDS]). However, the left lower bronchus stump had hypertonicity. To decrease the tension at the suture site, a 4–0 PDS attached to the Teflon pledget (CROWN JUN, size 6 mm × 10 mm) with two needles was placed in the central part of the stump. This procedure and our bronchoscopic findings indicated that the bronchial obstruction was secondary to the endobronchial migration of the Teflon pledget that had eroded through the bronchial wall.
At 1 month after removal, bronchoscopy showed pedunculated granulation tissue, the biopsy result showed no malignant findings, and the bronchial lumen was still open . At 4 months after removal, CT showed disappearance of the tumorous lesion protruding into the bronchial lumen and disappearance of pneumonia .
The patient’s clinical course after the procedure was favorable. At 1 year after Teflon pledget removal, there were no recurrences of the pulmonary carcinoid tumor or obstructive pneumonia.