A 40-year-old, malepatient, was admitted to the hospital with a 19-year history of recurrent fatigue was hospitalized in The First People's Hospital of Huzhou on September 27, 2019.Generalized fatigue and dyspnea developed following upper respiratory infection 19 years ago, laboratory test revealed profound hypokalemia (serum potassium1.8 mmol/L), he was intubated and mechanic ventilation was applied due to respiratory failure resulting from respiratory muscle weakness. After intravenous potassium chloride (KCl) was administered, serum potassium was normalized, the fatigue and dyspnea was subsequently completely resolved. After he was discharged, he wasn’t on KCl supplement though generalized fatigue relapsed occasionally. Fatigue resolved by potassium-rich food intake. From 10 years ago, fatigue failed to be resolved by potassium-rich food intake. Therefore, he was on potassium supplement (KCl 2 ~ 3 g daily). Ten years ago, mild proteinuria developed, the amount of 24 h protein excretion was about 2 g, increased postprandial glucose level was revealed 2 years ago, but he did not take any glucose-lowering drug. From childhood, he had polydipsia and polyuria, paroxysmal tetany and palpitation, but had no salt craving, constipation, physical and mental retardation. His parents were not consanguineous, he had a younger sister and a son. His relatives are all healthy. Physical examination revealed a sitting blood pressure of 118/83 mmHg. His height was 170 cm, body weight 59.3 Kg, BMI 20.52 kg/m2.Serum biochemistry showed hypokalemia, hypochloridemia, normomagnesemia, mildly elevated creatinine (Cr). Concomitant 24 h urine collection showed inappropriate renal potassium wasting, borderline hypercalciuria, moderate proteinuria (2793 mg), and high oxalic acid and low citric acid. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed decompensated metabolic alkalosis. Urinalysis showed elevated microalbuminuria which indicated glomerular injury and elevated β2- microglobulinuria which indicated proximal tubular injury. Fasting blood glucose level was 7.33 mmol/L, the glucose level at 2nd hour of Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was 11.27 mmol/L, both glucose levels confirmed the diagnosis of type2 diabetes mellitus (DM) . Ultrasound of urinary tract showed bilateral and multiple kidney stones and cysts .
Chronic hypokalemia resulting from urine potassium wasting, metabolic alkalosis, normal blood pressure despite elevated renin and aldosterone indicated SLTs. Therefore, whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed to identify the exact type of SLTs. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood peripheral leukocytes. Paired-end sequencing libraries then were prepared using a DNA sample prep reagent set 1 (NEBNext). The amplified DNA was captured use GenCap WES capture kit. The enrichment libraries were sequenced on IlluminaHiSeq X ten sequencer for paired read 150 bp.After sequencing, the bioinformatics analysis was performed. After quality control, the clean reads were mapped to the UCSC hg19 human reference genome using BWA. Variants were filtered using GATK VariantFiltration and further annotated by ANNOVAR and associated with multiple databases. The potential pathogenic mutations were selected. Candidate mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The mutations of family members were confirmed by the same procedure. WES revealed two heterozygous mutations in SLC12A3 gene: one splicing mutation (c.2038-1delG), potentially leading to loss of function of the gene, one missense mutation (c.2012 T > G) resulting in arginine substitution for leucine at codon 671 (p.Leu671Arg). According to the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) mutation guidelines, the splicing mutation (c.2038-1delG) was classified as “pathogenic” and the missense mutation (c.2012 T > G) was classified as “likely pathogenic”.p.Leu671Arg was a novel mutation. His father carries a heterozygous mutation of c.2038-1delG , his mother carried a heterozygous mutation of p.Leu671Arg .
The unusual association of SLTs and glomerular proteinuria prompted us to perform a renal biopsy. Light microscopy (LM) showed chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis and hypertrophy of the juxtaglomerular apparatus which are consistent with renal involvement resulting from GS; LM also revealed thickened basement membrane, mild mesangial cells and mesangial matrix proliferation, thickening arteriole wall and narrowing lumen. Immunofluorescence demonstrated no deposition of immunoglobulins or complements. Electron microscopy shows foot process effacement (50–75%) and thickening GBM with no electron dense deposits. The renal pathology also indicated early stage of diabetic nephropathy (DN) .
Eventually, the diagnosis of GS without Gitelman-like features and with kidney stones, cysts and DN was established. KCl at the dose of 3 g three times daily, magnesium oxide 188 mg once daily and perindopril 4 mg once every night are administered to correct hypokalemia, acarbose100 mg three times to correct hyperglycemia. On Dec 20th, 2019, serum Cr was 104 μmol/L, serum potassium3.57 mmol/L and fasting blood glucose was 6.89 mmol/L.The fatigue didn’t relapse.