An ultrasound (US) examination was performed at 28 gestational weeks (GW) on a woman aged 39 who had 3 previous pregnancies. Detailed two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) US examinations were performed with a scanner (Medison Model 8000) and a trans-abdominal transducer (2–5 MHz). It revealed a female fetus with biometry consistent with 28 GW. A posterior US confirmed the ventriculomegaly. Brain fetal biometry parameters were as follows: biparietal diameter 7.51 mm, head circumference 295.6 mm, posterior horn of the lateral ventricle width 19.3 mm. These parameters are in the upper 90th percentile for gestational age and are suggestive of ventriculomegaly. No other abnormal findings were obtained. Figure shows the US performed at 36 GW, with a lateral ventricle width of 22.3 mm. A follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination performed at 33 GW revealed stenosis of the SA and ventriculomegaly, confirming hydrocephalus . At 37 GW, an elective C-section was performed and a baby girl was delivered with a weight of 2,750 g, a length of 45 cm (which is below the 10th percentile for gestational age), a cranial circumference of 36.5 cm > P 98, and Apgar scores of 9 and 9 after 1 and 5 min, respectively. An examination of the neonate showed a normal external morphology.
At postnatal day 2 a computerized axial tomography study confirmed the large expansion of the third and lateral ventricles . The final diagnosis was fetal onset hydrocephalus. MRI performed on the 5th postnatal day showed SA obliteration . An endoscopic third ventriculostomy was performed on the 14th postnatal day and ventricular CSF was collected. The penetration site of neuroendoscope was the prefrontal region of the right hemisphere. Direct endoscopic visualization from the third ventricle showed complete occlusion of the SA. Since in animal models the subcommissural organ (SCO) is involved in the SA stenosis/obliteration [–], CSF samples were processed to study SCO secretory proteins (see below). In the immediate postoperative period the patient developed ventriculitis and fever prompting external ventricular drainage for ten days and treatment with Ceftriaxone (100 mg/Kg/day) and Vancomycine IV (10 mg/Kg/day). Following a good response to antibiotic treatment the patient left the Pediatrics Intensive Care Unit on the 60th postnatal day.
During the patient’s postnatal course, MRI and electroencephalography (EEG) studies, cognitive tests and CSF analyses were performed. Parental informed consent and approval from the Ethics Committees of the Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile and the Hospital Regional Valdivia, Chile, were obtained.
A MRI performed at 6 years of age showed obliteration of the SA, mild dilatation of the lateral ventricles, a normal subarachnoid space, signs of periventricular leukomalacia in the frontal horns of the lateral ventricles, and a zone suggesting a glial scar in the frontal subcortical zone .
At 14 months of age the patient had an initial generalized tonic-clonic seizure while she was sleeping (1:00–2:00 am). Phenobarbital (6 mg/kg per day) was used as monotherapy to treat the seizures with an adequate response. Subsequently, the patient had four additional tonic-clonic seizures during sleep, all of them associated with a decrease of the Phenobarbital dose. The EEG study showed epileptiform specific activity in the posterior frontal region with rapid intercritic generalization.
Her psychomotor development included sitting without support during the 7th month, first intentional spoken words during the 8th month, walking beginning during the 17th month, and sphincter control by the 19th month. At the 21st month the psychomotor development was evaluated as normal by using the Psychomotor Development Test EEDP .
The patient was examined by a clinical neuropsychologist at 3 and 6 years of age. During the 3rd year, a TEPSI test aimed at the assessment of coordination, language and motor development was normal. However, a discrepancy between the scales was evident; she excelled in language but was below normal in coordination and motor development. During the 6th year, a comprehensive neuropsychological test battery with a structured interview was performed for several cognitive functions aimed at the assessment of global cognitive functioning, memory, language, processing speed, visual-spatial abilities, and executive functions. The following tests were used: Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC-R) [, ], Bender Visual Motor Gestalt Test (BVMG) [, ], and Goodenough Test [, ]. Each valuation was performed in individual sessions.
According to the results of performance subtests (picture completion, block design, matrix reasoning and coding) of the WISC-R, the Intelligence Quotient (IQ) score was normal (97). The patient had good verbal conceptualization and language development accompanied by an appropriate numerical reasoning to age. She excelled on the Verbal Scale (112) but the Verbal Executive scale was below the normal range (80); this discrepancy was statistically significant (p >0.95), suggesting the existence of a neurological disorder. In addition, the patient showed poor hand-eye coordination and an overall decreased maturation level, ranging from 5.0 to 5.1 years old. She showed an appropriate long-term memory but diminished working and short-term memories, with serious interference by hyperactivity, abnormal attention, and concentration skills. She also had difficulties in abstract thinking, synthesis and categorization. Concerning social abilities, the patient had a very good deductive reasoning and an adequate planning capacity, contrasting with her diminished ability to cope and manage problems and situations of everyday life.
The subcommissural organ is phylogenetically the most ancient brain gland, developing early in ontogeny [, ]. In the human it is fully developed by the 12th GW . It is located in the roof of the third ventricle at the entrance of the SA . The SCO secretes into the CSF two classes of proteins: the ones that remain soluble in the CSF and consequently move with the flow of CSF and those that aggregate to form an insoluble ever-growing structure, the Reissner fiber [–]. SCO-spondin is the main protein secreted by the SCO and its complete sequence was reported by Gobron et al. (2000) . Proteins of 200, 63, 50, and 25 kDa reacting with antibodies specific for SCO-spondin have been consistently found in the CSF of normal rodents. These proteins most likely result from processing of SCO-spondin .
In the present case, immunoblot analyses of CSF collected at the time of endoscopic third ventriculostomy were performed using antibodies against: (1) P15, a specific peptide whose sequence is unique for SCO-spondin ; (2) a protein extract of human subcommissural organ (anti-hSCO) ; (3) L1-CAM, an adhesion molecule that has been found in the CSF of hydrocephalic newborns and; (4) aquaporin-4 (anti-AQP-4), a water channel selectively expressed by ependymal cells and astrocytes [–]. Anti-P15 reacted with cells of the SCO . The pattern of anti-P15 reactive compounds in the control CSF resembles that of the CSF of normal rats . The CSF in the present case showed a pattern of anti-P15 reactive compounds different from that of historical controls; the compounds of 200 and 25 kDa were missing and an abnormal form of 180 kDa was present . The anti-hSCO also revealed differences between the CSF of the hydrocephalic patient and that of control . The L1-CAM and anti-AQP-4 were barely distinguished in the control CSF but distinctly detected in the CSF of the hydrocephalic patient .