We reported a case of a 31-year-old female who is medically free, presented with a history of gait unsteadiness and bilateral lower limbs weakness and numbness of 40 days duration. She addressed difficulties in standing and sitting when she is lying down. Her symptoms were progressive in a manner that affected her productivity and daily activities.
The patient denied having difficulties in passing urine or stool. No reported history of fever, weight change, or trauma, and is not on any regular medications or supplements. The patient had no history of personal nor familial history of endocrine tumors. She used to take over-counter supplemental vitamins.
Clinically she was slim presented in a wheelchair with difficulty rising up to a standing position. Upon physical exam, the patient's vital signs were within normal ranges. She was awake and oriented. Cranial nerves were intact. Examination of her limbs showed full strength in upper limbs and −4/5 strength on her lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were 3+ on knee jerk and ankle jerk. The lower limbs were hypertonic. Babinski test showed upward going toes. Fine and pinprick sensations were intact. Digital rectal examination had normal sensation, normal tone, but weak power. No skin lesions were noted.
Her blood tests showed sky-high parathyroid hormone levels of 862 pg/ml (normal range is 15–65 pg/ml). Despite the elevated parathyroid hormone levels, Calcium, phosphorus, vitamin D, thyroid hormone levels and kidney function results were within the normal ranges. Also, a complete paraneoplastic markers assessment turned negative. Subsequently, she underwent parathyroid ultrasound which revealed evidence of well-defined hyperechoic mass lesion in the left anterior neck region, measuring about 2*0.5*0.6 cm. This lesion was highly suspicious for parathyroid adenoma.
Whole spine MRI was performed and revealed heterogenous soft tissue mass lesion involving the right pedicle, lamina, transverse process, and inferior articular process of T7, as well as the right posterolateral aspect of T7 vertebral body. This lesion appeared predominantly isointense on T1/T2WI with vivid enhancement on postcontrast images measuring about 3.5 × 1.8 cm. This lesion was shown to compress and displace the spinal cord from the right which causing compressive myelopathy on the corresponding level of the spinal cord .
Contrasted multiple axis Computed Tomography of neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed well defined enhancing mass lesion in the left anterior neck region. In addition to an expansile bony mass involving the body, right pedicles and posterior arch of T7 was noted. The lesion was associated with epidural soft tissue component extending from T6-T7 compressing the spinal cord and scalloping the T7 vertebral body. Of note, there were generalized osteogenic changes involving the ribs, clavicle, scapula, and the examined spine.
Bone scan showed several foci of increased and decreased uptake in the axial bone skeleton mainly in the ribs and spine consistent with mixed osteolytic/osteoblastic bony lesions suggestive of brown tumors.
The patient expressed her distress of the emergent weakness that significantly impaired her ability to maintain daily activities, therefore surgery aimed to decompress and to stabilize the thoracic spine to allow for motor function improvement, as well as to obtain histopathological examination.
The patient was prepared for surgery having her consent. We performed A posterior midline approach that involved T7 decompressive laminectomy, and removal of the tumor. For stabilization, we performed T5-T9 transpedicular screws fusion . The surgery was conducted by team of consultant neurosurgeon and senior neurosurgery resident at tertiary university hospital. Post operatively, the patient had no complications and her lower limbs regained full strength and hypertonia was significantly improved.
Histopathological exam showed portions of bone containing a cellular spindle cell proliferation with abundant brown, granular and globular material and scattered groups of multinucleate giant cells of the osteoclast type, no malignant degeneration was noted. In the context of high parathyroid hormone levels, a diagnosis of brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism was made.
Work up for parathyroid adenoma continued with a Sestamibi scan that showed no scintigraphic evidence of parathyroid adenoma, however, findings were compatible with false negative test. The patient was referred for general surgery team for further management of her parathyroid lesion.