The patient was a 70-year-old female with continued right knee rigidity and pain after right TKA. Four years earlier, she was diagnosed with severe osteoarthritis of the right knee at another hospital, and TKA was performed uneventfully. She recovered well in a couple of months after surgery, but then she began to feel sharp pain in the medial part of the right knee, and as a result experienced a decrease in the range of motion (ROM). In subsequent years, her right knee pain and rigidity gradually increased. Treatments including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, cortisone injections and physical therapy provided little or no relief. At our clinic, she reported severe pain on the medial genicular region with any movement of the lower limbs and even at rest. The visual analogue scale (VAS) score for her knee pain was 6/10. Her right knee motion was limited to several degrees. Other medical history involved hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus for about 10 years.
On physical assessment, the patient’s BMI was 24.7 kg/m2. She walked into the ward with an antalgic and stiff gait. The skin over the right knee surgical incision was well-heeled. There was slight atrophy of her right calf or quadriceps. Tenderness was found at the medial knee compartments but not the lateral compartment. Tinel’s sign was positive, whereas the varus stress test, valgus stress test and patellar compression test were all negative. Active ROM was 0° to 60° .
Plain radiographs demonstrated that the prosthesis was well-placed and well-fixed without any signs of periprosthetic fracture, implant loosening or osteolysis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was not performed. A diagnosis of arthrofibrosis after TKA was established and neuroma was also highly suspected due to the positive result of Tinel’s sign.
The patient then underwent right knee exploration, adhesiolysis and spacer exchange under general anesthesia. Antibiotic prophylaxis was administered for perioperative infection prevention, and the tourniquet was set at 250 mmHg. The surgery was performed through the previous surgical approach, which was a 15-cm standard midline skin incision. After blunt separation of subcutaneous tissue, we observed several thickening neuroma-like tissues distributed in both superior and inferior parts of the medial genicular area . Based on the innervation around the knee, these abnormal tissues may have been derived from the infrapatellar branch of the saphenous nerve or the medial femoral cutaneous nerve. Some nerve branches were scarred and adhering to surrounding blood vessels and fat in clumps. Subcutaneous neurectomy was performed and the specimen was then sent for pathological examination. The joint capsule was incised through the medial parapatellar approach. Exploration showed hyperplasia of the synovium, and the presence of a large amount of fibrous tissue around the prosthesis, patella and intercondylar fossa. The femoral component and tibial tray showed stable fixation. These findings corresponded to the stiffness of the patient’s physical examination, and confirmed the diagnosis of arthrofibrosis. Adhesion lysis was performed to remove the intracapsular scar tissue . Synovectomy was performed to remove hyperproliferative synovial tissue. The polyethylene spacer was replaced by a new one of a suitable size, with a thickness of 11 mm. The incision was then closed, and the patient’s immediate postoperative course was uneventful.
The patient resumed knee exercise 2 days after surgery and recovered uneventfully. She had complete resolution of right knee pain without pain medication (VAS 2/10 on 2nd postoperative day, VAS 0/10 at 2 weeks postoperatively). The ROM of the right knee was 0° to 110° on the 2nd postoperative day and increased to 0° to 120° at 2 weeks postoperatively. The post-revision radiograph revealed similar fixation and placement as pre-revision . The pathological report showed that the specimen contained fat, blood vessels, collagen and nerve tissue, and the arrangement of nerve fiber bundles were haphazard, which was considered to be a traumatic neuroma .
At 3-month follow-up, the patient was mobilizing well without obvious claudication and the ROM of the right knee was 0° to 120°. There had been no recurrence of her right knee pain.