A 9-year-old, African American male presented to the emergency room accompanied by his mother with right knee pain of 5 d duration.
The patient stated that the pain began after he was scratched by a cat 5 d prior to presentation. His mother noticed her son was not bearing weight on the right lower extremity 2 d after the incident. He described the pain as constant and worsening and aggravated by both passive movement of the knee and weight bearing of the extremity. The patient and his mother denied any history of fever or drainage from the wound but did report antecedent upper respiratory infection symptoms one week prior. He had not trialed NSAIDs or acetaminophen for the injury. The patient was in the 2nd grade and lived with both parents. The orthopedics service was consulted to rule septic arthritis of the right knee.
The patient had no past medical history.
The patient had no relevant family history, including no history of metabolic disorders such as hereditary hemochromatosis or hyperparathyroidism.
Focused examination of the right lower extremity demonstrated warmth and swelling across the knee. Superficial scratches were noted across the anterolateral leg. One punctate wound on the lateral knee was noted without erythema or drainage. Thigh and leg compartments were soft and compressible. Significant pain was reproduced with both axial loading and passive range of motion of the knee from 0°-40°. Sensation and motor function were intact in all nerve distributions with palpable distal pulses and brisk capillary refill in all toes.
Initial laboratory studies showed a white blood cell count of 8.9, C-reactive protein of 1.1, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 39. The patient had a calcium level of 9.7 and alkaline phosphatase of 209. Due to the clinical concern for septic arthritis, joint aspiration was performed. Aspiration yielded 10 mL of cloudy, viscous, yellow fluid. Follow-up cell counts of the synovial fluid yielded a glucose of 99, protein of 4.9, and a WBC of 7,345 with 59% polymorphic neutrophils. Positively birefringent, rhomboid shaped crystals were present and identified as calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals. Bacterial and fungal cultures of the fluid were both negative for any growth. This synovial fluid analysis was suggestive of an inflammatory origin and a preliminary diagnosis of CPP arthritis was made.
Radiographs of the right knee demonstrated a joint effusion within the suprapatellar recess and trace effusion within Hoffa’s fat pad . No chondrocalcinosis was observed. Follow-up ultrasound of the right knee was performed for comparison, which showed a simple fluid collection in the knee joint.
The patient was placed in an ace wrap for compressive dressing, started on oral ibuprofen, intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone and clindamycin, and admitted for additional work-up. Pediatric infectious disease was consulted and elected to continue ongoing antibiotic management and perform Bartonella titers, which were negative. On the third day of admission, MRI with IV contrast was performed and significant for a focal, intra-synovial area of enhancing, 6 mm cortical defect at the lateral border of the lateral femoral condyle . Additionally, a small joint effusion and subcutaneous soft tissue edema overlying the proximal tibia, rim enhancement suggestive of synovitis, and a collection within the inflammatory changes of the vastus lateralis with rim enhancement suggesting small abscess formation were also found.