Inspection of an 11-year-old female Queensland koala (Phascolarctos cinereus), kept in a zoological park, Tokyo, Japan, revealed hyperkeratotic lesions on the third and fourth claws of right forepaw, along with white-yellowish, non-erythematous, and scaly plaques on forepaw pads, and hyperkeratosis and parakeratosis of the affected areas .
The animal was gently restrained, the affected claws and active border of the lesions of the paw were scraped off with a sterile scalpel blade, and the sample was submitted to our laboratory in Teikyo University Institute of Medical Mycology (TIMM), Tokyo, Japan, to be screened for potential fungal infection. A part of the scrapings was treated with 20% potassium hydroxide (KOH) and subjected to direct microscopy. On microscopy of a wet-mount preparation, observation of short, irregular, narrow, hyaline hyphae suggested a dermatophytic infection. The remaining sample was inoculated onto both Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA) and Mycobiotic agar (Difco Laboratories., Detroit, MI, USA) plates, at separated points, and incubated at 28°C. Cultures became positive within a few days, and after 10 days, two distinct colonies with different morphology (designed as types I and II) were observed at the inoculated points. In order to purify the colonies and to observe the appearance in greater detail, original colonies of each morphological type were subcultured on SDA, Mycobiotic agar and potato dextrose agar (PDA) (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, MI, USA) plates and incubated at 28 °C for two weeks. During subculturing, colonies with macro-morphology similar to the wild-type isolates were formed. On SDA, the type-I colony appeared flat, outspread, slightly granular and white-colored in the center while being characterized by buff thalli in the margin, and a brownish-yellow reverse pigment was seen . On PDA, the colony developed as flat, radiating, fluffy in texture, bright yellow to yellowish-orange and slightly folded in center, and buff to colorless with a fringe of submerged growth in the advancing border which made it resemble M. canis. The reverse pigment was also light yellowish .
On SDA, the type-II colony was uniformly buff-colored, raised in the center, and flat along the periphery edge with limited radial groves. It had a velvety to suede-like texture and a brownish reverse pigment . On PDA, the colony consistently appeared discolored-yellow to colorless, radiating, and flat, with fluffy thalli and a pale yellow reverse pigment .
The two strains also differed in terms of microscopic configuration on both media. The teased mount preparation of morphotype-I colony was significant for numerous three- to five-celled, fusiform to cucumber-shaped macroconidia, as well as some round to clavate microconidia, characteristic of M. gypseum. Also, the distal end of most macroconidia was slightly oval to rounded, while the proximal end was almost truncate .
The microscopy of morphotype-II revealed abundant three- to six-celled, ellipsoidal, elongate, and bullet-shaped macroconidia, along with a limited number of pyriform to clavate microconidia, resembling those of M. fulvum . The subculturing of both colony types was repeated twice under the same incubation conditions. The characteristics described above reappeared and could therefore be confirmed.
Cultures were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) for 2 h at 4 °C. After being washed twice with the buffer, specimens were post-fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide in cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4) for 2 h at 4 °C. Next, the samples were dehydrated with graded acetone, freeze-dried in t-butyl alcohol, and coated with osmium tetroxide using an osmium coater, OPC 60A (Filgen, Nagoya, Japan), as described previously . Colonies were examined using a JEOL JSM-7500F scanning electron microscope (JSM-7500F, JEOL, Japan), operated at 1kV. The type–I colony was characterized by abundant thick, spindle-shaped macroconidia with a rough surface . Meanwhile, the type–II colony showed slender- and elliptic-shaped macroconidia with a rough surface .
To confirm the diagnosis of dermatophytosis and additionally to determine if the etiologic agents represented the same species/strain, the two isolates were subjected to PCR and sequencing by the following primer sets: The universal fungal ITS1/ITS4 primers were used to amplify the DNA fragment covering the internal transcribed spacer regions (ITS1 and ITS2) and the flanking 5.8S subunit of the rRNA gene (rDNA); the pan-dermatophyte primers EF-DermF/EF-DermR were used to amplify translation elongation factor1-α (Tef-1α), and the universal fungal primers T1 and Bt2b were used to amplify the beta tubulin (BT2) gene. Interestingly, analysis of all three loci by pairwise sequence alignment revealed that the two strains were identical (100% similarity). The ITS sequence was submitted to the open access validated CBS database for dermatophytes (www.cbs.knaw.nl/dermatophytes) and it showed 100% similarity to sequence JN134132, M. gypseum IFM 5292.
The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the isolates towards seven antifungal agents were tested according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI) broth microdilution (BMD) methods for filamentous fungi . The MICs of amorolfine, terbinafine, itraconazole, bifonazole, ketoconazole, butenafine and micafungin were 0.25, 0.004, 1, 8, 4, 0.06, and 0.12 μg/mL for the colony type-I, and 0.25, 0.06, 1, 8, 4, 0.12, and 0.12 μg/mL for the colony type-II, respectively. The koala was treated with terbinafine, 250 mg/kg once daily for 12 weeks.