A 38-year-old man was admitted to our hospital, presenting with a 2-month history of rash and half a day of abnormal behavior. This behavior was characterized by the patient standing at his door wearing only underwear, talking to himself, and appearing confused. He also had a history of unsafe sexual practices.
Physical examination yielded the following findings: a temperature of 38.9 °C, pulse rate of 144 beats/min, respiratory rate of 40 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 90/55 mmHg. The patient exhibited signs of delirium, with unfocused gaze, irrelevant responses, and neck resistance. Palpable superficial lymph nodes were found in the neck, armpits, and groin, each measuring approximately 1.5*1 cm. These nodes were irregularly arranged, soft, and had a good range of motion. A substantial number of necrotic papules were visible on the patient’s face and trunk .
Laboratory examinations revealed low levels of hemoglobin (97 g/L), leukocytes (2.5 × 109/L), and platelets (49 × 109/L). High levels were observed for C-reactive protein (159.27 mg/L), lactic acid (7.04 mmol/L). Anti-HIV antibody was positive, and the patient’s CD4 T-cell count was 6 cells/ml. The patient’s HIV RNA level was 8.76 × 104 IU/ml.
Additional blood tests, including those for cytomegalovirus-DNA, Toxoplasma-IgM, and cryptococcal capsular polysaccharide antigen, were within the normal range. Parvovirus B19-IgG/IgM and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests were negative.
Given the patient’s abnormal behavior, and no significant abnormalities observed in the head CT scan, we performed a lumbar puncture examination. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was pale yellow, with significantly elevated protein levels (2369 mg/L) and cell count (nucleated cells: 600 × 104/L, 90% neutrophils), but decreased glucose (1.1 mmol/L) and chloride (112 mmol/L) levels. All other CSF tests, including IgG, IgM, IgA and ADA were within the normal range. Tests for CMV-DNA, ink stain of CSF, Cryptococcus capsular polysaccharide antigen, and acid-fast bacilli returned negative results.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes (abdominal, retroperitoneal, bilateral axillary, and supraclavicular). Blood cultures tested positive for Talaromyces marneffei (identified after 6 days of culture) and Salmonella (identified after 3 days of culture). Concurrently, CSF culture suggested a Salmonella infection. The culture results indicated a multidrug-resistant Salmonella Group D, resistant to ampicillin and sulbactam, gentamicin, amikacin, cefazolin, cefotetan, and tobramycin, but sensitive to piperacillin-tazobactam, ceftazidime, ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, cefepime, imipenem, compound sulfamethoxazole, ertapenem and aztreonam.
The patient, in septic shock, was promptly administered aggressive anti-septic shock therapy with empirical treatment. Concurrently, he received antifungal therapy with intravenous voriconazole (200 mg twice daily) for 10 days, and intravenous meropenem (2 g every 12 h) for 10 days due to the severity of his condition, with meningitis concurrent with sepsis. This was followed by oral voriconazole (200 mg twice daily) and intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g every 12 h) for 23 days. Symptomatic treatment was administered continuously during hospitalization. With active treatment and basic care, the patient achieved complete remission of fever, delirium. A biopsy was not performed on the rash, which recovered gradually with treatment. After infection control was relatively stabilized (2 weeks after admission), antiviral therapy with tenofovir, lamivudine, and dolutegravir was initiated.
Unexpectedly, three weeks after treatment initiation, the patient’s left elbow started showing slight swelling and pain. At this time, anteroposterior and lateral X-rays of the left elbow joint showed regular bone arrangement, complete bone structure, normal shape, and no density difference. The joint was in position, and no obvious abnormality was detected in the soft tissue. Ultrasound revealed no significant abnormalities in the left upper limb’s axillary, brachial, basilic, and median cubital veins.
Over the following week, more joint symptoms manifested. The left knee and elbow joints became swollen, tender to touch, and exhibited limited range of motion in flexion and extension. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left knee revealed numerous patchy long T1 and long T2 signal lesions in the knee bones, with unclear edges. A large amount of fluid signal was observed in the joint space and the upper bursae of the abdomen, and swelling was observed in the surrounding muscles and soft tissues .
Fluid accumulated in the joint cavity and suprapatellar bursa of the left knee. The MRI of the left elbow joint showed diffuse long T1 and long T2 signals in each group of left elbow osteoplasia. Large slices of long T2 signals were observed in the muscle tissue around the left elbow, with blurred muscle space, spots of long T2 signals in the triceps tendon, and a significant amount of fluid in the left elbow joint space . The CT scan of the left elbow joint revealed a reduced density area of erosion in the lower end of the humerus and olecranon cortex of the ulna. The trabecular structure was disorganized, the left elbow was properly positioned, the surrounding soft tissue was swollen, and fluid was visible in the joint space .
We sought the assistance of an orthopedist to conduct arthrocentesis of the elbow joint and knee. The results indicated an increased cell count (nucleated cell count was 7200 × 104/L, neutrophils 79%) in the left knee joint. Similarly, the left elbow joint puncture fluid demonstrated elevated levels of cells (nucleated cell count was 96,044 × 104/L, neutrophils 77%), aiding the diagnosis of osteoarthritis. The etiology inspection of the puncture fluid tests, including brucella, HLA-B27, autoantibody, vasculitis, acid-fast bacilli, fungi, and bacteria detection, didn’t provide significant information. Nevertheless, MRI of the joint revealed swelling and effusion in the left elbow joint space, and progressive bone destruction at the left lower end of the humerus and the left olecranon. During this period of joint-related symptoms, the patient exhibited normotension, fever (temperature repeatedly reached 38.8 °C), and HR 80–120. His respiration and blood oxygen saturation remained stable.
Under such conditions, we performed metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) to identify potential pathogens in the puncture fluid due to the disease’s progression. Given the lack of standard interpretation method for mNGS results and the reported parameter diversity across different sequencing platforms, we used GenSeizer™-based mNGS results for interpretation. The results revealed 8000 T. marneffei and 300 Salmonella-specific sequences. Consequently, we adjusted his final diagnosis to fungal arthritis caused by T. marneffei and Salmonella. It was considered that the anti-infection effect was not good in the early stage with ceftriaxone and voriconazole. We altered his treatment to an intravenous injection of amphotericin B (0.5 mg/(kg·d)for one month)) and piperacillin-tazobactam. Due to poor performance of ceftriaxone sodium in the preliminary results, we switched to piperacillin/tazobactam based on the resistance pattern. The patient’s swollen joint symptoms improved after one month of admission following extensive anti-infection treatment, and he returned to normal temperature. Upon discharge, he continued treatment with itraconazole and cefixime. At a two-month follow-up, we observed significant improvement in elbow movement. Imaging findings suggested no further progression of bone destruction. HIV RNA was below detectable levels, and the CD4 + T count increased to 22/µl.