We present the case of a 5-year-old girl from Mexico, with medical history of a congenital cervical lymphangioma, with a partial surgical resection during the neonatal period, requiring a gastrostomy and tracheostomy, and currently being treated with oral sirolimus (0.8 mg/m2/twice a day). She presented to the emergency department with a two-week history of intermittent fever, increased urination frequency, and vesical tenesmus, for which she was treated in an out-patient clinic with levofloxacin for seven days with no clinical response. Upon physical examination she had mild abdominal tenderness and left costovertebral angle tenderness. Complete blood count (CBC) was normal (leukocytes 6.25 k/µL, neutrophils 3.1 k/µL, lymphocytes 2.3 k/µL, hemoglobin 12.6 g/dL, and platelets 249,000/mm3). Acute phase reactants were slightly elevated (C-reactive protein 1.1 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 30 mm/h). Urinalysis was normal (negative nitrites, leukocyte esterase, and no leukocytes). Renal ultrasound showed a normal right kidney, and echogenic bands in the superior pole of the left kidney, in addition to renal sinus compression, and areas of cortical hypoperfusion in color-Doppler examination, suggestive of focal left pyelonephritis . Blood and urine cultures were taken upon admission, the latter obtained via vesical catheterization. Given that the patient had no history of recent hospitalization, intravenous gentamicin (6 mg/kg/day) was empirically initiated as a second line of treatment for community-acquired pyelonephritis. Blood cultures were negative. After a 48-h incubation period, urine culture reported growth of colonies with alpha-hemolysis on blood agar (> 100,000 CFU/mL) . Colonies were identified as Facklamia hominis by a MALDI-TOF Biotyper® using a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization and time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry system, with a score value of 2.03. Antimicrobial susceptibility was determined via disc method, and the four antibiotics tested (vancomycin, gentamicin, tetracycline, linezolid) were susceptible. Quinolones were not available in laboratory. The patient presented clinical resolution of symptoms within 72 h of therapy. Due to the rarity of the case, a follow-up urine culture was performed 14-day later, with no growth reported, and she was discharged after completing a two week-course of gentamicin.