A 32-year-old woman presented to the rheumatology department with a 5-year history of symmetric polyarticular joint pain in hands, elbows, and knees responsive to NSAIDs, with recurrent painless oral ulcers. During this period, she also had a significant loss of appetite with weight loss of 10 kg. The patient has a previous history of unprovoked popliteal thrombosis in the lower extremity, and remarkably, there are no identified risk factors for venous thromboembolism (VTE). There is no history of cardiac failure, respiratory failure, recent stroke, recent myocardial infarction, acute infectious disease, malignancy, myeloproliferative syndrome, nephrotic syndrome, previous VTE, prolonged immobilization, travel exceeding 6 h, or chronic venous insufficiency. Furthermore, the patient has not undergone any hormonal therapy, be it contraceptive or substitutive.
She had two unexplained abortions at 24 weeks of gestation, she also mentioned having elevated blood pressure during pregnancy (Preeclampsia without severe features), she was treated with aspirin and heparin, and thereafter she had full-term delivery.
One week prior to admission the patient complained of severe headache with elevated blood pressure of 200/110 mmhg. She didn’t have any medication at that time.
On evaluation, the BMI was 16.6 kg /m2. Temperature was 36.4°C, blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg, pulse 88 beats/min, respiration rate 20 /min, and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air. There were no lower limb oedema and no crackles was found on lung auscultation. Cardiovascular examination revealed a grade III systolic murmur in the mitral area radiating to the axilla with soft S1 and normal S2. Livedo reticularis was evident on the feet. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.
A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was conducted and showed severe mitral regurgitation, left ventricular hypokinesia, and thrombus in patent foramen ovale. Systolic pulmonary artery pressure was estimated to be 35 mmHg.
Subsequently, a transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed an absence of clots in the left atrium and appendage with a good emptying velocity.
A bubble test was performed and demonstrated a protracted diaphragm separating the two atria, along with a lesion measuring 1.5 × 1.56 cm2. The lesion was hyperechoic, and mobile, with calcification at its apex in proximity to the inferior vena cava, suggesting a potential diagnosis of a haemorrhagic thrombus or chronic vegetation .
Laboratory investigations revealed: anaemia, indicated by a haemoglobin level of 8.8 g/dl; a mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 82 fl; and thrombocytopenia, with a platelet count of 98 ×103/µl. The glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 110.
Mixing studies, which are tests conducted on the blood plasma of patients or test subjects, play a key role in differentiating coagulation factor deficiencies from factor inhibitors. Examples of inhibitors include lupus anticoagulant or specific factor inhibitors like antibodies directed against factor VIII. Specifically in our case, the mixing study results were as follows: before mixing, the prothrombin time (PT) was 53, PTT was 35, and the international normalized ratio (INR) was 1. After mixing, the PT remained at 53, the PTT slightly decreased to 33, and the INR remained unchanged at 1. Blood cultures were negative. The level of anti-cardiolipin (IgG) was 27.3 (normal <15) and anti-beta-2 -glycoprotein (IgG) was 121 (normal <20), while tests for ANA and anti-double-stranded antinuclear antibodies (dsdNA) yielded negative results. Additionally, complement proteins C3 and C4 were found to be low. Rheumatoid factor (Rf) was negative, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (Anti-CCP) testing was not conducted. .
Urinalysis showed moderate proteinuria .
The patient fulfilled the criteria of SLE with APS which will be clearly explained in the following discussion.
TEE was done after 6 weeks for follow-up, and the patient symptoms significantly improved.