A 71 year-old Chinese man with past medical history of hypertension and moderate to severe aortic insufficiency presented to the hospital due to chest tightness & abdominal pain for four days. He was admitted to the geriatrics department of our hospital on December 22, 2020. This patient had a history of hypertension, and took carvedilol and nifedipine controlled-release tablets for long-term antihypertensive treatment. His blood pressure was usually well controlled and he had regular outpatient follow-up. The patient's cardiac color Doppler ultrasound in 2017 revealed moderate to severe aortic regurgitation, with an enlarged inner diameter of the ascending aorta (44 mm). Cardiac enlargement (left atrium 44 mm, right atrium 66×50 mm, left ventricle 70 mm, right ventricle 25 mm), left ventricular ejection fraction 60% . The patient did not present other diseases, such as type 2 diabetes. Additionally, We also did not find a history of secondary hypertension, connective tissue diseases such as Marfan syndrome, or acute aortic syndrome in patients. Vitals observed at the time of admission: Temperature 37.5 °C, pulse 71 beats per minute at rest, respiratory 18 breaths per minute, BP 151/61 mmHg. Regular heartbeats and a systolic murmur of the aortic valve could be heard. No additional heart sounds and pericardial friction rubs were heard. Sinus rhythm, left ventricular hypertrophy, and ST-T segment changes were indicated by the ECG. Acute aortic syndrome was suspected based upon symptoms and history. A CTA scan with contrast agent revealed aneurysm of the innominate artery arising from the aortic arch and an acute uncomplicated type B AD with penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers, involving the descending aorta. Contrast agent of the descending aorta and the right external iliac artery displayed a limited sac-like shadow, with the largest cross-sectional area located at the level of the abdominal aorta and mesenteric artery (area of 3.0*1.6 cm) . The brachiocephalic trunk of the aortic arch was dilated, but the celiac trunk, left subclavian artery, left common carotid artery, and bilateral renal artery openings were not involved. The patient was then immediately transferred to the Cadiac Surgery department. Echocardiography revealed an aneurysmal dilatation of the ascending aorta and ascending aortic sinus (inner diameter of about 47 mm), cardiac enlargement (LA 45 mm, RA 59*49 mm, LV 74 mm, RV 24 mm), severe aortic valve insufficiency, and left ventricular ejection fraction of 54% . The patient was treated with urapidil infusion, carvedilol 10 mg bid, and nifedipine controlled-release tablets 30 mg qd, with a target blood pressure of systolic 100-130 mmHg, mean arterial pressure 60-70 mmHg, and heart rate 60–80 beats/min. His symptoms were markedly improved as conditioned gradually stabilized. Repeat CT Chest angiography showed stable dissection without any further extension.
After consultation with the experts in the field of cardiothoracic surgery, taking into consideration the patient's age and the relative contraindications to long-term anticoagulation therapy in the case of AD, it has been planned to perform an open surgical procedure for aortic valve replacement with a biological valve prosthesis after 20 days. During the surgical operation, a degeneration of the aortic valve was found, but there was no obvious coronary valve prolapse, mild valve margin thickening or aortic valve insufficiency, therefore an aortic valve bioprosthetic replacement was performed after valve leaflet removal. Pathology revealed uneven thickness of fibrous connective tissue with collagenization and myxoid degeneration. The patient was discharged 10 days after surgery.
On the follow-up CTA scan 1 year after the initial event, his dissecting ulcers had disappeared, the hematoma had largely resorbed and his aorta looked completely normal . Echocardiography revealed the postoperative status of the aortic valve replacement, atrial enlargement (LA 43 mm, RA 59*39 mm, LV 51 mm, RV 20 mm), and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 66% . The patient's heart was significantly remodeled. Three dimensional reconstructions revealed a favorable prognosis . He is doing well, with no new complaints and his blood pressure is well controlled.