Our patient was a 44-year-old man whose chest CT scan showed a solid pulmonary nodule in the right upper lobe a month ago . After anti-infective therapy, enhanced CT re-examination showed that the solid nodule was slightly larger than the previous CT scan. Due to the enlarged pulmonary nodule, the patient was admitted to our hospital on May 24, 2019. A laboratory test showed that the patient was infected with hepatitis B virus. There were no abnormal findings on other relevant examinations. The CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy was carried out on May 29, and the biopsy was diagnosed by pathology as adenocarcinoma. The following positron-emission tomography and computed tomography (PET-CT) were performed. PET-CT images showed high uptake in the solid nodule in the right upper lobe with an SUV max value of 1.51 and pulmonary hilar lymph nodes; the latter was interpreted as a reactive increase. On June 5, lobectomy and lymph dissection were performed.
The lobectomy specimen showed a 1.2 × 0.8-cm nodule, with a tan-white, firm, and pleural indentation. Microscopic examination demonstrated an invasive adenocarcinoma with a predominant papillary pattern . The cells contained abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and vacuolar nuclei with irregular contours and distinct nucleoli .
In total, 28 lymph nodes were examined, ranging from 0.5 to 2.5 cm in size in the largest dimension. These lymph nodes were tan-black, without macroscopic lesions. Thirteen of the lymph nodes were designated as intrapulmonary lymph nodes. One of the intrapulmonary lymph nodes showed a few CK-positive glands within the node parenchyma . The glands had two layers of epithelial cells in the haematoxylin-eosin stain (HE stain) section . The luminal cells contained abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and vacuolar nuclei with relatively regular contours and distinct nucleoli, which were very similar to pulmonary adenocarcinoma cells. The abluminal cells were small round hyperchromatic nuclei with indistinct cytoplasm and were positive for P63, P40, and CK5/6 . The patient has remained alive without recurrence and metastasis at the last follow-up before publication.