The patient was a 3.5-year-old girl, a product of consanguineous first-degree cousin marriage, who was born at the gestational age of 38 weeks after a normal and uncomplicated pregnancy. She was in good health after delivery with a good APGAR score. Her weight, length and head circumference were 2500 g, 45 cm and 33 cm, respectively. Weight and length were below the 3rd percentile, whereas head circumference was slightly above the 15th percentile according to the national child growth curve. Failure to thrive and proportional microcephaly continued until one year of age but development was good. She presented with jaundice at the age of one year. Laboratory tests showed decreased WBC count (3000/mm3, reference range for age: 5000–15,500/mm3) with 64% neutrophil and decreased hemoglobin levels (11 g/dL, reference range for age: 12–14 g/dL). Furthermore, lab results revealed an MCV of 88.7 fL, platelet count of 261,000, ESR of 2 mm/h, reticulocyte count of 5.1%, a positive direct Coomb’s test, negative indirect Coomb’s test. Moreover, ACLA, ANA, ds-DNA, C3, C4, ANCA were within normal range. Osmotic fragility test was negative. Hb electrophoresis showed Hb-A1 of 91.8%, Hb-F of 5.7%, and Hb-A2 of 2.5%. Viral marker tests revealed negative cytomegalovirus (CMV) PCR and parvovirus antibody. The patient was referred to a hemato-oncologist with a diagnosis of AIHA and was subsequently treated with prednisolone. The patient’s parents did not mention any history of hospitalization or outpatient visits due to infectious disorders. Furthermore, according to her flow-cytometry results, low level of CD19+ and the very high level of CD56+ cells were detected. . The immunophenotyping test were performed at the age of 2.5 years.
As the patient was a result of a consanguineous marriage, a thorough family history was taken from her parents. Both her parents were in good health. The other sibling was a boy who presented with jaundice and anemia at the age of three months. He then presented with recurrent infections and passed away at the age of three years due to pneumonia. Serum PCR for CMV was positive in the deceased individual. No further clinical and laboratory data were available.
To evaluate the patient for the underlying genetic disorder, whole-exome sequencing was carried out on the DNA extracted from the proband’s peripheral blood sample. Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) was performed on Illumina NextSeq500 instrument. The sequencing results were subsequently analyzed using different bioinformatics tools and databases such as BWA aligner, GATK and ANNOVAR. Whole exome sequencing details of coverage and number of reads are provided in Table . It was found that the patient had a stop-gain mutation in NHEJ1 gene (NM_024782.2:c.532C > A). Sanger sequencing subsequently confirmed that the patient was homozygous and both parents were heterozygous for the mutation .
On follow-up, the patient had growth and development retardation with her length/height, head circumference and weight being below the 3rd percentile corrected for the age. Except for axillary lymphadenitis following BCG vaccination, the patient had had full vaccination including BCG, HepB, polio, MMR and DTP without any complications. On the last follow-up at the age of three years, the patient’s height and weight were 86 cm and 9.1 kg, respectively—both below the 3rd percentile corrected for the age. However, she has not had any evidence of immunodeficiency, despite living a normal life without any special precautions to preserve the patient’s health.