We present the case of a 77-year-old ambulatory man with hypertension, sarcoidosis, complete atrioventricular block status post-pacemaker implantation, chronic kidney disease due to FSGS, and right facial nerve paralysis, who presented with sporadic gait and right face numbness. He was diagnosed with sarcoidosis by biopsy of a tumor in front of the right tibia 14 years before presentation. Since the tumor and abdominal lymphadenopathy were the only manifestation of sarcoidosis and no other signs of organ involvement were present, he received no immunosuppressive treatment. The abdominal lymphadenopathy had been stable over time. Nine years before presentation, he was referred to our nephrology clinic to determine the cause of chronic kidney disease. His serum creatinine level was 1.2 mg/dL and he had proteinuria of 0.4 g per day. Hematuria was not present. Renal biopsy revealed six globally sclerotic glomeruli among all 34 glomeruli (18%) and some residual glomeruli with segmental sclerosing lesions, but no involvement of sarcoidosis. He was diagnosed with primary FSGS. Since the proteinuria was mild, he did not receive immunosuppressive treatment.
One year after that, the patient experienced palpitations and was diagnosed with complete atrioventricular block. Coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis of the coronary arteries, and he underwent pacemaker implantation. Whether sarcoidosis contributed to the complete atrioventricular block was unclear. The abdominal lymphadenopathy and the dyskinesia of the ventricular septum were stable and did not progress over time.
The patient was stable for eight years, until when he started to suffer from sporadic gait and right face numbness that occurred and resolved within a day every few weeks. Three months later, the symptoms recurred along with sudden dysarthria and left limbs weakness. Physical findings were notable for pronator drift on the left side. Perfusion computed tomography (CT) with iodinated contrast and CT angiography revealed no ischemic lesions or occlusion of major cerebral arteries. The symptoms disappeared three hours after the onset. A transient ischemic attack (TIA) was suspected, and he was admitted to the stroke unit. Ultrasonography revealed no stenosis of the internal carotid arteries, and transesophageal echocardiogram showed no abnormalities of the atrial septum. His pacemaker detected paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, which was presumed to be the etiology of the TIA. Thus, edoxaban 30 mg per day was started and he was discharged after one week of hospitalization.
One month after his discharge, his left leg started to swell and his gait worsened. Urinary protein excretion was 0.6 g per day, serum creatinine was at the baseline level of 1.6 mg/dL, and serum albumin level was 3.8 g/dL. Although no coagulopathy was found, ultrasonography revealed left femoral vein thrombosis that was 41 mm long. Edoxaban was stopped, and heparin was administered intravenously for two weeks. Low mobility due to his gait was presumed to be the cause of development of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). The patient was switched to warfarin and was discharged, but the left leg edema persisted. Three months later, he developed complications of urinary retention and constipation.
Four months after discharge, the patient presented to the emergency department with sudden left leg pain and inability to walk. The entire left lower limb was slightly pale and had slow pitting edema. The left dorsal artery was not palpable, and the left femoral artery was barely palpable. Contrast CT revealed occlusion of the left femoral and superficial femoral arteries together with the known DVT in the left femoral vein . Emergency thrombectomy for acute arterial occlusion was performed and the leg perfusion resumed. The emboli (maximum of 23 mm in diameter) were sent for pathological examination. The patient was admitted to the hospital and started on heparin infusion in place of oral warfarin. The history of recent TIA implied hypercoagulable state, but again no coagulopathy was found. While malignancy screening was being planned, the pathology of the arterial emboli revealed an unusual and surprising finding: the surface of the thrombi was filled with large atypical lymphoid cells and was covering the necrotic interior of the thrombi. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells on the surface and the necrotic interior of the thrombi were positive for CD20 and CD79a but negative for CD3 , which is characteristic of B cells. Leukocytosis was absent (white blood cell, 4,000/μL; segmented neutrophil, 55%; lymphocyte, 34%; monocyte, 9%; eosinophil, 2%). Serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor level was 1,548 U/mL (normal, 122–496 U/mL); lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level, 808 U/L (normal, 120–245 U/L); LDH-2 fraction, 39% (normal, 28–35%), and LDH-3 fraction, 32% (normal, 21–27%). These findings were consistent with large B-cell lymphoma with intravascular proliferation, but the etiology of the aortic thrombi was unclear.
The hematology consultation team considered that the patient needed further biopsy to determine the etiology. Bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular marrow with normal maturation, but with infiltration of CD79a-positive large atypical lymphoid cells within the small vessels . Although no lymphadenopathy was detected on palpation, CT scan showed swollen bilateral axillary and inguinal lymph nodes, which were up to 30 mm in diameter. While surgical biopsy of the right axillary lymph node and random skin biopsy were planned for diagnosis, the patient developed a complication of sepsis presumably due to pyelonephritis on hospital day nine. Piperacillin/tazobactam and vancomycin were started. Because partial thromboplastin time was prolonged, biopsies were withheld. Although white blood cell and neutrophil counts were improving, the patient died due to sudden respiratory and cardiac arrest on hospital day twelve. The patient had a do-not-resuscitate order. His family agreed to an autopsy.