A 55-year-old Middle Eastern woman, overweight-to-moderately obese in appearance, was transferred to the ED by the Emergency Medical Service. She was agitated and perspiring, and displayed severe dyspnea and tachypnea. Although conscious, she was not able to talk properly. The dyspnea worsened with changing from the sitting to supine position, and accessory respiratory muscles were visibly in use. The primary vital signs recorded in the ED were as follows: blood pressure, 145/80 mmHg; pulse rate, 120/min; respiratory rate, 40 bpm; and SpO2, 60 %. Her companions claimed no significant illness in her past medical history except for asthma and intensive care unit (ICU) admission following a severe asthmatic attack the previous month, during which she remained orotracheally intubated for approximately 5 days.
Reservoir mask oxygenation, with pulsoximetry and cardiac monitoring, failed to increase the SpO2 over 70 %. Thus, concerning the persistent hypoxemia and impending respiratory failure, the clinical decision was made to perform rapid sequential intubation (RSI).
Considering pre-intubation evaluations, including the mobility of the neck, the patient’s weight, and a Mallampati class III, the author as the attending emergency physician expected to face a moderately difficult laryngoscopy . At this step in the evaluation, he found neither anatomical abnormalities associated with a possibility of difficult extraglottic device (EGD) placement nor a mass, or radiation or surgery history, associated with a possibility of difficult cricothyrotomy . However, bag–valve–mask (BVM) ventilation for pre-oxygenation displayed resistance and poor ventilation. The physician therefore replaced RSI with the sole use of intravenous midazolam (0.2 mg/kg) plus succinylcholine (1 mg/kg) as neuromuscular blocking agents . This facilitated laryngoscopy, which revealed a subglottic stenosis with an orifice of approximately 2 mm in diameter 3–4 cm caudal to the vocal cords. At that point, orotracheal intubation was considered impossible. The SpO2 had fallen to 50 %, so a size 4 laryngeal mask airway (LMA) was tried. As expected, resistance, leaking, and poor ventilation were encountered, and LMA ventilation failed to increase the SpO2 over 70 %. A needle was inserted through the cricothyroid membrane, and subsequent rapid laryngoscopic examination showed the needle tip above the stenosis. This indicated that cricothyrotomy would be useless and the only way to provide a secure airway would be tracheostomy.
Tracheostomy is not generally regarded as an emergency procedure in most centers. Obtaining a competent physician and setting up the appropriate equipment are time consuming, so either the patient is transferred to the operating room or the tracheostomy setup needs to be established in the ED. Tracheostomy—which involves retracting the strap muscles and thyroid—is not a straightforward procedure such as that in cricothyrotomy. Even in the best hands and the most organized centers, the time required to position the tracheostomy tube in place is more than minutes, and an additional 4–5 min is needed to increase the SpO2 from 50 to 90 %; this delay may lead to irreversible damage of the hippocampal and neocortical pyramidal cells, striatal neurons, and Purkinje cells . Thus, until the requested emergency tracheostomy setup was ready, the physician applied the “Best Interests Standard” and decided to apply the following innovative strategy:
As shown in Fig. , a double-lumen 12 F central venous catheter of 20 cm in length was selected. Opposite to the Seldinger technique, the straight end of the guide wire was inserted into the blue hub of the catheter and advanced until it emerged about 2 cm from the catheter tip. Under direct laryngoscopy, the projected guide wire was introduced into the stenosis orifice. Then, the catheter was slid over the wire, as performed during the Seldinger technique, until the side holes in the blue line were completely past the stricture. The guide wire was then retracted. The connector of a pediatric endotracheal tube (ETT) with similar size to the catheter hubs (size 3) was inserted into the blue hub (In Fig. , it is shown in the red hub for demonstration purposes). The catheter was fixed at the appropriate depth by tapes. A BVM device was connected to the system and ventilation started. A fentanyl infusion (50 μg/kg/min) was started after intubation. Bilateral modest chest rise was considered as acceptable ventilation. To deliver sufficient tidal volume (Vt) in this high-resistance system, the physician had to close the pressure relief valve of the bag. Thus, to avoid potential barotrauma from increasing intrinsic positive end expiratory pressure (iPEEP) after several cycles, as feared in any obstructive condition, the physician tried to give as much time as possible for each expiration cycle until the bag was fully re-expanded [–]. These passive expiration cycles were actively assisted by gentle manual compression on both sides of the chest. When the tracheostomy setup was ready, the procedure was performed after appropriate preparation and disinfection and the instillation of local anesthesia. A size 6 tracheostomy tube was positioned and fixed in the trachea between the 5th and 6th rings. The explained model successfully improved the SpO2 up to 80 % and maintained it until establishment of the tracheostomy. The latter definitive airway provided the desirable saturation of 95 % and the patient was admitted to the surgery ICU for further care.