A 24-year-old man presented to our hospital with a complaint of instability during exercise and difficulty in defecation. When the patient was 14 years old, classmates had pointed out his enlarged buttocks. He consulted a doctor at a nearby hospital and was diagnosed with neurofibromatosis type I based on clinical findings on physical examination. When he was 20 years old, he underwent partial resection of the lesion because the tumor interfered with defecation. During surgery, the patient suffered blood loss of up to 800 ml within an hour. Since the lesion continued to grow after this partial resection, a second surgery was planned. Because the previous surgery had incurred a large blood loss, the patient was treated by a multidisciplinary team at the university hospital.
At his first visit the patient was 159 cm in height and 70.0 kg in weight without an obvious osseous lesion. A large tumor was located on the patient’s bilateral buttocks and posterior-upper thighs. A few large café-au-lait spots were observed, as were small skin tumors on his trunk and limbs, which were diagnosed as neurofibromas. No intracranial lesion was identified .
Otherwise, the patient’s medical history was unremarkable with no family history of type I neurofibromatosis. He had worked as a transporter until the large tumor on his buttocks became a burden. He regularly exercised and ran to maintain muscle strength.
Large, bilateral, and almost symmetric drooping tumors were observed on the buttocks. The surface of the tumor was smooth, hairless, and shiny, and the margin of the tumor was relatively unclear. Both the gluteal cleft and the gluteal sulcus were indistinct . Although the large lesion interfered with daily life, the patient was not aware of exertion dyspnea or palpitations. Ultrasound cardiography was performed one month before admission. The patient’s cardiac output was relatively high (5.2 L/min), and tricuspid regurgitation was observed.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which was performed at the previous hospital, showed a large tumor on the muscle layer in a bilateral area from the lumbar to the posterior thigh . The lesion showed almost homogeneous isointensity relative to the muscle on T1-weighted images (T1WI) and showed a slightly higher intensity signal relative to the muscle in T2-weighted images (T2WI). Many luminal organs, with diameters up to 1 cm, were observed on the MR images. These were identified as blood vessels.
A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan was performed one month after the first visit. The tumor appeared as a homogeneous low-density area in the early phase including enhanced vessels (supplemental data 3, 4, 5). Another thin, low-density area was observed between the muscles of the erector spinae, bilateral gluteus maximus, posterior side of the thighs, and the large tumor in both early phase and late phase. This indicated the presence of loose tissue between the large lesion and the muscle layer (supplemental data 3, 4, 5).
Based on the literature, we planned to use interventional radiology (IVR) to embolize the arteries feeding the plexiform neurofibroma followed soon after by a total excision of the tumor. Two weeks before the day of surgery, the patient was admitted to Yokohama City University Hospital, where he underwent embolization on the next, fourth, and eighth days. In the first procedure, the 2nd lumbar arteries on each side, the 3rd lumbar artery on the left side, and the 4th lumbar artery on the right side were embolized. During the second procedure, all other lumbar arteries underwent IVR embolization. At the same time, the bilateral superior gluteal arteries, right inferior gluteal artery, left superficial circumflex iliac artery, and left lateral circumflex femoral artery were embolized. In the last procedure, the right lateral circumflex femoral artery, a branch of the right superior gluteal artery, and a branch of the left inferior gluteal artery were embolized. Only the right superficial circumflex iliac artery was identified as not requiring embolization. Platinum micro coils were used in all embolization procedures .
The first excision surgery was performed two days after the last IVR treatment. The incision line was located approximately 1 cm to the lateral side of the tumor margin as based on CT and MRI. Under general anesthesia, in the lateral position of both sides, dissection with electric scalpel was performed just under the deep fascia . The boundary between the tumor and the muscle was clear in almost all areas, and only a little arterial bleeding was observed. However, venous bleeding was obvious, especially from the surface of the dissected tumor, and hemostasis with ligation was needed. The lesion around the anus was the last section to be treated. Surgeons from the Department of Gastroenterological Surgery treated this area, and the tumor was totally removed en bloc. Total operation time was 14 hours and 15 minutes with four position changes, and blood loss was 3862 grams. The patient was transfused with 20 units of packed red blood cells, 20 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), and 2 units of autologous blood prepared before surgery. After removal of the tumor, a skin graft was taken from the surface of the excised lesion. The graft was applied as a 3:1 mesh skin graft using a modified Alabama method . The patient was sent to the intensive care unit (ICU) after extubation, observed for 10 hours, and then moved to the general ward.
The patient’s clinical course was mostly uneventful. Although only half of the skin graft had attached, there was no sign of local infection. The nutrition support team intervened two weeks after surgery because the patient’s hypoalbuminemia (2.0 to 2.5 g/dl), which was thought to be caused by blood loss during surgery, had not improved. Once the albumin levels reached 3.3 g/dl, the next operation was planned. The second surgery was performed 34 days after the first surgery. An approximately 400 cm2 of split thickness skin graft was removed from the back. Part of the graft was applied as a 3:1 mesh skin graft while the remaining part was grafted as a patch skin graft (supplemental data ). The patient was discharged following epithelialization of the donor site.
Although erosion occurred in a few areas of the skin graft, conservative therapy with an ointment (Actosin® Ointment, Maruho Co, Ltd, Osaka, Japan) recovered epithelialization. The patient noticed improvement in daily activities due to his weight loss. A histopathological examination of the tumor did not indicate malignancy . Eighteen months after the primary surgery, clinical findings revealed no obvious recurrence, although follow-up CT images indicated a small tumor in the right back and the left buttock .
An echocardiogram was performed 8 months after the resection surgery. A significant decrease in cardiac output from 5.2 L/min to 3.6 L/min was observed and tricuspid regurgitation had improved. In addition, the size of the left atrium and ventricle and the pericardial effusion had decreased .