A man in his 70s presented to our hospital after an abnormality was detected on an upper gastrointestinal series. The patient had no significant medical or family history. The performance status was 0. The results of blood tests on admission were unremarkable, including tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and cytokeratin 19 fragment. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a type 2 tumor (biopsy-confirmed NEC) spanning the endothelial cell junction to the abdominal esophagus . Histopathological examination of the biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of esophageal NEC. Preoperative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scans showed no distant metastasis, and esophagectomy was planned. Thoracoscopic esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection, gastric tube reconstruction, and feeding jejunostomy tube placement were performed. The operative time was 493 min, and the blood loss was 20 mL. Histopathological examination confirmed a diagnosis of esophageal NEC with features of adenoid cystic-like carcinoma and squamoid pattern (pT2 [MP], INF a, ly1, v1 [EVG], pIM0, pDM0, pRM0, pN1 [1/28], M0; Stage II), which was positive for synaptophysin. Immunohistochemistry revealed a Ki-67 labeling index of 3–30%, with 23 mitoses per high-power field. Tumor cells were positively stained for synaptophysin, CD56, neuron-specific enolase, P40, p53, and cytokeratin 7, and negatively stained for chromogranin A, cytokeratin 20, and CK20 . The positive rate of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression was ≤ 1%. The patient was wild type for the UGT1A1*6/*28 polymorphisms. The postoperative course was good, with no complications.
The patient was treated with 100 mg of irinotecan and 100 mg of cisplatin, administered every 4 weeks, as postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. Grade 3 loss of appetite was observed, and adjuvant chemotherapy was discontinued after four cycles of first-line treatment. No recurrence was subsequently observed.
A PET-CT scan 3 years after surgery showed abnormal uptake in the subaortic, left hilar, and left axillary lymph nodes, and in a mass in the right lung apex . The patient was diagnosed with metastatic esophageal NEC postoperatively. First-line treatment could not be repeated due to toxicity from the initial treatment. Nivolumab (240 mg every 2 weeks) was administered as second-line treatment, and radiotherapy was simultaneously started (56 Gy delivered in 28 fractions to the local [subaortic and hilar] lymph nodes). The protocol of the combination therapy for NEC was approved by the Institutional Review Board of International University of Health and Welfare Hospital (Approval No. 21-B-28), and the patient provided written informed consent. The only adverse event during treatment was Grade 1 myelosuppression. After 10 cycles of nivolumab in combination with radiotherapy (56 Gy), a PET-CT scan was performed to evaluate the treatment response according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (Version 1.1) . The scan showed disappearance of all lesions, and a complete response was considered to have been achieved . Maintenance therapy (240 mg of nivolumab) was continued. No recurrence has been observed for 42 months.