A 35-year-old (gravida 0, para 0) female patient presented with a painful mass in her left forearm that first occurred 2 years ago. She stood 161 cm tall and weighed 54 kg. At that time, she first discovered a mass on her left forearm with a heating sensation, swelling, and pain. After she took a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), the size of the mass decreased and the pain was relieved. However, the pain recurred repeatedly, and an additional mass occurred in the proximal part of the existing mass 6 months before she visited our clinic. In addition, from that time on, she was prescribed an NSAID without any imaging study, and the pain continued without subsiding. She was referred to our clinic after visiting a primary medical institution, with suspected soft tissue masses on the left forearm.
Two linear masses were palpated in the longitudinal direction on the dorsal side of the left forearm of the patient . The masses with pain and tenderness were firm with clear boundaries. According to the patient, she experienced a heating sensation on both masses when the second mass first appeared. However, at the time of physical examination, the heating sensation of mass was absent. There were no fractures or soft tissue abnormalities on the plain radiograph of her left forearm. The long-axis and short-axis ultrasound confirmed an oval-shaped mass with a homogenous echogenicity filling the left cephalic vein . In the Doppler ultrasound, the vascularity of the masses was not increased, and the Doppler signal in the vascular lumen was absent. In addition, when the lesion was compressed with a probe, unlike the opposite forearm showing a normal collapse of the vein, there was no change in the shape of the vein, indicating thrombi in the cephalic vein . Furthermore, a contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the left forearm was performed to exclude the underlying risk factors of venous thromboembolism (i.e., malignancy). A 12-cm-long mass without enhancement, filling the cephalic vein in the longitudinal direction, was identified confirming SVT at the forearm, without any other soft tissue pathologies .
In an interview conducted after the imaging tests, the patient, who did not mention any special past medical history, reported that she had been repeatedly taking and discontinuing OCs (ethinyl estradiol 0.03 mg + drospirenone 3 mg) for 8 years due to endometriosis and that she had been taking OCs steadily for the last 2 years. Tumor marker, autoimmune antibody, and hematologic laboratory tests were performed to identify the risk factors of venous thrombus other than OCs. Protein C Ag level was 80% (70%–140%), and Protein S Ag level was 95% (70%–140%). The patient tested negative for anticardiolipin antibody, antiphospholipid antibody, and lupus anticoagulant antibody. AFP, CEA, CA 125, CA 15-3, and CA 19-9 levels were normal. The patient showed no history of immobilization of the left upper limb, smoking, air travel, local trauma, insect bite, or repeated local compression related to her professional or personal activities, and in recent years, there has been no instance of catheterization placed around the forearm lesion, such as intravascular injection or fluid therapy. In addition, no venous thrombi or varicose veins were observed in other parts of the body.
The patient was diagnosed with SVT in the left forearm caused by long-term use of OCs confirmed by the imaging tests, with the exclusion of other etiologies through medical history taking and blood tests. The patient did not complain of any respiratory symptoms, and fibrinogen degradation products (FDP) and D-dimer were in the normal range. No thrombus in the deep veins of the upper extremity was seen on the MRI, and computed tomography (CT) was not performed to confirm pulmonary embolism.
As part of conservative treatment, NSAIDs (zaltoprofen 80 mg 1 T t.i.d.) were administered, and local heat treatment was additionally performed as the inflammation was not in the acute phase. In addition, a vasoprotective agent (calcium dobesilate 1 T b.i.d.) was added after consultation with the Department of Vascular Surgery, and aspirin 100 mg 1 T q.d. was administered as part of prophylactic treatment for recurrent venous thromboembolism and major vascular events. Through consultation with the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, it was confirmed that the current OCs could be discontinued, and the pain mostly relieved after conservative treatment.
Three months later, the patient visited our clinic for a follow-up, and the ultrasound examination performed at that time showed that the blood clot remained in the vein. However, the pain relieved completely, following which the administration of anti-inflammatory drugs and vasoprotective drugs was discontinued. Aspirin was also discontinued after 3 months of administration. However, the patient experienced recurrent pelvic pain and vaginal bleeding because of endometriosis 6 months after discharge. After visiting a gynecologist, she was treated with a dienogest, an oral progestin that has a low risk of thrombosis. The pelvic pain relieved after the ingestion of dienogest.