A 66-year-old man presented with intermittent dizziness for two years and aggravation for 10 d.
The patient have been smoking for more than 30 years, with more than 20 cigarettes a day. He had drunk for more than 40 years and has stopped drinking now.
The patient had a more than 10-year history of type 2 diabetes and severe diabetic eye disease with blindness in the left eye. The patient self-injected long-acting insulin subcutaneously, 12 units per day. The patient denied having other diseases.
His father died of heart disease at the age of 72 years. His mother and children are healthy.
First admission to hospital in March 2018: On physical examination, the patient’s blood pressure in the left upper limb was 120/70 mmHg, and blood pressure was not detected in the right upper limb. The patient was conscious and able to answer questions fluently, no abnormalities were detected on a nervous system examination, and the right brachial artery and radial artery pulsations were not detected.
Second admission in October 2018: The pressures in the left and right upper limbs were 140/68 mm and 85/60 mmHg, respectively. The results of a nervous system examination were normal. The right radial artery pulsation could not be detected, but the left radial artery pulsation was accessible. The patient was conscious and could carry on a normal conversation but had slightly slurred speech.
Imaging studies including a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head, computerized tomography angiography (CTA) of the vessels of the head and neck, and cerebral angiography. Upon the first admission to hospital in March 2018, CTA of the vessels of the head and neck showed severe stenosis at the beginning of the brachiocephalic artery. A CT scan of the head showed no obvious abnormalities. Cerebral angiography showed that the stenosis of brachiocephalic artery had almost occluded it . Upon the second admission in October 2018, a CT scan of the head revealed multiple cerebral infarctions in bilateral basal ganglia and the right lateral ventricle. CTA of the vessels of the head and cerebral angiography both showed severe stenosis in the brachiocephalic artery stent. Reverse blood flow through the right vertebral artery compensated for the right subclavian artery, and the left internal carotid artery was occluded.
Laboratory examinations included routine blood tests, liver function, kidney function, electrolytes, coagulation function, routine stool, and urine tests and relevant immune factor tests, and no obvious abnormalities were found. Only blood lipid examination was abnormal .