A 6-year-old girl was injured after falling off a kick scooter. A local physician diagnosed the injury as a left olecranon fracture, and she wore a splint for the following 3 weeks. Her plain X-ray revealed radial head dislocation and a proximal ulnar fracture .
A plain X-ray taken 1 month after injury revealed dislocation of the left radial head with surrounding calcification. The patient was referred to our department for examination due to persisting limited elbow range of motion. The patient exhibited considerably limited elbow range of motion at initial examination (flexion, 90°; extension, -25°; pronation, 90°; and supination, 0°) .
The plain X-ray also revealed anterior dislocation of the radial head with surrounding ossification as well as plastic deformation of the ulna . Thus, a long-standing Monteggia fracture was diagnosed.
The posterior elbow approach was used for surgery. Fasciotomy was performed using the Boyd approach, with an incision extending in a straight line from the olecranon to the triceps brachii muscle. Osteotomy of the proximal third-to-quarter of the ulna was performed, and the periosteum was preserved. Complete reduction could not be achieved using only ulnar osteotomy and straightening .
The scar tissue and annular ligament remained intact, thereby hindering complete reduction . The subluxation was reduced after surgically removing the scar tissue surrounding the radial head. The annular ligament was reconstructed using the Bell-Tawse method. Thereafter, 8 mm × 75 mm of the triceps muscle fascia was restored. To prevent obstruction of the triceps muscle fascia, two half-pins were inserted in the proximal and distal ulna, respectively. External fixation was performed using an Orthofix external fixator (M511). The correction angle was set at 20° ( and ).
Furthermore, bone lengthening, and not bone grafting, was used. Bone lengthening at a rate of 0.5 mm/day for achieving a total of 7 mm was performed post-operative day 7 onward. 1 week postoperatively, elbow range of motion training was permitted without any limitations. Bone union was achieved at 8 weeks postoperatively, and the external fixation device was removed. At present, i.e., 1 year postoperatively, the patient’s elbow range of motion has considerably improved (flexion, 160°; extension, 10°; pronation, 75°; and supination, 75°), and the patient experiences no hindrance to daily life. The patient’s Mayo Elbow Performance Index was excellent (score, 100).