A 16-year-old male presented with the primary concerns and symptoms of the acute onset of palpitations and generalized chest pain. Although not noted by the patient and not a component of his chief complaint, during his initial physical examination, he was also noted to have a rash compatible with EM. Cardiac exam revealed an irregular rhythm. No other concerns were noted on exam. The patient did not recall having been bitten by a tick. The medical, family, and psychosocial history, including relevant genetic information, was reviewed and found to be noncontributory. No prior interventions had been undertaken. An EKG demonstrated 1st degree AV block with a PR interval of 384 msec (normal range, 120–200 msec). Laboratory evaluation on the day of admission revealed a normal basic metabolic panel (BMP) and magnesium level. His troponin I (extra-sensitive) level was 0.042 μg/L with a reference range of 0.000–0.045 μg/L (M Health Fairview Ridges Hospital Lab). His complete blood count with differential was within normal limits. The patient’s C-reactive protein level on the day of admission was 34.3 mg/L (reference range, 0.00–8.0 mg/L). Group A Streptococcus was not detected via PCR of a pharyngeal swab. Anti-DNase B and antistreptolysin O antibodies were not detected.
Diagnostic methods included an echocardiogram on hospital day one that revealed normal intracardiac connections, normal motion of the tricuspid, mitral, pulmonary and aortic valves, and no pericardial effusion. There was normal left ventricular size and left ventricular systolic function. The calculated left ventricular ejection fraction from the four-chamber view was 53%. An echocardiogram was repeated on hospital day five and revealed normal valves and motion, no pericardial effusion, and a calculated biplane left ventricular ejection fraction of 70%. Laboratory studies revealed detectable Borrelia burgdorferi antibodies by ELISA assay, with an index value of 7.91 (reference range 0.00–0.89). B. burgdorferi IgM was detected via western blot assay (bands present: 41, 39, 23 kDa). Differential diagnostic considerations included other vector borne diseases, and a post-streptococcal inflammatory process. However, streptococcal studies were negative, and laboratory evaluation did not detect Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, or Ehrlichia muris-like DNA by PCR (ARUP laboratories, SLC, Utah, USA). Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Babesia microti and Ehrlichia antibody studies were all negative. In addition, no Babesia, Anaplasma phagocytophilum or Ehrlichia species were found on a parasite (Giemsa) stain of the blood. Thus, the final diagnosis was LD, with associated Lyme carditis.
Diagnostic challenges included an evolving rhythm profile during the hospitalization. A stress test was performed on hospital day nine following transient episodes of complete heart block. The patient exercised for 8 min and 3 s, achieving a heart rate of 187 bpm in sinus rhythm. He stopped due to his legs feeling tired. He achieved 91.75% of his expected maximum sinus rate. There were no arrhythmias or ST-T changes. A BMP rechecked on hospital day eight remained normal. First degree AVB continued . During the first week of hospitalization, he was noted to have sinus pauses and possible 2:1 heart block on telemetry, and a brief episode of third degree AVB.
For therapeutic intervention, the patient was treated with IV ceftriaxone for 10 days with continuous cardiac monitoring until sustained stabilization of the PR interval at < 200 msec was demonstrated. His PR interval normalized to < 176 msec after 10 days of parenteral antibiotic treatment. He was transitioned to oral doxycycline (see timeline, Fig. ) and discharged home to complete a 28-day course of antibiotics.
Upon follow-up, extended ambulatory cardiac monitoring demonstrated resolution of the previous EKG changes. Clinician- and patient-assessed outcomes were both assessed as highly favorable. The important follow-up diagnostic test results focused on EKG, which normalized. Intervention adherence and tolerability, as assessed by careful history, was exemplary. There were no adverse or unanticipated events. The patient shared his perspective on the treatment he received and commented that he was “doing well”. He denied palpitations, chest pain, syncope or presyncope and was overall “doing well without concern”.