The present study follows two pregnancies of an initially 32-year-old primigravida. During the first pregnancy, a routine ultrasound scan (USS) at 28 WG did not identify any polyhydramnios or other fetal abnormalities. However, the USS at 32 weeks detected a fetal goiter . The mother was subsequently referred for endocrinological evaluation. The mother stated that she does not take medication and that she presented thyroid hyperplasia two years earlier. As shown in , subsequent cordocentesis confirmed fetal hypothyroidism (TSH: 135 μIU/mL; FT4: 0.57 ng/dL). At 34 WG, the fetus was delivered by cesarean without any complications due to spontaneous premature labor. The male newborn weighed 2.145 kg and had Apgar scores of ten at 1 and 5 min. The newborn presented weak suction and vomiting and remained in the intensive care unit for five days. Serum thyroid hormones were measured two days after birth, and hypothyroidism was confirmed. The neonate was subsequently treated with levothyroxine (LT4).
During the second pregnancy, the USS at 22 WG revealed no abnormalities. Like the first pregnancy, four weeks later (26 weeks), a fetal goiter was detected . It was decided that no intervention would be administered at the time. Due to the progressive increase of the goiter volume, delivery was induced at 35 WG. The male child was delivered without complication and weighed 2.255 kg presenting Apgar scores of nine at 1 and 5 min. Two days after birth, congenital hypothyroidism was confirmed (TSH: 83.89 μIU/mL), and LT4 treatment was initiated. Thyroid hormone status of the patients and parents and LT4 doses over time are presented in .
Both siblings and the family showed good adherence to LT4 treatment; however, the patients still have goiter detected by USS. They showed good clinical conditions and puberty stages according to Tanner . Considering the height and body mass indices, no growth retardation was observed according to World Health Organization (5–19 years old) , and there were no motor problems detected in either child during the medical follow-up. Currently, Patient 1 is 16 years old and in his second year of high school. He has a height of 175 cm and weight of 55.7 kg, Height/Age and BMI/Age z scores of 0.08 and −1.19, respectively, and bone age of 17 years. He takes 150 mcg of levothyroxine per day. Patient 2 is 11 years old. He is in elementary school. He is 148.5 cm tall and weighs 39 kg. His calculated z scores for Height/Age and BMI/Age are 0.17 and 0.16, respectively, and his bone age is 10 years. Patient 2 is also treated with levothyroxine (75 mcg/day). In May 2021, laboratory thyroid tests of the siblings’ serum were TSH 6.98 µcIU/mL and 2.65 µcIU/mL (0.27–5.00) and FT4 (1.36 ng/dL and 1.33 ng/dL (0.75–2.00) for Patients 1 and 2, respectively. In Patient 1, a slight increase in TSH level was observed, with normal levels of FT4 . It was then decided to maintain the levothyroxine dose and to repeat the tests in two months.
The sequences analyses revealed that the genomic DNA of the two siblings contained three TPO mutations: p.Gln660Glu (C.1978C>G) and p.Arg665Trp (c.1993C>T) in exon 11 and a new deletion p.Cys296Alafs*21 (c.886delT) in exon 8. Thep.Arg665Trp mutation was present in the mother’s DNA, and the p.Gln660Glu and p.Cys296Alafs*21 mutations were found in the father’s DNA . The p.Gln660Glu mutation is on the same allele as the deletion mutation; thus, it is unlikely to contribute to the disease. Thus, the presence of both the p.Arg665Trp and the p.Cys296Alafs*21 mutations indicates compound heterozygosity in the siblings’ DNA.
The pathogenicity of the p.Arg665Trp (Arg665Trp-TPO) and p.Cys296Alafs*21 (delT886-TPO) mutations was evaluated in HEK293 cells. The delT886-TPO mutation alters the protein reading frame and introduces a new stop codon at residue 316, resulting in a 35 kDa protein product. In comparison, the Arg665Trp-TPO missense mutant and TPO-WT migrate at a molecular weight of 103 kDa . We also measured the enzymatic activities of TPO-WT, Arg665Trp-TPO, and delT886-TPO. As shown in , the TPO activities of Arg665Trp-TPO and delT886-TPO are significantly lower than TPO-WT levels.
Next, we assessed TPO localization by immunofluorescence. Under cell permeabilizing conditions , cytoplasmic TPO-specific immunostaining was observed in the wild-type and mutant TPO transfected cells. These results confirm TPO transfection and expression. Under non-permeabilizing conditions , TPO-WT was localized along the cell membrane. Notably, we observed reduced membrane staining in cells transfected with delT886-TPO and Arg665Trp-TPO, indicating that these mutant proteins are not correctly inserted into the membrane . It is also worth mentioning that no immunostaining was detected in cells transfected with empty pcDNA vector under either condition. The full methods are in the .
A clinical neuropsychologist evaluated the two brothers for attention (divided, sustained, and focused), cognitive flexibility, short- and long-term memory (verbal and visual), intellectual processes (reasoning, abstract thought, and critical thinking), motor functions (movements, laterality, and others), visual functions (perception, discrimination, and visuospatial and visuoconstructive organization), praxis, general intelligence, learning ability, and language (expressive, receptive and written). The children were also evaluated for the presence of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Herein, the fourth edition of the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children (WISC IV) test to assess the siblings’ intelligence was used. These evaluations were performed at 11 years of age for Patient 1 and 6 years for Patient 2. A summary of these results is presented in . In general, the children exhibited behavior consistent with their age, sex, and education. Moreover, the evaluations showed that both boys had adequate age-related logical reasoning, conceptual verbal formation (abstract thinking), memory and verbal fluency, semantic knowledge, intellectual curiosity, and ability to deal with abstract symbols. Quantitative analyses of the WISC-IV results and comparisons of each patient with himself using the factorial indexes, which are considered more accurate measures of intelligence, showed that both patients exhibited lower Processing Speed Index (related to the speed of mental processing and motor graph), and motor visual organization scores. Additionally, Patient 2 had a significantly lower Operational Memory Index (OMI), according to the WISC-IV. The OMI provides a measure of the child’s attention. Due to its sensitivity, it has been utilized for detecting ADHD; however, to confirm the ADHD diagnosis, new evaluations are required between 7 and 12 years of age. Although Patient 2 is currently 11 years old, the parents refused consent for revaluation.