A 35-year-old man presented at a local hospital with epigastric pain. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed that an IVC filter strut had penetrated the third portion of the duodenum (arrow, Fig. ), and this was confirmed by computed tomography (CT) (arrow, Fig. ). In order to retrieve the IVC filter, the patient was referred to our department. He had a history of testicular cancer with para-aorta lymph node metastasis. Left renal vein thrombosis developed because of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before RPLND, and anticoagulants were administered before RPLND. Three years previously, he had undergone left orchiectomy, retro-mediastinal lymph node dissection, and RPLND at the previous hospital. The left common iliac vein was intraoperatively damaged during RPLND. Because the previous surgeon was worried about the high incidence of postoperative DVT and PTE, anticoagulant therapy was continued after RPLND. However, because DVT developed in the left common iliac vein after the initial surgery, a retrievable IVC filter (ALN, France) was placed in the IVC caudal to the renal vein to prevent PTE, and the patient had been receiving anticoagulant therapy. Because follow-up CT after IVC filter placement showed that DVT persisted at the left common iliac vein despite anticoagulant therapy, the IVC filter could not be retrieved at the previous hospital.
Enhanced CT also revealed that DVT remained in the left common iliac vein. Because ultrasound examination showed organized DVT, an IVC filter was considered unnecessary. An endovascular approach was considered unfeasible for retrieval because two of the filter struts had penetrated the duodenal wall. An extensive discussion with an internal medicine specialist was performed. Because DVT remained with no remarkable changes in CT images for 3 years and the incidence of PTE caused by DVT in the left common iliac vein would be low, we chose surgical treatment for this patient in order to prevent bleeding at the duodenum.
The IVC filter was retrieved through cavotomy, and the duodenal penetration site was repaired using intraoperative EGD clipping. The operation lasted 5 h and 54 min, and the intraoperative bleeding volume was 1172 mL. Because it was not possible to mobilize the duodenum due to adhesions resulting from the previous surgery, the IVC at the sites caudal to the renal vein could not be explored. However, a mesenteric incision caudal to the third portion of the duodenum enabled encircling and taping of the IVC . After clamping the IVC cranial and caudal to the duodenum, a 5-cm vertical incision was made on the IVC cranial to the duodenum and the IVC filter was retrieved . Although the head of the IVC filter had penetrated into the IVC intima, we were able to bluntly peel the filter head from the intima. The IVC incision was closed using a continuous 5-0 Prolene suture (arrow, Fig. b). The IVC clamping time was 22 min. Intraoperative EGD revealed no bleeding at the duodenal penetration site . To prevent duodenal bleeding or perforation, the penetration site was repaired by EGD clipping. Retrieved IVC filter was presented as . The patient did not develop any postoperative complications and was discharged on postoperative day 16.