A previously healthy 19-year-old male was admitted to hospital for acute chest pain and fever. He underwent chest X-ray (which detected enlargement of cardiac shadow), electrocardiogram (aVF and III ST elevation) and transthoracic echocardiography (2.2 cm pericardial effusion). Since the clinical presentation was consistent with acute pericarditis, he was treated with ibuprofen (600 mg) and colchicine (1 mg) and was discharged in good condition after one week; colchicine was maintained as therapy (0.5 mg). At 1 month follow-up, pericardial effusion persisted at echocardiography (0.7 cm) and so did asthenia. After seven months, another episode of important asthenia associated with pericardial effusion occurred, so a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) was requested. The CMR detected the presence of a large mass (54 × 42 mm) in contiguity with the epicardial profile of the basal and middle anterior wall of the left ventricle. The mass was hypointense with a peripheral hyperintense rim in T2-weighted sequences and hyperintense in T1-weighted sequences. It also showed rich contrast enhancement after Gadolinium injection except for a central core . At the diffusion-weighted whole-body imaging with background body signal suppression (DWIBS) sequences, the mass did not show a signal increase. Inversion recovery turbo field echo sequences to evaluate late gadolinium enhancement were not performed. These findings strongly suggested the presence of a primary cardiac neoplasm. A cardiac computed tomography (CCT) was performed, confirming hypervascularization of the mass, with a central hypodense scar, located superiorly to the antero-septal wall of the left ventricle. It also confirmed the intra-lesional course of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery . Cardiac structures did not show signs of infiltration. The patient was referred to cardiac surgery consultation where three different metanephrines were tested: 3-methoxytyramine resulted increased both in blood and in urine samples [6058 μg/L—n.v. < 550 μg/L]. Moreover, a marker of neuroendocrine tumours (chromogranin A) was tested resulting a high increase [627 ng/mL—n.v. < 100 ng/mL]. These findings suggested the diagnosis of cardiac PGL.
The patient was later admitted to hospital for recurrence of acute pericarditis with high fever, cough, and thoracic pain, with normal I-troponin levels (3 ng/L) and increased C-reactive protein (196 mg/L).
The patient underwent a positron emission tomography (PET) with 68Ga to assess the expression of somatostatin receptors. The mass showed intense uptake (SUV max 33.7), supporting the diagnostic hypothesis of PGL . A 123-iodine metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy was performed to assess the possibility of radio-metabolic treatment, resulting negative. Cardiac computed tomography was repeated, showing a dimensional increase of the mass (56 × 49 mm compared to previous CCT 49 × 47 mm).
At present time, resection of the mass is not achievable, given its proximity to LAD. The patient was referred to a different centre to try an experimental treatment to reduce the mass and to allow subsequent surgery. Further information is not currently available.