A 67-year-old Asian man was admitted to our hospital with a complaint of progressive myelopathy. Over the preceding several months, gait disturbance and numbness in his upper extremities had progressed rapidly. He had a medical history of dialysis-dependent chronic renal failure over 36 years. He also had a medical history of hypertension for 17 years and parathyroidectomy for parathyroiditis 6 years ago. He had no history of diabetes. He also had no tobacco smoking or alcohol history. He has no history of cancer or similar condition in his family. His family consisted of his wife and daughter. With regard to his social and professional history, he had originally worked at a desk but had already retired. He was taking a selective angiotensin 1 (AT1) receptor blocker as an antihypertensive drug, as well as a proton pump inhibitor and sodium alginate as gastrointestinal drugs. He was also taking zolpidem tartrate tablets as a sleep aid, sennoside as constipation medicine, and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) as a painkiller. Vital signs on admission were as follows. His blood pressure was 145/70 mmHg. His pulse was 65 beats/minute. His body temperature was normal at 36.8°C. Oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. There were no abnormal findings in the head, and consciousness level on the Glasgow Coma Scale was E4V5M6. The heart was in regular rhythm with no murmurs. Lung auscultation was clear with no distress. The abdomen was soft with no tenderness. No abnormalities were found on the body surface of the extremities and trunk, except for a dialysis shunt placed in the right elbow. The patient had difficulty handling chopsticks and fastening shirt buttons. Ten-second grip and release test showed a decrease in hand dexterity, with 15 and 16 repetitions on the right and left, respectively (normal values are more than 25 repetitions). Manual muscle testing showed grade 3/5 muscle weakness in finger extension, finger flexion, and finger abduction on the right. Other muscle strength was normal at grade 5/5. The patient had a dialysis shunt in the right upper extremity. He had numbness and sensory loss in the C6 area of his right upper limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were normal in the upper extremities, and the patella tendon reflex showed hyperactivity. He could not walk without a cane and needed a handrail to go up and down stairs. Neurological testing demonstrated motor weakness of right upper limbs, showing grade 3/5 muscle strength. He had numbness and sensory loss in his right upper limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were normal in the upper extremities and showed hyperactivity in the lower extremities. The lower extremities showed spasticity. The Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) score excluding bladder function was 9.5 points (full score is 14.0 points). Blood tests showed normal values of Ca 8.8 mg/dL and P 3.9 mg/dL. Level of β2-microglobulin was slightly higher at 25.6 mg/L. Intact parathyroid hormone (intact-PTH) was 62 pg/mL, which is normal. Serology and microbiology tests were normal. Though radiological examination did not show severe destructive changes in the cervical spine, computed tomography (CT) detected extradural amyloid deposits and a hypertrophied ligament, which are characteristic findings for dialysis-related spondyloarthropathy . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multilevel spinal cord compression at the C3–C6 and T2-weighted hyperintensity of the spinal cord at the C3–C4 level . Bone mineral density by dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) was 0.799 g/cm2 for the femoral neck and 1.213 g/cm2 for the lumbar spine. These were 84% of the young adult mean (YAM) for the femoral neck and 102% of the YAM for the lumbar spine. Based on the history and clinical findings, we diagnosed cervical spondylotic myelopathy due to dialysis-related spondyloarthropathy. The patient consented to undergo cervical laminoplasty.
After inducing general anesthesia, a Mayfield skull clamp was applied with the patient supine. Torque was applied to the screws with gentle care, but there was no resistance, and it was not easy to reach the standard 60 lb (267 N) to 80 lb (356 N) torque. Initially, we attributed the lack of torque to the failure of the Mayfield skull clamp itself. Another attempt was made with an alternative fixator. To change the insertion point, the left and right sides of the instrument were reversed. Nevertheless, we could not stabilize the skull and obtain appropriate torque. A skull fracture was suspected, so we canceled the surgery. After the patient awakened from anesthesia, we confirmed that no cranial nerve symptoms appeared. An emergency postoperative head CT showed depressed skull fractures underlying the single-pin sites with an associated epidural hematoma on the left side . We immediately consulted the neurosurgery department. Conservative treatment with rest, blood pressure control, and suspension of antiplatelet medication during dialysis was proposed. If neurological symptoms appeared, surgery was also suggested. We decided to treat the fractures and epidural hematoma conservatively. Spontaneous resolution of the hematoma was confirmed with no appearance of neurological symptoms. The patient was temporarily discharged 10 days after the initial surgery. Cervical laminoplasty was performed successfully using a mask-type head holder on the subsequent day . After the decompression surgery of the cervical spine, the symptoms of cervical myelopathy showed a consistent improvement. He is now able to use chopsticks, which he could not do before the surgery, and his lower limb spasticity is reduced, making walking easier. His JOA score improved to 10.0 points for 1.5 years at the time of the last follow-up.