A 30-year-old woman was transported to our hospital by ambulance due to epigastric pain. A laboratory analysis revealed the following: white blood cells, 4000/mm3; total bilirubin, 3.0 mg/dL; alkaline phosphatase, 640 IU/L; GOT, 395 IU/L; GPT, 746 IU/L; and amylase, 37 IU/L. Abdominal CT demonstrated multiple gallbladder (GB) stones without inflammation of the GB; the diameter of the common bile duct (CBD) was 10 mm. ERCP was performed under the suspicion of CBD stones. Bile duct cannulation was easily performed. Cholangiography revealed no apparent CBD stones. Although EBD is not routinely carried out in this situation, we carefully performed EBD due to the suspicion of CBD stones, and carefully taking the clinical course into consideration. Before the procedure, a dilatation balloon (Hurricane RX Rapid Exchange, Boston Scientific, MA, USA) was inflated as a precaution in order to check the condition of the balloon. The dilatation balloon was then passed over the guidewire and located at the site of the biliary sphincter. The balloon was inflated to 2 atmospheres of pressure. After the procedure, the balloon suddenly burst. We were unable to remove the EBD catheter because the balloon was caught at the biliary sphincter . A computed tomography (CT) scan showing the burst balloon located at the site of the biliary sphincter . Finally, we had to perform surgical intervention to remove the EBD. We made an incision at the pylorus, and then we manually pulled the EBD catheter through this incision, as shown in Fig. a, b. The broken catheter was successfully removed without injuring the biliary sphincter. Cholecystectomy, CBD exploration, and then removal of the CBD stone were performed. A T-tube was inserted for drainage. Intra-operative cholangiography revealed no residual stones and no biliary sphincter abnormality . The burst balloon of the EBD catheter is shown in Fig. . The patient was discharged without any complications after removal of the T-tube on post-operative day 14.