A 39-year-old male was admitted with a 2 month history of intermittent fever up to 39°C, later on becoming daily, 1 week moderate exertion dyspnoea, and 24 h orthopnoea. He had no relevant personal history other than occasional smoking and alcohol consumption and had no regular medical treatment. He denied lower limb swelling, palpitations, dizziness, or syncope. Likewise, he denied weight loss or symptoms suggestive of constitutional syndrome.
On physical examination, the patient presented an acceptable general condition, with mild tachypnoea at rest. Vital signs at admission showed a temperature of 36.9°C, a blood pressure of 129/40 mmHg, and a heart rate of 105 b.p.m., and blood oxygen saturation was 96% with no need of oxygen therapy. Cardiopulmonary auscultation revealed previously unknown diastolic murmurs in both aortic and pulmonary areas, with slight crackles in both lung bases. Upon inspection, no skin alterations were observed, and the oropharyngeal cavity was normal. The abdomen was soft and depressible, not painful on palpation, without masses or megalia. There was no oedema in the lower limbs.
Blood tests revealed elevated C-reactive protein (87 mg/L; normal range < 5 mg/L), leucocytosis (16 610 × 109/L, normal range 4.00–11.5 × 109/L), neutrophilia (12 810 × 109/L, normal range 1.80–8.00 × 109/L), and anaemia (haemoglobin 10.8 g/dL, normal range 13.0–17.5 g/dL). The electrocardiogram had no significant findings. Chest X-ray showed mild bilateral pleural effusion and right basal atelectasis.
He was admitted to the Internal Medicine department with an initial diagnosis of unknown origin fever and first episode of heart failure, with suspicion of infective endocarditis. Blood cultures were extracted, and empirical antibiotic therapy with piperacillin–tazobactam was started.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a moderately dilated left ventricle (biplane end-diastolic volume 252 mL), with preserved ejection fraction (62% estimated by Simpson’s biplane method). Right atrium and right ventricle had a normal size, with normal function of the right ventricle (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 24 mm and tricuspid annulus S′ wave 14 cm/s in tissue doppler imaging). A mild tricuspid regurgitation was found, with a peak velocity of 297 cm/s, with and estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure (sPAP) of 40 mmHg. The most notable finding was a severe aortic regurgitation with a wide central jet that exceeded the anterior mitral valve plane, with a pressure half-time of 117 ms. Likewise, images suggestive of vegetation in the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve, and aortic root pseudoaneurysm with left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula, were observed. Transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed the presence of a 5 mm vegetation, attached to the ventricular face of the non-coronary aortic cusp. Likewise, an 18 × 7 mm periannular pseudoaneurysm and a subaortic left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula, immediately superior to the tricuspid valve (Gerbode defect), were detected (, see , –).
Gram-negative bacilli grew in two sets of blood cultures, subsequently identified as C. canimorsus. The patient recognized having a suffered bite on the lower right limb by a friend’s dog 4 months earlier. In addition, he owned a correctly vaccinated pet dog. Antibiotic therapy was then switched to ceftriaxone 2 g/12 h for 8 weeks, subsequently adding metronidazole 500 mg/8 h for 4 weeks, due to persistent fever, after sensitivity to this drug was demonstrated through the antibiogram.
After discussion by the Heart Team, urgent surgical treatment was decided. The vegetation was attached to the ventricular side of the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve. A 10 mm defect was present next to the non-coronary cusp, connecting aorta and left ventricle to right atrium. The aortic root had a diameter of 18 mm. First, aortic root enlargement was performed following Nicks procedure, which consists of an aortotomy that involves the non-coronary sinus through the aortic annulus into the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. Then, a bovine pericardial patch was used to reconstruct the aortic defect. The fistula was repaired using the same bovine pericardial patch. Afterwards, the native aortic valve was replaced with a Perimount Magna Ease (Edwards) n°21 biological prosthesis. After aortic declamping, significant bleeding was detected through the portion of the pericardial patch that was used to repair the fistula, leading to re-establishment of extracorporeal circulation for revision and reinforcement of the sutures. After the second declamping, no leaks were detected through the patch, and the surgery was finished with no further complications. The patient was then admitted to intensive care unit for post-operative care.
The patient’s early post-operative period was unremarkable. Post-operative echocardiogram showed normal function of the biological prosthesis. However, persistence of the left ventricle-to-right atrium fistula was detected (see , and ), due to a dehiscence of the pericardial patch. The fistula showed haemodynamic signs of restriction to blood flow, with a peak velocity of 4.7 m/s, a peak gradient of 89 mmHg, and a Qp/Qs ratio of 1.2.
On post-operative day +12, the patient suffered worsening of his general condition, with low-grade fever and profuse sweating. On inspection, purulent secretion was seen in the insertion region of the temporary pacemaker leads implanted during surgery. A thoracic computed tomography was performed, showing severe anterior pericardial effusion with right ventricle compromise, and findings compatible with acute mediastinitis. A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram showed severe anterior pericardial effusion, with diastolic collapse of the right heart cavities and pathological respiratory variations of transvalvular flows, compatible with haemodynamic repercussion. Therefore, the patient underwent emergency surgery to drain the pericardial effusion and anterior mediastinal abscess. Enterococcus faecalis grew in the culture of the purulent material, so ampicillin 500 mg/6 h was added to antibiotic therapy.
Post-operative evolution was satisfactory, with progressive clinical improvement. Control computed tomography angiography performed 2 weeks later showed resolution of mediastinitis, with no residual pericardial effusion. It was decided not to reoperate to close the fistula during this admission, and he was discharged to finish antibiotic therapy with oral drugs (metronidazole 500 mg/8 h for 4 more days after discharge and linezolid 600 mg/12 h for 2 weeks after discharge). In subsequent check-ups, the patient has showed improvement of his clinical condition, with no fever, no symptoms or signs of heart failure, and normal physical activity.