A 42-year-old man presented to our department after 3 years after receiving a diagnosis of the left-sided rotational torticollis. He began to exhibit symptoms 2 months after a motorcycle accident in which he temporarily lost consciousness and experienced minor neck pain. Initially, he exhibited a paroxysmal involuntarily head rotation toward the left without elevation of the shoulder. No other symptoms were evident such as blepharospasm, oromandibular dyskinesia, or tremor. The symptom was exacerbated by anxiety or mental stress. Later, the head rotation became more tonic, resulting in a constant fixed rotational position except when sleeping. He had to touch his chin to keep his head in the midline. No history of torticollis or dystonia was reported among his family members. Treatments with a variety of oral medications as well as repeated botulinum toxin injections were no longer effective. His symptoms deteriorated and became more uncomfortable, limiting his daily activities and ability to work. He was then referred to our department for surgical consultation.
The neurological examination results were normal at the time of admission, except for palpable abnormal sustained contractions of the right sternocleidomastoid (SCM) and left posterior neck muscles (splenius capitis and semi-spinalis capitis). A sensory tick (geste antagonistique) was noticed when he touched his chin. The Toronto Western ST Rating Scale (TWSTRS) gave a score of 24 on the torticollis severity scale, 23 on the disability scale, and 11 on the pain scale (total score = 58). An electromyography (EMG) was not used to record aberrant muscle activation. His magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain revealed no abnormalities, but his MRI spine indicated cervical spondylosis with mild narrowing of the left neural foramen at C3 to C4 and C6 to C7 levels.
Following a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits of surgical treatment, the patient opted to undergo the operation in February 2018. We used the modified Bertrand’s procedure to denervate the left posterior neck muscles, in which we strictly followed the technique described by Taira et al. In brief, the anterior rootlets of the left C1 and C2 spinal nerves were sectioned intradurally through a C1 hemilaminectomy, whereas the posterior branches of the left C3 to C6 spinal nerves were sectioned extradurally. A separate incision was made along the posterior border of the right SCM muscle to section all branches of the spinal accessory nerve (SAN) supplying the muscle. During the procedure, we used monopolar electrical stimulation to identify each nerve branch and then confirmed total denervation using a strong voltage stimulation (5 Hz, 1 ms pulse width, 2 volts).
Unfortunately, after the operation, the patient had no meaningful relief, with a TWSTRS score of 22, 23, and 9 on the torticollis severity scale, disability scale, and pain scale, respectively (total score = 54). After 6 months of intensive exercise and physiotherapy, the symptoms appeared to be unchanged. A second stage operation with modified McKenzie-Dandy operation was considered and performed in September 2018.
The patient was placed in the prone position. We used spinal somatosensory evoked potential and motor evoked potential for neuromonitoring. An EMG was used to monitor the SCM and trapezius muscle activities. A left-sided Bertrand’s hockey stick incision was made. The trapezius, splenius capitis, and semi-spinalis muscles were dissected and sectioned from their insertion just below the nuchal line of the occipital bone. Subperiosteal dissection was then performed bilaterally. At the C1 and C2 spinous processes, the left inferior oblique capitis and rectus capitis major and minor were detached and severed from their origin. A laminectomy of C1 to C3 was carried out and the posterior rim of the foramen magnum was removed. The dura was then opened to expose the lower brainstem and upper cervical spinal cord. Using the microsurgical technique, an arachnoid dissection was performed. After cutting the denticulate ligaments, we used bipolar electrode stimulation (0.1–0.3 volts) to detect the anterior cervical nerve rootlets. The first cervical motor root was identified as it runs transversely just below the proximal intradural part of the vertebral artery. Some of the left anterior C1 and C2 rootlets were already cut by the previous operation. The left anterior C1 to C4 rhizotomies were carried out using bipolar and microscissors. The right anterior C1 to C3 rootlets, on the other hand, were sectioned less aggressively to minimize the risk of swallowing difficulty and bilateral phrenic nerve impairment. Any tiny blood vessels were carefully preserved. The spinal root of the right SAN was tracked upward until where it crosses the vertebral artery. Neither abnormal vascular loop nor the connection between the SAN and the C1 root (McKenzie branch) was found. Three to four spinal rootlets of the SAN that produced a strong contraction of the SCM muscle on electrical stimulation were sectioned, while the upper medullary rootlets were preserved to minimize the risk to the pharynx or vocal cord impairment . The dura was closed. Then down to C6, dissection was performed between the plane of the semi-spinalis capitis and semi-spinalis cervicis. The insertion of the semi-spinalis capitis to the vertebral body was severed, and extensive coagulation was performed in the area lateral to the facet joints. A strong voltage electrical stimulation (2–5 volts) was used to confirm total denervation. A suction drain was then placed, and the incision was closed.
After the operation, the patient’s head and neck returned to normal posture. He stated that he had a marked improvement. He complained of a mild degree of swallow difficulty. He did not have choking or dysphagia. The symptoms were completely resolved 1 month after surgery. The TWSTRS at 3 months gave a score of 3 on the torticollis severity scale, 4 on the disability scale, and 2 on the pain Scale (total score = 9). He could return to his previous job and social activities. He experienced no numbness or dysesthesia in the occipital area. At 3 years follow-up, he was free of symptoms, and the effect of treatment was still sustained . A follow-up flexion-extension radiograph of the cervical spine revealed a mild degree of segmental kyphosis at the C3 to C4 level, but no signs of spinal instability .