A 23-year-old man consulted our department for skin ulcers on his extremities that persisted for more than 2 months, with mild itching. The patient reportedly remained healthy until he developed tinea pedis infection in the left foot more than 2 months ago. Improvement was noted after topical application of terbinafine hydrochloride ointment and furacillin solution at a dermatological hospital. However, following the itching phase, symptoms of urticaria developed rapidly. Symptomatic relief was achieved following a 3-day treatment with oral glucocorticoids and antihistamines. After a few days, round superficial ulcers began to appear linearly in the lower limbs, and gradually spread to the upper limbs; however, the itching was not present this time. The patient also denied that the skin lesion was formed due to scratching.
The differential diagnoses in this case were sporotrichosis, syphilis, vasculitis, perforating dermatosis, Talaromyces marneffei infection, dermatitis artefacta, and drug rash. Physical examination revealed shallow cup-shaped ulcers in the extremities and a linear distribution of the skin lesions . Koebner phenomenon and initial fungal microscopic examination findings of the skin of the feet and lower limbs were negative. The results of a series of serological tests, including acquired immunodeficiency syndrome screening, treponema pallidum particle agglutination assay, rapid plasma reagin test, liver and kidney function tests, blood glucose analysis, whole blood cell test, and erythrocyte sedimentation, C-reactive protein, anti-streptolysin “O”, antinuclear antibody, extractable nuclear antigen, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody tests, were negative. Mycobacterial culture and identification were negative, and no fungus was detected. A skin biopsy was subsequently scheduled, and the patient was suggested a diagnostic treatment with itraconazole. Considering the possibility of a fungal infection due to tinea pedis infection at the early stages of onset, we administered oral itraconazole 200 mg BID as a therapeutic challenge. Unexpectedly, the ulcers rapidly healed and formed scars in a week.
At this time, the results of haematoxylin and eosin staining indicated perforating dermatosis. On elastica van Gieson staining, the fibrous tissue was found ejected through the epidermis . In correlation with the clinical findings, a diagnosis of ARPC was considered. To determine the aetiology and an evidence-based basis for treatment, hexamine Gomori’s methenamine silver staining and periodic acid–Schiff staining were performed, but no evidence of a rare fungal infection was found. In the fourth week, itraconazole treatment was discontinued, but the patient’s condition worsened after interruption. On dermoscopy (DL4D2035), the ulceration reappeared . With the consent of the ethics committee and the patient, itraconazole 200 mg BID for 8 weeks was administered. Following this, while the ulcers did not recur, multiple scar formation was observed .