A 13-year old girl presented with a rapidly progressive paralysis and encephalopathy. She had a mild viral-like illness for the preceding week, with lethargy. Over the days preceding presentation she developed back pain and difficulty in walking. On the morning of admission, she developed a headache, vomiting, a fluctuating level of consciousness and became unable to move her limbs.
Neurological examination showed an encephalopathic girl, with four limb paralysis, absent deep tendon and abdominal reflexes, and mild bilateral facial weakness. A high thoracic (C4) sensory level, severe urinary retention and stool incontinence was evident. Systemic examination did not reveal pyrexia, rash, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly or sepsis.
Her remote clinical history was notable: at age 2 years, she had developed acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), common B-cell variant. Six months after completing chemotherapy using the UKALLXI protocol, the girl re-presented with an encephalopathy due to a CNS and bone marrow relapse of the leukaemia. The girl received cranial irradiation and further chemotherapy on the MRC UKALL R2 relapse protocol which achieved a further remission. Because of the high risk of further relapses, she proceeded to have an bone marrow transplant (BMT) with a matched unrelated male donor. Total body irradiation was used in conditioning for the BMT. Following the BMT, the girl was in prolonged remission for the following 7 years with no overt CNS or systemic sequelae.
Initial MR imaging showed diffuse involvement of the CNS . The spinal cord was diffusely swollen showing central cord T2 hyperintensity from C1 to the conus. There were multifocal grey and white matter lesions in the cerebral cortex, subcortical areas and cerebellum which showed diffuse gadolinium enhancement. The appearances were consistent with an infective or inflammatory encephalomyelitis, but the girl's remote history and presentation raised the concern of a recurrent CNS relapse of ALL.
CSF examination revealed 125 white cells with a lymphoblastic appearance and 5 red cells. CSF protein (0.61 g/l) and CSF:blood lactate ratio (3.2:1.2 mmol/l) were raised with a low CSF: glucose ratio (4.3:8.9 mmol/l). CSF cytospin showed increased proportion of lymphocytes which further increased suspicion of ALL relapse . Immunophenotyping of the CSF cells demonstrated the cells were CD10 negative, strongly CD2 and CD7 positive and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) negative. These findings suggested that the cells were mature T-cells. Cytogenetic studies and FISH using centromeric X and Y-chromosome markers on the CSF lymphocytes confirmed that the overwhelming majority of cells were of male donor type (6–14% of cells were of host origin but not clonal). These CSF findings, along with a normal peripheral blood count and normal bone marrow biopsy confirmed that the girl's illness was not due relapse of her previous ALL.
The girl was treated with intravenous high-dose methylprednisolone and aciclovir. Blood-brain barrier studies showed an abnormal CSF IgG index; oligoclonal bands were not detected. Further negative tests included: CSF culture; CSF PCR for HSV1 and 2, VZV, EBV, HHV6/7, adenovirus, echovirus, parechovirus, enterovirus and echovirus; serology for influenza, mycoplasma, Chlamydia, and toxoplasma; ASOT, ANA, ANCA, anticardiolipin antibodies, tissue autoantibodies. Immune function tests did not reveal an underlying inmmunosuppression. A presumptive diagnosis of ADEM with associated transverse myelitis was made.
The girl's encephalopathy resolved over succeeding days without overt cerebral sequelae, but spinal recovery was much slower. A repeat MRI at 2 weeks after onset showed resolving brain and spinal lesions. Her disability slowly improved over several months: Barthel activities of daily living index was 15/100 at 3 weeks, 40/100 at 7 weeks, and 85/100 at discharge from hospital 3 months after onset. At last review, 10 months after onset, her Barthel index was 100/100. She was mobile on her feet without aids, and had just ceased intermittent catheterisation for urine voiding. She was unable to walk on her heels, and had lingering fatiguability.