A 24-year-old young man presented initially with nasal bleeding as the first symptom. He was admitted to West China Hospital of Sichuan University due to “intermittent nasal bleeding for 2 years and vision loss for 6 months”.
The patient had a 2-year history of infrequent nasal bleeding and intermittent episodes of nasal bleeding. He had reported no nasal obstruction or dizziness, and nasopharyngoscopy in other hospitals had revealed no abnormalities. He had no nausea, anorexia, weakness, weight gain, gynecomastia, fatigue, or other symptoms, and he was taking no medication. However, 6 months before presentation at our hospital, following repeated epistaxis the patient developed blurred vision in both eyes, and his visual field decreased and gradually worsened. He reported intermittent mild headaches but no sinus pain, numbness, tingling, or constitutional symptoms. The patient did not report sexual dysfunction, including decreased libido or erectile dysfunction. His family history was unremarkable and he had no history of traumatic injury or brain surgery before admission.
On physical examination, his temperature was 36.5 °C, his pulse was 83 beats per minute, his blood pressure was 119/75 mmHg, and his respiratory rate was 19 breaths per minute. His height was 169.0 cm, his weight was 67.7 kg, and body-mass index (BMI, the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters) was 23.7 kg/m2. He did not have acromegalic or cushingoid features. The remainder of the examination was normal.
Nasopharyngeal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and nasopharyngeal biopsy were performed. Pituitary MRI showed an irregular, abnormal signal mass in the nasal cavity, sphenoid sinus, and sellar region, about 7.8 × 4.6 × 5.0 cm in size . The anterior pituitary gland exhibited high signal on T1-weighted images and/or low signal on T2-weighted images. The mass enhanced heterogeneously after gadolinium. It invades the sphenoid and cavernous sinuses, with encasement of the carotid arteries and optic chiasm compression. Electronic rhinopharyngoscopy showed chronic congestion of the nasal mucosa on both sides and new organisms in the right olfactory cavity. There was purulent attachment in the nasopharyngeal region, chronic congestion, and swelling of the nasopharyngeal mucosa. A biopsy of the nasal cavity suggested olfactory neuroblastoma of the right olfactory cleft. Immunohistochemistry analysis indicated Syn ( +), CK ( +), Ki67 30%, CgA (-), EMA (-), S100(-), HMB (-), and LCA (-).
The patient was diagnosed with olfactory neuroblastoma and was scheduled to undergo surgery, supplemented by radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The main reason for the impaired vision and visual field was considered to be that the suprasellar lesions were compressing the optic chiasm. To save vision and the visual field, otolaryngologists planned to work with neurosurgeons to remove the upper lesions of the saddle in order to decompress the optic nerve, followed by radiotherapy of the nasopharynx. However, after carefully reading the MRI results, we determined that the lesion was invasive and mainly located in the sphenoid sinus and the cavernous sinus and saddle. There was no obvious space in the ethmoid sinus or nasal cavity, which is not completely consistent with the characteristics of olfactory neuroblastoma. Routine preoperative examination of pituitary and target-glands related hormones showed the initial PRL level of this patient was greater than 200 ng/mL, and the measured value after dilution was as high as 4700 ng/mL, with normal thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (FT4), luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), testosterone (T) and cortisol levels . Combined with the patient’s medical history, physical symptoms, imaging and laboratory tests, the diagnosis of giant prolactinoma was considered. We then reviewed the pathological section and added pituitary tumor immunohistochemical staining .
He was administered oral bromocriptine at an initial dose of 2.5 mg, once a day because of difficulties in obtaining cabergoline in Chengdu. After 3 days, the dose was increased to 2.5 mg twice a day. No nausea, vomiting, or other discomfort followed. The oral bromocriptine was gradually increased after 1 week to 2.5 mg, 3 times per day. He has tolerated the bromocriptine well without any adverse events. The PRL levels were reviewed each month, and the MRI (plain scan + enhancement) was repeated at 6 months and 12 months after treatment. Prolactin levels had reached normal or near-normal level within approximately 6 months. After 12 months of follow-up, the patient’s visual acuity and visual field improved significantly, and PRL had gradually normalized. The nasopharynx was examined, and we found that the nasopharynx mucosa was chronically congested; the nasopharynx, the double pharyngeal crypt, the eustachian tube bulge, and the surface of the pharynx were smooth. Magnetic resonance imaging of the sellar region showed a significant reduction in the size of the giant macroprolactinoma.