A 10 years and 6 months old girl, was admitted to hospital due to “epileptic seizures for five months”, which manifested as an involuntary nodding movement accompanied by loss of consciousness, with no fever, limb stiffness, cyanosis, salivation and incontinence. During the early period of illness, these symptoms lasted for about 10 s - with a frequency of about 2 episodes per day. Then it gradually increased to 30 s to 1 min before spontaneous cessation, with a frequency of about 4–5 times a day. The patient was treated with “carbamazepine and vitamin B6” but there was no obvious improvement in symptoms or progression of illness. Physical examination done at time of admission: T 36.8 °C, P 89 beats /min, R 19 beats / min, BP 109/68 mmHg. Weight 27 kg, height 125 cm. The patient is positive for special type of facieswitha flat nose, wide-set eyes, micrognathia, deciduous and misaligned teeth, and 9 maxillary and mandibular teeth. Head circumference is 52 cm.The anterior fontanelle is open, approximately 4 × 4 cm size, and soft on palpation. The sagittal and coronal sutures are unclosed. The width of the sagittal suture is about 6 cm. The width of the coronal suture is about 0.5 cm. They are all soft and flat, without tenderness. No résistance was felt in the neck. Defects can be observed in the right clavicle, bilateral shoulders can reach the midline. The thoracic cavity hollows and changes like a funnel. A brown patch which is approximately 2.5 × 1.0 cm in size is visible on the left wrist and a light brown patch of approximately 3.5 × 4.0 cm is visible on the right wrist. The double knee valgus is deformed in an “X” shape with no limitation of activity. There were no abnormalities in the spine and joints, and the muscle strength and muscle tones of the limbs were normal. The pathological reflex were negative . The child raised his head at 3 months old, crawled and rolled over at 7 months old, walked alone and called daddy and Mommy at 1 year old. At present, she is in the third grade of elementary school, she can answer simple questions but cannot add or subtract within 10. The funnel chest was found a week after birth, and the anterior fontanelle was not closed at 2 years old, none of them were treated. The child has two brothers, both healthy, with no obvious abnormalities in development . laboratory examination: blood routine: WBC 4.6 × 109/L, N 34.9%, HB 134 g/L, PLT 281 × 1012/L; Blood ammonia: 40 umol/L; Vitamin D determination: 12.8 ng/ml; Kidney and kidney function, electrolytes, blood gas analysis, glucose, pyruvate, β - hydroxybutyrate, calcium/phosphate/alkaline phosphatase, urination and defecation were both normal. Electrocardiogram is normal overall. X-ray examination showed: Asymmetry in Bilateral clavicles, a third of the right lateral clavicle is absent. The cranium is higher, the cranial suture are widened, and the anterior fontanelle was not closed. The bone structure of the cranial plate is not completely developed. There are many suture bones in the skull. . Video EEG: Abnormal: multi-focal sharp wave, sharp and slow wave were frequent issued . Skull clavicle dysplasia syndrome RUNX2 gene sequencing suggested RUNX2 c.947delA p. (His316fs) heterozygous, pathogenic frameshift mutations .