A 78-year-old man presented to our clinic with melena and weakness for 15 d.
The patient’s symptoms started 15 d before presentation but had worsened over the previous week. He presented to the gastrointestinal department with melena, weakness, and vomiting. He then presented with anemia (hemoglobin level: 38 g/L) and a positive fecal occult blood test.
The patient had undergone surgery and chemotherapy for a history of lymphatic sarcoma on the left side of the neck 20 years prior. He also had a more than 10-year history of gallstones and a 2-year history of diabetes. He had no other history of disease or allergic reactions to medication.
The patient’s personal and family history was typical.
Following physical examination, he presented an anemic appearance and pretibial edema. No other obvious abnormalities were observed during physical examination.
The laboratory values following admission indicated microcytic hypochromic anemia, with a hemoglobin value of 63 g/L, lymphocyte count of 0.33 × 109/L, lymphocyte percentage of 9.9%, albumin value of 20.68 g/L, and globulin value of 13.96 g/L. The laboratory examination for fecal occult blood was positive. The urinary protein was negative. No significant abnormalities were recorded in other tests.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) displayed multiple small cystic lesions without enhancement distributed in the spleen, kidney, liver, ascites, and pleural effusion . CT also revealed thickening of the ascending colon wall .
Colonoscopy revealed a strawberry mucosa, variable spontaneous bleeding, and surface erosion located in the terminal ileum and ileocecal valve . Multiple cystic masses with a translucent and smooth surface, diffuse white spots located in the colon, and a laterally spreading tumor (LST) located in the ascending colon were also observed.
The biopsy of the LST indicated villous tubular adenoma with low-grade intraepithelial neoplasia as well as highly differentiated adenocarcinoma after surgery. Histological findings also showed a large amount of vascular hyperplasia and dilatation located in the muscularis mucosae and submucosa , which were immunohistochemically positive for D2-40, a specific lymphatic endothelial marker .