A 23-year-old man was referred to our department when transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) suggested a right atrial (RA) tumor. Emergency computed tomography (CT) revealed complete RA obstruction and tumor prolapse into the right ventricle (RV) , causing inflow congestion, pleural and minimal pericardial effusion. The patient, in cardiogenic shock, was immediately transferred to surgery. On moderately hypothermic non-beating heart bypass with snared caval veins, the firm tumor (8 × 5 × 5 cm, pedicle diameter 2.5 cm), adherent to the lateral RA wall, was macroscopically completely resected. The defect was closed with pericardial patch plasty. The NOS.G-3 spindle-cell sarcoma contained mitotic cells. Immunohistochemistry reacted positively with cytokeratin 7 and 19, EMA antibody. The proliferative ratio, evaluated with MIB1 (Ki-67), reached up to 60% of the cells. Fast-track extubation and perioperative course were uneventful. The patient was discharged with sinus rhythm and 65% ejection fraction (EF). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and positron emission tomography (PET) showed no metastases. Two cycles of radiotherapy (single dose of 1.8 Gy in the tumor region, with a tumor dose up to 50.4 Gy) were ordered when the final histology showed a few tumor cells near the resection margin.
At 21 months postoperatively, CT and cardiac MR angiography showed a tumor emerging from the lateral wall of the superior caval vein (SCV) and the RA (4.4 × 5.3 × 5.8 cm) . After careful resternotomy using an oscillating saw, meticulous preparation of massive adhesions after irradiation was performed. Moderately hypothermic non-beating heart bypass via the brachiocephalic vein and the right femoral vein was started. Both caval veins were snared. The ascending aorta was clamped, and 1000 ml of blood cardioplegia was applied. After incision of the right atrium, waste suction was used. The tumor, adherent to the wall of the superior caval vein, was resected in toto with the vessel wall to achieve clear margins. The complete free wall of the RA with the adherent tumor, the RA appendage, and the pericardial patch of the first operation were excised . After the cardiac tumor was completely resected, the wall defect was replaced with a tailored Dacron tunnel prosthesis from the superior caval vein sleeve to the inferior caval vein and the free wall of the RA . Histology confirmed R0 resection of a G-3 spindle-cell sarcoma. Tumor cells had 25 mitoses per 10 high power fields; distinct tissue necrosis was present. Immunohistochemistry was identical to the first tumor and S100 positive. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed SYT/SSX1(t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2)SYT/SSX) consistent with the specific diagnosis of a monophasic fibrous synovial sarcoma. TTE upon discharge showed normal biventricular function with EF 65%. The heart was tumor-free upon PET-CT 24 months thereafter. A sudden progression with innumerable pulmonary nodules caused only minimal exertional dyspnea, and the patient received monthly cycles of palliative monochemotherapy with ifosfamide, which he tolerated well. Thirty months after the first operation, he developed left-sided hemiparesis and succumbed to hemorrhage from a brain metastasis.