A 55-year-old female was urgently admitted to our hospital for acute backache and abdominal pain for 48 h. Following the completion of an emergent computed tomography angiography (CTA), an extent III TAAA with aortic intramural hematoma was found, with a maximum diameter of 36 mm in the proximal descending aorta, a maximum diameter of 74 mm at the distal descending aorta level, 40 mm at the level of visceral artery and 30 mm from inferior mesenteric artery level to 3 cm distal to the bifurcation of abdominal aorta .
The patient had a history of hypertension, diabetes, chronic renal insufficiency and coronary disease with cardiac insufficiency. In addition, the patient had taken clopidogrel and aspirin for acute chest pain before admission. Given her multiple comorbidities, she was therefore considered at high surgical risk and unfit for open repair. After extensive discussion with the patient and her family, they wished to proceed with a repair that offered the lowest possible risk and minimally-invasive approach. Therefore, the thoracoscope-assisted fixation and SMFEG was finally chosen under informed consent for comprehensive treatment.
Surgery was performed with general anesthesia in the endovascular operating room. A 3-port technique was performed through a left video-assisted thoracoscopic approach. One 10-mm trocar was placed in the sixth intercostal space in mid-axillary line to accommodate thoracoscopic camera. And two 15-mm ports for operating were placed into the fourth intercostal space.
Then a metal mark was fixed on the adventitia of the proximal descending aorta . Both femoral arteries were retrogradely punctured. Heparin was given intravenously, as an Ankura II tampering stent-graft 38*160 (Lifetech Scientific, China) was introduced over an Lunderquist super-stiff guidewire (Cook Inc, Bloomington, Ind). The 160-mm long main body of the Ankura II stent-graft is tapered; the diameter is 38 mm at the top and 34 mm at the bottom. Using the optimal C-arm position, the delivery system was advanced to orient the top markers of the stent-graft just over the level of the metal mark on the adventitia, then the first stent-graft was fully deployed . After insertion of the thoracoscope again, a double needle suture (4–0 Prolene) with 2 felt pledgets was placed on horizontal mattress type. Under radiation, the double needle was penetrated both the aortic wall and stent-graft and was knotted tightly .
The second Ankura II 38*200 tapering endograft, 200 mm long main body with 38 mm diameter at the top and 30 mm at the bottom, was partially deployed on a back table and four modified fenestrations was positioned according to the measurements of the CT scan analysis. To calculate the position of fenestrations, the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) ostium was considered the primary reference point . The four fenestrations to incorporate the celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), left renal artery (LRA) and right renal artery (RRA) graft were normally constructed in proper size. Celiac and SMA fenestrations are 9 mm in diameter located in the 01:00 and 12:00 clock positions, and RRA and LRA are 6 mm located at 9:00 and 03:00 positions, respectively. Each fenestration was reinforced by a radiopaque wire and marker using 6–0 prolene stitches, to prevent tearing or fraying of the graft fabric and to allow intraoperative orientation under fluoroscopy .
Using 5F catheter coude (Cordis Corp, Bridgewater, NJ), we catheterized the SMA, LRA and RRA through the access from left brachial and left femoral artery . Precatheterization of the SMA, LRA and RRA were used to be reference for the orientation and deployment of the endograft. Then the fenestrated endograft was reconstrained and introduced through the right femoral access. When advancing at the level of visceral artery, the endograft was oriented extracorporeally by rotating the SMA, LRA and RRA fenestration radiopaque markers and deployed with perfect apposition between the fenestrations and the target visceral artery .
The selective catheters were sequentially withdrawn from branch arteries and used to regain access to the fenestrations and target vessel. Hydrophilic sheaths (8 Fr) were advanced into the target vessels over stiff 0.035-inch guidewires. Each vessel was sequentially stented using Viabahn self-expandable stent (VSXS, W. L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ, USA). A 9*59 mm VSXS was deployed in the celiac trunk artery and then post-dilated with a 10*30 mm balloon in its distal portion and the fenestrated ostium. Then a 10*59 mm VSXS for SMA and two 6*59 mm VSXSs for both renal arteries were deployed and post-dilated using the same method, respectively . An Ankura cuff stent 32*80 was deployed in the distal abdominal aortic artery .
The attachment sites between the main body of the Ankura stent-graft, and the proximal and distal landing zones were dilated using Coda balloon (Cook Medical), followed by completion angiography, which confirmed widely four branch fenestrated stent graft and distal abdominal aortic artery with no endoleak .
The total operative time was 6 h, fluoroscopy time was 56 min, and 88 mL of iodinated contrast was administered. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged on the second postoperative week. CTA obtained at one week and at six months postoperatively revealed no endoleak and widely patent visceral branches .