A 75-year-old Thai man with a recent history of tuberculosis infection presented with an enlarged tonsil. Following an initial physical examination, the otolaryngologistsn sent the patient for computed tomography (CT) scan of his neck, which revealed that his tonsil was normal but that there was a mass located incidentally at his cervical spine at the level of C1/C2. There was no history of neck pain, gait abnormalities, or neurological problems. Physical examination revealed only increased tendon reflex of his upper and lower extremities. His neck range of motion was full, and his bowel bladder function was normal. Neither paralysis nor paresthesia was observed. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an extradural enhancing mass at the right C1/C2 level compressing the spinal cord . The provisional diagnosis was a benign tumor with suspicion of schwannoma. Despite the subtle clinical neurological deficit, the MRI finding of severe spinal cord compression was concerning, and treatment options were discussed. Due to the high risk of creating instability following resection of the tumor, the treatment chosen was that of additional fusion of the upper cervical spine. Preoperative plain radiographs of the cervical spine and the upper cervical sagittal alignment are shown in Fig. .
A standard posterior midline cervical spine approach was carried out. Since preoperative imaging showed that both C2 and C3 pedicles were feasible enough to insert the pedicular screws, we decided to use the technique to achieve maximal strength and stability of the construct system assisted by the CT navigation system. The pedicle screw insertion at the C2 level was uneventful. However, lateral breeching was encountered during the insertion on the right side at the C3 level. Concerned for the risk of bilateral vertebral artery injuries, we switched to the lateral mass screw technique on the other side of C3. Intraoperative neuromonitoring using motor-evoked potentials) and somatosensory-evoked potentials were used and remained unchanged from baseline throughout the surgery.
After surgery, and while still in the recovery room, the patient complained of discomfort in his throat, accompanied by difficulty swallowing and opening his mouth. Bedside swallowing evaluation revealed some weakness of the neck muscles and desaturation following swallowing of a small amount of water (3 ml). He could not voluntarily cough sharply. The gag reflex was positive on both sides but delayed. Therefore, the rehabilitation physicians suggested keeping him with a nasogastric tube until further evaluation.
Postoperative radiographic examination illustrated that the screw-rod system was intact and that the atlantoaxial alignment was neutral. CT angiography showed no VA injury with good distal flow. MRI of the brain did not demonstrate any evidence of stroke or suspected cause of dysphagia . Using the McGregor line as a reference of the occipital bone, the occiput-C2 and C1–C2 angles were − 1.8° and − 25.1°, respectively (the minus value indicates that the angle is in lordosis). The craniovertebral angle proposed by Takami et al. to evaluate the craniovertebral fixation angle, namely, the angle between the line parallel to the bony palate and the posterior longitudinal line of vertebrae of C2, was 81.1°. The space between the posterior border of the mandible and the anterior of the cervical spine was narrowed, as was the distance between the screw-rod fixation system and the occiput . Taken together, these findings led us to believe that the cause of the trismus and dysphagia was the position of the screws. Therefore, an operation to adjust the position of the C1 and C2 screws to be relatively more extended position was performed on the eighth day after the first surgery.
Comparison of intraoperative fluoroscopic images before and after adjustment of the implant positions revealed that following the adjustment, the alignment of the C1–C2 level was more extended . The space of interest behind the mandible associated with the cervical spine and just beneath the occipital bone associated with the screw-rod system was widened. Immediately after the revision surgery, the patient’s trismus and dysphagia symptoms improved drastically. He could swallow 3 and 10 ml of water in a test without coughing or havein g a wet voice. He passed the cup drink test of 30 ml water by straw without choking. As the segment was more lordosis, the occiput-C2 and C1–C2 angles were changed to − 13.7° and − 32°, respectively. At the same time, the craniovertebral angle of Takami was decreased to 76° .