A 9-year-old boy presented to the outpatient department with a 1-year history of vague pain, swelling, and restriction of movement of the left ankle. The pain was not localized to a particular region, and swelling gradually increased over the medial aspect of the left ankle over the last 3–4 months. Physical examination revealed non-tender single spherical, lobulated swelling measuring 5×4×3 cm over the anterior aspect of the left medial malleolus . The swelling was immobile, bony, hard in consistency, non-reducible, non-compressible, and not adhered to the skin. There were no secondary changes over the swelling. There was a restriction of dorsiflexion of the left ankle compared to the right side. The rest of the foot ankle examination was unremarkable. There was no other swelling elsewhere in the body, and the patient was otherwise healthy, with no significant history.
Radiograph of the left ankle showed mild soft-tissue swelling with variable size calcific foci adjacent to the medial malleolus and medial tibiotalar joint space, but no significant bony erosion. The ankle mortise space was well maintained .
A magnetic resonance imaging of the left ankle was obtained, which suggested diffuse benign synovial neoplastic process of tibiotalar joint with 1–2 cm size few focal marrows containing loose bodies adjacent to the medial malleolus. The synovium of the ankle joint was thick, and there was no cortical erosion, and tibiotalar joint space was normal. These imaging findings favor primary synovial chondromatosis .
In light of these data, the patient was taken for an en bloc excisional biopsy. During the biopsy, a lobulated pearly white mass arising from the ankle joint was observed . The lesion and synovium were excised and sent for a histopathology examination . The diagnosis of synovial chondromatosis was confirmed by histologic examination.
On gross examination, it was a grey-white cartilaginous nodule. On microscopy, subepithelium showed attenuated synovium with osteocartilaginous nodule and moderate cellularity and variable atypia. Binucleated and multinucleated form of chondrocyte was appreciated. Enchondral ossification, mature bony trabeculae with intervening fibro adipose tissue, was noted. All these features are consistent with synovial chondromatosis.
Following en bloc excision, the patient had symptomatic relief in the early post-operative and was utterly asymptomatic at the time of stitch removal. In addition, at annual follow-up patient has no sign of recurrence and pain free.