A 4 year-old, previously healthy boy was admitted to the surgical unit of the Colombo South Teaching Hospital, Sri Lanka with an abscess in the left big toe. No fever or local lymphadenopathy was present at initial presentation. The abscess was drained, treated with antibiotics and the child was discharged. Two weeks later the child was re-admitted with an infection at the site of original abscess and left sided inguinal lymphadenopathy. Full blood count (FBC) revealed an eosinophilia of 12.5% (WBC count 19,800, N 40.8%, L 35.9%). Blood picture showed moderate eosinophilia with reactive changes suggestive of either a parasitic infection, or an allergic/drug reaction. A blood sample was sent for the detection of Toxoplasma and Toxocara antibodies to the Medical Research Institute (MRI), Colombo. Empirical treatment was commenced with Diethyl Carbamazine 6 mg/kg/body weight for 14 days and Mebendazole 50 mg twice a day for 3 days (based on body weight of 13 kg) together with intravenous antibiotics. The lymph node enlargement which persisted during the wound infection resolved with treatment and the child was discharged 14 days after admission.
Three months later the child was referred to the Paediatric Unit of the same hospital with reports of the blood sample taken at the time of previous admission indicating positive serology for both Toxoplasma gondii and Toxocara spp (Toxoplasma antibody IgG Negative, IgM Positive and Toxocara antibody IgG Positive). Examination of the child at this instance revealed bilateral cervical (2 cm) and left side inguinal (3 cm) lymph nodes, and non tender hepatomegaly approximately 2 cm from the costal margin. No splenomegaly was noted. There was no history of fever, cough, wheezing or recurrent infections. No weight loss, night sweats or chronic cough suggestive of tuberculosis was recorded. There was no contact history of tuberculosis though intensive questioning of the parents revealed a history of lymphadenopathy due to tuberculosis in the elder sibling, approximately one year before this child was born. The sibling had been treated with the full course of anti-tuberculosis treatment based on the WHO recommendations and was healthy thereafter. There was no association with cats or ingestion of undercooked meat though there was a history of close contact with dogs which were not de-wormed.
The patient was re-admitted to the Paediatric Unit. Full blood count and blood picture was repeated and FBC showed a total count of 16,500 with 18.5% eosinophils (N 29%, L 46% M 5.4%). The blood picture was similar to the previous report. Ultrasound Scan abdomen confirmed mild hepatomegaly 3 cm from costal margin but no splenomegaly or para-aortic lymph node enlargement. As toxoplasmosis is generally a self- limiting disease in this age group, the child was treated with high doses of Albendazole (50 mg/kg per day in two divided doses to a maximum dose of 400 mg daily for 5 days) for toxocariasis.
Mantoux test was positive, suggesting co-existing tuberculosis in this child. Chest x- ray did not show any lesions suggestive of pulmonary tuberculosis. An inguinal lymph node biopsy was taken for histology on the 5th day of treatment with Albendazole. A repeat FBC indicated that the blood counts were within normal range (Total count 10,800, N 47%, L 51%, M 1%, E 1%). However, the lymph node enlargement persisted.
The biopsy report of the left inguinal lymph node which was received two weeks later, indicated central necrosis with numerous tuberculoid type granulomata. Granulomata consisted epithelioid histiocytes. Langerhans type giant cells seen in central caseous necrosis. The appearance was compatible with tuberculous lymphadenitis with no evidence of Toxoplasma or Toxocara in the lymph node sample.
The parents were requested to take the child to the national chest clinic for anti tuberculosis treatment with instructions to report back to the Paediatric clinic with results of antibody tests for toxoplasmosis and toxocariasis both in the mother and child and an HIV Profile of the child. Acute Toxoplasma and Toxocara infection was confirmed in the child with positive anti Toxoplasma IgM and IgG antibodies and a four-fold rise in the IgG titre for toxocariasis as compared to the results taken 3 months previously justifying the treatment for toxocariasis. The HIV screening was negative. All test results were negative in the mother. The parents were requested to repeat the tests 6 months after completion of treatment and advice given to prevent re-infection of zoonotic parasitic diseases. They were also educated about tuberculosis and the importance of completing the full course of treatment.