A 72-year-old woman without a history of any coexisting disease was admitted to the emergency room with a complaint of dyspnea and chest tightness. Physical examination showed obvious cyanosis of lips; vital signs indicated an unstable hemodynamic status, with a heart rate of 102 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 25 beats/min, and blood pressure of 88/51 mmHg, finger oxygen saturation of 61%, and body temperature of 36.0 °C. The initial electrocardiogram at admission suggested sinus tachycardia, nonspecific intraventricular block, abnormal q waves (leads III, V1), ST-segment depression (leads V2, V3, V4), T wave inversion (leads II, III, avF, V1, V2, V3, V4), and ECG axis right deviation. CA occurred 10 minutes later, and high-quality CPR was performed immediately. The blood test revealed a high level of D-Dimer of 8051 ng/ml. After 60 minutes of high-quality CPR, she returned to spontaneous circulation and was transferred to the intensive care unit due to unstable hemodynamics. Subsequent ultrasonography examination revealed an intermuscular vein thrombosis (4.3 mm) in the right lower extremity. Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed a thrombus in the left lower pulmonary artery trunk and multiple small thrombi in the pulmonary artery branches . Thus, PE was highly suspected as the cause of CA. Then, the patient received thrombolytic therapy with 50 mg of recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (alteplase).
Four days later, she regained consciousness and was able to perform commanded movements. Unfortunately, she was diagnosed with paraplegia. Physical examination showed that Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was E4 + VT + M6; the muscle strength of both upper limbs was grade 5 with normal sensation, and upper limb deep and superficial reflexes were present, but the muscle strength of both lower extremities was grade 0, and pain and temperature sensation disappeared. Deep tendon reflexes were absent at the bilateral lower limbs. However, the sense of touch and proprioception existed below the T9 level of the spinal cord. Thoracic spinal cord 3.0 T contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicates T7 - T12 thoracic spinal cord swelling with abnormal signal, showing ischemia-like changes, “pencil-like” sign in sagittal view, and “eagle eye” sign in the cross-sectional scan. The neurologist’s consultation concluded that she was diagnosed with spinal cord infarction, which was consistent with anterior spinal artery syndrome. At discharge from the hospital after 23 days of treatment, her neurological condition deteriorated; she lost bowel and bladder sensation.