A 39-year-old Asian woman presented to our hospital with symptoms including headache, dizziness, and right-sided hearing impairment, which she had experienced for some time but described as worsening starting 2 months prior to presentation. The patient did not adopt any specific medications until hospital admission. She was a multi-para woman (gravida 2, para 2, living 2, abortion 0). The family members did not have any specific diseases and did not suffer from the same symptoms. She lives in Hanoi and worked as an accountant with normal medical profile prior to this admission. On physical examination, the patient’s weight and height were 50 kg and 162 cm, respectively [body mass index (BMI) of 19]. Vital signs were within normal range, with body temperature of 37 °C, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute, blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. Upon neurological examination, no neurological defects of sensorium, cognition, cranial nerves, motor, sensory, cerebellar, gait, reflexes, meningeal irritation, or long tract signs were observed. Blood test findings were normal in her report (glucose of 80 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen of 12 mg/dl, creatinine of 1 mg/dl, alanine aminotransferase of 22 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase of 32 U/L, white blood cell count of 7.8 × 109/L, red blood cell count of 5 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 12.8 g/dl, and hematocrit of 42%).
On head CT, we detected a 50 × 40 × 28 mm mass in the right CPA primarily consisting of a solid component with slight hyperdensity and some cystic-like proximal structures. No calcification or hemorrhage was identified. A mass effect could be observed in the fourth ventricle and cerebellar peduncle, which dilated the ventricular system upstream .
On the following day, MRI was performed. A lobulated mass on the right tentorium showed mixed-signal features, including hypersignal on T2-weighted image (T2WI) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery. A very low ADC of 0.404 × 10−3 mm2/second was observed, corresponding with the hyperdense feature on CT, indicating a suspected high-cellularity neoplasm. In the post-contrast sequence, poor enhancement characteristics and some small blood vessels were documented. A schwannoma case was suspected, and a three-dimensional constructive interference in steady-state (3D-CISS) sequence was ordered, which revealed the preservation of the right internal acoustic meatus with slightly anteriorly displaced nerves . The 3D-CISS results allowed for the exclusion of schwannoma, indicating a probable diagnosis of hemangioblastoma.
The patient underwent a retrosigmoidal suboccipital craniectomy for tumor resection. According to the operative report, this CPA tumor was located close to the dural matter and was soft with hypervascularity. The preoperative specimen confirmed a medulloblastoma case, and gross total excision was performed.
The postoperative histopathological result revealed that this neoplasm was composed of multiple cells with carrot-shaped nuclei and scant cytoplasm. The tumor cells were arranged in sheets, rows, or nodules. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2, synaptophysin, and INI1 but negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein, beta-catenin, and p53 . These pathological findings are consistent with a medulloblastoma (World Health Organization grade IV) diagnosis.
Three weeks after surgery, the patient returned for a postoperative follow-up. The brain MRI and whole spine scan detected no evidence of recurrence or metastatic signs, respectively. She received adjuvant radiation therapy in keeping with our standard of care for this type of tumor. After 6 months of follow-up, the patient did not suffer from any adverse events and the symptoms were completely resolved.