An 82-year-old man with severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction (ischaemic cardiomyopathy), on guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for heart failure (HF), underwent cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator (CRT-D) implant in 2016 (Medtronic Viva® XT CRT-D DTBA2D4). His usual functional status was New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class III. Past medical history included treated hypertension, atrial fibrillation, previous stroke, chronic kidney disease (CKD 3B), and aortic stenosis for which the patient was under follow-up but, due to co-morbidities and frailty, was for conservative management.
In November 2019 the patient was enrolled in an innovative remote monitoring clinical care pathway (Triage-HF Plus; ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04177199), whereby any ‘high’ Triage-HF risk status transmission triggers a phone call-based virtual consultation with a member of the hospital HF team . In February 2020, device-based physiological measurements began to signal a change in health-related data, culminating in a ‘high’ Triage-HF risk status remote transmission on 11 March 2020, triggering a phone call-based virtual assessment as per the clinical pathway.
The diagnostic challenge was to differentiate between false alerts, worsening HF that may lead to decompensation, or an alternative acute medical issue that could explain the recent shift in health-related data. Routine phone call screening questions identified that the patient had previously been relatively stable. However, in recent weeks, he reported worsening shortness of breath (NYHA Class IV) but without peripheral oedema. Accordingly, review of the transmitted CIED health-related data showed changes starting around February 7, culminating in a transition to a ‘high’ Triage-HFRS a few weeks later. In addition, suboptimal ventricular rate control, biventricular pacing ≤75%, markers of excessive fluid, and reduced physical activity, correlating with his worsening functional status, were observed .
Community nurses undertook renal profile sampling which demonstrated stable renal function [estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 32 mL/min]. The patient was commenced on a diuretic. The prescription was issued remotely, filled by the community pharmacy, and delivered to his home. This approach circumvented the need for face-to-face review and delivered care in an entirely remote manner from decompensation identification through to prescription and telephone follow-up. The patient’s symptoms improved, repeat renal profile was satisfactory, and he remains well to this time. In keeping with this, repeat remote transmission undertaken on 18 April demonstrated temporal improvements in fluid index, heart rate, and activity. The HFRS transitioned from a ‘high’ to ‘medium’ Triage-HFRS on 14 March .