An 82-year-old man with a 2-year history of MCC was referred for evaluation and treatment of uncontrolled high blood pressure and new onset hyperglycemia.
In 2018, a cervical lymphadenopathy biopsy showed metastatic MCC with no apparent primary cutaneous lesion . Multiple bone metastases were demonstrated by an 18F (18-fluorodeoxyglucose) PET/CT scan (18FDG-PET/CT). No pathological uptake was seen in the lungs. The patient achieved good response to avelumab initially as disclosed by a significant reduction of uptake intensity in cervical lymph nodes and in the skeleton on a subsequent 18FDG-PET/CT scan. But thereafter, the disease progressed despite adjuvant radiotherapy and systemic therapy including etoposide, carboplatin, and topotecan. Indeed, a further 18FDG-PET/CT scan showed intensification of the uptake in bones, and new metastases in mediastinal lymph nodes and multiple cutaneous lesions. Noticeably, no disease was present in the lungs.
The patient’s history was significant for multiple surgical treatments for squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma of the skin.
Multiple surgical treatments for squamous cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma of the skin.
Physical examination revealed high blood pressure (198/100), and a 4 cm-sized purplish-blue tumor in his central chest , bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy, and bilateral lower extremities pitting edema. The clinical phenotype was dominated by weight loss and muscle wasting.
Initial blood work revealed a glucose level of 241 mg/dL with hypokalemia (2.7 nmol/L). The 24-h free urine Cortisol level was 9986 nmol/24 hr (normal values: 57.7-806.8). After high dose (8 mg) overnight dexamethasone suppression test (HDST), the 8-am serum cortisol was 44.9 µg/dL (normal values: 4.3-22.4). Serum adrenocorticopic hormone level was elevated: 106 pg/mL (0.0-46). Testing with intravenous corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) administration did not affect adrenocorticopic hormone or cortisol levels, which is typical of ECS Magnetic resonance imaging scan of the pituitary gland was normal.