A 36-year-old female patient complained of "painless vision decline in the left eye with dark shadow covering for 10 d".
Ten days previously, she had a feeling of decreased vision with dark shadow covering in her left eye.
The patient neither had a history of ocular trauma or surgery nor a family history of ocular diseases. She denied any history of systemic disorders or sojourns in the epidemic-stricken area and was not receiving any medication at the time.
The patient had a 14-year-old daughter with type 1 diabetes mellitus combined with diabetic cataracts.
On her first visit to our department, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/30 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. Slit-lamp microscopic examination revealed no inflammatory signs in the anterior chamber or vitreous in either eye. Dilated fundus examination revealed white-yellow subretinal exudates in the posterior pole in both eyes, corrugated inferior bullous retinal detachment with shifting of subretinal fluid, and no retinal hiatus .
Laboratory tests, such as routine blood tests, infectious diseases, blood biochemistry, and tumor indicators, were normal. The results of chest computed tomography and electrocardiogram were also normal.
Ophthalmic B-scan ultrasonography confirmed a bullous retinal detachment in the left eye . B-scan ultrasonography of the right eye revealed normal findings . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a discontinuous band of retinal pigment epithelium in the right eye and neurosensory detachment at the fovea with some hyperreflective material suggestive of fibrin in the left eye . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) revealed multiple patchy leakage foci in the retina, with localized low fluorescence damage and patchy high fluorescence. Retinal vascular fluorescence leakage was observed in the retinal detachment area. Some retinal vessels in the non-detachment area showed slight leakage, and the optic disc exhibited slight leakage in the late stage . Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed multifocal flakes with high fluorescence in the middle stage and low fluorescence in the retinal detachment area in the late stage . FFA and ICGA of the right eye were also abnormal .