A 34-year-old male patient presented to our center following a fall from a height. The patient had no history of medical illness, family history, or history of drug intake. The patient was resuscitated and managed according to the advanced trauma life support protocol, and he was found to be a transient responder (bleeding 20–40%).
Focused assessment sonography in trauma was positive for fluid in Morrison's pouch. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple bilateral nondisplaced rib fractures, comminuted scapular fractures, and bilateral lung contusions. Furthermore, abdominal injuries were found, such as grade 4 liver laceration, left renal artery injury resulting in left kidney devascularization, and a right adrenal hematoma. Although initially responsive, following a CT scan, the patient became vitally unstable. Therefore, resuscitation was started, and a plan to take him to the operative room was made.
Intraoperatively, the liver was found to be the primary site of hemorrhage, which was controlled with packing. The lesser sac was opened, and no blood or bile was found, and postrior pastric wall was inspected with no injuries,
Additionally, a serosal tear was found in the transverse colon, which was primarily repaired with continuous PDS suture. Packing with temporary closure of the abdomen was performed (damage control laparotomy), and the patient was sent to the intensive care unit (ICU).
Forty-eight hours later, the patient was taken to the operating room (OR) for a second look. Exploration was uneventful, and the abdomen was successfully closed.
Despite an initial uneventful postoperative recovery, 2 weeks after surgery, the patient’s condition deteriorated. Abdominal examination suggested the presence of gas coming from the upper part of the laparotomy wound, and a diagnosis of septic shock was made. Following resuscitation, the patient underwent an emergency exploratory laparotomy, which was performed by an on-call trained trauma consultant.
Upon exploration, a 2-cm long, full-thickness posterior gastric injury was found at the level of the cardia just below the GE junction. The necrotic and ischemic margins were debrided resulting in a larger defect that extended up to the GE junction . Despite the difficulty in gaining good exposure of the injury, primary two-layer closure of the gastric rupture was performed with continuous 2.0 PDS sutures (Z775D) and reinforced with Vicryl 2.0 (J589H) interrupted sutures. No other injuries were found. The patient was sent to the surgical ICU with an open abdomen.
After 48 hrs of observation, the patient was returned to the OR. A jejunostomy feeding tube was inserted, and the abdomen was closed using an abdominal wall closure system device (ABRA; CWK08, Southmedic Inc. 50 alliance Blvd, Barrie, Ontario, Canada).
During the third exploration, the gastric injury that was previously repaired showed a persistent leak. A trial of nonoperative treatment with a Niti-S esophageal BETA-2 covered stent (size 28 mm × 180 mm, made in Korea, LBN 00-01) and wide drainage were initiated through gastroscopy.
Five weeks later, a fluoroscopy study showed a para-stent leak at the proximal end . Later on, upon endoscopy for the replacement of the stent, the previously noted perforation decreased in size. However, a gastric ulcer was found at the level of the pylorus (the distal end of the stent) , so re-stenting was deferred. Conservative management was planned in the form of jejunostomy tube feeding and 40 mg proton pump inhibitor was given for 2 weeks. Furthermore, endoscopic stenting was performed. The patient tolerated the consequences of the above management option with complete satisfaction.