The patient was a 54-year-old man who had undergone laparoscopic low anterior resection for rectal cancer (pT2N0M0, stage 1) 6 months previously. Liver metastasis (5 cm in diameter) was detected, with invasion of the right hepatic vein (RHV) and attachment to the middle hepatic vein. He was started on preoperative chemotherapy with mFOLFOX6 plus bevacizumab (Bmab). After seven courses of chemotherapy, the tumor size had decreased to 4 cm in diameter, and the tumor was no longer attached to the middle hepatic vein . There were no complications after chemotherapy. Then, if we did not do the RHV reconstruction, the rate of the liver congestion volume would be 34.1% . As a result, we decided to perform liver resection with RHV reconstruction using the IJV graft.
An approximately 6-cm-long horizontal skin incision 2 cm above the left clavicle or diagonal skin incision along the medial border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle was made. The anterior surface of the IJV was exposed by dissecting the connective tissue behind the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The omohyoid muscle was divided and the IJV was free from the surrounding tissue by dividing the small inflow branches from the level of the facial vein tributary to the level of the upper border of the clavicle. Two vascular clamps were applied on the upper and the lower portions of the dissected IJV, and the IJV graft was taken. The IJV graft was 3 cm in length and 1 cm in diameter. Then, partial hepatic resection of segments 7 and 8, including the root of the RHV, was performed. There were no tributaries of the RHV in the resected site, and the RHV was reconstructed using an IJV graft by running suture . The operation time was 6 h 48 min, and the estimated blood loss was 740 ml. There was no blood transfusion during the surgery. Postoperative histopathological examination of tumor tissue revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with invasion of the RHV . The postoperative course was uneventful . Patency of the reconstructed hepatic vein was confirmed by computed tomography on postoperative day 7. No hepatic congestion or ascites was noted . He was discharged 8 days after the surgery, and he is doing well without ascites nor diuretics in the current outpatient clinic once a month. We found the graft patent by computed tomography in 3 months after the surgery.