An 85-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital with a two-day history of fever and worsening malaise. He denied respiratory tract symptoms. The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus (hemoglobin A1c level, 7.0%), but no past medical history of pulmonary disease. On admission, his vital signs were recorded as follows: heart rate, 90 beats/min; blood pressure, 123/77 mmHg; room-air oxygen saturation, 94%; respiratory rate, 19 breaths/min; and body temperature, 38.2 °C. Based on the laboratory test results, the patient was diagnosed with leukocytosis (12,000 cells/μL) and showed elevated levels of C-reactive protein (18.8 mg/dL); however, his liver and renal functions were normal. A chest radiograph showed multiple small pulmonary infiltrates in both lungs. Additional chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules mainly in subpleural areas , suggesting the diagnosis of SPE.
While searching for the primary source of infection, transthoracic echocardiography was performed multiple times (on the day of admission and 5 days after admission), and showed the absence of vegetation on the heart valves. Additionally, contrast-enhanced CT scan of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed neither an abscess nor suppurative thrombosis on the day of admission. After collection of the blood sample, empiric treatment with meropenem (1 g every 8 h) and vancomycin (1 g every 12 h) was initiated. On the 3rd day of hospital stay, the blood culture with a BacT/ALERT 3D system (BioMérieux, France) was found to be positive for P. micra, identified by RapID-ANA II system (Innovative Diagnostic Systems, Inc., Atlanta, Ga), a qualitative micromethod employing conventional and chromogenic substrates for the identification of anaerobic bacteria. The isolate was highly susceptible to all β-lactams, clindamycin, and carbapenems. Repeated physical assessment to detect the source of infection revealed mild tenderness on the left temple. Oral examination by a dentist showed periapical periodontitis at the root of the second left maxillary premolar. Further, contrast-enhanced facial CT scan identified an abscess in the infratemporal fossa , and thus puncture drainage of pus was performed on the 9th day of hospital stay . Following a review of susceptibility test results, we changed the antibiotics to ampicillin-sulbactam (3 g every 8 h), targeting P. micra and all possible anaerobic bacteria. Although Gram stain of the sample taken from the infratemporal fossa abscess showed positive staining for polymicrobial patterns of Gram-positive cocci and Gram-negative rod strains, only Prevotella oris (not P. micra) was isolated from culture of the abscess. The isolation same method was used for Prevotella oris and P. micra. Isolated Prevotella oris was susceptible to ampicillin-sulbactam, clindamycin, and carbapenems, but intermediately susceptible to penicillin and ampicillin. P. micra was not recovered from the infratemporal fossa abscess, probably due to the effect of ampicillin-sulbactam and difficulty in culturing anaerobic organisms.
Thus, we diagnosed this case as periodontal disease-associated SPE and infratemporal fossa abscess. Following combined treatment with ampicillin-sulbactam, tooth extraction, and puncture drainage of the infratemporal fossa abscess, the patient’s symptoms including fever and malaise gradually improved . Intravenous antibiotic therapy with ampicillin-sulbactam was administered for 4 weeks, followed by continued oral treatment with clindamycin for 4 weeks. We confirmed complete remission of the lung lesions by CT scan , and there has been no recurrence of symptoms after discontinuation of antibiotics.