M.N.S., seven years old, male, has right spastic hemiplegic CP, level I, according to
the Gross Motor Function Classification System (GMFCS), caused by a hypoxic-ischemic injury at two years old. The child has
participated in a physical therapy intervention program based on the Bobath
Neuroevolutive Concept twice a week for four years. His main complaint is the difficulty
in participating in games that include jumping and overcoming obstacles at school with
his friends.
The proposed intervention was approved by the Ethics Committee on Human Research of the
institution where the research took place (Case N. 190 903), in accordance with
Resolution 196/96 of the National Health Council. The child's guardian authorized his
participation in the study by signing the Free and Informed Consent form.
The study involved the use of multiple repeated measures in a single subject, according
to the A-B-A model.
- A trained physical therapist, blinded to the
study, performed all assessments during the three phases of the study: baseline 1 (B1),
two weeks prior to the trial; baseline 2 (B2), on the day immediately prior to the
intervention period; baseline 3 (B3), on the day after the intervention was finished.
Assessments of the child's motor performance through the Motor Development Scale
(MDS), and of the functional balance through
the Pediatric Balance Scale (PBS) were performed.
The MDS tool assesses the following areas of development: fine motor skills (MA1), gross
motor skills (MA2), balance (MA3), body schema (MA4), spatial organization (MA5),
temporal organization (MA6) and laterality. With the exception of laterality, the other
areas are evaluated by ten tasks each, distributed in progressive difficulty, between
the ages of 2 and 11 years. The child should start with the tasks related to the age
immediately below theirs. Each successfully completed task determines one point in the
correspondent Motor Age (MA). Based on the calculation of the motor ages in each area,
the calculation of the General Motor Quotient (GMQ) is carried out. The values ​​of GMQ
are quantified and categorized, allowing the classification of analyzed skills as: much
superior (130 or more), superior (120-129), high-normal (110-119), medium-normal
(90-109), low-normal (80-89), inferior (70-79), and much inferior (69 or less).
The PBS questionnaire, adapted from the Berg Balance Scale, assesses the balance in
children with neuromotor dysfunction. It
consists of 14 activities, scored from zero to four, with zero indicating maximum or
full assistance to perform the activity, and four indicating the independent performance
of a task. The total score is the sum of all the scores, ranging from zero to 56, with
higher scores indicating better skills in balance control.
The intervention program using VR-based therapy consisted of 12 sessions of 45 minutes
each, with two sessions a week. During the intervention period, the child underwent
normal physical therapy sessions. The child attended all sessions. At each therapy
session, the child had contact with two distinct games for a period of 20 minutes each,
with a resting interval of five minutes between them. The two games used for the
protocol were: a) A game in which the child saw himself projected inside an aquarium,
which contained holes that had to be stopped using the upper or lower limbs; and b) A
game in which the child, on top of a moving trailer, had to overcome obstacles by
jumping, squatting and performing side-to-side movements of the body.