A 61-year-old man presented to his general practitioner with a short history of pain in his right ring finger. His finger was swollen and tender particularly in the proximal phalanx. Treatment was initially with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and investigation was performed for possible gout. As his pain failed to improve in the following month, he was referred for an X-ray of his right hand .
This was reported as showing significant translucency of the proximal phalanx of the right ring finger. Features were felt to be consistent with an aggressive infective process, although the radiologist could not exclude non-benign infiltration. The patient was initially referred for an orthopaedic opinion. At the time of review, he denied any weight loss or other bony symptoms; systemic enquiry was unremarkable and of particular note he had no respiratory symptoms, other than a longstanding non-productive cough. He was a heavy smoker of up to 40 cigarettes per day, with moderate alcohol consumption and a past medical history of cerebrovascular disease and hypertension.
A chest X-ray showed a right mid zone mass lesion . Routine blood tests including calcium were normal. Alkaline phosphatase was mildly elevated at 126 U/litre (normal upper limit 115 U/litre).
Bronchoscopy showed partial stenosis of his right upper lobe bronchus with some mucosal abnormality. Biopsies and aspirate from this procedure were unfortunately non-diagnostic. Computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of a right upper lobe mass, along with mediastinal lymphadenopathy and multiple small pulmonary metastases. His bone scan showed increased uptake in the proximal phalanx of his right ring finger and likely metastatic deposits in T9 vertebrae and several ribs.
In order to obtain a histological diagnosis, a biopsy of the finger lesion was performed. This confirmed moderately to poorly differentiated metastatic adenocarcinoma in keeping with lung origin. At a recent oncology review, the patient did not wish to explore chemotherapy treatment options, but went on to have one fraction of palliative radiotherapy to the metastatic deposit in his finger. Unfortunately, he declined further treatment and defaulted from follow-up.