A 56-year-old man suffering from chest pain presented at the Emergency Department of our hospital on October 25, 2015. The patient’s symptoms lasted for nine hours with persistent episodes of chest pain, which have especially worsened over the last 2 h.
The patient had no previous medical history.
None.
The patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C, heart rate was 120 bpm, respiratory rate was 23 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 97/70 mmHg, and the oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. Heart sounds were very faint and rales were heard in both lungs. All other signs were negative.
The patient’s blood tests showed elevations in cardiac troponin-I (CTN-I) (0.34 ng/mL; normal: < 0.05 ng/mL). Electrocardiograph (ECG) revealed ST segment elevation in the precordial leads II, aVF, and V4–V6. No abnormalities were observed on chest computed tomography (CT). Acute anterior myocardial infarction was thus initially considered.
The patient received dual antiplatelet agents comprising clopidogrel and aspirin at load dosages and underwent emergency percutaneous coronary angiography under the application of nitrates. The operation showed no stenosis in the left main coronary artery or right coronary artery, and about 50% stenosis in the ostial left anterior descending segment and left circumflex artery.
Considering that the lowest blood pressure was 74/40 mmHg and it was not possible to maintain normal blood pressure with the help of dopamine, the patient was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU) for further analysis. Subsequently, he required high doses of norepinephrine to maintain blood pressure. Follow-up bedside cardiac ultrasound showed pericardial effusion . Pericardial tamponade was considered. The patients then underwent pericardium puncture drainage with some 220 mL pericardial effusion; consequently, the blood pressure increased to 110/75 mmHg, while the CTN-I increased to 2.29 ng/mL. At 18:24 (see Table ), the symptom of chest pain worsened and the blood pressure was decreasing. Bedside cardiac ultrasound revealed a large number of pericardial blood clots prompting cardiac tamponade . Our medical team including cardiology, ICU, and thoracic surgery, taking into consideration the unexplained hemopericardium, decided to preform emergency thoracotomy and pericardium exploratory surgery with the prior consent from patients’ relatives at 19:57. During the operation, the sharp foreign body, a long fish bone measuring about 3.7 cm , was found at the surface of the pericardium and penetrating the left ventricular myocardium to some blood vessels.