A 53-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital complaining of tinnitus over a period of three weeks. He also noted slightly abnormal “fuzzy” vision in the previous two weeks. An otorhinologist was consulted to rule out Vogt–Koyanagi–Harada disease.An ocular evaluation revealed a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 1.2 in his right eye and 1.0 in his left eye. His intraocular pressure was 14mmHg in his right eye and 16mmHg in his left eye. The anterior segment was normal in both eyes. However, a fundus evaluation revealed a significant papilledema in each eye (Figure ).
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated the absence of an intracranial mass or hemorrhagic lesion. Our patient did not experience hypertension or uveitis; at that point, he had experienced no loss of BCVA. We did not measure our patient’s intracranial pressure because he did not approve the procedure. Because he did not demand further examination, we held follow-up appointments with our patient every two weeks.
Our patient had been taking aripiprazole for depression for over seven years. He was also diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment, also known as incipient dementia, for which he was not receiving treatment.
Ten weeks after his first visit to our hospital, our patient began to experience sporadic marked blurred vision and transient day blindness. His BCVA had deteriorated moderately to 0.9 in his right eye and 0.8 in his left eye. A neurosurgeon detected a DAVF in his sigmoid sinus on angiography. The fistula was classified as type I, according to Borden classification, and type IIa, according to Cognard classification.Transarterial and transvenous embolization was successfully performed to treat the causative DAVF. Three weeks after therapy, the papilledema had significantly improved (Figure ) but the BCVA in our patient’s right and left eyes was 0.8 and 0.3, respectively. His tinnitus disappeared by one week after embolization therapy. The angiography results before and after embolization are presented in Figure .We followed this patient for four years. Regular ocular examinations demonstrated the absence of papilledema recurrence. However, the patient’s BCVA continued to deteriorate progressively (Figure ), with concurrent complete disc paling (Figure ) but without thinning of the foveal retina or retina around the disc, as determined by optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Figure ).A mild vitreomacular adhesion in his right eye was revealed by OCT with SDOCT RS-3000 (Nidek Co., Ltd, Aichi, Japan) and Nidek Advanced Vision Information System EX version 1.3.0.3 (Nidek Co., Ltd) (Figure ). Our patient did not notice metamorphopsia, and he did not request pars plana vitrectomy. Goldmann perimetry showed progressive narrowing of the visual field in both eyes after embolization (Figure ).
Four years after embolization, our patient’s BCVA was 0.15 in his right eye and 0.04 in his left eye. His intraocular pressure was within normal range in both eyes at all examinations (data not shown). Our patient’s intracranial condition was examined by MRI and magnetic resonance angiogram every six months, but he never had a recurrence of the right DAVF in the sigmoid sinus, nor were there any other abnormal findings.