The patient in this case study was a 70-year-old man (height 152 cm, weight 57 kg) with a history of hypertension who was receiving treatment from an ophthalmologist for pain in the right eye and blurred vision. He had been prescribed a course of loxoprofen sodium (60 mg), but the treatment was ineffective. He was referred to our hospital 5 days after symptom onset. In addition to the right eye pain and diplopia, findings during our initial examination included ipsilateral palpebral ptosis and oculomotor dysfunction, and oculomotor nerve paralysis was suspected. Simple cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no intracranial space-occupying or periorbital lesions. The patient was prescribed tramadol hydrochloride (25 mg) for the eye pain, and the pain was relieved. However, the palpebral ptosis and diplopia persisted, and the patient was hospitalized for observation and treatment.
The findings at hospitalization are shown in Fig. . The patient showed limited lateral movement and elevation of the right eye in addition to palpebral ptosis but had no problems with visual acuity. Thus, he was diagnosed with incomplete oculomotor paralysis of the right eye. Cranial gadolinium-contrast MRI revealed slight expansion of the right cavernous sinus (relative to the contralateral site) but no clear signs of a tumor . We ruled out diabetes-induced painful ophthalmoplegia, sarcoidosis, and other inflammatory diseases, as well as cerebrovascular disease based on the patient’s symptoms, physical examination, and imaging results. Considering the above findings, we suspected THS accompanied by oculomotor paralysis.
Sixteen days after symptom onset, the patient started steroid pulse therapy; he was treated with intravenous methylprednisolone at 1000 mg/day for 3 days. The patient developed hiccups, which are an adverse drug reaction to methylprednisolone, but this symptom disappeared after treatment with metoclopramide and shakuyakukanzoto, a Chinese herbal medicine . The following day, the pain in the right eye disappeared, and the palpebral ptosis showed some improvement; however, the oculomotor dysfunction and diplopia persisted. The patient was started on a course of oral prednisolone at 60 mg/day subsequent to the steroid pulse therapy.
The patient developed progressively aggravated delirium at 5 days after the initiation of steroid pulse therapy. He showed clouding of consciousness accompanied by speech disturbance, abnormal sleep cycle, and marked appetite loss. No abnormalities were revealed on a cranial computed tomography scan performed that day, and the delirium was considered an adverse reaction to methylprednisolone. Accordingly, the oral prednisolone treatment (60 mg/day) was temporarily suspended. The delirium resolved subsequent to this suspension of treatment. By the day after prednisolone was suspended, the patient’s level of consciousness had recovered to the pretreatment level.
Two days after resolution of the delirium, oral prednisolone treatment was resumed at 10 mg/day. The patient manifested no subsequent hiccups, delirium, or disturbance of consciousness. The pain in the right eye completely disappeared, and palpebral ptosis, impaired right-eye elevation, and diplopia resolved. The prednisolone treatment at 10 mg/day was continued, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. After discharge, the oral prednisolone dose was tapered and then stopped at 53 days after the start of therapy. The patient showed no relapse after prednisolone cessation, and his treatment was regarded as complete. Follow-up MRI was not carried out since the patient smoothly recovered from the illness.