An 11 year-old boy was diagnosed with CGD in infancy, following severe recurrent lower respiratory tract infections. There was no history of primary immunodeficiency disease in his family.
The patient gradually developed hypoxia, dyspnea on exertion, cyanosis and became worse during childhood. There were some evidences of repeated pneumonia and consequently using intravenous antibiotics in his past medical history. At the time of his admission to our clinic, he had not fever, but physical examination revealed tachypnea, crackles, retraction, and increased anteroposterior diameter of chest. Laboratory findings, including complete cell blood count (CBC), ESR, liver function test, sweat chloride test and serum immunoglobulin levels were normal. Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis showed: pH 7.28, O2 saturation 64.7% and PCO2 54.3 mmHg. Blood cultures and tracheobronchial secretion cultures for pyogenic, fungal and mycobacterial infections were negative. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Aspergillus and Candida albicans was negative. Diagnostic bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed to obtain specimens for cytology and culture. The smear of BAL showed many isolated bronchial epithelial cells accompanied with few inflammatory cells.
Nitroblue-tetrazolium (NBT) dye test was defective. The result was compatible with diagnosis of CGD, which was also further confirmed by dihydro rhodamine123 (DHR) dye test.
Serial plain chest X-rays showed increased vascular and interstitial markings. The Result of high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan revealed ground glass appearance in both lung fields with some areas of decreased attenuation, honeycombing, asymmetric emphysematous change and increased interstitial marking, which was compatible with diagnosis of interstitial lung disease .
In PFT, forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) was decreased to 38.7%; residual volume (RV) and total lung capacity were increased to 773.2% and 203.8%, respectively. The result of PFT was air trapping and high airway resistance in favor of restrictive pattern and destructive lung disease.
Echocardiography revealed normal systolic and diastolic function without pulmonary hypertension. For excluding systemic disease-associated interstitial lung diseases, IgM rheumatoid factor, serum antinuclear antibodies reactive to nuclear (ANA), cytoplasmic antigens, anti smooth muscle antibody as well as serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level were measured, which were all normal.
After considering ILD in the patient, prednisolon therapy was initiated at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day associated with hydroxychloroquine. At the time of discharge, 30 days after admission, clinical respiratory findings such as cough and dyspnea subsided. After a 3-month course of prednisolone and tapering the dosage, an increased oxygenation at rest and sleep was achieved. Such treatment leads to improvement of pulmonary disease in the patient.