A 22-year-old woman, gravida 4, para 2, one early abortion and 2 alive children, was transferred from a medical center to the maternity ward of the University Teaching Hospital of Ouahigouya (Burkina Faso) for bowel sub-obstruction and intrauterine fetal death, with failure of labor induction, on an assumed full term pregnancy.
She first consulted for moderate abdominal pain that had been going on for 10 days, at the health center in her village, where early childbirth labor was diagnosed. The day after she arrived, she was evacuated to the referral medical center for fetal distress suggested by an abnormal decreasing of the fetal heart rate.
The history of the pregnancy notes that the patient, who did not know the exact date of her last menstrual period, had done in the health center of her village, 05 antenatal consultations during which no particular anomaly was noticed. The symphysio-fundal height grew steadily up to 30 cm at the last visit, with a presumed cephalic presentation. The patient did not perform any ultrasound or other blood tests outside the HIV serology that was negative. She did not experience pelvic pain or metrorrhagia at the beginning of her pregnancy, and never consulted for any pathology during her pregnancy. She had no particular medical and surgical history.
On admission at the maternity ward of the University Teaching Hospital of Ouahigouya, the patient no longer complained of abdominal pain, but reported respiratory discomfort due to abdominal distension, and absent fetal movements.
She had normal hemodynamic state, but mild pallor. Her abdomen was distended, and the fetal parts were palpated under the maternal abdominal wall, with difficulty in specifying the presentation. The sounds of the fetal heart were not perceived. At the vaginal touch, the cervix was anterior, short, soft, and dehiscent, and the fingerstall was stained with traces of blood. There was no ileus.
Diagnostic hypothesis of uterine rupture or abdominal pregnancy with intrauterine fetal death were thought about.
Emergency ultrasound scan noted an empty uterus of subnormal size, a fetal death and a lateral uterine mass reminding the placenta.
An emergency laparotomy was then indicated for suspicion of abdominal pregnancy or uterine rupture. At the opening of the peritoneum, a bloody fluid (most likely blood, amniotic fluid and peritoneal fluid) was sucked up. The fetus that bathed in the abdominal cavity was extracted dead and macerated . It weighed 3300 g and did not have any malformation. The placenta was fully inserted into the hypertrophied and ruptured isthmus of the left fallopian tube . The ipsilateral ampullary and infundibular portions were free and normal-looking . The uterus was non gravid and had normal size. The abdominal viscera were free from adherence. The diagnosis of full term abdominal pregnancy, with implantation of the placenta into the isthmus of the left tube was then retained. A left total salpingectomy removing in the same time the placenta was performed. The patient received a blood transfusion, and the postoperative follow-up was simple.