A 30-year-old man was diagnosed as Cholangiocarcinoma with mediastinal lymph node metastasis stage IV. In July 2013, he received treatment at a local hospital for Crohn’s disease. In Nov. 2014, he received a liver transplantation; a huge tumor at hepatic portal was intraoperatively resected. The postoperative pathology report revealed a liver and hepatic portal poorly-differentiated adenocarcinoma with unresectable Cholangiocarcinoma metastasized to lymph nodes.
The MRI scan performed on Feb. 24th, 2015 showed a lesion in patient’s liver, therefore, he received lymph node resection on Apr. 13th, 2015. From Jun. 13th, 2015 to Aug. 14th, 2015, the patient received radiotherapy for hepatic portal and the area adjacent to inferior vena cava, with a total dosage of 45Gy. Afterward, the patient did not receive any further anti-cancer treatments, except follow-up visits. The PET/CT collected on Apr. 15th, 2016, showed lesions in mediastinum and liver. On Jun. 29th, 2016, the patient came to the Fuda Cancer Hospital. Firstly, aspiration biopsy was conducted and 10 I125 was seeded into the mediastinal tumor. On June 2017, when the patient came back the Fuda Cancer Hospital for follow-up check-up, biopsy result showed recurrent abdominal lymph node metastasis by experts’ consultation, therefore starting from June 2017, the patient only received γδ T cell immunotherapy to control his lesions, and the first γδ T cell infusion was scheduled on August 2017.
100 ml of blood was donated by a donor who had passed a health examination that included a check for infectious diseases. Following this procedure, a cell culture formula, which we developed (patent pending) that included zoledronic acid and a variety of interleukin was applied specifically to expand Vγ9Vδ2 T cells in vitro (culture media components and mechanism will be discussed in detail in our preparing article). With this formula, we can generally obtain 300–400 million of Vδ2 T cells at ~ 12 days. Figure shows a brief illustration on cell expansion and cell quality control as well as cell reinfusion, and Fig. indicates schedules of γδ T cell treatments and immunophenotypes monitoring (Additional file : Figure S1 and S2).
5 mL of peripheral blood was extracted from the patient each time, 1–3 days before receiving Vδ2 T cell treatment. Peripheral blood monocyte cells (PBMC) were isolated using the Ficoll recipe. Then immunofluorescence labeled cells were analyzed using flow cytometry (FACSanto™ II; BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). The analyzed immune cells mainly included T lymphocytes, NK cells, and γδ T cells.
During Vδ2 T cell treatment, tumor was routinely evaluated by using MRI imaging to monitor tumor size/area changes by the largest transverse diameter, particularly before and after treatment. The patient received plain and enhanced MRI 2 weeks before treatment, and then scanned periodically at the 3rd and 6th months after treatment.