A 15-year-old, 99 kg, and 163 cm (body mass index 37.3) adolescent boy presented to an orthopaedic practice with complaints of chronic left groin and thigh pain for 6 months. He described atraumatic, nonprogressive pain with unilateral altered gait on weight-bearing. Anterior-posterior (AP) and cross-table lateral radiographs of the patient's pelvis and left hip were obtained, and he was diagnosed with a unilateral, idiopathic, stable, chronic SCFE. Figure provides preoperative patient radiographs.
The patient and family were counseled on surgical management by the initial treating surgeon and brought to the operating room (OR) for a percutaneous pinning procedure. The surgeon was unable to complete the procedure, noting difficulty with visualization and interpretation under fluoroscopy to obtain the appropriate starting point and final screw placement. Intraoperative fluoroscopy amounted to 54.32 mGy cumulative radiation dose for the index procedure. The patient, after postoperative radiographs showing inadequate physeal fixation, was immediately returned to the operating room by the initial surgeon for hardware removal and referred to a pediatric center for management. Figure demonstrates the initial fixation attempt.
Preoperative planning was done at the pediatric center with repeat radiographs and CT scan. A single screw tract was visualized. Before the OR, the PGY-5 orthopaedic surgery resident on service did a SCFE training module four consecutive times using iVR (PrecisionOS Technology). The module provided a representative severe SCFE that the resident was able to actively percutaneously pin using a partially threaded cancellous screw in a virtual environment, complete with guide pin insertion, and fluoroscopic localization on interactive 3D anatomy. Figure demonstrates the SCFE iVR environment using the PrecisionOS system.
After iVR training, the patient was returned to the OR. The actual patient was placed supine on a radiolucent table with the left leg free-draped to obtain dynamic anterior-posterior and frog-leg lateral radiographs given the stable, chronic slip and reported difficulty with initial fracture table fluoroscopic visualization. With the presence of a pediatric fellowship trained orthopaedic attending surgeon, the senior resident independently placed two 7.3-mm cannulated screws perpendicular to the physis and lateral to the intertrochanteric line. Two screws were used given the severity of SCFE and patient size. Screw orientation and lengths were carefully considered to maximize fixation and prevent impingement. A single attempt was undertaken for Kirschner wire and screw placement to minimize cortical perforation given the previous surgery. Cumulative radiation dose by fluoroscopic imaging amounted to 7.13 mGy. Postoperative radiographs demonstrate appropriate screw orientation and depth, with greater than five threads across the physis. Figure demonstrates this fixation. The patient was discharged from hospital when deemed safe to ambulate on postoperative day 3. Unfortunately, the patient fell while out of hospital one week after discharge and sustained a left-sided periprosthetic, pertrochanteric hip fracture. After readmission to the children's hospital, a CT scan was obtained and the patient underwent an open reduction and internal fixation using a proximal femoral locking plate. At 3-month follow-up, the patient is ambulating independently without pain and demonstrates radiographic union although there has been some interval fracture subsidence and there is a risk of screw perforation. Figure provides a representative preoperative CT scan image and postoperative radiographs of the revision hip fixation.