An 81-year-old man presented with abdominal discomfort and distention. His medical history was remarkable for hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus. He and his family denied alcohol abuse. Physical examination revealed hepatomegaly without jaundice, ascites, or hepatic encephalopathy. Laboratory data included platelet count 101,000/mm3, total bilirubin 0.9 mg/dl, AST 33 IU/L, ALT IU/L, and PT-INR 1.15. The serum AFP and PIVKA-II levels were 1081.0 ng/ml and 43 mAU/ml. Serologic tests for hepatitis B and C virus were negative. The diagnosis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis with Child-Pugh A liver cirrhosis was made and four HCC lesions were found in segments II, VI, and VIII on the imaging. The largest one was located near the liver capsule in segment II measuring 6.5 cm in diameter. The other three lesions were less than 2 cm with one in segment VI and two in segment VIII. Segmental TACE with epirubicin and iodized oil was performed and he was discharged uneventfully.
He was doing well until he developed abdominal pain 15 days after TACE which was gradually getting worse emergency transport to the hospital. His temperature was 37.7°C, blood pressure 102/41 mmHg, and pulse rate 79/minute. On physical examination, the abdomen was distended and hard to palpation without rebound tenderness. His hemoglobin was 12.6 g/dl. A contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed iodized oil and intraperitoneal free air with a rupture of the HCC in segment II into the peritoneal cavity adjacent to the gastric wall . Extravasation of contrast medium was not seen. Emergent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy confirmed no gastric mucosal lesions or a site of perforation. Without evidence of septic shock or hemorrhage, surgical drainage and transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) are considered less effective. He was treated nonoperatively with piperacillin and tazobactam. Although an abdominal abscess formed, he was discharged on hospital day 18 with continued antimicrobial therapy.
Five weeks after undergoing TACE, he was readmitted with hematochezia and hemorrhagic shock. The hemoglobin level was dropped to 6.6 g/dl. A contrast enhanced CT scan demonstrated gastric extraluminal compression by an HCC lesion with extravasation of contrast medium into the stomach . Emergent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a submucosal tumor with central ulceration located on the anterior wall of the gastric body, corresponding to extraluminal compression by a HCC . The hemorrhage from the ulcer was successfully controlled by hypertonic saline-epinephrine injection. Another submucosal tumor was found in the gastric fundus without ulcer formation . The patient's condition stabilized and he was discharged for palliative care and died six weeks after undergoing TACE.