A 29-year-old man was admitted to Hebei General Hospital (Shijiazhuang) on July 7, 2020, due to skin yellowness, anorexia, nausea, and vomiting after satiety, occasional abdominal distension, and dizziness. Four months before presenting to our hospital, the patient was initially diagnosed with cholecystolithiasis because of similar symptoms and abdominal ultrasound results (splenomegaly and bile duct neck stones) and did not receive treatment at a county hospital. The patient was subsequently admitted to our hospital with complaints of weight loss and unrelieved symptoms resulting from cholecystolithiasis. More than 10 years ago, the patient’s father showed mild anemia, splenomegaly and elevated bilirubin without a clear diagnosis and further treatment. On admission, the estimation of the complete blood count, a mild reduction in hemoglobin and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration was observed in the blood of the patient and his father . Laboratory examination revealed increased number of reticulocytes and increased levels of total bilirubin and indirect bilirubin . However, the patient showed negative results on immunofluorescence diagnosis and Coombs’ test. Peripheral blood smears for the patient and his parents showed different forms and sizes of mature red blood cell (RBC), with small globular RBC in the patient (2.4%) and his father . The osmotic fragility test for the patient showed that a significant increase in RBC osmotic fragility .
Furthermore, the eosin-5′-maleimide (EMA) binding test using flow cytometry (FCM) showed decreased fluorescence of EMA-labeled RBCs, with a mean fluorescence intensity of only 30.33% , providing strong evidence that the band 3 protein is deleted in the RBC membrane. Based on the father’s medical history of anemia and splenomegaly, DNA from the patient and his parents were screened for nearly 700 genes related to hereditary blood and immunodeficiency diseases (SPTB, SPTA1, EPB41, EPB42, ANK1, SCL4A1, ALAS2, SFXN4, TET2, HSPA9, HBA1, MTR, MMAB, etc.) using the next-generation sequencing (NGS). The results showed a heterozygous nonsense variant (NM_000342: exon16, c.G1985A: p.W662X) in SLC4A1. Sanger sequence further demonstrated that this variant was inherited from his father, but not from his mother . According to the Mutational Database, including 1000 Genomes Project, dbSNP, ClinVar, ESP6500, ExAc, Ensembl, HGMD, and UCSC, this variant has not been reported previously. Meanwhile, it was predicted to be pathogenic variant (PVS1 + PS1 + PM2) based on the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) standards and guidelines.
Additionally, abdominal ultrasound showed fatty liver, hepatomegaly, multiple gallstones, splenomegaly, and splenic vein widening. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) further demonstrated multiple gallstones, splenomegaly, and left renal calculi .
Based on the prominent symptoms, laboratory results, and DNA screening, the patient was diagnosed with HS, gallbladder stone, and left kidney stone. He began treatment with folic acid and mecobalamin. After splenectomy, the anemia was relieved without any obvious unpleasant side effects. And no occurrence of anemia was observed in the follow-up period.