A 63-year-old male with a past medical history of benign prostatic hyperplasia and hypertension presented with an elevated PSA at a community Urologist's office in June 2021. He had minimal lower urinary tract symptoms at presentation with nocturia and daytime frequency. He had a benign feeling, enlarged prostate on digital rectal examination. He had no family history of prostate cancer. His PSA was 7.8 (PSA density of 0.13 ng/mL2) prior to his biopsy in June 2021. He had prior PSA 5.9 and 4.4 earlier in 2021 (April and March respectively).
He underwent a TRUS prostate biopsy in July 2021 that showed a focus of ductal adenocarcinoma in 1 of 12 cores and involving less than 5% of the biopsy tissue. This was designated GGG 4, high-risk prostate cancer. He did not experience any post-procedural complications. Following histological diagnosis, the patient was offered radical prostatectomy (both open and robotic) alongside consultation with radiation therapy. The patient elected for robotic radical prostatectomy (RP) at our tertiary care center.
The patient had conventional imaging to complete his workup following his biopsy. He had a technetium-99 methylene diphosphonate whole-body bone scintigraphy that did not identify any bony metastases. This was followed with mpMRI in September 2021 which identified no suspicious measurable abnormality Prostate Imaging Reporting and Database System (PIRADS 2).
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient's surgery had been delayed. He had in the interim enrolled in a clinical trial at our University (NCT05141760) and underwent a Prostate Specific Membrane Antigen Positron Emission Tomography (18F-PSMA-1007 PET) scan alongside a repeat mpMRI in March 2022. His MRI once again showed no measurable abnormality (PIRADS 2) . The PSMA PET showed a unifocal organ-confined lesion in the left base/mid cavity . The lesion had a PSMA expression score of 1, meaning this was equal to or above the blood pool but lower than the spleen. The PSMA-RADS score, which describes anatomic abnormality, was reported as a score of 4 – a lesion that would be typical for prostate cancer but without a definitive anatomic abnormality. There was no focal abnormal PSMA uptake at the site of biopsy-proven prostate adenocarcinoma.
The patient underwent an uncomplicated non-nerve sparring RP in April 2022 and had a typical course in the hospital, being discharged on postoperative day 1. He had a Jackson-Pratt drain placed in the prostatic bed at the time of the OR that was removed prior to discharge.
The patient's final pathology revealed no invasive carcinoma. Towards the prostatic base, in a similar location to the focus of carcinoma in the biopsy, only occasional foci of HGPIN were identified. This was confirmed by a retained basal cell layer with positive staining with High Molecular Weight Keratin (HMWK) . Postoperatively, the patient's PSA remained undetectable at 1-year postop.