A 76-year-old male patient presented with fatigue, New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class III, ascites, and peripheral oedema. He had had three hospital admissions for decompensated heart failure in the past year. His medical history is remarkable for non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy, with a previous mitral ring annuloplasty (Ce ring 34 mm), primary prevention implantable cardio-defribillator (ICD) implantation 15 years ago, and permanent atrial fibrillation. He was under optimal medical therapy, with warfarin, furosemide 60 mg b.i.d., sacubitril/valsartan 24 mg/26 mg b.i.d., carvedilol 6.25 mg b.i.d., spironolactone 25 mg, and dapagliflozin 10 mg. The laboratory evaluation pointed to an N-terminal pro-B type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) level of 2580 pg/mL, with other unremarkable parameters. The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed biventricular dilation, with left ventricle ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30%, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) 15 mm, fractional area change (FAC) of 42%, bi-atrial enlargement, a prosthetic ring in the mitral position without obstructive flow or significant regurgitation, and torrential TR (regurgitant volume estimated in 95 mL), due to tricuspid annulus dilation and the presence of an endocavitary eletrocatheter . The case was discussed in the Heart Team, and due to high surgical risk (EuroSCORE II of 6.78%) and previous heart surgery, the patient was selected for a percutaneous approach. Due to the presence of a large coaptation gap of the leaflets and the presence of an ICD eletrocatheter, the patient was not eligible for a transcatheter edge-to-edge repair (TEER) procedure and was selected for a bicaval valve (TricValve™) implantation. Right heart catheterization showed V waves of 26 mmHg in both the SVC and the IVC, and coronary angiography did not show significant stenosis. Pre-procedural cardiac computed tomography angiography (CTA) was performed, resulting in prosthetic sizing of 25 mm for the SVC and 35 mm for the IVC. The SVC valve was deployed with good technical results ( and ). The IVC valve delivery position was assessed with fluoroscopic guidance and with a pigtail catheter in the supra-hepatic veins (SHV). After IVC valve delivery, mild device displacement to the right atrium was noted . At that moment, the valve appeared to be in a stable position, and no significant leak was observed, so a conservative approach was chosen, and the patient was discharged clinically well after 7 days. Three months later, the patient has a re-hospitalization for decompensated heart failure. The TTE revealed a significant peri-valvular leak with flow inversion in the SHV. Invasive angiography was repeated, and despite the valve being in the same position, a major peri-valvular leak was observed with significant contrast reflux to the IVC . Cardiac CTA was performed to better characterize the leak dimensions and plan a possible re-intervention. The evaluation revealed a 39.2 mm × 19.7 mm posterior peri-device leak (area 2.82 cm2). At this point, several options were considered by the Heart Team including surgery, valve-in-valve procedures either with dedicated TricValve™ devices or with non-dedicated balloon-expandable valves, percutaneous leak closure with a plug, and, at last, medical therapy. There was no experience in the centre at closing leaks with these dimensions at venous structures using plugs, and the dimensions of the IVC demanded a dedicated valve for an eventual valve-in-valve procedure, so it was decided to perform a valve-in-valve procedure with an IVC 35 mm prosthetic caval valve (TricValve™). The valve-in-valve procedure ( and ) occurred without complications and with a good final result (mild leak in the final angiography). The patient was discharged at 6 days after the procedure under medical therapy. At 6 months of follow-up, he is clinically well, in NYHA class II and without other hospital admissions.