A 79-year-old male returned to our neurosurgical clinic with weakness and increasing leg pain, due to extensive spinal stenosis (T11-L3), adjacent level degenerative spondylosis [Figures and ], peripheral vascular disease (PVD) of small vessels, neuropathy, and neurogenic claudication pain. He felt bilateral leg heaviness and pain exacerbation of the back and the leg below a knee while walking a short distance (<50 feet). Physical examination identified an abnormal tandem gait and weakly positive Romberg's sign. Back flexion improved the pain and back extension at 5–10° exacerbated back and leg pain. An L4-S1 lumbar laminectomy with fusion was performed 6 years prior to presentation and an L3-S1 fusion 3 years later while taking warfarin for AF of 10 years. These surgeries were performed with successful discontinuation of warfarin and restarting anticoagulation therapy following surgery without complications for thromboembolic events. Additional surgeries were completed for cervical central spinal canal stenosis that required cervical fusion of C3-C5 and ulnar nerve decompression surgery. Furthermore, he had a history of malignancy in the lung, urinary bladder, and prostate, which were surgically and medically treated and for which he was closely monitored by the specialists.
Patient's main concerns were leg heaviness and neurogenic claudication pain, which had affected his quality of life. Our intention was to improve his pain control without resorting to oral opioid medications, which were considered a relatively poor choice due to his advanced age and multiple comorbidities, which included obesity, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, multiple malignancies, coronary artery disease, PVD, Type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension (HTN), and AF. Pain management options included CMM with physical therapy, IDDS, surgical decompression and fusion with surgical lead SCS implantation, or percutaneous SCS therapy at the thoracic level.
This high-risk patient with multiple comorbidities was confronted with the following choices. Standard conservative medical management with analgesic medications and physical therapy were largely unsuccessful in treating adjacent level degenerative spondylosis. Surgical options might include considerations of a decompression laminectomy of L1-L3 with an extended instrumental lumbar fusion of T10-L3 that would also include palliative intervention by implanting surgical paddle leads at T10-T12 for SCS therapy. These procedures would be performed by withholding warfarin and restarting it postoperatively, as for the previously performed neuraxial surgical procedures. Decompression laminectomy would address his leg heaviness as a result of the compressive nature of symptoms and associated neurogenic claudication. SCS therapy should provide coverage for the leg pain, due to inoperable PVD. The choice of a surgical paddle lead was preferred due to severe low-level thoracic spinal stenosis on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that would create significant challenges to advancement of percutaneous leads and which would be considered a relative contraindication for implantation of a percutaneous lead SCS. IDDS therapy would be used strictly as a palliative intervention since it is associated with opioid-related risks. However, it would not be the optimal approach for a relatively short interval pain lasting between 3 and 5 h/day and leg heaviness as a predominant symptom.
The main concerns for this patient were presented to him during the educational process regarding his use of chronic anticoagulation, choice of intervention, and its potential for catastrophic risks. A surgical paddle lead was recommended over a percutaneous lead to decrease the chances of him developing a catastrophic thoracic spinal-epidural hematoma upon lead migration, repeated epidural needle insertions, multiple lead advancements in the epidural space, and/or micromotion trauma. An elderly patient should be presumed to have a greater chance of traumatic and spontaneous bleeding risk due to poor international normalized ratio control on warfarin, fragile venous vessels, and a high risk for accidental trauma due to expected poor balance and limited mobility. One-time discontinuation of anticoagulation medications might carry less risk in this patient rather than repeated abstinence of warfarin for the several procedures required with percutaneous lead placement for trial and permanent implantation and any revision or re-implantation unless a “perm-trial” type of procedure was selected for use. All these considerations may lead to a potentially catastrophic intraspinal thoracic hematoma, which may carry with it severe morbidity and mortality among elderly patients, and the proximity to the spinal cord water shadow zone has a potential for a high risk of permanent paralysis.
Despite neurosurgical recommendations of fusion and a surgical paddle lead, the patient elected to receive percutaneous lead SCS therapy with another group of pain specialists without consulting us as to his decision and choice. We believe the complexity of this case deserves a multispecialty approach of consulting and including a trained and experienced neurosurgeon and/or pain specialist in the area of surgical and percutaneous leads placement for patients on chronic anticoagulation therapy.