A 55-year-old female patient was admitted to the Department of Infectious Diseases of our hospital on October 2, 2022, due to “recurrent fever for more than 1 month and aggravation for 3 days.”
On August 20, 2022, the patient developed an unprovoked fever. Predominantly low-grade fever, occasionally exceeding 39.0°C, accompanied by coughing and coughing a small amount of sticky white sputum. Chest computed tomography (CT) examination in local hospital which showed “lung infection.” The patient was discharged with symptoms relieved after receiving empirical anti-infective therapy. Half a month later, she developed fever again, with temperature fluctuating around 38.5°C. Then, she was hospitalized at a local hospital to complete peripheral blood NGS examination which revealed a low sequence number of Acinetobacter baumannii and Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections. Doctors reinforced anti-infective regimen but she continued to have high fever with chills and rigors. So the patient came to our hospital.
On physical examination, the patient temperature was 38.2°C, heart rate was 92/bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, blood pressure was 115/79 mm Hg. The patient had clear consciousness, and a soybean-sized lymph node was palpable on the right side of the neck, which was moderate in quality, mobile, and non-tender. Breathing was slightly coarse in both lungs, and moist and dry rales, as well as pleural friction rub sounds, were not audible in both lungs. Cardiac and abdominal examination of the patient was unremarkable. There was no swelling or pain in the joints of the body, and no edema in the limbs. After admission, the blood work showed the following: white blood cells, 9.18*109/L; hemoglobin, 92.8 g/L; mean corpuscular volume, 59.38; mean corpuscular hemoglobin, 19.54. Her urine routine, stool routine, and blood biochemistry tests were unremarkable. The pathogenic smears and cultures of sputum, peripheral blood, bone marrow, and CSF were all negative. Tumor markers in patients’ serum were all negative. The electrocardiogram was within the normal range and the cardiac ultrasound did not show any abnormalities. Superficial B ultrasound revealed a 1.2 * 1.0 cm lymph node detected in the right neck, and pathological biopsy of the lymph nodes revealed no neoplastic lesions. Chest CT examination on admission revealed a few exudative lesions in both lungs. Positron emission tomography-CT examination revealed: Inflammatory hyperplasia of multiple systemic lymph nodes (bilateral neck areas I, II, and V, bilateral axillae, mediastinum, bilateral hilum, and bilateral groin). Slight inflammation in both lungs. Bone marrow with increased glucose metabolism, which was likely reactive changes. A bone marrow biopsy showed that proliferation of the bone marrow was active, and abnormal cells were not detected. The patient was diagnosed with fever of unknown origin (lung infection?) and received anti-infective therapy with large encirclement of anti-bacterial, antifungal and empirical anti-tuberculosis successively during hospitalization in the Department of Infectious Diseases. Yet her condition continues to progress. During the treatment, the patient complained of swelling, pain, and stiffness in many joints and particularly the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal hand joints, wrists, ankles, elbows, and knee joints. Autoantibody test showed the following: ANA, + (1:320); RF, +; Anti-CCP, +; Anti-ENA, −; Anti-dsDNA, −; Antiphospholipid antibodies, −; C3/C4, −. X-ray examination revealed osteoporosis of both hands and minimal soft tissue swelling around the proximal interphalangeal joints of both hands and the first metacarpophalangeal joint of the right hand. Joint ultrasonography examination revealed thickening of the synovium of both wrists and a small amount of blood flow signal. The patient was diagnosed with definite RA and transferred to our department on October 21, 2022 for continued treatment. She was treated with glucocorticoids (GC, 40 mg qd) and methotrexate (MTX, 10 mg qw) with a slight decrease in peak body temperature, but still had recurrent fever. On November 03, 2022, the patient presented with worsening condition, characterized by severe cough with chest tightness, progressive worsening of anasarca , increased pleural effusion and decreased blood pressure, with a minimum blood pressure of 84/44 mm Hg. Dynamic reexamination showed a significant increase in white blood cell count, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and ferritin levels, and a progressive decrease in albumin levels . Inflammatory factor test results suggested significantly increased levels of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, TNF-α, and INF-α . A repeat chest CT revealed progressive ground-glass lesions in both lungs and bilateral pleural effusion. We summarized a series of patient case characteristics and reviewed a case series that fulfills the criteria for hyperferritinemic syndrome and CLS reported in the literature. The patient was eventually diagnosed with RA combined with hyperferritinemic syndrome and CLS. Then she received GC (160 mg qd) combined with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG, 20 g/d, for 3 days). After treatment, her temperature gradually decreased, but still fluctuated. We considered that the patient also had an overwhelming proinflammatory cytokine storm, so she received a strong anti-inflammatory treatment with tocilizumab (TCZ) (400 mg qm). The patient symptoms and follow-up chest CT showed significant improvement following treatment . Subsequently, the patient returned regularly, and the GC dose was gradually reduced to discontinuation according to the criteria. Following up to now, the patient was taking MTX (15 mg qw) and TCZ (400 mg qm) continuously and the disease was in sustained remission.