A 62-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and cervical spine osteoarthritis was hospitalized for the problems of worsening chronic neck pain, new bilateral upper arm pain, and a persistent leukocytosis with an absolute monocytosis. His weight was 106.59 kg and height was 185.42 cm. His baseline hemoglobin and hematocrit were 11.1 grams/dL and 33.6% respectively. The described pain was intermittent, severe, and at times lancinating in nature. The patient underwent extensive diagnostic testing for the above mentioned problems and was ultimately diagnosed with complex regional pain syndrome. The patient was begun on steroid therapy and an improvement in his symptoms followed. The etiology of the leukocytosis and monocytosis remained unclear at the time of discharge. Other medications he received during hospitalization include: cephalexin, amitryptyline, amlodipine, enoxaparin, gabapentin, pantoprazole, oxycodone, and pravastatin.
During the hospitalization, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, done as part of the investigation for the monocytosis, revealed bilateral ground glass pulmonary opacities. Further evaluation with bronchoscopy was performed. Topical pharyngeal anesthesia was achieved with 100 mL lidocaine hydrochloride solution orally, 4 mL of lidocaine aerosol, and 10 mL lidocaine jelly 2% topically. The patient was sedated with a total of 8 mg of midazolam and 50 mcg of fentanyl. His oropharynx was sprayed two times (one second each spray) with non-metered dose Hurricaine topical anesthetic aerosol spray (20% benzocaine) in preparation for bronchoscopy. The endoscope was inserted into the trachea and bronchi without difficulty.
During the procedure, the patient's oxygen saturation was 94% via pulse oximetry. Thirty minutes after the procedure, the patient developed central cyanosis, and his oxygen saturation decreased to 85% via pulse oximetry. His blood pressure was 152/77 mmHg and heart rate was 89 beats for minute. His cardiovascular and chest examinations were within normal limits. The patient did complain of being uncomfortable.
Oxygen was administered by nonrebreathing face mask initially at 10 L/minute, then at 15 L/minute when the cyanosis did not resolve. A chest radiograph was unremarkable. A chest CT was performed and showed no evidence of pulmonary embolism. An arterial blood gas revealed pH 7.45, PCO2 42, PO2 282, oxygen saturation 85%. The color of arterial blood was not noted. Co-oximetry performed revealed a methemoglobin level of 17.5% (normal 0.6–2.5%). A diagnosis of methemoglobinemia was made. The patient was continued on 15 L/minute nonrebreathing face mask and subsequent oxygen saturation improved to 92% within two hours. With hemodynamic stability and improved SpO2, treatment with methylene blue was withheld.
The patient's oxygen requirements lessened to 3 L/minute by nasal cannulae within 12 hours and his cyanosis resolved. Repeat arterial blood gas the next morning revealed a methemoglobin level of 1.1% by co-oximetry and the patient was doing well on room air. He had no adverse sequelae and the bronchoscopy revealed no abnormal findings. He remained in the hospital for several more days for treatment of his other medical conditions.