We present a 50-year-old woman of Asian-Indian origin with no significant medical history who developed right lateral ankle pain of 1-month duration, associated with swelling and numbness of the joint. There was no direct trauma or twisting injury of note, and no other joints were involved. On clinical examination, lumps were noted over the medial aspect of the midfoot and tenderness was elicited over the calcaneofibular ligament, anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL), and joint line of the right ankle. The remainder of the foot and ankle examination was unremarkable with good range of motion of the ankles bilaterally and negative anterior impingement.
Preoperatively, her ankle-hindfoot American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Score (AOFAS) was 38 (out of a maximum score of 100), and physical function score of Short Form 36 (SF-36) was 25 (out of a maximum score of 100), indicating a relatively poor pre-operative functional level.
Weight-bearing ankle radiographs demonstrated loose bodies at the anterior ankle joint line, with normal alignment and preserved joint spaces noted .
Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple loose bodies (at least 8) within the anterior ankle joint recess intracapsularly but superficial to the ATFL and AITFL, suggestive of synovial chondromatosis . A 3 mm full-thickness chondral defect on medial talar shoulder and thickened and frayed ATFL was also noted.
The patient initially declined surgery and was thus managed conservatively with ankle brace and symptomatic treatment. However, on follow-up 3 months later, there was no improvement in her ankle pain and the patient was keen to undergo surgery.
She subsequently underwent right ankle arthroscopic debridement, synovectomy, removal of loose bodies, and microfracture, with intraoperative fluoroscopy . This was performed through standard anteromedial and anterolateral arthroscopic portals under spinal anesthesia and tourniquet application. Intraoperatively, the right ankle synovial chondromatosis with multiple loose bodies in anterior ankle joint was confirmed. In addition, significant synovitis and osteoarthritis of tibiotalar joint with generalized cartilage thinning were noted.
Postoperatively, a below-knee Backslab was applied and the patient was not allowed weight-bearing for 2 weeks. On follow-up 2 weeks after surgery, wounds were well healed, and stitches were removed. Thereafter, the patient was on an Aircast ankle brace and she was allowed partial weight-bearing with crutches for 4 weeks. Subsequently, the Aircast ankle brace was removed and she was allowed full weight-bearing as tolerated. Her ankle was stable, and she was able to return to activities within 5 months after surgery without pain or limitations.
At 6 months after surgery, both her AOFAS ankle-hindfoot score and physical function score had also improved to 71 and 55, respectively, indicating a significant improvement in functional level after the procedure. She was followed-up at 8 months postoperatively, with no complications or recurrence of signs and symptoms.