A 77-year-old man with POAG of both eyes (OU), severe stage, presented to our glaucoma clinic to transfer care after his glaucoma specialist, who had been seeing him for 15 years, retired. His past ocular history was remarkable for failed trabeculectomy in the OD, BGI OU, cataract surgery OU, and central retinal vein occlusion of the OD. Notable medical history included diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and hypertension. His IOP at the previous glaucoma specialist was 26 OD and 14 OS a month prior to presentation to our clinic. Latanoprost 0.005% (Xalatan; Pfizer Inc., New York, NY) one drop in OD, one time nightly, and brimonidine tartrate 0.2% (Alphagan; Bausch & Lomb Inc., Rochester, NY) one drop in OD, three times daily was added at that visit.
On initial exam, IOP was 16 in OU, which did not meet the IOP goal of <13. The best corrected visual acuity with a pinhole was count fingers OD and 20/40 OS. Other notable findings on the exam included superotemporal BGI's OU, scarred trabeculectomy bleb superiorly OD, peripheral iridectomy OD, and cup to disc (C/D) ratio of >0.95 OD and 0.85 OS. Subsequently, netarsudil 0.02% (Rhopressa; Aerie Pharmaceuticals Inc., Irvine, CA) 1 drop in OD, one time nightly, was added. Despite good medication compliance, the patient's IOP continued to remain in the 15–19 range, above the low-teens goal for the OD. In addition, his Humphrey Visual Field (HVF) 24–2 at Stim V showed a progression in his inferior arcuate defect compared to 6 months prior. Of note, the patient's central vision was counting fingers from prior ischemic CRVO, but he was able to perform HVF with a stimulus size V. Initially, an inferonasal BGI was recommended; however, the patient was concerned about the cosmesis and potential discomfort of an inferonasal shunt given his baseline lower eyelid retraction. Fortunately, there was still at least 4 mm of healthy conjunctiva nasal to his superior scarred trabeculectomy. As such, we recommended the patient undergo an open conjunctiva ab externo XEN gel stent placement with mitomycin C (MMC) in the OD. The XEN gel stent (Allergan Inc., Irvine, CA) was placed in the 2 o'clock position adjacent to the nasal border of the scarred trabeculectomy ).
Intraoperatively, the patient was prepped and draped in the usual sterile fashion. After topical anesthesia, a lid speculum was placed, and a 6–0 Vicryl traction suture was placed at the superotemporal cornea to expose the superotemporal quadrant. Paracentesis was made with MVR blade. Mini Westcott scissors and 0.12 forceps were used to create a 3 mm peritomy. Sub-tenon's anesthesia was given. A non-toothed forceps was used to grab both the Tenons and conjunctiva to expose the sub-tenon's space which was blunt dissected with Westcott scissors. An amount of 0.4 mg/mL of MMC soaked sponges were used on the scleral bed for 120 seconds and subsequently removed and irrigated with BSS for 10 seconds. XEN implant was removed from its packaging and primed. The needle was directed parallel to the iris plane and entered the eye about 2.5 mm behind the limbus in a straight path at the 1 o'clock location. The needle was found to be above the iris plane and away from the cornea. The injector was slowly removed from the eye, leaving the implant in place with 3 mm in the anterior chamber and about 2 mm above the sclera. Two wing sutures were used with 10–0 Vicryl sutures to close the conjunctiva and tenons on either side of the peritomy, and the limbal edge remained Seidel negative. Attention was directed to ensure no tenons were bundled around the XEN implant as the tenons were brought forward at the final closure. All incisions were checked to be watertight and Seidel negative. Subconjunctival injections of cefazolin and methylprednisolone sodium succinate were given inferiorly at the conclusion of the case.
Given the patient's history of failed trabeculectomy, a prophylactic subconjunctival 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) injection was given on postoperative week 2. His IOP remained between 7 and 10 mm Hg for the first 4weeks after the surgery, with no glaucoma medications. He was kept on prednisolone acetate 1.0% (Pred Forte; Allergan USA Inc., Madison, NJ) 1 drop in the OD, every 2 hours while awake for 3 weeks before being transitioned to four times a day for another month and slowly tapered based on the bleb appearance.
Despite a low diffuse bleb superonasally, his IOP rose to 18 without glaucoma medication at postoperative week 6, and a repeat subconjunctival 5–FU injection was administered on postoperative week 6. From week 8 to week 12, his IOP remained in the 15–18 mm Hg range without glaucoma medication, and at postoperative month 4, we began to add back netarsudil/latanoprost 0.02/0.005% (Rocklatan, Aerie Pharmaceuticals Inc., Athlone, Ireland) 1 drop in OD, one time nightly, followed by dorzolamide hydrochloride–timolol maleate 22.3 mg/6.8 mg per mL (Merck & Co. Inc., Whitehouse Station, NJ) 1 drop in OD, two times daily. Between postoperative month 6 to month 12 after the XEN gel implant, the patient maintained his IOP at 10–12 mm Hg without adverse effects from the medications or surgery.