A 44-year-old female came to us 1 year ago with a history of road traffic accident. She complained of pain in the lower back region. On examination, her vitals were stable. The pelvic compression test was positive and there was a limb length discrepancy. Radiographs revealed a vertical shear pelvis . We planned for spinopelvic fusion surgery with anterior reconstruction of the pelvic ring. In the supine position, the symphyseal plating was done through an anterior approach. Then, the patient was flipped to prone position and a midline incision over the sacrum was applied followed by soft-tissue dissection. Pedicle screws were inserted from L4 to the ilium and rod was connected after the fracture was reduced. This was also supplemented with a buttress sacral plate (-). However, she started having a discharge from the wound on 4th day in the post-operative period. The wound was opened and VAC dressing was applied as shown in . In the absence of a commercial VAC device, the suction was connected to the wall-mounted suction. The dressing was changed on the 3rd day. However, it was noticed that a part of the polyurethane sponge was found to be adherent to the wound base . All attempts to remove the retained sponge failed and daily debridement and piecemeal removal was done. The patient was taken to our minor operating room daily and the parts of the adherent sponge that loosened out were removed using a 15-number surgical blade. The wound was irrigated with normal saline after the minor surgery and was covered. Everyday, the wound was dressed twice. Subsequently, by 2 weeks, the entire sponge was removed and the wound was found to be healthy and had developed a layer of granulation tissue . A keystone perforator flap was done to close the defect as shown in -. The patient was made to bear weight after 2 months of surgery with the help of a walker. Full weight-bearing without aids was started 4 months after the surgery. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient is doing fine and can walk without any aids. The wound has healed and there are no wound complications .