A 1-year-old girl with head trauma was admitted to our hospital in November 2016. At four weeks after surgery, the patient was febrile and disturbance of consciousness was observed.
The patient fell off the bed and mild head trauma was suspected. Incidentally, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed an intracranial space-occupying lesion . One week after the admission, the child underwent a brain tumor resection. Immunohistochemical staining of the specimens indicated a choroid plexus papilloma. On the fourth postoperative week, she suddenly developed an altered state of consciousness with febrile illness. External ventricular drainage was performed. During the course of the disease, the patient had no diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, cold, or any other discomfort.
The patient had no medical history of chronic diseases such as diabetes, coronary and other heart diseases, infectious diseases such as hepatitis and tuberculosis, surgery, blood transfusion, trauma, and drug allergy. The patient’s history of preventive inoculation was unknown.
She was operated for a choroid plexus papilloma in November 2016. The rest of the personal and family history was unexceptional.
At admission, the patient showed stable vital signs; however, the skin on the right side of the forehead was swollen, approximately 5.5 cm × 4 cm in size. On the fourth postoperative week, she suddenly developed an altered state of consciousness and hypertonia of limbs, along with the disappearance of the direct and indirect pupillary light reflexes.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed a white blood cell count of 500/mm3. The patient was diagnosed with meningitis and intravenous administrations of meropenem (120 mg/kg/d divided q8h) and vancomycin (60 mg/kg/d divided q6h) were initiated; however, the patient did not show any improvement. After 5 d, CSF analysis showed a white blood cell count of 40000/mm3, protein concentration of 573 mg/dL, and glucose concentration of 0 mmol/L. CSF culture was positive for A. baumannii, which was sensitive only to tigecycline and colistin while it showed varying degrees of resistance to penicillin, amikacin, ceftriaxone, cefixime, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, gentamicin, meropenem, imipenem, and tobramycin.