A previously healthy 78-year-old Japanese woman with mild diabetes mellitus and hypertension presented to a neighborhood clinic with general fatigue since July, and progressive muscle weakness and walk disturbances since September 2012. She had no specific family medical history. She complained of progressive illness and fever in November 2012, and was diagnosed with severe edema of the lower extremities; however, no specific neurological abnormalities were detected except mild muscle weakness in the lower extremities. Her blood tests at that time showed a normal white blood cell (WBC) count (5.2 × 109/L), mild hyponatremia (sodium level 133mEq/mL), and elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (16.23mg/dL) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (950U/L). No abnormal findings were detected on her ultrasound tomography or systemic computed tomography (CT) scans. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain revealed a hyperintense lesion in the central pons area in T2-weighted imaging, diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging with no mass effect.
She was admitted to our emergency department in a state of shock in December 2012. Her blood tests showed greatly elevated CRP (25.25mg/dL) and LDH (1475U/L) levels, an almost normal WBC count (9.4 × 109/L), and a low platelet count (94 × 109/L), which decreased to 48 × 109/L and 40 × 109/L, respectively, in the following days. She had severe hypoalbuminemia (1.64g/dL) and mild hyponatremia (sodium 132mEq/mL), and showed signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation. A lumbar puncture showed that her cerebrospinal fluid pressure was within normal limits, with no pleocytosis, abnormal cells, or elevation of sugar or protein. Mild bilateral pleural effusion, prominent subcutaneous edema, and splenomegaly were detected on her systemic CT scan. Her body fluid cultures (blood, urine, sputum, and cerebrospinal fluid) did not show signs of infection, and she tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus infection. Her bone marrow examination showed a hypercellular bone marrow with numerous large lymphoma cells. A G-band analysis revealed complex karyotypes, and immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)-JH gene rearrangement was detected. Lymphoma cells, which were positive for CD20 and MT1 and negative for CD3 , were also present in vessels, particularly in larger vessels, but not in capillary vessels, in the epidermis, or dermis .
She was diagnosed with stage IVB diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and identified as high risk according to the international prognostic index score. As she was critically ill before the diagnosis was made (she required mechanical ventilation and central venous catheter insertion), she was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy, followed by systemic chemotherapy (rituximab with modified THP-COP regimen, including cyclophosphamide, pirarubicin, vindesine, and prednisolone). Despite the presence of grade 4 neutropenia, her physical condition improved markedly after her first course of chemotherapy, with gradual correction of her hyponatremia and hypoalbuminemia. After two courses of chemotherapy, no lymphoma cells were detected on her bone marrow examination, and the hyperintense lesion in the central pons on T2/FLAIR imaging had decreased in size and intensity. After four courses of chemotherapy, the hyperintense lesion was even smaller, with no enhancement on gadolinium imaging, and after seven courses, it was almost undetectable . Her serum sodium levels showed a slow and gradual correction: 132mEq/mL at presentation to our department, 137mEq/mL after two courses of chemotherapy, and 140mEq/mL after seven courses of chemotherapy. A complete response was achieved and sustained after nine courses of chemotherapy. She showed complete recovery and was discharged without any sequelae. However, she relapsed nine months after her last chemotherapy. She was retreated with salvage chemotherapy and showed a partial response, but eventually died of lymphoma five months later.