A-30-year-old woman presented to her general practitioner with episodic epigastric pain radiating to the left flank over a period of 6 months. She had a history of migraines but was otherwise well with no previous abdominal operations.
The pain was somewhat positional, improving when the left side was dependent. It was exacerbated by food—solids more than fluids—and she had noted some recent weight loss. Colonoscopy was normal; gastroscopy revealed mild gastritis, but initiation of a proton pump inhibitor (omeprazole 20 mg daily) made no improvement in symptoms. There may have also been a component of superior mesenteric artery syndrome present alongside findings consistent with nutcracker syndrome; however, this could not be substantiated as there was no imaging to support this claim. Urinalysis revealed no significant findings and no hematuria.
A CT venogram demonstrated compression of the LRV between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta with a prominent left ovarian vein (LOV) as seen in . Her pain worsened and became constant despite negative findings on repeat gastroscopy, and the decision was made to proceed with angiography and angioplasty with a view for intervention on the LRV.
Access was gained via a 7F sheath placed in the right common femoral vein under local anesthesia. The LRV was cannulated, and angiograms were performed, demonstrating the venous dilatation and reflux into an engorged left ovarian vein . A 10 mm × 40 mm Amada 35 balloon (Abbot Laboratories, Chicago, IL, United States) was inflated across the point of maximal stenosis. Remarkably, the patient had instant and profound relief of symptoms, describing herself as pain-free for the first time in many months; however, once the balloon was deflated, the pain recurred over the course of 30–60 s, only to be relieved again by a second balloon inflation.
A 16 mm × 40 mm Zilver Vena self-expanding stent (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, United States) was deployed. No post-stent angioplasty with balloon was performed as there were already concerns regarding the oversizing of the stent. Disappointingly, the deployment was associated with an immediate recurrence of significant pain. Checking angiograms showed resolution of the stenosis and the absence of reflux into the ovarian vein. The pain improved over the course of the next few hours and was completely settled by the second postoperative day. She was discharged on 2 months of apixaban 5 mg b.i.d. and long-term aspirin 100 mg daily. She was symptom-free at 3-month follow-up with a duplex ultrasound demonstrating resolution of stenosis . On further follow-up at 35 months, the patient continued to be symptom-free with no complications.