A 49-year-old female with a 5-year history of hypertension was hospitalized for grand mal seizures. Six months prior to hospitalization, the patient had been diagnosed with right basal ganglia hemorrhage via computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure A) and underwent treatment by hemorrhage debridement and craniotomy decompression surgery. The surgical routine included the application of Surgicel™ to stop bleeding in the surgical bed. The postoperative recovery was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged to resume independent living. Two months after hemorrhage treatment, the patient received a titanium plate to restore the skull structure. Five months after hemorrhage treatment, the patient suffered two grand mal seizures, which featured transient loss of consciousness and limb rigidity, with episodes lasting approximately 5 minutes. Physical examination upon hospital admission showed left upper limb muscle strength of grade II, left lower limb muscle strength of grade IV, and positive left Babinski sign, but no signs of neurological defect.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies showed an irregularly shaped lesion in the right frontal temporal lobe and basal ganglia, with a mixed signal (Figure B) including reduced signals in T1WI and T2WI and an increased signal indicative of dark fluid. After the signal was strengthened, the MRI-detected lesion measured 1.7 cm × 3.7 cm (Figure C,
D). Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) studies showed a focal signal of heterogeneous intensity, an unstable spectral baseline in the lesion due to signal interference of liquid and hemosiderin, and an increased choline (Cho) peak and Cho/N-acetylaspartate (NAA) ratio. The presence of abnormal gliosis in the right frontotemporal lesion area led to a diagnosis of suspected tumor (Figure ).
The space-occupying lesion was surgically resected. The titanium plate was removed, and the frontotemporal lesion and related dural adhesions were visually identified. The gross appearance of the lesion included pale coloration, rough surface, poor blood supply, and clear boundaries. The bottom of the lesion was tightly adhered to the lateral ventricle. Under microscopic guidance, the lesion was completely resected. The patient’s postoperative recovery was unremarkable. A CT scan 5 days after surgery showed complete lesion exenteration.
Pathological analysis indicated a foreign body response, as evidenced by substantial amounts of foam-like cells distributed throughout the lesion. The presence of gliosis led to the final diagnosis of a giant-cell granuloma caused by Surgicel™ application (Figure ). The patient was discharged to home 8 days after surgery. There were no remarkable physical, clinical, or imaging findings at the 6-month follow-up visit.