An 86-year-old woman (body mass index of 20.5 kg/m2) with a history of depression was admitted to the emergency room due to sudden-onset, non-radiating precordial pain lasting 9 h. Dyspnea, nausea, and back pain were not reported. She was taking escitalopram 5 mg as needed and had no family history of GBC. On physical examination, her abdomen was soft, flat, and scar-free. Electrocardiogram (ECG) did not show ST segment changes. On blood examination, her cardiac enzyme, white blood cell, and C-reactive protein levels were not elevated; however, her hemoglobin level was low (6.4 g/dL). Computed tomography (CT) revealed a tense gallbladder with a heterogeneous, high-density area (a) with no evidence of pleurisy or aortic dissection. Contrast-enhanced CT showed no obvious contrast extravasation in the gallbladder or obvious mass lesions. Increased pericholecystic attenuation on arterial-phase CT was confirmed, which indicated the possibility of acute cholecystitis (b). Due to the risk of acute cholecystitis and gallbladder perforation, we performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy without lymphadenectomy. Operative findings did not reveal any evidence of malignancy in the gallbladder serosa. Congestive findings were noted from the body to the fundus of the gallbladder . The total operating time was 47 min, while the intraoperative blood loss was 5 mL. Two units of red blood cells were transfused intraoperatively. The patient had no postoperative complications.
Examination of the resected specimen revealed a blood clot-filled gallbladder lumen and a gallbladder body with a papillary, infiltrating-type lesion measuring 25 × 17 mm . Histopathological examination revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder invading perimuscular connective tissue on the peritoneal side with no extension to the serosa (T2a according to the 8th edition of the UICC TNM classification).
The precordial pain disappeared postoperatively. Although the tumor depth was T2a, considering her age and general condition, the patient and her family decided to forgo additional gallbladder bed resection or S4/5 hepatic bisegmentectomy and lymphadenectomy.