A 55-year-old Hispanic female with newly diagnosed T3N0 poorly differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell features presented to the Valleywise Health Medical Center Emergency Department 2 weeks after pyloric stenting and first cycle of neoadjuvant chemotherapy at a different facility with symptoms of intractable nausea and emesis. Initial workup with computed tomography (CT) scan was concerning for an occluded stent resulting in gastric outlet obstruction. Patient was admitted to the hospital and underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) that revealed high grade stricture due to tumor ingrowth within the stent. General Surgery was thus consulted, and a venting gastrostomy tube and distal feeding jejunostomy tube placement was recommended at this time to bridge the patient through her neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to definitive cancer resection. The surgery was uncomplicated, and patient was initiated on trickle jejunal tubefeeds on postoperative day (POD) 1 and advanced to goal by POD2. Patient initially tolerated the tubefeeds well but was noted with interval development of a diffuse maculopapular rash that improved mildly with antihistamine therapy. On POD3 patient began experiencing abdominal discomfort and nausea, with return of new bloody output from her venting gastrostomy tube. Within a period of 6 h, her abdominal exam became significantly more distended and tender without peritonitis, and the patient became increasingly lethargic. An abdominal plain film at this time revealed dilated loops of small bowel with pneumatosis. A follow up CT scan confirmed presence of diffuse pneumatosis as well as portal venous gas .
The patient was taken emergently for an exploratory laparotomy, and a total of 160 cm of small bowel was resected for frank necrosis . The bowel was left in discontinuity, and the patient was taken back for two more exploratory laparotomies where more small bowel was resected prior to final restoration of intestinal continuity. A feeding jejunostomy tube was replaced, and jejunal aspirates were collected at this time. Surgical pathology confirmed extensive mucosal necrosis with inflammation, submucosal pneumatosis intestinalis, and foci of transmural inflammation along with an abundance of bacteria with mixed features . Quantitative cultures from the jejunal aspirates revealed 108 CFU/g. The diagnosis of small intestinal bacterial overgrowth was concluded at this time, and the patient was started on Rifaximin, Zosyn, Bactrim, linezolid, and Diflucan. Serial jejunal aspirates were obtained for quantitative analysis, and the patient was supported nutritionally with total parenteral nutrition for 2 weeks until her bacterial counts were below diagnostic criteria for SIBO to allow for re-initiation of enteral nutrition. Patient was transitioned to PO rifaximin and linezolid, and the tubefeed administration rate was slowly increased to goal over the course of 10 days with careful monitoring of symptoms. Patient was eventually discharged home 7 weeks after initial hospital admission with hospice care and passed away a few months later.