A 5-year-old female child had a trivial slip and fall and complained of pain in her left hip following the fall. She was unable to bear weight over the left lower limb following the fall. On examination, she was found to have swelling and tenderness over the left hip. Radiographs revealed an expansile, lytic lesion in the metaphysis of the left proximal femur. Trabeculations were visible within the lesion. Cortical breach was present resulting in a pathological fracture. The child underwent a biopsy of the lesion, which showed anastomosing cavernous areas lined by fibrous tissue and filled with blood. A diagnosis of ABC was made. It was classified as stage 3 (aggressive) as per Enneking’s staging of benign musculoskeletal neoplasms. We performed an extended curettage of the lesion, bone grafting, and angle blade plate fixation. The child was followed up regularly and the fracture was radiologically found to have healed completely. The angle blade plate was removed 1 year after the surgery.
Two year following the curettage surgery, child complained of pain in the left hip for 2 months. The pain was insidious in onset, dull aching type, non-radiating, and gradually progressive. On examination, the scar from the previous surgery was found to have healed completely and there were no other significant findings. She had painless, full range of movements of the left hip joint. There was no limb length discrepancy compared to the contralateral limb. Radiographs showed an eccentrically located, geographic lytic lesion in the metaphysis of proximal femur surrounding the dense opacity of the previously inserted bone graft. Pattern of destruction could be identified as Lodwick pattern IB. Cortical thinning and periosteal scalloping were noted in the lesion. There was a narrow zone of transition. Cortex was found to be intact and there was no periosteal reaction. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-defined lobular lesion in the metaphysis of proximal femur extending into the diaphysis, and measuring 5.8 × 3.3 × 2.8 cm. Multiple blood fluid levels were noted. Thin incomplete septations were also noted. It was diagnosed to be a recurrence of ABC. We then performed an extended curettage, creating a large cortical window, and performed curettage with high speed burr and thermal cauterization of the lesion. We also augmented the curetted lesion with bone substitute. We stabilized the region using a proximal humerus internal locking system (PHILOS – Depuy Synthes® Switzerland) plate and screws as the pediatric proximal femur locking plate was unavailable at the time. The histopathological examination of intraoperative samples confirmed the diagnosis of recurrence of ABC. We followed up the child for 3 years and found no further recurrence of the tumor. She was walking unaided and had full range of the movement of the left hip joint.