A 77-years-old, male (height, 163 cm; weight, 52 kg) was scheduled for carotid endarterectomy (CEA) due to right internal carotid artery stenosis. He had a history of atrial fibrillation for 8 years, spinal canal stenosis, arteriosclerosis obliterans, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, dyslipidemia, right lower extremity ulceration due to diabetes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease without hemodialysis. He took 0.625 mg/day bisoprolol fumarate, 20 mg/day nifedipine, and 30 mg/day edoxaban tosilate hydrate. Preoperative electrocardiogram (ECG) showed atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 47/min, complete right bundle branch block, and inverted T waves in V1–4 leads with a normal QRS axis. Echocardiography showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 66%, no wall motion abnormalities, and no valvular disease. Blood tests showed blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 31.8 mg/dl, creatinine 2.46 mg/dl, Na 138 mmol/L, K 5.3 mmol/L, and Mg 2.1 mg/dL. HbA1c is 5.9%. His exercise tolerance exceeded four metabolic equivalents (METs).
General anesthesia was induced with propofol and fentanyl, and rocuronium was administered to facilitate tracheal intubation. Remifentanil, fentanyl, and desflurane were administered to maintain general anesthesia. After induction of anesthesia, atrial fibrillation returned to sinus rhythm. Upon the surgeon’s request, continuous intravenous phenylephrine was initiated to maintain systolic blood pressure in the range of 120 to 160 mmHg. A near-infrared brain oxygen monitor (NIRO) was applied to both sides of the forehead. After clamping the right carotid artery, the tissue oxygenation index (TOI) from the NIRO gradually decreased from 53 to 27%. Due to the patient’s hyperbranched right carotid artery, it was difficult for the surgeon to closely check the peripheral anastomosis site. During surgery, bleeding from the needle hole occurred. Severe calcification of the carotid artery prevented the detection of bleeding, and short-term bleeding reached up to 1600 ml. Even after completion of hemostasis, a low TOI persisted (19%). Intraoperative carotid angiography revealed carotid artery dissection, and a bailout stenting was planned. To maintain cerebral blood flow thereafter, hypercapnic ventilation (Max PaCO2 59.5 mmHg) was employed at this point. The TOI improved to 66%.
When the surgeon touched the dissected carotid artery before the guidewire crossed the true lumen of the lesion, VF had occurred . The anesthesiologist immediately recognized the VF and alarmed surgeons to stop surgery and start chest compressions.
Electrical defibrillation (biphasic 150 J) was performed 1 min later, which quickly restored sinus rhythm. After the sinus rhythm had been restored, systemic hypotension persisted, requiring incremental intravenous bolus noradrenaline (0.1 mg), and chest compressions were required. After 0.3 mg of intravenous adrenaline was administered three minutes after the onset of VF, blood pressure recovered to the normal range. No blood electrolyte abnormalities other than hypomagnesemia (Na 134 mmol/L, K 4.6 mmol/L, Cl 109 mmol/L, Ca2+ 1.09 mmol/L, Mg 1.6 mg/dL) were found. ECG showed inverted T waves in V1–4 leads, flat T waves in V5–6, and QT prolongation. Blood transfusions and continuous noradrenaline and landiolol infusions were initiated. The surgical procedure was resumed after the hemodynamics stabilized. The duration of surgery was 7 h 21 min, and the duration of anesthesia was 9 h 58 min.
The patient was transferred to the ICU postoperatively with the trachea intubated in a stable condition. On ICU admission, V4–6 ST depression was noted, and echocardiography showed hypokinesis in the anterior to the apex and inferior left ventricular wall. A high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I (cTnl) level was elevated (6335pg/ml, on POD1). Although reduced wall motion and elevated cardiac enzyme levels led us to suspect myocardial ischemia, coronary angiography was avoided due to the possibility of further deterioration of renal function with the use of contrast media. The patient was extubated on postoperative day (POD) 1. The catecholamine support was weaned off on POD 2. He was discharged from the ICU and moved to the general ward on postoperative day (POD) 6. There was no further recurrence of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmia. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 18 without further examination. Three months after discharge, the patient was readmitted to the hospital for gastrointestinal bleeding. During hospitalization, the patient died of intractable and progressive heart failure.