An 83-year-old man was firstly admitted to hospital 13 years ago for prostatic adenocarcinoma and underwent radical prostatectomy. He also received adjuvant radiotherapy and annual injection of leuprorelin (enantoneR) for a biochemical recurrence characterized by a prostate-specific-antigen (PSA) level of 4.60 ng/mL detected 2 years after surgery. Clinical evolution was favorable and serum PSA level has progressively decreased to lesser than 0.1 ng/mL. At 8-years follow-up, he presented with an abundant gross hematuria. Serum PSA level was slightly increased (0.60 ng/ml). A cystoscopy was performed showing a nodular tumor growth on the right side of the lateral bladder wall that appeared as a large calcified tumor on computed tomography. Transurethral resection of bladder (TURB) was carried out. Tumor specimens consisted of small fragments of whitish firmer tissue. Microscopic examination showed frond like papillary projections which were lined by thick layers of stratified transitional epithelial cells with central fibrovascular cores. There was a predominant disorderly pattern with marked variation of architectural features. Tumor epithelial cells focally showed prominent cytologic abnormalities with moderate to significant nuclear pleomorphism. Quite numerous mitotic figures were observed and prominent nucleoli were also present in places. In some areas, the tumor cells disrupted the basement membrane and invaded into the lamina propria. The muscularis propria was respected. All these findings were consistent with the diagnosis of high-grade papillary urothelial carcinoma with infiltration of lamina propria (pT1 stage). Coexisting urothelial carcinoma in situ was found focally (Cis). The tumor stroma contained multiple bone trabeculae of variable size, lamellated or coarsed-fibred and separated by loose fibrous connective tissue with osteoid seams . Those osteoid and bony structures were outlined by numerous isolated large cells with abundant blue cytoplasm and quite numerous multinucleated giant cells that respectively correspond to osteoblasts and osteoclasts, without atypia nor pleomorphic stromal cells . No cartilage formation was observed. Immunohistochemistry showed in osteoid areas and bone tissue, a positive expression of CD56 in osteoblasts. There was a discrete and heterogeneous staining for PS100, a discrete immunoreactivity for P53, and a Ki67 index of 20% in tumor cells. MDM2 and CDK4 immunostaining was negative in both metaplastic bone and carcinomatous components. Multinucleated osteoclasts were also strongly stained by CD68 . At 2-months follow-up after TURB, a control cystoscopy was performed and showed necrotic zone and retractile fibrous scar on the right side of the bladder trigone which were completely excised by secondary TURB. Those remaining lesions correspond essentially to fibro-inflammatory changes without residual tumor. Six courses of BCG therapy have been indicated. Two local recidives with recurrent episodes of gross hematuria have occurred during an 8-month follow-up period after immunotherapy. These local tumor recurrences displayed the same histological findings that demonstrated a high grade papillary urothelial carcinoma with superficial invasion of the lamina propria but were devoided of SOM foci. The multidisciplinary discussion recommended six further courses of BCG therapy at the time of the first recurrence. The second tumor recurrence appeared 2 months later and has been completely excised.
At one-month follow-up, the patient was well and did not complain of any symptoms.