A 61-year-old female patient was admitted to a local hospital in August 2018 because of irritating cough and progressively increasing breathlessness over a duration of 4 weeks. Rinopharyngeal thoracic computed tomography scans showed severe luminal obstruction of the middle upper segment of the trachea caused by a mass. Rigid tracheoscopy was performed, revealing an endotracheal mass with a wide base originating in the posterior lateral wall of the trachea occluding 75 % of the lumen. The tumour was then endoscopically resected through high-frequency electric coagulation, cutting and argon plasma coagulation in that hospital. Postoperative pathology gave a misdiagnosis of clear cell sarcoma of the trachea. The patient was free of any discomfort until April 2019. Then, she complained of the reappearance of nonproductive cough and shortness of breath, which gradually worsened.
This patient was subsequently admitted to our hospital in June 2019. Cervicothoracic CT scans revealed a 2.5 × 1.8 × 1.6 cm mass arising from the right posterior lateral wall of the trachea approximately 4.5 cm below the glottis and 4.7 cm above the carina with a suspicious extension of the oesophageal wall . Bronchoscopy was performed, showing a cauliflower-like mass obstructing 60 % of the tracheal lumen. After obtaining biopsies, an in-site exfoliated cell smear was performed, which indicated suspicious tumour cells with nuclear atypia. Tumour debulking was then performed through high-frequency electric coagulation and cutting to alleviate airway obstruction. This patient gained obvious relief from the obstructive symptoms postoperatively.
Histopathology revealed diffuse spindle cells with pleomorphic nuclei and translucent cytoplasm. Mitoses and necrosis were noted. The tumour cells were positive for S100 , SOX-10, and vimentin but negative for pancytokeratin, SMA, desmin, transcription factor E3 (TFE3), and master myogenic regulatory factor (MyoD1) by immunohistochemistry. Melanocytic-specific markers, such as HMB45 and melan-A, were also negative. Thus, taken together, the morphologic and immunohistochemical features favoured the diagnosis of a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour (MPNST). Owing to the epithelioid morphology and diffuse S100 immunoreactivity, an unusual variant of an epithelioid MPNST was therefore determined. The tumour of this patient was further classified as a sporadic MPNST since no related signs of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) were noted.
Because of the rarity of this disease, this case was discussed in a multidisciplinary tumour board meeting. A consensus was reached, and this patient was later treated with tracheal resection and tracheoplasty through a median sternotomy approach. Intraoperative exploration did not find obvious neoplastic involvement of the oesophageal wall. The length of the resected trachea was approximately 3 cm. Both margins turned out to be negative. The airway was reconstructed with a posterior continuous suture and an anterior row of interrupted sutures, and the anastomosis was covered with autologous thymus tissue. This patient experienced an uneventful postoperative course. At her six-month postoperative follow-up, she continued to do well without complications or evidence of recurrence . The patient is scheduled to receive regular follow-up evaluations every 6 months using computed tomography and bronchoscopy to monitor for recurrence.