A 30-year-old multigravida (g3p2, repeated cesarean section) 32-weeks pregnant patient reported to the emergency service at 10 PM with complaints of chills, cough and shortness of breath that started 6 days ago. She had no medical history and her previous pregnancies had normal processes. There has never been a COVID-19 vaccine. Her respiratory rate was 26/min, blood pressure was 110/75 mm Hg, oxygen-free saturation was 84%, and body temperature was 38.8 °C. There was no uterine activity.
Initial laboratory examinations of the patient in the emergency room revealed lymphopenia, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets, increased Prothrombin Time (PT/INR) and activated Partial Thromboplastin Time (aPTT), high D-dimer, high total bilirubin, and high LDH; hemoglobin and kidney function tests were normal. The patient’s laboratory findings were evaluated as compatible with HELLP syndrome . Gynecological examination by obstetrician (no uterine tenderness, no foul-smelling discharge, no amniotic discharge in speculum examination and ponding test), Ultrasound findings (head presentation, fetal heart rate: 145/min, amniotic fluid volume normal, biparietal diameter normal, placenta anterior) and NST findings (no reactive contraction) were normal. With these findings, the patient was admitted to the 3rd level intensive care unit reserved for COVID-19 patients, with preliminary diagnoses of COVID-19, sepsis and HELLP syndrome.
In the intensive care follow-up, the patient accepted the tomography recommendation, and bilateral diffuse ground glass areas, diffuse peripheral interstitial thickening and bilateral mild pleural effusion were found in the thorax CT examination, and these findings were reported to be compatible with viral pneumonia (COVID-19) . Immediately after this, the oropharyngeal swab sample obtained for the COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was positive. Also, hepatitis markers studied and HIV test were negative. There was no growth in the blood and urine cultures taken on the first day. Serum electrolytes (Na, K, Cl, Ca, P, Mg) and cardiac markers (Troponin I, CKMB) were normal. Anti-Covid treatment (Lopinavir/Ritonavir, Hydroxychloroquine) was started upon the recommendation of the infection specialist, after obtaining the patient’s written consent.
The patient became hypertensive (blood pressure value ≥185/120 in consecutive measurements) at the end of the second day of hospitalization. Pregnant patient’s oxygen-free saturation dropped below 80% and a change in consciousness level developed. The patient was intubated in this condition. Obstetrician was consulted again to evaluate the possibility of termination of pregnancy, but they decided to operate the patient if hemodynamic stabilization was achieved. Our pregnant patient did not have risk factors for preeclampsia such as twin pregnancy and first pregnancy. However, hypertension developed. Therefore, the patient was started on antihypertensive treatment (sodium nitroprusside) and magnesium sulfate for seizure prophylaxis upon the recommendation of the obstetricians.
Haptoglobin studied on the 2nd day of hospitalization was 21 mg/dl, Reticulocyte Count was 98,109/L, Corrected Reticulocyte Percentage (Ret% ×HCT /45) was 2.93 and direct COOMBS test was negative. Abdominal USG was evaluated as normal (liver size, parenchyma echo was normal) and there was no acute fatty liver of pregnancy. In addition, Anti Ds DNA studied for differential diagnosis of HELLP Syndrome, IFT (5.88 IU/mL), Lupus anticoagulant/confirmation test (31.6 sec), Anti-nuclear Antibody (FANA) (IFA), Anti Cardiolipin IgG (5.6 GPL-U/ mL) was found to be negative on the 3rd day of hospitalization. In addition to these, thyroid function tests, vit-B, folic acid levels, Brucella Agglutination (Rose Bengal), lipase, urine microscopy and culture were also normal.
However, in the echocardiography performed on the 3rd day of the intensive care follow-up, segmental wall motion defects were detected and myocarditis was considered in the forefront by the cardiologist in the patient who developed concurrent troponin and CRP elevations. For the patient who was consulted again with the obstetrics and gynecology department on the same day (day three) (due to a progressive deterioration in maternal oxygen saturation, progressive deterioration in the blood picture despite platelet, FFP, fibrinogen replacement, a deterioration parallel to the pregnant’s baseline low in the NST follow-up of the fetus and in order to protect the fetus from hypoxic damage as much as possible), cesarean delivery was recommended. Thereupon, the patient was given preoperative two units of erythrocyte suspension, five units of platelet, two units of fresh frozen plasma transfusion with the recommendation of internal medicine physicians, and a singleton live baby boy via CS with Apgar scores of two and six was delivered on the third day of her hospitalization. Following delivery, the general condition and vital signs of the newborn deteriorated rapidly and he was intubated. Chest X-ray was normal, but the fetus was confirmed to be positive for COVID-19. Pancytopenia and renal failure developed on the 2nd day of intensive care hospitalization. The newborn died on the 5th postnatal day.
During the intensive care treatment, fluid, electrolyte, blood and blood products resuscitation, antihypertensive treatment, magnesium sulfate, antibiotherapy, hemodialysis due to anuria continued to be applied, however, the general condition of the patient gradually deteriorated. Brain MRI examination performed on the 9th day of her hospitalization revealed normal brain MRI findings. However, many attempts to extubate the patient were unsuccessful, and unfortunately the mother patient died on the 10th day of her hospitalization. This case belongs to a research proposal with ethical approval code of Mogadishu Somalia Recep Tayyip Erdogan Training and Research Hospital institutional Medical Ethics Committee (MSTH/8135).