A 58-year-old previously healthy Caucasian woman initially presented to our institute with headaches, nausea, and photophobia. She was found to have a 4.7 × 4.2 × 3.6–cm hemorrhagic right temporal lobe mass. She underwent emergent right craniotomy and mass resection, and the tumor pathology was consistent with glioblastoma. In laboratory examinations to evaluate her baseline hepatic function before chemoradiation, the results were aspartate transaminase 22 IU/L (normal range 5–34 IU/L), alanine transaminase 14 IU/L (normal range 5–55 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase 90 U/L (normal range 40–150 U/L), and total bilirubin 0.4 mg/dl (normal range 0.2–1.2 mg/dl). The patient’s medications during chemoradiation were temozolomide, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and ondansetron, and no supplements (herbal or over-the-counter vitamins) were used during chemoradiation.
Six weeks after initiation of temozolomide and radiation therapy, the patient was admitted to the hospital for rapidly increasing transaminitis (aspartate transaminase 425 IU/L, alanine transaminase 1028 IU/L), elevated alkaline phosphatase (291 U/L), and hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 7.9 mg/dl) discovered in routine weekly blood work. She presented with jaundice and dark urine but otherwise was asymptomatic. The results of her infection workup (hepatitis panel, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV) and her autoimmune workup (antinuclear antibody, smooth muscle antibody, antimitochondrial antibody, immunoglobulins) were negative, and her liver ultrasound was unremarkable. She was not on any other hepatotoxic medications at the time of admission. Temozolomide was held on admission, and, although her aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase levels improved, her total bilirubin continued to rise. Her initial liver biopsy pathology was consistent with a cholestatic pattern of injury with mild ductopenia and portal eosinophilia consistent with a drug-induced liver injury.
Three weeks after admission, the patient’s total bilirubin rose to a peak of 36.8 mg/dl, and repeat liver biopsy revealed progression to severe biliary ductopenia, consistent with vanishing bile duct syndrome. She was started on a trial of ursodeoxycholic acid and zinc with gradual improvement of her transaminitis and hyperbilirubinemia over several months. After discontinuation of temozolomide, she completed radiation. She did not have any further therapy except radiation while her hepatic function normalized. She relapsed approximately 9 months later and was then treated with re-resection followed by reradiation. Since her reradiation, the patient has had no evidence of recurrence and undergoes follow-up magnetic resonance imaging every 3 months. She has been followed for a total of 2 years and is currently without evidence of disease.