The patient was 67 years old and male with a history of hepatitis B going back 30+ years and a history of hypertension going back 10+ years. He had never taken antiviral treatment, but his blood pressure was under control. He had undergone repeated hematemesis 5+ years earlier, and gastroscopy revealed severe esophageal varices and gastric fundus varices. Intravenous pumping of proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) and somatostatin and gastroscopic tissue glue injection into the varicose veins showed a poor hemostatic effect. Abdominal CT indicated liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, a small amount of ascites, and portal hypertension accompanied by collateral circulation. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed multiple calcification of the abdominal aortic wall, dilated portal and splenic veins, and varices of the lower esophagus and gastric fundus. Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) was performed, and 2 stents (1 COOK bare stent, and 1 BARD covered stent) were placed. The discharge diagnosis of the patient 5 years ago was “post-hepatitis B cirrhosis (decompensation stage) with portal hypertension, upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, post-TIPS, and hypertension grade 3.”
At a physical examination 10+ days ago, a 3/6 grade systolic blowing murmur was detected at the left edge of the sternum, hepatic jugular vein reflux sign was negative, and there was no heart palpitation, shortness of breath, syncope, amaurosis, or lower extremity edema detectable. Cardiac color Doppler ultrasound revealed two tubular hyperechoic shadows in the right ventricle , significantly enlarged right heart (right atrium with transverse diameter of 56 mm, and right ventricular with base transverse diameter of 51 mm), and severe tricuspid regurgitation . Cardiac CTA showed tubular high-density shadow in the tricuspid valve area and right ventricle . Liver ultrasound showed tubular hyperechoic shadow between the right hepatic vein and the right portal vein without blood flow signal in it . Abdominal CT reconstruction showed tubular shadow in the right portal vein that passes through the liver parenchyma to the proximal end of the inferior vena cava with low-density shadow filling within the tubular structure . Under general anesthesia, the foreign pieces in the right heart were removed and tricuspid valve replacement surgery was performed. During the operation, a stent fragment was found to be tightly attached to the posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve , and the other two fragments of the stent were attached to the right ventricular trabeculae, one of which was short and small. The stent fragment at the valve leaflet attachment location was difficult to remove, so part of the posterior leaflet was cut along the attached stent to completely remove the stent fragment. The hyperplasia tissue at the root of the leaflet where the fragment attached was cleared, and the stent fragments in the right ventricular were also removed, retrieving a total of three stent fragments . Half a month after the operation, cardiac color Doppler ultrasound showed that the diameter of the right heart had returned to normal and no tricuspid regurgitation was observed.