A 50-year-old male was admitted to our department because of pain and limited range of movement of his left nondominant shoulder. Five months before he had been involved in a motor vehicle accident and underwent multiple lesions including moderate thoracic injury, occipital condyle fracture and left ipsilateral midshaft clavicle and scapular neck/body fracture .
Shoulder girdle treatment, at the time of the accident, was limited to clavicle open reduction and internal fixation with plate and screws. Attempts at physical therapy were made, but were unsuccessful due to persistent stiffness at pain during mobilization.
Clinical assessment showed a severe impairment of shoulder function with active and passive forward flexion limited to 80° (normal 180°) , absent external rotation (normal 90°) , and internal rotation limited to the buttock.
The preoperative Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) Score was 73.3, whereas the Total Shoulder Pain and Disability Index (SPADI) was 88.5% (Total Pain Score 80%, Total Disability Score 93.8%). DASH Score and SPADI are self-reported questionnaires commonly used to measure upper limb and shoulder pain and disability; or both the scales the more positive is the outcome, the score decreases.
Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scan showed a discrepancy between normal metrics for scapular imaging and patient’s morphology with an excessive lateral border offset of 53 mm (cut off 20 mm) and complete displacement of the glenoid segment anteriorly and medially to the scapular body, with impingement between the lateral most prominent scapular bone spur and humeral shaft. Glenopolar angle was 19° (accepted when > 22°), scapular body angulation on the sagittal plane was 12° (should not exeed 45°) .
According to close to normal scapular body angulation and lower end of abnormal glenopolar angle, pain, disability and surgical indication seemed to arise from scapulo-humeral impingement .
CT DICOM files of both scapulae were sent to an external company (Medics Srl, Moncalieri, Italy) to develop a 3D model and an interactive virtual plan which allowed us to fully understand the deformity, by comparing the affected scapula to the healthy side in a mirroring procedure. The scapula deformity consisted in medialization and anterior displacement of the glenoid fragment, further enhanced by scapular body fragment lateralization. The scapula spine fragment showed forward inclination on the sagittal plane .
Surgical strategy consisted in separating the three main elements (glenoid, body and spine) through an osteotomy line between scapular spine and body and a second osteotomy between glenoid and scapular body .
Therefore, a first guide was created to separate scapular spine from scapular body along the previous fracture plane and to allow for lateralization correction through a bone wedge removal. The second guide, to perform an osteotomy between glenoid and spine segments, was adapted to the local complex morphology determined by callus formation and to the course of the suprascapular neurovascular bundle. A patient-specific wedge was created to assist holding the reduction during plate fixation .
Surgical procedure was performed under general anesthesia on a radiolucent table. The patient was positioned in prone decubitus and a traditional Judet approach to the scapula was performed through a boomerang-shaped incision. As planned with the interactive software and on the model, the first guide was positioned at the superomedial angle and fixed with a K-wire . Osteotomies between the scapular spine and the body were performed with an oscillating saw and an osseous wedge was removed. The second guide was positioned laterally, based on the lateral margin of the scapular spine and on the glenoid rim, and an osteotomy between the glenoid and the scapular spine segments was performed .
Once the three main segments were separated and mobilized, reduction sequence started at the vertebral border, with correction of coronal and sagittal deformity, using pointed clamps and a patient-specific wedge, created to hold the correction obtained .
A 2.7-mm plate (Stryker VariAx 2 Mini Fragment Locking Plating System) was contoured around 90° to fit the angle between the vertebral border and the origin of the scapular spine and fixed with screws. Relationship and stability between the body and the spine segments was improved with a straight 2.7-mm plate (Stryker) contoured on the bony profile of the medial third of the scapular body and with a T-shaped 2.7-mm plate (Stryker) more laterally. Reduction between the obtained body-spine segment and the glenoid segment was performed with the aid of a Schanz screw implanted into the glenoid neck, with function of joystick, and a hook in the lateral border of the scapular body through a drilled hole. The Schanz screw allowed for direct manipulation of the glenoid segment, while the body was retracted distally and medially with the hook. Once a correct reduction was obtained, two 2.7-mm plates were contoured to fit the lateral border and fixed with screws .
Scapular shape and hardware position were checked with fluoroscopy in Grashey, axillary and axillary Y views.
After copious irrigation with saline solution, posterior deltoid and infraspinatus were reinserted with #2 absorbable transosseous sutures through the spine and the vertebral scapular border. The wound was closed in layers. The upper limb was hold in a 15-degree abduction brace for 3 weeks. Passive and active rehabilitation were then started.
Consolidation of the osteotomy was visible on x-rays after 3 months .
Clinical evaluation at 12-month follow-up showed an improved function of the shoulder girdle with 150° of active forward flexion, 30° of external rotation and internal rotation to the level of T12 .
The DASH Score decreased to 28.3 and Total SPADI decreased to 21.5% (Total Pain Score 24%, Total Disability Score 20%).
Lateral border offset, glenopolar angle and scapular body angulation were recalculated on a postoperative CT: glenopolar angle increased to 31°, scapular body angulation was 5° and lateral border offset decreased from 53 to 7 mm .