A 34-year-old woman presented with multiple episodes of recurrent upper abdominal pain associated with retching and vomiting. All episodes were treated at home with intramuscular metoclopramide, not requiring hospitalization. Her clinical examination noted only mild tenderness on upper abdominal examination. Haematological and biochemical profiling was performed, as were plain abdominal X-ray and abdominal sonography, and all were normal. She also underwent an endoscopic examination of the upper digestive tract, which revealed a suspected stomach rotation. Following this, the patient ingested a barium meal that showed an organo-axial rotation of this organ, confirming the presence of a volvulus. The patient was treated with nasogastric drainage, intravenous fluids and proton pump inhibitors. She was offered definitive surgical treatment for her condition by laparoscopic gastropexy.
Laparoscopy was performed under general endotracheal anaesthesia. A carboperitoneum of 12 to 14 mmHg was created through umbilical Veress needle insertion. A number 10 trocar was placed here for camera passage. A number 10 trocar was inserted in the right iliac fossa and a number 5 trocar was inserted in the left iliac fossa. A great number of peritoneal adhesions were found on examination of the abdominal cavity. No macroscopic diaphragmatic defect was found. A laxity of gastrocolic and gastrophrenic ligaments was found, associated with a medium-grade gastrectasis.
The major curve was approached by making an opening into the gastrocolic omentum, which was divided from the antrum to the fundus and skeletonised using an ultracision harmonic scalpel. Four Ethibond 2/0 seromuscular sutures were later placed, using the trocar ports to introduce the strands. The sutures were placed on the anterior wall of the stomach (two near the fundus on the major and lesser curve side and two on the gastric body on the major and lesser curve side). The needles were cut off, retrieved and both ends of the suture were exteriorized from the abdominal wall. The carboperitoneum was reduced by 5 mmHg in order to progress the stomach to the abdominal wall. The sutures were then tied into the subcutaneous tissue through port-site incisions. Adequate positioning of the stomach to the abdominal wall was confirmed by visualization from within. The trocars were removed and the wounds were closed.
The patient was allowed a fluid and light diet intake from the first postoperative day and was discharged on the second postoperative day. A year later she underwent a barium meal investigation which revealed no radiological abnormalities and she remained asymptomatic at a follow-up of 2 years.