A 12-year-old entire male domestic shorthair cat was referred with a 5 week history
of intermittent vomiting, loss of appetite and weight loss. A mid-abdominal mass had
been identified at the referring practice on abdominal radiographs and ultrasound,
with the origin not determined. The cat’s previous history included chronic
arthritis being treated intermittently with the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) meloxicam (Metacam; Boehringer Ingelheim), which was stopped by the
referring practice prior to presentation. The cat had been in remission from
diabetes mellitus for 2 years.
Blood work performed at the referring practice showed mild anaemia (haematocrit [HCT]
25.7 l/l; reference interval [RI] 30–45 l/l) that was not further characterised as
blood film examination or reticulocyte evaluation was not performed. A limited
biochemistry profile showed azotaemia, with creatinine at 254 μmol/l (RI 53–177
μmol/l) and urea of 11.5 mmol/l (RI 5.4–12.5 mmol/l). A urinalysis was not
performed.
An in-house SNAP ELISA for feline leukaemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus
was negative. Thoracic radiographs were unremarkable. An ultrasound-guided
fine-needle aspirate of the mass was performed, which showed heavy blood
contamination with a moderate number of large lymphocytes and reactive macrophages.
The sample was considered non-diagnostic.
On presentation at the University Teaching Hospital, Sydney, the cat was bright and
responsive, weighed 5.2 kg (body condition score 2/5) and had lost 900 g of weight
over the previous month. On physical examination, a grade III/VI parasternal
systolic heart murmur was auscultated. A large (6 × 4 cm), slightly irregular and
firm mass was palpated in the mid-abdomen. The left kidney was palpably smaller than
the right. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
A repeat abdominal ultrasound (Phillips EPIQ5; Phillips Medical Systems Netherlands)
using linear array and curvilinear array (5 Mhz) transducers identified a 50 × 67 mm
lobulated heterogeneous mass in the mid-abdomen adjacent to the mesenteric vessels
. The
ileocolic lymph node was mildly enlarged (short axis 6 mm) with normal sonographic
appearance. Nephrolithiasis and a decrease in size of the left kidney and presumed
compensatory hypertrophy of the right kidney were identified. Cytological
examination of the mass and the enlarged ileocolic lymph node by ultrasound-guided
fine-needle aspirate showed blood contamination and was considered inconclusive.
Ultrasound-guided core biopsies were obtained under sedation using a 14 G Tru-cut
biopsy needle (Becton Dickinson Australia).
Histopathological evaluation of the Tru-cut biopsy revealed a non-encapsulated
proliferation of irregular bands of pleomorphic spindle cells forming irregular
blood-filled spaces and interspersed with multiple foci of lymphoid tissue . The cells had large
round-to-angular, hyperchromic basophilic nuclei with 1–2 nucleoli, displaying
marked anisokaryosis and a mitotic index of 2/10 high-power fields . The cells had a
moderate amount of pale eosinophilic cytoplasm with indistinct cell boundaries. The
diagnosis of HSA was made based on the cytological features of malignancy in the
cell population forming vascular spaces.
The cat was started on oral metronomic chemotherapy with compounded 5 mg oral
cyclophosphamide (Bova Compounding Chemist, 16.6 mg/m2 daily). The cat’s
owner reported that the cat did well at home after starting treatment. There was one
single vomit and loss of appetite for 2 days that resolved on temporary
discontinuation of medication for 3 days. Four weeks after treatment started, the
cat’s appetite increased with only occasional vomiting (1–2 times a month). The cat
started gaining weight 6 weeks after commencing cyclophosphamide and maintained this
for 8 months. The abdominal mass was palpated to be similar size on physical
examination.
A complete blood count performed every 4–8 weeks revealed a mild, non-regenerative
microcytic, normochromic anaemia (HCT 24–28 l/l [RI 30–45 l/l]; mean cell volume
34–37 fl [RI 40–45 fl]), mild persistent thrombocytopenia (217–289 ×
109/l; RI 300–700 × 109/l) with lymphocytopenia (0.3–0.68 ×
109/l; RI 1.6–7 × 109/l). A biochemistry panel performed 6
weeks post-treatment revealed persistent but stable azotaemia (creatinine 256 μmol/l
[RI 90–180 μmol/l], urea 15 mmol/l [RI 7.2–10.7 mmol/l]) and hyperphosphataemia
(2.82 mmol/l [RI 1.3–2.3], not measured previously). The cat was clinically stable
at this stage and was diagnosed with International Renal Interest Society stage 3
chronic kidney disease, based on its creatinine level. A commercial kidney diet
(Hill’s Prescription Diet k/d) was recommended.
Three months into treatment, the cat developed acute onset of sneezing, which
resolved spontaneously with a presumptive diagnosis of viral upper respiratory
disease. The cat developed alopecia from self-mutilation, over the flanks, 4 weeks
into treatment; the alopecia resolved spontaneously. Eight months after treatment
started, a repeat abdominal ultrasound was performed, which showed that the
abdominal mass was similar in size (53 × 45 mm) with mild progression of
mineralisation and heterogeneity . There was enlargement of multiple mildly heterogeneous
ileocolic lymph nodes (largest one 20 × 30 mm), suggestive of metastatic disease.
There was mild free peritoneal fluid and also mild progression of chronic changes in
both kidneys. The cat continued to be clinically well until 10 months after
diagnosis, when it lost 300 g within a month. The cat presented for acute onset of
anorexia and weakness 10 months after treatment started. On physical examination,
the cat was tachycardic and tachypnoeic with weak femoral pulses. There was also
evidence of fluid wave in the abdomen suspected to be due to haemorrhage. The cat
was euthanased 6 days later owing to failure of improvement in clinical signs.
Post-mortem examination of the cat was declined by the owner.