Our patient is a 77 year old Caucasian female with a past medical history of hypertension and peripheral vascular disease who presented with substernal chest discomfort. A few hours prior to admission the patient's car was hijacked at gunpoint. Shortly after being attacked, she suddenly developed a sudden squeezing chest pain accompanied with dyspnea and bilateral jaw pain. The pain was mild to moderate with no associated dizziness, diaphoresis, nausea or vomiting. On the way to the hospital, the patient received sublingual nitroglycerin with no relief. On arrival to the emergency department, her vital signs were within normal limits. On physical examination, no jugular venous distension or peripheral edema was noted. Her lung exam was normal. The cardiovascular exam revealed a tachycardia and normal S1 and S2 sounds. A systolic ejection murmur was appreciated at the apex with no radiation. No rubs or gallops were noted. ECG tracings revealed sinus tachycardia, non specific ST and T wave changes (see figure ). Peak CK-MB and Troponin I levels were 12.3 ng/ml (0–4.9 ng/ml) and 3.8 ng/ml (0–0.2 ng/ml) respectively. Serum chemistries and pro BNP were normal. The patient was given aspirin, nitroglycerin, eptifibatide, beta blockers and intravenous heparin and was scheduled for cardiac catherization. Coronary angiography revealed 70% stenosis of the right coronary artery (RCA) immediately beyond the ostium which did not correlate with the area of myocardial compromise. The remainder of the vessel was normal giving rise to standard right ventricular and acute marginal branches. The left coronary artery (LCA) and its branches showed no significant stenosis. Left ventriculography showed left ventricular dilatation and dysfunction, with an ejection fraction of 30%. The distal halves of the anterior and inferior wall adjoining the apex were akinetic while the proximal segments displayed normal contraction . The patient improved dramatically within hours of the event and was discharged in two days on aspirin, lisinopril, metoprolol and pravachol. Our patient improved dramatically the next day with normalization of her troponin I levels in 4 days. Two years later, the patient was re-evaluated with an echocardiogram which revealed normal left and right ventricular function with no wall motion abnormalities and an estimated ejection fraction of 60%.