A 40-year-old female patient referred to our cardiac centre from a general hospital with a gunshot injury 8 days prior. There was no past medical history or comorbidities. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed the bullet but reported wrongly outside the heart, a bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) missed the bullet. The thoracic surgeon opened a lower sternotomy wound but failed to find the bullet, he closed the wound with two sternal sutures and referred the patient to our centre. On arrival, she was haemodynamically stable, her heart rate was 96 b.p.m., blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 17/min. The ECG and blood markers including Troponin-T were normal. She told her husband shot her with a gun along the street while she was leaning forward. On examination, there was one wound above the medial third of the right clavicle presenting the bullet inlet. A chest X-ray showed the bullet inside the cardiac shadow near the lower border of the heart; there was no pneumothorax or clavicular fracture . A revised CT chest showed the bullet inside the RV . A detailed (TTE) revealed the bullet in the RV cavity near the apex in apical four-chamber view with posterior angulation . There was mild tricuspid regurgitation (TR), intact interventricular septum, and no pericardial effusion . After a prolonged discussion, we decided to try to retrieve the bullet percutaneously with surgical backup.
Under conscious sedation and TTE guidance, right femoral vein access using an E-sheath 16-Fr (Edward lifescience) was established; we bevelled the distal end of the sheath to allow for larger inflow. We selected this sheath as it is expandable to 24-Fr by an internal expansion of passing objects. An assembly made of tip deflectable catheter AGILIS™ NXT steerable introducer (St Jude Abbott vascular) and telescoped with 5-Fr Judkins Right guide and single loop gooseneck 15 mm snare. We try to snare the bullet from the RV cavity beneath the tricuspid valve apparatus where we faced a lot of thin chordae and the moderator band. Transthoracic echocardiography showed an increase of TR from mild to moderately severe due to a traction of the assembly on the leaflets; however, there was no mechanical affection of the leaflets or subvalvular apparatus. The bullet was grasped from outer to inner to ensure the snare is free of any structures , then the bullet retrieved with careful manipulation of the Agilis catheter and counterclockwise rotation till it came to the right atrium. Once the bullet came out to the right atrium, the TR severity reduced back to mild. In the inferior vena cava, the whole assembly was tried to engage the 16-Fr sheath but failed so we pulled the entire system to the groin . The bullet slipped out and migrated up towards common iliac vein then down to the right internal iliac vein . To avoid this slippage, a figure of 8 suture should be taken proximal to the bullet site at the groin to prevent slippage of the bullet while manipulating to extract it. We selected a different assembly made by a 24-Fr sheath (Medtronic), guiding JR 5-Fr, 15 mm gooseneck snare through the right femoral vein, and in the left femoral vein 5-Fr JR guiding handling 15 mm gooseneck snare. The bullet was caught using both snares simultaneously and manipulated to come out safely from the right femoral vein through the 24-Fr sheath , the vein was closed using a figure of 8 suture. The procedure was not associated or followed by any arrhythmia. The extracted snared bullet showed in , the removed bullet measured 12 mm length and 6 mm width. The patient discharged home after 2 days. After 1 month, the patient condition was reasonable, and the follow-up TTE revealed normal study with trace TR.