In 1998, a healthy female patient, aged 61 years and 10 months old, presented at the
orthodontic service of the Brazilian Dental Association with anterior crossbite and
multiple missing teeth. Her chief complaint was related to poor dental esthetics.
Prosthetic rehabilitation was thought to be determined by the conditions of dental
occlusion. There was premature contact between lower central incisors, and anterior
crossbite was mostly caused by functional sliding resulting from contact. In occlusion,
the patient had Class I canine relationship on both sides ( and ).
Patient's face was symmetrical in frontal view, with a marked nasolabial fold. Facial
profile was unbalanced, with mild maxillary deficiency and protrusion of the lower lip
which was positioned ahead of the upper lip. The nasolabial angle denoted the incorrect
anterior-posterior position of the maxilla, which was confirmed by cephalometric
findings. The mentolabial sulcus was flat, most likely due to muscle adaptation to
anterior crossbite.
Lower dentition was mutilated: molars and second premolars were absent on both sides. On
the right side, there was a single-unit ceramic crown over the lower first premolar. In
the upper arch, posterior teeth were extruded, left first molar was absent and right
first premolar had a ceramic crown. A midline diastema of 5 mm was found in the upper
arch and associated to the migration of central incisors and to the space of missing
lateral incisors .
Periapical radiographs revealed generalized mild attachment loss, which suggested
judicious periodontal control during orthodontic treatment. In spite of the edentulous
regions, bone height was enough for conventional implant placement. Cephalometric
evaluation revealed skeletal Class III malocclusion associated with retrusion of upper
incisors and protrusion of lower incisors (and ).
The objectives of treatment were: (1) correct anterior crossbite; (2) reestablish
vertical dimensions in the posterior region, which would provide space gain for
implant-retained prosthetic restorations in the region of lower premolars and molars;
(3) close interincisal diastema; (4) gain space for implants and prosthetic crowns in
the region of upper lateral incisors; and (5) improve the relationship established
between upper and lower lips.
Delay in rehabilitation treatment after extraction of posterior teeth is expected to
provoke alveolar bone atrophy; therefore, only basal bones of the maxilla and mandible
remain intact. Lack of dental occlusion in the posterior region leads to a reduction in
lower facial height and changes in the position of remaining teeth. The mandible rotates
anticlockwise, remodeling the condyle process and the glenoid fossa.
, Orthognathic surgery may be the first choice
to correct anterior crossbite and provide the height necessary for prosthetic
rehabilitation in the posterior region. Presurgical Orthodontics may create space for
implants to replace missing lateral incisors.
Surgery was considered a risky procedure for a 61-year-old patient. She presented
favorable conditions for camouflage, since adequate anchorage could be provided.
Conventional dental implants can also be used for orthodontic anchorage. Upper incisors
should be proclined so as to increase arch perimeter, which would help space gain for
upper lateral incisors. Treatment plan was designed according to patient's needs and
expectations.
A diagnostic setup was performed according to cephalometric findings. Lower central
incisors underwent retrusion of 4 mm and intrusion of 1.5 mm . Upper central incisors were subsequently positioned in
contact, with an increase in buccal inclination so as to achieve a 2-mm overjet.
Bilateral spaces of 6 mm were created to replace missing upper lateral incisors.
Implants should be inserted 2 mm distal to the lower right first premolar and 3 mm
distal to the lower left first premolar. Temporary acrylic crowns were adapted over
conventional dental implants (Brånemark System, Nobel Biocare, Kloten, Switzerland: 11.5
x 5 mm in the region of molars and 4 x 11.5 mm in the region of premolars) on both sides
of the lower arch. Orthodontic brackets were bonded after six months. Absolute anchorage
unit allowed distal movement of lower right canine and left premolar; in addition, it
provided retraction and intrusion of lower incisors.
Upper molars were banded and a full fixed orthodontic appliance was placed (Standard
Edgewise 0.022 x 0.028-in, 3M-Unitek, Monrovia, USA). Leveling and alignment followed
the sequence of stainless steel archwires in increasing stiffness (3M-Unitek, Monrovia,
USA). Upper diastema closure and distal movement of lower teeth were performed by
sliding mechanics with elastomeric chains.
Retraction of lower incisors and proclination of upper incisors occurred simultaneously.
Tear drop loops were bent in 0.018 x 0.025-in stainless steel archwires halfway between
lateral incisors and canines. Ideal 0.019 x 0.026-in stainless steel archwires allowed
detailed angulation to be performed. Total treatment lasted 36 months.
Maxillary implants were inserted after orthodontic space opening (Brånemark System,
Nobel Biocare, Kloten, Switerland: 3.3 x 13 mm on the right side and 3.3 x 15 mm on the
left side).