A 60-year-old woman was referred for evaluation of a tender nodule in the left lobe of the thyroid. She had no prior history of head and neck radiation and no family history of thyroid or parathyroid disease. The patient had noted little change in lesion size but persistent pain, aggravated by talking, which was troublesome for her. She did not have any complaints of voice change. She had initially been investigated 5 years earlier with complaints of pain radiating over the left side of her face. At that time a small firm nodule in the left thyroid lobe was discovered and a needle biopsy found no evidence of malignancy. At that time it was diagnosed as a benign nodular goiter and observation was recommended.
An ultrasound identified a left lower thyroid lobe mass measuring 2.7 × 1.6 × 2.7 cm with cystic and solid components. Her serum ionized calcium level was normal and her intact PTH was elevated to three times the upper limit of normal. Due to ongoing facial pain a left thyroid lobectomy and isthmusectomy was carried out. Intraoperatively, a firm multinodular left thyroid lobe was appreciated. There were no abnormal central compartment lymph nodes identified or removed at surgery.
Pathological examination of the specimen revealed a large, yellowish tumor measuring 2.7 × 2.0 × 2.0 cm that was pushing into the left thyroid lobe, but separated from it by a fibrous capsule . The mass was noted to be composed of monomorphous parathyroid cells without significant necrosis or mitotic activity. There was invasion into the thyroid capsule and into adjacent fatty tissue. No vascular invasion was noted . A cystic goiter was also noted in the left thyroid lobe. Further immunohistochemical studies found the tumour did not express: Thyroid Transcription Factor – 1, Calcitonin, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), but did express Chromagranin, Synaptophysin, Bcl -2 and Cytokeratin 7.
Postoperatively the patient's parathyroid hormone normalized and her ionized serum calcium level remained within normal limits. Her postoperative course was uneventful and she has remained disease free greater than 27 months postoperatively.