A 51-year-old female with no significant medical problems and no prior surgeries presented to the emergency department complaining of an intermittent, yellowish discharge from the right groin for a period of two weeks associated with right sided, burning abdominal pain. She noted that she had right groin swelling for the past 3 months that was diagnosed as an inguinal abscess, which was therefore incised and drained. The wound did not heal and continued to intermittently drain yellow, feculent material.
Objectively, she was febrile to 38.6C with a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg, pulse rate of 118 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 92 % on room air. She appeared acutely distressed and moderately dehydrated. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness to palpation, mild distension, dullness to percussion, and absent bowel sounds. A 3 cm incisional wound with expressible purulent discharge was noted in the right groin overlying a 4 cm diameter area of induration. There was no swelling palpated, and the discharge increased by increasing the abdominal pressure.
Rectal and pelvic examination was unremarkable. The patient was admitted for resuscitation and further workup. Labs were notable for leukocytosis and a hemoglobin of 6 g/dL, electrolytes, and liver function tests were within normal range. Abdominal ultrasound demonstrated that the inguinal wound was continuous with a loop of ileum incarcerated within the femoral space as well as peri-ileal fluid and a fluid collection in the hepatorenal space. Abdominal X-ray revealed pneumoperitoneum under the right hemidiaphragm . The patient was diagnosed with peritonitis associated with an EC Fistula. An obstructed Richter's femoral hernia seemed likely to be misdiagnosed and treated as a groin abscess. A pre-operative blood transfusion was done in addition to Intravenous fluids. The patient was consented for exploratory laparotomy which was performed through a midline incision. On opening the abdomen, a distal ileum loop (about 25 cm proximal to ileocecal junction) was found to be incarcerated within the internal femoral ring, which was retrieved back into the abdominal cavity . There was perforation and ischemia (around 6 cm) over the adhered loop. Resection of the necrotic segment of ileum was done with double barrel ileostomy.
The femoral hernia site was repaired by the classic repair approximating the inguinal ligament to Cooper's ligament and the pectineus fascia with Nylon suture. Mesh repair was not done for hernia defect due to faecal contamination. The internal femoral ring was additionally closed from inside of the peritoneal cavity with plicating sutures. The openings in the skin over the femoro-inguinal region were communicated with each other and has been left open due to cellulitis of the area involved and pus discharged. Six liters of normal saline were used to lavage the peritoneal cavity and a double burred ileostomy was performed, because of, bowel edema and peritonitis. After achieving adequate hemostasis and drain placement in pelvis, the abdomen was closed in layers. IV Antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g one time a D and metronidazole 500 mg three times a day for 7 days) and analgesics (tramadol 100 mg two times a day for 2 days then diclofenac tablet 50 mg two times a day for 3 days), IV fluids (3.5 L of Normal saline, ringer lactate and dextrose 5) and nutritional support was administered as planned. The open groin wound was debrided surgically and packed using Iodine before doing a delayed primary closure. We performed a delayed primary closure of the wound over the femoral region on 12th day, using a non-absorbable suture (Nylon 1), interrupted technique. Antibiotics (Amoxicillin- clavulanic acid 625 mg twice daily and metronidazole 500 mg three times a day) were administered, combined with dressing all 2 days. Post-operative recovery was uneventful. The patient was discharged on post-operative day 18. The groin wound healed properly 7 days after to be discharged. The ileostomy reversal was performed after six weeks from the exploratory laparotomy, any complication occurred.
Our study was conducted in a teaching hospital and the surgery was performed by a senior consultant general surgeon with a resident in general surgery as an assistant.