A 27-year-old male officer, who was previously healthy and lived in South China, was presented to a local clinic in early November after skin itching, emesis, generalized myalgia and slight weakness in all limbs (Time line in Fig. ). He denied any recent trauma, homosexual behavior, exposure to toxins, illicit substances, sick people, arthropods, or rodents. Additionally, he denied diet habit or history of eating fresh locally produced vegetables, snails, slugs, crabs and lizards. He had no known sick contacts but consumed a worm which accidentally entered the box with take-away smoked meat and was eaten by mistake one day before the onset. Given a suspicion of allergy and mild rhabdomyolysis, he was treated with anti-allergic agents and rehydration.
Five days after onset (DAI 6), the patient manifested progressive pain and weakness of all limbs but alleviated itching. Upon admission to a local hospital, he presented muscle strength of Grade 3 for all limbs in physical examination. Transient rashes on his trunk were observed on DAI 8 . The CSF opening pressure was mildly elevated (230 mm H2O) by lumbar puncture (LP) on DAI 11, with the white blood cell (WBC) 164 × 10^6/L (71% monocytes and 29% multinucleated cells), protein 2380 mg/L and glucose 3.75 mg/L. CSF/blood glucose ratio was 71.1%. Gram stain was negative for bacteria. Fungal stain was negative for Cryptococcus, and no worms were seen in the CSF. Microbiological tests and computed tomography (CT) of the brain were unrevealing. He was then treated as Guillain-Barré syndrome with a high dose of intravenous methylprednisolone (40 mg/d) and immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/d) from DAI 11 to DAI 15, showing a significant but temporary improvement.
On DAI 15, the patient’s condition suddenly deteriorated with fever, generalized flaccid paralysis, gatism, and mental aberrations, including delusion and raves. The second LP was performed immediately to find CSF opening pressure remaining at 230mmH2O. CSF analysis revealed WBC 278 × 10^6/L (85% monocytes and 15% multinucleated cells). The CSF protein was 620 mg/L and glucose was 3.2 mg/L with CSF/blood glucose ratio of 58.6%. Cytology of CSF was not recorded. The mNGS for pathogen detection from the serum was carried out on DAI 16 and reported negative on DAI 18 (See Additional file ). The serum enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for parasites also negative. CT of the abdomen showed the peritoneum was focally thickened, indicating the possibility of peritonitis. Ceftriaxone and linezolid were thus prescribed immediately as the anti-infection therapy.
On DAI 17, the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) for further treatment. He was sleepy but alert, complained of severe weakness, mild headache and stomachache. Neurological examination was remarkable for severe quadriparesis (muscle strength of Grade 1) and positive meningeal irritation signs. Extensive microbiological tests of the serum were negative on admission. He was intubated on DAI 20. The LP was performed again on DAI 20 and revealed raised CSF opening pressure of 520mmH2O and mNGS with the CSF sample was carried out for the first time. Of note, the CSF showed the coconut-like appearance , and the analysis of CSF disclosed eosinophils proportion was 67% , with the leucocytes increased to 750 × 10^6/L. On the same day, the patient fell into a persistent coma with the Bispectral index fluctuating between 50 to70. Given the consideration of worsening infection, ceftriaxone was replaced by meropenem. Ophthalmological consult recorded significant papilloedema but no evidence of parasitic invasion. As a result of the multidisciplinary consultation on DAI 21, dexamethasone (10 mg per day) and albendazole (400 mg per day) were added to the patient’s treatment regimen, with the consideration that parasitic infection was a potential etiology.
On DAI 22, A. cantonensis was reported for the first time by mNGS from the CSF with the DNA strictly map reads number (SMRN) of 13,492. The result was verified by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) later with the same CSF sample for mNGS (Experimental details of mNGS and qPCR in Additional file ). With the permit of his wife, the patient was treated by standard regimen of albendazole (400 mg twice a day) and high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (500 mg per day) since DAI 23 according to the result of mNGS. On the other hand, mNGS was then carried out periodically to assess the condition during treatment . Moreover, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on DAI 24 demonstrated diffuse enhancement of the meninges and cervical leptomeninges, with multiple new lacunar infarctions, scattered tiny hemorrhages, and prominent Virchow-Robin spaces . A. cantonensis was not confirmed by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) until DAI 31.
Unfortunately, methylprednisolone was suspended on DAI 26 due to severe bleeding of pre-existing hemorrhoids and then the intrathecal dexamethasone was tried on DAI 31 because the miserable fact that the CSF opening pressure increased to more than 1100 mm H2O and the patient was in deep coma with the Bispectral index falling to 20–30. The high CSF opening pressure then showed a drastic drop after intrathecal dexamethasone and eventually stabilized . On the other hand, the Bispectral index recovered to 30 to 40 and the patient’s vital signs became relatively stable with less intravenous norepinephrine. The DNA SMRN of mNGS during treatment disclosed a sharp increase since anthelmintic therapy and a trend of slight decline after intrathecal dexamethasone . However, the patient never regained his consciousness. He eventually died on DAI 38, right after the family abandoned therapy and discharged voluntarily, 16 days after the NGS diagnosis and 37 days after onset of symptoms.