A 59-year-old Japanese postmenopausal woman (gravida 2, para 2) with no history of being immunocompromised, visited our hospital for a detailed examination of an ovarian tumor found during a medical checkup. She had a family history of prostate and pharyngeal cancer in her father and mother, respectively. Transvaginal ultrasonography showed a 70-mm cystic tumor with solid parts in the right ovary. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography and plain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a right ovarian teratoma and multiple enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes . 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission, tomography-computed tomography revealed increased fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation in the right ovarian tumor and pelvic to axillary lymph nodes . These clinical images suggested OMT-associated ovarian cancer with multiple lymph node metastases or TTM from malignant lymphoma to OMT. Carbohydrate antigen 125 level of 32.9 U/mL (normal range, ≤ 35.0 U/mL), carbohydrate antigen 19 − 9 level of 3.0 U/mL (normal range, ≤ 37.0 U/mL), and soluble Interleukin-2 receptors level of 432 U/mL (normal range, 204–587 U/mL) were normal. Soluble interleukin-2 receptors are one of the useful serum markers for lymphoma. A bilateral adnexectomy and retroperitoneal lymph node biopsy were performed, revealing a moderate amount of milky ascites. Macroscopically, the right ovarian tumor was a cystic mass with fat and solid parts . Ascitic cytology revealed no neoplastic . The cyst was lined by squamous epithelium constituting an OMT, and the solid part showed diffuse proliferation of abnormal lymphoid cells . Immunohistochemically, abnormal lymphoid cells of the ovarian tumor tested negative for CD5, MUM1, and CyclinD1, and positive for CD10, CD20, CD21, BCL2, and BCL6 . The abnormal lymphoid cells of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes were negative for CD5, CMYC, MUM1, and CyclinD1, and positive for CD10, CD20, CD21, CD79a, BCL2, and BCL6. Genetic analysis of the lymphoma using G-banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) identified a translocation of t(14;18) (q32;q21) and diagnosed TTM from nodal follicular lymphoma (histological grade 1) to OMT. Twelve months after the surgery, the patient showed no recurrence without adjuvant therapy.