A 39-year-old morbidly obese (weight 128 kg, height 170 cm, body mass index 44.3) diabetic female presented to the emergency room with acute onset chest pain. She was not known to have significant past medical history, including hypertension or smoking, but developed type 2 diabetes, associated with her obesity. Other than morbid obesity, the physical examination was not contributory the blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg.
She was diagnosed with an inferior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and was sent for an urgent angiogram. The angiogram revealed a total occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) that was successfully stented. No other significant atherosclerotic lesions were noted at that time. Given her favourable evolution, the patient was sent home after initiation of optimal medical therapy and was referred for evaluation of metabolic and genetic causes of premature coronary artery disease (CAD).
A work-up to identify possible rare causes of premature coronary atherosclerosis, such as genetic dyslipidaemia, was performed and came back negative. She was referred for bariatric surgery which resulted in a weight loss of over 100 pounds and subsequent discontinuation of her anti-diabetic medications (metformin 500 mg PO [per os (orally)] bid). However, despite the significant weight loss and the compliance to her antiplatelet therapy, she consulted again for angina less than one year after the first event.
Upon presentation to the emergency room, the patient had diffuse ST depression and refractory chest pain. A repeat angiogram performed via a right radial approach demonstrated a subtotal occlusion of the distal left main coronary artery (LMCA) . An attempt was made to restore the flow in the LMCA, but unfortunately the patient went into cardiac arrest during the procedure. After successful resuscitation, an attempt was made to insert an intra-aortic balloon pump which failed due to the patient’s body habitus. The decision was made to send the patient for an urgent coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG). Both the left anterior descending (LAD) and the first obtuse marginal (OM) were successfully bypassed with saphenous vein grafts because of the urgent nature of the surgery, and the patient’s obesity the internal thoracic arteries were not used. The surgery was uneventful except for the ascending aorta that appeared mildly inflamed . In that context, a biopsy was taken and sent for further analysis. The pathology examination did not reveal any evidence of neoplasia or vasculitis and the patient had a favourable post-operative course. The patient was given guideline recommended treatment for secondary prevention with aspirin, high-doses statin, ticagrelor, and metoprolol.
One year later, the patient presented with recurrence of her typical chest pain and was diagnosed again with a non-STEMI . A repeat angiogram demonstrated an occlusion of the first OM bypass at the site of the aortic anastomosis and a reocclusion of the ostial RCA. The saphenous bypass to the LAD was patent . Moreover, a transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a decreased ejection fraction of 40–45% and at least moderate aortic insufficiency that was not visualized on previous examination. Given the complexity of the lesions for angioplasty, the patient’s young age, and the concomitant aortic regurgitation, decision was made to send the patient for a redo surgery.
During the second surgery, the intra-operative echocardiogram demonstrated severe aortic regurgitation. The striking feature was what appeared to be a whitish, thick inflammatory lesion around both coronary ostia, along the aorto mitral curtain. The valve was also involved in this process with retracted curled edges. An arterial bypass to the OM and a venous bypass to the RCA was successfully performed in addition to the aortic valve replacement with a bioprosthesis.
Pathologic examination of the native aortic valve revealed high-grade undifferentiated (intimal) sarcoma of the aortic valve . She was referred to an oncologist.
The initial treatment with doxorubicin failed to show improvement, and the patient was then started on a second line of treatment with gemcitabine and docetaxel and was referred for palliative radiotherapy.
Unfortunately, the positron emission tomography scan done for the tumour staging demonstrated bone metastases in the ribs and left hemipelvis , which confirmed a stage IV metastatic cancer. Patient was started on liposomal doxorubicin chemotherapy and radiotherapy (8Gy to affected ribs). The patient underwent a course of gemcitabine and docetaxel. Chemotherapeutic drug choices were limited by the patient’s poor left ventricular function due to multiple ischaemic events. Mesna and ifosfamide were then substituted, along with another course of palliative radiotherapy to ribs, hip, and right orbit (8Gy) (Timeline). Despite the treatment, patient complained of progressive bone pain. A computed tomography (CT) scan was done to assess the response to treatment and demonstrated progression of multiple new bone metastases. In addition, the patient developed new right supraorbital pain, which was shown to be another infiltrative bone metastasis on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) .
Subsequent CT scans demonstrated progression of the metastatic lesions despite treatments. She also developed complete heart block, likely due to the local infiltration of the tumour in the myocardium, for which she had a permanent dual chamber pacemaker implanted in the left sub-clavicular area. Unfortunately, the patient passed away less than 4 years after the initial ischaemic event. No autopsy was performed respecting the patient’s and her family wish.