A 70-year-old female was referred to our hospital after a positive fecal occult blood test. The patient had hundreds of skin warts and pigmented spots on her body. None of her family had such skin lesions.
Rectal carcinoma was detected in the upper rectum during colonoscopy . Histological examination of a mucosal biopsy revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. A submucosal tumor 20 mm in diameter was detected in the duodenal bulb during the preoperative screening upper gastrointestinal endoscopy .
Histological examination of duodenal biopsy specimen showed spindle-shaped cells with positive immunohistochemical staining for KIT and CD34. S100 was negative for staining. The duodenal tumor was diagnosed as GIST.
Abdominal-contrast CT showed the rectum wall and swelling of the lymph nodes in the mesorectum . A duodenal tumor was found to protrude into the duodenal bulb . Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) levels were within normal ranges.
Surgical exploration was undertaken and a diagnosis of rectal carcinoma with duodenal GIST was made. Laparoscopic low anterior resection with lymph nodes resection for the rectal carcinoma was performed followed by local resection of the duodenum with mini-laparotomy. During the operation, five white small nodules 3–6 mm in diameter were observed on the serosal surface of the jejunum approximately 20 cm from the Treiz ligament; one 6-mm nodule was excised for histological examination. A covering ileostomy was created, and one abdominal skin wart was excised for histological examination. The patient progressed favorably post operation and was discharged.
Histologically, the resected rectal carcinoma was a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with (four) lymph node metastasis —T2N2aM0 stage IIIB according to the TNM classification of UICC, seventh edition . The resected duodenal tumor was 22 mm in diameter and showed 1 mitosis per 50 high-power fields (HPF) microscopically . Risk of tumor progression was low according to the modified-Fletcher classification . A resected small nodule from the jejunum was also positive for KIT and CD34 immunohistochemically but showed no mitosis per 50 HPF and the risk was very low. The resected skin wart was confirmed as neurofibroma after nodules showed proliferated spindle-shaped cells with unclear boundaries microscopically .
The patient took adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine plus oxaliplatin . However, it was discontinued after three courses due to severe diarrhea.