The patient was a 28-year-old man without cerebrovascular accident risk factors such as arrhythmia, overweight, hyperlipidemia, DM, and hypertension. He was diagnosed with right frontal GBM (IDH wild-type) and underwent surgery on April 17, 2020, followed by CCRT. We adopted the Radiotherapy and Oncology Group (RTOG) guideline.[ The RTOG recommendation is composed of 2 phases, first 46 Gy then followed by 14 Gy boost. The first phase planning target volume (PTV) is surgical resection cavity with residual enhancing tumor (postcontrast T1 weighted magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and surrounding edema (hyperintensity on T2 or FLAIR MRI) plus margin; while the second phase PTV is surgical resection cavity with residual enhancing tumor (postcontrast T1 weighted MRI) plus margin. The radiation lasted 6 weeks, from May 14 to June 14, 2020. He underwent secondary surgery for recurrent GBM resection on July 29, 2020.
However, on March 03, 2021, he suffered sudden hemiparesis; MRI revealed acute infarction on bilateral ACA territory and left MCA territory. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and digital subtraction angiography revealed the string sign in the bilateral A1 segments as well as occlusion and left MCA stenosis . In April 2020, MRA indicated no stenosis of the intracranial vessels before GBM treatment, especially the bilateral ACA. According to the tumor location, there was no chance for the operator to injure the contralateral ACA branch. However, the planning target volume (PTV) contained the contralateral ACA. In approximately 9 months, he developed symptomatic radiation vasculopathy. We started administering 100 mg of aspirin every day after that. Left side direct bypass (superficial temporal artery [STA] and MCA 4th segment [M4] anastomosis) with indirect bypass eencephaloduroarteriosynangiosis and right STA-radial artery-ACA (A3) bypass were performed. Postoperatively, he exhibited progressive recovery from hemiparesis and no stroke attacks, and follow-up digital subtraction angiography confirmed the patency of the bypass . The patient is still alive (2022 November) under immunotherapy and he had not suffered from recurrent symptoms of transient ischemic attack or ischemic stroke for 1.5 years.