A 70-year-old man was diagnosed with left RCC (clear cell carcinoma, G2, pT1aN0M0) following radical left nephrectomy. Eight years later, he underwent partial lobectomy of the right lung with a diagnosis of primary lung adenocarcinoma (pT2aN0M0). One year after the lung surgery, follow-up CT revealed a nodule in the upper lobe of the left lung, swelling of the mediastinal lymph nodes , and a tumor in the right kidney. Transbronchial biopsy from mediastinal lymph nodes was performed to confirm whether the lesions originated from lung cancer or RCC. The pathological diagnosis was RCC metastasis to the lung and mediastinal lymph nodes. Combination therapy with ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) and nivolumab (240 mg/body) was initiated as first-line therapy because his disease risk was classified as intermediate (hypercalcemia and thrombocytosis) based on the International Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma Database Consortium.
After 13 weeks of treatment, xerostomia and dysgeusia appeared (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, Grade 2). The Saxon test demonstrated 0.1 g/2 min of saliva, indicating a severe decrease in saliva production. A blood test showed negativity for anti-nuclear antibody, anti-SSA antibody, and anti-SSB antibody. Salivary gland scintigraphy (99mTcO4-) showed washout of scintillation after lemon juice ingestion. This indicated that the saliva output was maintained while production was reduced. We performed a labial salivary gland biopsy, and the results showed significant infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells into the salivary glands. Immunostaining of the salivary glands showed positivity for CD3 and CD8 and negativity for CD20 . The final diagnosis was sicca syndrome as an irAE caused by ICI therapy. Pilocarpine hydrochloride (15 mg/day) was initiated without corticosteroids, while ICI therapy was continued. After 36 weeks, the result of the Saxon test improved to 5.2 g/2 min, and the patient's symptoms alleviated. At the same time, the metastatic lesions and the tumor in the right kidney showed shrinkage, and an antitumor effect was observed .