A six year and eleven month old girl of non-consanguineous Caucasian parents first presented with a two week history of fever, weight loss, arthralgia and maculopapular rash. She was born at term via Caesarean section with no neonatal concerns. Her medical history was fairly unremarkable, with mild eczema and croup and normal growth. There was no family history of autoimmune conditions. She was up-to-date with her immunizations. She was initially diagnosed with tonsillitis which was positive for Streptococcus on a throat swab. She remained unwell despite recurrent courses of antibiotics over a 6 week period. A comprehensive viral surveillance including Epstein Barr Virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), HIV and Hepatitis B using PCR on blood was negative on admission. She attended her local hospital due to persisting symptoms. She had no clinical features of arthritis or bowel disease. Serum inflammatory markers were prominent including C-Reactive Protein 135 mg/l (0-10 mg/l), thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 64 × 109/l (150–300 × 109/l), raised alanine transaminase (ALT), 1038 IU/l (10–35 IU/l), raised lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 8775 IU/L (420–750 IU/l), hyperferritinaemia, 71,378 μg/l (23–76 μg/l), hypofibrinogenaemia, 1 g/l (1.5–4.0 g/l). Her haemoglobin (Hb) and white cell count (WCC) were 80 g/L (115–155 g/l) and 5.1 × 109/l (4.5–13.51 × 109/l) respectively. She was referred for further investigation; her bone marrow biopsy showed occasional haemophagocytosis; flow cytometry perforin expression was present, there was normal granule release (CD107a) on activation of CD8 and NK cells and her CD56 + ve cells were normal (82.4%) compared to ﻿the control (71.5%). A basic auto-immune screen was negative (anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA), and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP)). A presumed diagnosis of secondary HLH was made as she fulfilled HLH criteria without any genetic cause with normal granule release. She was treated with dexamethasone (8 weeks), etoposide (12 weeks), cyclosporine A (weaned from 7 months) as per HLH 2004 protocol. She made a good recovery, her biochemical markers normalised (ferritin 42 μg/l, CRP <5 mg/l, ALT 26 IU/ml, platelets 260 x 109/l, Hb 120 g/l) and she remained well for 20 months.
She subsequently represented with a HLH relapse having been unwell for 2 weeks with headaches and lethargy and 5-days of fever. Due to her previous medical history she was screened for a relapse of secondary HLH. Serum ferritin level was 6702 μg/l and LDH 1002 u/l. Repeat bone marrow aspirate showed no evidence of haemophagocytosis. She continued to have quotidian fevers occurring in the evening and night for over a month with other similar symptoms to the initial presentation, arthralgia, a migratory erythematous rash, lethargy and significant weight loss of 2 kg. A skin biopsy showed neutrophilic leucocytoclastic vasculitis therefore she was further investigated by paediatric rheumatology for an underlying systemic condition with an angiogram which showed no specific evidence of vasculitis. Further auto-antibody screening detected a raised anti-tissue transglutaminase (anti-TTG) at 108U/ml (0–6.9U/ml) and positive anti-endomysial antibodies (anti-EMA) indicating a positive coeliac screen. Her HLA typing was positive for HLA-DQ2 but negative for HLA DQ8. She was too unwell to tolerate an endoscopy and jejunal biopsy. There had been no abdominal symptoms and there was no family history of Coeliac Disease. She commenced a gluten-free diet without any Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs (DMARDs) or biological agents, after which her symptoms dramatically improved with her energy levels rising to 90% of normal, however, the rash took longer to fade. Her biochemical markers also improved with her anti TTG level normalising to 4.3U/ml and her ESR reducing from 34 mm/h to 12 mm/h (<13 mm/h) within a month of a gluten free diet. She remained extremely sensitive to gluten, any exposure caused a reaction within a few hours with fevers lasting up to seven days. This suggested that the driving factor for her inflammatory process was due to Coeliac Disease. In light of her hypersensitivity and severe clinical condition, it was felt that a re-challenge with gluten was not appropriate.
Since establishing a gluten-free diet she remained well with no further episodes of MAS. However, after 3 years of commencing a gluten free diet she developed swelling of her joints and was diagnosed with arthritis, mainly affecting the left elbow, which required joint injections and treatment with methotrexate. The family have noted that her symptoms correlate with mistakenly eaten food containing gluten. At no point has she had any bowel symptoms. There was no active arthritis, morning stiffness or limping during either episode of MAS, making SoJIA unlikely. A jejunal biopsy has not been carried out as she has remained on a strict gluten-free diet. Care was provided by a multi-professional team of rheumatologists, gastroenterologists and haematologists.