The present study was conducted in accordance to the ethical laws and the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki and the Surgical Case Report (SCARE) guidelines .
A 38-year-old female had chronic pain in the maxillary right region and was diagnosed with having an impacted third tooth by orthopantomogram (OPG) .
Clinical examination revealed absence of the right maxillary third molar, radiologic examination excluded the presence of carious or periodontal disease borne by neighboring teeth . The subject did not report a history of restorative or prosthetic treatment procedures performed in the recent years. After clinical examination a Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT) (Vatech Ipax 3D PCH-6500, Fort Lee, NJ, USA) was executed to assess presence of carious, periodontal disease or impacted tooth. The radiograph showed an impacted wisdom without an enlarged follicle much higher with part of the crown and all part of the roots in the distal wall of the sinus maxillary and above the second molar .
After explaining the different surgical possibilities to the patient, we decided to perform a transinusal access. The wisdom extraction was scheduled in an ambulatory setting and under local anesthesia. Prior to surgical treatment, the patient’s mouth was rinsed with a chlorhexidine 0.2% digluconate solution (Curaden Healthcare S.p.A., Saronno, Italy) for 2 min. The local anesthesia was performend by the administration of Articaine® (Ubistesin 4%-Espe Dental AG, Seefeld, Germany) with epinephrine of 1:100,000.. Written informed consent was acquired from the patient for publication of the case report. A modified triangular flap without anterior release was performed as previously described for access to the sinus maxillary [,,]. A window was opened by rosette round bur in the posterior part of the maxillary sinus .
The tooth was observed in the posterolateral aspect of the maxillary sinus, no bone was present around the dental crown and no pericoronal lesion was detected. The maxillary sinus was entered through the Schneiderian membrane and the tooth was dislocated with a lever and then grasped with a klemmer and removed.
The maxillary sinus window was covered by pericardium membrane (Shelter slow, Ubgen, Padova, Italy) . The flap was carefully sutured with Polimid 4.0 (Assut, Magliano de’ Marsi, Italy), which was removed after seven days. An analgesic medication (ibuprofen 600 mg) 2 h following surgery and every 6 h afterward was prescribed, to be continued for 3 days. Also, a single dose of betamethasone 4 mg was given to limit postoperative edema of the face and cheek, and the patient was told not to blow her nose for two weeks to avoid mouth-antral communication. No complication was reported during post operative time. After 1 month the patient describes the disappearance of chronic pain in the right maxillary region.