An 8-year-old boy without any documented medical or surgical history was admitted to a tertiary academic center with the chief complaint of progressive dyspnea. His parents mentioned that he used to suffer from postbreastfeeding cyanosis in infancy and also after crying. In the years after infancy and before school age the patient’s symptoms were described as exertional dyspnea becoming worse by exercising and walking accompanied by fast heartbeats and increased shallow breathes. As the patient had reached the school age, his dyspnea had become more severe with stridor heard while breathing. His dyspnea and stridor had progressed in the last 3 months. He had not experienced fever, chest pain, weight loss, and coughing in the course of his illness.
In general appearance, he was a child with a height of 125 cm and a weight of 27 kg, and physical examination revealed tachycardia (heart rate: 120), tachypnea (respiratory rate: 30), mild hypotension ( blood pressure: 90/70), and low oxygen saturation (Spo2: 85%). Laboratory results were normal and no anemia or leukocytosis was seen.
The patient underwent a rigid bronchoscopy. Bronchoscopy findings included normal tracheal mucosa and a soft tissue mass that could be compressed with the bronchoscope. Afterward, a neck computed tomography (CT) scan was performed revealing a vascular mass behind the larynx and cervical trachea . Subsequently, surgery is performed for investigating the mass in the patient’s neck. It was reported during the operation that the mass is of a vascular nature but resection could not be done. A tracheostomy was performed by the surgeon in the same session.
He was transferred to the radiology department for an MRI with contrast. At MRI, a multiloculated nodular lesion in the intraluminal part of the trachea and also partly in the infra-glottic area, measuring 12×8 mm and taking up half of the tracheal lumen, was found. The lesion was hypo-signal in the T1 sequence, hyper-signal in the T2 sequence, and heterogeneous after the contrast injection . MRI findings confirmed the diagnosis of hemangioma.
Three sessions of angioembolization were carried out for the patient, and the patient’s progress was controlled with MRI. Finally, after hemangioma atrophy tracheostomy was extracted.
He was given guaifenesin every 8 h and discharged from the hospital. At 3 month follow-up, the patient’s symptoms were significantly improved and repeated bronchoscopy did not demonstrate any recurrence.