A 53-year-old male complained of a left sided hearing loss for few months as well as a left sided nasal block, then developed a vague facial and dental pain few weeks prior to his visit. Physical examination showed the hearing loss to be of conductive nature, reduced sensation in the area of skin innervated by the infraorbital nerve, and no lymphadenopathy was noted. MRI showed a heterogeneously enhancing tumor measuring 38 mm × 28 mm × 42 mm in the maxillary sinus that eroded the medial wall of the sinus, extended to the posterior aspect of the nasal cavity eroding the posterior aspect of the hard palate, and extended posteriorly thereafter closing the pharyngeal aspect of the Eustachian tube causing otitis media with effusion, and reaching the pterygopalatine fossa eventually . No signs of metastasis were found.
All information was pointing towards a possible malignant tumor; Therefore, a biopsy was endoscopically obtained from the tumor in the maxillary sinus. Microscopic examination of the biopsy showed small ovoid to spindle-shaped cells with scanty cytoplasm, some of which demonstrated signs of atypical mitosis. The cells were arranged in short interlacing sheets, with no epithelial components to be found; all of which pointed towards a monophasic spindle cell tumor. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for Vimentin, Bcl-2, and CD99 , and negative for CK, with a Ki67 proliferative index of 3%; Thus, a monophasic spindle cell sarcoma was diagnosed. A TNM classification of T4aN0M0 was put. Surgery was chosen as the treatment of choice. Under general anesthesia, the coronoid process of the mandible was removed to create a window through which the posterior aspect of the tumor could be reached, the patient then underwent partial left maxillectomy in which the alveolar arch (up to the 1st premolar) was preserved, the left pterygoid processes of the sphenoid bone were also excised, and the tumor was resected en bloc; the anterior wall of the maxillary bone was separated and preserved with plans to reattach it should the surgical margins be clear; which were proven so on histological examination of the frozen section. The patient was put on an adjuvant radiotherapy, and is being followed on a monthly basis for the first year, and yearly thereafter; with no recurrence 5 months after therapy. The cosmetic result after the surgery was good .