A 68-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with persistent colic in the lower abdomen which radiated to the back that had persisted for more than 10 days. He ate fish two weeks ago. There was no history of gastrointestinal bleeding or jaundice. Surgery for acute appendicitis and appendectomy was performed 6 years ago. The abdominal wall is palpated as slightly tense, with tenderness in the whole abdomen, significantly in the lower abdomen, no rebound pain and muscle tension. He visited the emergency department of our hospital and his emergency abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed high density streaks along the anterior lower edges of the 3rd part of duodenum with peripheral exudation and localized peritonitis . X-ray examination results showed no free gas under the diaphragm. Blood tests showed WBC 10.03 × 109/L (normal range 3.5 × 109/L –9.5 × 109/L), N 0.68 (normal range 0.4–0.75), CRP 35.80 mg/L (normal range 0.068–8.2). The patient was diagnosed as “Foreign bodies in the duodenum” and hospitalized in department of Gastroenterology. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed gastric body ulcer (locally with high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia); chronic atrophic gastritis with erosion (c-3) bile reflux; duodenal bulbous polyp. In order to observe the changes in the position of the foreign body, we recheck the abdominal CT. His second abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed foreign body in the 3rd part of duodenum with peritonitis, local inclusional effusion or abscess; Larger portion of the foreign body was located outside the intestine . The patient was transferred to gastrointestinal surgery for suspected duodenal foreign body and perforation. We gave conservative treatment measures such as fasting, drinking, and acid suppression. After one days of conservative treatment, the patient felt that the abdominal pain was relieved. On the second day of admission, we believed that the foreign body was clearly present and moving. Although the symptoms and signs were alleviated, the remained foreign body may cause perforation of the digestive tract or even shock and death, so we decided to operate. Then laparoscopy was made to detect and remove foreign body. The observation hole was located 5 cm below the umbilicus and was about 1 cm long. The main operation hole was 3 cm below the left midclavicular line and about 1.2 cm long. The remaining three operation holes were located 3 cm below the right midclavicular line and the intersection of the lateral third of the line connecting the bilateral anterior superior iliac spine and the umbilical cord, about 0.5 cm long. During the surgery, the retroperitoneum was opened to expose the 3rd and 4th part of the duodenum on both sides of the superior mesenteric vessels. No obvious inflammatory reaction was observed around the duodenum, and the location of foreign body penetration could not be determined. Considering colonoscopy is longer than gastroduodenoscopy, intraoperative colonoscopy were used and showed the perforation site between the 3rd and 4th part of the duodenum . Laparoscopy could not find the perforation site, and did not detect the abnormal area. So, we switched to open surgery. The median incision in the abdomen is about 20 cm long. Cut into the abdomen layer by layer, and continue to free the duodenum behind the upper mesenteric vessel on the right side. The lower wall of the intestine and the underside of the 3rd and 4th part of the duodenum showed heavy inflammation and tissue edema. The junction of 3rd and 4th part of the duodenum was partially perforated to a size of 0.5 cm. A fishbone-like foreign body about 3 cm long was found in the inflamed tissue below the perforation (in front of the right spine of the abdominal aorta) . We took out the foreign body and flushed the operation area. The duodenal decompression tube with a diameter of 4 mm is placed above the perforated part of the duodenum level and the jejunal nutrition tube were placed proximally and distally at 15 cm and 25 cm from the ligament of flexion, and two drainage tubes with a diameter of 7 mm were placed at the duodenal perforation. The operation lasts 6 h. Intraoperative vital signs were normal, with T 36.5 ℃, P 85 beats/min, R 20 times/min, BP 130/75 mmHg, SPO2 98 %. The bone was like a knife . Postoperative recovery is smooth, and the patient resumed normal diet and was discharged without any complication. The patient was hospitalized for 30 days. Enteral nutrition was started on the fifth day after the operation. The drainage tube and jejunal nutrition tube were removed after 3 weeks from the operation. The frequency of follow-up after discharge was once every two weeks. The last follow-up was one month after discharge, with normal nutritional status.