A 43-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department with a 2-day history of acute abdominal pain. He presented with a history of an enlarged prostate but no history of abdominal surgery or trauma. At presentation, his blood pressure was 106/75 mmHg and his pulse rate was 83 bpm. His abdomen was mildly distended, and tenderness was noted throughout the abdomen. He had bilious vomiting in the emergency room. Laboratory tests were unremarkable, as expected for leukocytosis (12,000/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a change in the caliber of the transverse colon and the presence of a hernia ring in the lesser curvature of the stomach. The transverse colon formed a closed loop on the cephaloventral side of the stomach . On axial contrast-enhanced CT images, the right and left gastric arteries were ventral and dorsal to the herniated intestine, respectively . As shown in the sagittal contrast-enhanced CT images, the transverse colon was herniated and located ventral to the gastric body. The gastric body was compressed cephalocaudally by the dilated transverse colon. The mesentery gathered between the pancreas and the gastric body at the hernia ring . The patient was diagnosed with lesser omental hernia based on the above mentioned findings, and he underwent laparoscopic surgery the same day of diagnosis. Intraoperatively, the anterior layer of the lesser omentum covered the transverse colon . The gastrocolic ligament was absent owing to the dysplasia of the greater omentum, and the bursa omental space was already free. The dorsal gastric corpus was lifted, which revealed a 2-cm defect in the posterior layer of the lesser omentum, and the transverse colon had formed an internal hernia. A 2-cm incision was made in the posterior layer of the lesser omentum with laparoscopic coagulation shears to widen the small defect. The herniated intestinal section was withdrawn from the hernia sac, and no ischemia was observed in the intestinal tract; therefore, the transverse colon was not resected. The hiatus of the lesser omentum was closed with continuous sutures. The patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day.