A 54-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department complaining of mild postprandial abdominal pain and fullness with a duration of 10 years. Her medical history included hypertension, diabetes mellitus and hypercholesterolemia.
On physical examination, our patient was obese with a body mass index of 31 kg/m2. Abdominal inspection was unremarkable. No murmurs were auscultated and abdominal sounds were normal both in frequency and in tone. There was mildly increased tympany on periumbilical percussion with no dullness. Abdominal palpation was unrevealing. The same applied to bimanual examination of both hypochondric areas. The remainder of the physical examination was normal, as were laboratory tests.
An abdominal CT scan was performed with oral administration of contrast. A large retroperitoneal mass (16 × 14 × 7 cm) was found, arising from the left adrenal gland and surrounded by a thin capsule. It exhibited both the density of adipose and solid tissue and was adjacent to but not invading the small intestine, pancreas, spleen, and left kidney. There was no evidence of lymph node or vascular infiltration .
Laparotomy was performed via a midline incision. After mobilization of the splenic flexure, a large mass was identified arising from the upper pole of the left kidney and involving the left adrenal gland. No obvious lymphadenopathy was seen. The mass was distinct and separate from the surrounding tissues. The entire left adrenal gland containing the tumor was excised .
Histological examination revealed a large adrenal lipoma, measuring 16 × 14 × 7 cm and weighing 950 g. Macroscopically, it had a smooth, soft surface . The adrenal gland was recognizable in an area of the external surface. The tumor was partially surrounded by a thin layer of adrenal gland cortex. During dissection, the tumor appeared relatively homogenous and yellowish-brown in color, with occasional irregular white or red-brown lesions .
Sections (1 cm) were examined by an experienced pathologist. Microscopically, the tumor consisted of large adipocytes without nuclear atypia or mitoses. In several locations, edema or fibrosis by connective tissue with low cell density were observed. Diffuse inflammatory, mostly lymphocytic and occasionally plasmatocytic, infiltrations and occasional depositions of hemosiderin were observed. Small loci of hemorrhage were observed in areas where the cortex was adjacent to the adipose tissue of the tumor. No megakaryocytes were found. Moreover, erythrocytes and leukocytes found were clearly mature, hemorrhagic, with inflammatory infiltrates . Thus, the tumor was diagnosed as a lipoma .
Our patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged on the ninth postoperative day in good condition. She became entirely asymptomatic and follow-up was uneventful for six years postoperatively.