A 37 year old man arrived at the outpatient facilities of our clinic complaining of a remittent pain at the right lateral abdomen and a palpable mass that was constantly growing up during the last twelve months. His medical history included an uneventful appendicectomy in his childhood, 27 years ago and spontaneous pneumothorax 15 years ago. By that time, he was under medication with antacids because of gastritis. He did not mention any evacuation or urination symptoms.
Physical examination revealed a firm, sizeable and hard mass at the right abdomen , extending from the inferior ribs to the right iliac crest. Laboratory findings were within normal limits. The ultrasound (US) of the abdomen demonstrated a compact mass of uneven shape at the right abdomen, extended from the liver to the minor pelvis. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, demonstrated a cystic textured lesion, extended from the lower pole of the right kidney to the right iliac fossa, with a cefalocaudal diameter of 11 cm . There were small diaphragms within the mass, enforced by the intravenous administration of a contrast essence. The tumor was expelling not only the homolateral ureter but also the small and the large intestine to the left, however, without any findings of obstruction. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen demonstrated a cystic tumor with diaphragms , extending along the right abdomen from the inferior pole of the right kidney to the right iliac crest. The tumor measured a maximum cefalocaudal diameter of 22 × 10 cm, causing a slight pressure of the inferior vena cava. The administration of paramagnetic essence revealed an uneven peripheral enhancement of signaling. Three focal lesions of magnetic abnormal signaling were brought out at the liver segments II, VI, VII, and VIII, suggesting secondary metastasis or hemangiomas. Colonoscopy and upper GI endoscopy was carried out in order to exclude involvement of the gastrointestinal tract. Gastritis was the only abnormal finding.
The patient underwent laparotomy. A retroperitoneal cystic mass of gelatinous-like content, arising from the paravertebral space of the L1-L2-L3 vertebra, was confirmed. An "en block" resection of the tumor was performed. The small and the large intestine as well as the right ureter did not present signs of primary or metastatic involvement.
The first postoperative hours, the patient complained of sub-hyperesthesia at the inner surface of the thigh that was extended to the middle of the calf. In addition, he asserted a reduction of muscle power at his crur (thigh flexion debility). Within the next 24 hours, he underwent an electromyogram which demonstrated a possible neurogenic damage, due to lesions of the L2-L3 level. Methylprednisolone (250 mg) was administrated as a single boost dose, followed by dexametasone (8 mg three times a day). The patient was discharged the fourth postoperative day without any other postoperative complication.
The tumor weighed 957 g and measured 22 × 14 × 4,5 cm. The histological examination described internal cysts within the mass, measuring from 1 to 4 cm in diameter. The thickness of the cystic wall was variable (from 0,1 to 0,5 cm). Microscopically the inner surface of the cystic wall revealed filiform and branching papillae lined by mucin-containing atypical epithelial cells . The lining cells were stratified, generally to two or three layers, and the nuclear atypia was mild to moderate. The collagen fibers of the wall were disintegrated by pools of mucous, epithelial cells and calcifications. Lymphocytic infiltration was also observed. The PAS-D and Alcian Blue stain was positive as well as the immunihistochemical stain for keratine 8/18, keratine 20, pankeratine, CEA and Ki-67 .
Two months later the patient had a new abdominal CT-scan which demonstrated absence of residual disease. The electromyogram was compatible with a chronic neurogenic damage of the quadriceps muscle. The next two abdominal CT-scans, performed 6 and 12 months later, showed no recurrence. A significant clinical improvement was observed in patient's neurological status, followed by a considerable increase of muscle power.