Our patient is an 86-year-old man who was brought to the ED by emergency medical services due to behavioural concerns reported by his daughter. These included the abrupt onset of altered mental status with auditory hallucinations, repetition of words and phrases, and intermittent episodes of agitation followed by periods of somnolence. His comorbidities included Alzheimer’s dementia that had been diagnosed one year prior to this presentation, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, osteoarthritis, syringomyelia post laminectomy, and peripheral arterial disease. Notable home medications included memantine, which had been started 1 month prior to this presentation at a dose of 5 mg twice a day, metoprolol succinate 50 mg daily, and meclizine 12.5 mg every 8 h as needed for chronic dizziness.
On presentation in the ED, his blood pressure was 197/79, heart rate 97, respiratory rate 15, and oxygen saturation above 95% on room air. There were no significant abnormalities in laboratory testing which included a complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, lipase level, ethanol level and drug toxicology. His electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm with a few premature ventricular contractions and a normal QTc interval. CT head without contrast showed chronic microvascular changes and age-related diffuse parenchymal volume loss. On physical exam, he was alert, only oriented to self and experiencing auditory hallucinations. He would repeat questions exactly as they were said to him. There was no nystagmus, tremor, or rigidity noted on exam. Due to concerns for respiratory compromise he was observed in the Intensive Care Unit. An urgent EEG was performed and did not show epileptiform activity. Neurology and psychiatry were also consulted to help determine the etiology of his waxing and waning mental status and altered behaviours.
While gathering collateral information from his daughter, medication review and compliance was discussed. It was discovered that there were at least 60 missing pills from memantine pill bottle. The provider contacted poison control, who confirmed that the hypertensive crisis, behavioural disturbances, and repetitive precise speech could all be attributed to memantine overuse.
After 96 h all his symptoms had resolved. He returned to his baseline cognition. His initial MMSE score which was 13/25 had improved to 21/28 prior to hospital discharge. Our patient had no recollection of the events leading to this hospitalization. His family felt that he may have mistaken the memantine bottle for meclizine bottle given the similarity in names and may have been trying to use additional memantine as his dizziness had worsened recently. Him and his family also reported increased anxiety over the last few months with mild subjective worsening of cognitive functioning. Escitalopram was added for anxiety prior to discharge and memantine was discontinued. The daughter later confirmed that the patient had mixed up Memantine with Meclizine and had been overusing Memantine over the prior week. We discussed medication supervision and compliance with him and his family in detail. We reviewed our patient’s records approximately one year after the hospital stay at the time of submission of this report, and he continues to live at home with the support assistance of his family and 24-hour caregivers.