A 53-year-old African-American man with a medical history of hypertension, smoking and rheumatic fever presented to the emergency room (ER) of our hospital with chest pain. He reported his chest pain to be dull, substernal, non-radiating, lasted over two hours and was associated with diaphoresis. Our patient was in severe respiratory distress with worsening mental status. He was immediately given aspirin, sublingual nitroglycerine and statin, but required emergency intubation due to acute respiratory failure and circulatory collapse on site within 10 minutes of his presentation.
His initial ECG in the ER showed ST elevations of >1.5 mm in leads V1 to V5, ST depressions in leads II and III and VF and Troponin I level of 0.268 ng/ml with CK-MB of 6.1 ng/ml and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 444 pg/ml. He was also started on heparin and eptifibatide (Integrilin) drips, but he was taken immediately for cardiac catheterization, which showed total occlusion of his proximal left anterior descending (LAD), diffuse left circumflex disease and severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction with segmental wall motion abnormality. A drug eluting stent (DES) was placed in his proximal LAD.
Meanwhile, a second set of cardiac enzymes showed troponin I level of 515 ng/ml , CK-MB of 1120 ng/ml, and CK of 11623 ng/ml about six hours after his presentation to the ER. Our patient remained hypotensive throughout the procedure and an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted. He was transferred to Coronary Care Unit for further close monitoring and management.
Subsequently, our patient's urinary toxicology examination result was positive for cocaine metabolites. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed severe LV dysfunction, marked left ventricular hypertrophy, LV ejection fraction of 15%, and akinesia of all his apical segments. His troponins gradually trended down to 42.1 ng/ml on the post-MI day 4, which was a delayed trending course .
Our patient denied chronic cocaine abuse but also mentioned that he was not complying with his home medication of hydrochlorothiazide. At post-MI day six, his IABP medication was discontinued upon careful monitoring of his vitals. Serial echocardiograms confirmed persistent akinetic apex, a severely hypokinetic septum, and severe LV systolic dysfunction. The posterior wall thickness of our patient's heart was 19 mm and an intravenous (IV) septum was found at 19 mm with an apical aneurysm. His visually estimated LV ejection fraction turned into 30% by day 12. Our patient stayed at the Coronary Care Unit for a total of 15 days before he was discharged.