A 61-year-old woman who had suffered intermittent blurred vision, floaters, redness, and pain in the right eye for over 4 months presented at the Department of Ophthalmology, Eye & Ear, Nose, and Throat Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China in September 2017. There was no previous history of glaucoma. The patient reported that she had undergone uneventful phacoemulsification with implantation of a posterior-chamber in-the-bag two-haptic IOL in her right eye in May 2003, 14 years before presentation. She had also undergone epiretinal membrane surgery in the same eye in June 2013. Both surgeries were followed by an uncomplicated early postoperative period. Four years after epiretinal membrane surgery (May 2017), the patient experienced sudden vision impairment, which was managed at her local hospital. The diagnosis was displacement of the IOL into the vitreous cavity. IOL explantation with suture scleral fixation of the original IOL was performed. One month later, the patient complained of blurred vision, floaters, redness, and pain in the right eye, and she was admitted to the local hospital. The patient’s visual acuity was CF/15 cm, and her IOP was 40 mmHg in the right eye, whereas the left eye was normal. She was administered systemic and topical IOP-lowering medication combined with an anti-inflammatory treatment. Her IOP had dropped to 17 mmHg and her visual acuity had improved to 0.6. However, in the following 4 months, the patient twice experienced sudden vision impairment with eye pain, redness, and floaters.
She finally came to our hospital in September 2017. After careful review of her medical history, a series of detailed ophthalmic examinations were conducted. A slit-lamp examination revealed depigmentation and atrophy of the iris, and a quiet anterior chamber in the right eye. Fundus photography showed an opaque image of the posterior segment . B-scan ultrasound showed a mass of echoes throughout the vitreous cavity and strip-like echoes in the peripheral region . Optical coherence tomography revealed a retinal structure that is common in highly myopic eyes . The perimetry of the central visual field was normal without defects typical of glaucomatous eyes. Several conventional diagnoses were first considered, including infectious endophthalmitis caused by hypovirulent bacteria, noninfectious uveitis, and secondary glaucoma. However, these did not fully explain the combination of symptoms or the recurrent onset of the syndrome. Considering the features at onset, a possible diagnosis of UGH syndrome was proposed. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) was conducted with careful inspection of the chamber angle in all directions, and detected high echoes in the sulcus at the 5 and 11 o’clock positions, which was the direction in which the haptics of the IOL were placed. The root of the iris was also pushed forward in the same positions . Gonioscopy revealed massive pigmentation in the chamber angle of the right eye and anterior synechia and angle closure, whereas the chamber angle in the left eye was normal . Chafing of the posterior iris by the IOL haptic almost confirmed the diagnosis of UGH syndrome, although it was still necessary to exclude delayed endophthalmitis. IOL explantation and anterior vitrectomy combined with an intraocular injection of antibiotic were performed in the right eye. The removed IOL was sent for bacterial culture and electron microscopic analysis, which revealed no bacteria but some pigment cells and blood cells on the IOL . At the follow-up 1 month after surgery, the patient’s visual acuity was 0.8 with an ideal IOP of 13.3 mmHg, without IOP-lowering medications.