A 48-year-old man experienced choreiform movements of the head and neck with mild involvement of the extremities (Supplement Video 1, Supplemental Digital Content). He was referred to our hospital at 48 years of age on November 16, 2020. Four months later, he had dysphagia and weakness in the arms and hands. The muscle weakness progressed and atrophy developed in the distal upper extremities in 2021. He sought evaluation in our hospital on September 23, 2021. There was no family history of degenerative disorders. No sexual dysfunction was reported, but the patient complained of irritability. The oculomotor examination was normal. The physical examination revealed chorea, mainly in the neck, shoulders, and distal lower extremities, and mostly on the left side. Chorea was observed throughout the examination at rest or in action, and was exacerbated by movement. He also had a reduced pharyngeal reflex with tongue atrophy and fasciculations. Severe amyotrophy was noted in the thenar and shoulder girdle muscles. Ongoing and chronic denervation changes in the bulbar, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar segments were shown during a needle electromyography (EMG) examination. The upper extremities showed distally pronounced weakness (right/left, Medical Research Council [MRC] grades), as follows: neck flexion 5/5; neck extension 4/5; shoulder abduction 5/5; forearm flexion 5/5; wrist flexion 4/5; wrist extension 4/5; and thumb abduction 4/5. The lower extremity muscle strength was normal. Pathologic brisk deep tendon reflexes (3+) were noted throughout. Bilateral palmomental reflexs, and Hoffman and Babinski signs were positive; the other pathologic reflexes were negative. The remaining neurologic examination findings were unremarkable.
Nerve conduction studies showed decreased amplitudes of compound muscle action potentials in the right (4.5 mV; normal > 5 mV) and left median nerves (2.2 mV; normal > 5 mV). Compound muscle action potential amplitudes in the ulnar, tibial, and peroneal nerve studies were normal bilaterally. The amplitudes of sensory nerve action potentials were severely decreased in the right ulnar nerve (2.5 uV; normal > 7.0 uV). Nerve conduction study findings showed a decreased motor conduction amplitude of the right median nerve and decreased motor conduction velocity of the ulnar nerve above the elbow (AE) and below the elbow (BE). The amplitude of sensory conduction in the right ulnar nerve was decreased. EMG showed evidence of diffuse active and chronic denervation in the tongue, left sternocleidomastoid muscle, abductor muscle of the left little finger, bilateral common digital extensor muscles, bilateral T9-paraspinalis muscles, and the right vastus lateralis muscles. Fibrillation potentials were present in the abductor muscle of the left little finger, left common digital extensor muscle, left sternocleidomastoid muscle, and left T9-paraspinalis muscle. Changes in motor unit potentials, including polyphasia and long duration, were observed in all the muscles examined. Findings suggesting unstable neuromuscular transmission (jitter/blocking of polyphasic spikes) in the tongue, sternocleidomastoid muscle, tibialis anterior muscle, and T9-paraspinalis muscle. Therefore, active, or chronic denervation was demonstrated in the bulbar, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar segments. Magnetic resonance imaging studies revealed bilateral abnormal putamen signals and slight spondylotic changes in the cervical spine, without signal abnormalities. Cerebral fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography showed no abnormities.
The findings from biochemical tests were unremarkable while screening for infections, toxins, and metabolic and systemic autoimmune diseases. Serum and cerebrospinal fluid paraneoplastic antibody assays (CV2, Ma2, Hu, Yo, Ri, and amphiphysin) and autoimmune encephalitis antibodies (CASPR2, GABAb, NMDAR, LGI1, AMPAR1, and AMPAR2) were negative. Next-generation sequencing and dynamic mutation detection (PCR + fragment analysis (capillary electrophoresis) methods were used. The results of genetic testing for HD-related genes (DRPLA, FRDA1, SCA1-2-7-17, VPS13A, JPH3, and the androgen receptor gene) and related genes of familial hereditary amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [FALS] (C9orf72, UBQLN2, FUS, TARDBP, SOD1, VCP, and PGRN) were negative. Gene tests revealed normal CAG expansion with 18 and 19 CAG repeats for each of the 2 alleles of the IT15 huntingtin gene. Serum ceruloplasmin (urinary Cooper) was normal (292 mg/L). His only daughter currently did not exhibit any clinical neurologic symptoms. His parents were deceased, and there was no information was available regarding other family members.
The clinical features, electrodiagnostic features, and laboratory test results suggested that the patient had ALS combined with chorea. The patient was discharged to home on October 1,2021. Oral treatment with haloperidol (2 mg tid) and riluzole (50 mg bid) reduced the frequency of involuntary dance-like movements.
At the follow-up visit in January 2022, there was no significant aggravation of involuntary movements. The patient had clear consciousness, but still had weakness in both upper extremities, difficulty in shrugging, and slurred speech. The distal muscle strength of both upper extremities was grade 4, and the distal muscles of both upper extremities, and interosseous and thenar muscles were atrophied. The supraspinatus muscles were atrophied. The patient did not develop parkinsonism. No psychiatric features or cognitive impairment were noted. The results of the other examinations were unchanged.
Twenty ALS patients with chorea were identified in the literature search until December 2021[ were collected with our case report, and the clinical and genetic features are summarized in Tables and . The gender distribution was nearly equal (10 males and 11 females), and 52.4% (11/21) of the patients had FALS or chorea. Among the 11 patients with a known family history, 2 had FALS, 2 had hereditary chorea, 6 had hereditary HD, and 1 patient had both FALS and hereditary HD. The mean age of onset was 53.6 ± 11.7 years (age range, 30–72 years; male mean age, 53.5 ± 12.1 years; female mean age, 53.6 ± 11.3 years). All 21 patients were clinically characterized by diffuse dance-like movements, and 10 patients had cognitive impairment. Other symptoms, such as eye movement disorders (4 cases), rigidity (2 cases), personality change (1 case), gait disorder (1 case), falls (3 cases), and Parkinson symptoms (1 case), were not prominent. Of the 9 patients with ALS onset followed by chorea, 2 had bulbar onset, 2 had cervical onset, and 2 had lumbar onset; the other 3 are unknown. Among the 12 patients who underwent imaging examinations, 4 had caudate nucleus atrophy, 3 had frontal hypoperfusion, 1 had pyramidal tract atrophy, 1 had cervical spinal cord atrophy, 1 had an abnormal putamen signal shadow, 1 had a white matter abnormal signal, and 1 had no imaging abnormalities. At present, the genetic test results of 14 patients were positive: 11 patients had CAG(HTT) gene mutations; 1 patient had an FUS gene mutation; 1 patient had both VCP and CAG gene mutations; and 1 patient had an SETX gene mutation.