A 60-year-old man underwent an occult bleeding test during his annual medical checkup, which showed positive results. Colonoscopy showed a type 1 tumor in the sigmoid colon . The biopsy of the lesion showed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. The patient had hypertension, type 2 diabetes, and hyperlipidemia. He had a history of smoking half a pack of cigarettes per day for 27 years, which he quit 15 years back. His family history was unremarkable. On physical examination, his abdomen was soft and non-distended. Laboratory data showed carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 6.1 ng/mL and carbohydrate antigen (CA)19–9 52 U/mL. Radiographic contrast enema showed an approximately 3-cm stricture in the sigmoid colon, and the apple core sign was positive. It was located between the upper part of the sigmoid colon and descending colon. The sigmoid colon was redundant . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a contrast-enhanced lesion in the sigmoid colon without metastases . He underwent laparoscopic sigmoidectomy with D3 lymph node dissection. The inferior mesenteric artery was ligated high. The sigmoid colon was resected at the level of the promontory, about 30 cm from the anal verge. We performed a double-stapling technique for the anastomosis. The length of resected specimen was 250 mm, and the tumor was located 200 mm from the distal margin. The surgical time was 135 min, and blood loss was 10 mL. His postoperative course was normal, and he was discharged on postoperative day 11. The pathology was S, type 2, 35 × 30 mm, adenocarcinoma (tub2 > tub1), T2 (MP), N0, M0 pStage I. He was followed up without any adjuvant therapy. Six months after his surgery, he presented with mild lower abdominal discomfort, tenesmus, and bloody stools. Abdominal CT revealed extensive edematous changes in the rectum between the anastomotic site and the anal canal . His symptoms had been deteriorating for 1 week with anal pain. Therefore, he was admitted to our department. His white blood cell count was 10,100/μL, and C-reactive protein was 2.04 mg/dL. Colonoscopy showed extensive circumferential rectal ulcers between the anastomotic site and the anal canal, which was especially severe and several centimeters beyond the anastomosis on the anal side. The mucosa around the anal canal was intact . The stool culture was negative. The biopsy of the lesion showed erosive and regenerative colonic mucosa, and there was no malignancy or cytomegalovirus infection. He was diagnosed with ischemic proctitis and administered antibiotics. Since the patient did not have any peritoneal signs, we selected a non-surgical treatment. Oral intake was stopped. We started with 10 sessions of hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO) for the patient on day 3 of admission. Prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) and Kampo medicines (®Saireito) were started on day 5, and nitric oxide (NO) was started on day 12. Oral intake was resumed on day 4. His rectal inflammation improved, and the last CT scan and colonoscopy showed normal findings 46 days after admission . He was discharged on day 48. He continues to take PGE1 and has used NO therapy for 1 year. He has remained symptom-free for 3.5 years.