A 30-year-old healthy non-smoker male presented to the Periodontology outpatient clinic. His chief complaint was upper lip swelling over the last few months, desquamating of the maxillary gingiva, and discomfort, especially when chewing. Clinical examination revealed maxillary gingival hyperplasia between the upper canines, poor oral hygiene and dental calculus, with no tooth mobility or attachment loss. Dental X-ray did not show abnormality. Deep scaling and root planning conjoined with antibiotic treatment (metronidazole for 7 days) did not improve the gingiva appearance, and therefore he was referred to the Oral and Maxillofacial outpatient clinic. Physical exam revealed maxillary gingival hyperplasia and upper lip polypoid swelling and superficial ulcerations in its inner aspect . Also, progression of the lesions and involvement of the palatal gingiva and hard palate, and ulcerations in the soft palate were found . No facialis or other head and neck neurologic deficit were found. Nasal exam showed few lesions in the columella region and the Kiesselbach mucosa. The patient denied fever and night sweats, and reported a weight loss of about 8 Kg. He also denied getting any immunosuppressive drugs. Chest X-ray was normal. Abdominal ultrasound showed mild splenomegaly of 15.4 cm (the upper normal limit is 14 cm and positively correlated with body height) , complete blood count and liver function tests were normal. Differential diagnosis included granulomatous disease (such as Granulomatosis with polyangiitis and orofacial granulomatosis), lymphoproliferative disease, myeloid malignancy (such as acute myeloid leukemia) and pyogenic granuloma. Incisional biopsies were taken from the inner aspect of the upper lip and the palatal gingiva. Hematoxylin and eosin histopathology sections revealed dense infiltrate of macrophages with abundant Leismania organisms. In the background plasma cells, lymphocytes and non-caseating granulomas . Wright-stained smear of the tissue revealed macrophages with multiple cytoplasmic oval amastigotes. Thorough anamnesis revealed that the patient works as a date farmer in an endemic region for cutaneous leishmaniasis in Israel, and spent several months in North Africa and Zambia 4 years ago. Nevertheless, the patient did not recall any insect bites nor skin lesions in the past, though a habit of oral breathing while sleeping was mentioned. No dermal scars or lesions were found in a physical examination. Diagnostic confirmation and species identification was carried out by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the internal transcribed spacer 1 region (ITS1) followed by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis indicating that the parasite belonged to the L. donovani complex (L. infantum or L. donovani). To differentiate between these species, we used the short cysteine protease E/F - PCR. The amplified product was electrophoresed on 2% agarose gel that generated a 400 bp amplicon typical of L. donovani . Given the unusual presentation and patient mild splenomegaly, a serology test was carried out for anti-rK39 antibodies (Kalazar Detect™ Rapid Test) and found negative. A fourth generation HIV-1/2 antigen/antibody test was negative as well. A diagnosis of Mucosal leishmaniasis (ML) was established and the patient was treated with intravenous liposomal amphotericin B, according to the 2016 Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the American Society of Tropical medicine and Hygiene (ASTMH) guidelines, to achieve a cumulative dose of 30 mg/kg body weight . The treatment resulted in marked improvement and complete regression of mucosal lesions by 2-months.