A 60-year-old male was diagnosed with anaplastic astrocytoma involving the left parietal and temporal lobes. The patient underwent surgical resection with subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-proven complete excision.
In the context of a clinical trial, exploring the role of high-dose chemo-radiotherapy in malignant glioma, the patient underwent high dose sequential chemotherapy consisting of cyclophosphamide 7 g/m2 plus rhG-CSF (5 μg/kbw) and hematopoietic cells harvest, followed by methotrexate 8 g/m2 and thiotepa 900 mg/m2. Autologous unfractionated hematopoietic stem cells were administered at doses of 7.5 × 106/kg CD34+ cells and the patient experienced an uncomplicated hematological recovery within 10 days.
One month later, the patient received 70-Gy of fractioned whole-brain irradiation, and steroids (dexamethasone 8 mg i.v. bid) were administered for 2 months and than tapered at the end of radiotherapy.
On day +105 he was hospitalized because of the occurrence of right hilum lymphoadenopathy associated with cutaneous lesions, as limited erythematous plaques, with well-demarcated margins and scalings.
Surgical nodes and skin excision showed the presence of HD, nodular sclerosis type, with atypical HD-like elements, infiltrating the skin. The staging evaluation, performed by CT scan of abdomen and thorax and bone marrow biopsy, was negative for distant involvement (stage IA) and no treatment was administered after radical surgery.
Eight months after HSCT, the malignant glioma relapsed and the patient received 2 cycles of carmustine (240 mg/m2 i.v. q.6 weeks) without clinical benefit, followed by palliative neurosurgical subtotal excision. The steroids treatment was resumed (dexamethasone 4 mg, daily) and chronically administered as supportive care.
Six months later, histological-confirmed HD relapse occurred as bilateral hilum lymphoadenopaty. Because of deteriorated neurological clinical conditions, the patient declined any further treatment and died 2 months later for progressive glioma.
Lymph node and skin biopsies were fixed in 10% buffered formalin and paraffin embedded. Micron sections were then prepared and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Paraffin section immunohistochemical stains were performed using a biotin-streptavidin technique. The lymph node structure and the skin biopsy were diffusely effaced by a growth consisting of polymorphic features of small T-cell-rich B cell lymphoma/HD-like, and typical Hodgkin's and Reed-Sternberg cells (HRSCs), nodular sclerosis type with limited areas of lymphocyte depletion (REAL) . At immunohistochemistry, HRSCs expressed the following molecules: CD30+, CD43+, CD15+/-, CD3+/-; and were negative for EMA, ALK and CD20.
EBV latent membrane protein (LMP-1) was weakly positive at HRSCs immunohistochemistry, but EBV-DNA determination by PCR performed in multiple node biopsy fragments and in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) yielded negative results.
According to the clinical, histological and immunohistochemical findings, HD consistent with non EBV-associated PTLD was diagnosed.