A 78-year-old woman presented at a tertiary eye clinic due to a painless swelling and reddening of the left upper eyelid and consecutive ptosis for almost two months. Despite a topical treatment with hydrocortisone ointment prescribed 4 weeks previously, the symptoms slowly progressed . Visual acuity on the left eye was 0.4 (Snellen: 20/50). A slit lamp examination of the left eye showed a conjunctival injection and chemosis, a cataract, and no sign of intraocular inflammation. The optic nerve head and central retina appeared normal. The visual acuity of the right eye was reduced to hand movements due to a complicated retinal detachment treated with vitrectomy and silicone oil tamponade three months previously, but anterior and posterior segment examination showed no abnormalities. However, a proptosis of the left eye and impaired upgaze were observed. The patient appeared in good health apart from arterial hypertension and had no other pre-existing conditions or symptoms, in particular no fatigue, fever or weight loss. Additionally, the patient did not have any indications of immunodeficiency. Vital signs such as arterial blood pressure, heart rate and temperature were normal. The C-reactive peptide concentration and leukocytes count were within normal limits. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and antinuclear antibody (ANA) were not detectable, and immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) levels were within normal range. An MRI study showed an extraconal mass with an inhomogeneous contrast enhancement expanding to the intraconal compartment. A second MRI after three weeks revealed an additional infiltration of the superior rectus muscle and the ethmoidal bone as well as mucosal thickening and fluid in the ethmoidal sinus . A biopsy of the mass was acquired using a transpalpebral incision.
Macroscopically, the mass appeared inflammatory- or lymphoma-like. In accordance, the histopathologic report showed small areas of unspecific inflammation with lymphocytic, eosinophilic and neutrophilic infiltration . Consequent immunohistochemic analyses were positive for the B-lymphocyte antigen CD20, as well as for the T-cell marker CD3, and no light chain amplification was observed. The clonality analysis using PCR returned negative. Based on these results and the clinical course of the disease, an idiopathic orbital inflammation (IOI) was diagnosed and a therapy with oral prednisolone was initiated
In the following two weeks under oral prednisolone (80 mg tapered by 10 mg every 4 days), the patient’s condition did not improve. An extended, deeper biopsy specimen was taken, revealing a granulocytic reaction (eosinophilic and neutrophilic) and fungal hyphae with ramification at a 45° angle, characteristic of Aspergillus spp., pointing to the diagnosis of orbital aspergillosis. The patient was transferred to an infectious disease department for further evaluation and therapy. Further blood work continued to show no sign of systemic infection. Blood cultures for bacteria and fungi returned negative, the search for the Aspergillus-antigen galactomannan (GM) was negative (< 0.5), but the (1–3)-β-D-glucan (Fungitell®, Cape Cod, MA, USA) serology was positive (113 pg/mL), thus accounting for an invasive fungal infection. Given these results, an oral therapy with voriconazole was initiated. In the following days, the plasma trough concentrations of voriconazole were within the target range of 1.0–5.5 mg/L.
Using PCR (AsperGenius kit, PathoNostics, Maastricht, The Netherlands) on paraffin-fixed biopsy tissue, A. fumigatus was identified in both biopsy specimens. Using the same test, mutations that are typically associated with azole-resistance were ruled out.
In the following 2 years, under sustained oral voriconazole treatment, the patient showed a clear clinical and radiologic improvement , and (1–3)-β-D-glucan turned negative after 3 months. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) for the left eye recovered to 0.7 (Snellen: 20/25). Since the therapy was well tolerated and the drug concentration stayed within therapeutic range, the voriconazole treatment was continued to minimize the risk of relapse.