We present the medical history of a boy, currently 13 years old, who has been hospitalised multiple times in different medical centres due to repeated episodes of fever and respiratory infections since he was three years old. The first hospitalisation was associated with a severe bacterial infection: meningitis, pneumonia, and pericarditis. Several subsequent hospitalisations were due to fever of unknown origin. When the patient was seven years old, the symptoms exacerbated in the form of persistent fever and weakness, which resulted in another hospitalisation. The boy presented with anaemia that required transfusion of erythrocyte concentrate – physical examination revealed liver and spleen enlargement; laboratory tests revealed raised inflammatory markers, hypergammaglobulinaemia and elevated concentrations of IgG 2978 mg/dl; the IgG4 concentration was not assessed. The fact that the patient did not respond adequately to empirical wide-spectrum antibiotic therapy raised suspicion of an autoimmune disorder. He received glucocorticoid therapy ordered in another hospital, which resulted in the resolution of fever and normalisation of inflammatory markers. The glucocorticoid treatment was continued for six weeks. Four months after the treatment he started complaining about headaches, and left exophthalmos was observed on clinical examination. MRI revealed a mass around the posterior wall of the left orbit, involving the lateral rectus muscle, sphenoid wing, and masseters . The image obtained from the test did not indicate a malignant tumour or demyelinating background. Available medical records do not confirm that other imaging examinations were performed. Unfortunately, histopathological examination of endoscopically collected biopsy specimens was non-diagnostic and suggests pseudotumour. The patient received glucocorticoid therapy again, which had been continued for four months. Control head MRI scan after the treatment showed progression of the tumour, which also involved the left pterygopalatine fossa. Earlier available medical documentation does not provide more detail about the diagnosis and treatment at that time.
At this point of time, nine years since initial manifestation of the disease, the patient was admitted to the Paediatric, Haematology, Oncology, and Rheumatology Unit of the District Paediatric Hospital in Bydgoszcz.
The boy underwent tumour surgery: first it included an open surgical biopsy of the tumour of pterygopalatine fossa, while histopathological examination of the specimens showed the characteristics of chronic inflammation. The result of histopathological examination did not allow determination of the aetiology of the inflammation. Five months later, enlarged lymph nodes were found on the neck and in the left supraclavicular fossa. The patient was qualified for another surgery, and some enlarged lymph nodes were collected for microscopic examination during the procedure. Histopathological analysis revealed reactive follicular hyperplasia; sinus histiocytosis of lymph nodes, and excess fibrous connective tissue, with signs of fibrosis and chronic diffuse infiltration of connective and adipose tissue; the pathologist suggested abnormal fibrosis IgG4 (+). Laboratory tests showed significantly elevated serum concentration of IgG 2528 mg/dl (N: 750–1650 mg/dl), with an increase in IgG4 fraction – 350 mg/dl (N: 4–230 mg/dl).
Based on these findings and the results of the histopathological examination of lymph node biopsy specimens, the patient was eventually diagnosed with possible IgG4-RD.
He received prednisone 0.6 mg/kg, which has been continued for three months. Then prednisone dose was slowly tapered to 5 mg. The boy did not tolerate the treatment well; although the fever resolved, he complained about malaise and lower extremity pain.
After one week of treatment with 5 mg prednisone, the patient again presented with fever, bone and joint pain, and elevated inflammatory markers. Hence, the prednisone dose has been maintained at 10 mg/day which resulted in adequate control of the symptoms and stabilisation of serum IgG4 within the normal range. Long-term course, dependence on corticosteroid therapy, lack of histopathological features of malignancy (pathologist suggested IgG4-RD), as well as complete regression of infiltrates in the pterygoid-palatal fossa and lymph nodes confirms our diagnosis of probable IgG4-RD according to Boston criteria and possible diagnosis based on criteria from 2012 [, ].