A caucasian 46 year old woman was seen in 2008 for a follow-up visit. She had a SSc in a limited form since 1998, comprising Raynaud phenomenon, sclerodactily, digital and facial telangiectasia, and sicca syndrome, with anti-centromere antibodies (Abs). She had never developed any other specific organ involvements. She had also thyroid insufficiency since 2005. No familial medical history was noted. Her treatment included ocular cyclosporine, ocular vitamin A, aspirin 75 mg/d, diltiazem 240 mg/d and levothyroxine 75 μg/d. She had never smoked. No toxic occupational exposures were found.
Weight was stable at 42 kg and body mass index was at 16.4 kg/m2 (constitutionnal thinness). Thorax morphology was normal. Skin fibrosis was stable, involving the fingers and the face, with a Rodnan modified skin score (mRSS) at 3. She did not complain of dyspnea or cough and lung auscultation was normal. Usual laboratory tests were normal. Pulmonary function tests (PFT) showed a decreased cTLCO (transfer factor of the lung for carbon monoxide, corrected for hemoglobin) at 55.9% (of predicted value), FVC (forced vital capacity) was at 2.68 L (87.8%) and total lung capacity (TLC) at 5.17 L (108.4%). FEV1/FVC ratio was at 1. Cardiac ultrasonography was normal. Thoracic CT-scan showed upper lobes predominant mild and focal pleural and subpleural thickenings without any other specific lesions . She was then followed every year without any signs of active SSc or respiratory signs, and BMI was stable. Treatment was unchanged and PFT remained stable.
In 2016, on the thoracic CT-scan, pleural thickenings appeared more pronounced, associated with bilateral sub-pleural foci of lung fibrosis in both upper lobes . At that time, the diagnosis of PPFE was made. 18-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET-scan was performed and found a mild uptake of the pleuro-parenchymal lesions without any suspicion of underlying neoplasia. Various differential diagnosis were ruled out and she did not have any signs suggesting Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis, spondylarthropathy or inflammatory bowel disease. On biologic analysis, a moderate peripheral thrombocytopenia was noted (31-75 G/L) without any other hematologic alterations: hemoglobin at 12 g/dL, leucocytes at 5.64 G/L, including 3.36 G/L neutrophils and 1.13 G/L lymphocytes. Liver tests and renal function (creatinine at 55 μMol/L) were normal. Gammaglobulins were at 9.2 g/L and albumin at 40.5 g/L. Arterial blood gas were normal. Auto-immune profile was stable, with anti-nuclear Abs (1/2560) and anti-centromere Abs, while anti-SSA/Ro, anti-SSB/La, anti-U1RNP Abs and rheumatoid factors were negative. The search for Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative (culture of sputum). Otherwise sequencing analysis did not find any mutations in TERT and TERC genes. At last evaluation in 2017, patient was stable, there was a slight decrease in cTLCO (48%), FVC (83%) and TLC (88%), while lung involvement was unchanged on CT-scan .