A 60-year-old woman presented to our hospital on September 6, 2011, complaining of discomfort in the throat that she had been experiencing for about half a month. Past medical history was not a factor and there was no family history of thyroid cancer either. Physical examination revealed a palpable nodule in the right lobe of the swollen (grade I) thyroid. An ultrasound examination was performed immediately and an irregular hypoechoic nodule (measuring 31 × 15 mm) was detected arising from the lower pole and extending to the isthmus of the thyroid. The nodule was solid with blurry margins and it was difficult to distinguish from the trachea. Several coarse calcifications with heavy shadows were noticed inside. The thyroid capsule was also involved. Two swollen lymph nodes were found beside the right internal jugular vein (level V) measuring 17 × 13 mm and 14 × 10 mm, respectively. Computed tomography (CT) scans of the lungs were done but no positive findings were noted.
Because invasive thyroid carcinoma with cervical lymphatic metastases was assumed, surgical treatment was scheduled. Before the operation, the patient received a general checkup, including blood tests, echocardiographic assessment, abdominal and gynecologic ultrasound examinations, and CT scans of the head and abdomen. A heterogeneous mass was found in the right lower quadrant behind the uterus. The mass, measuring 115 × 92 × 94 mm, contained a large quantity of echoic fluid. Thick separations and two irregular solid components (measuring about 33 × 37 mm and 33 × 21 mm, respectively) were noticed inside. The ultrasound image is shown in Figure B. Abundant blood flow signals were detected in the solid components using color Doppler. The outside border of the mass was quite clear and smooth, but inside the mass closely adhered to and was difficult to distinguish from the right wall of the uterus. Neither ovary was involved. The serum cancer antigen 125 (CA125) level was slightly elevated at 70.58 U/ml (normal range, 0-35 U/ml). Carcinogenic embryonic antigen (CEA) (1.97 ng/ml) and CA19-9 (8.82 U/ml) levels were normal. Given the complex texture of the mass, an ovarian tumor, probably a cystadenocarcinoma, was suspected. After a thorough discussion with the relatives of the patient, a second operation following treatment of the thyroid nodule was scheduled.
A total thyroidectomy and neck exploration were performed on September 17, 2011, under general anesthesia. Histological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a well-differentiated PTC . Immunohistochemical examination demonstrated that the cells stained positively for thyroid transcription factor (TTF), cyclin D1, P27, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and Ki-67 (ratio 10%), and were negative for cytokeratin 19. Regional lymph node (3/4) metastases were confirmed. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the 7th postoperative day.
Fifteen days later she returned to our department of gynecology for further treatment of the abdominal mass. An abdominal exploration was performed and a large pink mass was detected arising from the posterior wall of the uterus. The mass was soft and covered by the serosa of the uterus. Both ovaries were easily identified because they were separated from the uterus and had a normal appearance. No ascites was found in the pouch of Douglas. A total abdominal hysterectomy along with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and a periaortic lymph node biopsy were performed while taking into consideration the age of the patient. On gross sections, several cysts were revealed that were filled with brown fluid inside the large heterogeneous mass. The two irregular solid components shown on the sonograms were also seen on the inside wall of the mass, and both of them had a gray and granular surface. No evidence of malignant changes was detected in tissue slices taken from the ovaries.
Postoperative pathological results were available five days later, and the diagnosis of a uterine metastasis stemming from the PTC was suspected . To rule out a primary uterine carcinoma, an immunohistochemical assay on an appropriate panel of proteins was performed. The heterogeneous mass showed strong expression of TG, CK7, CAM5.2 and TTF. Results for CA125, EMA and CD10 were negative. Therefore, the diagnosis of metastatic PTC in the uterine corpus was established. No positive findings resulted from the harvested lymph nodes. The clinical course following surgery was indolent; the patient was discharged on October 14, 2011. Just prior to being discharged, she accepted to undergo a general radioactive iodine scan, and no abnormal hotspots were found. For unclear reasons, the patient declined further treatments and follow-up was suggested. Since then, she has returned three times for general checkups and once for a PET-CT examination, and thus far no signs of recurrence have been detected.