A 21-year old male construction worker was brought to casualty department with two 12 mm iron bars/rods (used for construction) impaled through his torso. He had fall from second floor slab of under construction building and landed on 3-meter long, two 12 mm iron rods projecting from column. Fire brigade rescue team showing presence of mind had carefully used rod cutter to cut these rods to rescue and evacuate the patient. He was transported in sitting position in ambulance within one hour of fall. In casualty he was conscious and comfortable in sitting position, hemodynamically stable but in excruciating pain. Both the entry wound had impacted piece of cloth of his shirt. First 12 mm iron bar was 1 m long, and had penetrated from right anterior axillary fold just below the level of nipple, traversing pectoralis major muscle and exiting out from left sternal border at the level of third costo-chondral joint. Second 12 mm iron bar was 1 m long, and had penetrated just below the tip of right scapula and exiting out from below left of xiphoid process. None of blood or radiological investigations were done. As per ATLS protocol nasal oxygen was started, intravenous access was secured, and blood cross matching was done. He was immediately taken to operating room, and placed in semi left lateral position. Anesthetist intubated him in same position after pre-anesthetic medications and oxygenation, general anesthesia with sevoflurane was administered. First rod impacted in right pectoral area was removed by joining entry and exit wounds of first 12 mm rod. Incision was deepened through right pectoral muscle till retromammary space. There was no injury to ribs, sternum or pleural space was not violated. For removal of second 12 mm rod, incision was taken from entry to exit wound, which when deepened led to laparotomy and mini-thoracotomy. Rod had pierced diaphragm at right costo-phrenic angle and segment six of liver and exited out from segment four of liver. Lung was normal. Gall bladder wad normal. Hepatotomy was done and this rod removed. Hepatotomy was around 15 cm long and 4 cm deep and was closed with no 1 Polyglactin mattress suture thus achieving complete hemostasis. Diaphragm rent of 3 cm × 2.5 cm was closed in two layers with no 1 Polypropylene. Inter-costal drainage tube was placed. There was hemoperitoneum of 100–200 milli-liters only. Abdominal drainage tube was placed. Thorough wash was given and both wounds were closed. Post-operative recovery was uneventful without any wound infection. He was administered anti tetanus serum.