An 83-year-old male with hypertension, dyslipidaemia, former smoker was admitted at our division after a positive stress test. Eleven years before, he underwent drug-eluting stent implantation in ostial-proximal LAD [sirolimus-eluting stent (SES) 3.5/28 mm)] for angina symptoms. The cardiovascular and respiratory examinations on admission were normal. Blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, electrocardiogram showed regular heart rate of 65 b.p.m. First-line blood test was normal. His medical therapy on admission was: aspirin 100 mg/day, ramipril 2.5 mg/day, bisoprolol 1.25 mg/day, and simvastatin 20 mg/day. Coronary angiography showed severe ostial in-stent restenosis and atherosclerotic progression in mid-LAD (, , Video S). By 6-Fr radial approach, two SESs (SES 2.75/12 mm + SES 3.0/28 mm) were implanted in mid-distal portion of LAD overlapping the distal portion of the old stent. The OCT was subsequently performed confirming the good apposition of new stents and the severe in-stent neo-atherosclerosis in ostial LAD . Real-time co-registration highlighted diffuse calcifications under the central portion of the old stent struts that have led to underexpansion [minimal lumen area (MLA) 4.1 mm2, , , Video S]. Multiple prolonged inflations in underexpanded site with non-compliant balloon were performed (3.5/20 mm + 3.5/12 mm at 28 atm for 30 s). Hourglass images persisted during all inflations. Therefore, four cycles of 10 impulses of ICL were performed (4.0/12 mm balloon inflated at 6 atm). Better expansion of non-compliant balloons was obtained. Provisional stenting in left main bifurcation with one-stent crossover into LAD (SES 4.0/18 mm) was followed by non-compliant balloon post-dilatations (4.0/15 mm + 5.0/12 mm). Final OCT scan showed the crushed calcium under the old struts (, , Video S3) confirming the good angiographic result (MLA 6.81 mm2, , , Video S4). Geometric change of the old stent, from elliptical to a round shape, was highlighted by OCT analysis . No major complications during the procedure or hospitalization occurred. Dual antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel and aspirin was prescribed for 6 months. At 1 year of follow-up, the patient was free of angina and on good clinical status.