A 19-year-old male with no medical history was referred to our service with approximately 2 weeks of headache and 2 episodes of vomiting. Detailed history from his parents revealed a change in behavior, including apathy and uncharacteristically poor university grades, over the prior 12 months. With the exception of a right pronator drift, his neurological examination was normal. CT brain revealed a large extra-axial heterogeneous mass involving the left frontal and temporal lobes with well-defined lobulated margins and avid enhancement of the high-density areas. The lesion eroded the inner table of the left frontal bone with the outer table almost completely eroded . MRI brain with contrast demonstrated a large extra-axial ovoid heterogeneously enhancing left frontal convexity mass measuring 6.2 cm ×7.1 cm ×7 cm . There was considerable susceptibility artifact, suggesting calcification and/or hemorrhage. There was also evidence of destruction and erosion of the calvarium, and a small extracranial component of the tumor was noted. The diagnosis of hemangiopericytoma was entertained and surgery planned.
Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to have breached the dura and as suggested by preoperative imaging, had invaded bone . The involved bone (including the lateral sphenoid wing) and a generous cuff of dura were resected. The tumor was soft and moderately vascular. The tissue plane between tumor and brain was easily developed using standard microsurgical technique. A gross total resection was achieved. The dural defect was repaired with pericranial graft, and titanium mesh used to repair the bony defect.
The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful and he was discharged home day 5 after surgery. Postoperative MRI revealed no evidence of residual tumor. PET scanning did not reveal any other lesions. The patient was referred to a local specialist sarcoma unit for adjuvant chemotherapy with VIDE (vincristine, ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and etoposide), to be followed by focal irradiation and second round of chemotherapy with VAI (vincristine, dactinomycin, and ifosfamide).
The patient is now 1-year postsurgery with no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence or metastatic disease.
Under light microscopy, the specimen showed a durally based, highly cellular tumor composed of relatively monotonous small blue cells with slightly irregular nuclei and thin rims of cytoplasm displaying PAS- positive material . The mitotic rate was high at 34 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. There were numerous vessels, some displaying thrombosis and there were areas of hemorrhage and hemosiderin deposition. There was no necrosis. The tumor cells were positive for FLI-1, MIC-2, and vimentin . The cells were negative for STAT6, CD 34, DUX-4, WT1, desmin, myogenin, ERG, synaptophysin, chromogranin A, pan-CK, EMA, P40, CK8/18, LCA, SOX10, CD 20, CD3, and TDT. Ki67 was positive in 30% of the cells, visually estimated. The specimen was sent for FISH and tested positive for EWSR1 (22q12) rearrangement.