A 9-year-old female child born to phenotypically healthy parents reported to the department of pediatric dentistry with a complaint of pain in the right lower back tooth for the past 10 days; the pain was spontaneous in nature and nocturnal in type. Medical history shows that the child was diagnosed with a congenital cardiac problem soon after birth and underwent surgical repair for the same. No other medical history was reported. Dental history revealed that the child had undergone extraction of deciduous teeth a year back under physical restraints. There was no previous history of dental trauma. On general examination, the child was thin built with below average height (122 cm) and weight (25 kg), along with a dysmorphic face with relatively decreased intercanthal distance and an upturned nasal tip with a long philtrum. On close observation and interaction, the child exhibited a slight alteration in their behavior, which was not appropriate for her age. On intraoral examination, there was a bifid upper labial frenulum, “V” shaped constricted maxillary arch, high arched palate, and numerous decayed teeth on both upper and lower arch, and some of the primary teeth exhibited preshedding mobility . In addition to this, a unique clinical finding of a single central incisor positioned exactly at the center of the maxillary arch was noted . An intraoral occlusal radiograph and a panoramic radiograph were advised to assess the multiple carious teeth and single central incisor. The intraoral maxillary anterior occlusal radiograph and a panoramic radiograph confirmed the clinical findings of single maxillary central incisors . In addition to this, it was noted that the maxillary permanent canines were highly placed near the nasal floor, raising a query whether that could be impacted, for which an orthodontic opinion was sought, cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) was advised for better assessment of the position of canines. CBCT revealed that one central incisor was present, and canines had a favorable outcome for eruption . Hence, on correlating the obtained information, we gave the provisional diagnosis of SMMCI.
A detailed history revealed the child had one maxillary central incisor in primary dentition, which was confirmed by the photographs of the child. As it could be associated with a spectrum of findings appearing as a syndrome, to confirm the associated findings, the child was referred for a multidisciplinary evaluation and opinion. After the evaluations and investigations by the multidisciplinary team, it was found that some systemic defects were associated with it .
Correlating the clinical findings and radiographic investigations, a final diagnosis of SMMCI syndrome was provided. After obtaining concerned opinions and fitness, the treatment plan was framed. Since the patient lacked cooperative ability for multiple surgical extractions, we opted for full mouth rehabilitation under general anesthesia .