A 48-day-old male infant presented to the emergency room (ER) of an outside hospital (OSH) due to three days of lethargy, reduced oral intake, and reduced number of wet diapers. The initial evaluation in the ER included an abdominal ultrasound, which was unremarkable, and a respiratory viral panel (RVP), which was negative. The infant was sent home with recommendations for symptomatic management. Over the following day, the infant developed a progressively weaker suck and could only syringe-feed. He then had a choking episode with apnea and was brought back to the OSH ER. During this second visit, he was noted to be hypothermic to 32ºC rectally, hypoxic, and stridulous, with gurgling noises appreciated from his posterior oropharynx. The infant was admitted to the NICU for evaluation and management.
This patient was a twin born at 36 2/7 weeks gestation with an unremarkable pregnancy and delivery. He spent 9 days in the NICU for likely transient tachypnea of the newborn and required respiratory support via nasal cannula during that time. His twin brother was asymptomatic and well-appearing at home. The mother ran an in-house daycare located in central Pennsylvania. No other children attending the daycare were ill. The mother denied feeding her infant any honey. She denied any exposure to construction sites or soil but endorsed that they live near farmlands. Before the infant became ill, he was taking full bottles of either breast milk or formula and had regular bowel movements and normal tone. He was growing well and meeting his developmental milestones.
At the time of presentation, the infant had poor feeding and had not had a bowel movement in more than three days. He was afebrile and without rhinorrhea, cough, vomiting, or diarrhea. On physical examination, the infant was hypoxic to 70% with mild respiratory distress, and had bilateral ptosis, pooling of secretions in the oropharynx, generalized hypotonia with significant head lag, and minimal suck, gag, and Moro reflexes. He had 2 + patellar reflexes with weak hand and toe grasp reflexes.
The evaluation in the ER included a sepsis work-up with a blood and urine culture, which were negative, a urinalysis and a complete blood count, which were unremarkable, and a second RVP which was positive for rhino-entero virus (REV). A chest X-ray (CXR) was notable for a right upper lobe infiltrate suggestive of a pneumonia. Upon the infant’s presentation to the NICU, there were significant concerns for encephalitis, therefore, additional workup was done including a lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture, serum, and CSF PCR for herpes simplex virus (HSV), and skin surface cultures for HSV, all of which returned negative. A brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) was performed to evaluate for a stroke versus abscess as an etiology for the infant’s presentation and was normal.
Differential diagnoses included encephalitis or meningitis, which are pathologies typically seen in a NICU, unlike that of IB. However, due to the infant’s significant head lag and hypotonia, neuromuscular and metabolic disorders were also being considered including congenital myasthenia gravis, and spinal muscular atrophy. Although not typically seen in the NICU, botulism was also considered by the NICU fellow, a differential that was not agreed upon by majority of the NICU attendings at the time as it had never been diagnosed in this NICU previously.
The infant was placed on two liters per minute via nasal cannula for the hypoxia. He was warmed to achieve a core temperature of 36ºC rectally and was started on maintenance intravenous fluids. He was unable to tolerate oral feedings and could only be fed via a nasogastric tube (NGT).
The infant was treated with empiric antibiotics of Vancomycin, Ceftriaxone, and Acyclovir. There was continued right upper lobe opacification on his CXR, so he was continued on Ceftriaxone to manage a suspected superimposed bacterial pneumonia. Vancomycin and Acyclovir were discontinued after all other studies had returned negative.
The infant developed worsening respiratory distress, followed by apnea requiring emergent intubation and mechanical ventilation within less than 24 h from admission. His neurologic exam worsened, and the infant lost his gag and suck reflexes, and developed complete areflexia. At that point, the pediatric infectious disease team became involved and was convinced IB was the diagnosis based on the pattern of neurological exam changes, and the botulinum antitoxin (BabyBIG) was ordered from the Center for Disease Control (CDC) in California within 24 h of admission to the NICU. A stool sample was sent to the Department of Health in Pennsylvania for a confirmatory botulism toxin assay. As the infant had not stooled in over three days, a sterile water enema was performed to collect stool. Glycerin enemas are not recommended per the CDC because they tend to yield unsatisfactory samples. Instructions on how to properly obtain a stool sample for botulinum testing can be found on the website for Infant Botulism Treatment and Prevention Program – California Department of Public Health .
The infant further developed urinary retention requiring placement of a urinary Foley catheter. At that point, he demonstrated nearly complete paralysis with no spontaneous movements and very sluggish pupils that would become slower to respond with repeated exams, demonstrating neuromuscular fatigue.
The BabyBIG antitoxin arrived within less than 24 h of contacting the CDC. It was administered to the patient within less than 48 h from his admission to our NICU. Within three days of receiving BabyBIG antitoxin, our patient started to show clinical improvement with return of some spontaneous movements and tolerated weans on his ventilatory settings. He also tolerated initiation of enteral trophic feeds. The infant’s botulinum toxin assay returned positive for Botulism subtype B seven days after sending the test to the Department of health. On day nine from administration of BabyBIG, he was successfully transitioned to invasive-Neurally Adjusted Ventilatory Assist (NAVA) to allow monitoring of his diaphragmatic activity to predict extubation readiness. On day thirteen, he was successfully extubated to non-invasive NAVA and had three spontaneous bowel movements. Over the following two weeks, he was gradually weaned to room air and started working on oral feeds. Due to continued hypotonia, he received physical, occupational, and speech therapies. A barium swallow study demonstrated aspiration with oral feeding secondary to fatigue. He was therefore maintained on NGT feeds with gradual advancement of oral feeds. After 23 days of NICU stay, he was discharged home in room air, with a combination of oral and NGT feeds and outpatient follow-up appointments that included pediatric neurology, speech and occupational therapy, early intervention, and our NICU developmental clinic. Four months following his admission to our NICU, our patient is reported to be back to baseline without any residual comorbidities.