The patient was a 77-year-old man with no significant medical history. He had cervical pulsation and shoulder stiffness for 3 months, but neurological deficits were not observed. The patient was referred for a palpable swelling in the left cervical region. Magnetic resonance imaging performed on admission revealed a vascular lesion measuring 25 mm in diameter . Digital subtraction angiography performed after admission revealed a giant saccular ICA aneurysm with flow disturbance, elongation, and tortuosity [-]. Single-photon emission computed tomography (CT) showed no hypoperfusion . There was no evidence of thrombosis in the aneurysm. No other dysplastic or atherosclerotic lesions were found in the other vessels except in the contralateral cervical ICA. Collateral flow through the anterior and posterior communicating arteries without delay in the capillary phase was observed with left cervical compression, suggesting that shunting during the anastomosis was unnecessary. The patient provided informed consent for the procedure.
Under general anesthesia and motor-evoked potential (MEP), the aneurysm was excised, and side-to-end anastomosis of the cervical ICA was performed . The aneurysm was exposed using a standard approach along the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM), dissecting from the parotid gland (PG) for a high-cervical approach . An aneurysm was observed under the thinly stretched internal jugular artery. After the vagus and hypoglossal nerves were detected, the common carotid artery (CCA), external carotid artery (ECA), and proximal and distal ICA were dissected. Subsequently, the CCA, ECA, and distal ICA were occluded. The excess length of the ICA allowed aneurysmectomy with side-to-end anastomosis using the Gore-Tex suture . The total ischemia time was 40 min, and no MEP changes were reported. Histopathological examination revealed an atherosclerotic aneurysm without dysplasia . The aneurysmal wall showed atheromatous changes with clusters of foamy cells and high cholesterol deposition. Elastica van Gieson staining revealed the disappearance of elastic fibers in the internal elastic lamina and media . The patient experienced a partial deficit in the hypoglossal nerve after the procedure, which fully recovered at discharge with speech therapy. No other neurological deficits were observed. CT angiography on postoperative day 1 showed complete removal of the aneurysm and a patent cervical ICA anastomosis . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7. The patient provided written informed consent for the publication of the study.