A 15-year-old girl was admitted to Shenzhen People's Hospital Neurology Intensive Care Unit (NICU) due to the sudden onset of a left-sided movement disorder. She experienced a sudden episode of weakness in her left lower limb one and a half months prior to hospitalization, which resolved spontaneously 3 days later. A month ago, she developed weakness in her left upper extremity, which disappeared after 5 days. Intermittent fevers of 39°C started 1 week ago, along with mild shortness of breath but no chills, cough, diarrhea, or bladder irritation symptoms. She noticed the sudden onset of a persistent left-limb movement disorder 3 h before being admitted to the NICU. She claimed to have lost 7.5 kilograms (17 percent of her body weight) in 3 months. She underwent orthodontic treatment a year ago and subsequently wore braces. She denied having a history of hypertension, diabetes, cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, intravenous drug use, immunosuppressant use, atrial fibrillation, and inherited diseases.
She was conscious on physical examination, and her verbal responses to questions were appropriate. Her face was pale, her left lower limb muscle strength was grade II, her left upper limb muscle strength was grade III, and both Babinski and Brudzinski's signs were positive. In addition, a grade 4–6 systolic murmur was heard in the mitral region, splenomegaly was confirmed by abdominal palpation, and clubbed fingers were observed upon careful inspection of the hands.
Laboratory analysis showed the following: a normal leukocyte count, but mild normocytic anemia (hemoglobin, 91 g/L); an elevated C-reactive protein level of 32.05 mg/L (normal range, 0–5 mg/L); and a slightly elevated procalcitonin level (0.07 ng/mL; normal range, <0.05 ng/mL). The NT-proBNP level was 1,123 pg/m (normal range, <125 pg/mL). The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was red, the pressure was 180 mm H2O, the glucose level decreased (1.79 mmol/L; normal range, 3.9–6.1 mmol/L), the protein concentration increased (0.55 g/L; normal range, 0.15-0.45 g/L), the nucleated cell number increased (280 /μL; normal range, <20 /μL), and the CSF culture was negative.
A head CT scan urgently performed revealed a cerebral infarction in the right basal ganglia and a subarachnoid hemorrhage . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed vegetation on the mitral leaflets measuring 2.3 × 1.3 cm . Before administering ceftriaxone to the patient, three blood cultures (aerobic and anaerobic bottles from peripheral blood once every half an hour) were obtained. After 9.5 h, the blood culture was positive for facultative anaerobic Gram-positive streptococcus, which was immediately identified as A. defectiva with the Vitek MS using library v3.2 (bioMérieux, Marcy-l'Étoile, France) and the percent of identity is 99.9%. According to antimicrobial susceptibility testing , the bacteria were susceptible to vancomycin, clindamycin, and linezolid but resistant to penicillin, ceftriaxone, and cefepime. All three blood cultures tested positive for A. defectiva. The girl met two of the modified Duke diagnostic criteria for IE. Based on the susceptibility test results, the antibiotic therapy was immediately changed to vancomycin, 3 days later, the girl's temperature turned normal. The girl was transferred to a higher-level hospital for cardiovascular surgery on the tenth hospital day. Three weeks later, she underwent mitral valve replacement surgery. Upon discharge, two months after the onset of symptoms, her left lower limb muscle strength was grade V, while the left upper limb muscle showed a strength of grade IV.