A 48-year-old Caucasian man presented to the Accident and Emergency Department of our hospital with symptoms of extreme asthenia, but showed no evidence of Raynaud's syndrome. In the past few months, he had complained about a productive cough and post-prandial vomiting. At admission, he was evidently dehydrated and undernourished, very pale, dyspnoeic and tachycardiac (110 bpm) at rest. Heart sounds were soft but no other pathologic sign concerning his lungs and abdomen was noted. His blood pressure was 80 over 50 mmHg.
A blood cell count showed severe anaemia (haemoglobin = 3.8gr/dl) and the patient was prescribed an emergency transfusion of RBCs (0 Rh-positive), owing to the severe anaemia associated with dyspnoea and tachycardia at rest, and hypotension. Blood samples were also sent to our Blood Transfusion Service at this time. Previous data relating to our patient was not found in our records.
After centrifugation, samples showed low hematocrit and normal plasma appearance. The direct blood group test resulted in unequivocally A with Rh phenotype Ccddee, while the indirect test revealed agglutination of B cells and a strong agglutination of 0 cells. Antibody screening also showed strong agglutination (4+) of all panel cells.
The above-mentioned Accident and Emergency Department was immediately alerted to our patient's immunohaematological situation, and we advised urgent cessation of the transfusion of RBCs (0 Rh-positive), which the physician had already initiated as prescribed by the emergency guidelines in force. We also recommended our patient's transferral to the Haematology Department in Ferrara City Hospital, where he arrived in a state of severe cardiovascular shock.
Blood samples taken from him at this time showed dramatic haemolysis, which led to his death within a few hours.
Subsequent blood tests revealed the presence of cold agglutinin syndrome with very high levels of anti-H (1:65.600). He showed positive (3+) results for the direct antiglobulin test for complement fractions, which caused the intravascular haemolysis and consequent cardiovascular shock.
His death prevented further attempts to define the aetiology of his condition. However, an emergency ultrasonography had shown several enlarged lymph nodes (average diameter, 5 cm) along the iliac vessels and the thoracic and abdominal aorta, suggesting a lymphomatous pathology.