A 70-year-old male was admitted to our department with a complaint of bloody urethral discharge during the previous month.
The patient reported bloody urethral discharge for one month. He had no flank pain or urethral pain.
In March 2015, this patient was admitted to a local hospital for painless hematuria. Percussion of the kidneys indicated no enlargement and no renal mass. A cystoscopy indicated hematuria from the right ureteral orifice, but no mass in the bladder or urethra. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a tumor with a size of 3.6 cm × 2.9 cm in the right renal pelvis . The urine cytology results were negative.
The doctors performed radical nephroureterectomy and bladder cuff resection. Postoperative pathology showed that the tumor was a high-grade UC that invaded the subepithelial connective tissue . There was no evidence of local or distant metastases. These findings led to a diagnosis of upper UTUC of the right renal pelvis with a clinical stage of T1N0M0. We recommended Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) intravesical chemotherapy, but he declined and was lost to follow-up.
In December 2016, the patient came to our department because of dysuria for three months. Percussion of the kidneys and inspection of the lymph nodes indicated no enlargement. The red blood cell count was 4.10 × 1012/L and the hemoglobin concentration was 131.0 g/L. Blood biochemistry showed elevated levels of cancer antigen 19-9: 48.32 U/mL and non-small cell lung cancer antigen: 9.51 U/mL.
Ultrasonography showed multiple masses in the bladder, and a chest X-ray showed a hyperdense nodule with a diameter of 4 mm in the inferior lobe of the right lung (data not shown). Enhanced CT of the urinary tract showed multiple masses in the bladder, the largest of which was about 6.5 cm × 5.0 cm , but there was no evidence of enlarged lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity, the retroperitoneal space, or the pelvic cavity. A cystoscopy confirmed multiple tumors in the bladder, and a biopsy showed no umbrella cells, but evidence of pathological mitotic figures and tissue consisting of low-grade UC. We therefore, performed radical cystectomy and left cutaneous ureterostomy. The postoperative pathology results showed the tumor was a low-grade UC that invaded the superficial muscle of bladder wall , but there were no positive margins or involved lymph nodes. Immunohistochemistry showed positive staining for CK7, CK20, CK (L), CK5/6, P40, P53, PHH3, and Ki-67, but no staining for CK (H). There were no local or distant metastases. We therefore diagnosed the patient as having bladder UC with a clinical stage of T2N0M0.
The patient denied any history of injury to the penis, scrotum, or perineum before development of bloody urethral discharge.
He reported smoking 10 cigarettes daily for over 40 years, and consuming white wine for more than 30 years. He quit smoking and consuming white wine in 2017. There were no similar cases in his family.
Percussion of the kidneys indicated no enlargement and no renal mass. We observed a 15 cm surgical scar at the right waist, and another 7 cm surgical scar at the lower right abdomen. We also observed that a stoma bag on the left side of the abdomen contained light yellow urine. All the vital signs were stable and there were no other abnormal findings.
Urethroscopy showed a cauliflower-shaped neoplasm with a size of 2.0 cm × 1.5 cm × 0.5 cm in the anterior urethra, and a biopsy revealed the tissue consisted of low-grade UC. The routine blood test showed high levels of white blood cells (12.07 × 109/L) and neutrophils (89.0%), but low levels of red blood cells (4.02 × 1012/L), hemoglobin (131.0 g/L), and lymphocytes (4.1%). The blood biochemistry showed low levels of estimated glomerular filtration rate (61 mL/min/1.73 m2) and total protein (61.8 g/L), but a high level of uric acid (438 μmol/L). The coagulation test and the prostate specific antigen test showed no abnormal changes. The results of all other examinations were normal.
Except for the absence of the right kidney, there were no abnormal findings in the color Doppler ultrasonography.