A 45-year-old gentleman of north Indian ethnicity, teacher by occupation, with no significant medical, family, or psychosocial history presented to us with complaints of bluish discoloration of mucous membranes, breathlessness on exertion belonging to New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class 3, and palpitations belonging to modified European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) class 3 for 1 year. Physical examination revealed central cyanosis and grade three clubbing in all four extremities with oxygen saturation of 82% on room air. Other salient features on physical examination included raised jugular venous pressure with prominent cv waves, grade three parasternal heave, a wide fixed split S2 with loud P2, grade two pansystolic murmur (PSM) at apex, and a grade three PSM at lower left sternal border which increased with inspiration. Twelve lead surface electrocardiogram (ECG) showed right bundle branch block (RBBB) with atrial fibrillation (AF) . Chest X-ray showed situs solitus, levocardia, right atrial enlargement, right ventricular (RV) apex, and dilated main and right descending pulmonary arteries with peripheral pruning of pulmonary vessels . Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed dilated right-sided chambers and severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with a right ventricular systolic pressure of 100mmHg. TTE also revealed an atrial septal defect (ASD) with maximum size 26.9mm with bidirectional but predominant right to left shunt and two non-obstructive membranes in the LA, dividing the LA into three chambers . The proximal chamber of LA (which we termed LA1) received all four pulmonary veins, the middle chamber (LA2) communicated with the right atrium (RA) through the ASD, and the distal chamber (LA3) communicated with the left ventricle (LV) via the mitral valve . Mitral valve showed presence of accessory tissue, mild mitral regurgitation (MR), and mild mitral stenosis (MS) with a mitral valve area of 1.9cm2. The maximum diameter of the proximal membrane was 18.1mm and of the distal membrane was 17.7mm. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) confirmed these findings (Video ). Bubble contrast TTE with contrast injected in left antecubital vein showed contrast first appearing in the middle chamber of LA (LA2), then progressing to RA through the ASD and then to RV, suggesting presence of persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVC) with unroofed coronary sinus (CS) . Contrast cardiac computerized tomography (CT) confirmed these findings . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed right superior vena cava (RSVC) draining into RA and PLSVC draining into LA and absence of the innominate vein . Cardiac catheterization confirmed these findings . Catheterization also revealed irreversible severe pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) with resistance ratio of 1.1 and step down in the oxygen saturation from pulmonary veins to LA. Through this multimodality imaging approach, we concluded with a diagnosis of cor triatriatum with supramitral ring: “Cor tetratriatum” with Raghib syndrome with Eisenmenger syndrome. Patient was kept on medical management with tablet torsemide 10mg once daily, tablet metoprolol succinate 50mg once daily, tablet warfarin 5mg once daily, and tablet sildenafil 20mg thrice daily. Follow-up at 1 month, 3 months, 6months, and 1 year showed no progression of symptoms, with the patient remaining in NYHA class 2 and modified EHRA class 2A. The international normalised ratio was maintained in the therapeutic range, and he had no adverse effects to any medications.