A 27-year-old ethnic han male patient arrived at our hospital in March 2021 presenting with a bilateral deviation in eye position that had been present since birth. The patient had a pointed head, protruding eyes, and normal mental development. There was a normal occlusion of the patient’s teeth, and fingers/toes were not deformed. While the patient’s grandparents, mother, and sisters exhibited a normal appearance, his father displayed similar symptoms to the patient.
Examination results revealed that his visual acuity was 20/25 (−0.75/−0.75 × 143 20/20) in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Non-contact tonometry test results indicated that the intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in the right eye and 19 mmHg in the left eye and the amount of ocular protrusion was 28 mm in both eyes. No significant abnormal changes were observed in anterior and posterior segment exams in both eyes, and Hirschberg test results showed that the corneal reflex was ≥ 45°. The prism alternate cover test (PACT) revealed a constant exotropia (XT) of 100∆ at near and distance fixation, 100∆ XT at upward gaze, and 90∆ XT at downward gaze. No titmus was observed. Eye movements were normal, although internal rotation was slightly inadequate. Incycloduction of both eyes was deficient by 2–3 mm during binocular eye movements, while a 1–2 mm deficiency was observed during monocular eye movements . As medial rectus muscle strength was considered acceptable, surgery was proposed for the four horizontal recti muscles.
Results of the computed tomography (CT) scan of the head confirmed that the head was narrow and elongated, with the top of the forehead being pointed and a carina projecting partially upward. Cranial sutures were fused and the overall shape of the head resembled that of a boat. CT scan of the orbit showed that the orbits were shallow with both eyeballs showing exophthalmos. Fundus photograph of both eyes showed no obvious abnormal findings. Peripheral blood samples from the patient, his parents, and younger sisters were extracted for assay of entire exome sequencing DNA testing. Both the patient and his father possessed the FGFR2 gene c.G812T:p.G271V heterozygous mutation, while the wild-type FGFR2 gene was present in the patient’s mother and sisters .
When assessed while the patient was under local anesthesia, lateral rectus muscles in both eyes were recessed 6 mm posteriorly and suspended 3 mm superiorly. Medial rectus muscles in both eyes were resectioned by 6 mm. Results of the intraoperative traction test revealed that mild tension was present in lateral rectus muscles. Pathological examination of an extracted portion of the lateral rectus muscle showed degeneration of striated muscle fibers, which were replaced by adipose tissue . When assessed at days 1 and 10 after surgery, the patient showed orthophoria . Coordinated eye movements were present in all directions.
This case demonstrates that Crouzon syndrome patients can show a fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene c.G812T:p.G271V mutation and display clinical symptoms such as extraocular muscle fibrosis, exotropia, exophthalmos, and a pointed head deformity.
A 27 year-old male patient arrived at our hospital in March 2021 with a bilateral deviation in eye position that had been present since birth. The patient was hospitalized on 24 March 2021 and surgical treatment of his strabismus was performed that day. The patient was discharged on 26 March 2021.
A complete systemic and ophthalmological examination was conducted prior to surgery. The patient exhibited no contraindications in response to this surgery. The preoperative assessment consisted of operation risk and antibiotic eye drops and general examination tests performed included thyroid function, routine blood assay, DNA determination, pathological examination, CT scan, and an evaluation of the strabismus. Results of the Hirschberg test indicated that the corneal reflex was ≥ 45°. The prism alternate cover test (PACT) revealed a constant exotropia (XT) of 100∆ at near and distance fixation, 100∆ XT at upward gaze, and 90∆ XT at downward gaze.
The patient experienced a large angle exotropia, while the main purpose for his visit was to improve his appearance. We chose a surgical treatment approach and explained the risk and prognosis to the patient, such as the potential for reoccurrence of exotropia and exacerbation of exophthalmos.
Eye positions in nine directions of gaze were performed at days 1 and 10 after surgery, with the results that normal eye positions were present and internal rotations of both eyes were significantly improved. The patient expressed satisfaction with these postoperative results.