A 15-year-old Asian boy came to the ear, nose, and throat– head and neck department with the chief complaint of a rapid lump behind the right ear, which had developed fast at 5 months. This “horn-like” tumor comes from the external meatus of the right ear. The tumor tends to bleed easily . He also reported localized pain and loss of hearing. He also felt a decrease in body weight. There was no family history.
The physical examination revealed facial right nerve VII paralyzed, conductive hearing loss of the right ear, retroauricular erythema, and a bleeding mass from the external auditory externus. The tympanic membrane cannot be evaluated. The laboratory examination showed slight leukocytosis (11.210/μL), normal hemoglobin level (10 g/dL), and normal neutrophil count (81.7).
Head CT scan revealed soft-tissue solid mass enhancement (7.1 × 6.6 × 8 cm) in the right jugular fossa with an irregular border. The mass is exophytic into the middle ear, mesotympanum, and hypotympanum. It reaches the right external meatus. CT scan showed contrast enhancement (72HU) with evidence of mass-induced destruction in the right mastoid and right temporal bone. The feeding vessels come from the segment temporalis superficial and posterior segment auricular artery from the right external carotid artery (ECA) [ and ].
MRI demonstrated isointense to hyperintensity on the T1-weighted image, with prominent flow voids forming a “salt and pepper image” on the T2-weighted image and unrestricted diffusion in the diffusion-weighted imaging area, which lacks contrast enhancement. The mass destroyed the right mastoid, right temporal bone, and part of the sphenoid bone. There was an intracranial extradural extension. The mass compressed the right posterior fossa, right cerebellum, and right temporal lobe. The mass size was 7.8 × 6.7 × 6.6 cm extending to the right fossa jugular, with exophytic to the middle ear, mesotympanum, and hypotympanum until the right external meatus with feeding arteries from the superficial temporal segment and the posterior auricular artery segment of the right ECA branch [-].
The definitive management approach for this patient involved radical surgery, preceded by digital subtraction angiography (DSA) abolition before surgery. The DSA angiography revealed a hypervascular lesion supplied by the right ECA, with branches from temporalis superficialis and right occipital arteries. We performed embolization using PVa 355-500 mm in the ECA branch to the occipital and superficial right temporalis arteries . After DSA, a craniotomy was conducted to excise the tumors. The tumor was completely removed and released detachment from healthy dura. The specimen was sent to the pathology anatomy department. This specimen was examined with an immunohistochemistry stain (i.e., CK antibody, vimentin, S100, SMA, synaptophysin, desmin, CD-34, and CD-99). The pathology examination showed EES characterized by small uniform primitive cells with round nuclei, scanty cytoplasm appearance, with positive in vimentin immunohistochemistry examination .