A 14-year-old girl who presented with the left posterior cervical pain and dysphasia was diagnosed with polyneuropathy due to reactive herpes virus infection by otolaryngologists. She was treated with antiviral drugs and adrenal corticosteroids; however, the symptoms worsened rapidly. Moreover, the patient developed hoarseness of voice due to vocal cord palsy 2 weeks after the initial manifestations. Additional investigations were performed considering the uncommon clinical course, and a skull base tumor was identified. The patient was referred to our department a month after the initial manifestations. Physical examination revealed left anterior and posterior cervical pain and multiple left cranial nerve (CN) palsies (glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerves). Serological examination did not reveal any obvious abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) revealed enlargement of the left petroclival synchondrosis with osteoclastic changes and a soft-tissue mass within the adjacent sphenoid sinus . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a heterogeneously enhanced en plaque lesion involving the left jugular foramen and hypoglossal canal, extending into the left sigmoid sinus [ and ]. Whole spinal MRI and body positron emission tomography CT did not reveal any abnormal findings. Granulomatous diseases, such as Langerhans cell histiocytosis, metastatic tumor, and primary malignant bone tumor, were considered in the preoperative differential diagnosis based on the radiological findings.
Due to the rapid progression of clinical symptoms, the patient underwent endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery for diagnosis of the pathology. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to extend into the sphenoid sinus and underlie the edematous mucosa of the sinus . The tumor was soft and relatively hypovascular, and was resected in sections . The majority of the tumor was smoothly detached from the adjacent mucosa; however, it was partially adherent to the clival region, which was presumed to be a consecutive lesion with a petroclival component . No obvious cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage was observed.
Histopathological examination revealed a lesion composed of round cells with clear cytoplasm and uniformly round nuclei . The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for CD99 . Although interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) did not reveal translocation of the Ewing sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene (22q12), EWSR1-friend leukemia virus integration site 1 (FLI1) gene fusion was screened by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR). The findings confirmed the diagnosis of primary petroclival ES.
Subsequently, the patient underwent adjuvant multidrug chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Five cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy using vincristine (2 mg/m2), doxorubicin (37.5 mg/m2), and cyclophosphamide (1200 mg/m2), alternating with etoposide (100 mg/m2) and ifosfamide (1800 mg/m2) combined with G-CSF, were performed every 2–3 weeks along with intensity-modulated radiation therapy (60 Gy/30 fractions). In addition, two cycles of chemotherapy using vincristine and cyclophosphamide, alternating with etoposide and ifosfamide, were performed at 2-week intervals. The patient experienced anemia, neutropenic fever, and thrombocytopenia. Complete response was achieved 9 months after adjuvant chemotherapy. At the 22-month post-surgical follow-up, the patient had recovered well with no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence or metastatic disease .