In March 2020, a 33-year-old Sri Lankan (Sinhalese) male patient presented with watery diarrhea, lower abdominal pain, and post-prandial abdominal fullness to a rural hospital in the North Central Province of Sri Lanka. He was a member of the Civil Defense Force. Although the patient was transferred to a District General Hospital from the rural hospital, they were unable to diagnose the cause of his severe gastrointestinal symptoms. After 3 months he was transferred to a tertiary hospital in the Central Province, which was 170 km away. The patient had 3–4 episodes of loose stools per day, mainly of food particles without any blood or mucus. Previously, he was diagnosed with borderline lepromatous leprosy and was treated since July 2019 with rifampicin, clofazimine, and 60 mg prednisolone daily. While he was on those drugs, he developed severe gastrointestinal symptoms and therefore defaulted leprosy treatment for 3 months.
The patient had severe loss of appetite and lost 15 kg of body weight during these 3 months. He did not have vomiting or nausea but had lower abdominal pain with post-prandial abdominal fullness. He denied cough, fever, shortness of breath, night sweats, urinary symptoms, dysuria, and joint pains. On examination, the patient was cachectic and pale. His body weight was 32 kg and he had no skin rashes. There was mild left iliac fossa tenderness with no hepatosplenomegaly.
His white blood cell count was high (14.54 × 103/µL) with neutrophil predominance (10.2 × 103/µL). The eosinophil count was normal. Hemoglobin level was marginally low (10.20/ µL) and the platelet counts were normal (436 × 103/µL). C-reactive protein was normal (2.8 mg/L), sodium (Na+) level was low (119 mmol/L), and potassium (K+) was in the lower margin of the normal range (4.20 mmol/L). Urinary Na+ (47 mEq/L) and urinary K+ (23.5 mEq/L) were high. His serum creatinine was normal (50.4 µmol/L). Total protein was low (38.4 g/L) with a very low albumin level (17.5 g/L). Aspartate aminotransferase test (AST), alanine aminotransferase test (ALT), and international normalized ratio (INR) were normal. The blood picture was compatible with anemia of chronic disease.
His Mantoux test was negative, and Hepatitis B and C, as well as human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) tests were also negative. His CD4, CD8, and CD19 cell counts were normal. The short Synacthen test was positive (9.00 am—24 nmol/L; 9.30 am—12 nmol/L) and adrenocortical insufficiency was diagnosed. A short Synacthen test is used for diagnosis of adrenocortical insufficiency on the basis of the measurement of serum cortisol before and after injection of synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). A cortisol level of more than 420 nmol/L at 30 min post-Synacthen indicates an adequate adrenal response. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen was normal except for bilateral small adrenal glands, which did not show any calcifications.
The patient was started on oral steroids (oral hydrocortisone 35 mg daily and fludrocortisone 100 µg daily) in June 2020. Complement factors C3 was normal (71 mg/dL), C4 was marginally low (19 mg/dL), immunoglobulin G (IgG) was normal (966 mg/dL), immunoglobulin M (IgM) was low (39 mg/dL), and immunoglobulin A (IgA) was normal (209 mg/dL).
Owing to persisting diarrhea, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (UGIE), duodenal biopsy, colonoscopy, and biopsy were performed. A severely inflamed oedematous duodenum was noted. The ileum was not inflamed and the gross appearance was normal. Duodenal (D2) biopsy revealed numerous intraepithelial nematodes within the lumina of glands in the duodenum, and the appearance was that of parasitic infestation favoring Strongyloides spp. . Biopsies taken from the ileum, caecum, and the rest of the colon were normal. Fecal wet smear revealed numerous S. stercoralis L1 rhabditiform larvae . Coproculture using the Harada–Mori technique yielded L3 filariform larvae, which confirmed the species identification by its long esophagus and the tail with a notched tip . Larval tracks were seen in the agar plate culture of feces. The patient was diagnosed with strongyloidiasis and was treated with albendazole 400 mg twice a day for 7 days according to the CDC, USA treatment guidelines.