A 17-year-old Chinese girl with no previous medical history or particular family history was admitted to our hospital with fever, headache, and weakness for 4 days. The patient developed paroxysmal headache and dizziness at school, followed by low-grade fever and weakness, without cough and expectoration. She then went to the emergency room of another hospital for treatment. During her hospitalization, she developed abdominal pain and computed tomography scan of the chest and abdomen revealed multiple lymphadenopathy and serous cavity effusion. After treatment with ceftriaxone and oseltamivir, the symptoms were not relieved, and her temperature peaked at 38.9 °C. Subsequently, the patient was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
Physical examination at admission revealed a fever of 37.7 ℃, anemic, abdominal tenderness, and anterior tibial edema. Several enlarged lymph nodes with slight tenderness were palpable in her bilateral neck and armpit. The patient’s height and weight were 168 cm and 48 kg, respectively, and her expression was indifferent.
Laboratory findings revealed elevated acute phase reactants with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) at 112 mm, and C-reactive protein (CRP) at 213.5 mg/L. Blood tests revealed pancytopenia and anemia (total white blood cell count: 2.27 × 109/L; hemoglobin level: 65 g/L; red blood cells 1.81 × 109/L, platelets 89 × 109/L; reticulocyte 1.9%). Urine tests showed proteinuria (1.66 g/days) and serum albumin was 26.5/L. Coombs test was positive and platelet antibody test was negative. The immunoglobulin G (IgG) was 24.5 g/dL and complement (C3 and C4) levels were decreased. Anticardiolipin antibody IgG was positive. The patient tested positive for the following autoantibodies: high titer of antinuclear antibody of 1:1000, positivity for anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) antibody, anti-nRNP/Sm antibody, anti-SS-A/Ro and anti-SS-B/La antibodies, anti-histone antibody, anti-ribosomal P protein antibody, and anti-nucleosome antibody. Tumor series and blood culture were normal.
Ultrasonography showed bilateral pleural effusion. Magnetic resonance of the brain revealed a few small cavities in the left semi-soft circle area and bilateral frontal cortex. No organic lesions were found on enhanced computed tomography scan of small intestine. Low bone mineral density detected by the dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (lumbar spine: Z-score, 1.7).
To rule out other hematologic diseases, bone marrow examination was performed, which showed no malignancy, but the Giemsa banding revealed a karyotype of 47,XXX in all 20 metaphase cells analyzed .
The patient was diagnosed with SLE on the basis of fever, hemolytic anemia, pancytopenia, low C3 and C4, proteinuria greater than 0.5 g/day, serous effusion, antinuclear antibody positive, and anti-dsDNA positive, fulfilling the 2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) criteria , complicated with lupus nephritis, pancytopenia, hemolytic anemia, serous effusion, lacunar cerebral infarction, and trisomy X syndrome. Although she had positive anti-SS-A/Ro and anti-SS-B/La antibodies, and anticardiolipin antibody, she did not fulfill the classification criteria of Sjögren’s syndrome (SS) or antiphospholipid syndrome. The SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI) score was 17, indicating the patient had high disease activity. The patient was treated successfully with intravenous gamma globulin at 17.5 g/day for 5 days to block antibodies, methylprednisolone 240 mg/day for 3 days (then the dose of methylprednisolone was gradually reduced), oral hydroxychloroquine 0.2 g/day, along with transfusion of washed red blood cells, albumin infusion, therapy of calcium supplement, stomach protection, diuresis, and anticoagulation. The symptoms were relieved after 2 weeks of treatment, edema disappeared, and ultrasonography did not show bilateral pleural effusion. Because of the lupus nephritis, the patient was treated with intravenous cyclophosphamide 0.6 g per 2 weeks. When the cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide reached 3 g, the blood cell count, serum albumin, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were normal, anticardiolipin antibody IgG was negative, and urinary protein decreased to 0.44 g/day. Considering the patient has not given birth and the inhibitory effect of cyclophosphamide on gonads, we decided to discontinue the treatment of cyclophosphamide and start with belimumab as a remission-maintenance drug. After altering to belimumab, the patient's condition remained stable.