An eighteen month old Nigerian female presented to our health facility with a history of noisy breathing since birth, associated with intermittent mucoid rhinorrhea, especially from the right nasal cavity. Protrusion of a pale mass in the right nasal cavity was observed by the parents prior to presentation. There was no epistaxis, fever or difficulty with feeding. The child was the product of a term pregnancy and delivery was said to be uneventful. The developmental milestones were within normal expectations.
Examination revealed a well-fed young girl with noisy respiration, afebrile and not pale. The external nasal pyramid appeared splayed; the right nasal cavity was completely obliterated by a lobulated pale mass which was firm, sensitive to touch, non-hemorrhagic and attached to the nasal septum. It was partly covered by mucoid secretions. Test aspiration of the mass was dry. The left nasal cavity, ears, throat and neck appeared normal. A nasogastric tube was easily passed through the left nasal cavity. No lesion was seen in any other parts of the body.
X-ray (occipito-frontal and post nasal space views) revealed radio-opacity of the right nasal cavity, extending posteriorly into the nasopharynx. There was no evidence of calcification of the soft tissue shadow or bony erosion of the nasal bony framework. The plain radiographs of the soft tissue neck and the chest were within normal limits. Complete blood and platelet counts were within normal range.
Examination under general anesthesia (via oro-tracheal intubation) revealed that the right nasal mass could neither be delivered via the anterior nares nor the post nasal space, prompting a right lateral rhinotomy for adequate exposure of the mass . The stalk which was attached at the mid portion of the cartilaginous septum was rocked and completely excised and the rest of the mass delivered. Hemostasis was achieved and wound closed in two layers.
The excised mass appeared irregular, but smooth-surfaced, measuring 6 × 5 × 3 cm and weighing 27 g. The cut surface showed a lobulated tan colored appearance. Histological examination revealed haphazardly arranged heterogeneous tissues, including cysts lined by epidermis with associated hair follicles and sweat glands, gastrointestinal epithelium, respiratory epithelium and columnar epithelium reminiscent of mammary glands. Lobules of mature adipose tissue and fibrocollagenous connective tissue were also present . These histological features were consistent with a mature teratoma.
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the seventh day post surgery. Follow-up for the past 31 months has been symptom free.