A 63-year-old male presented to us with low velocity fall at home followed by quadriparesis. On examination, he had upper limb weakness more than lower limb (Right upper limb power 1/5, the left upper limb power 2/5, and power in both lower limbs 3/5). Sensation to catheter tug presents with intact perianal sensation. The hand dexterity was poor in both upper limbs with the upper motor neuron signs in bilateral upper and lower limbs. ATLS protocol was followed when the patient arrived to the emergency department. Cervical spine was immobilized and patient was sent for further investigations like CT scan of whole spine and brain with MRI scan of cervical spine.
The CT scan demonstrated C6 fracture with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament in addition to diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis with anterior osteophytosis. CT picture showed florid OPLL from C2 to C4 with horizontal fracture through the entire width of the C6 vertebral body which extended posteriorly to bilateral facet joints without any dislocation/displacement. There is also calcification of the longitudinal ligament all the way down to T3. However, it was particularly severe from C2 to C4. There was also suggestion of fracture of the ossified PLL at C3 level [-]. MRI images showed that there is marked spinal canal stenosis from C2 down to C4 due to ossified posterior longitudinal ligament with intrinsic signal changes in the cord. There were also hyperintense fluid signal changes at C2/3 level s/o fracture of PLL at that level. There was also edema of posterior elements and muscles s/o recent fall and injury with evidence of C6 vertebral body fractures [-].
The patient was initially placed in a cervicothoracic brace for temporary stabilization. The patient’s neurology improved after the initial injury, and hence, the decision was made to continue the brace to allow his neurology to improve further and settle at a baseline after multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion. The plan was to operate him on an elective basis after 7–10 days to allow for complete assessment. However, subsequent standing AP and lateral X-rays showed 32° of local kyphosis without brace with reduction in the width of C6 body through the fracture line [ and ]. Due to progressive kyphosis which was suggestive of instability and concern that patient may require a much bigger surgery if fracture gets fused in kyphosis, it was decided to intervene surgically at that point of time.
The plan was to proceed with a posterior cervical decompression from C2 to C7 and instrumented fusion from C2 to T2 under navigation and neuromonitoring. The case was discussed in the local MDT and there was overall agreement about the decision to proceed with surgery and the surgical plan. Despite the fact in the UK use of spinal cord monitoring in cervical myelopathy is not commonly used, we had recognized that the risks were significantly higher in the presence of severe pre-existing OPLL and an unstable fracture in this particular case.
Intraoperative monitoring (IONM) was undertaken using a 32 channels and multimodal XLTEK Protektor intraoperative monitoring recording system. Intraoperative recording modalities consisted of transcranial motor-evoked potentials (MEPs), free running electromyography, and upper limb and lower limb somatosensory-evoked potentials (SSEPs). SSEPs were recorded for all four limbs using stainless steel corkscrew electrodes supine MEP baselines that were recorded before the patient was transferred to the surgical table. The patient was transferred to a prone position and MEP responses repeated and set as baseline.
Transcranial MEP amplitudes remained stable during placement of screws from C2 to T2 under navigation. Posterior cervical decompression was carried out with bone cuts using bone scalpel for laminectomy. During decompression, after the laminectomy at C3/4 was completed, transient amplitude changes were noted for the right extensor digitorum communis (EDC), right abductor pollicis brevis (APB), and right abductor digiti minimi (ADM). When the lamina was removed, MEP responses initially augmented for the right trapezius, right deltoid, right EDC, right APB, right ADM, and right abductor hallucis in association with an augmented body jerk from the patient. An alert was given to the surgeon and the patient retested four min later. On retest, MEPs were abolished below spinal level C4 with preservation of trapezius MEPs.
The spinal cord at risk protocol was initiated. A bolus of the decompression was extended higher and lowers including the whole of posterior elements of C2–C7. The mean arterial pressure (MAP) was kept above 85 mmHg for the whole procedure. To assess for any ongoing compression and hardware malposition, we performed an intraoperative CT which showed that the decompression was satisfactory and no evidence of spinal subluxation or screw misplacement . The left C7 screw looked to breach the medial wall and was removed. After rod placement, AP fluoroscopy confirmed adequate metalwork placement. Intermittent MEP monitoring was performed every 5 min using maximum stimulation parameters (500 Hz, train of 6 pulses, 0.05 ms, and 500 volts). Persistent spontaneous prolonged discharges were noted bilaterally from trapezius post lamina removal and the surgeon was informed.
Five minutes from losing MEPs, the right upper limb SSEPs showed a 50% decrease in amplitude from baseline values with an increase in the sensory threshold (50 mA, 1.0 ms). The left upper limb SSEPs remained with intraoperative baseline values. Bilateral lower limb SSEPs remained stable and within intraoperative baseline values. MEPs remained absent below trapezius during rod placement.
Following the placement of rods and completion of the surgical procedure, MEPs remained absent below trapezius. The right upper limb SSEP showed minimal N20 amplitude reduction (<50%) from intraoperative baseline values, the left upper limb SSEPs were within baseline values, the right lower limb SSEPs remained within intraoperative baseline values, and the left lower limb SSEPs showed a reduction in P37 amplitude of 50% from intraoperative baseline values.
The patient was transferred to ITU intubated with ventilator support, MAP >85, and to continue dexamethasone 8MG twice daily. Postoperatively, he had quadriplegia with C5 sensory level. Immediate postoperative MRI was done to rule out any compressive pathology.
MRI showed T2 intramedullary hyperintensity of the cord at C3 level which appeared expanded with a central syrinx. Cord edema was noted at the C3 level. No evidence of epidural hematoma or other compressive lesion was noticeable at the operative site [-] and the diagnosis of WCS/RPI was established based on postoperative MRI findings as there were no other discernible causes of Quadriplegia.
Steroids were tapered over a period of 1 week. Tracheostomy was performed and gradual weaning from ventilator support was started. The patient was transferred to inpatient rehabilitation center 6 weeks after surgery with still no improvement in motor strength.