A 38-year-old man presented as a wake-up stroke to the emergency department with left
arm weakness, left facial droop, and slurred speech. Initial NIH Stroke Scale
(NIHSS) score was eight. Computed tomography brain excluded haemorrhagic stroke with
cerebral angiography revealing occlusive thrombus in the right middle cerebral
artery. On arrival to a thrombectomy centre, NIHSS score had progressed to fourteen.
Successful clot retrieval was achieved and post-thrombectomy NIHSS score was
zero.
He had no prior medical or surgical history and no contributory family history.
Increasing amphetamine use over the previous 6 months was noted with daily use for
the preceding 3 months. The mode of amphetamine administration was intranasal
inhalation. He denied alcohol or other illicit drug use. Urine toxicology was
positive for amphetamines alone.
On transfer back to referring hospital, telemetry confirmed sinus tachycardia ranging
from 110 to 120 beats per minute. Admission electrocardiogram (ECG) was abnormal
with low limb lead voltages, anterior Q waves, lateral T-wave inversion, and
prolonged QT interval . These ECG findings have been associated
with methamphetamine-induced cardiac pathology. Baseline laboratory investigations were
normal aside from mildly elevated liver transaminases (alanine transaminase of
118 IU/L; reference range 5–41 IU/L and aspartate
aminotransferase of 75 IU/L; reference range 5–40 IU/L).
Troponin was normal as per local reference range.
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea with desaturation to 70% was noted on the first
night of admission. Crepitations were appreciated on lung auscultation with findings
suggestive of pulmonary oedema on chest X-ray. Saturations of 96% were
achieved using supplementary oxygen at 2 L/min.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated LV global hypokinesis with left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 5% and dilatation of all cardiac
chambers. A 3 cm apical LV thrombus was visualized ( and , Videos 1 and 2). Subsequent coronary angiogram revealed normal
coronary arteries. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain confirmed acute infarction
in the right basal ganglia with no infarction in other vascular territories
. Interestingly, virology screening was
positive for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) Immunoglobulin M consistent with acute
infection.
Anticoagulation was initiated with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) bridging
therapy until warfarin achieved therapeutic international normalized ratio (INR).
Pharmacological therapy for heart failure was commenced and up-titrated according to
tolerability including angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB), beta-blockade,
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (spironolactone), and intravenous loop
diuretic. By the 8th day of admission, supplemental oxygen was no longer required
and 5.8 kg weight reduction was achieved. Valsartan/sacubitril was
subsequently instituted following tolerability to initial ARB therapy. By Day 17 of
admission, thrombus was no longer demonstrated on echocardiogram (, Video 3). Twenty-seven days
following initial presentation, interval TTE demonstrated LVEF improvement to
27%.
Medications at discharge included warfarin, bisoprolol 5 mg, spironolactone
12.5 mg, valsartan/sacubitril 24/26 mg twice daily, and furosemide
40 mg once daily. Inpatient medication education was provided. Outpatient
follow-up as well as enrolment with a general practitioner was arranged.
During the next 6 months, the patient did not attend follow-up and was readmitted
twice with decompensated heart failure and recurrent thrombus formation due to
medication non-adherence and sporadic amphetamine use. On first readmission, TTE
demonstrated severe dilated cardiomyopathy with an LVEF of 5–10% and
reformation of two distinct LV thrombi. Interval TTE, 37 days later,
revealed resolution of thrombi and some improvement in LVEF to
10–15%. Subsequently, on second readmission, TTE showed thrombus had
recurred for a third time and LVEF remained at 10%. On this occasion, urine
toxicology was positive for amphetamines. The patient stated that psychosocial
factors including unemployment and homelessness triggered amphetamine relapse.