A 52-years-old female was referred to our hospital because of a persistent morning headache. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a right frontal lobe tumor measuring approximately 4.1 × 3.1 cm with bony hyperostosis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the tumor was enhanced by gadolinium and was accompanied by a dural tail sign and strong peritumoral edema . She was diagnosed with a right frontal convexity meningioma. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) demonstrated that the main feeding vessels of the tumor were the bilateral ethmoidal arteries arising from the ophthalmic artery (OphA). The vascularization of the meningioma was more significant in the left-sided feeding artery than in the right-sided feeding artery . Additionally, a left internal carotid artery-ophthalmic artery (ICA-OphA) aneurysm with a bleb was observed . Its maximum diameter was 5.5 mm. The aneurysm was not in contact with the tumor .
Surgery for symptomatic brain tumor was performed by right frontal craniotomy (7.5 × 5.0 cm). The intraoperative frozen section diagnosis was a meningioma without obvious malignancy. The interface between the tumor and the surrounding brain was tightly adhered. The tumor interface was created in the following order: posteriorly, laterally, and anteriorly under a microscope. The medial border of the tumor is the surface of the falx. Finally, the bottom surface of the tumor was detached after coagulation of the feeding artery. Immediately after the en bloc resection of the tumor, the right frontal lobe appeared to swell rapidly . Additional craniotomy of the right parietal and left frontal regions and resection of the swollen brain protruding into the epidural space was performed (see additional file ). The wound was closed without returning the skull bone flap, and she underwent intracranial scrutiny under anesthesia. Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was observed on CT . The patient was promptly transported to the angiography room. DSA findings showed that the tumor feeder that arose from the left OphA disappeared, and the left ICA-OphA aneurysm was recognized preoperatively . An examination of the cause of SAH revealed no findings other than the left ICA-OphA aneurysm, which could cause bleeding. Endovascular surgery for this ruptured aneurysm was performed with systemic heparinization to prevent acute thrombosis. A 6-Fr shuttle guiding sheath (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) was introduced into the right ICA from the right femoral artery. A microcatheter, SL-10 STR (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA), was inserted into the aneurysm. Coil embolization was performed using the balloon-assisted technique with Scepter XC (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) . The time required for endovascular treatment was 1.5 h. Subsequently, the patient returned to the operating room for right extra-ventricular drainage and skin closure. Immediately after the operation, thiopental (4 mg/kg/h) was continuously administered for 72 h to control intracranial pressure. Fasudil hydrochloride (90 mg/day) and ozagrel sodium (80 mg/day) combination therapy was administered for 14 days to prevent cerebral vasospasm-related SAH from day 3 post-surgery. Her impaired consciousness tended to recover. On day 37 post-surgery the patient’s consciousness level fully recovered. The histological diagnosis was transitional meningioma (WHO grade I). Follow-up MRI showed a total resection of the meningioma. She underwent rehabilitation and was discharged home approximately 3 months after surgery. Cognitive assessment was not performed during rehabilitation. Functional outcome at discharge was assessed using the Functional Independence Measure (FIM™) . FIM™ motor and cognitive score were 85 and 26 points, respectively, suggesting that her Activities of Daily Living (ADL) was relatively well maintained. She had gradually recovered by 6 months post-surgery without any neurological deficit.