A 64 years old male diabetic patient with coronary artery disease and a history of myocardial infarction had recently experienced two episodes of transient ischemic attacks. The presumed diagnosis was cerebral embolism since an intracranial hemorrhage was excluded and there was no detected ipsilateral carotid stenosis. The patient was in NYHA class III, with no angina. Thallium-201 myocardial scintigraphy showed a combination of scar and viable myocardium in the territory of the occluded left anterior descending.
On coronary angiography he was found to have triple vessel disease, with total occlusion of the left anterior descending branch and of the right coronary artery. Left ventriculography revealed left ventricular dysfunction with a LVEF of 35%, akinesia of the anterior-apical wall and hypokinesia of the inferior wall. He was referred to our department for coronary artery bypass grafting.
The operation was performed with the aid of cardiopulmonary bypass, moderate hypothermia and intermittent combined (retro and antegrade) cold blood cardioplegia. Intraoperatively the apical walls were found to be thin and scared and collapsed with ventricular venting.
We performed a triple coronary artery bypass with a left internal mammary artery to the intermediate artery (since it was the best target vessel) and two saphenous vein grafts to the obtuse marginal and the left anterior descending. The latter was endarterectomised due to chronic occlusion. Despite the fact that the patient had no absolute indication for a ventricular restoration (SVR) procedure, the extent of the damaged apical wall found intraoperatively and the history of the Transient Ischemic Attacks made us perform a ventriculotomy and an "anti-remodeling" procedure. After the ventriculotomy, inspection of the left ventricular cavity revealed a "round – shaped" calcification of the peripheral interventricular septum (diameter of 5 cm) with a central crater filled with clot .
We performed a resection of the found lesion together with the surrounding damaged endocardium (endocardiectomy) .
The area of the endocardiectomy together with the infracted peripheral septum was covered with a Dacron patch. Consequently this septal patch was incorporated in the linear closure of the anterior-apical ventriculotomy .
Postoperative recovery was uneventful. He was discharged from the hospital on the 11th postoperative day and is doing well 6 months later, with improvement in both ventricular function (LVEF 45%) and clinical status (NYHA class I).