A 62-year-old male body builder with a 20-pack year smoking history and surgical history of repaired inguinal hernia and appendectomy presented to his PCP with cough, fatigue, and weight loss. CT of the chest showed a 7 cm mass in the right lower lobe of the lung with enlarged subcarinal lymph nodes . Subsequent PET/CT showed FDG uptake in the lung mass and right hilar and subcarinal lymph nodes , but no evidence of metastatic disease. Pre-treatment pulmonary function tests revealed a FVC of 66% and FEV1 of 59%. Biopsy of the right lung mass confirmed poorly-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of pulmonary origin. Nodal involvement was confirmed by endobronchial ultrasound guided sampling of mediastinal lymph nodes. He was treated with chemoradiation to a dose of 6000 cGy in 30 fractions with 6 cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel given weekly. Of note, the lung V20 for his radiation plan was 31%. Two cycles of consolidative carboplatin and paclitaxel were also given.
CT Chest 2 months post radiation completion showed shrinkage of the primary mass to 4.4 cm, reduction in the size of involved lymph nodes and associated radiation changes in the surrounding lung . However, by 3 months, he developed malaise and a persistent cough, so an empiric 1 week course of azithromycin and prednisone were prescribed for pneumonia. His symptoms persisted despite therapy and repeat imaging 3 months later showed opacities within the high and intermediate areas of radiation dose consistent with pneumonitis . A 5 week prednisone taper with a starting dose of 25 mg was prescribed. Symptoms improved with therapy but returned as he tapered to 5 mg so the dose was increased to 20 mg and additional course of azithromycin was prescribed. Repeat pulmonary function tests showed had slightly worsened with a FVC of 57% and FEV1 of 63%. Further attempts over the next 4 months to wean from prednisone failed. After 9 months of collective prednisone therapy, he noted abdominal fullness and was found to have elevated ALT and AST of 114 and 53, respectively. On CT imaging he was noted to have hepatic steatosis. Evaluation with colonoscopy, abdominal US, and CT enterography were unremarkable leading to the conclusion that his liver dysfunction was a sequela of steroid therapy. Based on his understanding that androgens can have anti-inflammatory effects, the patient elected to taper prednisone and self-prescribed the androgen-based regimen shown in .
Within two weeks of initiating therapy, the patient experienced a reduction in abdominal fullness, resolution of cough and improved energy. By eight weeks, he felt fully recovered and was able to return to full workouts lifting weights. During androgen therapy, no other significant changes in medical therapy, diet or lifestyle were noted that could be linked to his improvement. CT of the chest 17 months post radiation therapy showed consolidation of the treated lobe and resolution of pneumonitis elsewhere in the lung . As of most recent follow up, 5 years post treatment, the patient had no clinically significant deficits related to cancer therapy and no evidence of active disease. The patient's treatment course is summarized as as e timeline in the supplementary materials.