A 27-year-old man had intermittent abdominal pain and mucosanguineous feces for 6 years. He was admitted to our hospital with complaints of dyspnea, fever, and worsening weakness.
The patient was diagnosed with CD (Montreal A2L3B1) 6 years previously. He had suffered from mucosanguineous feces, abdominal pain, and an anal fistula for 6 mo. Colonoscopy, biopsy, and multi-slice computed tomography (CT) enterography were performed. Negative blood tests were observed and no opportunistic infections were found. He was prescribed mesalazine 3 g/d for 1 year without complications but primary symptoms were only partially relieved. One year later, his symptoms of abdominal pain and loose stool were aggravated, and gastroscopy showed involvement of the upper gastrointestinal tract. He was treated with oral methylprednisolone 48 mg/d for 10 d. The dose was reduced by 4 mg every 2 wk without any improvement in symptoms. He continued to take mesalazine 2 g/d. In December 2018, reexamination with colonoscopy and biopsy showed stenosis of the sigmoid colon accompanied by numerous new ulcers. He was examined at another hospital and from then to the present, no extraintestinal manifestations occurred. The patient was advised by the doctor to undergo IFX therapy and he stopped taking mesalazine after excluding tuberculosis and other viral or bacterial infections. On December 3, 2018, he took the first dose of IFX 300 mg based on his weight (60 kg, dose 5 mg/kg). After 2 and 6 wk, he received the second and third IFX injection and a maintenance dose was planned every 8 wk thereafter. He responded well to this therapy, his symptoms disappeared and he had formed stools, and colonoscopy was planned after four doses of IFX. However, on January 21, 2019, 1 wk after the third injection, he suddenly developed dyspnea, fever, and worsening weakness and was admitted to our hospital.
The patient had no previous medical history, and no history of chest trauma or cardiac procedure.
The patient had no family history
He was febrile, tachycardiac (120 bpm), and normotensive. Our clinical considerations were heart disease or pulmonary embolism.
An electrocardiogram on admission was negative for acute changes and his troponin I and creatine kinase-MB levels were normal. There were no abnormalities in his white cell count or platelet count, and the coagulation index was normal. Viral titers including Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, coxsackie B virus, human immunodeficiency virus and bacterial serologies were negative. A T-spot test was also negative. Blood, stool, and urine cultures were all negative. Laboratory examinations were remarkable for an elevation in C-reactive protein (CRP) to 65.24 mg/L (reference < 5.00 mg/L) and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 48 mm/h. The procalcitonin level was normal.
CT scan of the chest revealed a large pericardial effusion and a small right-side pleural effusion , and excluded the diagnosis of pulmonary embolus. An echocardiogram showed a large pericardial effusion and normal left ventricular function . Then successful ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis was performed and 600 mL hemorrhagic fluid was drained.