A 60-year-old white man with stage 4 chronic kidney disease (CKD), coronary artery disease, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and a recent diagnosis of PMF presented at our renal division with generalized body swelling and an elevated serum creatinine level with massive nephrotic-range proteinuria. His serum creatinine level was 1.78 mg/dL at the initial consultation at our institution. He was a former smoker of 35 pack-years.
The examination revealed diminished bibasilar breath sounds and severe abdominal distension with massive hepatosplenomegaly along with profound anasarca. No skin rashes were seen. Laboratory work-up revealed thrombocytosis, hyperlipidemia, and hypoalbuminemia. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria at 600 mg/dL and 300 mg/dL of glucose, and the spot urine sample had a protein to creatinine ratio of 23 along with multiple granular casts. The estimated glomerular filtration rate was 27 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal range, 90–120 mL/min/1.73 m2).
Given his massive proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and peripheral edema, the differential diagnoses included focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (secondary to myelofibrosis), membranous glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis, and paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis. Results from the proteinuria assessment and work-up with serum and urine protein electrophoresis, immunofixation, hepatitis and human immunodeficiency virus tests, and tests for antinuclear antibodies and other immunological markers were unremarkable. Transthoracic echocardiography images showed no valvular abnormalities, and the patient had an ejection fraction of 60 % (normal value > 55 %).
The patient was placed on a salt and fluid restricted diet and was treated with bumetanide, lisinopril, hydralazine, carvedilol, isosorbide mononitrate, and rosuvastatin. He was on hydroxyurea for PMF. He underwent a kidney biopsy (less than 30 days from his initial diagnosis of PMF and nephrotic syndrome) to determine the etiology of his massive proteinuria and further worsening kidney injury.
The patient’s symptoms improved with treatment over the next 2 weeks, with a reduction in body swelling and abdominal distension. Therapy with a new JAK inhibitor (ruxolitinib) was started; after 4 months of treatment, the patient’s white blood cell count decreased from 61,000 K/ul to 12,000 K/ul and platelets from 1152,000 K/ul, to normal levels, decrease in splenomegaly from 13 cm to 4 cm, and hepatomegaly from 14 cm to non-palpable,. This was accompanied with a decrease in his protein to creatinine ratio to 8 g from 23 g and return of his baseline creatinine to 1.78 mg/dL from a peak value of 4.23 mg/dL.