A 13-year-old boy presented with a one year history of exophthalmia in the left eye, without any nasal symptoms. There was no history of local trauma or systemic disease, and he was operated on 6 months ago under a rhinoscopic approach when a marsupialization of the cyst was done with pathological examination showing characteristics of an aneurysmal cyst. He was actually admitted for recidivism of the same lesion.
Clinical examination showed exophthalmia of the left eye without loss of visual acuity .
Rhinoscopy found a well-defined mass, sitting at the level of the left ethmoidal sinus, smooth and pink. The other side was normal .
Tomodensitometry showed an oval multiloculated lesion more extensive in the anteroposterior plan replacing the ethmoidal cells measuring 39 × 23 × 35 mm. This lesion has regular walls, duplicated by place. Its content is made of multiple stalls with a liquid level realized by blood outside as it pushes the globe and the right internal muscles without signs of invasion, responsible for an exophthalmia grade I. Inside it fills the nasal fossa and pushes the septum without a free interface. At the top it displaces the ethmoidal roof inward without endocranial invasion. It is responsible for fluid retention at the level of the left maxillary sinus, and through posterior ethmoid cells invasion it is responsible for the narrowing of the optical channel, whereas the frontal and sphenoidal sinuses are free .
Surgical intervention involved the total excision of the tumor with all its walls, in addition to the orbital medial wall and its periorbital by endoscopic approach. This was assisted by ENT navigation system which was helpful to determine the skull base, the orbit and the carotid canal because landmarks are modified by the tumor .
Histopathology found fusocelular carcinomatous proliferation in the herring bone with calcification, presence of multinucleate elements showing atypia estimated at 3/10 fields. Those tissues are negative for desmin and CD 34 and positive for vimentin .
The multidisciplinary team deciding on the treatment options included surgeons, oncologists, radiotherapists and radiologists. The decision was made to treat the patient with radiotherapy, but the patient refused. The alternative was to closely monitor the patient, with monthly clinical and endoscopic examinations. No recidivism was actually found after one year of follow-up.