A 35-year-old Sudanese woman presented to the Surgical Out-patient Department at Soba University Hospital, Khartoum, Sudan with bilateral breast and axillary swellings. Her condition started one year prior to presentation with a small painless right breast lump slowly increasing in size. It was not considered necessary by our patient to report it during her regular follow-up until seven months later when she noticed multiple small painless nodules on the left breast. She mentioned these lumps to the nephrologist in the following visit. There was no nipple discharge, local skin changes or variation in size with menstruation. One month later she noted bilateral painless axillary swellings that started to increase in size.
Our patient was diagnosed with end-stage renal failure of unidentified etiology three years prior to presentation. She underwent regular hemodialysis sessions before kidney transplantation two years prior to presentation. Her post-operative recovery was uneventful and she was commenced on cyclosporine-A (175 mg/day). She continued to attend regular follow-ups post transplantation. After two years of follow-up, she was found to have gum hypertrophy with no associated pain, bleeding or oral complains.
Her menarche was at the age of 16. She had a regular menstrual cycle and unremarkable adolescence. She had normal breast development, with no past or family history of breast disorders. She never used contraceptive pills.
General examination was satisfactory. Oral examination confirmed upper and lower gingival hypertrophy with congestion, good oral hygiene and no ulceration or bleeding spots. There was bilateral accessory axillary breast tissue. Right breast examination revealed a 20 cm mobile firm non-tender mass. Examination of the left breast revealed multiple mobile masses not more than 5 cm in diameter with similar features to the findings in the right breast. A similar mass, 3 cm in diameter, was found within a right accessory axillary breast but no palpable axillary lymph nodes. There were no associated nipple or skin changes. Both accessory axillary breasts tissue contained multiple small masses. The findings of both breasts and axillae were consistent with a clinical diagnosis of fibroadenoma .
Full blood count, liver function test, kidney function test, chest X-ray and echocardiogram showed no abnormalities. Serum prolactin level was also within normal range. Bilateral breast and axillary ultrasound examination supported the clinical findings suggestive of multiple fibroadenomas.
She underwent excision of multiple bilateral breast and axillary fibroadenomas through multiple skin incisions. She had a good post-operative recovery and wound healing. Histopathological examination of all excised masses confirmed the diagnosis of fibroadenomas.