An 11-month-old African-American female presented to neurology due to seizure-like activity. She was a former term infant with a birthweight of 3.714 kg. At presentation she weighed 9.6 kg (56th%) and was 77 cm (89th%) tall. During her evaluation, a glucose value of 38 mg/dL (1.998 mmol/L) and bicarbonate of 24 mmol/L were noted.
During a subsequent fasting challenge, her serum glucose decreased to 32 mg/dL (1.776 mmol/L) within 5.5 h. The results of the critical sample are presented in Table . Specifically, her insulin level was appropriately low, while her beta-hydroxybutyrate (BOHB) was minimally elevated, and free fatty acids were inappropriately within the normal range. Additionally, her growth hormone was low. All other laboratory results including ammonia, *urine organic acids, *serum amino acids, and *acylcarnitine profile were normal (*drawn in the fed state). A glucagon stimulation to assess glycemic response at the time of hypoglycemia was attempted but was unsuccessful. Based on the critical sample results, she was thought to have growth hormone deficiency and was started on growth hormone therapy. She was discharged after several inpatient days with improved glucose levels.
In the interim, the insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) (prior to growth hormone therapy) resulted at 105.7 ng/mL (approximately the 80th% for age and sex), and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) was 2800 ng/mL (above the mean for age and sex). While at home, she was noted to have a glucose of 19 mg/dL (1.0545 mmol/L) despite growth hormone therapy. Given the severity of her hypoglycemia, she was readmitted for further assessment. An arginine/clonidine growth hormone stimulation test done after discontinuation of growth hormone revealed a peak growth hormone level of 7.9 ng/dL (radioimmunoassay). In the setting of continued hypoglycemia despite growth hormone therapy, her critical sample obtained at her initial admission was reviewed and determined to be concerning for CHI. Therefore genetic studies for CHI were sent (Athena Diagnostics, Worcester, Massachusetts).
While genetic studies were pending, diazoxide treatment was initiated and titrated to 15 mg/kg/day divided three times daily. However, she continued to have hypoglycemia. After one week of diazoxide therapy, octreotide was added. Octreotide was increased to 15 mcg/kg/day, with subsequent improvement but not resolution of hypoglycemia. Frequent feeds and uncooked cornstarch were implemented to avert hypoglycemia. Her hyperinsulinism was deemed diazoxide-unresponsive and diazoxide was discontinued.
Mutational analysis confirmed a diagnosis of CHI as three variants in ABCC8 were identified . The R1215W variant was found to be paternally-inherited while the W739C and R1393L variants were maternally inherited. The paternal change was a known mutation described previously (at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia) in a patient with diffuse disease. In this previously described patient, the inheritance pattern was thought to be recessive, given a normal maternal ABCC8 gene copy. In our patient, the significance of the maternal variants was unclear as they had not been previously described in CHI cases. Therefore, for our patient, we were unable to predict focal versus diffuse disease pathology based on mutational analysis alone.
Our patient was transferred to Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia for an 18-fluoro L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine positron emission tomography (18-F-DOPA-PET) scan. There was no focal uptake of isotope by the pancreas , which suggested, but did not confirm diffuse disease. A pancreatic biopsy was subsequently recommended in order to further delineate her pathology, but was declined by the family. A gastrostomy tube was placed for enteral dextrose administration (overnight glucose infusion rate (GIR) of 7 mg/kg/min).
Over several months, the child has continued to have intermittent, daily hypoglycemia despite adjustments of her treatment regimen. The GIR of her fluids has been gradually increased. Her current treatment regimen at age 3 years consists of octreotide 20 mcg/kg/day divided three times daily and overnight dextrose (14 h, GIR of 9 mg/kg/min) through her gastrostomy tube. She continues to have daytime hypoglycemia [glucose <70 mg/dL (3.885 mmol/L)]. Speech delay that was noted shortly after diagnosis persists despite therapy. Considering her disease and failure of medical management, a near-total pancreatectomy may be necessary to achieve normal blood glucose levels. Other treatment options that are also being considered include continuous glucagon via an insulin pump [, ] and continuous octreotide via an insulin pump . These treatments have not been pursued based on parental requests.