A 10-year-old boy presented to his primary care provider one day after the onset of fever, headache, emesis, diplopia, and left ptosis. Ophthalmologic evaluation confirmed a pupil-sparing partial third nerve palsy and a left sixth nerve palsy . Head computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a hemorrhagic intracranial mass. A head CT angiogram demonstrated a lytic defect of the clivus and widening of the left petrous apex without calcification of the expansile mass. The mass displaced the basilar and left carotid arteries . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated a lobular mass arising from the central skull base, asymmetric to the left side. The mass measured 45 × 25 × 28 mm and demonstrated heterogeneous T2-weighted signal with layering suggestive of recent hemorrhage [Figures and ]. The presence of blooming on a gradient echo sequence was also suggestive of hemorrhage . The differential diagnosis of the mass included a chordoma with atypical internal hemorrhage, chondrosarcoma, or metastatic lesion.
Surgical exploration and subtotal resection were performed via an extended middle fossa approach. The tumor consisted of gelatinous material and hemorrhage of different ages. The bone surrounding the resection cavity had a “moth-eaten” appearance with tumor invasion.
On pathologic examination, the tumor was moderately cellular and displayed a vague lobular appearance. The tumor cells were arranged in small groups or cords and had relatively uniform nuclei and moderately abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. This showed a variable degree of vacuolization (physaliphorous cells) [Figure and ].
The cellular component of the lesion was associated with a rich myxoid-like matrix, multiple areas of hemorrhage, and occasional fibrous septae. Focally, there were areas of calcification. Mitoses and necrosis were not observed. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were strongly positive for cytokeratin and S-100 protein. Epithelial membrane antigen was also positive in a membranous pattern . These features are consistent with a pathological diagnosis of chordoma.
At 2-month follow-up, the patient had resolution of the partial left third nerve palsy and improvement of his left sixth nerve palsy . A coinciding MRI confirmed subtotal resection and demonstrated residual mass effect on the ventral pons. The patient was taken back to the operating room for endoscopic endonasal transclival resection of the remaining mass for gross total resection verified by intraoperative MRI. The patient did develop a lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak secondary to a lumbar drain placed preoperatively, but recovered well from this. The patient has been followed by radiation oncology since his initial presentation and will now proceed with proton beam therapy.