A 39-year-old woman in her 3rd pregnancy booked with us at 12 weeks of gestational age. Her previous pregnancies had culminated in normal vaginal deliveries. She is a housewife with a moderately active lifestyle. Aside from a history of on and off constipation, her past medical history was unremarkable and her current pregnancy was managed as a low-risk pregnancy. All her booking visit investigations including thyroid status were normal. She was on calcium supplements throughout the pregnancy and iron supplementation in second and third trimesters. Her booking BMI was 28 and total weight gain was 9 kg.
At 39 weeks of gestation, she went into labour spontaneously. Following approximately 4 h of the latent period, she had a spontaneous rupture of membranes. On admission to the labour ward, her cervical dilatation was 4 cm and well effaced with one mild contraction per 10 min. No rectal enema was given on admission to labour ward. Second review after 4 h revealed the similar vaginal examination findings while she was experiencing only 2 moderate contractions per 10 min. After careful evaluation, oxytocin infusion (5 mIU/ml) was commenced and maintained to achieve 3–4 contractions per 10 min. She opted to have nitrous oxide and intramuscular pethidine as pain relief and had liberal oral fluids during active first stage of labour. Active phase of the first stage lasted 5 h in total, after which active pushing in the second stage was attempted for nearly 45 min. At this stage, a moderate caput had developed with grade 2 moulding and the diagnosis of deep transverse arrest was made. The attempt at manually rotating the fetal head in the labour room failed. Since the patient declined a trial of instrumental delivery, an emergency cesarean section was performed. During the cesarean section, the uterine incision was noted to have a right sided extension towards the vagina which was sutured carefully. No bladder damage was noted. Total blood loss was approximated at 400 ml, and her baby weighed 2.9 kg. She was commenced on oral fluids 2 h postoperatively and mobilized after 6 h from surgery. Standard post-operative bladder care, catheter care and fluid management were given. Urinary catheter was removed on post-operative day 1 and the patient was discharged on the second post-operative day after spontaneous bowel opening with paracetamol and NSAIDs for analgesia, oral antibiotics for 5 days with prophylactic dose of low molecular weight heparin for 7 days and iron supplements for 6 months.
One week later she had presented to the general practitioner with a history of no bowel movements for 6 consecutive days and anuria for the last 3 days. She was prescribed stool softeners and a rectal enema and was directed to the emergency department by the general practitioner. However, patient did not present to the emergency department initially as she had a bowel movement. Over the next day she complained of severe abdominal discomfort and progressive abdominal distention with difficulty in breathing and persistent anuria prompting her to ultimately present to emergency treatment unit.
On admission she was hemodynamically stable, and her abdomen was distended with evidence of free fluid. As she had undergone a second stage cesarean section, the team decided to catheterize and rule out the possibility of a bladder injury causing urine leakage into the peritoneal cavity. Catheter drained 1 l of clear urine and subsequent ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis showed normal bladder contour, normal ureters and moderate amount of peritoneal free fluid. Her renal function tests showed evidence of acute kidney injury, which were as follows:
eGFR − 16.67 ml/min/1.73m2.
Blood Urea − 150.5 mg/dl.
Serum creatinine − 3.32 mg/dl.
Digital rectal examination revealed significant fecal loading and manual dis-impaction was done; followed by rectal enema. Subsequently she was commenced on oral laxatives. Upon further evaluation of the patient’s history, it was revealed that she had constipation throughout the latter part of her pregnancy which she had failed to mention in previous appointments with her caregivers.
Over the next 12 h the patient produced 12 l of urine. Her laboratory investigations revealed hyponatremia with serum sodium level of 123 mmol/l (reference range – 136- 145 mmol/l). Patient’s urine protein level was 8.1 mg/dl (reference range – 0 – 15.0 mg/dl) and urine protein: creatinine ratio was 0.38 (reference range- less than 0.2). The patient had a serum osmolality of 301 mOsm/kg (reference range – 275- 295 mOsm/kg) with a urine osmolality of 270 mOsm/kg (reference range – 700-1500 mOsm/kg) showing an inability to concentrate urine despite the physiological response of serum hyperosmolality. Her urine full report and urine culture were unremarkable with urine specific gravity at 1.015. Spot urine sodium was 66 mmol/l.
Her other laboratory investigations were as follows: serum potassium – 5.1 mmol/l (reference range – 3.5 – 5.1 mmol/l), serum chloride – 89 mmol/l (reference range – 98 – 107 mmol/l), serum calcium – 8.2 mg/dl (reference range 8.6–10.0 mg/dl), serum magnesium – 1.4 mg/dl (reference range 1.6–2.6 mg/dl). Her liver function tests were normal and 2D echocardiogram had no abnormal findings.
Upon advice from the consultant nephrologist, fluid replacement was done with liberal oral fluids and intravenous fluid replacement at less than 10% of the previous hour urine output. Oral calcium supplements, oral sodium chloride replacement and single dose of intravenous magnesium sulphate infusion of 1 g was added to her treatment regime.
Marked clinical improvement of the patient was seen over the course of the initial 12 h with resolution of her abdominal discomfort and difficulty in breathing. Subsequent 24 h saw persistent polyuria with the patient’s condition being stable. Close monitoring of the urine output hourly ensured proper fluid balance with serial laboratory values for serum electrolytes, urine and serum osmolality and renal function assessment every 12 h fortifying the ongoing management. Over 36 h after onset of diuresis patient’s renal function and other laboratory values returned to normal with the settling of polyuria more than 48 h after onset.
The patient was discharged on the day after resolution of polyuria with a foley catheter in-situ which was subsequently removed a week later. Patient resumed normal voiding of urine after catheter removal. Post-void residual volume 1 week after catheter removal was ultrasonically confirmed to be less than 50 ml.