A 62-year-old woman was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix uteri FIGO Stage IIIC2(r) (according to FIGO 2018). Computed tomography (CT) at first diagnosis showed a large cervical mass of 9 cm, enlarged iliac and paraaortic lymph nodes, and right hydronephrosis. Prior personal and family history were negative. First-line treatment included combined radio-chemotherapy with 6 cycles of cisplatin 40 mg/m2 weekly and lymph node irradiation, which was followed by intra-cervical brachytherapy with Iridium-192 resulting in a partial response. Three months later, progressive disease with a new palpable mass in a left supraclavicular lymph node and suspicion of pulmonary metastases (small nodules of 6 mm, not amenable to biopsy) was noted. A mixed response of the pelvic nodal metastases as well as a progression of the cervical mass was documented. After radiotherapy of the left supraclavicular lymph node metastasis and second-line chemotherapy with 6 cycles of carboplatin/AUC6, paclitaxel 175 mg/m2, and bevacizumab 15 mg/kg, partial response (regression of all lesions without complete resolution) for 6 months was achieved. However, bevacizumab had to be interrupted due to rectorrhagia and ensuing anaemia. Due to progressive disease with new retrocrural and paraesophageal lymph node metastases, local radiotherapy was applied and a third-line systemic treatment with nivolumab (3 mg/kg q2w for 17 months, then according to Checkmate-358 with 240 mg q2w) was initiated leading to complete remission as verified by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) at 12 months after immunotherapy initiation. Complete remission was also documented after 22 months of treatment.
The immunotherapy was well tolerated over the course of 8 months, then the patient presented with a well-delimited inflammation of the vulva and perianal region with ulceration and epidermolysis . A bacterial, fungal, or viral infection was excluded by microbiological analyses. Histology of a punch biopsy revealed a lichenoid interface dermatitis with a pronounced lymphocytic infiltrate along the dermo-epidermal junction as well as intraepithelial. Immunohistochemically, most of lymphocytes were CD8-positive T cells intermixed with CD4-positive T cells , consistent with an immunotherapy-related vulvitis. This IRAE was successfully treated by topical corticosteroid (clobetasol propionate 0.05%, 1-2x daily; Fig. b).
We performed molecular analyses of the primary tumour. The tumour was positive for PD-L1 (clone SP263, Ventana), as 30% of tumour infiltrating immune cells were PD-L1 positive (defined as the proportion of tumour area occupied by PD-L1 staining of any intensity in immune cells), whereas the tumour cells were PD-L1 negative. Unexpectedly, the tumour was negative for p16 by immunohistochemistry, so that an HPV-association appeared unlikely. A qPCR-based HPV test (Anyplex™ II HPV28 Detection, Seegene) on DNA from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue was negative. To further characterize the neoplasm, we performed a genome-wide DNA methylation analysis (Infinium Methylation EPIC, Illumina) and compared the methylation pattern by a combined filtering and dimension reduction approach [, ] with reference data on various cancer types (The Cancer Genome Atlas, TCGA) including HPV-associated cervical squamous cell carcinomas, as specific HPV-associated structural aberrations and increased target-gene expression have been reported . We observed the highest concordance with the methylation classes of squamous cell carcinomas, particularly of the cervix, head and neck, and oesophagus .
TMB was exceptionally high with 44 mutations/megabase (Oncomine™ Tumor Mutation Load Assay, Thermo Fisher Scientific), even though cut-off levels for non-HPV-related cervical cancers have yet to be defined. The TMB sequencing data were further screened for disease-related somatic variants. They revealed a pathogenic mutation in the PIK3CA gene and a likely pathogenic mutation in the ERBB2 gene with allelic frequencies close to 40%, matching the estimated tumour proportion of 80%). Somatic mutations in both of these genes have been suggested to play a role in the pathogenesis of cervical squamous cell carcinoma .
Immunohistochemistry for DNA damage repair proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) showed preserved expression of all examined proteins, consistent with a microsatellite stable (MSS) carcinoma.