A 66-year-old man presented to our hospital on 13 May 2022 with recurrent syncope for 1 month. He was diagnosed with AL-CA 16 months previously, on 4 January 2021, when he presented with dyspnea on exertion. His blood pressure was recorded at 85/55 mmHg, and a physical examination revealed skin bruising and macroglossia. There was no evidence of polyneuropathy, dysautonomia, or carpal tunnel syndrome. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis with immunofixation revealed a positive result for monoclonal light-chain kappa, and the ratio of serum kappa:lambda free light chain (FLC ratio) was 79.46 (serum free light-chain kappa: 530.00 mg/L, and serum free light-chain lambda: 6.67 mg/L). The difference between involved and uninvolved free light chains (FLC-diff) was 52.33 mg/dl. The presence of amyloid deposits was confirmed by Congo red staining in the bone marrow biopsy tissue. Echocardiography revealed symmetry hypertrophy and diastolic dysfunction of the left ventricle (interventricular septum thickness: 12 mm, posterior wall of left ventricle thickness: 12 mm, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 42 mm, e′: 6.1 cm/s, and E/e′: 15.6) without pericardial effusion or aortic stenosis, and the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 57%. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging indicated diffuse late gadolinium enhancement in the subendocardial regions and the involvement of the bilateral atrium, bilateral ventricle, and interventricular septum. Holter monitoring revealed an intermittent sinus pause and AVB, suggesting SND and conduction disease . Per the result of the bone marrow biopsy, the presence of monoclonal light chains, and an abnormal FLC ratio, the diagnosis of light-chain amyloidosis was made. The confirmation of cardiac amyloidosis was based on the unexplained left ventricular thickness ≥12 mm and the diffuse late gadolinium enhancement in CMR . Based on the results of FLC-diff, cardiac troponin I (cTnI), and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) (FLC-diff: 52.33 mg/dl, cTnI: 0.04 μg/L, NT-proBNP: 1,021 pg/ml), the patient was classified as Mayo Stage Ⅱ , and BCD protocol chemotherapy, which included bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone, was initiated on 8 January 2021.
After undergoing the ninth cycle of chemotherapy in September 2021, the patient achieved a very good partial response (VGPR) at the hematologic level, with a significant reduction in FLC-diff and FLC ratio from 52.33 to 1.55 mg/dl and from 79.46 to 2.24, respectively . In addition, cTnI and NT-proBNP decreased from 0.04 to <0.017 µg/L and from 1,021 to 541 pg/ml, respectively. Dyspnea was also relieved. Chemotherapy was suspended by his hematologist.
On 6 April 2022, the patient experienced his first syncope episode. Holter monitoring revealed an intermittent third-degree AVB with and without ventricular escapes . During complete AVB, the heart rate was 38 bpm, and the morphology of ventricular escape exhibited a left bundle branch block (LBBB) pattern (QRS duration: 132 ms), indicating right bundle branch origination . However, during atrioventricular 1:1 conduction, the PR interval was 220 ms, and the morphology of the QRS complex exhibited a right bundle branch block (RBBB) pattern, indicating conduction through the left bundle branch . The results of repeated laboratory tests of FLC-diff showed stability without amyloidosis relapse, and the echocardiography results were similar to those of the previous one. On 13 May 2022, the patient was admitted to our hospital for further therapy. Because of the new-onset syncope and the worsening of atrioventricular conduction without reversible etiologies, a permanent dual-chamber pacemaker was planned to be implanted, and to achieve electrical and mechanical synchrony, an LBBP was attempted. Before the implantation procedure, the patient’s intrinsic electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with 1:1 atrioventricular conduction, and the QRS complex exhibited an RBBB pattern with a duration of 125 ms and without decreased voltage. Because the PR interval was 250 ms and the frontal plane axis showed a left deviation of −43°, consistent with a left anterior fascicular block (LAFB), a diagnosis of first-degree AVB and LAFB was confirmed, and supraventricular excitation was presumed to be conducted through the left posterior fascicle .
The LBBP procedure was performed as previously described . The pacing lead (Model 3830; SelectSecure, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was supported by the delivery sheath (C315His; Medtronic Inc.) via the left axillary vein. The paced ECG and the intracardiac electrogram were collected using an ECG recording system (LEAD-7000 C EP Recording System, Jinjiang Electronic Medical Device Technology Co., Ltd., Sichuan, China). The delivery sheath was advanced across the tricuspid valve summit in the right anterior oblique (RAO) view at 30° and was further advanced to approximately 20 mm toward the right ventricular apex. A counterclockwise torque was applied so that the sheath could reach the right ventricular base to the mid-septum. The initial pacing site was the right ventricular septum. The QRS morphology in the pacing site showed a “w” pattern with a notch at the nadir of the QRS in lead V1 . Then, the lead was screwed into the interventricular septum until a paced QRS (voltage output at 5 V @ 0.4 ms in the unipolar mode) of RBBB morphology with a terminal R-wave in lead V1 was obtained . There was little difficulty in screwing the Model 3830 lead into the deep septum. The left bundle branch potential could be recorded when the lead was deeply screwed into the subendocardial area on the left side of the interventricular septum . A threshold test was performed, and it showed that the transitions in the QRS morphology were quite subtle when pacing from high voltage (5 V @ 0.4 ms) to low voltage (0.5 V @ 0.4 ms); therefore, the test was non-conclusive. When pacing at high and low output voltages, consistent values of the stimulus to V6 R-wave peak time (V6RWPT) were recorded, as shown in . To confirm the left bundle branch capture, the LBBP ECG criteria were evaluated. The V6–V1 inter-peak interval was 41.67 ms , and the stimulus to V6RWPT was 78.28 ms . Because the left bundle branch potential to V6RWPT in intrinsic rhythm was 58.33 ms , the difference between the potential to V6RWPT and the stimulus to V6RWPT was 19.95 ms. Because V6RWPT <80 ms fulfilled the European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) criteria , the LBBP of our patient was confirmed. The threshold of left bundle branch capture measured in the unipolar mode was 0.5 V @ 0.4 ms, the R-wave amplitude measured in the bipolar mode was 21.0 mV, and the ventricular lead impedance was 774 Ω. The threshold of right atrium capture was 0.8 V @ 0.4 ms, the P-wave amplitude was 1.6 mV, and the atrial lead impedance was 922 Ω. The paced QRS duration was 106 ms. The pacing leads were connected to a generator (X3DR01 Astra S DR, Medtronic Inc.). The positions of the leads are shown in .
After pacemaker implantation, there was no occurrence of recurrent syncope. At the patient’s 3-month follow-up visit, the pacing parameters were stable. The unipolar left bundle branch capture threshold was recorded at 0.75 V @ 0.4 ms, the unipolar pacing impedance was measured at 570 Ω, and the sensed bipolar R-wave amplitude was 20.0 mV. The right atrium capture threshold was recorded at 0.75 V @ 0.4 ms, the pacing impedance was measured at 323 Ω, and the sensed P-wave amplitude was 1.1 mV. At the 1-year follow-up visit, the patient's intrinsic rhythm was a sinus rhythm with first-degree AVB ; therefore, the left bundle branch capture threshold was measured by mandatory ventricular pacing, and the value was 0.75 V @ 0.4 ms. The sensed R-wave amplitude and pacing impedance were 20.0 mV and 532 Ω, respectively. The right atrium capture threshold was recorded at 1.0 V @ 0.4 ms, the pacing impedance was measured at 323 Ω, and the sensed P-wave amplitude was 0.8 mV. The stimulus to V6RWPT (78 ms) was stable at high (5.0 V @ 0.4 ms) and low (1.0 V @ 0.4 ms) output voltages when the left bundle branch was captured . The atrial and ventricular pacing rates were 37.4% and 7.7%, respectively. In addition, no pacemaker-related complications, such as pocket infection, hematoma, lead dislodgement, and rupture, were reported. There was no reported occurrence of syncope, and the patient did not experience dyspnea on exertion.
The trends in the right atrial lead and LBBP lead threshold, sensing, and impedance are shown in . The timeline of the present case is shown in .