A 29-year-old girl, G1P1, presenting with amenorrhea for 2 months, irregular vaginal bleeding for 1 month and elevated serum hCG level (83,962IU/L), was admitted to the gynecology department. The antecedent pregnancy of this patient was a full-term cesarean delivery 7 years ago. An ultrasound examination revealed a mixed echogenic mass measuring 3.2*4.5*3.9 cm in the uterine cavity, partially invading the myometrium, with honeycomb like internal echoes , and color Doppler showed that it was filled with abundant blood flow signals , and the spectrum of arteriovenous fistula was measured in pulsed-wave Doppler . Meanwhile, the pelvic MRI scan depicted heterogeneous mass measuring 3.9*4.0cm in uterine cavity with hemorrhage and invasion of the myometrium . There were no abnormal findings on gynecological examination, chest CT scan and other image examinations.
The patient’s diagnosis caused controversy amongst the medical team. Someone considered it as GTN (choriocarcinoma) originating from the previous full-term pregnancy on the basis of the fact that GTN can emerge in many years or decades after a previous pregnancy. The patient, who is currently presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding, an elevated hCG level and positive images suggesting myometrial invasion, had an antecedent full-term cesarean section 7 years ago. While others disagreed with the above suspected diagnosis. They viewed it as a new onset of pregnancy which quickly progressed to a GTN, although the appearance was very rare. Because abnormal lesions occurred simultaneously in the uterine cavity and myometrium. In order to confirm the origin of the myometrial invasive mass, suction evacuation was performed after the discussion of the medical group. Histologic examination showed moderate to severe trophoblast proliferation accompanied with edematous villi and immunohistochemical staining identified p57 negative , which indicated a complete molar pregnancy. The patient was reevaluated one week post evacuation. Although the hCG decreased to 26,444IU/L, ultrasound suggested honeycomb like mass filled with abundant fire-sea-like blood flow signals was seen within the uterine fundus measuring 5.3*4.8*2.7cm . Additionally, pulsed-wave Doppler detected a high-speed, low-resistance arteriovenous fistula spectrum. . Hence, pGTN was diagnosed as FIGO stage I with the prognostic score of 4(2 points for pre-treatment hCG concentrations, 2 points for the largest tumor mass diameter).
According to 2000 FIGO staging, a risk score of 6 and below is classified as low risk. Despite the patient’s prognostic score being low risk, EMA/CO (etoposide, methotrexate, and dactinomycin alternating with cyclophosphamide and vincristine) multi-agent chemotherapy regimen was selected in order to avoid single-agent chemotherapy resistance, taking into account the patient’s extensive uterine invasion, the high hCG level prior to chemotherapy, and the highly malignant potential of the tumor. The patient’s HCG decreased drastically to 716.3 IU/L after the first chemotherapy course, to 8.9 IU/L after the second course, and was normalized after the third course. Additional 2 courses of chemotherapy were given to minimize the risk of recurrence. The last course of additional chemotherapy was replaced by methotrexate mono-chemotherapy due to severe bone marrow suppression caused by multi-agent chemotherapy. Ultrasound after each chemotherapy course showed gradual regression of the mass, with complete disappearance of the lesion and the arteriovenous fistula at the last chemotherapy course. The woman was followed up for one year and her hCG level was normal with regular periods.