A 70-year-old man, who had been taking with aspirin, dabigatran and other medication for atrial fibrillation, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia, presented to his local physician with a 3-day history of cough and diarrhea. A real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction test of his nasopharyngeal swab specimen showed positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid, and he was admitted to the source hospital with the diagnosis of moderate COVID-19 pneumonia. He had been administered one liter of supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula and treated by remdesivir and dexamethasone. Antithrombotic therapy with dabigatran and aspirin for comorbidities was continued after his admission.
Eight days later, acute onset of severe abdominal pain appeared, and he was diagnosed as right renal infarction by contrast computed tomography (CT) at that time. Although heparinization was administered immediately, his clinical course was complicated with worsening abdominal pain and respiratory condition. On the next day, he was transferred to our hospital with severe general condition, and intubated immediately. Contrast CT in our hospital showed that bilateral lower lobe/middle lobe and lingula ground glass opacification with distribution suggestive of COVID-19 pneumonia and right renal infarction. In addition, it demonstrated SMA occlusion with intestinal ischemia suggesting extensive necrosis from the jejunum to the transverse colon . A retrospective re-review of the CT at the previous hospital showed SMA occlusion was already presented at that time. After consultation with surgery departments, the patient underwent an emergency exploratory laparotomy. During operation, institutional COVID-19 precaution guideline was implemented with appropriate personal protective equipment. Upon exploration, the intestine from jejunum at 100 cm from Treitz ligament to middle of transverse colon appeared clearly necrotic. We resected necrotic bowel and evaluated the blood flow in the preserved intestine by utilizing an indocyanine green fluorescence imaging device, photodynamic eye camera. Although intestinal blood flow was confirmed by the system, considering severe general condition of the patient, we constructed jejunostomy and transverse colon mucous fistula without primary anastomosis.
He was extubated the next day of the surgery and out of intensive care unit on postoperative day 2. The jejunostomy and transverse colon mucous fistula had revealed favorable color with no signs of necrosis. After surgery, the patient was continued on heparinization, and then transitioned to apixaban on postoperative day 11. We performed second surgery to close the jejunostomy and transverse colon mucous fistula with end-to-end anastomosis on postoperative day 22. The postoperative course was uneventful and he required no nutritional treatment despite having only 100 cm small bowel. He moved to another hospital for rehabilitation to improve activities of daily living (ADLs) on postoperative day 45. As of 6 months after the surgery, his ADLs have completely improved and he has returned to social life without any intravenous nutritional supports for short bowel syndrome.