A 22-year-old African American woman presented with a two-week history of generalized, continuous headache, bilateral visual blurring and horizontal diplopia. With the persistence of the symptoms, as well as development of a left eye deviation, our patient was brought to our hospital. She was admitted two weeks prior to an outside hospital and empirically treated for pyelonephritis with 500 mg of ciprofloxacin twice daily for two weeks. Symptoms began two days after starting ciprofloxacin and worsened with continued treatment. She did not have a history of recent ear infection, treatment for acne, vitamin A supplementation, lead exposure, seizure disorder, oral contraceptives, steroid intake or withdrawal. There was no history of tick bites, target rash or joint pains. Her medical, surgical, travel and family history were all unremarkable.
On examination, our patient's body mass index was 29.4. Her temperature was 37.2°C; heart rate 66/min, respiration rate 16/min, blood pressure 119/74 mmHg. On ophthalmic examination, her corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in her right eye and 20/40 in her left eye. She had diplopia on her left lateral gaze with left eye esotropia. The intra-ocular pressure, anterior segment and papillary response were normal. The fundus picture demonstrated bilateral disc swelling without spontaneous venous pulsations [Figure ]. Both of her tympanic membranes were intact, and there was no evidence of bulging or discharge. She did not have neck rigidity and Kernig and Brudzinski signs were negative. Cranial nerves II to XII were intact. Manual muscle testing in all extremities was 5/5, and deep-tendon reflexes were all 2/4. Her cerebellar function was intact, as was gait, and Babinski reflexes were downward bilaterally. Sensation was intact to pain and soft touch. Findings of an examination of her lungs, heart, and abdomen were benign. Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain with and without contrast and a magnetic resonance venogram were normal. A diagnostic lumbar puncture performed in the recumbent position demonstrated an opening pressure of 380 mmH2O. Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein, glucose, cell count, veneral disease research laboratory test (VDRL), herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, Toxoplasma, cryptococcal antigen, Gram stain, acid fast bacilli stain, routine bacterial, viral, and fungal cultures, and cytology were all normal. CSF protein electrophoresis was normal without any oligoclonal bands. Laboratory data, including a complete blood count, chemistry panel (blood urea nitrogen of 16 mg/dL and creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL), liver function tests, thyroid function tests, sedimentation rate, anti-nuclear antibodies, VDRL, rheumatoid factor, and angiotensin-converting enzyme, were all normal. A urine beta human chorionic gonadotropin test was negative.
A diagnosis of PTC was made. Ciprofloxacin was discontinued and serial lumbar punctures returned the opening pressure to 140 mmH2O. Our patient's symptoms improved after each lumbar puncture. The improvement of symptoms and subsequent reduction in CSF opening pressure was consistent with the elimination half-life of the drug. She was discharged home with close ophthalmology follow-up. Four weeks later, there was complete resolution of papilledema [Figure ].