A 54-year-old, right-handed man had experienced two episodes of focal impaired awareness seizures and was taking levetiracetam. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a high-intensity lesion of the temporal lobe on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery-weighted images, and a noncontrast-enhanced cyst appeared inside the temporal lobe at the 1-year follow-up, suggesting the presence of a low-grade brain tumor [ and ]. The patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. He spoke fluently and had an average memory as determined with the revised Wechsler memory scale (WMS-R) . Long-term electroencephalographic (EEG) monitoring revealed interictal epileptiform discharges of the left temporal lobe, a rare finding. As a Wada test revealed that the left hemisphere was dominant in terms of language and memory, the medial temporal structures were reserved for functional preservation by performing a partial resection . Histopathological examination revealed diffuse astrocytic gliomas. Genomic analysis indicated that the IDH gene and the TERT promoter were wild type, and the MGMT promoter was unmethylated. Therefore, we diagnosed this tumor as a diffuse astrocytoma, IDH-wild type, according to the 2016 World Health Organization classification [ and ].
No neurological deficits were observed immediately after surgery. However, 3 days later, a focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizure (FBTCS) occurred, followed by aphasia. The verbal disturbance was initially presumed to be a part of the postictal state; however, these symptoms persisted even as his eating, walking, and comprehension returned to baseline levels. The presence of ischemic complications was excluded using diffusion-weighted MRI. This suggested that NCSE, such as ASE, could be responsible for the language disturbance. Therefore, levetiracetam was increased to the maximum dosage of 3000 mg/day, and lacosamide was additionally administered at 200 mg/day. However, their efficacy was limited. Four days after the FBTCS, EEG revealed 1.5 Hz left-sided periodic discharges (PDs) and ictal spatiotemporal evolution of rhythmic activity, which demonstrated that the ASE persisted . The ineffectiveness of treatment with subsequent additional ASDs (fosphenytoin, perampanel, and clobazam) led us to choose aggressive treatment with intravenous anesthetics 9 days after the FBTCS. Forty-eight hours of deep sedation with induction of burst suppression terminated the NCSE pattern, and the patient’s verbal disturbance gradually improved. Three days after administration of the intravenous anesthetics, an EEG revealed the disappearance of the PDs. However, verbal deficits remained at 3 weeks after surgery, predominantly in object naming and word retrieval, with a total score of 82 in the Western Aphasia Battery (WAB) . No improvement in the WAB score at the 3-month follow-up indicated that permanent complications had occurred.
In addition, a decrease in the indices of the WMS-R demonstrated substantial memory impairment after the prolonged ASE. Automated hippocampal volumetry, conducted with the FreeSurfer software suite , revealed an approximate decrease of 20% on the diseased side on MRI 3 months after surgery . Five months after the initial diagnosis, the patient died because of tumor progression.