A 39-year-old male patient was admitted to hospital due to “left lower abdominal pain for 1 day.” On physical examination, T was 37.3°C, P 78 beats per minute, R 18 breaths per minute, and BP 115/61 mmHg. There were no obvious abdominal bulge, tenderness, and rebound pain in the left lower abdomen, bowel sounds were 4 times/min, and there was no shifting dullness. Laboratory tests showed that the white blood cell count was 10.2 × 109/L, neutrophils was 91.4%, lymphocytes (%) 6.0%, and C-reactive protein 301.2 mg/L. Imaging examination by abdominal CT showed that the appendix was not clearly visible, and a mass was found in the left lower abdomen . Because the patient's abdominal pain was severe and the current diagnosis was not clear, after soliciting the patient's consent, we performed laparoscopic exploration. It revealed an omentum-enclosed mass with pus moss on the surface at the left iliac fossa of the patient . Laparoscopic exploration revealed the right iliac fossa occupied by ileum that pushed the cecum and ascending colon to the left iliac fossa, which is an intestinal malrotation with a left-sided appendicitis , and intestinal malrotation left-sided appendicitis was diagnosed intraoperatively. The pus on the surface of the mass was aspirated and the omentum was detached by blunt dissection with the aspirator to expose the appendix, which was seen to be swollen, approximately 6 cm in length, approximately 1 cm in diameter, and with pus moss attached to the surface . Subsequently, we performed laparoscopic appendectomy, and the procedure was uneventful, detailed surgical video can be found in the . Antibiotics were used after the operation. On the first postoperative day, the patient had flatus in the anus but without defecation and was given liquid diet. On the second postoperative day, the patient had defecation and was given a semifluid diet. A re-examination of the blood routine 3 days after operation showed WBC: 5.1 × 109/L, NEU: 61%, LYM: 6.0%, CRP: 3.0 mg/L. Since the patient's blood routine examination was normal on the third day without fever, we stopped using antibiotics and the patient was discharged. Postoperative pathology revealed acute gangrenous appendicitis with periappendicitis , and on telephone follow-up on the seventh postoperative day, the patient reported good recovery without any complications.