In April 2019, a 68-year-old Chinese female with no smoking history was referred to the respiratory department of our hospital after a routine physical examination at a healthcare center. She complained that pulmonary lesions had been discovered, despite not experiencing any discomfort in the past. Her chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 34 mm × 37 mm × 56 mm mass in the right upper lobe with metastases to mediastinal and right hilar lymph nodes ( and ). Further cranial MRI confirmed there was no brain metastasis. The whole-body emission computed tomography (ECT) revealed lesions with increased radioactivity in patients’ right shoulder and left coxa. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining of endobronchial ultrasound-guided needle aspiration specimen of the mass in the right upper lobe revealed a typical adenocarcinoma histology ( and ). Based on the imaging examinations, histopathology and immunohistochemical profile, the patient was diagnosed with stage IV (cT3N3M1c) lung adenocarcinoma according to UICC 8th edition TNM staging .
Subsequent targeted NGS of 14 cancer-related genes analysis (Nanjing Geneseeq Technology Inc., Nanjing, Jiangsu, China) of her aspiration biopsy identified an IGR (chr2: 30,316,870)-ALK fusion , but no other oncogenic alterations were found. The test results suggested that there was no known sensitive targeted medicine for this type of fusion. Therefore, the patient was treated with chemotherapy with nedaplatin (50 mg on d1-2) and pemetrexed (0.8 g on d1, q4w) on May 15, 2019. After the first cycle of the chemotherapy, the patient reported intolerable severe gastrointestinal adverse reactions with dizziness, amaurosis and weakness. Therefore, a combined treatment of crizotinib (250 mg bid) and maintenance chemotherapy with pemetrexed (0.8 g on d1, q4w) were administrated on May 27, 2019 and achieved a partial response (PR), as indicated by chest CT scan one month later which showed a remarkable shrinkage of the right upper lung lesion and multiple nodules in the two lungs . Since the monthly chest CT scan in the following 6 months indicated a remarkable shrinkage of the right upper lung lesion and multiple nodules in the two lungs , the patient was only given crizotinib as maintenance treatment on October 31, 2019. In July 2020, the patient’s chest CT scan showed that multiple nodules in both lungs were benign nodules . The patient’s lung lesions were successfully converted from PR to complete response (CR) and remained progression-free-survival (PFS) on crizotinib for 21 months up to the most recent follow-up. During the targeted therapy, the patient experienced mild adverse reactions such as visual disturbance, dizziness, fatigue, and rash, which were well tolerated.