A 73-year-old female presented to the hospital with sudden onset of severe stabbing chest pain radiating to the back. Her past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidaemia, transient ischaemic attacks with minor deficits (mild short memory deficits and gait instability), atrial fibrillation requiring AV nodal ablation and a VVI single chamber pacemaker, there was no family history of aortopathies or any other familial disorders. On arrival at the emergency department, she was found to be hemodynamically stable without a significant arm blood pressure difference or any new neurological findings. Her echocardiogram (ECG) showed a ventricular-paced rhythm . Because of the classic characteristics of her pain (sudden, tearing, and radiating to the back), an acute aortic syndrome was suspected and an emergent computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed which showed an extensive type A (Debakey Type I) intramural haematoma in circumferential contiguous fashion from a level just beyond the aortic valve, extending distally to a level between the take-off of the renal artery and the inferior mesenteric artery with a focal non-flow-limiting dissection flap anteriorly just below the level of oesophageal hiatus , which could have been the entry site tear. There was no visible site of entry tear observed in the ascending aorta with all major branches being filled by the true lumen.
The patient was noted to have a normal Rubidium positron emission tomography perfusion 18 months prior to her presentation which was done to investigate exertional chest pain. She was rushed to the operating room and underwent a valve-sparing replacement of the ascending aorta and the aortic hemiarch with the placement of a distal aortic stent (frozen elephant trunk) with resuspension of the aortic valve. Cardiopulmonary bypass weaning was unsuccessful, and she was found to have a new apical regional wall motion abnormality (echo images available in ). Central veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was started, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
She was then taken to the cardiac catheterization lab for an urgent coronary angiogram. This was done through a right femoral approach and showed the angiographic appearance of type II spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) of the proximal to distal left anterior descending artery (LAD), distal left circumflex artery (LCx), branch of ramus intermedius artery and distal right coronary artery (RCA) (; cine clips available in ). Of note, the patient was not on any vasoactive agents at the time of the angiogram, which can cause intense diffuse vasospasm mimicking this appearance. A 2.50 × 10 mm FLEXTOME MONORAIL cutting balloon was inflated in the proximal and mid LAD to relieve the intramural haematoma followed by implantation of a 3.00 × 20 mm PROMUS ELITE drug-eluting stent, which yielded an excellent angiographic result . The rest of the vessels were treated conservatively. Intravascular imaging was not used given the typical angiographic appearance and the critical patient condition. Three days later, she was taken back to the OR and decannulated from ECMO. Fibromuscular dysplasia screening with CT angiogram of the head and neck and CT angiogram of the abdomen and pelvis were negative. She was discharged to inpatient rehab a week later where she underwent physiotherapy and occupational therapy before going home a month later; 10 months after discharge, she was complaining of shortness of breath on exertion and underwent a follow-up angiogram, which showed a patent LAD stent with mild in-stent restenosis and complete resolution of the LCx and RCA SCAD (; cine images in the ). An ECG showed a normal ejection fraction (60%) with normal LV dimensions and thickened mitral valve leaflets with new severe central mitral regurgitation and a follow-up CT chest showed a stable appearance of the repaired aorta .