We describe the case of a 21-month-old female patient from southwest Colombia, who was the second child of a 34-year-old mother and a nonconsanguineous 36-year-old father, both without a significant family history. The mother’s pregnancy was uncomplicated, and prenatal ultrasounds were normal. A cesarean delivery was performed at 38 weeks because of the breech position of the baby. The birth weight was 3,324 g (48th centile). The baby showed spontaneous neonatal adaptation with APGAR 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. She was released jointly with her mother on the second day after birth.
At three months of age, she was assessed by a neuropediatrics service for generalized hypotonia associated with psychomotor development delay. At six months of age, a low weight and height were documented as well as generalized hypertrichosis. The occurrence of this neurological symptoms together with persistent hypertrichosis at 12 months led to an assessment by a pediatric endocrinologist, who ruled out an androgenic hormone disorder (normal testosterone levels, α-OH-progesterone and somatomedin). At that age, she was also assessed by a pediatric gastroenterologist who diagnosed moderate gastroesophageal reflux that required pharmacological management. Later, at 20 months of age, she presented with two episodes of urinary infection, one of them complicated by pyelonephritis.
Regarding her development, she achieved cephalic support at 12 months, and assisted sitting at 18 months. At the age of 21 months, she did not exhibit age-appropriate language development.
The paraclinical tests performed on the patient included Normal brain MRI performed at 10 months of age. A renal ultrasound, dimercapto succinic acid renal scan and voiding cystourethrography were performed at 20 months of age and were reported to be normal. Other studies performed at this time were karyotype, blood and urine metabolic screening, creatinine phosphokinase, complete blood count, fasting glucose test, transthoracic echocardiogram, auditory and visual evoked potentials; all of them were reported as normal. X-rays of the extremities performed at 21 months of age showed bilateral congenital hip dislocation.
At 21 months of age, she was referred for genetic assessment because of delayed psychomotor development, generalized hypotonia, low height, and hypertrichosis. Her weight was 8,7 kg (-2,2 SD) and her height was 72 cm (-3,83 SD). Physical examination revealed round facies, thick eyebrows, synophrys, long eyelashes, downslanted palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, long philtrum, Dennis Morgan folds, and excessive thick facial hair mainly in the frontal region . Generalized hypertrichosis was present and more pronounced on the back and around the mammillae . Other findings included mild generalized hypotonia, broad feet, and irritability without hyperactivity.
Further investigation was performed using whole exome sequencing (WES) in the trio approach with a massive sequencing platform (CeGaT-GmbH, Tübingen, Germany). WES was performed on the sequencing coding and flanking intronic regions using the HiSeq2500/4000 system (Illumina®, San Diego, CA, US). The CASAVA 1.8 analysis package (Illumina®, San Diego, CA, US) was used to demultiplex the sequencing reads. The trimmed reads were mapped to the human reference genome (GRCh38) using the Burrows-Wheeler aligner software. A novel frameshift pathogenic variant in the heterozygous state of the KMT2A gene (v1. NM_001197104.1) was identified: c. 4177dupA (p. Ile1393Asnfs*14). This variant was not identified in either of the patient’s parents and has not been reported previously in population databases. This variant generates a change in the reading frame that results in the premature truncation of the protein or degradation of the messenger RNA. This finding was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and was compatible with the diagnosis of WDSTS. No other gene variants were identified in this case.
According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) Guidelines for the Interpretation of Sequence Variants , this variant is classified as pathogenic (PVS1, PS2, PM2, and PP3 criteria). The variant functional prediction software tools SIFT (https://sift.bii.a-star.edu.sg/), Functional Analysis through Hidden Markov Models FATHMM and Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (Polyphen-2 http: // genetics. bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/) classified it as a deleterious/damaging variant (disease causing) because of its high evolutionary conservation.
The de novo inheritance of the mutation was explained to her parents, as was the recurrence risk that varies from 3% to 5% in future pregnancies . The patient's follow-up plan includes annual renal and cardiac tests to assess other syndrome-associated features that may not yet be present in the patient due to the young age of the diagnosis. Neurological follow-up includes a therapy intervention for the hypotonia and the possible intellectual commitment.
The patient’s parents provided written informed consent for the publication of her case report and accompanying images.