In early March 2020, a 63-year-old woman presented with mild fever, with intense asthenia, anosmia and hypogeusia. The patient had no significant co-morbidities or previous olfactory or gustatory disturbances. In 5 days, fever and asthenia completely regressed, while chemosensory disturbances remained unchanged. At the end of March, after the detection of several cases of Covid-19 at the patient's workplace, she was subjected to a nasopharyngeal swab, which was negative, and a serological test, positive for SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin (Ig) IgG and IgM.
In June, given the persistence of anosmia for over three months, the patient was admitted to the maxillofacial surgery department of the University Hospital of Sassari for diagnostic investigations.
At the time of admission, nasopharyngeal swab and serological tests were repeated, which revealed positivity only for SARS-CoV-2 IgG. In the previous three months, the patient had not taken any specific medication. The olfactory and gustatory functions were objectively evaluated with psychophysical tests as per our protocol, which detected anosmia and severe hypogeusia.
The patient was first subjected to contrast-enhanced MRI of the nasal cavities and brain. The examination did not reveal any pathological findings: the olfactory bulb and clefts were of normal volume, without signal anomalies .
After providing signed written consent and being informed about the risks of the procedure, the patient underwent a biopsy of the left olfactory epithelium. The endoscopic procedure was conducted under general anaesthesia, as previously described by other authors. During the procedure, a swab was performed directly on the olfactory epithelium, which showed as negative for residual Covid-19.
The mucosal biopsy sections measured 8 mm × 4 mm in maximum dimension. There was extensive loss of surface epithelium , with no associated surface fibrin or inflammatory exudate . The architecture of glands in the lamina propria was maintained. A minimal chronic lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate was present . No eosinophils or mast cells were identified.
Immunohistochemical staining for pan-cytokeratin AE1/AE3 antibodies demonstrated only very focal residual attenuated surface epithelium . There was strong nuclear and cytoplasmic positivity for S100 immunostain in scattered cells within structures, compatible with Bowman's glands ; the same immunostain highlighted small nerve bundles, possibly of trigeminal origin. Immunostaining for angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor showed focal membrane staining in the S100 positive cells in Bowman's glands . There was focal positive staining for synaptophysin, and neurofilament immunostain highlighted small neurites and nerve bundles in lamina propria . No abnormal neural proliferation was identified.
Based on the results of the histopathological examination, the patient began systemic cortisone therapy with prednisone, starting with 75 mg/day and tapering the dose for 15 days. The patient received nasal irrigation with betamethasone, ambroxol, and Rinazina® for 30 days. At the end of therapy, the patient reported a slight improvement in chemosensory symptoms. Psychophysical tests revealed severe hyposmia and moderate hypogeusia. A new cycle of cortisone therapy was scheduled for September.