A 72-year-old male patient who had a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and thrombocytosis presented with generalized seizure. T2-wighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at admission revealed focal edema in the left posterior temporal lobe . Susceptibility-weighted imaging revealed the presence of microbleed within the edematous area in the brain . The seizure was controlled by the oral administration of levetiracetam (1000 mg/day). DSA revealed dAVF in the superior wall of the left transverse sinus, which was fed by a single artery (the left occipital artery [OA]) and drained into a single vein (the left temporal cortical vein), without drainage into the left transverse sinus [-]. Left internal carotid artery angiography revealed segmental stenosis of the left transverse sinus, which was adjacent to the shunting point . This finding indicated the presence of thrombosis in the left transverse sinus, which can be a cause for the development of Cognard Type III dAVF. Since endovascular access to the shunting point was difficult due to the tortuosity of the feeding artery, surgical interruption of the intradural draining vein was performed in the hybrid operating room.
After the induction of general anesthesia, a 4-F catheter was placed in the left common carotid artery (CCA) through the right radial artery. Then, the patient was placed in prone position. Left CCA angiography that was performed before craniotomy revealed the presence of dAVF . Left temporo-occipital craniotomy was then performed, and the left OA was excised during craniotomy. The shunt was not observed during the second DSA conducted after craniotomy . However, after dural opening, the draining vein was discovered as a red vein, indicating the presence of the remaining shunt . Abnormal arterial vessels were accumulated in the dura adjacent to the shunting point. IA-ICG videoangiography was performed using the same catheter used in DSA using the microscope with integrated ICG technology (ZEISS KINEVO 900, Carl Zeiss CO., Oberkochen, Germany). ICG videoangiography after craniotomy revealed early venous filling of the draining vein, which clearly indicated the remaining shunt . We resected the shunting point along with the sinus wall and arterialized draining vein . The shunt was not observed during IA-ICG videoangiography conducted after resection .
Postoperative T2-weighted MRI revealed rapid improvement of the edema and magnetic resonance angiography showed the elimination of the shunt . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged without any neurological deficits.