A 42-year-old Greek woman was referred to the Department of Otolaryngology of Chania General Hospital, complaining of facial pain and deformity, and a radiographic finding of a round, radiolucent, and osteolytic, bone-expanding lesion in the anterior part of the right maxillary sinus with invasion of the adjacent floor of the orbit, anterior ethmoids and nasal cavity . There was no family history of peptic ulcer, parathyroid disease, or any other endocrinopathy. There was no history of increased thirst, urinary frequency, constipation, weight loss, urolithiasis, fracture, peptic-ulcer, use of vitamin or calcium supplements, Paget's disease, exposure to ionizing radiation or industrial toxins, or use of tobacco or alcohol.
On physical examination, the patient appeared well. Her head and neck were normal; no cervical masses were palpated. Her lungs, heart, breasts, and abdomen were normal, as was her urine. Hematocrit was 39.8%; white-cell count was 6800/µL, with a normal differential count; platelet count, prothrombin time, and partial-thromboplastin time were normal. Rigid nasal endoscopy, with a 00 endoscope, revealed medialization of the right lateral nasal wall with no signs of mucosal alteration.
Under general anesthesia, an excision biopsy was performed using the Caldwell-Luc approach. The mass had a submucosal origin from the floor of the orbit, infiltrating the lateral nasal wall, with a diameter of approximately 2 cm. The mucosa over the mass was intact and after its excision, erosion of the floor of the orbit was detected with prolapsed periorbital fat. The opening was repaired with an underlay application of dura tissue which was immobilized with tissue glue. Histological sections showed a lesion with regions of discrete bone resorption with osteoclast activity, areas with newly formed bone tissue, and a loose fibrillar matrix with deposits of hemosiderin . Multinucleated giant cells were also found in the lesion . A giant cell lesion was diagnosed, with a brown tumor among the possible causes.
Blood tests after histology demonstrated elevated calcium (13.3 mg/dL) and parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations (920 pg/mL). Phosphorus was 1.9 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase was 227 U/L (normal range 30 to 100 U/L); the urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, bilirubin, uric acid, protein, albumin, globulin, serum aspartate aminotransferase, and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were all normal. Sodium was 139 mmol, and potassium was 5.5 mmol. Carcinoembryonic antigen was less than 1 µg/L, and serum immunoelectrophoresis was normal. The concentrations of IgG, IgA, and IgM were normal. This suggested the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism initially manifesting as a brown tumor of the maxilla. Postoperative explorations with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans and gadolinium infusion confirmed the existence of an underlying parathyroid adenoma in the upper left parathyroid gland as the cause of the condition. The patient was referred to the outpatient clinic of the Department of Endocrinology, at the University Hospital of Crete, for examination of her parathyroid function.