A 61-year-old Caucasian woman presented herself at the ophthalmology department of the University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium. She had woken up that morning with a frontal, right-sided headache, and a complete loss of vision of the right eye. She also mentioned that she could not feel whether the right eye was open or not. She had a past medical history of diffuse large B cell lymphoma treated with chemotherapy (R-CHOP) one year ago. She had no known history of cardiovascular events, a positive history for smoking, with a present use of 5 cigarettes a day. There was no use of medication, except for occasional use of Zolpidem.
Ophthalmological examination showed the best corrected visual acuity was light perception without localization for the right eye (OD) and 1.0 for the left eye (OS). Examination of the eye movements showed a unilateral elevation deficit of the right eye . The intra-ocular pressure measured with Goldmann applanation tonometry was 9.0 (OD) and 12.0 (OS). Slit lamp microscope examination of both anterior segments showed no abnormalities, as well as dilated fundoscopy. There was no sign of anisocoria, there was however a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) of the right eye. There was no dilatation lag. There was no ptosis and normal eyelid opening. Sensory supply of the V1-V3 area was intact, as was the corneal reflex. There was no temporal artery tenderness to palpation. There was no proptosis; Hertel exophthalmometry showed a symmetrical finding of 14 mm for each eye.
Laboratory findings including complete blood count, C-reactive protein, sedimentation rate, comprehensive metabolic panel, immunology auto-antibodies (antinuclear antibodies and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies), bacterial serology (borrelia, toxoplasma, Treponema pallidum) and viral serology (cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV, varicella-zoster virus), were all negative and/or unremarkable, with exception of an elevated angiotensin-converting enzyme count of 89 U/l (8-52 U/l).
Fluoresceine angiography was performed at presentation. It showed a remarkably slow and incomplete filling of both the choroidal and retinal vasculature of the right eye. Retinal filling only began one minute after intravenous injection of the fluorescein dye. Eight minutes after injection there was still an incomplete filling of the peripheral retinal vessels .
The patient was urgently referred to the colleagues at the neurology department. Brain imaging showed no abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) angiography of head and neck vessels revealed a proximal occlusion of the right common carotid artery (ACC), with distal filling through collaterals and a narrow internal carotid artery (ACI) , most likely because of low flow. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no sign of embolism or recent ischemia. The patient was admitted to the stroke unit a dual and antiplatelets therapy was started.
One week and 4 months after the initial event, a slight gradual improvement in visual acuity of the right eye to counting fingers and a partial recuperation of elevation of the right eye was found. Optic coherence tomography showed atrophy of the retinal layers four months after presentation.