A 64-year-old male presented to the emergency department complaining of jaundice and hepatalgia. He was a smoker (18 pack-years) with a body mass index (BMI) of 24,6. His medical history included arterial hypertension diagnosed several years earlier treated by angiotensin receptor blockers, and chronic renal failure with moderately decreased function.
On admission, the vital signs included heart rate of 110 beats per minute, blood pressure 114/76 mmHg, tachypnea with an oxygen saturation above 96% on room air. The patient was afebrile. The physical examination showed muco-cutaneous jaundice, associated with signs of right heart failure (jugular vein distention and hepatomegaly). Cardiac auscultation revealed a harsh, holosystolic murmur at the lower left sternal border. Lung auscultation was otherwise unremarkable. Upon questioning further, the patient reported an episode of severe chest pain lasting several hours, dating back 5 days.
An 18-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) performed on admission revealed a sinus rhythm, a right bundle branch block, with ST segment elevation in the anterior leads with necrosis Q waves, as well as reciprocal ST segment depression in the inferior and posterior leads. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a VSR measuring 15mm, with a left-right shunt, which was demonstrated on color Doppler by the presence of flow across the interventricular septum. Left ventricular (LV) systolic function was depressed with an ejection fraction of 40%. The anterior wall, interventricular septum and the left ventricular apex were all akinetic. The right ventricle (RV) is dilated with systolic function in dysfunction: RV systolic annular velocity (S’) at 8 cm/s, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) at 9 mm and tricuspid regurgitation with a pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 50mmHg. The right atrium is dilated, while the left atrium is normal. Laboratory analysis showed an elevated troponin T at 29 753 ng/L (normal range<50 ng/L). Additional blood tests showed a disturbed liver function. The results were as follows: total bilirubin = 35 mg/L, direct bilirubin = 24 mg/L, alkaline phosphatase = 275 U/L, AST = 7394 U/L (N: 5-34), ALT = 5355 U/L (N: 0-55), with a PT = 26% and INR = 2.78. the result of the admission arterial blood gaz analysis is normal.
Coronary angiography performed 4 hours after admission showed a total occlusion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) with TIMI grade 0 flow. The other arteries were without significant lesion. .
After discussion between cardiologists and cardiovascular surgeons, given that the patient already had a secondary complication of acute right heart failure, as well as the unavailability of circulatory support, a strategy of early surgical repair was chosen, as the choice of a delayed surgery could worsen the right heart failure. The decision was then made for immediate surgical repair on 1 day of his admission and 5 days after the infarction. The decision was to perform a surgical closure of the shunt and despite the myocardial necrosis and the acute hepatic insufficiency as well as the altered general state, we wanted to take advantage of the surgical repair of the septal rupture with a revascularisation of the anterior territory, since we considered that we could have a preserved viability in this territory. For this purpose a monotruncular bypass of the LAD is performed at the same time.
After placing the patient in supine position, induction of anesthesia was performed without incident. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed a 25 mm wide septal rupture without mitral regurgitation. The patient was approached through median sternotomy, and extra-pleural pericardiotomy is performed. Anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin was started with a dose of 3 mg/kg. Exploration showed dilated right and left cavities with ectasia of the left atrium. After establishing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) using aortic and bicaval cannulation, the closure of the VSR was started. The first step was to perform a vertical right anterior ventriculotomy allowing exploration of the VSR, which occupied the anterior 2/3 of the septoapical wall, which was weakened by ischemia up to the postero-external pillar of the mitral valve . The closure was achieved by a 0.6 mm PTFE (polytetrafluoroethylene) patch measuring 5 cm in diameter, fixed on the external side of the septal wall of the LV using 4-0 prolene, and by a second bovine pericardial patch of the same diameter which was fixed on the inner side of the septal wall of the LV . The ventriculotomy was closed by 2 Teflon strips reinforced by an external bovine pericardium patch. The second operative step consisted of bypassing the LAD using the left internal mammary artery, with the anastomosis performed on the LAD end-to-side.
The total duration of CPB was 150 minutes, and that of aortic clamping 103 minutes. Hemodynamics were stable under 5 µg/kg/minute of dobutamine. A postoperative TEE did not show a residual shunt. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit.
The day after the surgery, the patient was extubated and remained stable after successful withdrawal of dobutamine.The evolution was marked by the onset of confusion with asterixis, and biologically worsening of liver function (PT = 17%, factor V level = 19%). The brain imaging was normal. A laboratory panel for other causes of hepatitis was performed, including viral serologies and screening of acetaminophen, and all the investigations were negative. The abdominal ultrasound and Doppler tracing showed severe dilation of the portal vein with reversed flow, without signs of vein thrombosis. We concluded to the diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy in fulminant hepatic failure secondary to acute heart failure. The patient was put on lactulose, with no noticeable improvement. Unfortunately, the patient died 3 days later.