A 29-year-old Asian man who had undergone surgical debridement at another hospital for a perianal abscess 5 days earlier was referred to the emergency room of Xiamen Chang Gung Hospital. The patient presented with continuous severe perianal and scrotal pain, scrotal swelling, and high fever (39.2 °C) of 3 days’ duration that had been aggravated for 1 hour. The patient was mildly obese, described himself as otherwise quite healthy, and had never been admitted to a hospital previously. He reported no significant chronic medical history, such as primary hypertension, any type of heart disease, disturbed microcirculation, peripheral neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, an impaired immune system, malignancies, leukemia, long-term administration of corticosteroids, liver cirrhosis, renal failure, urinary tract infection, or hemodialysis. The patient also reported no history of infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis, any type of hepatitis, or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The patient’s medical history revealed no trauma, blood transfusion, other surgical procedures, or other serious event. He had not lived in an epidemic area and had no contact history of toxicity or radioactive exposure. The patient denied a family history of any inherited cancer. He did not smoke or consume alcohol and reported no other unhealthy lifestyle behaviors. The patient was a businessman by occupation and traveled for business most of the time.
A general physical examination on admission revealed that the patient was hypotensive (blood pressure, 92/63 mmHg) and tachycardic (heart rate, 117 beats/minute). No positive signs were found during the neurological, cardiopulmonary, and abdominal examinations. Neither pain around the kidney area with percussion nor tenderness along the bilateral ureteral approach was found. No bulging, tenderness, or mass was evident in the bladder area. A genital examination revealed a normal distribution of pubic hair and normal penile development without deformity, prepuce, penile ulceration, tenderness, induration, or neoplasms. No ectopia or secretions were found at the urethral orifice. A perianal abscess and hemorrhoids were identified upon full perineal examination (a previous surgical wound with obviously inflammatory secretions was detected 2.0 cm from the anal edge and approximately 1.5 × 2.5 cm in size), and the patient’s rectum was noted to be very tender. Furthermore, the scrotum was gangrenous with extensive cellulitis of the perineum and bilateral inguinal area and an increased skin temperature. No clear findings were obtained by palpation of the bilateral testis and epididymis.
Following a rectal examination, the patient rapidly became sweaty and unwell, and his scrotum became blue, swollen, and tense, with erythema extending into both groins. Crepitations between the skin and fascia were palpable. The patient noted a concomitant deterioration in his urinary stream and a degree of hesitancy. His white blood cell, red blood cell, and platelet counts were 23.1 × 109/L, 4.11 × 1012/L, and 112 × 109/L, respectively. Upon admission, his hemoglobin was 123 g/L, his ST-segment elevation was 84.0%, and his C-reactive protein level was 275.55 mg/L. The results of serology for both liver and renal function were normal. His coagulation and electrolyte profiles were normal. Computed tomography of the lower abdomen and pelvis (Additional files and ) revealed extensive emphysema around the testicles, epididymis, and perineal subcutaneous tissues. A diagnosis of FG complicating a perianal abscess was made.
The patient underwent aggressive fluid administration, hemodynamic support, and intravenous antibiotic therapy. He was treated with immediate surgical debridement under general anesthesia . Tissue cultures were obtained to isolate the responsible microorganisms. The necrotic skin in the scrotum and the perianal region was evacuated into an open drainage area using three incisions, leaving both testes exposed . There was no damage to the testicles, spermatic cords, or external sphincter.
Blood and aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures were performed. Microorganisms were not found in the blood cultures. Tissue samples taken during the first two debridements revealed that the microbiological etiology of FG was polymicrobial. Aerobic Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus haemolyticus, and Escherichia coli as well as anaerobic peptostreptococci and Prevotella corporis were detected. Preoperative antibiotic treatment with combined broad-spectrum antibiotics (metronidazole 0.5 g every 8 hours and ceftriaxone 1 g every 12 hours for 6 days) was initiated and later adjusted to the culture sensitivity of the microbial isolates. The patient was therefore intravenously administered levofloxacin (0.3 g every 12 hours for 5 days).
The patient’s white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level gradually decreased. On the third postoperative day, his white blood cell, red blood cell, and platelet counts were 6.6 × 109/L, 4.54 × 1012/L, and 190 × 109/L, respectively. His hemoglobin was 135 g/L, his ST-segment elevation was 64.0%, and his C-reactive protein level was 100.24 mg/L. He had no fever thereafter.
Local wound care was administered using moist gauze dressing (i.e., normal saline) and was changed three times per day until healthy granulation tissue was observed. The patient underwent two subsequent surgical debridements. His infection gradually subsided, his gas gangrene resolved completely, and good granulation was present 1 week after surgery. Because both testicles were severely exposed, they were transpositioned into the scrotum on the eighth postoperative day. Split-skin closures (3-0 nylon suture) and open drainage from the scrotum and perianal area were subsequently performed . The patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day (with antibiotics adjusted to oral administration of levofloxacin 0.1 g twice daily).
The patient attended the outpatient department four times for follow-up. The bilateral scrotal wounds healed, and the stiches were removed on the 18th postoperative day (the first follow-up). The viability of both testicles was confirmed using Doppler ultrasound on the 21st postoperative day (the second follow-up) and at 3 and 10 months after discharge (the third and fourth follow-up examinations). The open drainage area from the scrotum and perianal area had healed at 10 months after discharge. The patient was healthy as usual, with no complaints or illness. His complete cell count and serum parameters of liver and kidney function were normal.