A 56-year-old woman underwent non-sedation gastrointestinal endoscopy for early cancer screening. It was the first gastrointestinal endoscopy for the patient. She had a sharp abdominal pain approximately 2 h after completion of the procedure once she had arrived home.
She presented with severe nausea and vomiting 2 h after the procedure. The patient did not have obvious abdominal pain immediately after the procedure. The pain was predominantly in the upper and middle abdomen, was persistent, severe and with no radiation. Pain was accompanied by nausea and non-projectile vomiting of stomach contents. Flatulence was reduced. The patient had a mild fever without chills, diarrhea, chest tightness, chest pain or any other discomfort.
Her past medical history included hepatitis B. She had no history of alcoholism, gallstones or pancreatitis.
Her birth history and feeding history were uneventful. There was no history of similar illness in the family.
On initial evaluation, vital signs revealed a temperature of 37.3°C, pulse rate of 77 bpm, blood pressure of 147/77 mmHg; and respiration rate of 15breaths/min. The patient was conscious and oriented. No yellowing of the skin or eyes was observed. Both lungs were clear, no dry or moist crackles (rales) were heard. The patient had tenderness in the upper and middle abdomen, no rebound pain or muscle tension was noted. Murphy’s sign, McBurney’s sign, and shifting dullness were all negative, and bowel sounds were heard at a rate of 3/min. No edema in the lower extremities was observed. No pathological signs were found.
Laboratory examination results were as follows: CRP 61.6 mg/L; white blood cells 15.5 x 109 cells/L; amylase level 1022 IU/L (normal 23-184 IU/L); lipase level 4264 U/dL (normal 1-35 U/dL); arterial blood gas findings pH 7.36, HCO3 22 mmol/L; hepatobiliary enzyme and blood lipids were normal; serum calcium 2.0 mmol/L; hepatitis B (HB) surface antigen positive, HBeAg positive, HB core antibody positive; erythrocyte sedimentation rate 95 mm/h.
The patient's upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was normal. A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography scan after admission suggested acute pancreatitis with peripancreatic fluid collection . Two incidental renal cysts and uterine fibroids were also detected. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed no structural changes and no gallstones in the pancreaticobiliary duct system .