We present the case of a 69-year-old male who arrived at the Emergency Department with right side acute scrotal pain. No history of trauma, recent sexual exposure, or major medical disease was documented, with only the symptom of intermittent diarrhea in recent months being reported. Vital signs were as follows: body temperature of 38°C, pulse rate of 72 per minute, respiration rate of 19 per minute, blood pressure of 76/54 mm Hg. Physical examination revealed that the pain was located on the right side scrotum and it extended to the ipsilateral inguinal region without perineum involved. The patient's hemoglobin level was 12.7 g/dL, the white blood cell count was 12,240 /μL, and the C reactive protein (CRP) level was 14.55 mg/dL. Scrotum sonography demonstrated some bright spots and hypoechoic areas . Acute epididymo-orchitis with abscess and gas formation was impressed. The patient underwent right unilateral orchiectomy and debridement. A pus culture showed Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium spp. The patient was discharged after adequate antibiotics with ceftriaxone and metronidazole at stable wound condition. However, recurrent right side scrotal pain was noted with purulent discharge from the previous surgical wound after 1 month, which pathogen proved as mixed organisms including B fragilis, Clostridium spp., and Klebsiella pneumonia. Digital rectum examination demonstrated moderate enlarged prostate with induration, without palpable rectal mass. Due to inexplicable clinical features, CT of the pelvis and scrotum was performed, which demonstrated a heterogeneous density of the prostate with central low attenuation, whole wall-thickening of the rectum, and enlargement of lymph nodes . Advanced-stage rectal cancer with prostate abscess was assumed. The colonoscopy showed a tumor lesion with annular type 5 cm above the anal verge , then a biopsy was performed and the pathologic analysis confirmed adenocarcinoma of the rectum. The immediate tumor markers showed carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 9.40 ng/mL and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) of 21.30 U/mL. The positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed no abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake throughout whole body region and the presumed case clinical stage of rectum adenocarcinoma was T4N1M0. The suprapubic cystostomy for urinary diversion and T-loop colostomy were performed for infection control. Subsequently, the patient received neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy with high dosage 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin. Finally, he underwent an exploratory laparotomy with abdominoperineal resection and radical prostatectomy. Pathologic analysis revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of colonic origin with direct invasion into the bilateral prostatic tissue . The final stage was ypT4bN1bM0. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with oral form capecitabine until the present time. The recent tumor marker results after resection of rectum tumor were a CEA level of 1.16 ng/mL and a CA19-9 value of 11.36 U/mL. No evidence of tumor recurrence was found by imaging study.
Written informed consent to publish the case report was provided by the patient, and the consent procedure was approved by the Ethics Committee of Tri-Service General Hospital.