A 52-year-old female presented with swelling in the neck, in the thyroid region, of 3 months duration. She complained of difficulty in swallowing and pain in the swelling for the last fifteen days. Clinically, she was euthyroid and there was no past history of exposure to radiation. Routine blood examination and serum chemistry revealed no abnormalities. Serum T3, T4 and TSH levels were normal. Renal function and liver function tests were normal.
There was no family history of thyroid disease. She was a known hypertensive on treatment. On examination a 3 × 2 cm lump was palpable in the lower part of neck, more so on the right side. This swelling moved with deglutition. No lymph nodes were palpable in the neck. No clinical evidence of abnormal parathyroid activity, Cushing syndrome, subcutaneous nodules or mucosal neuromas was present.
Computerized tomography (CT) scan neck showed a 3.5 × 2.5 cm hyper dense lesion in the right lobe of the thyroid without any associated lymphadenopathy. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was suggestive of a poorly differentiated carcinoma. On laryngoscopic examination, bilateral vocal cords were mobile. Near total thyroidectomy was done without lymph node dissection. Post-operative period was uneventful. Unfortunately, serum calcitonin level was not estimated preoperatively but postoperative serum calcium and calcitonin levels were within normal limits. Thyroid weighed 24 gm and thyroid capsule was intact. Cut surface showed a single nodule measuring 3.1 × 2.2 × 1.1 cm within the right lobe of thyroid. Nodule was partially encapsulated but well demarcated from adjacent normal appearing thyroid. Cut section of nodule was soft homogeneously black in color with grey white foci . No satellite nodule was seen in the rest of the thyroid. Lymph nodes were not found in the specimen.
Tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, routinely processed and paraffin embedded. Five micron thick sections were cut for hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemistry. Immunohistochemical staining was done by streptavidin-biotin peroxidase complex method and a panel of antibodies was used to characterize the tumor. These include thyroglobulin (dil 1:50), thyroid transcription factor (TTF, dil 1:100), synaptophysin (dil 1:50), carcinoembryonic antigen(CEA, dil 1:100), melan A(dil 1: 100), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA, dil 1:50), pancytokeratin (CK; dil 1:100), cytokeratin 19 (dil 1:100), S-100 protein (dil 1:100), vimentin (dil 1:100), chromogranin (dil 1:50), calcitonin (dil 1:50), HMB 45 (dil:100), p53 (dil 1:50), bcl-2 (dil 1:50) and MIB-1 (dil 1:50). All antibodies were obtained from M/s Dako Patts, Denmark except p53 and TTF which were procured from M/s Novocastra UK and M/s Neomarker, USA respectively. High temperature antigen retrieval using microwave was carried out by immersing the sections in 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0) and heating inside a 750 watt microwave oven in full power for 30 minutes except for chromogranin, HMB-45, S-100 and EMA.
MIB-LI was calculated as percentage positive nuclei in the highest labeled areas. For electron microscopy, the tissue was fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, post-fixed with 1% osmic acid and embedded in epoxy resin. Routine thick sections were cut to select representative area for ultra-thin sectioning. Ultra-thin sections were double stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined under a transmission electron microscope (TEM, Morgagni 268, Holland). Microscopic examination showed a cellular tumor arranged in solid sheets, nests and trabecular pattern with few residual normal thyroid follicles . Tumor cells were polygonal, round to oval, at places showing spindling. Cellular outlines were indistinct with moderate to abundant amphophilic cytoplasm. Nuclei were vesicular and showed moderate pleomorphism, multi-nucleation and conspicuous nucleoli. Frequent mitoses were present but necrosis was not seen. Scant perivascular eosinophilic amorphous material was present which was reactive to Congo red stain and showed apple green birefringence on polarization. Brown-black, coarse intracytoplasmic pigment was present in the tumor cells which bleached with Masson-Fontana stain and it was negative for iron stain. Melanin was present in all types of tumor cells. Tumor cells showed diffuse immunopositivity for calcitonin, HMB-45, carcinoembryonic antigen, synaptophysin, chromogranin, vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen but focal paranuclear dot-like positivity for cytokeratin , and were negative for thyroglobulin, S-100, melan-A and TTF . Electron microscopy revealed abundant compound melanosomes, premelanosomes in various stages of melanogenesis and sparse membrane bound dense core neurosecretory granules measuring 50–200 nm along with intermediate filaments . Patient was discharged on fourth post operative day and was doing well.
Follow up: However in the follow up, she developed local recurrence twice after 10 months and 18 months of operation in the soft tissue of neck. Serum calcitonin levels were within normal range. Excision of recurrent nodules showed medullary carcinoma without pigment production. After 3 months of second recurrence, she developed multiple nodules at the same site and surgical excision was done in another hospital. After this surgery she had multiple metastases to the scalp and died after 24 months of first surgery. Mutational analysis for ret oncogene could not be done.