The first patient was a 44-year-old man whose cardiological history started with the diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, which required dual chamber implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)CD implantation after development of severe atrioventricular block complicated by ventricular fibrillation. His family history was significant for cardiovascular disorders, as his mother passed away from stroke at 62 years of age. Review of past history showed arterial hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy, as well as scleroderma (however, this last diagnosis wasn’t confirmed buy subsequent clinical or laboratory data).
Two years later, the patient was admitted for an ischemic stroke and anticoagulation (warfarin) was started after evidence of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Serial cardiological assessment documented a progressive decline of left ventricle systolic function with an end-stage evolution over time. Subsequently, two episodes of ventricular tachycardia occurred, requiring transcatheter tissue ablation. At 69 years of age, urinalysis revealed proteinuria with normal serum creatinine. These clinical data led to suspicion of cardiac FD: genetic testing revealed a pathogenic missense mutation NM_000169.2: c.486G > T (p.W162C) in GLA. His lyso-GB3 levels were supportive of the diagnosis (73.13 ng/ml, normal values being < 2.7 ng/ml) and α-galactosidase A activity was undetectable (< 0.8 µmol/L/h [limit of detection]).
Cornea verticillata and angiokeratoma were not evident at dermatological and ophthalmological evaluation. From a neurological point of view, physical examination was unremarkable except for diffusely weak, but symmetric deep tendon reflexes. The patient reported an episode of migratory articular pain without definite paresthesia at 47 years of age, following a stressful event. At 56 years of age he suffered from transient monocular vision loss lasting several minutes, which was interpreted as a transient ischemic attack. A subsequent head CT scan demonstrated two ischemic lesions affecting the right thalamus and centrum semiovale. We performed skin biopsy searching for Gb3 accumulations in skin samples by an immunofluorescent indirect (IF) technique which were not found. ERT was started at 70 years of age without side effects.
Unfortunately, cardiomyopathy progress towards severe left ventricle systolic dysfunction with heart failure, as diagnosed from around 70 years of age. The patient remained clinically stable (New York Heart Association class IIb), until the age of 73 years when he was admitted due to acute-on-chronic heart failure. Long-term mechanical assistance with left ventricular assist device was deemed unfeasible by a multidisciplinary care team due to an unfavorable risk-benefit ratio. and the patient passed away a month after admission due to refractory heart failure.