On November 24, 2018, a 56-year-old female patient, 2 years after breast cancer surgery, presented with persistent elevation of carbohydrate antigen 15-3 (CA15-3) for 1 year, accompanied by abdominal distention and difficulty defecating for one month.
In October 2016, the patient underwent a physical examination that resulted in the identification of a breast mass. Subsequently, after the excluding surgical contraindications, the patient underwent a modified radical mastectomy for right breast cancer with sentinel lymph node dissection at our hospital in December 2016. Postoperative pathology results showed infiltrating lobular carcinoma of the right breast (maximum diameter, 3 cm; sentinel lymph node metastasis, 2/6). Immunohistochemical (IHC) results showed that the expression status of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) were positive at 90% and 5%, respectively. The expression status of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) was negative (1+) and Ki-67 was low (3%). According to American Joint Committee on Cancer 8th edition staging and Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology 2021 edition guidelines, the patient was diagnosed with ILC of the right breast, and postoperative staging was: pT2N1M0, IIB, Luminal B type (HER-2 negative). After surgery, docetaxel combined with cyclophosphamide adjuvant chemotherapy was administered for four cycles, and followed by local radiotherapy and letrozole (2.5 mg qd) as maintenance therapy.
Until July 10, 2017, the CA15-3 Level was 26.44 U/mL (electro-chemiluminescence immunoassay detection, reference range 0.0–25.0 U/mL), but the patient’s CEA and CA125 levels were within normal ranges. Imaging examinations, including chest computed tomography (CT) and abdominal, breast, axillary, and supraclavicular lymph node ultrasonography, showed no abnormalities. In October 2017, the CA15-3 Level was found to be increased again than before. However, positron emission tomography-computed tomography-CT (PET-CT) findings showed no obvious abnormal glucose metabolism foci. Subsequently, the patient continued treatment with Letrozole. During a routine follow-up, levels of CA15-3 continued to rise up to 61.10 U/mL in April 2018 ; however, other tumor markers were not shown to be abnormal. Conversely, contrast-enhanced CT neck, chest, and abdomen scans and bone scans showed no obvious abnormalities. While breast cancer-related lesions indicating recurrence and metastasis were not identified on imaging, we could not completely rule this out. Subsequently, endocrine therapy was switched from letrozole to exemestane.
In July 2018, digestive system clinical symptoms such as eating less, fullness of the abdomen, and fatigue appeared, and the patient’s CA15-3 Levels still showed an upward trend. The patient had been reviewed regularly for the previous breast cancer with no obvious abnormality found during follow-up. On November 5, 2018, the patient’s fullness of the abdomen is worse than before. Then, the patient underwent a colonoscopy, which revealed multiple lesions in the colon. Pathologic findings showed a heterogeneous cell mass with a tendency toward poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, suggesting a source of breast cancer. In addition, IHC analysis showed GATA-3 positive and CK20 and CDX negative results. According to the above results, the patient was diagnosed with gastrointestinal metastasis of breast cancer. On November 24, 2018, the patient came to our hospital again, and the pathological consultation results showed small round tumor cells observed in the ileocecum, transverse colon, and sigmoid colon and in the propria layer of the rectum and focal mucosal muscle, suggesting metastasis secondary to ILC of the breast. IHC analysis showed ER (40%+), PR (5%+), HER-2 (2+, no amplification by FISH), and Ki-67 (20%).
Aside from a > 20-year history of chronic viral hepatitis B, the patient's past medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
Menopause started at age 50 years, and the patient denied any family history of cancer or any relevant genetic history.
Physical examination findings on admission were as follows: Temperature, 36.4 °C; heart rate, 61 beats/min; blood pressure, 114/69 mmHg; and Karnofsky Performance Scale score, 80. No systemic involvement or enlargement of the superficial lymph nodes was observed. A surgical scar was observed on the right chest wall. The abdomen was slightly distended, with no tenderness or rebound pain, and the ribs overlying the liver and spleen were not tender on palpation nor swollen. Mobile dullness was negative, and there was no hyperactivity or weakening of bowel sounds.
Pathology results indicated small round tumor cells in the ileocecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon, propria layer of the rectum, and the focal mucosal muscle, suggesting metastasis secondary to ILC of the breast. IHC analysis showed ER (40%+), PR (5%+), HER-2 (2+, no amplification by FISH), and Ki-67 (20%). Blood analysis and biochemistry analysis showed no obvious abnormalities. However, both CA15-3 and CA125 Levels were elevated, with values of 118.50 U/mL and 63.55 U/mL, respectively.
Endoscopic examination suggested multiple lesions in the ileocecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and rectum. Enhanced CT scans of the neck, chest and abdomen showed no obvious abnormalities.