A 63-year-old male patient, a teacher, presented with swallowing difficulty lasting for a week and had a history of anterior neck trauma caused by bamboo penetration 6 mo before.
The patient had undergone debridement and extraction of a bamboo section in a primary care hospital. The wound healed without auxiliary examination and treatment , and the patient did not complain of subsequent discomfort. A month ago, he had abnormal sensations in his neck and heel, but no dysphagia. The laryngoscopy performed at the local county hospital did not show any abnormalities, so no other auxiliary examinations or treatments were performed.
A week ago, the patient presented with marked dysphagia and could only ingest liquid food. Gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy revealed a dark-brown foreign body in the lateral wall of the esophagus. In the primary hospitals, attempts to remove the foreign body with a flexible GI endoscope were unsuccessful because the foreign body was embedded in the lateral wall of the esophageal mucosa, which could cause further trauma if the foreign body was forcibly removed.
On admission, we performed neck and chest computed tomography (CT) and found that two foreign bodies had penetrated the esophagus from the superior mediastinum. In addition, each layer of the esophagus was penetrated diagonally, and the embedded foreign bodies were adjacent to the left common carotid and left subclavian arteries above the aortic arch . The laboratory data were judged as normal after multidisciplinary discussion among the anesthesiologist, gastroenterologist, and thoracic surgeon. Rigid esophagoscopy combined with angle endoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia .
A rigid esophagoscope was inserted in the esophagus. However, because the rigid esophagoscope was significantly long, an angle ureteroscope was inserted in the rigid esophagoscope to reveal the foreign body impaction in the lateral wall of the esophagus from the esophageal mucosa 23 cm from the incisor .