The patient was a 57-year-old woman who consulted a clinic complaining of melena, intermittent abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting that had persisted for about 3 years. Six months before her presentation, she underwent segmental resection of the jejunum for acute peritonitis due to spontaneous jejunal perforation. A blood test revealed that her serum immunoreactive gastrin (IRG) level was 12,037 pg/mL (normal range 40–140 pg/mL), and an abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a hypervascular tumor of 23 mm in diameter in the segment 5 (S5) region of the liver . The tumor showed hypointensity on T2-weighted imaging and hyperintensity on diffusion-weighted imaging using abdominal contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . A biopsy of the mass revealed a diagnosis of gastrinoma. Considering retrospectively, the previous jejunal perforation might have been caused by jejunal peptic ulcer due to excessive gastric acid secretion in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. Based on the suspicion of metastatic gastrinoma from other intra-abdominal organs, several imaging studies were performed. On somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS), only the hepatic tumor was visualized . An endoscopic ultrasound did not reveal any tumor in the pancreas. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multiple submucosal tumor-like lesions in the first and second portions of the duodenum . A few endoscopic biopsies of the duodenal mucosa and submucosa were performed, but a pathological examination of the specimens was negative for malignant cells and could not diagnose hyperplasia of Brunner’s glands, too. The patient’s serum IRG level, despite using proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), increased to 13,339 pg/mL. During the first selective arterial secretagogue injection (SASI) test , an injection of calcium gluconate (85 mEq) was used to successively stimulate the gastroduodenal artery, the superior mesenteric artery, the right hepatic artery, and the splenic artery. Subsequently, blood samples were collected from the right hepatic vein at time points of preinjection, as well as 20, 40, 60, and 90 s after the injection of calcium solution. The serum IRG level at 40 s after the calcium stimulation rose from 6427 to 79,160 pg/mL, only after the injection into the right hepatic artery, and not after any injections into the other arteries. Therefore, it was concluded that the gastrinoma was located only in the liver.
Other endocrine examinations, such as serum levels of calcium, parathyroid hormone, prolactin, growth hormone, insulin, and glucagon, were all within normal ranges. Thus, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) was excluded. Serum levels of tumor markers were within normal ranges, except for a slight elevation in cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, at 52.2 U/mL (normal range 0–37.0 U/mL).
The results of the second SASI test, which was performed during the administration of a PPI and a somatostatin analog (octreotide acetate), were different from the first one . Specifically, the serum IRG level was elevated from 56 to 130 pg/mL at 40 s after the injection of calcium into the gastroduodenal artery, as well as into the proper hepatic artery (from 120 to 220 pg/mL), although the serum IRG level of all samples taken at the second SASI test was only about 1% of the serum IRG level of samples taken at the first SASI test .
Based on the results of the first SASI test, primary hepatic gastrinoma was initially suspected. However, at that time, we had interpreted the results of the second SASI test as that gastrinoma might be located in the upper part of the duodenum or the pancreas, because the serum IRG level was elevated from 56 to 130 pg/mL at 40 s after the injection of calcium into the gastroduodenal artery, although the serum IRG level of all samples taken at the second SASI test was only about 1% of the serum IRG level of samples taken at the first SASI test. Besides, the upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed multiple submucosal tumor-like lesions in the first and second portions of the duodenum which could not be differentiated from the duodenal neuroendocrine tumors endoscopically, although pathological examination of the biopsied specimens was negative for neuroendocrine tumor. On the other hand, in the pancreas, any tumor had been detected by either endoscopic ultrasound examination or CT or MRI. So, we planned to resect, with great care, the total duodenum without resecting any pancreatic tissue.
Consequently, we performed an anterior segmentectomy of the liver and a pancreas-preserving total duodenectomy. There was a solid mass measuring 13 mm in diameter in the resected liver tissue , and there were multiple submucosal tumor-like lesions in the duodenum . Histopathological examination of the liver mass revealed a gastrinoma . Tumor-like lesions in the duodenum were diagnosed as hyperplastic Brunner’s glands, and immunohistological staining with anti-gastrin serum did not reveal any microgastrinomas in the duodenum .
On the first postoperative day, the patient’s serum IRG level decreased to 26 pg/mL. Since then, her serum IRG levels have remained within the normal range. For 4 years postoperatively, the patient has had no ulcerogenic symptoms in the absence of using a PPI, and no recurrence of the hepatic tumor has been detected on CT or MRI.