A 15-year-old Igbo female from Enugu, Nigeria, presented in our clinic with her grandmother, with a history of asymmetry of the breasts noticed 4 years ago. The right breast was noticed to be gradually increasing in size, to its present adult size, with no corresponding change in the size of the left breast. There was no preceding history of trauma, and no nipple discharge. The obvious asymmetry had been a constant source of anxiety and embarrassment for the patient, and also for her caregiver. They had sought treatment at various health facilities but presented to our clinic eventually. The past medical was not remarkable, and she was not on any previous medications. She achieved menarche at 13 years of age. Both parents are dead; she lives with the grandmother, and they are of low socioeconomic status. At presentation, they had intense fears of the need for a plastic surgical correction of the left breast.
On examination, she was apprehensive and visibly self-conscious; her vital signs were stable with temperature of 36.8 °C, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute and blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg. She had marked breast asymmetry, with hypoplasia of the left breast of SMR 11 , while the right breast had a staging of SMR V. In addition, we noted a large, hyperpigmented patch extending from the left axilla and covering the left anterior chest wall, and spreading posteriorly. This had been present since birth, and had not been given much attention since it was not associated with pain or other asymmetric skeletal abnormalities. Neurological examination did not reveal any abnormality. Abdominal ultrasound and skeletal radiographic imaging were unremarkable.
Based on her symptoms, diagnosis of Becker’s nevus syndrome was made. The diagnosis of Becker’s nevus syndrome is mostly clinical, based on the presence of a Becker’s nevus with ipsilateral breast hypoplasia or hypoplastic defects of the muscle, skin, or skeleton. In our patient, there was a Becker’s nevus with ipsilateral breast hypoplasia. This syndrome, belonging to the class of epidermal nevus syndromes, is very rare, and is usually benign. She was placed on spironolactone tablets (50 mg daily). After 6 months of therapy, there was an improvement in the size of the hypoplastic breast; increased from SMR 11 to SMR 111 , and her fears were allayed.