A 41-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital complaining of diarrhea immediately after oral intake (10 bowel movements per day for the last 10 months), weight loss (15 kg) and weakness. He reported a partial gastrectomy and gastrojejunostomy due to a duodenal ulcer 18 years prior to his current presentation. On physical examination our patient looked emaciated and dehydrated. Data from laboratory tests performed on admission revealed he had hypoproteinemia and hypoalbuminemia. Parenteral nutrition was started in order to improve our patients' nutritional status. On colonoscopy, the endoscope was able to pass into the remnant stomach through an abnormal fistula that occurred in the transverse colon . Biopsy specimens of the tissue surrounding the fistula were taken and pathology results revealed no malignancies. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination was the performed, revealing a remnant stomach with a Billroth II gastrojejunostomy and a fistula located close to the anastomosis leading to the transverse colon. An upper gastrointestinal series confirmed the existence of an abnormal passage between the remnant stomach and transverse colon .
When our patient's nutritional status had improved, a laparoscopic surgical resection was performed successfully. Trocars were placed according to laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy . Intra-operatively, moderate adhesions between the remnant stomach, transverse colon, and proximal jejunum were identified, as well as a retrocolic gastrojejunostomy . A radical one-stage laparoscopic en bloc resection was performed, involving partial gastrectomy, segmental resection of the jejunum with conversion into a Roux-en-Y anastomosis and segmental resection of the transverse colon with end-to-end colocolostomy through a small laparotomy (5 cm). The operation duration was 260 minutes and the blood loss was 50 g. Pathology results revealed no evidence of malignant cells within the fistula . Our patient's post-operative course was uneventful and oral nutrition was resumed on the seventh post-operative day. Three months after the operation our patient is well and his body weight has increased by 5 kg.