A 43-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the Department of Internal Medicine at the University Teaching Hospital in Cagliari. His clinical manifestations started in 2002 with a sudden onset of neurological symptoms. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of lesions was consistent with a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Our patient, employed as a prison officer, was not deemed fit for work. In 2003, he was admitted to a small community hospital where he was also diagnosed with hypertension, polycythemia and intermittent claudication. Finally, in 2006, he was referred to the Multiple Sclerosis Centre at Cagliari University where a vascular origin was postulated for his neurological symptoms. Tests carried out on fibrocalcific atherosclerotic lesions accounted for the concomitant presence of systemic hypertension, polycythemia, brain injury and peripheral arterial occlusion. His electrocardiogram (ECG) findings were normal, although due to a compromised limb function, an exercise ECG could not be performed. Ethical reasons also dissuaded us from performing a coronary angiograph.
His family history for cardiovascular events was negative. A brain MRI revealed mild cortical atrophy with bilateral lacunar ischemic lesions and gliosis in his cerebral white matter, mainly in the semi-oval center and the corona radiata . The presence of extensive arterial damage with bilateral atherosclerotic lesions was revealed using color Doppler ultrasound. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) angiography of his aorta and lower limbs showed widespread fibrocalcific atherosclerotic lesions . Both his renal arteries and iliac branches were affected by severe stenosis (70% to 85%). His tibial arteries were occluded, preventing us from examining parts of his legs. A plaque determining a 50% reduction in his left carotid gauge was also revealed using color Doppler ultrasound. Blood tests showed normal serum levels for lipids and glucose, and his systemic inflammatory markers were all within normal ranges . Common thrombophilic conditions and markers of immunological diseases all yielded negative findings. Infection markers for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), toxoplasmosis, herpes I, II, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) were also negative, but a low titer of HCV-ribonucleic acid (RNA) was found.
As our patient showed negative results for conventional risk factors for atherosclerosis, we considered the possibility that the disease was related to HCV infection. However, no virus was detected in his lymphocytes, monocytes and macrophages. These findings, together with a suspected abnormal response to infective stimuli, prompted us to investigate our patient's immune cell reactivity. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a Gram-pathogen considered to be a potential contributor to the development of atherosclerotic plaque even at extremely low serum concentrations [,], was used to evaluate his macrophage response. An abnormal reactivity of macrophages to LPS, exacerbated by our patient's own serum, was found; in fact this reaction mainly caused foam cell formation rather than pro-inflammatory cytokine production . Neither LPS nor our patient's serum were capable of reproducing similar effects on macrophages in healthy subjects. In addition to the role played by viruses and other unknown factors, these findings suggested the possibility that our patient's macrophages were unusually susceptible to infective stimuli.
Our patient was prescribed the following: interferon-gamma therapy was suspended to avoid its adverse effects; atenolol 10 mg/day; amlodipine 10 mg/day; cardio-aspirin 100 mg/day; lansoprazole 30 mg/day; allopurinol 300 μg/day; escitalopram 10 mg/day; and therapeutic bleeding about once a month.
HCV mRNA was first detected in 2006, the titer progressively increased but the criterion for interferon therapy was only reached in 2007. Unfortunately, the therapy was withdrawn because of the severe adverse effects observed shortly after its administration (aplastic myelosis, behavioral disturbance with depression, neurasthenia and anorexia). As our patient's lipids and systemic inflammatory markers were normal, it was not possible to prescribe conventional therapy to counteract the progression of his atherosclerosis. The disease is still worsening (the arterial tree has the appearance of being coated with wax) concomitantly with the increase in his HCV titer.