A 29-year-old G2P1L1 (previous NVD) woman with a gestational age of 11 weeks and 6 days and one prior childbirth (2 years prior to the current pregnancy) with the diagnosis of cystic hygroma introduced herself to the labor ward at 10 p.m. on May 19th, 2021 for legal abortion. She had no remarkable medical history except hypothyroidism. Apart from consuming levothyroxine 50 mcg (every day other than Fridays) for hypothyroidism, she reported no current medications.
Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg, heart rate of 80 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, temperature of 37°C, and oxygen saturation of 98% in room air. At the time of hospitalization, the patient was conscious and had no dyspnea. The heart sounds were normal with a regular rhythm, and no murmur was found. In lung auscultation, no remarkable finding was detected. Vaginal exam indicated no pathological findings. Uterus fundal height was 12 weeks. No vaginal bleeding was seen and the cervix (CX) was firm. Transvaginal ultrasound showed that the nuchal translucency (NT) was 8 mm which is more than normal size.
Cystic hygroma measuring 8 mm × 20 mm was observed in the neck area. Diffuse generalized edema was seen in the fetus, which favored generalized hydrops fetalis. The pregnancy had a poor prognosis and the length of the cervix was 31 mm.
The laboratory examination results before any interventions were as follows: the CBC (WBC: 12.9, RBC: 4.55, Hb: 13.2 g/dl, HCT: 38.7%, Platelet: 387, Neutrophil: 74, Lymphocyte: 22, Monocyte: 2, Eosinophil: 2, MCHC: 34 g/dl, MCV: 85, PT: 12.5 seconds, INR: 1, PTT: 35 seconds, MCH: 29 pg, ESR: first hour: 22 mm/h, Urea: 17 mg/dl, Cr: 0.6 mg/dl).
The Obstetrician presumed a diagnosis of cystic hygroma and treated her with misoprostol 200 mg vaginally in the admission day at 8:30 p.m. Three hours later, at 11:30 p.m. our patient received 400 more milligrams of misoprostol (200 mg sublingual, 200 mg vaginal). In the next day, at 7:45 a.m. another 400 mg of misoprostol (200 mg sublingual, 200 mg vaginal) were prescribed for her.
After 1 hour and 45 minutes of the last intravaginal placement of misoprostol, the patient developed bending and a mild Cyanosis of fingers. We asked for checking her Ca, P. The laboratory results were as below: Ca: 10 mg/dl, P: 4.5 mg/dl. Additionally, she showed tachycardia with pulse rate of 140 beats/min. Her O2 saturation decreased to 78% for a minute and then, after receiving O2 nasal, it increased to 98%. But, due to detection of tachycardia, cardiac consultation was requested for the patient.
These symptoms began after the last intravaginal administration of misoprostol. At this time, the patient had a miscarriage because of which she lost the fetus and placenta and she had no heavy bleeding or abnormal bleeding.
After that, the patient had been referred to a cardiologist for cardiac monitoring by performing D-dimer test, echocardiography, and electrocardiogram (ECG). Echocardiography showed ejection fraction (EF): 55%, normal right ventricular (RV) size which showed that patient was not at risk of any clots or massive pulmonary embolism (PE). The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia . Therefore, the patient was hospitalized with a possible diagnosis of embolism in the cardiac care unit (CCU). The cardiologist administered heparin drip 5000-unit IV stat, and 1000 unit/h heparin and asked for CT- angiography and D-Dimer test (Pt, Ptt, and INR). But the laboratory reported that patient’s blood sample was hemolyzed and they could not analyze it. They only checked her hemoglobin which was 4 g/dl and the CT angiography did not perform because of her Hemodynamic instability. Consequently, the heparin drip was hold and the patient received 3 packed red blood cells.
After blood transfusion, she appeared a little bit icteric and pale, she had no petechiae and purpura, or ecchymosis. At this time, she was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU). Her physician requested color doppler and transvaginal ultrasound for diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and rule out the possibility of uterine remains, uterus rupture, and intra-abdominal free fluid after complete abortion, respectively. Ultrasounds showed no acute DVT or any other anomalies. Transvaginal ultrasound showed no blood in abdominal cavity and the uterus was normal without any rupture. Once more, complete blood count tests were prescribed for her. The results were as follows: WBC: 8.88, Hb: 6.5 g/dl, MCV: 88 fL, PLT: 241000, PT: 19.6 seconds, PTT: 35 seconds, INR: 2.2. Approximately, 12 hours later she went through an episode of tachycardia, and her O2 saturation reduced to 70%. During all this period, our patient had normal bleeding after her abortion (equal to the amount seen during menstruation). Suddenly, she lost her consciousness. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed for the first time at 8:35 a.m. which was successful. Nearly 40 minutes later, she had cardiorespiratory arrest and CPR was conducted for the second time. Unfortunately, she could not survive and she died.
In the autopsy report, it was found that there was no free fluid inside the abdomen, and there were no signs of scars or rupture throughout the uterus. Furthermore, no amniotic fluid cells (Squamous cells) were observed inside the lung parenchymal tissue of our patient.