In September 2009, a 35-year-old woman presented at the referring hospital with left cervical lymph node swelling. Malignant lymphoma (ML) was first suspected, but aspiration cytology and biopsy of the lymph node suggested metastatic adenocarcinoma resulting from breast cancer. However, no evidence of breast cancer was found on ultrasonography and mammography examinations. Whole-body computed tomography (CT) showed systemic lymph node swellings (left supraclavicular and multiple para-aortic lymph nodes) but no primary lesion . Upper Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no evidence of malignancy. The patient was diagnosed with unknown primary cancer and referred to our hospital for further examination in November 2009.
We reevaluated the lymph node biopsy specimen obtained by the referring hospital. The tumour cells with oval to round nuclei with prominent nucleoli were found to be showing partial ductal structures, leading us to suspect poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Additionally, immunohistochemistry (IHC) studies showed the biopsy specimen to be negative for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), and positive for CDX2, an intestine-specific homeobox transcription factor, and cytokeratin 20 (CK20), a cytoskeletal protein usually found in the colonic epithelium. These IHC results strongly suggested the metastasis from a primary colorectal cancer . We performed a total colonoscopy and detected a small protruding lesion in the transverse colon . The tumour was very small, with a diameter of only about 12 mm, and contained a depressed component, leading to a diagnosis of macroscopic type with 0-Is+IIc according to the Paris classification . Furthermore, the severely thickened stalk and irregular pits visible in a magnified image of the depressed area combined to suggest direct invasion of the deep submucosa . We concluded that this lesion was the primary site of the metastatic cancer despite its small size.
A diagnostic endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) was performed and the specimen removed was serially dissected into three sections and examined. The tumour was composed of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and signet-ring cell carcinoma . It primarily consisted of solidly proliferated cells, but exhibited some indistinct gland formation. The tumour had a preserved intramucosal component but infiltrated deeply into the submucosal layer, with severe lymphatic and venous invasion detected the submucosal layer. The vertical and horizontal cut ends of the resected tumour were both positive for cancer cells . IHC studies showed strong expression of MUC5AC, and weak expression of MUC2 and CDX2; indicating the tumour having a mixed gastric and intestinal character, with the gastric phenotype being predominant. Patients with advanced colorectal cancer with gastric phenotypes have been reported to frequently exhibit lymphatic permeation and lymph node metastasis . Additionally, the tumour was positive for CK20 and slightly positive for CK7. There was no evidence of differentiation to endocrine tumour or hepatoid adenocarcinoma .
These pathological results suggested that colon cancer was the origin of lymph node metastasis. The patient was referred to the Gastrointestinal Oncology Division, where she underwent combination chemotherapy using capecitabine (Xeloda® ) plus oxaliplatin (Elplat® ) and bevacizumab (Avastin® ), which is one of the standard therapy of metastatic colon cancer. After 4 courses, CT scan showed a significant reduction of tumour volume, but after 10 courses, the tumour marker rapidly increased and peritoneal metastasis progressed. The genomic analysis of KRAS status revealed wild type, so we started the second-line combination chemotherapy using cetuximab (Erbitax® ) plus irinotecan hydrochloride (Topotecin® ). After the 4 times administration of cetuximab, tumor marker was decreased significantly. Her age, i.e. 35-years, is in accordance with the Guideline, which are used as recommendation criteria for MSI testing. However, she did not agree to undergo MSI testing, because she would like to give top priority to receive the chemotherapy.