A 64-year-old man presenting with anorexia, diarrhea, and altered consciousness was brought to our hospital. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a large mass in the upper right lobe of his lung and the patient was admitted for a close investigation into the lung mass on the same day. Bloody diarrhea, lower abdominal pain, and hypotension were observed soon after admission, and he was referred to us. The patient had a past medical history of hypertension and depression and a family history of lung and laryngeal cancer. He reported a history of smoking 20 cigarettes/day for 44 years, but had no history of consuming alcohol. His physical examination was unremarkable except for mild tenderness in the lower abdomen and severe emaciation. Laboratory results showed significant anemia, leukocytosis, renal failure, and a coagulation disorder with a white blood cell count of 15.4 × 103/μL (86.5% neutrophils), hemoglobin level of 7.2 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen level of 69.4 mg/dL, serum creatinine level of 1.9 mg/dL, prothrombin time 27.4%, and an activated partial thromboplastin time of 46.1 s. The result of his HIV-antibody test was negative. Urgent abdominal contrast-enhanced CT scan was performed due to a sudden change in patient’s condition. It revealed extensive intestinal ischemia, intestinal pneumatosis, free intra-abdominal gas, intussusception of a small intestinal tumor, and a small amount of ascites . Chest CT also revealed a large mass in his right upper lobe of the lung . The preoperative diagnosis was bowel necrosis and perforation with intussusception of small intestinal tumor. The pulmonary tumor was considered not to be directly associated with his abdominal presentation. Accordingly, emergency subtotal colectomy and enterectomy were performed soon after the contrast-enhanced CT. A jejunal tumor was found telescoped inside of the oral jejunum which caused intussusception . We resected the following intestinal tracts which had necrotic or ischemic change: the jejunum , part of the ileum, the transverse , descending, and sigmoid colon, and the upper rectum. The residual intestine had no necrotic, ischemic, or perforation change. The residual jejunum and ileum were anastomosed with an automatic suture device. Exteriorization of the ascending colon was performed at the end of surgery. After surgery, he was taken to the intensive care unit and placed on a ventilator with an antibiotic treatment including meropenem for 10 days. Additionally, vasopressors including noradrenaline and adrenaline were administered to keep his blood pressure above 80 mmHg. Candida was positive in culture test of abdominal drainage fluid on the 5th-day post-surgery and micafungin treatment was soon started. In his postoperative course, he experienced septic shock and despite our intensive care, the patient did not recover from sepsis and died with disseminated intravascular coagulation and multiple organ failure 10 days after surgery.
The resected specimens showed multiple extensive necrotic or ischemic areas. Particularly, the resected transverse, descending, and sigmoid colon areas had multiple sites of necrosis with ulceration. A mass-type tumor was observed in the resected jejunum . On histopathological examination of the resected specimens with periodic acid–Schiff stains, the dark-red colored segments of the bowel showed ischemic changes such as epithelial desquamation, bleeding, and congestion while the white colored segments of the colon showed transmural necrosis and massive amoebae invasion . He was diagnosed with FAC based on the histopathological findings of the resected specimens. The mass-type tumor in the resected jejunum consisted of markedly atypical and polymorphic cells and was poorly differentiated. Therefore, it was difficult to define whether it was a primary or metastatic tumor. We performed an autopsy to determine the cause of his death after obtaining the consent of the patient's family. On pathoanatomical examination, extensive transmural ischemic and necrotic areas, as well as multiple perforations, were observed in the residual ileum and rectum. Surprisingly, the amoebic invasion was also observed in the residual ileum and rectum . The celiac, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric artery showed no thrombus or tumor embolus. The histological determination of the large mass in the upper right lobe of the patient’s lung was large cell carcinoma, which was similar to the jejunum tumor. In conclusion, the autopsy revealed that he had developed pulmonary large cell carcinoma with small intestinal metastasis and the cause of his death was intestinal ischemia, necrosis and the perforation of the residual ileum and rectum caused by amoebae invasion.