An 82-year-old man presented with left forearm/hand pain and fevers in the context of immunocompromise secondary to stage IV Hodgkin's lymphoma and recent cycle of cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin and prednisone (CHOP) chemotherapy regime. He had a cannula inserted into the volar forearm one week earlier for administration of chemotherapy and developed worsening symptoms over 10 days. On examination there was mild cellulitis, with some bruising and discolouration similar in nature to other areas of his skin. The key finding was tense swelling of the left volar and dorsal forearm and hand, associated with pain on passive stretch and paraesthesia over both surfaces. The tense swelling was only marked when compared to the wasted right arm. There was also delayed capillary refill of over 3 s with radial and ulnar pulses not present. A clinical picture of compartment syndrome became apparent.
While systemically well upon triage, awaiting review he became unstable in the emergency department with signs of septic shock. He was commenced on piperacillin/tazobactam, vancomycin and clindamycin as per local guidelines. Plastic surgical input was sought. The constellation of fevers and raised inflammatory markers with no overt fracture or bleeding, made NSTI the most likely diagnosis prompting immediate operative intervention.
Urgent fasciotomy of the dorsal, volar forearm and dorsal interossei compartment release was performed by the consultant plastic surgeon assisted by his senior registrar in a major local hospital. This was followed by aggressive debridement of devitalised tissue of the forearm to healthy bleeding tissue. Operative findings included rapid development of superficial pustule formation, ‘dishwasher’ fluid in the suprafascial plane (dorsal and volar) and tense bulging flexor and extensor muscle compartments. Post fasciotomy, distal capillary refill returned to less than 3 s and pulses were felt at the wrist. The early identification of compartment syndrome and urgent fasciotomy resulted in limb salvage for this patient.
He remained unstable in ICU post debridement requiring vasopressors until antibiotic rationalisation from piperacillin/tazobactam to meropenem based on culture findings of extended spectrum beta lactamase Escherichia coli (ESBL E. coli). The patient required daily dressing changes with ongoing intravenous antibiotics for a number of weeks. The patient experience was painful, with daily dressing changes often performed under nitrous or anaesthetic in intensive care. He returned to the operating theatre for reconstruction of his debridement and fasciotomies wounds three weeks after initial presentation. One week later he was transferred to a rehabilitation facility for hand and occupational therapy.