A 76-year-old male sought chiropractic care for complaints of right shoulder pain and mild right arm weakness. The onset of pain was insidious and of one week's duration. Pain was rated 8/10 on a visual analogue scale (0 = no pain, 10 = the worst pain of one's life). The pain was described as severe and worsened with movement. Additional symptoms included mild shortness of breath and posterior thoracic pain on respiration.
The patient's past medical history included headache, degenerative joint disease affecting the cervical spine, and a benign thyroid nodule. The patient reportedly smoked tobacco products for 50 years. He was a retired electrician.
The patient was afebrile. Vital signs were normal. Respirations were 18 cycles per minute. The lungs were clear to auscultation. The patient reported upper thoracic pain on inspiration.
A non-tender, mild decrease in active range of motion of the cervical spine was noted in all planes. No tenderness was elicited on palpation of the cervical spine. Cervical compression and Soto-Hall tests were negative. Valsalva maneuver was negative. Neurologic examination revealed no focal deficits.
Examination of the right shoulder revealed exquisite tenderness on palpation of the lateral border of the scapula with muscle spasm affecting the ipsilateral infraspinatus, teres major, and teres minor muscles. Active ranges of shoulder motion were restricted and painful in abduction, internal, and external rotation.
Plain film radiographs of the right shoulder (AP with internal and external rotation views) and thoracic spine (AP and lateral views) were performed. Disruption of the cortical margin of the lateral border of the right scapula was noted as evidenced by an indistinct lucency (see Figure ). In addition, a suspicious mass was noted in the hilar region of the right lung. Complete loss of the right hilar vascular detail secondary to the tumor mass effect were noted with visualized subsegmental infiltrate densities. No evidence of pleural effusion was noted.
The initial diagnostic impression included: suspicious right lung pathology and apparent lytic process affecting the scapula of an unknown origin. The patient was referred for imaging evaluations that included chest x-ray (CXR) and computed tomographic (CT) evaluation of the chest. He was referred to his primary care medical physician.
The CXR and CT examination of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed:
1. A large mass in the right upper lobe of the lung with associated mediastinal and hilar adenopathy (see Figures and ).
2. Metastatic disease of the scapula (see Figure ).
3. Metastatic liver disease.
Subsequent bone scintigraphy revealed abnormal increased accumulation of radiopharmaceutical along the lateral aspect of the right scapula (see Figure ). MRI evaluation revealed additional metastatic foci including the cervical, thoracic and lumbar spinal regions as evidenced by multiple regions of decreased signal intensity are visualized on T1 weighted images (see Figures and ). Biopsy confirmed a primary lung carcinoma origin. Unfortunately, the patient succumbed to the disease within 3 months of its diagnosis.