A 15-year-old male (BMI 24.2 Kg/m2) had the first onset of the disease on March 2018, with mild headache and dizziness. During a routine blood test, severe hypoglycemia (26.8 mg/dl) was detected, referred by the patient’s mother. He had no family history of diabetes or any other hereditary disease.
He was studied by a primary physician in his city who indicated an OGTT that could not be completed due to an acute onset of nausea, headache and lightheadedness. The patient underwent metabolic testing (ruling out adrenal insufficiency and hypothyroidism) with the subsequent diagnosis of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Chromogranin blood levels were 41 ng/ml (Normal reference value: < 100 ng/dl). In our setting it was not possible to correlate studies determining the use of sulfonylureas in urine and blood because the patient was referred from another medical center for surgical conduct, with studies already been carried out. But at referral, spontaneous fasting insulin, C-peptide and HbA1C levels , did not support the possibility of having a possible factitious form.
Afterwards, a 18-F-DOPA PET-CT scan was performed , detecting diffuse hyperfunctioning of pancreatic tissue in the body (SUV max. of 4.8) and tail (SUV max of 5.8). A psychological evaluation was indicated for him and his family in order to rule out any factitious behavior or Munchausen syndrome.
Based on the clinical presentation, laboratory studies and PET scan result, the patient was given diazoxide 300 mg per day for 2 months. In spite of the dietary and pharmacological treatment, he continued having clinical manifestations of hypoglycemia at least 4 nights a week with finger stick values of glucose of < 40 mg/dl. For this reason, he was referred to our institution, where a multidisciplinary team evaluated him. After a comprehensive assessment, it was decided that the best approach was to perform a subtotal pancreatectomy (80-90%), as the international literature recommends for patients with HH that do not respond to the medical treatment [–].
An exploratory laparoscopy and intraoperative ultrasound were carried out without identifying any macroscopic lesion. Therefore, it was decided to perform an 80% distal pancreatectomy with spleen preservation.
The patient had a satisfactory postoperative recovery and was discharged 3 days after the surgery took place. The surgical drain was removed on the 7th postoperative day after an imaging study showed absence of free abdominal fluid or intra-abdominal abscess. The final pathology report confirmed the presence of a brownish area with an irregular surface, within a homogeneous distal pancreas (size: 11.6 × 4.5 × 3 cm). No macroscopic nodular lesions were evidenced after successive serial cuts of the surgical specimen. Microscopically, numerous islets of Langerhans of variable sizes and irregular shapes were found: they were unevenly distributed, with a slight tendency to converge, and some of them had a periductal location . No tumor, or neoplastic cell proliferation were identified in the serial cuts from the studied material. Immunohistochemical techniques with chromogranin and synaptophysin were negative. Both morphological and immunohistochemical findings were compatible with diffuse hyperplasia of the islets of Langerhans, compatible with nesidioblastosis. Three months after surgery, patient remains with no surgical complications nor signs or symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia. Insulin, C-peptide levels and HbA1C percentage in blood were normal according to laboratory tests .
A systematic literature review was done by using as primary term “Nesidioblastosis”; 594 publications were shown. When the “adult” term was added, 277 publications could be obtained instead; when the term “adolescent” was used combined to the primary term, we obtained 63 publications. Adolescence has been defined as the transitional phase of growth and development between childhood and adulthood. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines an adolescent as any person between ages from 10 to 19. This age range falls within WHO’s definition of young people, which refers to individuals between ages from 10 to 24 .
After this initial search, we decided to add the term “children”, considering that the broad spectrum of ages comprehended in the definition of adolescents might have them included both in pediatric or adult medical groups. The new search resulted in 114 additional manuscripts. Therefore, 454 final manuscripts were individually evaluated, and after matching them for duplications, a final number of 22 articles were included in the systematic review . From 1980 to the present, from a total of 205 patients included in 22 manuscripts (9 case reports, 13 case series); 41 could be identified as adolescents .
Only 9 out of them responded to medical therapy and 32 required surgery. From the latter group, 72% received subtotal distal pancreatectomy (SDP) (60 to 80%) as primary treatment; which was done in 2 surgeries in 2 patients that did not resolve after the first one. Asymptomatic long-term follow-up has been reported in the vast majority of cases with follow-ups up to 21 years.