We describe the case of a previously fit and well 80 year old female who presents with a 10 day history of recurrent episodes of vacancy and confusion. These occurred on a background history of hypertension and primary hypothyroidism. The patient had a limited recollection of these events; however, her husband described transient episodes of unresponsiveness which occurred with increasing frequency in the morning and generally abated following breakfast. Two episodes were associated with low capillary blood glucose readings recorded by paramedics – on the first occasion a capillary glucose of 2.4 mmol/l rose to 5.1 mmol/l following oral intake. A further event coinciding with capillary glucose of 2.4 mmol/l was noted in the emergency department. There was no precipitation of symptoms by exertion or associated weight change. On examination, the patient was clinically well. No clinical features of hypoadrenalism or hypopituitarism were evident. There were no acromegaloid features. The patient had no history of significant alcohol intake, was a lifelong non-smoker and, on collateral history, had no access to oral hypoglycemics or insulin at home.
Whipple’s criteria were fulfilled with a symptomatic episode of confusion with confirmed laboratory serum glucose of 2.7 mmol/L and resolution of symptoms on treatment of hypoglycemia.
Routine admission biochemical investigation demonstrated mild hypokalaemia of 3.0 mmol/l with otherwise normal electrolytes and liver function tests. A synacthen test was normal with a rise in serum cortisol to 554 nmol/L and 697 nmol/L at 30 and 60 minutes respectively. Similarly, anterior pituitary hormone profile was normal including T4 14.4 pmol/L (reference range 9.0–19.1), TSH 3.54 mIU/L (0.35–4.94). Prolactin 341 mU/L (110–562). LH 13.5 IU/L, FSH 32.0 IU/L and oestradiol 58 pmol/L were consistent with post-menopausal status. IGF1 level was low 4.4 nmol/L (4.4–21.8) as was a random growth hormone of 0.26 μg/L. All hormones were measured using Abbott Architect assays except for GH and IGF1 which were measured on the IDS-iSYS analyser. Routine clinical chemistry was performed using the Beckman Coulter AU5800 instrument.
In this context, a prolonged 24 hour fast precipitated early hypoglycemia with plasma glucose of 2.7 mmol/L and a concurrent suppressed serum insulin, c-peptide, proinsulin and 3-hydroxybutyrate. A serum sulphonylurea screen was negative and insulin antibodies were not detected (see Table ). Investigation proceeded to a 72 hour fast with repeat measurements confirming appropriate suppression of serum insulin and c-peptide in the setting of a symptomatic hypoglycemia of 1.9 mmol/L. In view of these findings, serum was analysed for both IGF-2 and IGF-1 and the IGF2:IGF1 ratio was calculated. IGF2 was analysed by radioimmunoassay and IGF1 was measured using the Mercordia immunoassay.
Results showed a serum IGF-2 of 78.2 nmol/L, IGF-1 of 3.5 nmol/L (4.4–21.8) and an IGF-2:IGF-1 ratio of 22.3 which is consistent with IGF-2 mediated hypoglycemia (see Table ) .
Cross-sectional CT imaging with contrast was performed to investigate for underlying malignancy and revealed a pelvic mass of 13 cm maximal diameter (see Fig. ). This prompted a follow up fluorodeoxyglucose PET-CT scan which demonstrated mild to moderate uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose by this mass (see Fig. ).
Clinical nutrition optimised our patient’s intake with frequent high carbohydrate content meals in an effort to minimise hypoglycemia. Despite extensive dietician input, prednisolone 20 mg once daily was required to prevent nocturnal hypoglycaemia while awaiting surgery.
Our patient was referred to our Gynaecolological Oncology service and proceeded to have a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Intra-operative findings included a 15 cm solid mass arising from the left uterine wall and extending into the broad ligament and left pelvic side wall. The tumour shows classical “pattern-less pattern” SFT spindle cell morphology, without cytological atypia or necrosis. Mitotic count was low (0–1/10 high power field). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated diffuse positivity for STAT6 in tumour cells, consistent with a diagnosis of an SFT. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that tumour cells were positive for IGF-2 as depicted in Fig. (Anti-IGF2 monoclonal antibody, Merek Millipore, clone S1F2). Incidentally, the right fallopian tube contained a 2 mm invasive high grade serous carcinoma with staging pT1a pNx FIGO classification, stage 1.
At review 3 months post-operatively, our patient reported full symptom resolution. Follow up serology (detailed in Table ) is indicative of biochemical cure with normalisation of the serum IGF2:IGF1 ratio.
Chemotherapy for tubal high grade serous carcinoma was completed with 3 cycles of carboplatin. Follow up imaging was reassuring without evidence of disease recurrence. The patient remains clinically well with no further hypoglycemia at 18 months following initial presentation.