An 11-year-old boy known to have aplastic anemia presented to our service complaining of headache and persistent vomiting and neck and back pain for 3 days. He had no history of head or spine trauma at all. His parents are relatives “positive consanguinity,” and his sister also suffers from aplastic anemia. Clinical examination at the time of presentation revealed severe pallor with petechial rashes all over the body, with no definite weakness or neurologic or locomotor deficit. Signs of meningeal irritation including neck rigidity and Kernig’s sign were positive. His blood picture indicated pancytopenia (HB = 8 g/dl, WBC = 1.59 10^3/uL, and platelets count = 19.5 10^3/uL). PT, PTT, and other liver function tests were normal. D-dimer and hepatitis B and C serological tests were negative. Bone marrow biopsy presented markedly hypocellular bone marrow with 20% cellularity. Abdominal ultrasonic scan excluded chronic liver disease and hypersplenism.
A CT scan of the brain was ordered on emergency bases and showed dilation of the supratentorial ventricles with acute SDH extending over both cerebellar hemispheres and retroclival space. Brain MRI showed posterior fossa and peri-mesencephalic SDH extending anteriorly opposite the whole clivus and posteriorly opposite the surface of both cerebellar hemispheres and associated supratentorial obstructive hydrocephalus. Whole spine MRI showed SDH extending from the lower border of C2 vertebra along the whole spine and down to the level of the lower end of the sacrum associated with spinal cord compression . A multidisciplinary approach including neurosurgery, pediatric hematology, and clinical pathology team was involved for the management and decision-making of this extremely rare and challenging case.
After discussion of the pros and cons of different therapeutic options, it has been decided to put the patient under strict observation with conservatives and supporting measures in the ICU. Patient received fluids, steroids, diuretic, and paracetamol infusion. The medical management of aplastic anemia included thrombopoietin receptor agonist TPO-RA; cyclosporin; folic acid; nutritional supplement for vitamins B1, B6, and B12; and Deferasirox. Serial clinical follow-ups were performed for the patient, and his symptoms and signs as well as his hematopoietic parameters showed gradual improvement. He has stayed in the ICU for 10 days, then was discharged to the inpatient ward for a week, then was discharged home from the hospital, and was scheduled for routine outpatient clinic visits. One month after the episode, the patient was clinically symptoms free. A brain and a whole spine MRI were ordered for the patient after 6 months, and they showed complete resolution of the SDH from the whole craniospinal axis with decreased ventricular size .