A 5 year old male goat (from an endangered Portuguese breed called Bravia) was presented with depression, reduced appetite and hind limb incoordination. Trauma had been suspected and the animal had been treated with an anti-inflammatory drug (carprofen, 2 mg/kg SC) for three days. This pure bred buck was part of a herd of autochthonous animals used to create a national gene bank. Pigeons had access to both the stable and the pastures used by the herd but no other animal had previously shown any neurological or respiratory signs.
The neurological signs were confined to the hindquarters and ataxia rapidly progressed to a complete flaccid paraplegia . Patellar, perineal and hind limb withdrawal reflexes were absent. Severe hyperalgesia and an intense pain reaction to touch were evident on both flanks and the hindquarters – for example, gentle stroking of the hind legs caused high-pitched bellowing. Constant scratching and self-mutilation occurred with the long horns resulting in a large alopecia on the right abdominal wall. There were no seizures, signs of blindness or other cranial nerve deficits. Head movements, reaction to touch and front legs’ muscle tone were reduced but considered normal due to the depression state of the animal, so the neurological examination suggested a lesion limited to the lumbosacral region.
Rectal temperature, heart and respiratory rates were inside the reference ranges. Blood analysis revealed leucocytosis characterized by a neutrophilia and monocytosis, moderate anemia and hyperproteinemia . Renal and liver values were normal. Radiography of the lumbosacral region were unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was collected by lumbar puncture under local anaesthesia. The fluid was clear, colourless and did not flow freely from the needle hub. CSF analysis showed severe mixed pleocytosis (980 cells/mm3; 65% neutrophils and 35% lymphocytes) with mild increase in protein concentration (1.15 g/L). No cryptococcal organism was identified and bacteria culture of the CSF yielded no growth. Meanwhile treatment was initiated with cephalosporin (ceftiofur, 4 mg/kg IM twice daily, Pfizer) and dexamethasone (one single 0.25 mg/kg IM injection). After three days of antibiotic treatment (six days after initial clinical signs) hyperesthesia continued to be very severe and so the buck was euthanized for humanitarian reasons.
Post-mortem examination revealed cachexia, hind limbs muscular atrophy and skin excoriations on both flanks. Mild pneumonia in the ventral lobes of the right lung, two well demarcated nodules with 1 cm in diameter in the right lung, caseous material in mediastinum and peripheral lymph nodes and an enlarged oedematous lumbar spinal cord were evident on gross internal examination. Microscopically there were signs of granulomatous pneumonia and extensive congestion and oedema with lymphocyte infiltration of the lumbosacral meninges consistent with acute meningitis. In both lung and meninges numerous round shape organisms with narrow-necked budding were visible and identified morphologically as C. neoformans . Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis was isolated from the caseous material found in the lymph nodes.