A 13-year old girl of Arab-Berber descent (Morocco) presented to our emergency department because of abdominal cramps and pain in the right and left iliac fossa for 3 days, accompanied by vomiting and high fever. One week before, she had returned from a 2-month visit in northwestern Morocco. During her stay in Morocco, she was residing in the house of a family member. There was no contact with animals, no history of a tick bite, and she did not visit any parks or forests. She swam in the Mediterranean Sea and in a freshwater swimming pool, but she never went swimming in natural freshwater resources. She had not been sick during her stay and no skin rash was seen. Returning to Belgium, the next day she developed lower abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, and high fever. After 4 days, she presented to the emergency department of our hospital.
Her medical history revealed a right-sided Bell’s palsy in the previous year with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan that showed a neuritis facialis, and a Borrelia serological test result that was negative. She had recurrent episodes of herpes labialis.
A physical examination at presentation showed a mildly sick girl with stable cardiovascular and respiratory parameters, without fever. She had a herpes labialis lesion on her lower lip. Her heart and lung auscultation were normal. An abdominal investigation showed normal bowel sounds and diffuse pain by palpation, most pronounced in the right and left fossa. The initial complete blood count showed a mild, Coombs-negative, normocytic anemia with a hemoglobin of 10.4 g/dL (normal 12.1–14.6 g/dL), reticulocytes 5.8/1000 red blood cells (RBC) (normal 8–22/1000 RBC), leukocytes of 4.7 × 10E9/L (normal 4.5–10.7 × 10E9/L) with a mild neutropenia and mild monocytosis, and thrombocytes of 55 × 10E9/L (normal 188–429 × 10E9/L), with C-reactive protein of 210 mg/L (normal ≤ 5 mg/L). There were no signs of hemolysis with normal lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin. An abdominal ultrasound scan was normal, but without visualization of the appendix. A urine investigation and thoracic X-ray showed no signs of infection. Since appendicitis could not be ruled out, an appendectomy was done immediately; however, the appendix was not inflamed on visualization. The next day, the complete blood count revealed a more pronounced pancytopenia (see Fig. ) and the blood smear test result showed some spirochetes. Therefore, the differential diagnosis was narrowed to leptospirosis and borreliosis (see Fig. ), making the latter more likely given the microscopic and morphological characteristics of the spirochetes. Serological test results for leptospirosis immunoglobulin M and G (IgM and IgG) and Borrelia burgdorferi were negative, as well as for ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, babesiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other parasitic infections. The diagnosis of tick-borne relapsing fever was suspected and treatment with tetracycline (intravenous, 20–40 mg/kg/day in four doses) was initiated. Blood and urine cultures did not reveal growth. Sequencing of 1500 bp of the 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) gene, of which 872 bp was analyzable [on a Genetic Analyzer ABI 3730XL (Applied Biosystems, Invitrogen Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), with the BigDye Terminator kit (Applied Biosystems) using a home-brew method], confirmed our diagnosis. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis of the consensus sequence revealed 100% identity with the first 13 propositions representing Borrelia hispanica 16s ribosomal RNA gene sequences. The closest match to the next Borrelia species was observed with several Borrelia crocidura strains showing 99% identity. The nucleotide sequence was submitted to GenBank and obtained the accession KY285287. Our patient was treated with a combination of ceftriaxone (2 g/day in 1 dose, for 3 days) and doxycycline (2 mg/kg/day in 1 dose, for 14 days) during which we saw a full clinical and hematological recovery.