The patient was a 5-year 8-month-old girl at the time of presentation, with epilepsy, intellectual disability, and a movement disorder. She was born to a 29-year-old woman, G3P1, at term, with c- section. She had extreme crying at the age of 2.5 months. She also had left lower eyelid hemangioma at birth. She was diagnosed with epilepsy at the age of 4 months. She had head control at the age of 1 year; she sat at 3 years; she never walked without assistance. She had delayed speech. She had microcephaly (46.5 cm, < 3 p); she has a dysarthric speech. Her tonus was increased in all four extremities; she also had involuntary movements (choreoathetosis and dystonia). Her deep tendon reflexes were increased in the lower extremities. She could only walk with assistance. Her 3 T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed non-specific millimetric white matter hyperintensities. Her EEG showed left temporoparietal and right posterior temporal interictal epileptiform discharges that also generalized. The patient was on Levetiracetam for seizures. Lumbar puncture (LP) was performed to confirm the genetic finding. LP showed no cells, protein 20,40 mg/dl, glucose 32 mg/dl, simultaneous blood glucose 87 mg/dl (before the lumbar puncture, after a 4-h fasting), and a negative CSF culture.
The quality of raw reads was checked using FastQC (v0.11.8) . Skewer (v0.2.2) was used to remove adapters and low quality (Phred quality score < 20) bases. Trimmed reads were aligned to the reference human genome (hg19) using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA mem, v0.7.17) . Post-alignment processing was performed following the Genome Analysis Toolkit’s (GATK, v4.0.11.0) best practice recommendations. Picard tool package (v1.141) was used to mark duplicate reads and fix the information of mate reads. Haplotyping and joint genotyping were also performed following GATK recommendation. Annovar (v2018-12-04) was used to annotate each variant by getting biologically significant information from several databases.
After WES data analysis, 10,800 heterozygous and 5,500 homozygous variants passed the depth and quality filter. A phenotype-driven prioritization strategy was employed to detected variants. According to the mode of inheritance, variant filtering was performed by either absence-approach that assumes that disease-causing variants are not found in healthy population databases or setting the minor allele frequency threshold at < 0.1% . The variants that are more than ten bases away from the exon–intron boundaries were excluded to filter the splicing variants. After the population frequency and splice site filtering, the number of variants decreased to 402 and 15, respectively. Several gene-level assessments, including the genic intolerance score and gnomAD metrics , and variant level assessments such as CADD , REVEL , M-CAP were utilized to interpret the pathogenicity. Then, the variants were prioritized based on the symptoms of the affected individual by collecting evidence from various sources; Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) , Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) , and literature search. The variants were visualized via the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) to coverage check. The whole bioinformatics workflow was shown in Fig. .
Combining all of these computational evaluations provided strong evidence that the novel variant in the SLC2A1 gene causes the observed phenotype. The heterozygous mutation in SLC2A1 (NM_006516), c.275 + 1del classified as “Uncertain significance” based on the 2015 guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) . The mutation was detected with high-depth reading in IGV .
Since the patient was a proband-only WES case, Sanger sequencing was carried out for parental segregation analysis. Peripheral blood samples were collected from the patient and her biological parents following the standard procedures. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples using the Quick-DNA™ Miniprep Plus Kit (Zymo Research, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA quality was checked by agarose gel electrophoresis and NanoDrop 2000c Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Sanger sequencing was carried out using standard protocols. PCR conditions and primer sequences can be provided upon request. Sequence electropherograms were visualized using the 4Peaks (Mekentosj, Amsterdam).
Sanger results indicate that the variant, c.275 + 1del, occurred de novo. Biological parents of the patient have reference alleles in the same position. In addition to the parental verification, mixed and low-quality traces from the heterozygous deletion point in both forward and reverse sequence direction confirm the IGV visualization .