A 48 years old female patient was admitted to the Clinic for Allergy and Immunology under suspicion of systemic connective tissue disease. The main complaints were marked fatigue, photosensitivity, hives, swelling and pain in the small joints of hands, wrists and ankles, Raynaud’s phenomenon. About seven months before admission the patient was treated at the regional hospital for pulmonary embolism and exudative pericarditis. Three years before admission she was examined by a hematologist due to generalized lymphadenopathy, and after a detailed examination a lymphoproliferative disorder was ruled out. Her past medical history revealed that she underwent thymectomy for generalized form of MG 28 years ago, after which a complete long-term remission was achived.
Physical examination on admission showed hives, generalized lymphadenopathy, cyanotic lips, spontaneous Raynaud’s phenomenon on fingers, acute synovitis of proximal interphalanegal and metacarpophalangeal joints and wrists, and perimaleolar pitting edema. Other physical findings were normal. Laboratory studies showed marked inflammatory syndrome, elevated total serum proteins, hypoalbuminemia, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, G-glutamyl transferase, lactate dehydrogenase. Granulated cylinders were seen in the urine sediment, with 24h-proteinuria of nephrotic range and slightly reduced creatinine clearance. The result of blood gas analysis was normal. Immunoserological analysis showed positive ANA on a substrate of HEp2 cells (indirect immunofluorescens) in a dilution higher than 1: 640 homogeneous type of staining, positive anti-dsDNA and anti-cardiolipin antibodies (both IgG and IgM type), presence of cryoglobulins, with marked signs of complement activation. Serum immunoglobulins levels were extremely high. Direct Coombs test was positive, but there were no other laboratory or clinical signs of active haemolysis.
shows the results of laboratory and immunological analysis at the diagnosis of SLE and secondary APS.
A minor pleural effusion on the right side and exudative pericarditis were seen on the chest radiography. Lupus Band Test (LBT) was positive. Abdominal sonography showed an enlarged liver (166 cm). Echocardiography demonstrated pronounced enlargement of the right heart, with 4 + tricuspid regurgitation, pericardial effusion around the entire heart, enlarged pulmonary vein and paradoxical movement of the septum, left atrium collapsed during diastole, the pressure in the right ventricle was estimated at 100 mm Hg. Multislice CT pulmonary angiography was normal.
The diagnosis of SLE was made based on the following criteria of the American College of Rheumatology (6/11): photosensitivity, polyarthritis, polyserositis (pericardial and pleural effusion), renal lesions (abnormal urine sediment, nephrotic rank proteinuria), positive ANA, anti-dsDNA and anti-cardiolipin antibodies. The diagnosis of secondary antiphospholipid syndrome was based on the Sapporo criteria: pulmonary embolism and positive anticardiolipin antibody IgG and IgM type on two occasions for a period longer than 12 weeks. The patient was treated using glucocorticoid (initialy methyl-prednisolon 1 mg/kg body weight, followed by three ’pulse’ doses of methyl-prednisolone, each 1,000 mg) and anticoagulant therapy with favorable clinical and laboratory response. In the further course, a renal biopsy was performed and pathohistological examination revealed diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis. Mycophenolate mofetil therapy was introduced at a dose of 2 grams orally with oral prednisone therapy. During the one-year follow-up period patient was in a stable remission of SLE.