A 52-year-old female was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) with hypoxemia due to COVID-19. On admission, she was conscious, oriented, and following verbal commands with no neurological deficit. The heart rate was 102 beats per minute, noninvasive blood pressure 146/72 mm Hg, respiratory rate was >35/minute and she was maintaining saturation (SpO2) of 88–91% on 15 L oxygen via a non-rebreather mask. She was shifted to high flow nasal oxygen (HFNO) therapy and was initially requiring a fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) at 90% to achieve SpO2 of 90%. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) chest was performed which bilateral ground glassing appearance with consolidation with CT severity score of 32/40. She was started on a third-generation cephalosporin, Inj Remdesivir, Tablet Baricitinib, Inj Solu-Medrol, and other supportive therapy including low molecular weight heparin (LMWH). The initial laboratory values are shown in .
From day 3 onward, her oxygen requirement started reducing with other vital parameters within the normal range. On day 5, the patient complained of abdominal pain which was diagnosed as rectus sheath hematoma on the CT abdomen. Anticoagulation was stopped in view of this finding. Gradually by day 7, her oxygen requirement had reduced to 45% but the patient started complaining of blurred vision and severe headache. On examination, the patient had a perception of light but was not able to see clearly. In view of the thrombogenic potential of COVID and discontinuation of LMWH in our case, MRI brain with stroke protocol was performed. MRI brain showed multiple bilateral frontal, parietal and occipital T2 FLAIR hyperintensities which are more pronounced posteriorly in addition to bilateral cerebellar hemispheres involvement compatible with PRES diagnosis . MRI brain and neck angiography was done to rule out any possibility of acute posterior circulation stroke. Another differential diagnosis like cerebral hemorrhage was also ruled out. The patient was managed conservatively, and she started to have an improvement in vision over the next 4 to 5 days. The patient was eventually weaned off oxygen and was discharged in stable condition on day 15.