This is the case of a 29-year-old male chef that complained about anteromedial gradual onset pain of the right knee for the 2 months, aggravated when descending stairs and when bending the knee over 90° of flexion for more than a minute. The patient did not report any relevant medical history, family background, or previous surgical intervention in the knee.
On physical examination, the patient presented medial parapatellar local tenderness and palpable click in this area when the knee was extended. The hamstrings 90/90 straight leg raise test revealed a 25° of extension deficit in the right lower limb.
Diagnostic imaging revealed a normal right knee X-ray. The patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 1.5 Tesla (General Electric Signa HDxt). He was positioned supine with the knee in a 10° flexion and 15° external rotation. The examination protocol included axial, coronal, and sagittal PD-WI, sagittal T2–WI, coronal T1–WI, and STIR MR sequences, all with a slice thickness of 4 mm. No intravenous media contrast was administered. Imaging revealed a duplicated medial plica , characterized by a high-intensity signal of the infrapatellar fat pad medial portion, after which a presumptive diagnosis of medial plica syndrome was proposed.
The patient was suggested to undergo a 12 week conservative treatment trial including NSAIDs and a rehabilitation program including analgesic physical therapy, hamstrings stretching and manual therapy, followed by quadriceps, gluteus muscles, and hip external rotator muscles strengthening and core stability. Despite the promising initial outcomes, the symptoms did not disappear completely, especially during stair descending and prolonged sitting. Therefore, surgical treatment was scheduled. The patient underwent standard knee arthroscopy (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) under general anesthesia, which revealed a duplicated medial plica, including a superior low profile and an inferior high profile medial plica , and hypertrophy of the medial portion of the infrapatellar fat pad . During knee flexion beyond 40°, the high-profile medial plica along with the hypertrophied fat pad came in contact with the medial femoral condyle proximal portion, which presented with superficial fissures at the articular cartilage . No other intra-articular pathology was found. Both medial plicae and the fat pad hypertrophy were resected with a mechanical shaver until no contact between the femoral trochlea and the fat pad was observed during the range of motion . The patient was discharged on the same day and allowed full weight-bearing as tolerated on the affected limb. Subsequently, he followed a postoperative rehabilitation program to regain full range of motion, stretching hamstring muscles and strengthening quadriceps and gluteus muscles. At 4 weeks postoperatively, symptoms completely resolved, and the patient was allowed to return to full activity. After 1 year of postoperative follow-up, the patient is still asymptomatic.