A 6-year-old healthy boy with no specific medical history visited the emergency room with right lower abdominal pain that started two days before the visit.
The day before the visit, he received a prescription from the local clinic, but there was no improvement, so he went to the emergency room.
A history of abdominal pain was not presented.
No family history of abdominal disease.
The patient’s height and weight were 115 cm and 29 kg, respectively. His vital signs in the emergency room were as follows: Body temperature, 37 °C; heart rate, 110 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 22 breaths/min. Tenderness of the right lower quadrant (RLQ) was observed, but rebound tenderness, muscle guarding, and rigid abdomen were not observed.
Not performed, because radiological findings were not significantly abnormal and the patient’s symptoms were relieved.
Abdominal X-ray examination was performed, and gaseous distension was observed . Abdominal ultrasound was performed after being referred to a radiologist to rule out acute appendicitis. Ultrasonography showed the appendix had collapsed and tenderness was not present. In addition, there was no significant wall thickening or tenderness in the scanned bowel loop, and no abnormal fluid collection or enlarged lymph node was seen in the abdominal cavity. There were no abnormal findings on ultrasonography.
Gastrointestinal disease; abdominal pain, right lower quadrant.
The symptoms improved spontaneously and the patient was discharged.
The patient visited the pediatric outpatient department two days later due to aggravated abdominal pain. At the visit, he had a limp, severe pain around the periumbilical area, no fever, and no symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, or anorexia. On physical examination, tenderness of the RLQ remained. A glycerin enema was performed under the suspicion of fecal impaction on initial X-ray, but there were no feces and no palpable stool by digital rectal examination. An additional physical examination showed rebound tenderness and a laboratory exam was performed. Inflammatory findings were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) 13200/mm3, absolute neutrophil count (ANC) 9540/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 40 mm/hr, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 1.2 mg/dL, but no electrolyte imbalance was observed. The calculated pediatric appendicitis score was 7, which was likely appendicitis, and contrast enhanced abdomen CT scan was examined. The appendix was collapsed, and no evidence of acute appendicitis was found. Abdominal CT scan showed approximately 4 cm of fat lobule below the umbilical ligament of the liver left lobe. A hyperdense halo and surrounding fat stranding were detected in the periphery of the fat lobule. The vessel of the upper portion inside the fat lobule showed a whirling sign. These abdominal CT findings were consistent with OI, and surgery was performed on the same day in consultation with the pediatric surgeon.