A 61-year-old woman with diabetes and schizophrenia visited the thyroid-endocrine center at our hospital complaining of dysphagia and repeated vomiting. Furthermore, she experienced increasing dyspnea when lying down from the day before the visit. She was diagnosed with schizophrenia approximately 30 years ago. She had a history of hospitalization in a closed ward when her symptoms were severe, and received antipsychotic medications, including lithium (300 mg/day). She had a slowly growing goiter that began to develop approximately 10 years after taking lithium. She had never undergone any diagnostic tests, including ultrasonography and biopsy, because she had no specific symptoms or discomfort. At the time of admission, the patient’s guardian said that the size of the goiter had dramatically increased in the last 3 months.
On physical examination, a nontender and hard, huge anterior neck mass of approximately 10 × 12 cm in size was observed. A neck ultrasound and enhanced thyroid computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a multi-lobulated mass measuring 10.9 × 9.2 × 12.8 cm on the right thyroid gland. Moreover, a leftward deviation of the trachea due to internal calcification and mass was noted. Laryngeal examination with fiber optic endoscopy revealed an airway obstruction due to the anterior neck mass, however, the vocal cord mobility was intact . Laboratory examination showed serum triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and TSH levels within the normal ranges.
In a multidisciplinary meeting, we discussed the options of whether to perform diagnostic confirmation procedures such as fine needle aspiration biopsy or emergency surgery. We consequently planned total thyroidectomy without additional diagnostic procedures considering the high risk of airway obstruction.
During surgery, an approximately 11.5 × 9 cm mass in the right thyroid gland was removed, and no mass was found in the left thyroid gland. No other extra-thyroidal extensions were noted on gross examination, and recurrent laryngeal nerves were preserved on both sides. Microscopically, the tumor showed a trabecular, insular, and solid growth pattern with necrosis, hemorrhage, and ossification. Additionaly, atypical cells with hyperchromatic convoluted nuclei and increased mitotic figures were observed . Immunohistochemical staining was performed on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues with antibodies against p53, TTF-1, and Ki-67. The tumor cells were diffusely immunopositive for p53, focally immunopositive for TTF-1, and the Ki-67 labeling index was more than 10% in the highest area . Mutation analyses for BRAF and the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) promoter were performed. No BRAF gene mutations were detected, but the TERT promoter C228T point mutation was present in the PDTC.
Approximately 6 h postoperatively, the patient complained of dyspnea and anterior neck swelling in the general ward. Emergency surgery was performed to remove postoperative hematoma and control bleeding. Postoperative 18F-FDG PET/CT showed no regional or distant metastases.
The patient received high-dose radioactive iodine therapy (150 mCi) 2 months postoperatively. At a recent follow-up 4 months postoperatively, she was taking TH replacement and remained in a relatively good health with a serum thyroglobulin level of 0.55 ng/ml.