A 52 year-old male patient was admitted after a high-velocity road traffic accident where he sustained among other injuries a left open Gustilo and Anderson grade II, segmental femoral shaft fracture type AO/OTA 32C2(i), a left open Gustilo and Anderson grade II, comminuted patella fracture type AO/OTA 34C2, a left closed, proximal intra-articular tibia fracture type AO/OTA 41B1.1 associated with a proximal fibula fracture type AO/OTA 4F1A(n), and a left closed, distal extra-articular tibia fracture type AO/OTA 43A3.3 associated with a distal fibula fracture type AO/OTA 4F3B [, ].
Wounds were débrided and irrigated, a left femoro-tibio-calcaneal external fixator was applied (Hoffmann III, Stryker, Selzach, Switzerland), and the patella fracture was fixed using the tension band wire technique on day 0, following damage control orthopedics protocol .
Definitive treatment of the femoral shaft fracture and proximal tibia fracture was delayed until day 7, but local soft tissue conditions around the distal tibia did not allow formal open reduction and internal fixation due to unhealed blisters. For this reason, the tibio-calcaneal external fixator could not be removed. After general endotracheal anesthesia and intravenous administration of Cefuroxime, the patient was positioned supine on a radiolucent table. The patient was prepared and draped for percutaneous screw fixation of the left proximal tibia fracture. The patient was then re-positioned on the fracture table for anterograde femur intramedullary nailing. The femoral part of the remaining external fixator was removed, leaving only the tibio-calcaneal construct. The positioning of the transcalcaneal pin did not allow proper fitting of the fracture table boot to the foot of the patient: the pin was inserted into the middle part of the posterior tuberosity of the calcaneus and the boot had no medial and lateral slot giving clearance to the pin . For this reason, the external fixator construct was extended with a distal frame consisting of three rods and four coupling devices (Hoffmann III, Stryker, Selzach, Switzerland) . Subsequently, the extended frame was fixed to the traction device of the fracture table by inserting and clamping connecting rods into the fixation apparatus that is usually dedicated to the attachment of the boot . Traction, rotation and slight abduction were then applied under fluoroscopic control in order to obtain adequate and stable reduction of the fracture. Surgery was then carried out after proper preparation and draping. An anterograde T2-recon femoral nail was inserted following the usual technique (Stryker, Selzach, Switzerland). After fluoroscopic control of the fracture reduction and fixation, copious irrigation was performed and the wounds were closed. Staples were used to close the skin. Sterile dressing was applied. No drains were used. The external fixator construct was disconnected from the fracture table traction device and the dedicated frame extension was dismantled. Upon operating room discharge, the lower extremity was well perfused and distal pulses were present. Postoperative radiographs showed adequate fracture reduction and fixation, as well as adequate femoral rotation.
Definitive treatment of the distal tibia fracture occurred in another institution, after the patient was transferred due to international health insurance regulations.