A 58-year-old woman was admitted to the Cardiovascular Department on September 24, 2017 for paroxysmal palpitations, chest tightness, and dizziness of approximately 6 mo duration without a history of syncope or structural heart disease.
Fatty liver, a rough gallbladder wall, and plaque formation in the left internal carotid artery were demonstrated by ultrasonography, which suggested liver disease, cholecystitis, and carotid atherosclerosis. The left ventricle was slightly enlarged, and the pulmonary artery was widened. The cardiac examination revealed mild mitral regurgitation. The ejection fraction was normal. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a few old lesions in the middle lobe of the right lung and small nodules in the lower lobe of the right lung. A possible “drop effect” was noted in the lower lobe of the left lung. Thickening of the pleura was present bilaterally. Mediastinal lymphadenopathy was also detected. Double-phase angiography of the left atrium pulmonary vein showed no abnormalities. The patient was not treated for any of these findings before the current hospitalization because no imaging studies had ever been performed on the patient.
The patient denied cigarette smoking and consumption of alcohol. She had a history of hypertension for 20 years, for which the highest recorded blood pressure was 220/110 mmHg; she was treated with valsartan and amlodipine. The blood pressure was well-controlled.
The patient denied family history.
A physical examination was performed once on the patient after hospitalization. The patient had shortness of breath with a respiratory rate of 30 per min. Auscultation of both lungs was significant for thick breath sounds without dry rales, wet rales, or a pleural friction rub. Percussion of the heart was normal. Palpation of the apex beat was normal with a heart rate of 179 per min, and the rhythm was irregular. No heart murmur was heard in each valve auscultation area, and there was no pericardial friction rub. There was no edema in the lower limbs.
All laboratory tests were normal, including liver and kidney function, electrolytes, myocardial enzymes, a routine hemogram, thyroid function, glycosylated hemoglobin level, and coagulation profile. Blood test results suggest dyslipidemia and cardiac insufficiency, as follows: Triglycerides, 1.99 mmol/L (0–1.7 mmol/L); and pro-BNP, 2506 ng/L (133–900 ng/L).
An electrocardiogram (ECG) obtained within 10 min after admission showed VT. After intravenous administration of amiodarone (0.15 g), the VT converted to a sinus rhythm, and the patient’s symptoms of discomfort were gradually relieved. The patient was transferred to the Cardiology Department for radiofrequency ablation. Before ablation, a preoperative transesophageal electrophysiologic examination was performed. Figure shows the ECG induced by S1S1 200 bpm atrial pacing during the transesophageal electrophysiologic examination. Atrioventricular separation was observed in the EB lead, confirming VT. Transesophageal ventricular pacing with S1S1 graded incremental stimulation showed a normal shape and time limit for the QRS downloaded from S1. VT induced by S1S1 200 bpm stimulation showed patterns for blocks of the right bundle branch and left anterior branch. The ventricular rate was 187 bpm, and the atrial rate was 98 bpm. The dysrhythmia then changed to another form of VT. Lead Vl showed an rS pattern. RS moved to leads V3, I, and II. The lead aVL main wave was upward. The lead III and the aVF main wave were downward. The ventricular rate was 202 bpm, and the atrial frequency was 98 bpm. The two forms of tachycardia alternated. After being captured by a sinus heartbeat, sustained VT recurred spontaneously. The ECG indicated normal sinus node function and accelerated conduction in the atrioventricular node, and persistent dual-source VT was diagnosed by physicians in the ECG department. It was concluded that there were two different kinds of tachycardia, as shown in Figure that could convert to each other spontaneously. The first form of VT was identified as a right-bundle-branch block, for which the morphology indicated the left posterior branch was much more likely to be blocked than the left anterior branch, and this prompted that VT originated from the left anterior branch. Whereas, the second form of VT had a left-bundle-branch-block morphology, similar to sinus rhythm, which prompted that VT originated from the septum of the right bundle branch. From the perspective of monism, the anatomical closeness of the origins of the two forms of VT suggested a single origin. Indeed, it was more likely that VT originated from the His bundle branch, which needed to be confirmed by a cardiac electrophysiologic examination.