A 62-year-old woman was referred to our outpatient clinic in February 2013, after visiting two different neurologists in 2012 who diagnosed her with CD, followed by an unsuccessful treatment episode in a rehabilitation clinic. The patient reported the following progressive problems since 2009: loss of power in the left arm and leg, and problems keeping her balance, sometimes resulting in a drunken gait and falling. In the 4 years before referral to our clinic, the patient had fallen spontaneously five times, without losing consciousness and with the ability to stand up immediately afterward. Furthermore, double vision occurred during fatigue, and the patient had difficulty articulating, difficulty finding words, pain in almost all joints and muscles, poor memory function, and difficulty in concentration due to which she could no longer read or solve puzzles – her favorite pastime. As a result, the patient experienced sleeping problems, low mood, no desire to perform activities, and a passive death wish.
In 2014, the patient again visited the neurological outpatient department. Anamnesis revealed progressive difficulties with speech and swallowing as well as falls due to balance disorder since 2009. On neurological examination, we saw a patient with a surprised look. Dysarthria was present, as well as a vertical upward supranuclear gaze palsy and slowing of downward vertical saccades. There was a prominent postural instability and a positive pull test. Snout reflexes were present. A left-sided striatal toe was seen. Rigidity and bradykinesia were present in legs more than arms. The applause sign was positive. Neither apraxia nor cortical sensory deficit was found, nor was there dysmetria or evidence of autonomic failure. Together with evidence of mesencephalon atrophy on MRI of the cerebrum and results on cognitive testing (described further), we concluded that the patient fulfilled the National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke and Society for PSP criteria (NINDS-SPSP) criteria for probable PSPS.