A 31-year-old male without underlying disease was presented to the Respiratory Medicine Department with right chest pain for half a year and an asthma attack 2 months before admission. At baseline, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed which showed thickened pleura and small amount of right pleural effusion. However, 2 months prior, the chest CT scan revealed decreased lung volume, hydropneumothorax (70% compression) (a), scattered nodules in the left lung (b), and thickening of the right pleura (c). Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and cytokeratin levels were normal, and thoracic closed drainage was performed. Routine examination of the pleural fluid indicated hemorrhagic effusion with normal carcinoembryonic antigen and cytokeratin levels. No tumor cells were detected in pleural fluid cytology. Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) was performed, which showed two hypermetabolic nodules with mild diffuse thickening of the right pleura, and multiple destructive bone lesions were located at the first lumbar vertebrae, second sacral vertebrae, bilateral ilium, and left ischium . Thoracoscopic pleural biopsy was performed under local anesthesia. Thoracoscopy revealed hemorrhagic hydrothorax, scattered hemorrhagic sites on the parietal and visceral pleura, and thickened pleura. Immunohistochemistry showed cluster of differentiation (CD) 31 (+) (d), vimentin (+), D2-40 (+), Ki-67 (+10%), tumor protein 53 (P53) (+), and creatine phosphokinase (CK) (−), indicating the possibility of a vasogenic tumor. After multidisciplinary discussion (oncology, pulmonology, pathology, and imaging) and remote expert consultation, it was suggested to perform lung and chest wall biopsies and test for CD34 and ETS-related genes (ERG). The lung and chest walls were biopsied under CT guidance. Pathological hematoxylin-eosin staining showed that pleural tumor cells were more heterogeneous than those of the chest wall and lungs (a–c). Immunohistochemical tests revealed CD34 (+) (e), ERG (+) (f), and F8 (−). Finally, the patient was diagnosed with primary pleural EAS with lung and bone metastases. The patient received 4 cycles of chemotherapy with ifosfamide and adriamycin. Unfortunately, the patient died 4 months after the diagnosis was confirmed.