A 50-year-old right-handed woman presented with a 4-month history of headaches, a progressive decrease in vision, a gait disorder, and sleep disturbances. Neurological examination revealed cerebellar ataxia; eye examination showed papilledema and right inferior quadrantanopia. Contrast brain MRI showed a large smooth, oval, well circumscribed mass (43 × 36 × 35 mm) in the pineal region, mass effect, and ventricular enlargement [-]. It severely displaced the midbrain and thalamus, compressing the aqueduct and invading the straight sinus and vein of Galen.
Resection of the lesion was performed through an occipital craniotomy in combination with a suboccipital craniotomy. The patient was in the three-quarter prone position with the neck flexed and the torso elevated about 30° . Intraoperative mannitol and steroids were used to reduce edema and intracerebral pressure and minimize the need for retraction. A midline skin incision was made in the occipital region, and an occipital bone flap was fashioned [ and ]. First, the supracerebellar infratentorial approach was performed , and a gray-yellow mass that grows in the capsule was identified in the pineal region [ and ]. The capsule of the tumor was separated from surrounding brain tissue and attached vessels, and the infratentorial component of the tumor was removed through dissection and bipolar coagulation under intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring. During the tumor removal, the vein of Galen and the pineal gland were identified and preserved . The supratentorial component of the tumor is resected through a right occipital interhemispheric approach. The U-shaped dural opening over the transverse sinus is done on the right side of the sagittal sinus . The right occipital lobe was carefully retracted, and the superior part of the tumor was dissected from the medial part of the occipital lobes and the spleen of the corpus callosum and removed . After the tumor was removed, cerebrospinal fluid circulation was restored. Simpson Grade I resection was achieved. The surgery was performed under the control of a surgical microscope (OPMI PENTERO 900 Zeiss). The histopathologic diagnosis was transitional meningioma (WHO Grade 1, ICD-O code 9537/0) . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 14 with a regression of headache and visual field defects. A control brain MRI with contrast-enhancement , performed 3 months after the surgery, shows total tumor removal and hydrocephalus regression due to the restoration of cerebrospinal fluid flow.