The 9 year-old boy from Southeast China came to Airforce Medical Center of PLA early this year, who was diagnosed of PJS in a local hospital. Multiple MPs on the lips and cheeks were observed by his families shortly after his birth, and this phenomenon did not draw their attention since this family did not have a history of PJS. At the age of seven, the boy got paroxysmal abdominal cramps after meal and fresh blood came out with stool. He was soon sent to the local hospital, and colonoscopy revealed multiple colon polyps. Then endoscopic polypectomy was performed, and pathological exam confirmed them hamartomas. The symptoms relieved largely after colonoscopy. Taking pigmentation and GI hamartomas together, the diagnosis of PJS was confirmed.
One year later, the similar symptoms appeared again, and this time doctors in the local hospital used capsule endoscopy, during which a large polyp with the diameter of 5 cm in the ileum was detected. After expectant treatment, the patient was referred to our department for further treatment. Physical examination confirmed the MPs and revealed no other PJS related findings (testicular tumors included). We arranged enteroscopy for him after his admission, and the large polyp whose diameter was actually 2.5 cm together with another smaller one within the ileum was resected successfully . Postoperational pathology reported the PJS-related hamartomas which showed the classical arborizing smooth muscle, consistently with previous results .
During the boy’s remedy, we collected the blood samples of his and his parents after their signing informed consents forms (ICF). In the laboratory, the genomic DNA was extracted from their peripheral blood leucocytes using animal genomic DNA kit (TSP201, TsingKe Biotech). Polymerase chain reactions (PCR) were performed by using modified DNA polymerase mix (TSE004, TsingKe Biotech), and the coding sequence and boundaries of STK11 gene were analyzed by DNA sequencing essentially as previously described [, ].
Fifty unrelated control individuals who came to our department for gastric polyps treatment were also screened for the presence of the mutation to rule out polymorphisms. All biological samples were collected after written ICF being acquired.
Sanger sequencing of STK11 gene revealed a heterozygous germline deletion c.243delG in exon 1 in the patient’s genomic DNA , while it was not detected in the parents’ or the control samples’. This mutation has not been documented in literatures or mutation databases such as dbSNP, OMIM, ClinVar, HGMD or ExAC . It generates a translational frameshift and a premature stop (p.K81Kfs*15), resulting in a large-scale loss of kinase domain and total loss of the C-terminal domain in comparison to the wild type .
Swiss-Model online software , a homology modeling program , showed the simulated mutant protein turns into an aberrant shape with significantly smaller size . Evolutionary conservation was analyzed by comparing across different species , and the results showed these missing amino acid residues were most conserved .
Generally, this mutation is believed to be a novel pathogenic one in STK11 leading to PJS in line with American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) classification system .