A 39-year-old woman with a history of ulcerative colitis and three-month diagnosis of BRAF V600E-mutant colorectal cancer with metastases to the liver presented to the dermatology clinic after developing innumerable 1–5 mm dark brown macules and papules. Prior to clinical presentation, the patient received 2 months of chemotherapeutic treatment with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab. Due to limited treatment response, she was transitioned to combination therapy with encorafenib (300 mg daily), cetuximab (370 mg weekly), and binimetinib (45 mg twice daily).
After completing 2 cycles of the triplet regimen over the course of 2 weeks, she noted multiple new melanocytic lesions on her face. Over the next 8 weeks while continuing on this regimen, she continued to develop over 200 additional lesions on her oral labia, shoulders, arms, palms, and buttocks (a–d). On dermatoscopy, the lesions demonstrated a fibrillar network pattern with focal areas of irregularity and non-perifollicular pigment dropout (a, b). No ocular lesions were noted. Note that the patient temporarily stopped binimetinib treatment 7 weeks after initiation due to significant menorrhagia. She resumed binimetinib after menorrhagia was controlled with 2 weeks of leuprolide acetate therapy.
A punch biopsy of a lesion on the right upper arm was performed, which demonstrated a compound melanocytic proliferation with moderate atypia and negative staining for BRAF V600E . Histopathologic findings did not meet diagnostic criteria for melanoma given that there was no significant pagetoid scatter, no severe cytologic atypia or dermal mitotic figures present, and maturation was present with depth and small size. Close follow-up with full-body skin exams every six to 8 weeks was recommended to the patient to monitor for malignant transformation.
16 weeks after initiating therapy, the patient developed new lung lesions with interval increases in liver metastases. Patient changed treatment to regorafenib and pembrolizumab combination therapy at an external institution and was noted to develop a drug rash and fever 2 weeks after initiation of treatment. Upon resolution of her drug rash, general physical exam described the patient’s skin as having no suspicious lesions. No specific comments regarding EMN after stopping encorafenib/cetuximab/binimetinib were made. The patient died due to complications secondary to mCRC, 11 months after diagnosis. The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as supplementary material (online suppl. material; for all online suppl. material, see ) .