A 37-year-old healthy Dutch man with abdominal pain, abdominal distension, dyspepsia, back pain, and fatigue presented to the emergency department of the Meander Medical Center of Amersfoort, the Netherlands. A computerized tomography (CT) scan was performed and revealed the presence of a gastric tumor. Initially it was suspected to be gastric cancer. However, subsequent positron emission tomography (PET) imaging and biopsy of the gastric tumor confirmed the diagnosis of gastric small cell neuroendocrine carcinoma with liver metastases (grade 3, stage IV), which carries a high risk for an unfavorable outcome. The patient was initially treated with cisplatin/etoposide chemotherapy for 7 months. Under this treatment, the disease progressed rapidly according to a CT of the thorax/abdomen and the RECIST 1.1. criteria. As a result, in September 2019, treatment was switched into ipilimumab/nivolumab immunotherapy. After two cycles, immunotherapy was terminated due to the development of symptoms including watery diarrhea up to 10 times per day, stomach aches, and bright red, rectal bleeding, which were diagnosed as autoimmune colitis. Against expectations, a stable disease was observed until June 2020 when nivolumab was reintroduced as monotherapy. While on this therapy, a CT scan showed moderate tumor growth. Due to this progression and the likelihood of a rapid deterioration of the clinical condition of the patient, coupled with the recent data suggesting strong synergism between ICIs and trained immunity inducers [, ], we decided to combine ICI therapy with BCG vaccinations every 3–4 months.
The BCG-naïve patient received his first intradermal BCG vaccination (0.1 mL, 0.75 mg/mL, Mycobacterium bovis, Danish strain 1331, SSI, Denmark) at the end of December 2020. A subsequent CT scan performed in February 2021 showed mild progression of the primary tumor and stable liver metastases. After having received the second dose of BCG in March 2021, radiation therapy (radiotherapy) was also initiated to treat the primary tumor because of slow progression of the tumor (a total dosage of 39 Gy, in 13 fractions of 3 Gy). The primary tumor responded and decreased in size from 6.6 cm to 5 cm. However, in April 2021, the patient developed diarrhea up to five times per day and stomach aches, which was identified as a second episode of immune-mediated colitis (IMC). As a result, both immunotherapy and radiotherapy were terminated. He was successfully treated with infliximab and prednisone.
In June 2021, the patient received his third and last dose of BCG. Between April 2021 and July 2021, without any further therapy, the cancer was stable. In July 2021, the patient developed uveitis and was treated successfully with topical steroids. On a CT scan performed at the end of July 2021 further progression of the primary tumor was observed. However, it is important to note that the radiologist observed changes in density and air bubbles within the tumor tissue, which was interpreted as areas of necrosis and made the scan difficult to interpret. Follow-up of the patient ended in September 2021 when the patient started with second-line chemotherapy carboplatin/paclitaxel based on second/expert opinion, unfortunately without clinical response. In January 2022, he started an experimental personalized vaccination therapy based on whole genome sequencing results of the tumor tissue in Germany, initiated on his own and not part of a clinical trial. He died from recurrent gastric bleeding in April 2022. A timeline of the events and treatments is presented in Fig. .
At baseline in December 2020 and before every BCG vaccination, blood was collected, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated using Ficoll-paque (Sigma Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) density gradient centrifugation. Cytokine production capacity was assessed after stimulation with Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tb) or Escherichia coli (E. coli) (the latter being used to reflect heterologous stimulation) for 24 h over 7 days. Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β), and interferon gamma (IFNγ) cytokine concentrations were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) with DuoSet® ELISA kits (R and D Systems, MN, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. A healthy, 29-year-old male, who received BCG administrations at the same time with the patient, served as control. Both the patient and the healthy volunteer gave written informed consent.
BCG vaccination led to elevated IL-6 and IL-1β production in PBMCs of the patient compared with baseline, following stimulation with both M. tb and E. coli, suggesting the induction of trained immunity . BCG had no clear stimulatory effect on TNFα and IFNγ production capacity . The increase of IL-6 and IL-1β production was less pronounced in the PBMCs from the control.