A 28-year-old female patient applied for an elective laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, she had a BMI of 40.8 kg/m2. (Weight: 98 kg, Height: 1.55 m). She is a known case of hypothyroidism on levothyroxine 50 mcg. She tried to lose weight using multiple diets, all of which have failed.
During the patients’ pre-operative assessment, full physical examination was performed. Upon palpating the abdomen, the stomach was felt on the right side instead of the usual left. This raised doubts about the presence of a type of heterotaxy.
Routine laboratory tests including complete blood count, renal and liver function test, coagulation profile, and thyroid function test were all performed, all were within normal ranges. Moreover, chest radiograph and electrocardiogram were both insignificant. She was also seen by the anesthesiologist and was cleared for surgery.
In regards to imaging, contrast study of the stomach and duodenum, using gastrograffin meal, was done which showed the stomach located on the right side of the abdomen, and jejunal loops on the left upper part of the abdomen, with no evidence gastro-esophageal reflux or hiatus hernia. After that, abdominal ultrasound was performed with limited visualization due to the patients obesity. A left sided enlarged liver with a normal gallbladder were the only findings. These findings has led to the need for a CT scan for proper visualization of the patients’ anatomy.
The CT abdomen with intravenous contrast was performed pre-operatively, where multiple significant findings were seen and diagnosis of Polysplenia Syndrome was confirmed. These findings include a right-sided stomach, a duodenum crossing anterior to mesenteric vessels, complete intestinal malrotation as the small bowels are on the left side and the large bowel on the right side, and the terminal ileum and cecum are midline. Other finding include, right sided splenules with a parent spleen, a midline liver, and infra-renal IVC with infra-hepatic interruption. The partially seen apex of the heart was at the left side. The gallbladder, adrenals, and urinary bladder showed no abnormality. The impression was that these features are suggestive of Polysplenia Syndrome/left isomerism (, ).
Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy was then performed by a bariatric surgeon under general anesthesia, with the patient in supine position. Starting with insufflation of the abdomen by a Veress needle at the right upper quadrant to create a pneumoperitoneum. Four ports were inserted under vision starting from the supraumbilical port; 11 mm, right and left midclavicular line; 5 and 15 mm respectively, and a 5 mm port at the epigastric area. The 15 mm port was inserted on the left to comply with the patients’ anatomy. The intraoperative findings include a large fatty midline liver, a right sided stomach, with a spleen posterior to it . Dissection was started at the gastrocolic ligament at 6 cm from the incisura by using a 5 mm ultrasonic device (LigaSure). The dissection continued from the incisura to the angle of His, with sealing of the short gastric vessels. The posterior attachment with the stomach was then removed. Bougie size 38 was inserted up to the pylorus, then 2 blacks and 3 purples were inserted using a reinforced stapler device (Signia). The hemostasis was reinsured then methylene blue test was done, as it is regularly performed, showing no leak or twist. The resected stomach was removed from the 15 mm port. Closure of the 15 mm port fascia was done using Vicryl and Endoclose. The skin incisions were closed subcuticularly, using Monocryl.
The only difference in this approach from the one used in the situs solitus patients undergoing LSG is the location of the 15 mm port, as it was inserted on the left midclavicular line instead of the right.
Day one post-operatively, imaging was performed to rule out incision site leak using single water-soluble contrast study of the stomach and duodenum, using gastrograffin meal, during which, free flow of the oral contrast is noted through the esophagus into the neo-stomach with no evidence of contrast leakage. The stomach emptied well into the duodenum, showing no evidence of contrast leak post laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (, ). This imaging is not regularly done; however, it was advised due to the patients’ anatomy.
The patient was discharged on post-operative day two, after drinking approximately 800 mL of clear fluids. She was not complaining of any nausea or vomiting. Her pain was tolerated with paracetamol and was improving gradually. She also passed urine, flatus, and stool normally. She was seen by a dietitian and consulted regarding the proper diet after LSG. She was encouraged to have a clear fluid diet of one to two Liters a day until her next follow up. Mobility and exercise were also recommended.
Two and four weeks after the surgery, she was seen in the out-patient clinic for a follow up. The patient was doing well, tolerating clear fluid diet with no complaints of nausea or vomiting. She did not complain of gastro-esophageal reflux either. Histopathology results were checked, and showed chronic inactive gastritis. She has lost 10 kg and her BMI decreased to 36.6 kg/m2. She drinks around 600 mL per day. She has been encourage to exercise daily, and to be followed up again in one month.