A 60-year-old male had epigastric pain and was admitted to our hospital for treatment of a suspected CBD stone. Past medical history was only hyperlipidemia. Mild tenderness in the upper abdomen was noted during physical examination. Laboratory findings on admission were as follows: white blood cell count, 6600/μl; hemoglobin, 14.0 g/dl; platelet count, 28.9 × 104/μl; C-reactive protein, 0.35 mg/dl; total bilirubin, 2.0 mg/dl; direct bilirubin, 0.4 mg/dl; serum aspartate aminotransferase, 307 IU/l; serum alanine aminotransferase, 409 IU/l; serum glutamyltransferase, 932 IU/l; and serum alkaline phosphatase, 534 IU/l. Regarding tumor markers, carcinoembryonic antigen was 1.7 ng/ml (normal range < 5.0 ng/ml) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 9.6 U/ml (normal range < 37.0 ng/ml). Viral markers for hepatitis, including hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C viral antibody, were negative.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a slightly dilated CBD and a high-density spot in the DBD, suggesting a CBD stone . Endoscopic ultrasonography demonstrated an elevated lesion on the DBD . Permeation to the pancreatic parenchyma or to the outside of the bile duct wall was unclear. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) revealed a circumferential stenosis 11.8 mm distal from the ampulla of Vater and a 5.1 × 6.5 mm irregularly shaped, elevated lesion on the DBD . A double pig-tail catheter (7 Fr, 6 cm) was inserted in the bile duct. Brush cytology showed atypical ductal cells, indicating adenocarcinoma (AC) of the DBD.
Under a diagnosis of primary cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) of the DBD, a subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed. Neither peritoneal dissemination nor lymph node metastases were found during the operation. Macroscopically, an irregularly shaped nodular tumor was found in the DBD . Microscopically, the lesion was seen to be composed of predominantly well-differentiated tubular AC in the superficial layer of the tumor, admixed with neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) in the deeper portion , indicating a diagnosis of MANEC of the DBD. While the AC component shows papillary growth toward the lumen of the bile duct, the NEC component had infiltrated into the muscle layer, with vascular and neural invasion. Atypical epithelium was found extensively in the superficial epithelium and accessory glands of the CBD, but no malignancies were found in the gallbladder, cholecystic duct, papilla of Vater, pancreas, or duodenum; based on this, the final pathological diagnosis was MANEC of the CBD, Pat Bi, fm, pPanc0, pDu0, pHM0, pEM0, tubular, well-differentiated tubular AC>NEC, INF β, int, ly0, v0, pm1. No lymph node metastases were found. After immunohistochemical staining, NEC components were diffusely positive for synaptophysin and CD56, and the MIB-1 index was 30% . In both components, p16 was positive and p53 was negative. Additionally, the NEC component was strongly positive for SSTR2, SSTR5, and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) .
The postoperative course was good, there were no serious complications, and he was discharged 33 days post-operation. Three months postsurgery, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 (120 mg/body/day) was started. More than 3 years postsurgery, he is alive without recurrence.