A 53-year-old African-American female with a history of uterine fibroids presented with a two-month history of nausea, vomiting, nervousness, weight gain and left lower quadrant abdominal pain. Weeks prior, she also went to the emergency department for similar symptoms where an abdominal computerized tomography (CT) scan showed an enlarged uterus along with fibroids, a hemorrhagic cyst of the right ovary and a teratoma of the left ovary . Regions of calcification were present measuring a maximum of 1.8 cm.
Physical exam revealed a soft, non-distended abdomen with pain upon deep palpation localized to the left lower quadrant. The thyroid gland was palpable, with an estimated weight of thirty to forty grams. It was nodular and nontender. The Pemberton sign checking for venous obstruction due to a goiter was negative. Tachycardia was present with a normal rhythm. S1 and S2 were normal with no S3, S4, gallops or murmurs detected. Initial labs revealed a mild normocytic anemia, a low TSH level and slightly elevated transaminases .
An endocrinology consultation was placed due to the abnormal TSH levels indicating hyperthyroidism. Baseline thyroid testing showed a TSH 0.04mIU/L (ref. range: 0.340–5.600mIU/L), free T4 level of 4.03 ng/dL (ref. range: 0.61–1.12 ng/dL) and total T3 of 451 ng/dL (ref. range: 60-181 ng/dL). A baseline thyroid ultrasound was also performed that showed a bilaterally enlarged thyroid gland, consistent with a goiter. Both lobes were heterogeneous. Multiple cystic and complex nodules were seen bilaterally. The largest of these measured 1.5 × 1.1 × 1.6 cm on the left lobe. There were small encapsulated nodules seen on each lobe. These findings were consistent with a multinodular goiter. The hyperthyroid symptoms improved after the administration of antithyroid medications: propranolol and methimazole.
Beta-hCG intact was measured twice, showing a value greater than 450,000mIU/mL. Because of the combination of ovarian and uterine pathology present, the patient was recommended for a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Following surgery, b-hCG levels dropped from greater than 450,000mIU/mL to 200,000mIU/mL and continued to decrease over the course of the hospital stay . The methimazole and propranolol doses were also titrated as the hyperthyroidism became less symptomatic. Tissue diagnosis by the pathology laboratory confirmed the ovarian teratoma . Sections of the myometrial wall containing massive hydropic chorionic villi with the presence of intravillous vascular cistern were noted along with excess trophoblastic proliferation . This, along with the extremely high b-hCG levels, was consistent with the presentation of a complete hydatidiform mole.
After discharge, the patient underwent serial b-hCG measurements until the levels were undetectable to monitor the potential development of GTN. Post-surgical management also included methotrexate for chemotherapy. During the course of chemotherapy, lung nodules were found on a subsequent CT scan along with a slight upswing in b-hCG. However, as more time passed, the levels of b-hCG were eventually undetectable, and there was no subsequent choriocarcinoma post complete molar pregnancy.
Thyroid hormone levels were also monitored after discharge from the hospital and low-dose methimazole was continued. There was a significant improvement in the thyroid hormone levels 1 month following the surgery: TSH 0.5mIU/L, free T4 0.77 ng/dL and free T3 2.26 pg/mL (ref. range: 2.3–4.2 pg/mL). TSH levels were continuously monitored for 12 months following the surgery and remained normal. A year after the surgery, the patient also sought treatment at the Mayo Clinic, who performed a fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of a thyroid nodule. The patient reported the FNAB results as negative and the methimazole was then discontinued.