A 44-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to the ophthalmology unit four hours after sudden painless loss of vision in her right eye. She was in remission following six months of chemotherapy with cyclophosphomide and fludarabine for chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Two months after her chemotherapy ceased (9 months prior to this presentation) she had severe right sided herpes zoster ophthalmicus with uveitis that was treated with topical steroids. She was a smoker and on hormone replacement therapy.
Her visual acuity was count fingers at one metre in the right eye and 6/6 in the left eye. Pupils were equal and reactive with a right relative afferent pupillary defect. Dilated fundus examination at presentation was essentially normal showing healthy discs with some mild arteriolar attenuation in the right eye. Whilst the history was highly suggestive of a central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) optic neuritis could not be excluded. Dual therapy was commenced with ocular massage and intravenous acetazolamide and high dose intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone (1 gram daily) and oral famciclovir (500 mg TDS) for a possible underlying vasculitic cause or optic neuritis. She continued the IV steroids for a total of three days and the oral famciclovir for three weeks.
Dilated fundus examination of the right eye the following day demonstrated a cherry red spot and retinal oedema, findings consistent with right CRAO . The early and late phase fluorescein angiogram images showed reperfusion of the right central retinal artery with no signs of optic neuritis or retinal vasculitis.
An embolic screen for possible sources of emboli included routine blood tests, carotid doppler ultrasound and a transthoracic echocardiogram. Blood tests were normal with no active leukaemia and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 19 and c-reactive protein < 3. The carotid doppler ultrasound revealed complete occlusion of the right ICA with a patent left ICA. CT angiogram the same day supported the finding of 100% right ICA occlusion with no signs of calcification and demonstrated a generalized diminished right intracranial circulation .
Vascular surgery was not undertaken as the occlusion was total and stable and the right intracranial circulation was well collateralized. At one month follow up she was clinically stable with no visual recovery.