A girl aged 7 years and 8 mo came to our department for repeated cough, shortness of breath for 7 years and one convulsion. There were four convulsions within 2 d after admission. No fever, vomiting, diarrhea and other symptoms were found.
The patient had convulsions shortly after waking up in the morning, for no obvious reason. They were characterized by generalized tonic–clonic seizures and relieved spontaneously within 2 min.
The patient had a paroxysmal cough after catching a cold, combined with cyanosis in the mouth and lips, and shortness of breath since 8 mo of age. Chest radiography indicated increased pulmonary markings in both lungs. Cardiac ultrasonography indicated congenital heart disease, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), patent oval foramen and pulmonary hypertension. She was admitted to the local hospital several times for the treatment of severe pneumonia, congenital heart disease, heart insufficiency, and malnutrition. These conditions showed remission after symptomatic treatment.
The child was born by cesarean section at 38 wk. Her parents and one of her brothers were healthy.
After admission, the patient’s temperature was 37.0°C; pulse, 112 bpm; respiration, 29 breaths/min; blood pressure, 98/60 mmHg; body weight, 18 kg; height, 118 cm; and head circumference, 50 cm. She was conscious, but presented with an appearance of malnutrition. The subcutaneous fat was thin. No swelling was noticed in the tonsils. No cyanosis was identified in the mouth and lips. No obvious edema was observed. her language, intelligence and movement showed slight delay. Congenital mydriasis was noticed. The pupils showed a diameter of 5 mm, and were no longer sensitive to light reflex. The heart rate was 112 bpm. The cardiac sound was loud, P2 showed accentuation. Persistent machinery murmur (III/6) was identified in the left sternal border. The pulmonary respiration in both lungs was coarse, without dry or moist rales. The abdomen was soft, and the liver was palpable under the ribs (1.0 cm). The boundary was sharp, and the texture was soft. No tenderness was felt. For nervous system examination, the neck was soft, and the pathological signs were negative. The myodynamia and muscular tension were normal, and the tendon reflex was normal. Appetite, sleeping, urination and defecation were normal.
Blood analysis revealed leukocytosis 8.58 × 109/L with the neutrophils as the major cells (68%). The hematocrit and platelet count were normal. The level of procalcitonin increased slightly (1.42 ng/mL). Serum C-reactive protein was 33.84 mg/L (normal range < 8 mg/L). Stool occult blood test was positive. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm and axis deviation to the right. Chest X-ray showed thickened texture in both lungs, together with patchy blurred shadows and enlarged heart shadow. There was obvious protrusion in the pulmonary artery segment, plump edge of the right heart, and left heart margin beyond the midline of the clavicle. There were no abnormalities in liver and renal function determination, cardiac enzymes, electrolytes, blood glucose and organic acid. The score based on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale was 75.
The video electroencephalogram findings showed background activity of 6–7 c/s in consciousness. The bilateral activity was symmetric, with no obvious spike/sharp wave. No paradoxical discharge was noticed in the presence of flash stimulation. Cardiac ultrasonography revealed congenital heart disease: PDA with a diameter of 0.68 cm, left coronary arteriectasis, patent oval foramen with a diameter of 0.12 cm, tricuspid and pulmonary regurgitation, and pulmonary hypertension. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) indicated stiffness in the brain vessels, together with multiple aberrant signaling shadows in bilateral paraventricular regions .
For the gene sequencing, venous blood samples (3 mL) were collected from the patient and her parents using a tube containing EDTA after obtaining informed consent. The study protocols were approved by the Ethical Committee of our hospital (approval No. 2016066). The pathogenic gene was detected by whole exon sequencing, and verified by Sanger technique. A heterozygous mutation (c.536G>A) was identified in the ACTA2 gene, which resulted in generation of p.R179H . No mutations were identified in the ACTA2 gene in her parents.