A 2-year-old boy was referred to a paediatric nephrologist for evaluation of non-nephrotic range proteinuria. He did not have hematuria, body swelling or features of vasculitis. His 24-year-old maternal uncle had been evaluated for the same presentation 10 years ago and a renal biopsy revealed non-specific changes with a few sclerosed glomeruli. However, he remained asymptomatic apart from the proteinuria.
Physical examination of the child did not show objective weight gain, ascites, pleural effusion or hypertension. Blood pressure was normal at 85/51 mmHg. He had normal serum albumin concentration despite having an elevated urine protein/creatinine ratio of 176 mg/mmol/l which is in the non-nephrotic range. Trace amounts of albumin with normal globulin fractions were identified by urine protein electrophoresis. Urine β-2 microglobulin concentration was elevated at > 500 ng/ml (normal range < 300 ng/ml). Serum protein electrophoresis revealed high-normal albumin concentration without abnormalities. The 24-h urinary calcium (1.58 mmol/day) and adjusted urinary calcium excretion (0.14 mmol/kg/day; normal range < 0.06 mmol/kg/day) were both elevated. He had a normal serum phosphate level and fractional excretion of urinary phosphate was normal. Urinary tract ultrasound was normal and showed no evidence of nephrocalcinosis. A diagnosis of Dent disease was clinically suspected based on the β-2 microglobulinuria, hypercalciuria and the family history, and thus screening was offered to the family. Table shows the biochemical profile of the child.
After providing pre-test counseling and obtaining written informed consent, the child, his mother and maternal uncle underwent genetic testing for Dent disease at the Rare Kidney Stone Consortium (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA). Individual exons with flanking intron sequences of the CLCN5 gene were amplified and sequenced from DNA extracted from peripheral venous blood. The primers and conditions for thermal cycling are available upon request. Both the child and his maternal uncle were found to be hemizygous for a nonsense pathogenic variant in exon 9 of the CLCN5 gene [NM_000084.4; c.1399C>T; rs797044811], which results in a stop codon at residue 467, leading to a truncated non-functional protein [NP_000075.1; p.R467X]. This confirmed the diagnosis of Dent disease-1 in the proband and his uncle. His mother was also confirmed to be an unaffected heterozygous carrier for the same variant. This pathogenic variant has previously been reported in association with Dent disease-1 in the published literature .
Following confirmation of the diagnosis our patient was started on thiazide diuretics and potassium citrate. After 1 month of therapy his adjusted urinary calcium excretion was 0.08 mmol/kg/day (normal range < 0.06 mmol/kg/day).