Mr X was an 83-year-old widower living at home near his family. He was retired after a business career. Some family members died very early in his life. A family psychiatric history only uncovered that a distant relative had committed suicide. His medical history included high blood pressure, thrombophlebitis, hypercholesterolemia, and local rectal cancer. The latter had been treated by surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, 1 year before he presented with GD; although he was still under follow-up surveillance, he was considered to be in remission. He was currently being treated once daily with 50 mg captopril, 50 mg chlorthalidone, and 10 mg simvastatin. He could mobilize with a cane.
His GD history began 30 years prior to this presentation. He reported a 5-year period of gambling in casinos that coincided with economic problems. His OG began when he was 80 years old after he lost his wife, which has led to the accumulation of debts that he has been hiding from his family. His OG problem deteriorated soon after it started, with negative emotional states (feelings of loneliness) and the need to “chase losses.” At the time he presented to us, he had accumulated debts of approximately €30, 000 and he needed several credit cards to cover debts payment. The main gambling problem, for which he consulted, was playing online casinos. His family asked for treatment and he consented to undergo clinical and neuropsychological assessment. On examination, he was not confused and had no obvious symptoms of neurocognitive impairment. He reported feelings of guilt, anxiety, and sleep disorder, but had no suicidal ideation or psychotic symptoms. He denied smoking, drinking coffee or alcohol, and illicit drug use, and we were confident that he was not suffering from any other behavioral addiction.
This case was assessed and treated in the Pathological Gambling Unit (PGU) of the Psychiatry Department of the Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL in Barcelona, Spain. All the results of the assessment are summarized in Tables , .
We conducted a clinical psychological assessment, which included the following: Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI 5.00); the South Oaks Gambling Screen (SOGS); the Diagnostic questionnaire for pathological gambling according to DSM-IV criteria (DSM-IV Diagnostic Questionnaire of Stinchfield), the Temperament and Character Inventory–Revised (TCI-R); the Barratt Impulsivity Scale (BIS-11); the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT); the UPPS-P Impulsive Behavior Scale; and the Symptom Checklist-90-Revised (SCL-90-R). (See references in Supplementary data).
The clinical assessment therefore highlighted an adjustment disorder. Moreover, Mr X fulfilled DSM5 diagnostic criteria for GD (American Psychiatric Association, ) (see Table ). The psychological assessment confirmed that the patient had a GD (by means of the SOGS and the DSM-IV Diagnostic Questionnaire of Stinchfield), as was already identified in the first clinical interview. It also revealed symptoms of depression, anxiety, hostility, and isolation (measured by the SCL-90-R) (see Table ).
Regarding personality traits (by means of the TCI-R), the patient was characterized by low scores on harm avoidance, reward dependence, persistence, self-directedness and cooperativeness. However, he showed extremely high scores on the self-transcendence subscale. These results showed that the patient was carefree, courageous, and generally optimistic, although he had difficulties anticipating or preventing potentially harmful or dangerous situations. Moreover, he was critical, skeptical, pragmatic, and individualistic. He did not need the approval of the others to make decisions, and had evidence of detachment and social coldness. Other personality traits indicate a tendency to irresponsibility, instability of purpose, lack of perseverance, and difficulties in planning and organizing goals. Finally, he appeared to be a very spiritual person, which is generally associated with more resources to cope with adversity, illness, suffering, or even death. These features are highly positive in the elderly, as these situations are most likely to happen at this stage of life.
He showed high levels of impulsivity on the impulsivity scales (BIS-11 and UPPS-P). Specifically in the BIS-11, the motor subscale and total score were higher than the means obtained in the Spanish general population (Oquendo et al., ). In the UPPS-P, the patient scored high on urgency (negative and positive) and low on (lack of) perseverance, premeditation, and sensation seeking. These results indicated a tendency to act impulsively, both with negative (depression, anxiety or hostility) and positive effects, with a lack of perseverance to achieve goals and meet obligations, and difficulties anticipating the consequences of his behavior. Finally, there was no preference for seeking stimulation or excitement. His AUDIT score was not suggestive of alcohol problems.
To exclude neurocognitive issues, we also performed the following assessments: Mini Mental State Examination-MMSE; Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-WAIS-III, subtest of Vocabulary (IQ estimation); Auditory Verbal Learning Test (verbal memory); Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test (visual memory); Animals (semantic fluency); FAS (Phonemic fluency); WAIS-III Digits Span (working memory); Trail Making Test (attention and cognitive flexibility) or TMT; and Stroop Color and Word Test-SCWT (inhibition response). (See references in Supplementary data). The neuropsychological assessment focused on executive functions, memory and verbal fluency. The most important reason for this neuropsychological assessment is that pathological gamblers show a dysfunctional executive profile (Fagundo et al., ). Additionally, memory is consistently affected in neurodegenerative diseases and frequently associated with cognitive impairment (Panza et al., ). Furthermore, alterations in both qualitative and quantitative aspects of phonemic and semantic fluency have been described in dementias (Fagundo et al., ). Thus, considering the age of the patient, the assessment of these cognitive functions was particularly relevant. No cognitive deficits or alterations were observed (see Table ). To exclude epilepsy, the patient underwent a clinical electroencephalogram, which was normal.
Based on the diagnosis of GD, ambulatory care was implemented based on individual cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). The individual CBT consisted of 16 weekly outpatient sessions lasting 90 min each and a 2-year follow-up period. The goal of treatment was to implement CBT strategies to achieve full recovery, defined as the full abstinence from all types of gambling. The general topics addressed in the therapy included psycho-education about the disorder (its course, vulnerability factors, diagnostic criteria, bio-psychosocial models of GD, and phases), stimulus control (money management, avoidance of risk situations, self-exclusion, and changing risky routes), response prevention (alternative and compensatory behaviors), cognitive restructuring focused on the illusions of control over gambling and magical thinking, reinforcement and self-reinforcement, skills training, and relapse prevention techniques. The treatment program has already been described (Jiménez-Murcia et al., ) and its short and medium-term effectiveness reported elsewhere (Jiménez-Murcia et al., , ). Several family meetings were also conducted to collect a detailed family history and to provide information about individual CBT. Mr X was informed about the intention to publish this case history and he provided signed consent.