A 67-year-old Caucasian male with a 10-year history of tophaceous gout in his knees bilaterally, treated with allopurinol, was admitted with a 3-week history of swelling, pain, and drainage from his left knee. His symptoms began after an acute traumatic injury to the left lateral knee, in which he suffered a small cut with a break in the skin. Before the injury, the patient was asymptomatic and denied any pain, bleeding, or skin breakdown to the bilateral knees. On physical examination, the patient had a large, tennis ball-sized mass over his left knee anterior to the patella and patellar tendon, with a second irregularly shaped firm mass inferior to this . There were multiple areas of skin breakdown over the large mass overlying the patient’s left knee, which was draining purulent and sanguineous fluid that appeared to be gouty tophaceous material. There was no surrounding erythema. Over the right anterior knee, there were two large, firm masses . The superior mass was tennis ball sized and the inferior mass was smaller and irregularly shaped. There was thinning of the overlying skin, which remained intact. He denied any pain to the right knee. The patient’s examination was also remarkable for a 3×3 cm, firm, mobile, non-tender, soft tissue mass over the proximal right olecranon. He denied any pain or limited range of motion or function secondary to this mass. His medical history consisted of gout, diabetes mellitus, and hypercholesterolemia. The patient reported a distant history of a similar mass being resected from his right knee. His surgical history also included removal of the left knee bursa and carpal tunnel release. He denied any smoking or illicit drug use but endorsed social alcohol use. He had an average build with a body mass index of 26.9. The patient was started on intravenous antibiotics and imaging studies were performed.
Plain radiographs of the bilateral knees revealed large soft tissue masses anterior to the patella ( and ). Magnetic resonance imaging of the left knee was also performed which demonstrated heterogeneous masses consistent with tophi and peripheral enhancement with central necrosis . A diagnostic biopsy was performed to rule out malignancy and to confirm tophaceous gouty masses . The results of the biopsy confirmed gouty tophi.
Surgical intervention was indicated for excision of the mass overlying the patient’s left knee due to its extraordinary size and ulcerating presentation. This was coordinated with plastic surgery for complex wound closure. A midline incision was used to approach the mass. Due to skin defects, a transverse incision was also made which allowed for the rotation of the skin and proper wound closure. The inferior mass was more encapsulated and was circumferentially resected in its entirety after careful elevation of the patellar tendon. Overlying necrotic tissue was removed and plastic surgery performed an adjacent soft tissue transfer for wound closure over a Jackson-Pratt drain . No skin graft was necessary. The mass was found to be extra-articular and directly anterior to the extensor mechanism. The patient’s wound healed uneventfully and he returned to normal function. Two months following excision of the left knee gouty mass, the patient returned and underwent planned resection of the gouty tophaceous mass over the anterior aspect of the right knee using a similar technique . Of note, the patient denied any antecedent pain or trauma to this knee. At the 1-year follow-up, the patient demonstrated full, painless, active range of motion in his bilateral knees. The surgical incisions appeared well healed and the patient had resumed his normal activities of daily living .