A 29-year-old G2P1 pregnant woman at 34 weeks’ gestation was diagnosed with stable placenta accreta during a routine examination at the obstetric outpatient clinic of West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University. The patient experienced dyspnea as she walked from the second floor to the outpatient clinic. Her pulse oximetry revealed an oxygen saturation level of 90%, which fluctuated between 90% and 95% during continued monitoring. After about 15 min of rest without oxygen inhalation, the patient experienced resolution of dyspnea, and her oxygen saturation level returned to 99%. The patient complained of progressively worsening dyspnea in the past month, which resolved spontaneously after resting without head elevation. The patient did not experience coughing, hemoptysis, nocturnal dyspnea, or other discomfort. Cardiopulmonary auscultation was unremarkable. The patient had a cesarean Sect. 3 years ago and had no underlying illnesses such as hypertension and diabetes. The patient’s physical examination was normal; thus, no further examinations or treatments were provided.
The patient was admitted to the Obstetrics Department of our hospital at 38 weeks of gestation for a cesarean section. After routine post-admission examinations, the patient underwent bilateral internal iliac artery balloon placement, followed by cesarean section under spinal-epidural anesthesia. The patient was slightly nervous before surgery but had normal vital signs and oxygen saturation. Epidural anesthesia (from T6 to S5) was successfully administered. One live infant was delivered successfully with clear amniotic fluid. However, the patient’s oxygen saturation gradually declined to 89% after delivery, which increased to 100% after administering 2 L/min of oxygen via a nasal cannula. The patient had no chest tightness, chest pain, shortness of breath, coughs, or remarkable fluctuations in heart rate and blood pressure. Auscultation revealed clear breath sounds without dry or wet rales and normal heart sounds. Skin mucosa was unremarkable. After the complete removal of the placenta and membranes, the patient exhibited poor uterine contraction and ruptured blood vessels in the lower uterine segment, resulting in substantial hemorrhage. Uterine massage and intramuscular injection of carboprost tromethamine were immediately provided to enhance uterine contraction. Emergency arterial blood gas analysis showed a PaO2 of 50 mmHg and Hb of 105 g/L with normal electrolytes. The uterine contraction improved and the bleeding was under control quickly. Coagulation, N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide level, and troponin level were unremarkable. D-dimer was 1.81 mg/L. Bedside electrocardiograph, echocardiogram, and vascular ultrasound of the lower extremities were normal. There were no drastic fluctuations in the patient’s heart rate, blood pressure, and respiration during the cesarean section. The operation lasted approximately 1.5 h with an estimated blood loss of 1000 mL. No blood transfusion was required.
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit after surgery and had an oxygen saturation level of 99% with oxygen administration (2 L/min by nasal cannula). On day 1, after surgery, the patient was conscious without discomfort. Without oxygen administration, she had a 97% oxygen saturation level and began ambulatory activities. On day 3, after surgery, the patient exhibited slurred speech during ambulation, accompanied by right limb myasthenia. An emergency head magnetic resonance imaging revealed cerebral infarction in the left basal ganglia. The patient was subsequently referred for chest and abdominal computed tomography angiography, heart ultrasound, and transcranial Doppler ultrasound to identify the underlying cause of these symptoms. Computed tomography pulmonary arteriography (CTPA) revealed bilateral multiple pulmonary vascular malformations . The patient’s symptoms significantly improved after antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy. After one month of treatment, the patient was conscious and articulate, with normal muscle strength in her right limb. She was then transferred to the Department of Thoracic Surgery for percutaneous embolization of PAVF. During the telephone follow-up 6 months after surgery, the patient reported no discomfort or adverse impacts on her quality of life. Her child was also healthy.