A 50-year-old Chinese man with a 5-year history of neck and shoulder pain presented with muscle atrophy and weakness in both arms. He was admitted to hospital with complaints of unstable holding for 9 months and numbness of limbs for 2 months, which worsened in one week. Five years previously, he tried the physiotherapy due to the pain of neck and shoulder, and relief from pain followed. Nine months previously, muscle atrophy and weakness in both arms were noted but without being promptly treated. And his pain of neck was obviously worsened 2 months before admission, together with numbness of limbs; the cervical and lumbar image examinations in other hospital were suggestive of protrusion of intervertebral disc at the C5–7 level and the L4-S1 level. Then he received the physiotherapy and felt the relief of pain, but numbness of limbs did not significantly relieve, which suddenly worsened in one week.
The patient also presented with a 3-year history of diabetes mellitus (DM), a 20-year history of gout involving left wrist and left knee, a 30-year history of smoking and drinking. Previous pharmaceutical treatment for gout had been intermittent for about 1 year, consisting of dexamethasone for acute episodes. Patient’s family and psychosocial history were not relevant for this case report.
After admission, physical examination was performed in accordance with best practice and clinical guidelines by physician, in which multiple tophi were seen in left wrist, both feet and knee; bilateral superficial sensory declined below the level of mastoid portion, particularly below the knee, which presumably resulted from the lumbar lesions. The muscle strengths of upper limbs were graded 2+ to 4 and lower limbs were graded 0 in accordance with Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale for Muscle Strength . The reflex of bilateral biceps, triceps and radial periosteum disappeared; the reflex of bilateral knee was normal and that of bilateral ankle disappeared. The muscle atrophy of bilateral thenar, hypothenar, forearms, biceps, triceps deltoid and quadriceps femoris, triceps surae was also noted. The gout history and physical examination revealing tophi in multiple joints informed the physician to perform some biochemical tests relating to gout, which found hyperuricemia with a level of 542 umoles/L (normal range, 208–428 umoles/L), and the C-reactive protein was 125 mg/L (normal range, 0–8 mg/L).
Based on the symptoms and physical examination, physician intended to consider peripheral neuropathy and could not rule out cervical spondylotic myelopathy. Then the cervical computed tomography (CT) and contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed. CT scan showed the slightly irregular osteolytic destruction of the C5–6 endplates with discontinuous peripheral sclerotic margins and multiple small calcification and sequestra. Narrowing of C5–6 disc space and mild spinal stenosis were also found . MR images displayed diffused abnormal signal of the C5 and C6 vertebrae marrow, which were low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and intermediate to high signal intensity on T2 and short time inversion recovery (STIR) images. The erosion and destruction of both adjacent C5–6 endplates showed discontinuous and waved changes. The C5–6 intervertebral disc appeared fluid like signal changes that were hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2-weighted images. Swelling of prevertebral soft tissue was also found. Contrast-enhanced images showed significant enhancement of the C5–6 vertebrae marrow with no enhancing intervertebral disc. Spinal dural thickening and enhancement of the C5–6 level could be also seen on the enhanced T1-weighted images .
The timeline for the development of this case is summarized in Fig. .
In this case, with clinical features, laboratory tests and imaging studies, physicians initially had difficulty in determining the lesions of C5–6; both infectious spondylodiscitis and spinal gout could not be ruled out. In terms of laboratory tests, it was difficult to judge that hyperuricemia was caused by peripheral gout or new lesions, and that the elevation of C-reactive protein was caused by gout or infection. As for the imaging studies of low specificity, radiologist was not completely sure of the etiology and such case was rarely met at that time; initially the imaging reported the first consideration was infectious spondylodiscitis. Under the circumstance of the lesions being not determined and nerve root symptoms, surgical treatment was performed, for the purpose of timely decompressing the spinal cord and providing conditions for the recovery of its function. Intraoperative findings showed that intervertebral disc of C5–6 was completely destructed and replaced by turbid fluid and the erosion of adjacent endplates and vertebrae. The pathological examination of the specimen demonstrated deposited uric acid crystals surrounded by granulomatous inflammation, as well as fiber and angiogenesis with a large number of chronic inflammatory cells infiltration . Postoperatively, the lesions of C5–6 were definitely diagnosed as gout.
Preoperatively, pharmaceutical treatment was given to relieve pain, nourish nerve and dehydrate . To immediately decompress the nerve root symptoms, surgical treatment including anterior cervical corpectomy, debridement and fusion, and internal fixation of C5–6 was performed [, , ]. After surgery, the muscle strengths of limbs were significantly improved. Postoperatively, the new diagnosis was confirmed; then colchicine and prednisolone were respectively given 1 mg t.i.d and 10 mg t.i.d. whose dosage reduced when symptoms improved [, ]. Rehabilitation training including electronic biofeedback therapy, pneumatic compression, equipment training and electronic standing bed training was also performed .
About 3 months after surgery, the patient felt that pain of neck and shoulder was not obvious and there was no sensory abnormality in the upper limbs; the muscle strengths of limbs were all improved, with upper limbs grade 4 and lower limbs grade 2- to 4 in accordance with Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale for Muscle Strength . The level of serum uric acid was well controlled between 336 umoles/l and 399 umoles/l (normal range, 208–428 umoles/l).