A 42-year-old Chinese Han male patient with chronic hepatitis B presented with a 3-day history of receptive aphasia, left hemiparesis and swallowing difficulties at an outside medical facility. Except for chronic hepatitis B (hepatitis virus B deoxyribonucleic acid [HBV DNA] =547 IU/mL), his medical history was normal. On the second day of admission, the brain MRI showed symmetric and confluent hyperintense signal abnormalities mainly located in the basal ganglia, internal capsule, external capsule, periventricular, corona radiata, frontal and temporal lobes . The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed normal intracranial pressure (100 mmH2O), elevated leukocyte (737/μL) and protein (0.94 g/L). Routine chemistry tests were all normal except for elevated transaminase (alanine aminotransferase 289 U/L). Autoimmune serology revealed positive ANA with a titer of 1:320. Empirically, he received both anti-bacterial and antiviral treatment. However, India ink staining was positive for Cryptococcus. CSF culture and metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) confirmed Cryptococcus neoformans. The diagnosis of CM was confirmed, and his condition improved while receiving intravenous fluconazole (intravenous, 400 mg per day). Entecavir was also administered at 0.5 mg per day to prevent hepatitis B virus reactivation. However, 11 days later, he developed impaired consciousness and incontinence of urine and feces. A repeat brain MRI revealed the lesions were progressive and enlarged . Then the patient was transferred to our department.
On admission to our hospital, electroencephalography revealed diffuse delta waves without electrographic seizures. Repeat CSF analysis revealed intracranial pressure of 230 mmH2O, leukocyte count of 80/μL and protein concentration of 0.7 g/L. Additionally, India ink staining revealed a fungal count of 5/mL , and CrAg titers in CSF and serum were 1:1 and 1:40, respectively . Furthermore, Cryptococcus neoformans was re-identified by CSF mNGS . Meanwhile, CSF culture was also positive for Cryptococcus neoformans. CSF Gram staining and acid-fast staining and serum HIV antibody were negative. And the tests for hepatitis virus A, hepatitis virus C and hepatitis virus E were negative. In addition, the serum and CSF were negative for autoimmune encephalitis-related antibodies. The flow cytometry of CSF showed normal immunophenotype and percentages of immune cells . Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed no evidence of underlying malignancy.
Based on the above MRI and CSF findings, cryptococcal infection-related inflammatory syndrome was diagnosed. Therefore, a combination of corticosteroids and antifungal therapy was initiated. The corticosteroids therapy consisted of dexamethasone (20 mg/day, intravenously) for 1 week followed by oral prednisone 1 mg/kg/day, tapered based on clinical and radiological response. The antifungal therapy consisted of amphotericin B (0.6 mg/kg/day, intravenously), voriconazole (400 mg/day in 2 divided doses, intravenously), and 5-flucytosine (100 mg/kg/day in 4 divided doses, orally). After 1 week of treatment, his condition improved and a repeat MRI showed partial improvement of the hyperintense signal lesions . Two weeks later, his symptoms improved significantly. After discharge, he began oral voriconazole for consolidation and maintenance therapy for 8 weeks and 9 months respectively. Brain MRI was repeated on the 54 days of corticosteroids treatment (January 26, 2021), and most of the hyperintense signal lesions disappeared . Repeat CSF culture was negative. No neurological sequelae were observed at 6-month follow-up.