A 41-year-old white woman with a past medical history of endometriosis presented to our clinic for her annual examination. She wanted to discuss cyclic rectal bleeding after having undergone a total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingectomy and left oophorectomy 1 year prior. She stated that, over the past 6–8 months, she had been experiencing bloody bowel movements for 1 week each month, in the same pattern as her previous menstrual cycles. She also experienced sharp, lower abdominal pain with these bloody bowel movements, similar to the pain from her endometriosis in the past. She described a mild to moderate amount of bleeding and noted that the blood was typically mixed with stool. The blood was dark red, which she believed looked very similar to her menses. She reported normal bowel movements the other 3 weeks of the month. Prior to her hysterectomy, she completed a colonoscopy which showed no transmural implants. Previous treatment for endometriosis included oral contraceptives which gave no significant symptomatic relief. Her other past medical history included hypertension for which she was taking extended-release metoprolol 50 mg in the morning and 25 mg in the evening before bed. She had never smoked tobacco and consumed alcohol occasionally. At that time, she worked as a systems engineer for information technology.
She had the onset of menarche at age 10 with heavy periods until age 16, at which time she went on oral contraceptive pills. At age 37, she gave birth to twins at 29 weeks of gestation via cesarean section without complications. Her other surgical history included a tonsillectomy at age 3, cervical conization at age 22, rhinoplasty at age 26, exploratory laparoscopy for excision of stage IV endometriosis with en bloc excision, left ovarian cystectomy, and bilateral ovarian suspension at age 34, as well as total hysterectomy, as mentioned above.
She denied any family history of endometriosis, although she noted that her mother had heavy periods prior to giving birth to our patient. Her mother also suffered from asthma. Her father had heart disease and her grandparents had a history of heart disease, diabetes, stroke, high cholesterol, hypertension, osteoporosis, and alcohol abuse.
Our patient’s examination revealed a temperature of 36.7 ºC, heart rate of 57 beats per minute (bpm), and blood pressure of 129/78 mmHg. She was alert and oriented with no focal neurologic deficits. Cardiac and lung examinations were normal. An abdominal examination revealed normoactive bowel sounds with no tenderness to palpation. No external hemorrhoids were visualized on rectal examination and stool guaiac was negative. An anoscopy was not performed.
Our differential diagnoses when we first saw her were: invasive endometriosis, internal hemorrhoids, diverticulosis, adenocarcinoma of the colon, inflammatory bowel disease, and angiodysplasia.
Laboratory tests revealed a largely normal complete blood count (CBC) with a hemoglobin of 12.4, platelet count was 196,000, and white blood cell count was 10,000. Our patient’s electrolytes and kidney function were normal with creatinine of 0.9, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 13, and albumin of 4.1. Other examinations such as urine analysis, serology, and microbiology were not drawn. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her pelvis, with and without contrast, was performed. Findings were consistent with invasive endometriosis in the pelvis, with possible sigmoid colon invasion . A colonoscopy was performed and revealed a stricture in the recto-sigmoid colon and endometrial implants . This was thought likely to be extrinsic infiltrating endometriosis affecting the submucosal and mucosal layers with erythematous mucosal changes. These sites were biopsied. The final pathology report revealed fragments of colonic mucosa with marked lamina propria and submucosal congestion . Immunostaining for estrogen receptor was negative.
Our patient was referred for follow-up with both Gynecology and Colorectal Surgery. She was advised by the surgical team to undergo exploratory laparotomy with removal of any endometrial implants and resection of the affected colon to avoid worsening stricture and potential obstruction. They recommended sparing of the remaining ovary to avoid surgical castration which, in women under the age of 45, has been shown to correlate with increased all-cause mortality [, ].
She opted to not proceed with the surgery due to concern of recurrence by maintaining her right ovary; she decided to manage the bleeding with stool softeners, increasing the dosage during her menstrual periods. After deciding for the non-surgical approach, our patient never complained about the same symptoms again, suggesting that the stool softeners managed her symptoms. Since her diagnosis over 4 years ago, her pain and bleeding have improved and she is starting to feel the first symptoms of menopause including hot flashes, mood swings, and difficulty sleeping. Since her menopausal symptoms have been mild and intermittent, she has decided to hold off from seeking treatment for them at this time.