A 33-year-old female, 168 cm height/100 kg weight, G1P0, at 40 weeks 6 days gestational age was admitted in latent labor with an uncomplicated pregnancy. She underwent labor epidural placement at L2–3 level smoothly, and attained satisfactory analgesia with 0.09% ropivacaine and sufentanil (5 mcg/mL) at 6 mL/h for labor. For intrauterine fetal distress, decision to proceed with emergency cesarean section was undertaken 6 h after labor analgesia. With a test dose of 3 mL 2% lidocaine after 3 min, 12 mL fresh 0.83% alkalized lidocaine (Lalk) (15 mL 2% lidocaine plus 3 mL 5% sodium bicarbonate) was administered, followed by 7.5 mL 0.75% ropivacaine 10 min later to raise the anesthesia level from T9 to T6. Another 7.5 mL 0.75% ropivacaine was added 40 min later when closing the peritoneal. The parturient underwent cesarean section comfortably, and the epidural catheter was removed at the end of surgery. An infant with 3,990 g was delivered with right occipital transeverse position, and her Apgar score was 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min.
On the second postpartum day, the patient noted numbness and weakness in the knee when bearing weight on the right lower limb and fell when she stood, with no back or leg pain. Neurological pinprick examination identified decreased sensation in the lateral-middle lower-third of the thigh, lateral crus, and dorsum pedis, with muscle strength grade-2 and a weak knee reflex, no pathological signs elicited and negative straight leg elevation test. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed minor expansion of the L2/L3 disc but no other abnormalities. The weakness and paresthesia improved by day three and four, respectively. She was discharged home on day five with mecobalamin and vitamin B1 for trophic neurotherapy, and the numbness persisted for 4 weeks.
Generally, the parturient received smooth labor analgesia and cesarean section, but presented with obvious weakness of the right lower limb. Although relief was observed by day four, she experienced slow recovery of numbness lasting 4 weeks, with negative magnetic resonance imaging or pathological signs.