Patient, male, 78 years old, was admitted to the hospital on September 18, 2021 due to "persistent discharge of pus from the left ear for 3 months, accompanied by ipsilateral earache and headache". Before admission, he had been treated continuously with ceftriaxone and metronidazole for one month in another hospital without significant improvement. There was no fever, no dizziness, no nausea, no vomiting during his illness. He has a history of chronic otitis media for more than 30 years, with recurring discharge of pus from the left ear. His left ear hearing had significantly decreased. Physical examination on his admission showed: Swelling of the left external auditory canal, existing medium-sized perforation of tympanic membrane and pulsating exudate. The discharge was a light pink viscous liquid with no odor. Audiometry test found that moderate mixed deafness in the left ear with an average hearing threshold of 65 dB. ABR showed that peripheral auditory nerve damage on the left side. Computed Tomography (CT) and enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the middle ear showed: left middle ear mastoiditis . Bacterial culture of ear secretion was negative. Blood routine examination result is WBC:11.98*109/L, N:72.2%, c-reactive protein (CRP) is: 11.31 mg/L. Patient was diagnosed with " Chronic otitis media and mastoiditis with otitis externa ". Patient had been treated with antibiotic at another hospital for almost one month, but without significant improvement, so we had to drain the discharge to prevent intracranial complication. On the 4th day after his admission, radical mastoidectomy of the left middle ear was performed. During the surgery, the mastoid was found to be diploetic type with few mastoid cells and small tympanic antrum. Light pink granulation tissue was found on mastoid cells, tympanic antrum and attic. Tissue was removed and sent to pathology; Test result showed: left middle ear mastoid granulation, local mucosal chronic inflammation with neutrophil infiltration . Intraoperative cavity was filled with iodoform gauze. Patient was treated with levofloxacin and dexamethasone through intravenous injection. Headache was relieved and ear pain is gone. One week after the surgery, iodine strips were removed. Patient was discharged from hospital.
After discharge, patient’s left ear pus discharge was relieved, but left side headache increased, mainly at the top of his temporal. Patient needed painkiller to help for sleep at night. Then, 25 days after the surgery the patient was admitted again to the hospital as mouth lopsided condition suddenly showed up. We found that the left ear intraoperative cavity was dry and with some white cheese like material . The left mouth lopsided had air leaking, left eye was closed and weak, and the left frontal lines became shallow. Audiometry test showed: severe mixed deafness in the left ear (mean hearing threshold 90 dB). CT and enhanced MRI of the middle ear showed: new soft tissue shadow in the residual mastoid cavity. So patient was diagnosed as "left middle ear mastoiditis complication with peripheral facial palsy. Blood routine examination results are: WBC 14.46*109/L, N89%, CRP 7.69 mg/L, ESR 72 mm/h. Patient was treated with cefepime anti-inflammatory, betamethasone and nerve nutrition. The headache was relieved during the steroid treatment, but his condition became worse and worse when the steroid dosage was reduced a week later, and a small amount of light yellow odorless fluid began to discharge from his left ear again.
After steroid withdrawal, dizziness, nausea and vomiting occurred on the 14th day of his second admission. His symptoms were reduced after symptomatic treatment, but diplopia reoccurred. Ophthalmic examination showed that only limited abduction of the left eye, pupil was large and round with reflection to light . MRI and CT of the head excluded cerebral infarction, cerebral hemorrhage, and tumorigenic lesions. Two lumbar punctures were performed successively and showed: intracranial infection was excluded as his intracranial pressure was normal. Cranial magnetic resonance venography (MRV) examination suggested that thrombosis was in the superior sagittal sinus , so betahistine and ginkgo biloba were infused to patient to improve microcirculation. 2nd review of the patient's middle ear CT and MRI showed that the apex of petrous part was blurred and had inflammatory changes , then with patient’s other symptoms of continuous headache, facial parlay, vertigo diplopia and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis. We considered that patient has otitis media complication "petrositis". Blood tuberculosis related indicators showed: Mycobacterium tuberculosis IgG, IgM and T cells of tuberculosis infection was negative. The ear secretions were taken for culture several times, and 2 results suggested: Candida glabrata .
The patient was tested for blood pathogen mNGS detection.Microbial cell-free DNA was extracted from blood using the VAHTS Serum/Plasma DNA Kit (Nanjing Vazyme Biotech Co., Ltd, Nanjing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, High-throughput sequencing was carried out by genetic sequencer MGISEQ-200 (manufactured in 2021 by Wuhan MGI Tech Co., Ltd, Wuhan, China).The software package mNGS SmartDxTM-3.2 (developed by MedcareDx Biotech Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China) was employed to conduct bioinformatics analysis. The final result was suggested as C. tropicalis . Multiple examinations of the patient's inflammatory indicators concluded: the presence of bacterial infection. The routine blood tests showed leukocytosis with an elevated neutrophil percentage , elevated C-reactive protein and continuously elevated amyloid A , while calcitoninogen level was always normal . Based on the above examination results, patient was infected with mixed bacteria and fungi at the apex of petrous part. So patient was infused with vancomycin combined with fluconazole for one week, but with no improvement. The headache was still severe, eyeball was still in the center and the tongue leaned to the left. Further chest and abdomen CT and PET-CT excluded neoplastic disease. So we re-examined pathological section. PAS staining showed a small number of yeast-like fungi in the exudate of the middle ear, accompanied by budding phenomenon. This indicated yeast infection . Treatment was adjusted by stopping vancomycin but adding antifungal medication with intravenous of amphotericin B and oral flucytosine tablets. The headache disappeared after one week of new medication, the facial palsy disappeared after 2 weeks of medication and diplopia condition was reduced, then finally disappeared after 1 month of new medication. There were no unconsciousness conditions such as neck stiffness, limb mobility disorder, and projectile vomiting during patient illness and treatment. There was no recurrence after three-month follow up. We mapped the consultation process of this patient into a flow chart using the CmapTools software tool (Software tool) recommended by Behzadi et al. .