A 53-year-old woman presented to us after she had a spontaneous left facial palsy on waking up from sleep. Some days before, she had a complaint of pain in her left ear, but an otological exam was completely normal, including the absence of vesicles at the external ear examination,. She received steroids and started physiotherapy that continued for the following months without positive results. Ten months later, she was seen for the first time at the Nerve Surgery Center of the University of Buenos Aires School of Medicine with a complete left facial palsy requiring special care of the cornea to avoid ulcers, which were not present. The physical exam showed at that moment a complete palsy of the upper, lower, and middle left hemi-face [House and Brackmann (HB) grade 6]. She was incompetent to close the left eye, the facial symmetry was lost, and she could not make any kind of active movement on the left side of the mouth. Signs of mimic muscle atrophy were evident on the affected side of the face . The rest of the physical exam, including vertigo-dizziness tests and tongue movements, showed absolutely normal results. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a normal brain. Electromyography confirmed complete denervation of mimic muscles on the left side of the face, with fibrillations and positive sharp waves, and no voluntary motor action potentials in the affected muscles signs. She was entrusted to our intensive physiotherapy program at that moment, but no further improvement of the palsy was evident after revaluation at 11 and 13 months. At that moment, a facial reinnervation procedure was offered to the patient, namely, a partial direct hypoglossal to facial nerve transfer involving mastoid bone drilling . The procedure was accepted by the patient and finally performed 14 months after the start of the symptoms.
The surgical technique is described elsewhere. Briefly, the facial nerve is dissected at the temporal bone, into the fallopian canal, up to the second knee where the nerve is cut to be sutured directly to one-third of the hypoglossal nerve, in which partial section was done at the neck near the digastric muscle and the internal jugular vein. The nerve suture was performed with two 10.0 monofilament nylon stitches; fibrin glue was employed to reinforce the suture line. Macroscopically, no special changes were seen on the facial nerve with the exception of those normally seen after more than 1 year of palsy (namely, slight diminution of the nerve width compared to a normal nerve). The patient was discharged 3 days after the procedure. Physiotherapy was started again at our institution after 3 weeks.
Some active contraction of the facial muscles was seen 5 months after the procedure. At 12 months, the patient showed a complete facial symmetry at rest, active movements under voluntary control with mild eye–tongue synkinesia, adequate eye closure – which prompted her to abandon the artificial tears – and no signs of tongue atrophy or asymmetry (grade 1 tongue atrophy in the scale describing the grade of tongue dysfunction after hypoglossal-facial neurorrhaphy). A grade 3 of the HB facial palsy scale was stated at that moment .