A 22-year-old male patient, cook by occupation, presented to the dermatology outpatient department (OPD) with a history of itchy skin lesions over the body, forearms and legs for 7 months. Lesions initially started during summer as a small papule and eventually progressed to form large circinate plaques. General and systemic examination of the patient was unremarkable. On dermatological examination, well-defined circinate, scaly plaques with erythematous papules of varying sizes were present over the flexor aspect of the right forearm and lower left leg, as shown in .
On further examination, similar lesions were seen in the lower abdomen, groin and the gluteal region (not shown in ). His palms, soles, hair and nails were normal without any concomitant infection. The patient denied a history of any application of topical corticosteroids or any self-medication. He gave a history of contact with black soil while working in resorts and continuous exposure to a warm and humid temperature in the cooking area. He shared his room and linen with two other occupants, none of whom had a history of similar lesions. The patient also informed about contact with a pet dog. There was no history of any other co-morbidities. His serological tests for hepatitis B and human immunodeficiency virus were negative.
After wiping the lesions with spirit, skin scrapings were collected from the active borders of the lesions from the right forearm, thigh and the lower abdomen and were subjected to 20 % potassium hydroxide (KOH) mount. The rest of the specimen was inoculated on Sabouraud’s dextrose agar (SDA) with 0.004 % chloramphenicol and 0.05 % cycloheximide (HiMedia, India) and a screening medium Dermatophyte test medium (DTM) agar base with 'Dermato Supplement', which includes cycloheximide, chlortetracycline and gentamicin (HiMedia, India) and incubated for 2–4 weeks in ambient air at 28 °C in a Biological Oxygen Demand/Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) incubator.
Direct microscopic examination of skin scrapings from multiple sites on 20 % KOH mount revealed thin hyaline septate branching hyphae characteristic of dermatophytes. Growth on SDA initially was cottony, colonies matured within two-weeks showing powdery growth. On DTM, colonies grew within 5–7 days and turned the medium into red colour by changing the pH. When sub-cultured on to potato dextrose agar (PDA), a rapid buff or brownish colour growth with powdery surface texture, and peripheral fringe of a white zone with a reddish reverse pigment was seen within 2 weeks of incubation. On further incubation, the colonies turned pleomorphic with ragged edges, as shown in .
Microplate cultures and rapid adhesive cellophane impression mounts were performed along with the physiological tests for the identification of the dermatophyte. The isolate perforated in vitro sterile pre-pubescent hair, and hydrolysed urease within the 10-days of incubation at room temperature. Lacto phenol cotton blue (LPCB) mounts revealed a moderate number of microconidia. Macroconidia were initially sparse but, older cultures showed an increased number of macroconidia, which are spindle-shaped, thin-walled with echinulations and blunt tips, as shown in . The above morphological and physiological features concluded the phenotypic identification as M. gypse
um. Due to the sparse production of macroconidia on initial subcultures on SDA and PDA, and its rarity in isolating from an immunocompetent host, the isolate was submitted for molecular confirmation and antifungal susceptibility pattern to the National Culture Collection of Pathogenic Fungi (NCCPF), Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India with a submission ID IL_2795 (Myc_186).
Molecular identification of the culture was performed at the NCCPF, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India, by sequencing the ITS region of the rDNA using the universal primer pair ITS-1(5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTTGCGG-3′) and ITS-4 (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′) . Mycelium was gently scraped with a sterile scalpel from 10-days old pure culture on PDA, and is transferred in to a sterile mortar and grounded in the presence of liquid nitrogen and 1 ml of extraction buffer (0.2 mol l−1 Tris-HCl, 10 mmol l−1 EDTA, 0.5 mol l−1 NaCl, 1 % SDS) and crushed by a pestle to form a slurry. DNA extraction was performed by phenol: chloroform: isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) and ethanol precipitation method. The quantity of DNA was assessed by using NanoDropspectrophotometer reading (Thermo Scientific) and gel electrophoresis on 1% agarose gel. Amplification of ITS region was performed inthe PCR assay and the purified products of ITS PCR was processed for sequencing using universal primers. The ITS sequencing was carried out using ABI PRISM BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA), according to the manufacturers’ recommendations, sequencing and analysis was performed in automated DNA sequencer-ABI Prism 3130XL Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) .
N. gypsea was confirmed by comparing the sequence with ITS sequence database in the Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures (CBS), Utrecht, the Netherlands, and the sequence showed 100% similarity with the type strain CBS161.69 N. gypsea .The isolate was confirmed as N. gypsea by ITS sequencing and was deposited in GenBank ITS databases and published in the NCBI database on 6/8/2018 with accession number MH715973.1 and name Nannizzia gypsea strain IL2795_Myc_186.
Antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) for the isolate was performed at NCCPF, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India using the standardized broth microdilution (BMD) method according to the Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) document M38A2. The five antifungal drugs widely used in the treatment of dermatophytosis were tested, which includes itraconazole (ITR), sertaconazole (SER), terbinafine (TER), griseofulvin (GRI) and amorolfine (AMO). All the antifungal drugs tested were of reagent-grade powders (Sigma-Aldrich, Bengaluru, India) and were directly procured by the NCCPF, Chandigarh, India. The inoculum was prepared using RPMI 1640 (HiMedia, India) with l-glutamine and without bicarbonate. Antimycotic drugs were diluted using 0.165 M morpholine propane sulfonic acid (MOPS) (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Germany) with pH adjusted at 7.0. The following quality control strains were used: Candida krusei ATCC 6258, Aspergillus ﬂavus ATCC 20430 and Candida parapsilosis ATCC 22019. Broth microdilution using 96-welled microtitre plates were used. Preparation of inoculum and dilutions were performed as described by Rudramurthy et al. . The antifungal drug dilutions stored at −80 °C prior to use. The results of the antifungal susceptibility testing of five antifungal agents on N. gypsea are shown in .
The patient was started on a combination of oral terbinafine 250 mg once daily at bedtime for 3 weeks, and topical 1 % luliconazole applied once daily for 3 weeks. The patient was advised not to spend more time in the kitchen and avoid humid premises and to maintain general hygiene with twice a day bathing and washing and drying the clothes regularly. He was also advised not to get in contact with the dog and restrict the exposure to soil. The patient did not turn up for a follow-up and hence due to the rarity of isolate we made a visit to the place where the patient worked to obtain the post-treatment information. Obtaining specimen from the dog was unsuccessful at the time of visit. Upon eliciting further, the patient gave the history of complete resolution of lesions after oral terbinafine 250 mg once daily bedtime for 3 weeks and he admitted to having discontinued the topical antifungal cream 1 % luliconazole after 5 days of use. His itching and inflammatory lesions resolved without any residual scars or relapse after 1-year post-treatment, as shown in .