A 57-year-old male with a history of type 2 diabetes and hypertension presented to the emergency department (ED) with low back pain radiating into his legs worsening over the prior three days. The patient was not able to identify any clear precipitating factors or trauma. He described the pain as moderate in intensity and of a “burning” quality. Prior to being seen in our ED the patient was seen at an outside clinic in Mexico where he was given a “Toradol shot and steroids” and diagnosed with sciatica. The patient denied any other symptoms including fever, cough, shortness of breath, chills, or weakness.
The patient’s vital signs on presentation were normal except for a heart rate of 101 beats per minute. He was noted to have a blood pressure of 119/79 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), a pulse oxygen saturation of 96%, and a temperature of 98.2° Fahrenheit (F). The patient’s exam was unremarkable except for pain to palpation of bilateral lower extremities. He was not noted to have any weakness or neurological deficit and had normal bilateral dorsalis pedis pulses. The patient had a blood glucose within normal limits. He was given pain medication and steroids and felt improvement of his symptoms. As the pain seemed to improve, his symptoms were attributed to sciatica and he was discharged home.
Two days later the patient returned to the ED reporting worsening pain in his flank and legs and bilateral lower extremity weakness. He reported moderate to severe pain with movement, which had limited his ability to ambulate. The patient complained of some dysuria but continued to deny other symptoms including fever, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, numbness or inability to urinate. At this presentation, the patient had a heart rate of 66 beats per minute, blood pressure was 120/79 mm Hg, oxygen saturation was 95% on room air, and his temperature was 97.4°F. He reported that his pain on arrival was 10/10. He was found to have full range of motion, normal sensation, and equal dorsalis pedis pulses bilaterally in his lower extremities. He was noted to have pain with movement of his lower extremities, and endorsed tingling. He had normal rectal tone. His lower extremities were noted to be hyporeflexic.
The patient was given pain medication and his laboratory results revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 23.5 × 109/liter (L) (reference range 4.0–10.0 × 109/L) with normal hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelets. His comprehensive metabolic panel was normal with the exception of bicarbonate of 22 milliequivalents (mEq)/L (23–30 mEq/L), an elevated blood urea nitrogen of 60 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (7–20 mg/dL), an alanine aminotransferase of 242 units (U)/L (7–56 U/L), and an aspartate aminotransferase of 617 U/L (normal 0–35 U/L). His creatine phosphokinase was markedly elevated at 26,818 U/L (20–600 U/L). His D-dimer was 562 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (< 250 ng/mL). His lactate dehydrogenase was 2601 U/L (140–280 U/L). The urinalysis demonstrated 2+ blood and 30 red blood cells. Based on his urinalysis, a computed tomography (CT) abdomen and pelvis was also ordered to evaluate for nephrolithiasis.
The CT of his abdomen did not demonstrate any significant intra-abdominal abnormalities, but he was noted to have diffuse patchy infiltrates in his lower lungs. A chest radiograph demonstrated patchy diffuse bilateral infiltrates. These findings prompted COVID-19 testing, which resulted as positive despite lack of any upper respiratory symptoms. A lumbar spine CT was completed, which was also unremarkable. While in the ED, his pain and weakness worsened and ultimately a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lumbar spine and a venous duplex of his lower extremities were also obtained and he was admitted for pain control and further workup. The MRI was unremarkable and his lower extremity venous duplex ultrasonography did not demonstrate any acute deep vein thrombosis. Within two hours of his ED stay, an arterial duplex of his lower extremities was performed and demonstrated no blood flow in the right dorsalis pedis artery or left posterior tibial, anterior tibial, or dorsalis pedis arteries. A computed tomographic angiography (CTA) of the aorta and lower extremities demonstrated diffuse arterial insufficiency with thrombosis of distal abdominal aorta and occlusion of bilateral iliac arteries . He was then placed on a heparin drip. The patient’s respiratory status deteriorated over the next few days and he required endotracheal intubation for acute respiratory failure. He was transferred to an outside hospital for possible thrombectomy.
The thrombectomy was successful; however, the patient’s lower extremities were not salvageable and he required bilateral above knee amputations. His hematology workup revealed slight decrease in protein S 39% (reference range 66–143%) with normal protein C, complement, antithrombin 3, homocysteine, and cardiolipin antibodies, and no evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Ultimately, the patient’s respiratory status improved and he was extubated. At the time of writing he remained hospitalized on enoxaparin with discharge planning ongoing.