A 17-year-old Greek Caucasian female was admitted to our department with weakness, new onset purpura, lethargy, and mild fluctuating dysarthria over the last 24 hours. She had recently followed a 10 days course of oral contraceptives (0.02 mg ethinylestradiol and 0.075 mg gestodene, Harmonette) because of dysmenorrhoea. One year earlier she reported having taken a similar compound for the same reason, with no negative side effects. There was no personal or family history of any gynaecological or haematological disease.
Vital signs on admission were normal. Physical examination revealed a purpuric rash on both legs, while the liver and spleen were not palpable. Laboratory findings on presentation were remarkable for decreased haemoglobin, 101 g/L, marked thrombocytopaenia, 15×109/L, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 599 IU/L, and elevated indirect bilirubin, 43 μmol/L. Coagulation tests were normal. Haemolytic anaemia was confirmed by low serum haptoglobin, <0.1 g/L and schistocytes on blood smear compatible with TTP. Direct Coomb’s test was negative, and clotting times were normal. Serum creatinine and liver function tests were within normal limits. Lupus anticoagulant, anti-dsDNA antibodies, as well as anti-phospholipid antibodies were negative. Urinalysis revealed haematuria of glomerular origin and trace of protein.
She was immediately commenced on daily, single volume (2.5 Lt) PE with fresh frozen plasma and 100 mg per day oral prednisone. The platelet count and the LDH levels normalized during the first 5 days of therapy. However, on the 7th day of daily plasmapheresis, the platelet count decreased to 20×109/L, while LDH increased to 802 IU/L. At that point twice-daily single volume PE was empirically instituted with continuation of the corticosteroid therapy. She responded slowly and recovered normal PLT levels 10 days after the beginning of intense plasmapheresis. On the 17th day, the patient was weaned off plasmapheresis to daily single volume PE, which resulted in a second drop of PLTs to 100×109/L necessitating intensification of steroid and PE treatment for a second time. She finally received 42 sessions of PE within 40 days and was weaned off corticosteroids after 90 days of treatment.
Due to the prolonged course of her illness a screen for genetic polymorphisms associated with thrombophilia such as prothrombin G20210A, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and factor V G1691A (FVL) was requested, which only disclosed FVL heterozygous status. On discharge she was advised to avoid oral contraceptives. Four years later, TTP has not relapsed and the patient remains in excellent clinical condition.