Patient is a 63-year-old Caucasian female with history of hypothyroidism who developed insulin resistant diabetes mellitus manifested by 20-pound weight gain and anxiety. She was diagnosed with pituitary microadenoma and Cushing disease. Her baseline liver tests were normal. The patient declined pituitary surgery and she was started on mifepristone 300 mg per os daily and semaglutide 0.5 mg subcutaneous injection weekly. Seven and a half weeks later, the dose of mifepristone was increased to 300 mg twice daily. Alkaline phosphatase level had increased to 187 U/dL but the rest of her liver tests including bilirubin level and aminotransferase activities were initially normal. Five weeks after dose increase of mifepristone, she developed jaundice, fatigue, and nausea. The patient did not have abdominal pain, fever, or chills. Semaglutide and mifepristone were discontinued. The patient drank moderately. Her vital signs were normal, and her physical exam was significant for deep jaundice and the liver edge was palpable at the costal margin. Laboratory studies; alkaline phosphatase 147 U/L, total protein 6.3 g/dL, albumin 4.1 g/dL, total bilirubin 11.3 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 68 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 73U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 390 U/L, international normalizing ratio (INR) 1.1, white blood count 8600, 4% eosinophil, hemoglobin 11.8 g/dL, platelet 397,000. Viral (anti-HAV IgM, HBsAg, anti-HBc IgM and anti-HCV) and autoimmune (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody) serologies were negative, IgA 86 mg/dL, IgM 60 mg/dL, IgG 567 mg/dL, thyroid stimulating hormone 7.69 µIU/mL, free T4 1.0 ng/dL. Magnetic resonance imaging and cholangiography showed liver measuring 17.5 cm, contracted gallbladder with no intra- or extra-hepatic biliary ductal dilatation. Liver biopsy showed cholestasis with inflammation characterized by marked centrilobular canalicular cholestasis, mild neutrophilic infiltrates of the lobules and portal tracts with rare eosinophils and minimal apoptotic hepatocytes . There was no significant lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates or steatosis. Importantly, there was no bile duct injury identified within the core biopsy material. Interestingly, focal endothelialitis was present within a central venule . Only minimal fibrosis was appreciated in the sinusoidal space by Trichrome stain .
She developed worsening pruritus despite taking ursodeoxycholic acid for 2 weeks. Her cholestatic symptoms persisted for one month before slowly subsiding. Four months after stopping mifepristone, the patient’s symptoms completely resolved, and liver tests became normal . Rechallenge was not performed. Compilation of Roussell Uclaf Causality Assessment Method (RUCAM) score indicated probable causality .