In August 2019, a 69-year-old man presented to the Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital with upper abdominal pain. He had type 2 diabetes. No family history was identified. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group score was 1. His hemoglobin concentration was 72 g/L, and the erythrocyte count was 2.91 × 1012. Serum cancer embryonic antigen was 117.2 ng/mL (normal concentration < 5.00 ng/ml), AFP was 131.6 ng/mL (normal concentration < 7.02 ng/ml), and other tumor markers were generally normal. On August 29, 2019, an enhanced abdominal and pelvic CT scan showed gastric cancer with multiple lymph node enlargement in the perigastric, mesenteric travel region, and retroperitoneal region. Endoscopy showed a gastric antrum ulcer, which was to be confirmed .
Gastroscopic pathology demonstrated adenocarcinoma in gastric antrum, part of which showed signet ring cell carcinoma differentiation. According to serological and histopathological findings, the tumor was diagnosed as AFPGC instead of hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the stomach.
Immunohistochemistry indicated HER2 (0), Ki67 (+ 90%), MSH2 ( +), MSH6 ( +), PMS2 ( +), and MLH1 ( +). PD-L1 (22C3) combined positive score (CPS) = 3 (mainly tumor cells), positive control (DAKO0905 +), and negative control ( −).
In situ hybridization findings are as follows: Eber ( −). Four common mismatch repair gene proteins (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2) were detected by immunohistochemistry. If any protein is lost (negative expression), it is considered deficient mismatch repair, and if all four genes are positive, it is considered proficient mismatch repair.
PET/CT showed nonuniform thickening of the gastric wall in the antrum area, a coarse serous surface, and increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism in the thickened gastric wall, consistent with PET/CT findings of gastric cancer. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left supraclavicular fossa, lesser omentum sac area, retroperitoneum, mesenteric root, and left iliac vessels, with increased FDG metabolism, and lymph node metastasis were considered.
The patient was definitively diagnosed as having AFP-producing gastric cancer (stage 4) with multiple lymph node metastases in the left supraclavicular fossa, lesser omentum sac, retroperitoneal, mesenteric root, and left iliac artery. After the anemia was improved, the hemoglobin concentration rose to 95 g/L. After four cycles of standard first-line chemotherapy with oxaliplatin (230 mg/d1) combined with S-1 (60 mg bid d1-14/21d), the disease was evaluated as stable according to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RECIST 1.1). Because the efficacy was unsatisfactory, albumin paclitaxel was added in the fifth cycle in combination with oxaliplatin, and, due to anemia, treatment was stopped on the 8th day. From January 12, 2020, to February 26, 2020, the 6th, 7th, and 8th cycles of chemotherapy were administered as follows: albumin-bound paclitaxel 200 mg d1 and 8 + S-1 60 mg bid d1-14/21d. After six cycles, the lesion remained stable. However, the tumor progressed significantly after eight cycles. On March 20, 2020, re-examination of the abdominal and pelvic cavities with enhanced CT indicated that the gastric antrum wall was thicker than earlier, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity and retroperitoneum were enlarged. There are changes in the right renal pelvis, the right upper ureter, and its surroundings, and the metastatic tumor has invaded the ureter, the right renal vein, and the inferior vena cava. There was hydronephrosis in the right kidney, hydrops around the ureter in the renal sinus and upper segment, hydrops around the testicular sheath, and subcutaneous soft tissue edema in the abdominal pelvis wall; these findings suggested progressive disease. The concentrations of serum cancer embryonic antigen and AFP increased to 113.1 ng/ml and 236.9 ng/ml, respectively, after eight cycles . On March 23, 2020, due to urinary tract obstruction caused by the compression of the metastatic tumor, a right nephrostomy was performed under local anesthesia for the patient. Because of the rapid disease progression and limited efficacy of chemotherapy, tislelizumab (once every 3 weeks) plus oral apatinib (250 mg once daily) was administered in our hospital beginning on March 31, 2020.
After three cycles of treatment, CT examination revealed that the thickening of the gastric antrum wall was thinner than earlier, and the multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity and retroperitoneal area were reduced. The metastatic tumor of the right renal pelvis and the upper part of the right ureter was smaller, peripheral exudation and effusion were better than before, the right renal vein and inferior vena cava were clearer, and pelvic effusion and testicular hydrocele were basically absorbed. Bladder wall thickening and abdominal pelvis wall edema were better than before. The carcinoembryonic antigen decreased to 8.17 ng/ml, and AFP decreased to 8.73 ng/ml . After three cycles, the tumor shrank by 56%, and the efficacy evaluation showed a large partial response. In December 2020, the patient’s right hydronephrosis had completely disappeared, and the right nephrostomy was removed. At review of the patient, at the end of April 2021, surprisingly, endoscopy showed that the gastric tumor and intraperitoneal metastasis had disappeared, and that the patient had achieved complete remission . The patient achieved 24 months of progression-free survival with the combination treatment by now, which significantly improved the quality of life. During treatment, the patient experienced grade 2 treatment-related hypertension according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events version 5.0; this hypertension was relieved after symptomatic treatment. The patient has taken nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker for his hypertension. The patient said that he does not take it every day and only uses it when his blood pressure is high. Moreover, his blood pressure has not elevated since November 2021, and he has stopped taking this antihypertensive medication. As of the last follow-up visit, on April 3, 2022, the patient was continuing with this combined treatment.