A 75-year-old female patient presented to the old age psychiatry inpatient unit with a 10-week history of deteriorating depressive symptoms, triggered by a telephone scam. She had repeatedly attempted to slit her wrists with a knife, and developed concerns about having cancer following two brief illnesses with infections. On admission, she presented with dysphoric mood, anhedonia, and severe negativity. She described herself as not having ‘any thoughts in my head,’ and ‘frightened.’ She showed evidence of catastrophizing, and appeared hypervigilant. Her food and fluid intake had been poor over the past 10 weeks.
In the past, she suffered from post-natal depression fifty years ago and was successfully treated with ECT. In the intervening years, she did not suffer from any episodes of severe mental illness, with no depression or mania. Physically, she suffered from hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and polymyalgia rheumatica for which she was on a reducing dose regime of prednisolone (4 mg OD on admission, reduced by 1 mg every 12 week). She was a non-smoker, and there was no history of alcohol or substance misuse. She lives with her husband and has two supportive children living nearby.
On examining her mental state, she was catatonic, displaying excessive motion intermittently including bilateral non-Parkinsonian motion of the upper limbs and lip licking. Her speech was slow and interrupted in flow. She felt low in mood and was negative in her outlook. She was not formally thought disordered, and she was cognitively intact. She had insight into the deterioration of her mental state and agreed to informal admission to the hospital for assessment and treatment.
Admission blood tests were normal. She was not anaemic, thyroid function tests were normal.
Initially on the ward, she appeared settled and was able to hold conversations with others. She was periodically anxious, requiring encouragement with food and drink intake. Due to her good response previously, the treatment team arranged a course of ECT during the admission, and she was deemed to have capacity to consent to the treatment. Prior to starting ECT, a 17-item Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) was obtained, for which she scored 23, indicative of severe depression. A Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) was performed, when converted into Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III (ACE-III), gives 69–73/100. Clinical Global Impression Severity (CGIS) by the responsible clinician was rated 6 (severely ill).
ECT was performed with Thymatron® System IV, using bitemporal electrode placement with a pulse width of 0.50 millisecond. The details of each ECT session are summarised in Table and Fig. .
Unfortunately, whilst on the ward, her clinical condition deteriorated. Her catatonia worsened considerably. She displayed virtually no interaction with external world. She showed mutism, fixed, non-reactive gaze. At times she would whisper ‘locked in,’ ‘I can’t’. She repeatedly exhibited a rocking motion of her torso with mild rigidity of her limbs. She was unable to be encouraged off her armchair and was unable to walk. She was unable to eat and drink, and was often unable to take oral medications. Prior to the second planned treatment, the team felt that she lacked capacity to consent to further sessions.
A Mental Health Act Assessment was arranged, and she was detained under Mental Health Act Section 2. Urgent ECT was prescribed under section 62, whilst a second opinion appointed doctor (SOAD) was sought for to grant her further ECT sessions. A total of 12 ECT sessions were granted.
After eight further sessions, the patient’s mental state did not improve. She continued to display minimal engagement. She often refused her medications, and her food and fluid intake was minimal. As a result, she underwent intravenous fluid therapy several times due to dehydration causing a deterioration of renal function. Treatment was given under Mental Health Act 1983 (amended 2007).
After 4th and 8th ECT sessions, repeated attempts were made by the ECT doctor to perform a MMSE, but she was deemed too unresponsive to answer the questions.
At the same time, several psychotropic medications were trialled. The date of their commencement and dose changes in relation to her ECT treatment are summarised in Table .
As a result of her lack of response to treatment, her diagnosis was reviewed and affirmed by the treatment team. Six further ECT sessions were granted through a Second Opinion Appointed Doctor (SOAD).
After 11 ECT sessions, she started to show signs of improvement. She started to walk around the ward and engage in various group activities. She started to accept her medications with less prompting. Her food and drink intake improved significantly, and she could eat independently. Her engagement with staff gradually improved, from making appropriate facial expressions to starting verbal communication. By the end of her ECT course, she could spontaneously engage in conversations and reported to us that ‘I am back.’ She was able to reflect on how severely unwell she was and felt ready to be discharged home. In view of her clinical improvement, ECT treatment was stopped. Extracts of clinical documentation on her progress have been summarized in Table .
The diagnosis was made during the admission – ICD-10 F32.3 severe depressive episode with psychotic symptoms . She showed features of psychosis during the admission period. She frequently appeared guarded and suspicious, at time frightened. She at times reported that ‘people on the ward were not eating or drinking,’
Three months post-treatment, she scored 4 on HAM-D, and scored 89–93/100 for ACE-III (converted from MMSE). Clinical Global Improvement or change (CGI-C) was rated 1 (very much improved). Efficacy index was rated at 02 (vast improvement with side effects that do not significantly interfere with patient’s functioning).