A 66-year-old Chinese woman presented with repeated chest tightness and cough for more than 2 months. Computed tomography (CT) examination of her chest revealed a large mass in the right thorax. Ten years ago, the patient had undergone a chest CT scan for a cough, and a mass in the right thorax had been found. CT-guided biopsy of the lesion was performed and it was misdiagnosed as a pulmonary abscess at a local hospital. The patient did not receive complete treatment at the time. She was hospitalized in July 2017 because CT showed that the mass in her right thorax was larger than before, causing obvious discomfort. The patient had no history of occupational exposure to silica, beryllium, or asbestos. Laboratory examination results showed no specificity. Chest CT revealed a significant soft tissue mass at the bottom of the right lung, approximately 20 cm × 13 cm × 12 cm in size, with a clear border. In addition, the mass was significantly larger than before, and contained multiple surrounding nodules . Chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the mass had low signal intensity on T1WI, slightly high signal intensity on T2WI, and low signal intensity on the internal strip. Contrast-enhanced CT and MR demonstrated noticeable heterogeneous enhancement of the lesion, but the necrotic area was not enhanced. The coronal view shows that the maximum diameter of the mass was located in the chest cavity, the lung tissue was compressed, and the mass was clearly separated from the lower liver tissue . There was no evidence of chest wall or mediastinal involvement and no significant mediastinal displacement.
The imaging appearance of the large chest mass was insufficient to determine the origin and nature of the tumor; therefore, a biopsy was performed. CT-guided biopsy along with immunohistochemical detection revealed that the tumor consisting of spindle cells with local degeneration and necrosis was an SFTP.
Because of its large size and the abundant blood supply to the tumor, the patient was referred to our interventional therapy department for preoperative embolization of major blood vessels. After angiographic confirmation, the hepatic artery and the right phrenic artery branches involved in the blood supply to the tumor were embolized . Right posterolateral thoracotomy through the sixth intercostal space was performed to resect the tumor. Upon entering the pleura, we found that the encapsulated circumscribed massive tumor blocked the view. We chose the ninth intercostal incision space for thoracoscopy and found that the pedicle of the tumor was located at the top of the diaphragm and in the right inferior hemithorax, which was closely related to the lower lobe of the right lung. Finally, the large tumor, approximately 23 cm × 16 cm × 15 cm in size, was completely removed by thoracic surgery. The tumor weighed 2250 g and appeared smooth, surfaced, and well circumscribed on macroscopic examination . In addition, there were two soft and smooth nodules on the parietal pleura near the thoracic spine. Histologically, the tumor cells were abundant, proliferative, and heterotypic (nuclear < 4/10 HPF). In addition, tumor cell degeneration, necrosis, and an invasive growth pattern were observed on the edge of the tumor. Immunohistochemical evaluation revealed positive staining for CD34, vimentin, and Bcl2, whereas pan-cytokeratin (PCK), smooth muscle actin (SMA), S-100, CD163, CD99, CD68, desmin, calretinin (CR), and human melanoma black-45 (HMB-45) were negative. The tumor was pathologically diagnosed as an SFTP. The right lung expanded completely, and pulmonary function recovered to the normal level after removal of the giant SFTP. The patient had no postoperative complications, and no recurrence occurred during the follow-up period.