Following the appearance of a rapidly evolving jaundice, a 62-year-old Caucasian male was diagnosed with moderately differentiated cholangiocarcinoma localized at the level of the common biliary duct. This tumor was classified as cT3N0M0, or subtype I, according to the Bismuth classification. A surgical resection was performed with Whipple’s duodenocephalic pancreatectomy. Two years later, he presented with postprandial pain, and he had lost approximately 20 kg in 1 year. These symptoms were found to be associated with recurrence in the liver and lung. The patient began chemotherapy with cisplatin and gemcitabine (cisplatin at a dose of 30 mg/m2 and gemcitabine at 1,000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8, respectively, every 3 weeks). Given the excellent therapeutic response after nine courses, the patient continued monotherapy with gemcitabine alone. Despite the stability of persistent lesions in the liver and lymph nodes, this medication was discontinued, due to the appearance of a discrete pulmonary infiltrate, which suggested gemcitabine toxicity. At the 5-month follow-up examination, the patient reported pain around his left shoulder without any other symptoms. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed an increase in the size of a lung nodule. F18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT confirmed recurrence of the cholangiocarcinoma. Moreover, there were two other suspicious lesions: one was in the anterior portion of the vertebral body of L2 and the other was located intramedullary at the C4 level . When the patient returned to learn the results, he reported that, within the last 36 h, he had developed a motor deficit in his left arm. The pain in the upper part of the left shoulder had also persisted. Therefore, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, and the results confirmed an intramedullary metastasis at the C4 level with spinal cord compression . The MRI results also revealed numerous parenchymal brain metastases . The high number of brain metastases disqualified the patient for neurosurgery. In addition, the risk of operating on the spinal lesion was considered too high for either a complete resection of the lesion or a decompressive cranial laminectomy. The next day, radiotherapy of the whole brain and cervical spine to C5 was started, combined with corticosteroid therapy (64 mg methylprednisolone/day). A total dose of 30 Gy was administered in daily fractions of 3 Gy, dispensed with two lateral photon beams shaped with a multi-leaf collimator. After completion of the radiotherapy, systemic treatment with cisplatin and gemcitabine was reinitiated, due to the patient’s previous excellent response to this chemotherapy regimen. The clinical evolution of the symptoms rapidly became favorable in terms of managing pain and neurological deficit. By the middle of the radiotherapy treatment, the patient had completely recovered from the paresis in the left upper extremity. At the time of publication of the present study, he remained on chemotherapy without any signs of neurological or systemic progression.