In August 2020, a 60-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Urology of The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University (Guangzhou, China) with repetitive painless gross hematuria and a 6-mo history of blood clots.
The patient had no history of chronic respiratory, cardiovascular, or other medical conditions.
There was no history of genetic disease or UC in his family.
On admission, the patient’s temperature was 36.6 ℃, heart rate was 70 bpm, respiratory rate was 15 breaths/min, and blood pressure was 136/83 mmHg. The abdomen was soft without masses or organomegaly, and no tenderness or percussed pain was observed at lower abdomen.
Routine blood tests revealed red blood cell, white blood cell, and platelet counts of 4.75 × 1012/L, 7.47 × 109/L, and 229 × 109/L, respectively, and hemoglobin level of 147 g/L. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal, but the level of fibrinogen was 4.82 g/L (2.00-4.00 g/L). The results of blood biochemistry tests were within normal ranges. Serum creatinine level was 78 μmol/L and blood urea nitrogen level was 3.9 mmol/L, indicating normal renal function. Routine urine test revealed higher amounts of protein, red blood cells and white blood cells in urine. The electrocardiography and chest X-ray were normal.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 24 mm × 42 mm × 29 mm mass located at the posterior wall of the bladder, which invaded the entire muscular layer and the serosa . Suspicious enlarged lymph nodes adjacent to the left internal iliac vessels in the pelvic cavity were observed . Cystoscopy and diagnostic TURBT were performed for further examination. Cystoscopy revealed a mass (approximately 45 mm in diameter) at the posterior wall of the bladder, with necrotic tissue and blood clots on the surface . Pathological examination revealed high-grade invasive UC with squamous and adenoid differentiation , and immunohistochemistry results showed positive expression of some intestinal adenocarcinoma markers. Based on the imaging, pathological and other examinations, the patient was staged as cT3N1M0 according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer.
The surgical tumor specimen and paired blood sample obtained from the patient were sent for genetic testing of 733 tumor-related genes (3D Medicines Inc., a College of American Pathologists-accredited and Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendment-certified laboratory, Shanghai, China). Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections were subjected to PD-L1 expression assessment using the VENTANA PD-L1 (SP263) Assay (Roche Diagnostics). PD-L1 expression was also determined using the Tumor Proportion Score (TPS), which is the proportion of viable tumor cells showing partial or complete membrane PD-L1 staining at any intensity. Tumor mutational burden (TMB) was defined as the number of non-synonymous and synonymous somatic single nucleotide variations and indels in the examined coding regions, excluding driver mutations.
Next generation sequencing results revealed that the tumor harbored six somatic mutations: ERBB2 p.S310F, RB1 p.F404Lfs*6, ARID1A p.S733*, TERT c.-124C>T, TP53 p.R282W and TP53 p.P152T . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining revealed that PD-L1 expression in the tumor was positive (TPS = 30%, Figure ). The microsatellite status was stable and the TMB was classified as intermediate with 10.06 mutations per megabase, which was less than 51% of MIBCs in the detection database .