The patient was a 63-year-old man who was diagnosed with malignant lymphoma in 2013 and underwent 2 years of radiotherapy and chemotherapy, after which he was deemed to be in complete remission. During the course of chemotherapy, the patient’s white blood cell count reduced to 200/μl, and he was in an immunocompromised state, but at the end of the chemotherapy, the count recovered to normal, and the patient lived a normal life without any medication. In 2016, mediastinal lymphadenopathy was noted on a follow-up chest computed tomography (CT), and his history revealed a dry cough for several months. Therefore, bronchoscopic lymph node biopsy, sputum culture, and blood culture were performed. Although the blood culture was negative, sputum culture grew M. avium, and he was diagnosed with nontuberculous mycobacterial infection and started on a course of rifampicin 570 mg/day, ethambutol 750 mg/day, and clarithromycin 800 mg/day.
After 1 month, he developed low-grade fever and chest pain, and a chest CT revealed a new saccular aneurysm of the aortic arch measuring 41 × 49 mm . He was continued on antibiotic treatment and closely followed; however, after 1 month a follow-up chest CT revealed that the saccular aneurysm had expanded to 43 × 62 mm , suggesting false aneurysm formation. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography with CT (PET/CT) was also performed for suspected infective aneurysm, and this revealed FDG uptake in the aneurysm . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with an infected aortic arch aneurysm due to M. avium.
Early surgical repair was deemed necessary because of the rapid expansion of the aneurysm. The options available were total arch replacement or thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR) with one or two debranching arch vessels as options. However, we opted to proceed with total arch replacement using a rifampicin-bonded gelatin-sealed woven Dacron graft because we strongly suspected an infective etiology. At surgery, median sternotomy was performed, and cardiopulmonary bypass was established via the femoral artery and the superior and inferior vena cava cannulas. Systemic anticoagulation was initiated with 300 units/kg heparin. Under hypothermic circulatory arrest at a pharyngeal temperature of 23 °C and a rectal temperature of 25 °C, the aortic arch was opened, and balloon-tipped selective cerebral perfusion cannulas were inserted. Balloon-occluded distal anastomosis was then performed under femoral perfusion of the lower body. The aneurysm was extensively debrided, and the resected section was sent for culture. Finally, the aortic arch was replaced with a rifampicin-bonded gelatin-shield 30-mm 4 branch woven Dacron graft (J Graft Shield Neo; Japan Lifeline Co., Ltd., Japan). Because of the presence of infected aneurysms near the origin of left subclavian artery, we could not perform in situ reconstruction of the artery and performed only extraanatomical reconstruction. The origin of left subclavian artery was closed, and the reconstruction was peripherally performed.
Postoperatively, no major complications were observed, and CT at the 14th postoperative day confirmed complete resection of the aneurysm . M. avium was isolated from the resected tissue. The patient was discharged on the 15th postoperative day without incident and continued on the course of rifampicin 570 mg/day, ethambutol 750 mg/day, and clarithromycin 800 mg/day. He has received oral antibiotic therapy as an outpatient for 30 months with no symptoms, and we plan to continue them for several more months.