A 23-year-old female medical student who was working as a urological video laparoscopy assistant suddenly presented urticaria and pruritus, initially on her face and arms, and then extending quickly to her whole body. No allergen could be identified and there was no previous personal history of allergy, but retrospective hypotheses included allergy due to surgical glove talc or inhalation of the glutaraldehyde that is used as a conservative solution for biological material.
The first medication given was oral antihistamine, but a mild improvement in symptoms and signs was only detected after administering intravenous methylpredniso-lone 500 mg. However, two hours after the first episode and medications, the symptoms and signs returned with the addition of vomiting. Associated upper respiratory distress, pulmonary sibilance, laryngeal stridor and significant facial angioedema (including erythema and lip edema) marked the evolution. At sites with severe pruritus, petechial lesions were observed. The clinical situation worsened, with dyspnea, tachypnea, peroral cyanosis, laryngeal edema with severe expiratory dyspnea and deepening unconsciousness. The patient was not in a state of circulatory shock, but the urticarial lesions, angioedema and upper respiratory tract distress continued to worsen.
Conventional treatment (300 mcg adrenaline injections and 1.0 g hydrocortisone), associated with other drugs like antihistamines, midazolam (20 mg), morphine (5 mg) and aerosols of beta-2 adrenergic agonists failed to reverse the imminent cardiocirculatory collapse. General sedation and curare for lung intubation and ventilatory support were considered at that moment, in view of the severe hypoventilation (PO2 = 168 mmHg and PCO2 = 217 mmHg). But before undertaking this extreme solution, and based in our previous clinical and laboratory experience, a 1.5 mg/kg (120 mg) bolus of 4% methylene blue was administered, followed by one hour of continuous infusion of another 120 mg diluted in 5% dextrose 5% in water. An initial bolus dose was selected because of the severity of the anaphylaxis. Following the initial dose of intravenous methylene blue, the clinical situation reversed completely (angioedema, urticaria, vasodilatation and upper respiratory dyspnea) in less than 20 minutes, thereby avoiding tracheal intubation. Unfortunately, no photograph was taken before the use of methylene blue, when the angioedema was very severe. Nonetheless, it was still present in the eyelids 20 to 30 minutes after treatment. Around 60 minutes later, the patient did not presented any anaphylaxis symptom apart from slight eyelid edema. No new drugs were adminis tered, and no drugs used previously were repeated. The patient was discharged home two hours later.