A 77-year-old man originating from a country with high incidence of tuberculosis, presented with severe increasing dyspnea to our institution. Echocardiography revealed a small left ventricle (LV) with normal systolic but mildly impaired diastolic function. Trans-mitral and trans-tricuspid Doppler demonstrated variations in LV and right ventricular (RV) filling, respectively, of 30%. The peak E and A velocities were 43.8 and 51.5 cm/s, respectively, resulting in an E/A ratio of 0.9. Tissue Doppler measurements demonstrated E’ septal velocity of 6.0 cm/s and E’ lateral velocity of 7.7 cm/s. These findings were suggestive of pericardial constriction with a restrictive component, however it had not been possible to identify the aetiology. Left heart catheterization revealed non-obstructive coronary artery disease, which was not felt significant to explain the degree of breathlessness. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed three days later and showed a small LV with mildly impaired ejection fraction and normal indexed mass. This study also demonstrated global, severely thickened pericardium (maximum thickness of 13 mm, normal < 3 mm), comprising of both pericardial thickening and a small effusive component along the lateral aspect of the LV and large bilateral pleural effusions . Short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequences showed increased signal intensity and imaging in the late phase after administration of the paramagnetic contrast agent gadolinium confirmed enhancement in the pericardium , both suggesting pericardial inflammation. Furthermore, there was marked septal flattening on inspiration and ventricular septal bounce consistent with constrictive physiology (Supplementary ). These findings strongly supported the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis most likely of a tuberculous etiology. The patient passed away shortly after the CMR and histology demonstrated fibrotic pericardium, accompanied by chronic inflammation with numerous epitheloid granulomas and marked central caseous necrosis, confirming mycobacterial infection.
Video 1: To see the video, refer to article’s online version.