A 35-year-old right-hand-dominant Sundanese male (resident physician) presented to the emergency department (ED) with the chief complaint of pain, swelling, blisters, and blackening at the right middle finger 24 hours after he had accidentally pricked the palmar aspect base distal phalanx of the right middle finger by suture needle using Chromic 1 during gynecological surgery suturing of the uterus at a rural hospital. He denied any allergies, history of sexually transmitted infections, smoking, and drinking, and had had no surgeries in the past. He had been administered broad-spectrum antibiotic (ceftriaxone 2 g) intravenously following the suture, with no improvement. Untreated, such symptoms rapidly destroy the gliding mechanism, causing adhesion formation and giving rise to necrosis. Afterward, the patient began to experience pain and swelling at the injured finger, later over his entire hand and wrist area. The middle finger had blisters and started to blacken .
On physical examination, the initial wound was nowhere to be found. The middle finger had necrosis and blisters at the level of proximal phalanx of the palmar aspect. There was swelling and redness at both the palmar and dorsal aspect of the hand; the latter had tensed swelling. There were blisters and fusiform swelling at the index, middle, and ring fingers with the position of slight flexion. Passive extension and palpation of the middle finger caused severe pain. Consciousness and vital signs of the patient were within normal limits. No visible edema was found on the forearm. Laboratory studies demonstrated a total leukocyte count of 9100/mm3, C-reactive protein level of < 0.5 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 42 mm per hour, D-dimer of 0.24 µg/ml, and international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.30. On radiographic examination, there was no evidence of phalangeal fracture, bony involvement, or foreign body. He was treated empirically with ceftriaxone.
The patient was diagnosed with compartment syndrome due to a flexor tendon sheath infection stage III. Emergency surgical debridement and fasciotomy were performed. Multiple incisions were made at the dorsal aspect of the hand with two longitudinal incisions over the second and fourth metacarpals and at ulnar and radial sides of the second to fifth fingers, opening the flexor tendon sheath. Minimal purulent discharge was revealed, and cultures for aerobic, anaerobic, acid-fast bacilli, and fungus were taken. The wound was irrigated with saline and left open with a modified shoelace suture for gradual closure . Follow-ups were performed daily (1–10 days) to assess the wound healing. The smear culture collected from the wound had tested negative. Afterward, the antimicrobial was subsequently changed to meropenem 1 g twice daily. On the 10th day of follow-up, the swelling was decreased. On the 20th day of follow-up, re-debridement and the primary suture were performed to evaluate the wound healing. A clear boundary of necrosis at the level of the middle phalanx of the right middle finger was found; subsequently, disarticulation at the level of the distal phalanx was performed. At the latest follow-up, 1 month after the initial surgery, examination of the affected distal phalanx was within normal limits, and there was no evidence of infection, inflammation, or swelling .
To avoid the gap at the middle finger, the patient agreed to perform a ray amputation. At 2 years of follow-up, the patient performed physical examination and surgery without any significant difficulty .