A previously healthy 44-year-old female presented with a 2-month history of visual disturbance. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a heterogeneously enhancing mass within suprasellar and intrasellar lesions . She underwent a partial resection, mainly caudal part of the tumor, via translabial transsphenoidal approach . As the pathological examination could not find any malignant cells, histological diagnosis from this operation was lymphocytic hypophisitis.
Steroid pulse therapy was performed, but 2 months after the first operation, bilateral abducens paralysis was noticed. The second partial resection was performed, mainly ventral and rostral part of the tumor, via a basal interhemispheric approach , and malignant cells were not found from the surgical specimen . Despite the aggressive therapies with immunosuppressant and radiotherapy for the lesion, she lost her vision in the left eye within a few months. MRI demonstrated the expansion of the lesion to the left cavernous sinus, the left orbital fossa and the left forehead with no regrowth in the sellar region . Furthermore, intracranial dissemination and distant metastasis were found in the right cerebellar hemisphere, vermis, spinal cord, and lung . Biopsies were performed at the left orbital fossa and the left forehead and histological diagnosis was AT/RT. Three drug chemotherapies were performed at 3-week intervals for a total of five cycles. Each cycle consisted of ifosfamide, cisplatin, and etoposide administered on days 1-5. Radiotherapy was given. She died of respiratory failure 17 months after the initial treatment.
The tumor was composed of polygonal cells with a relatively high nuclear/cytoplasm ratio and the rhabdoid cells had medium, round, single or double nuclei, and eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions. The tumor cells showed strong immunoreactivity for O-6 methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), Nestin and S100 protein, and focal positivity for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and Glypican-3. Desmin, oligodendrocyte transcription factor 2 (oligo2), placentral alkaline phosphatase, myogenin and p63 were negative. Proliferative activity is high, and Ki-67/MIB-1 labeling index was more than 90%. Since the tumor cells lacked nuclear expression of INI1, the tumor was pathologically diagnosed as AT/RT .