A 53-year-old male Caucasian patient was incidentally diagnosed with multiple right ventricular outpouchings (RVOs) 8 years ago, when he was investigated for fever of unknown origin. Computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest and abdomen showed abdominal lymphangioma , ascites , and a RVO measuring 3 × 2.5 cm. His abdominal lymphangioma was resected surgically and he did not undergo chemo or radiotherapy. Right ventricular outpouching was left alone without any intervention for observation and monitoring over time. An anterior abdominal wall hernia was also noticed, probably a forme fruste of Cantrell syndrome. The patient developed shortness of breath, leg swelling and was unable to lose weight 7 years post-surgery. Physical examination was equivocal, and he had a repeat CT scan for chest and abdomen which revealed multiple RVOs and eccentric foci of pericardial calcification near the neck of the largest RVD but also over the left ventricle AV groove and basal lateral wall . Furthermore, features of fluid overload such as diffuse oedema of abdominal wall , misty mesentery, mild to moderate ascites, hepatic congestion, nodularity, and prominent splenic vessels were also noted.
On his latest admission with shortness of breath, abdominal distension and ascites, echocardiography demonstrated supranormal, early diastolic tissue velocities with average of 19.8 cms−1, and a septal bounce phenomenon on m-mode imaging suggesting constrictive physiology which triggered a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) referral.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging viability scan with gadolinium contrast demonstrated multiple (at least four) diverticula along right ventricular (RV) free wall —the largest measuring 4.5 × 2 cm with a sizeable neck and at 1.5 cm from the tricuspid valve annulus. Another smaller diverticulum (9 mm) was seen just apically from the first and the third further close to the true RV apex. In the right ventricular outflow tract view , the larger diverticulum was located to the acute RV angle and the fourth diverticulum was found in the free RV wall just beneath the pulmonary valve. All these outpouchings had displayed either a trabecular network Figure ) and/or a contractile behaviour that favoured the diagnosis of diverticula as opposed to aneurysms (, Videos S1–S3). First pass perfusion depicted a direct contrast communication into the diverticula without evidence of extravasation into the pericardial space . Late gadolinium enhancement revealed localized epicardial type of hyperenhancement over the left ventricular (LV) lateral wall segments corresponding to areas of decreased signal intensity on T1 mapping mimicking pericardial pocket formation ( and H). RV function was moderately compromised, whereas LV function was preserved .
A diagnosis of right heart failure with constrictive physiology was made based on the presence of RV diverticula, progressive pericardial thickening and calcification, and moderately compromised RV function. The patient was medically managed with loop diuretics and spironolactone—later replaced with eplerenone due to side effects. He is scheduled for periodic surveillance.