A 28-year-old pregnant woman (height 155 cm; weight 55 kg) visited our emergency room complaining about progressive dyspnea and recurrent hemoptysis at 30 weeks’ gestation. Two years ago, she was diagnosed to have congenital heart disease because of heart failure which occurred at her fist pregnancy. As a result, she had to have an abortion at 20 weeks’ gestation. But she refused to receive any treatment. She said that she was asymptomatic except for mild cyanosis before getting pregnant. This was her second pregnancy. She said she was uncomfortable on the left lateral position during late pregnancy this time. Physical examination indicated cyanosis, orthopnea and acropachy. Temperature was 36.6 centigrade, blood pressure was 115/60 mmHg, heart rate was 99 per minute, and pulse oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 75 % when she inhaled air. Electrocardiogram showed incomplete right bundle branch block. Chest radiograph revealed bilateral patch shadows, cardiac enlargement and bulging of pulmonary artery segment. Echocardiography of the mother showed: The diameter of the right atria and right ventricular were 55 cm and 30 cm separately; the diameter of the left atria and left ventricular were normal; the aorta and pulmonary artery were parallel without enlargement; the aorta ridded on ventricular septum, 80 % of the aorta was from right ventricular; there was a 26 mm ventricular septum defect under aorta; there was a left to right shunt between left and right ventricles was detected, the max velocity was 1.6 m/s; there was absence of fibrous joint between anterior mitral valve leaflet and posterior wall of aorta; the ejection fraction of the left ventricle was 58 %. The diagnosis of the echocardiography was DORV (subaortic ventricular septal defect),mild reflux of pulmonary valve and contraction function of left ventricle was normal . Echocardiography of the embryo indicated cor triatriatum of right atrium. The results of laboratory tests were normal except for platelet count which was 79 × 109/L. The hemoglobin concentration was 112 g/L. Her New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class was III–IV. The patient was treated with oxygen, furosemide and dexamethasone when she arrived at our hospital. The dexamethasone was used to promote maturity of the feta’s lung. One day’s later, the symptoms of the patient were improved. The obstetrician decided to terminate pregnancy by cesarean section for deterioration of the heart function.
When she arrived at the operational room, oxygen 8 L/min was provided with a mask. The operating table was turned to reverse trendelenburg position. She was monitored with pulse oximetry, 5-lead ECG and invasive blood pressure Measures (SPACELAMBS, UltraviewSl2700). One 16-G access was placed in the peripheral venous. We should had inserted the central venous catheter. But unfortunately, we failed after trying twice. Because the patient couldn’t lie down and the ultrasound machine was unavailable. Ringer’s lactate was administered slowly according to the heart rate and blood pressure. In order to balance pulmonary circulation and systemic circulation and in case of heart failure. We decided to perform epidural anesthesia and pump phenylephrine at the same time. She was kept on the left lateral position with hips and knees flexed to assist puncturing. One epidural catheter was inserted into L3–L4 interspace with pointed toward caudal direction, another epidural catheter was inserted into L1–L2 interspace with pointed toward cephalic direction. Then the patient was placed on supine position with uterus pushed to the left. Just in the process of changing position, the patient coughed badly as well as complained about chest congestion and dyspnea. At the same time, the SpO2 decreased to 50 %. Rale was auscultated on bilateral chest, the blood pressure was 102/65 mmHg. The symptom improved soon after 10 mg furosemide was given intravenously and with the head of bed elevated. 2 % lidocaine 3 mL was injected into epidural for testing. Then sensory block level of S5–T6 was achieved by titrating 15 mL chloroprocaine through the two catheters. Along with epidural anesthesia, phenylephrine was pumped at a rate of 0.1–0.3 μg kg−1 min−1 to keep hemodynamics stable. During cesarean section, the mother was infused intravenously 5 IU dose of oxytocin after the baby was delivered. 3 min later, the symptoms as they occurred in position changing before reappeared unexpectedly. Then 10 mg furosemide, 3 mg morphine and 2 mg cediland were administered, then the patient felt better gradually. Apgar scores of the baby were 7 at 1 min and 10 at 5 min. In the surgery, the patient received 200 mL Ringer’s lactate, blood loss was about 200 mL and output of urine was 700 mL. The mother was transferred to intensive care unit, the baby was sent to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit for premature birth postoperatively. 7 days later, the patient recovered and was discharged.