A 67-year-old male patient was admitted to the gastroenterology department due to abdominal pain over 3 months. He was hospitalized with a diagnosis of gastricism and a proton-pump inhibitor was started, but abdominal pain persisted. Physical examination showed mild epigastric tenderness. A complete blood count on admission were as follows: white blood count 9.76 × 109/L, the C-reactive protein level 138.31 mg/L, red blood count 3.79 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 120 g/L, platelets 118 × 109/L, liver function tests, kidney function tests and pancreatic enzyme levels were within normal limits. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was scheduled revealing a linear, hyperdense, foreign body along the stomach wall and pancreatic neck , and bone condition CT clearly shows the position and shape of the fish bone in the abdominal cavity . The patient was questioned about her past medical history. He remembered that he had abdominal pain after eating fish and something else 3 months ago. After urgent consultation, we made a final diagnosis of localized inflammation caused by a fish bone penetrating the posterior wall of the gastric antrum and migrating into the neck of the pancreas. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed; however, in addition to the chronic atrophic gastritis and distal gastric ulcer, no foreign body was found. Later, the patient was transferred to department of hepatobiliary and pancreatic oncology and underwent laparoscopic surgery. The patient was placed in a supine position. The operator stood on the right side of the patient, the assistant on the left side, and the scopist between the patient’s legs. Five trocars were placed: one above the navel for the laparoscopy (10 mm), two in the upper right abdominal quadrant (12 mm, 5 mm), and one in the upper left abdominal quadrant (10 mm, 5 mm). Fibrous structures were observed between the small curvature of the stomach and pancreas neck, and after the adhesions were dissected, a fish bone was identified and removed laparoscopically . The foreign body was identified as a 3.2-cm-long fish bone . Bleeding was controlled by pressure with a hemostatic gauze, and no suture repair was performed, because the penetrated wall was small and no leak was observed in both stomach and pancreas. Surgical intervention was completed after placing a drain in the operation area. The operation time is 2 h, and the bleeding during the operation is about 100 ml. Postoperative antibiotherapy was started, with proton-pump inhibitor treatment continuing for three more days. Clear fluid was drained, finally the drain pipe was removed on the third day after surgery. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the fifth day after surgery without any postoperative complications. And CT reexamination had not found obvious abnormality 2 months after the surgery.