A 71-year-old woman presented with a painless visible swelling of the left cheek. Skin and oral mucosa were intact and of normal color. At palpation, the mass was mobile and apparently not adherent to the cutaneous and mucosal tissue.
For what concerns comorbidities, the patient was only known for Hashimoto thyroiditis in hormone replacement treatment (no relevant comorbidity was known).
Under ultrasound guidance, a 3-cm hypoechoic lesion was visualized in the left malar region and fine-needle-aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed. Cytological examination showed numerous Red Blood Cells, some lymphoid small B- and T-cells, plasma cells with no polyclonal atypia and a population of small-sized cells with plasmacytoid cells with the following immunophenotype: S-100 protein + , GFAP ± , P63 ± , cytokeratin7-, suggesting a salivary origin. However, a more precise diagnosis was not possible because of the small amount of material available.
The following month, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with intravenous paramagnetic contrast (Gadobutrol) was performed . T1-weighted (T1w), T2-weighted (T2w), fat-saturated Short-TI Inversion Recovery (STIR), Diffusion-Weighted Imaging (DWI), and T1w sequences after contrast administration were acquired. It revealed the presence of a solid polylobate lesion located around the left parotid duct, with an antero-inferior component of 13 × 13 × 15 mm in the soft tissues adjacent to the buccinators, and another component of about 22 × 27 × 29 mm in the buccal fat pad extending into the infratemporal fossa up to the pterygo-maxillary fissure, which exerted a mass effect on the masticatory muscles and the posterolateral wall of the maxillary sinus. The mass showed contrast medium uptake and diffusion restriction (apparent diffusion coefficient, ADC = 0.9). Notably, the lesion displayed hyperintense signal compared to muscles in T1w sequences and hypointensity on T2w sequences. Some enlarged oval lymph nodes with progressive contrast enhancement were present in the left fifth cervical level. Overall, the MRI findings were suggestive of a malignant lesion that the radiologists assumed to have arisen from minor salivary glands on the basis of the anamnesis of the patient and of the epidemiology of neoplasms in this region.
The T1 hyperintensity was referred to possible blood residues in consideration of the recent bioptic procedure.
Surgical exeresis was performed 2 weeks later. Intraoral access through the gingival fornix was obtained. The lesion, which extended to the pterygo-maxillary fissure, did not adhere to the surrounding tissues and was easily removed. It was partially solid, with a colliquated component.
Histological examination showed the presence of fibro-connective and lymphatic tissue containing malignant neoplastic cells compatible with a nodule of melanoma inside the buccal fat pad .
Gene mutation analysis for c-KIT and BRAF was performed: c-KIT was Wild Type (WT), while V600 mutation of BRAF exon 15 was found.
[F-18]FDG PET-CT revealed multiple localizations of pathological radiotracer hyper-accumulation: bilateral suprahyoid and axillary lymph nodes, fifth liver segment, right adrenal gland, multiple abdominal solid lesions (perigastric, left psoas muscle, right iliac fossa), various subcutaneous, and muscular tissue localizations (left and right thigh and gluteus, right pectoral muscle, right masseter, and right fourth toe).
Full-body computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast was then performed, with the following results: no encephalic lesions; 2-cm left cervical lymph node (LN); 5-mm left paracardiac micronodule; 7-cm LN conglomerate in the left axillary region; bilateral adrenal lesions (3.5 cm on the right side; 2 cm on the left); multiple enlarged mesenteric LNs, the largest of about 2 cm; 2.8-cm lesion in the left psoas muscle.
Dermatological examination revealed a 2-cm ulcerated cutaneous lesion on the distal phalanx of the left fifth finger, compatible with a primitive localization. The patient reported having it for about 1 year but never investigating it. Incisional biopsy of the lesion was performed, and histological examination confirmed the presence of melanoma cells with V600E mutation of BRAF gene.
Immediately afterwards, treatment was begun with Dabrafenib 300 mg/die and Trametinib 2 mg/die.
Two follow-up full-body CTs at 2 and 6 months were performed and showed significant size reduction of the axillary and abdominal LNs, of the adrenal and mesenteric localizations, and disappearance of the thoracic nodules.