A 33-year-old woman with congenital heart disease and obesity presented with exertional dyspnoea for 5 months. She had a history of congenital aortic stenosis due to BAV and coarctation of the aorta. She underwent a Ross procedure at 10 years old and per the operative report, she was found to have a single coronary ostium from the left coronary cusp upon inspection of the aortic valve. She was diagnosed with common origin of the right and left coronary arteries, and a single coronary button was created from the left cusp and reimplanted following suturing of the pulmonary autograft in the aortic position. A 20 mm synthetic graft (Vascutek Ltd.) was placed in the pulmonic position. She eventually developed symptomatic stenosis of the synthetic graft and underwent uncomplicated transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement (TcPVR) with a Melody valve prosthesis with concomitant stenting of the aortic coarctation at 22 years old.
As part of her current evaluation, physical examination was notable for a palpable right ventricular lift, a grade III/VI mid-systolic crescendo murmur and a Grade II/IV short diastolic decrescendo murmur, both heard best at the left upper sternal border. The pulmonary examination was normal. Transthoracic echocardiography showed moderate stenosis and moderate regurgitation of the pulmonary prosthesis. The peak velocity across the pulmonary prosthesis was 3.3 m/s with peak instantaneous gradient of 44 mmHg and mean gradient of 25 mmHg. There was normal neo-aortic valve and biventricular systolic function, trace tricuspid regurgitation, and no evidence of re-coarctation of the aorta. Cardiopulmonary exercise test revealed severely reduced peak oxygen consumption of 14 mL/kg/min with a total exercise time of 5 min 40 s, ventricular bigeminy during exercise and recovery, and diffuse 1 mm flat ST depressions during exercise. These results were markedly worse compared with a test done 2 years prior, during which the patient was able to exercise up to 9 and 10 s with peak oxygen consumption of 20 mL/kg/min and only rare ventricular ectopy seen during recovery.
Given concern for symptomatic prosthetic valve disease, she was referred for valve-in-valve TcPVR with coronary angiography to evaluate for coronary ostial stenosis given the history of a prior Ross procedure. Laboratory tests were notable for elevated B-type natriuretic peptide at 214 pg/mL, undetectable serum troponin-I level, mild thrombocytopenia of 139 000/μL, normal leukocyte count, renal and hepatic function, and normal C-reactive protein of 0.7 mg/dL.
A cardiac catheterization was performed, demonstrating right ventricle (RV) systolic pressure of 76 mmHg with a peak-to-peak systolic gradient of 23 mmHg across the pulmonary valve, and angiography of the main pulmonary artery demonstrated severe pulmonary regurgitation. Aortic pressure was 98/55 mmHg. Selective angiography of the left coronary artery (LCA) demonstrated a large left anterior descending artery (LAD) that wrapped around the left ventricular apex, and no epicardial LCA disease. However, retrograde filling of a medium-sized dominant right coronary artery (RCA) via collaterals from the LAD was noted, with systolic washout of contrast from the RCA (Video 1). Aortic root angiography showed no evidence of an RCA ostium, but the pigtail catheter momentarily prolapsed into the LVOT during injection. This revealed an RCA ostium originating from the high LVOT, immediately below the aortic valve (Video 2). Selective RCA angiography was then performed using a Judkins Right 4.0 catheter prolapsed across the aortic valve, and showed an angiographically patent RCA ostium with pulsatile antegrade flow augmented during systole, with washout and reflux of contrast into the LVOT during diastole (Video 3, , ). The aortic valve was clearly seen to be above the level of the RCA ostium (see , ).
Given the absence of angiographic stenosis, we concluded that the collateralization of the RCA occurred because of ischaemia in the RCA territory resulting from inadequate coronary perfusion pressure due to the subvalvular coronary origin and the consequent systolic dominant RCA flow. We successfully performed valve-in-valve TcPVR with a 23 mm Sapien S3 prosthesis, with the improvement of transvalvular gradient to 8 mmHg and resolution of pulmonary regurgitation. A coronary computed tomography angiogram (CCTA) was obtained, which re-demonstrated the subvalvular RCA takeoff . Transthoracic echocardiography done the day after valve replacement showed complete resolution of pulmonary regurgitation and improvement in pulmonary valve haemodynamics when compared with before the valve-in-valve TcPVR. The peak velocity was 2.8 m/s with peak instantaneous gradient of 32 mmHg and a mean gradient of 17 mmHg. Trace tricuspid regurgitation was seen. Over the next 6 months, the patient reported significant improvement of her exertional dyspnoea with improved exercise performance and absence of angina, ventricular ectopy, and wall motion abnormalities on repeat stress echocardiography. Given these results, along with consideration of the risk of redo sternotomy for coronary bypass grafting or RCA reimplantation, conservative management including medical therapy with aspirin and labetalol as well as targeted lifestyle counselling directed towards weight reduction was pursued, after a discussion with the patient.