A 74-year-old man was transported to our hospital due to fever. His medical history included epilepsy, smoking 20 cigarettes per day for 50 years, and medications such as sodium valproate, clobazam, and phenobarbital. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a compression fracture of the third lumbar vertebra, an abdominal aortic aneurysm, and coronary artery stenosis. Aortic root enlargement was shown on the CT . The patient was scheduled to undergo OPCAB.
Preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed an ejection fraction of 48% and normal wall motion. The presence of a PFO was not checked. He had mild aortic valve regurgitation with a Valsalva diameter of 51 mm, sinotubular junction of 48 mm, ascending aortic diameter of 43 mm, descending aortic diameter of 37 mm, and abdominal aortic diameter of 58 mm. Coronary angiography revealed stenoses of 90% in the posterior descending branch, 75% in the left main trunk, and 90% in the mid portion of the LAD.
In the operation room, an arterial catheter (FloTrac, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted, followed by induction of anesthesia with midazolam 3 mg, fentanyl 350 µg, and rocuronium 80 mg and maintenance with remifentanil 0.15 µg/kg/min and sevoflurane 0.6–0.8 minimum alveolar concentration. A central venous catheter (PreSep, Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine) was inserted in the right internal jugular vein. Standard monitors, transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), bispectral index monitoring (Covidien, Dublin, Ireland), and cerebral regional oxygen saturation monitoring (INVOS 5100C, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) were used. Intraoperative TEE showed aortic root enlargement, compression of the right atrium, and an atrial septal aneurysm, which deviated the atrial septal tissue 10 mm from the atrial plane into the left atrium, but we did not search for the presence of a PFO at that time .
Using the Octopus Tissue Stabilizer® (Medtronic), anastomosis was performed in the order of saphenous vein graft to the posterior descending artery, right internal thoracic artery to the high lateral branch, and saphenous vein graft to diagonal branch (D1) of the left coronary artery. Atrial fibrillation occurred during the anastomosis of the saphenous vein graft to D1 of the left coronary artery. After two cardioversions, the electrocardiogram returned to sinus rhythm. Then, anastomosis of the RCA and left circumflex artery was performed.
For the left internal thoracic artery to LAD anastomosis, the area near the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) was fixed using the Octopus Tissue Stabilizer®, resulting in a sudden decrease in central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO2) from 84 to 23% and regional cerebral oxygen saturation from 67% in the right frontal region/62% in the left frontal region to 29%/32% over 8 min. This was followed by a decrease in the peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) from 100 to 49%. Converse to the decrease in oxygenation, the cardiac index increased from 2.0 to 3.3 l/min/m2 and then decreased to 1.8 l/min/m2 with a decrease in systolic blood pressure from 110 to 38 mmHg) .
With these declines, we performed a recruitment maneuver because the TEE showed atelectasis, and fluid resuscitation was performed for possible hypovolemia. However, these methods failed to improve his condition. When the Octopus Tissue Stabilizer® that immobilized the area near the RVOT was released, his blood pressure gradually improved. ScvO2, regional cerebral oxygen saturation, and SpO2 also returned to their pre-fixation values over 8 min. Using the Octopus Tissue Stabilizer® to immobilize the heart again, ScvO2, regional cerebral oxygen saturation, SpO2, and blood pressure decreased again. The patient’s central venous pressure (CVP) increased from 5 to 15 mmHg. The TEE revealed a PFO that had been unnoticed preoperatively and a marked right-to-left shunt .
We hypothesized that the increased afterload in the right ventricular system resulted in a right-to-left shunt from the PFO. After the Octopus Tissue Stabilizer® was released again and the patient’s condition improved, we discontinued positive end-expiratory pressure to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance and minimized fluid administration to decrease right atrial pressure. Then, cardiac immobilization for left internal thoracic artery to LAD anastomosis was tried again while the ScvO2 and regional cerebral oxygen saturation were closely monitored. After the anastomosis was completed, TEE revealed no shunt through the PFO.
The operative time was 431 min, anesthesia time was 498 min, blood loss was 5838 mL, total administration of intravenous crystalloid and colloid solutions was 8700 mL, red blood cell transfusion was 2240 mL, and fresh frozen plasma transfusion was 1200 mL. The TTE performed 9 days after the operation showed no shunt via the PFO.