A 22-year-old right hand dominant male presented in the outpatient department with complaints of shortening and inability to extend middle finger of the left hand. On examination, there was an extension lag at the middle finger, poor grip strength, and reduced height of middle ray . The patient had a history of incidental trauma to the left hand for which he was treated conservatively. Over the 6 months after the trauma, the patient started developing the symptoms in the form of gradual shortening and reduced handgrip strength and presented to our hospital. On investigation, blood parameters including calcium levels and parathormone levels were normal. The X-ray showed pathological fracture of third metacarpal with osteolytic lesion involving base of second metacarpal and carpal bones . Magnetic resonance imaging showed almost complete osteolysis of the 3rd metacarpal with only the base visible and fracture of the 4th metacarpal with thinning and resorption of the bone and surrounding soft tissue. It also showed pathological fracture involving capitate with patchy areas of osteolysis . Serial X-rays taken at 4 weeks, 8 weeks, 12 weeks, 18 weeks, and 6 months revealed that there was progressive concentric reduction of metacarpal shaft, first involving third then fourth metacarpal giving appearance of a sucked candy . At this point in time, we kept in mind the differential diagnosis of primary bone tumor like aggressive giant cell tumor or aneurysmal bone cyst or metastasis from any other primary tumor. Positron emission tomography scan was done to rule out any tumor, however, no evidence of tumor was found. Parathyroid hormone levels were within normal limit. Biopsy suggested myxoid areas, proliferating vessels interposed with skeletal muscle fragments with no evidence of malignancy. Based on the clinical-radiological and histopathological presentation, we made a diagnosis of vanishing bone disease. Since there was increased proliferation of blood vessels, we planned to reconstruct vanished metacarpals with non-vascularized fibula as there already was a hypervascular bed. Dorsal S-shaped incision starting from the metacarpal head to radiocarpal joints was taken. Intraoperatively, it was found that there was a thin shell of cartilage from third metacarpal head along with intact collateral and intermetacarpal ligaments. Non-vascularized fibular autologous graft was harvested from the ipsilateral limb and fixed with transverse k-wires to adjacent metacarpal . Intraoperatively, osteolytic lesion involving carpal bones was curated and bone graft substitute was used to fill cavity and some graft was put alongside of fibular graft. Postoperatively, hand and wrist were immobilized with plaster slab in functional position. The patient was started on 1000 mg elemental calcium in the form of calcium carbonate tablets. Vitamin D, 60,000 IU, once weekly for 12 weeks was also administered. Bisphosphonates were given in the form alendronate 70 mg once weekly for 8 weeks. K-wires were removed at end of 8 weeks and gradual physiotherapy was started to improve hand function. At the end of 2 years, graft was completely incorporated and the patient gained functional recovery with active flexion at metacarpophalangeal joints of the 3rd and 4th finger from 0 to 70° and normal range at proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint (0–100°) and DIP (0–80°) joints. The patient has 60% grip strength in affected hand as compared to normal hand (using dynamometer) with no evidence of recurrence (additional file 1: Movie 1).