A 53-year-old man was admitted to a nearby hospital owing to high-grade fever. CT revealed a low-density mass in his right hepatic lobe. Consequently, he was diagnosed with a bacterial liver abscess. Percutaneous drainage of the hepatic abscess was performed, as well as treatment with antibacterial drugs. Despite this, the infection and condition of the patient worsened. He was admitted to our hospital for undergoing intensive treatment .
His vital signs included a temperature of 38.8 °C, blood pressure of 122/87 mmHg, heart rate of 120 beats per minutes, and disturbance of consciousness (Glasgow coma scale, 13). The patient had no pertinent medical history other than pneumothorax. He had no history of sexual activity nor travel. At the time of admission, no pathogen was identified from the pus of the liver abscess or the blood culture. CT demonstrated that the low-density, 15-cm mass in the right liver lobe was partially replaced by necrotic solid tissue. There was an emergence of new fluid lesions in the mediastinum and right thoracic cavity . After admission to our hospital, additional percutaneous drainage of both fluid lesions was performed. E. histolytica was detected from the drained discharge of the mediastinal cavity. Thus, the patient was diagnosed with amebic liver abscess. We administered MNZ (1500 mg) orally for 10 days, but his physical condition did not improve. The patient presented with a sustained fever of 38.9 °C, blood pressure of 117/79 mmHg, heart rate of 117 beats per minutes, respiratory rate of 32 per minutes, and a disturbed consciousness (Glasgow coma scale, 13). The patient had abdominal distention and complained of widespread abdominal pain. Additionally, his laboratory blood tests revealed a high inflammatory reaction and a tendency towards disseminated intravascular coagulation . CT showed no change in the size of the liver abscess (15 cm). The mediastinal abscess was already well drained. No additional drainage was performed during surgery . Based on these results, we decided to perform surgical intervention to drain the amebic liver abscess.
On laparotomy, there was a congested peritoneum due to acute secondary diffuse suppurative peritonitis not only around the liver, but also around the abdominal cavity. The small intestine was dilated because of inflammation. The coagulation abnormality induced easy bleeding, especially at the time of right liver mobilization. The boundary of the liver abscess could not be detected macroscopically since the visible change in the hepatic capsule was minimal. However, preoperative CT allowed us to estimate the range of the cavity . The aspiration drains became important guideposts to reference CT images. We also used IOUS to determine adequate resection areas of the hepatic capsule and hepatic tissue . These modalities allowed us to perform a safe necrotic tissue resection without damage to the major vessels. The whitish and semi-solid necrotic tissue occupied most of the abscess cavity in the right liver lobe. This was considered the cause of inefficient drainage and was debrided. The pig tail catheters inserted in the abscess were replaced with thick drains. A jejunostomy was done using a needle catheter to create a route for nutrient administration . Because the patient had coagulopathy, stopping liver bleeding posed a difficult problem. Hence, resection or enucleation of the abscess area was not performed. The mediastinal abscess was already well-drained. No additional drainage was performed during surgery . The operation time was 246 min, with intraoperative bleeding amounting to 2635 mL. The excised specimen pathologically showed purulent granulomas, although the presence of amoeba could not be confirmed. E. histolytica has not been detected again in any drain since the initial diagnosis.
The disseminated intravascular coagulation immediately subsided after surgery. Owing to a high fever, the patient was placed on prolonged bedrest. He eventually became malnourished and suffered from disuse syndrome. After long-term physical therapy, the patient was discharged 137 days after surgery. In the CT prior to his discharge, the abscess had almost disappeared . The patient had no recurrence of liver abscess 1 year after surgery.