A 56-year-old female patient with a history of hypertension presents with a three-year history of epigastric abdominal pain, which has increased in intensity over the past month and now radiates to the back. She has no history of alcohol consumption, diabetes, or other remarkable medical history. All her blood tests were within normal limit. The computed tomography scan of the upper abdomen revealed pancreatic atrophy and a dilated pancreatic duct (18 mm) with the presence of large stones (1.0 cm × 0.6 cm) in the pancreatic head (, ). No malignancy or biliary dilation was detected. The preoperative diagnosis is chronic pancreatitis with dilated duct obstructed by a large stone.
A laparoscopic exam of the pancreatic duct was performed, followed by applying electrohydraulic lithotripsy. The duct was then emptied into the duodenum using an 8 Fr catheter, and the opening was closed with PDS 4/0 sutures without creating pancreatojejunal anastomosis.
Before the procedure, the patient was administered prophylactic antibiotics and endotracheal anesthesia. The patient was positioned in a reverse Trendelenburg position with legs apart and tilted 30 degrees to the right. Five trocars were utilized, including two 10 mm trocars, two 5 mm trocars, and one 10 mm trocar located directly at the opening of the pancreatic duct, to ensure the placement of a connecting tube from the duct to the skin, preventing the entry of stones or fluid into the abdomen (, ).
We performed a laparoscopic evaluation of the abdominal cavity and opened the great omentum to access the anterior surface of the head and body of the pancreas. This was achieved by elevating the stomach and lowering the transverse colon. Using a unipolar electric knife, we incised the pancreatic duct to a diameter of 8 mm, which was large enough for inserting the percutaneous catheter at the head and body of the pancreas . The flexi endoscope was then inserted into the pancreatic duct to assess and evaluate its condition and the location of pancreatic stones.
We performed hydraulic wave pancreatic lithotripsy to break up the stones into smaller pieces and remove them by stone extraction baskets, suction, and irrigation of the pancreatic duct . After removing the stones, we ensured that no residual stone debris or bleeding was present in the duct. Then, we inserted an 8 Fr drainage into the main pancreatic duct to drain its contents and then closed the opening with PDS 4-0 sutures without performing pancreatojejunal anastomosis.
The surgical procedure was finished without placing abdominal drainage and lasted for 185 min, with a total blood loss of 50 m. We administered routine laboratory tests on postoperative day 1 and 3, without any sign of acute pancreatitis. The patient was discharged on the fifth day after the procedure uneventfully. After three months, the patient reported a significant decrease in pain, and a follow-up abdominal CT scan showed no presence of stones . We removed the catheter by endoscopy.