A 12-year-old boy was hospitalized with complaints of a headache and high fever accompanied by psychosis, delirium, and indistinct consciousness. He was diagnosed with limbic encephalitis, which is an autoimmune disorder characterized by inflammation of the limbic area in the brain. His symptoms became exacerbated, and he required intensive therapies including high-dose steroid and catecholamine administration.
Despite the continuous therapeutic support mentioned above, he abruptly developed hypotension following diarrhea, fever, and abdominal distension on day 41 after admission. Metabolic acidosis (pH 7.34, base excess − 7.0 mmol/L) was confirmed by blood gas analysis, and highly elevated CPK 11800 U/L, AST 461 U/L, ALT 201 U/L, and LDH 1034 U/L values were revealed by a blood chemistry profile. An emergency CT scan revealed pneumatosis intestinalis localized in the ascending colon and rectum coexisting with portal venous gas . While the root of the SMA and the inferior mesenteric arterial (IMA) flow was maintained, the peripheral blood flow was attenuated adjacent to the non-contrast-enhanced ascending colon and rectum.
Although intraabdominal free air was not detected in the CT scan, the massive ascites and progressing peritoneal signs with muscular guarding required an emergency laparotomy for suspected mesenteric ischemia and bowel perforation. Intraoperatively, skip ischemic lesions were observed in the ascending colon close to the hepatic flexure and the rectum without bowel perforation. Although SMA and superior rectal arterial pulsations were present, the marginal perfusion near the two lesions could not be confirmed. The patient was diagnosed with NOMI based on these operative findings and the rapid progression of the symptoms, which are unlike other vascular disorders or necrotizing enterocolitis. The remaining colon, from the transverse to the sigmoid colon, appeared intact. The color of the unaffected intestinal wall was restored, which suggested intestinal viability . We performed a distal ileostomy without bowel resection because a second-look laparotomy after 24 to 48 h was considered.
After returning to the ICU, the patient required resuscitation for cardiac arrest, septicemia, and DIC. The scheduled second-look laparotomy was canceled, and intensive care including hemodiafiltration was continued. However, the gastrointestinal symptoms did not progress during the intensive treatment.
On the 16th and 60th postoperative days, colonoscopies were carried out, and they revealed rectal and ascending colon stenosis with ulceration . The patency was 5 mm in diameter at both strictures. However, normal findings in the transverse colon to the sigmoid colon were observed by colonoscopy.
A lower gastrointestinal series by gastrografin contrast radiography also demonstrated the patency of the two lesions after laparotomy . Based on successful evacuation of the contrast media and intact mucosal findings around the mild stricture, we scheduled ileal stoma closure. For 1 month prior to the closure, approximately 100 ml of bowel contents that had collected in the ostomy pouch were injected into the anal side of the ileostomy to induce efficient bowel movement. We confirmed the continuous expulsion of feces from the anus and the improvement of transient bowel strictures; therefore, the ileal stoma was closed 14 months after the previous laparotomy.
Currently, the patient’s confusional state has prolonged, and he has received enriched liquid nutrition via gastrostomy. The two stenotic lesions are completely resolved, and defecation has been maintained after stoma closure .