A 79-year-old female with a medical history of Factor V Leiden (FVL) and venous thromboembolism (VTE) presented with a sudden bursting sensation above the right eye. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a homogeneously enhancing 2.0 × 2.1 × 1.9 cm lesion in the right temporal lobe and right sphenoid wing, consistent with a meningioma . Two years later, on a routine surveillance MRI scan, the lesion enlarged to 2.7 cm in diameter and the patient elected to undergo SRS-GK. The patient underwent treatment with 15 Gy to the 50% isodose line and without complication. Following SRS-GK, the patient remained neurologically intact with stable scans on serial imaging. Twelve years after SRS-GK, she presented with 10 days of headache and gait imbalance. MRI brain with and without gadolinium was obtained depicting a 5.0 × 4.3 × 2.7 cm right frontal ring-enhancing lesion . The mass extended inferiorly toward the anterior temporal pole with surrounding vasogenic edema and a 7 mm midline shift with right subfalcine herniation.
Before elective scheduled surgery, she was placed on a heparin drip given her history of FVL and VTE. Two days following the heparin drip initiation, the patient developed a headache with nausea and emesis. A non-contrast head computed tomography was obtained and showed significant right frontal hemorrhage, increased edema, and worsened midline shift up to 16 mm. She was taken emergently to the operating room for hematoma evacuation. Following careful removal of the hematoma, areas of the lesion were biopsied. Pathologic analysis revealed isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 wild-type the World Health Organization (WHO) grade IV GBM multiforme with intact retained α thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX), loss of NF1 gene, and combined losses of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor A and B. Deoxyribonucleic acid repair gene methylguanine methyltransferase showed promoter methylation .
She underwent adjuvant fractionated radiotherapy with a dose of 34 Gy with concurrent chemotherapy with temozolomide. At the 6-month follow-up, tumor progression was noted, and the patient underwent a repeat right frontal craniotomy for debulking of tumor. At the latest documented follow-up (9 months following initial craniotomy for hemorrhagic GBM; and 3 months following repeat craniotomy), the patient was neurologically intact with a Karnofsky performance score of 100.
We conducted a comprehensive literature search of electronic online databases (PubMed/MEDLINE) to identify relevant case reports or studies published up to March 2023. A combination of keywords and MeSH terms related to the transformation of meningioma and radiation therapy was used to identify relevant articles. All articles published in the English language were included in the study. Inclusion criteria required the initial lesion to be a meningioma and the secondary lesion to be a GBM originating from a similar or adjacent anatomical location as the primary meningioma. Exclusion criteria included the co-existence of both distinct lesions at the time of initial presentation.