A 69-year-old Chinese woman presented with a progressively enlarging mass in her left buttock that was first noted four months earlier. Menopause had occurred when she was 46 years of age. She had a history of two vaginal spontaneous deliveries and one abortion. She had no family history of cancer or other diseases. On physical examination, we detected a spherical mass close to her uterine rectal nest, and she was referred to the Department of General Surgery at our hospital. Combined with the results of a needle biopsy, the mass was believed to have a smooth muscle origin, and surgery was scheduled.
On computed tomography, a mass sized approximately 11.2×9.0cm was detected in her uterine rectal nest. We found varied density and low density shadows and a calcified separating strip. The edges of the lesion and separation showed obvious enhancement with enhanced scanning. The lesion was completely encapsulated. Her uterus, vagina, rectum and bladder pressure changed due to the tumor. There was no obvious pelvic lymph node enlargement and no pelvic effusion .
Our patient was prepared for surgery following our routine preoperative procedures. We placed our patient in the dorsal lithotomy position and made an approximately 20cm longitudinal caudal incision to her perineum. We performed a laminectomy, removing the third to the last sacral vertebrae, to access the posterior vaginal wall tumor. The tumor, including the capsule, was resected completely. The resected mass measured about 12.0×9.5×8.0cm, and two drains were inserted into the area from which the tumor had been removed .
The histological pattern of the tumor was of a well-differentiated spindle cell sarcoma with pleomorphic areas. The tumor cells comprised spindle-shaped nuclei with blunt ends, coarse nuclear chromatin, and prominent nucleoli. Mitoses were easy to see (>5 per 10 high power fields). Based on the histopathological and immunohistochemical results, the tumor was diagnosed as a high grade leiomyosarcoma .
Our patient received adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery. She was free of disease at a one-year follow-up and her general condition is good.