A 45-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department of the University Hospital of Heraklion, Crete after a fall from a ladder. The patient occupied in everyday activities as a house wife and a farmer. There were no concomitant injuries. Thorough clinical examination and radiological imaging revealed a depression fracture of the lateral tibia plateau which was classified as Schatzker III/AO 41-B2 . Radiological examination by a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed , which showed the details and personality of this specific fracture to assist in decision making.
Estimated the clinical and radiological findings as well as the needs of the patient, surgical treatment was decided.
Taking into account that the position of the fracture was at the most posterior area of the lateral plateau and the difficulties from open reduction of the articular surface, closed reduction via a minimal incision arthroscopically and fluoroscopy assisted using balloon kyphoplasty instrumentation was performed . After reduction of the articular surface confirmed by arthroscopy the bone defect was filled with calcium phosphate via injection . The fracture was considered a stable one and no further support and fixation was needed.
Initial immobilization was obtained with a log leg cast for 2 days. Afterwards, continuous passive motion (CPM) was started with flexion and extension as tolerable. The patient started to walk with crutches and no weight bearing. A knee cast with goniometer was placed permitting knee exercises in flexion and extension. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 5th postoperative day in a very good condition.
The patient was examined 6, 12 and 24 weeks after the operation regarding the movements of the joint and the muscle strength. A CT scan was ordered at the 6 week follow-up for a detailed evaluation and imaging of the tibial plateau . The clinical outcome was excellent at the 6, 12 and 24 weeks follow-up with full range of motion of the knee joint. The patient didn’t report any issues regarding her rehabilitation. At the 12 week follow up partially weight bearing was started as tolerable. At the 24 week follow-up full weight bearing was already achieved by the patient with no reporting problems.