In this case, a 54-year-old morbidly obese male presented to the office with a large, painful mass of his right lower chest wall, interfering with day-to-day activities and his quality of life. The patient had pneumonia several months prior to presentation, with a particularly strenuous episode of excessive coughing, with subsequent ecchymosis of the right flank and severe pain in his right rib cage. Subsequent to the coughing episode, the patient noted worsening pain and a steadily enlarging bulge of his right chest wall. The patient had an initial body mass index (BMI) of 37.6. Physical examination revealed a large, approximately 15 × 20 cm defect and herniation between ribs 9 and 10, with a reducible bulge. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large, right intercostal hernia between ribs 9 and 10 containing liver and ascending colon [. Various approaches were discussed with the patient, including open repair and laparoscopic or robotic repair; we decided to pursue a robotic approach, which would allow for mesh-based herniorrhaphy and would avoid the need for trans-fascial sutures or intra-abdominal tacks, which based upon the hernia’s location, may irritate or injure the intercostal nerves, the periosteum of the ribs, or the diaphragm.
The patient utilized an abdominal binder for support, and through dietary modifications lost weight prior to surgical repair. After weight loss to a BMI of < 30, the patient underwent a robotic-assisted laparoscopic intercostal hernia repair. Upon initial inspection, a large, approximately 15 x 20 cm ovoid-shaped intercostal weakness was noted between ribs 9 and 10. The fact that the defect was too large to be closed, and the ribs would not allow closure meant that the repair had to be conducted through mesh reinforcement. Through a three-port approach, a 25 × 30 cm piece of dual-layered polypropylene mesh was used to buttress the weakened intercostal space. The mesh was delivered through a 12 mm port and was secured circumferentially over the area of weakness with an absorbable self-locking suture, with at least 4 cm of space for overlap on all borders of the hernia. Standard, small bites of the needle were through the peritoneum and judiciously into the muscle, with particular care taken to avoid injury to the nerves and periosteum of adjacent ribs. The mesh was further secured with a second layer of circumferential interrupted simple sutures of absorbable braided suture. The patient was admitted postoperatively for observation and was discharged home on postoperative day one.
The patient was contacted for telemedicine follow-up, where he was found to have significant improvement in his pain and discomfort. He reported tolerable postoperative pain and had patient-controlled analgesia with Dilaudid® on-demand, as well as a transversus abdominis plane block. He continued appropriate weight loss postoperatively, and over time was able to return to his normal activities without restriction.