A 71-year-old Caucasian man diagnosed with metastatic papillary thyroid cancer was referred to the Pleural Clinic for management of a large right-sided effusion. He was diagnosed with papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) 11 years prior, and was treated with total thyroidectomy and adjuvant radio-iodine treatment. Mutation analysis was not performed. Over the next four to six years of follow-up, he received further radioactive iodine therapy due to disease recurrence with rising serum thyroglobulin levels. Small pulmonary metastases were first identified as fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid lesions on positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) five years before this presentation, together with right-sided pleural thickening. Since then serial serum thyroglobulin showed continual rises from 51 to 1100ug/L over four years. The patient had iodine-refractory disease and was enrolled in a clinical trial of pazopanib, a multi-targeted receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, two years prior to his presentation to the Pleural Clinic. Treatment with pazopanib, significantly reduced his thyroglobulin level to 290ug/L.
He was an ex-smoker, with a history of ischaemic heart disease, peripheral vascular disease and asbestos exposure.
When assessed at our Pleural Clinic, he was dyspnoeic and had a large, right-sided pleural effusion on CT scan and ultrasound. A thoracentesis and a subsequent medical thoracoscopy both revealed an unusual dark brown pleural fluid (very similar in colour to commonly used iodine-based antiseptic solutions) , also seen on the additional movie file (see Additional file ), which remained after centrifugation . The fluid was an exudate by Light’s criteria (protein 85g/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 712U/L) and had a pH of 7.13 and glucose 0.8mmol/L. Cytological and immunohistological features were consistent with adenocarcinoma, with positive thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and PAX8 suggesting metastatic thyroid carcinoma. However, thyroglobulin staining was negative, making an unequivocal diagnosis difficult.
Medical thoracoscopy revealed multiple areas of tumour deposits on the parietal and visceral pleura, clearly shown in the additional movie file (see Additional file ). Many of the tumour nodules had the same unique dark brown pigmentation as the pleural fluid. Histopathology showed papillary structures, colloid material, psamomma bodies and adenocarcinoma cells positive for TTF-1 and thyroglobulin, confirming a metastatic PTC.
Pleural fluid thyroglobulin was more than 80-fold higher than in corresponding serum (29,000 versus 350ug/L), and is the highest level yet reported. Given the unusual colour of the fluid and its striking resemblance to iodine solutions, we analysed the pleural fluid total iodine content using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry and showed a high concentration of 23,000ug/L. Both the pleural fluid iodine and thyroglobulin concentrations were from the extracellular component of the fluid analysed.
The patient received a talc poudrage pleurodesis and continued with pazopanib therapy.