A 62-year-old woman sought medical help in our department for severe low-back pain of 3 years’ duration with accompanied numbness of the right leg. Initially, the patient had no obvious cause of low-back pain and did not go to the hospital for treatment. Application of an analgesic plaster achieved poor curative effect. Subsequently, the back pain gradually worsened, and numbness of the right leg developed at the same time and progressed over the course of 3 years. She visited our department for treatment on March 9t, 2018. She complained that if she sat for more than 2 hours or walked more than 300 m, she experienced low-back pain accompanied by numbness at the front side of the right thigh and lateral calf, and relief of symptoms when she was lying down or bending forward. However, these symptoms seriously affected her daily life and activities.
The patient was subjected to a straight leg–raising test, and the result showed that the right side was positive at 70° and the left side negative. There was no obvious tenderness at the patient’s waist. Patient evaluation was performed using the VAS and Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) scores before and after treatment. In the results Before treatment, scores of VAS of 6 points and JOA of 10 points were obtained. Based on these findings, she was recommended to undergo lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assist in diagnosis. In MRI results , lumbar curvature was normal and anterior and posterior margins of multiple vertebral bodies rough and sharp. On the T2-weighted image scan, presence of multiple signals of the intervertebral disk, bulging of the intervertebral disk at L2/3, L3/4, and L4/5, protrusion of the intervertebral disk at L5/S1, dural sac compression at corresponding levels, LFH at L2/3 L3/4, and L4/5, and LSS were observed.
Before the operation, positioning and labeling of L2/3, L3/4, and L4/5 with the positioning grid was performed under CT guidance. Subsequently, the CT scan was used to measure the bilateral thickness of the LF at L2/3, L3/4, and L4/5. The angle and depth of the needle on the left and right sides of the L2/3, L3/4, and L4/5 segments were measured on the CT-scan image and the needle-insertion point marked on the body surface . For routine surgical disinfection, 2% lidocaine was injected into each of the facet joints. The facet joint was punctured with the needle knife, the direction and depth of the needle adjusted to the edge of the lower facet, and the position reconfirmed by CT scan . Next, the needle knife was used to cut the attachment point of the LF to about 2–3 mm depth and pressed for 10 minutes, and the patient was instructed to maintain a supine position for 6 hours. After surgery, there was a small amount of hemorrhage, no infection, ecchymoma, headache, dizziness, or numbness, and pain and weakness of the lower limbs and other complications . Then, the thickness of the bilateral LF at L2/3, L3/4, and L4/5 was measured . In the straight leg–elevation test performed immediately after the operation, negative results on the VAS (0 points) and JOA (10 points) were obtained at both sides. She was followed up after treatment at 1, 2, 4, 6, and 12 months . In the results of follow-up evaluation at 12 months, VAS of 0 points and JOA of 29 points were obtained. The patient’s waist and leg pain had completely resolved.