The case of a 25-year-old male patient who came into the emergency room after suffering trauma with left knee injury due to motorcycle accident is presented. Clinical examination revealed significant joint effusion and limited and painful mobility. Anterior and posterior drawer tests were difficult to evaluate because of pain. No laxity was observed. In the X-rays taken at the emergency room, concurrent avulsion fracture of anterior and posterior tibial spines was shown, Type IIIb (displacement and rotation offragment) and Type II, respectively, as classified by Meyers and McKeever .A computed tomography scan was performed to confirm such lesions ; the size of the avulsed fragments was 11× 12 × 8 mm (ACL bony avulsion) and 19 × 12× 6 mm (PCL bony avulsion). Surgery was performed6days after trauma.
The operation was performed under general anesthesia. The patient was positioned supine with the limb placed in a standard leg holder with 90°flexion of the knee, and is chemia was applied to the root of the affected limb. The central transtendinous (usually employed by the authors for cruciate ligaments surgery) and the anteromedial and posteromedial portals were used. Arthroscopic diagnosis was made, confirming both lesions and ruling out other associated injuries. With the arthroscope placed in the central portal, and after removing synovial tissue and Hoffa’s fat pad to improve visualization, it was proved that bony avulsion of ACL could be reduced, with the help of a probe introduced by the anteromedial portal. The posteromedial recess was addressed by introducing the arthroscope between the PCL and lateral wall of the medial condyle. The posteromedial portal was established so that the avulsion of the PCL could be observed . For fixation of both avulsed fragments, the adjustable length suspension device ZipTight® (Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) was used. This device has a pusher to facilitate the passage of the implant through a bony tunnel . The PCL tibial avulsion fracture was treated first. An exhaustive debridement of the remnants of the synovial tissue was performed, and the bony fragment was reduced to its anatomical position. With the arthroscope placed in posteromedial portal, the PCL Guide (Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) was introduced through the anteromedial portal, positioning it on the avulsion of PCL insertion. With the guide set at 45°, a 2.4mm guide pin was introduced from the anteromedial aspect of tibial metaphysis (after performing a longitudinal 2-cm incision) through the avulsed fragment, displaying the output of the needle through the center of the bony fragment to avoid any possible damage to the popliteal neurovascular bundle. Over the guide pin, a tunnel was performed with a 4.5 mm cannulated drill bit. Meanwhile, an assistant prepared the ZipTight implant, placing it in the end of its pusher. Once prepared, it was introduced in the tibial tunnel, carried by the pusher, to the intra-articular exit of the tunnel, through the avulsed fragment . Once the implant appeared at the intra-articular exit of the tunnel, an obturator was introduced through the pusher until the implant came out entirely to the joint. By pulling the loops of the device, the implant was settled over the fractured fragment. Subsequently, the strands were fitted to the lateral grooves of the cortical button and side wires were pulled to adjust the knob to the tibial cortex. Continuing traction, fragment was reduced and fixed firmly in its bed . Second, the fixation of the anterior cruciate avulsion fracture was carried out. With the arthroscope in the central portal, ACL bone avulsion was addressed. As in the posterior spine injury, exhaustive cleaning of synovial and small chondral remnants was performed. Using a probe, the bony fragment was reduced to its anatomical position. Through the anteromedial portal, an ACL Guide (Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) was introduced, open at 55°; a 2.4 mm guide pin was placed from the medial side of tibial metaphysis, using the same incision made for the posterior fragment, and crossing the avulsed bony fragment. Using such needle as a guide, a tunnel was performed with a 4.5 mm cannulated drill bit. Subsequently, another implant was placed, adjusted, tensioned, and fixed in identical manner to the posterior fragment Passive mobilization of the knee started 24 h after surgery. Full weight-bearing of the limb was allowed with a knee brace in extension during the 1st 4 weeks. After the 4th week, the immobilizer was removed and progressive full knee flexion was allowed. The patient returned to his usual sports activity 6 months after the intervention. No post-operative complications appeared. At 18-month follow-up, the patient was conducting normal life and free of symptoms. At clinical examination, Lachman, anterior drawer, pivotshift, posterior drawer, and reverse pivot shift tests were negative. Range of motion was 130° flexion, with a 5°lack of extension. The International Knee Documentation Committee score was 83.80 points. Lysholm scale was 85 points. Patient resumed activities of daily living without any problem. Consolidation of both tibial spine avulsions was confirmed by anteroposterior and lateral X-ray and by magnetic resonance imaging.