A one-year-old male child presented to the emergency room with acute onset of respiratory distress while sleeping, perioral cyanosis and severe cough. The patient’s mother said that she worked in a farmer’s market, on a stall where beans and vegetables were sold, and that she took her son to work with her every day. Among the harvested goods sold at the farmer’s center are unprocessed seeds from Lupinus mutabilis Sweet, known as “chocho”. The child had been seen placing a chocho seed in his mouth three hours before arrival at the hospital.
The physical examination upon presentation to the hospital was notable for stridor, which prompted bronchoscopic evaluation for a foreign body. However, no foreign body was found in the airway. Endoscopy revealed the presence of grains of chocho in the gastric cardia and stomach.
Six hours after initial presentation, the patient became irritable. He developed altered consciousness and shallow breathing. On examination, he demonstrated dilated, sluggishly reactive pupils and dry mucus membranes. His abdomen was distended and tympanic to percussion. His heart rate was 100/minute, respiratory rate 26/minute and oxygen saturation 98% on 30 FiO2 (fraction of inspired oxygen) through a nasal cannula. The arterial blood gas demonstrated pH 7.5, pCO2 23, pO2 135 and HCO3 18.4. The blood parameters were: sodium 144 mEq/l, potassium 3.4 mEq/l, white blood cells (WBC) 8,800/mm3, hemoglobin 9.9 g%, platelets 316,000/mm3, glucose 107 mg/dl, creatinine 0.8 mg/dl and C-reactive protein (CRP) negative.
His altered mental status prompted admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) for monitoring and further evaluation. He was empirically started on intravenous fluids, ceftriaxone and mannitol. Computed tomography of the head was normal and lumbar puncture revealed normal cerebrospinal fluid; for this reason, all medications were discontinued and he was kept in the ICU for monitoring and supportive care.
After 24 hours, his mental status had improved and irritability diminished; his pupils returned to normal size and were reactive. On the following day, he developed liquid stools with elimination of the chocho seeds, and examinations demonstrated no remaining neurological signs. On the third day, he was discharged home.