A 6-month-old boy presented with a 10-day history of continuous fever. Antibiotic therapy (oral cefixime for 2 days and intravenous cefuroxime for 5 days) was administrated, but the fever persisted. Four days before admission, the patient developed left-sided facial nerve palsy. On the day before admission, the patient developed somnolence and bilateral facial nerve palsy. A physical examination showed impaired consciousness and enlargement of the bilateral submaxillary lymph nodes (the largest node was approximately 1.5 × 1.5 cm, with a hard nature and marked mobility), disappearance of the bilateral forehead wrinkles and nasolabial grooves, and an inability to close the eyelids completely. The bregma was slightly distended (2.0 × 2.0 cm). There was no neck rigidity or Brudzinski’s sign, and bilateral Babinski’s signs were positive. No rash or desquamation was noted. A laboratory examination showed leukocytosis (18.11 × 109 white blood cells [WBC]/L), a decreased hemoglobin level (93 g/L), reduced mean corpuscular volume (76.4 fL), reduced serum albumin level (29 g/L), increased C-reactive protein level (69.60 mg/L), increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (120 mm/hour), increased urine erythrocytes (6.3 red blood cells/high-power field), and increased urine leukocytes (21 WBC/high-power field). A cerebrospinal fluid examination showed an elevated leukocyte count (36 × 106 WBC/L) with a monocyte percentage of 97%. Glucose, chlorine, and protein levels were normal, and bacterial culture was negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed no abnormalities.
On admission, a diagnosis of bacterial infection was suspected, and the patient was treated with ceftriaxone, mannitol, and glucocorticoid to relieve the potential nervous edema. After 4 days of treatment, no symptomatic or laboratory improvement was observed. Echocardiography was performed and showed dilation of the bilateral coronary arteries and coronary artery aneurysms . Further examination of the medical history showed that the patient had experienced mild non-secretory conjunctival injection, and perioral and perianal excoriation for 1 day on the third day after onset. These symptoms spontaneously regressed.
A diagnosis of KD was made. The patient was treated with intravenous gamma globulin (2 g/kg, intravenous drip for 5 days) and oral aspirin (four doses of 30–50 mg/kg/day). The fever subsided on the following day. Three days later, the dose of aspirin was reduced to 3 to 5 mg/kg/day. Five days later, the laboratory parameters were all within the normal range. The right-sided facial nerve palsy was relieved 1 month after treatment. An 18-month follow-up showed that the left-sided facial nerve palsy persisted and the patient’s condition remained stable. Echocardiography showed that the coronary arteries were still dilated, with a left coronary diameter of 4 mm and a right coronary diameter of 5.2 mm. Oral aspirin administration was continued.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents. This study was approved by the ethics committee of the First Hospital of Jilin University.