A previously healthy 55-year-old woman entered a general ward complaining of lower abdominal pain and nausea. She was diagnosed with gastroenteritis and received fluid rehydration therapy with 1500 mL of hypotonic electrolyte solution per day, and intravenous acetaminophen was used for abdominal pain. Her nausea was improved after admission, so she did not take antiemetics. Her vital signs included a heart rate of 103/min, blood pressure of 104/67 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 97% while breathing ambient air, and temperature of 39.7 °C. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 29.5 × 109/L and C-reactive protein of 19.3 mg/dL. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) examination showed a thickened wall of the small intestine but no ascites . She had no travel history and had not taken any medications or consumed any perishables. Any bacterial culture examination was not performed until ICU admission because infectious disease was not anticipated. Despite fluid rehydration therapy, her general condition worsened. On day 6, she entered the ICU because of disturbance of consciousness and respiratory failure. Before ICU admission, her vital signs were as follows: heart rate, 135/min; systolic blood pressure, 60 mmHg; and respiratory rate, 50 breaths/min. Laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 10.6 × 109/L and elevated C-reactive protein of 34.2 mg/dL. An abdominal CT showed intestinal edema and ascites on the liver and Douglas’s fossa . Her limbs were cold, and both forearms were swollen because of the leakage of the peripheral infusion. Furthermore, she had respiratory distress. Septic shock was suspected, and she was treated with fluid resuscitation, empirical antibiotics (meropenem, linezolid, and micafungin), and a vasopressor. On ICU day 2, her arms became swollen and red . CT of the upper limbs showed edema between the muscles, suggesting necrotizing fasciitis . Therefore, emergency skin incision and debridement were performed. A pathological examination showed intense polymorphonuclear cell infiltration with diffuse connective tissue necrosis, compatible with a diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis. Renal replacement therapy was also initiated because of acute kidney injury. Serum creatinine had increased from 0.72 to 3.03 mg/dL (stage 3 based on the KDIGO classification). Surprisingly, S. pyogenes was detected from cultures of ascitic fluid, which were taken before sepsis developed, from blood and skin. The empirical antibiotics were switched to penicillin G, linezolid, and clindamycin (linezolid was discontinued on ICU day 8). On ICU day 3, 1420 mL of ascites was drained and the patient underwent second debridement of the upper limbs, because the inflammation had extended over the shoulders. Her condition improved, and she overcame the septic shock on ICU day 6. On ICU day 9, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida parapsilosis were found in a skin culture. Therefore, the antibiotics were switched to ciprofloxacin and micafungin. Flap angioplasties of both forearms were performed on ICU day 22. The pedicle flaps were harvested from each intact area of the arms and were placed to defect sites of the respective limbs, then additional skin grafting was performed on ICU day 36. The patient was transferred from the ICU to the general ward on day 62 (ICU day 57). She was discharged to a regional medical support hospital on day 110.
A genetic examination of the S. pyogenes harvested from the skin and blood cultures showed that the strain had a mutation in the covS gene.