A 48-years-old woman was referred to The Department of Otolaryngology of the Medical University of Gdańsk (Poland) with palpable masses in the parotid region that have been slowly growing bilaterally for the last six months. There were no other symptoms and no relevant medical, family or psychosocial history. Facial nerves function was normal. Physical examination revealed the presence of firm, movable, bilateral parotid gland tumors, measuring 2 × 1.5 cm on the right side and 3 × 3.5 cm on the left side, with no signs of discharge from the salivary ducts. Moreover, no lymphadenopathy was observed . A fine-needle aspiration biopsy reports were twice described as non-diagnostic.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with an application of standard T1 and T2-weighted sequences as well as diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and dynamic contrast-enhanced T1-weighted fat-saturated sequences was performed. The examination confirmed the presence of tumors within the superficial lobe of the left parotid (3.6 × 3.2 × 3.7 cm) and the inferior part of the superficial lobe of the contralateral parotid (2.9 × 2.6 × 3 cm). It revealed the second lesion in the deep lobe of the right parotid gland (4.8 × 3.6 × 4 cm) extending into the parapharyngeal space . All three lesions had smooth, well-defined margins. They presented as heterogeneous structures, with central cystic areas, partially with higher protein content and signs of bleeding, and enhancing, more peripherally placed solid components. The time-intensity curves obtained based on dynamic contrast-enhanced sequence showed a continuous uptake of the contrast agent suggestive of adenomas. Tumours did not show signs of diffusion restriction with apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) values of approximately 1.48 × 10−3 mm2/s .
A total parotidectomy was performed on the right side with facial nerve preservation and resection of the two tumors in the superficial and deep lobe. The left side was operated on in the second stage, in 6 months—patient underwent superficial parotidectomy with tumor resection and facial nerve preservation.
Histopathological examination proved that all tumors were basal cell adenomas (membranaceous growth pattern). The tumors were surrounded by a fibrous capsule without evidence of invasion, as is characteristic for adenoma, with the following immunophenotype pattern—p63 protein (+), S-100 protein (±), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (+), CD117 protein (±), smooth muscle actin (SMA) (+). The excision of the tumors was complete .
Finally, molecular analysis was performed. For this purpose, both DNA and RNA were isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue, and Illumina TruSight Oncology 500 targeted hybrid-capture assay was used for comprehensive genome profiling. Libraries were sequenced using a NextSeq550 instrument (Illumina), and data were analyzed using the Clinical Genomics Workspace (PierianDx). No variants of strong, potential of unknown clinical significance were detected in the studied sample.
After 5-year of follow up, there were no clinical and ultrasonographical signs of recurrence. Facial nerves function was normal after surgery, as well as two years after the surgical procedure.
PubMed, Medline, Web of Science were searched for English-literature case reports and case series of synchronous basal cell adenoma of the parotid gland in the last 30 years. The following keywords were used: (Synchronous basal cell adenoma or Synchronous basal cell adenomas) and (Parotid gland or Parotid glands). We found eight reports presenting multifocal basal cell adenomas of the parotid gland (five synchronous, three metachronous) [–, –]. Only five cases were included for analysis: four cases of synchronous bilateral basal cell adenomas and one case of synchronous unilateral basal cell adenomas. The literature results are presented in Table .