A 36-year-old Chinese man presented with 26 months of progressive motor aphasia and cognitive decline. Fourteen months after the initial symptoms, he began complaining of mild right-sided weakness. He was admitted to our hospital for acute exacerbation of confusion and weakness of limbs lasting 3 days. Upon further questioning after admission, the patient indicated that he had been experiencing slight vision loss for 11 months, particularly the right one, which had not attracted any attention due to the ametropia of both eyes. Neurological examination revealed bradyphrenia, motor aphasia, normal pupillary response but decreased visual acuity of bilateral eyes (visual acuity could not be measured using the standard logarithmic visual acuity chart due to the poor consciousness state of the patient), right central facial palsy, dysarthria, and quadriplegia.
His medical history included papillary thyroid cancer for over 1 year without any special treatment and chronic hepatitis B virus infection and cirrhosis for 10 years under regular anti-virus therapy. The patient had no siblings. Family medical history revealed that his father had developed a brain mass of unclear etiology and died at the age of 34. While his mother did not suffer from any neurological disorder.
The first MRI and brain biopsy were conducted 22 months ago in another hospital. We observed a T2 hyperintense massive subcortical lesions with rim enhancement in the left frontal lobe and a non-enhanced nodular lesion in the left cerebellum. Histopathology of the former lesion indicated focal necrosis and reactive gliosis, along with vessel wall hyalinization and inflammatory cell infiltration. The patient was tentatively diagnosed with TDLs 18 months ago. Three courses of high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone and two courses of intravenous cyclophosphamide had been given subsequently during the following 16 months. The patient received repeated brain MRIs every six months. Cerebral edema reduced while contrast enhancement still existed and a surgical trail was left in the frontal lesion. The new lesions appeared in the left temporal-occipital lobe and the right temporal lobe on serial images and gradually deteriorating clinically indicated these treatments failed to prevent relapse.
Current laboratory examination revealed mild anemia, mildly elevated liver enzyme levels, and elevated thyroid autoantibodies. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed normal pressure and only slightly elevated protein. No antibodies associated with ganglioside or autoimmune encephalitis (against NMDA-R, CASPR2-R, AMPA1-R, AMPA2-R, LGI1, GABAB-R, DPPX) or paraneoplastic neurologic syndromes (against CV2/CRMP5, PNMA2, Ri, Yo, Hu, Amphiphysin) were detected in CSF and serum. CSF oligoclonal band, serum AQP4-IgG, and MOG-IgG were not detected. Whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed no evidence of malignancy. Repeated non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head showed hypodense lesions and several punctate calcifications . A second brain biopsy of the lesion in the left temporal-occipital lobe was obtained but only revealed a similar result to the first time . We confirmed retinal vasculopathy using fundus photography and fluorescein angiography , leading us to suspect hereditary vasculopathy. Whole exome sequencing identified a heterozygous GTCA insertion (c.741_742insGTCA) in the TREX1 gene (NM_033629) resulting in a frameshift mutation (p.T249Sfs*14). Nucleotide change was confirmed by Sanger sequencing . Therefore, we diagnosed the patient with RVCL-S. Genetic testing of the mother, aunt (father’s sister), and son showed that all lacked the mutation .