A 67-year-old man was diagnosed with gastric cancer via an upper endoscopy for the evaluation of esophageal varices while commuting to our hospital for alcoholic cirrhosis (Child–Pugh classification: grade B). The patient tested positive for Helicobacter pylori infection. He had a history of drinking > 108 g of alcohol per day for 40 years (stopped 5 years ago) and smoking 40 cigarettes per day for 40 years (stopped 8 years ago). Due to impaired liver function and the presence of esophageal varices, the surgical risk was high, and partial gastrectomy (D0 dissection, with antecolic Roux-en-Y reconstruction) was performed with preservation of the left gastric artery. The postoperative pathological diagnosis was LMD, Gre, Type 3, 90 × 55 mm, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, non-solid type, pT2 (MP), INFc, Ly0, V0, pPM0 (15 mm), pDM0 (3 mm), and pN0 (#3:0/9, #4d:0/2) according to the Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma and T2N0 Stage IB in accordance with the 8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control classification, with no signet-ring cell .
The patient underwent a follow-up upper endoscopy 18 months after gastric cancer surgery. A 0–IIc lesion was found at the gastrojejunal anastomosis; a biopsy of the same site revealed SRCC . Blood chemistry tests showed that liver function improved with abstinence (Child–Pugh classification: grade A), and other blood count and biochemistry parameter levels were within normal ranges. Levels of tumor markers, carcinoembryonic antigen (2.2 ng/ml), and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (11.6 U/ml) were within normal limits.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed difficulty in identifying the primary lesion, and there were no findings suggestive of lymph node (LN) metastasis or distant metastasis. There were no abnormal findings in the gallbladder wall, except for the presence of gallbladder stones, with no changes observed for 2 years . Fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)/CT revealed negative uptake in the gastric lesion .
Surgical findings showed no distant metastasis, such as peritoneal dissemination or liver metastasis, or obvious LN metastasis. In addition, the intraoperative washing cytology was negative. There was also no obvious exposure of the serous surface to residual gastric cancer. In the gallbladder, the wall of the body appeared thickened; however, there were no obvious neoplastic lesions. Therefore, we performed a total gastrectomy with LN dissection and cholecystectomy to prevent cholecystitis.
As for the macroscopic findings, a thickening of the mucosa on the gastric side of the previous gastrojejunostomy anastomosis from the previous operation was observed, and the main lesion was 75 × 55 mm . Histopathologically, the stomach showed an SRCC and a non-seminomatous poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in the mucosa . The cancer cells showed strong lymphatic invasion and had invaded the layer of tissue under the serosa. The LNs showed metastasis in No. 1, 3, and 4sa (11/14).
The gallbladder showed partial wall thickening, suggestive of adenomyosis . Histological examination of the gallbladder revealed no mucosal epithelial lesions. The lymphatic vessels of the gallbladder wall were extensively filled with tumor cells, especially in the grossly thickened areas . Since the histological findings of the gastric and gallbladder lesions were identical, the gallbladder lesion was diagnosed as gallbladder metastasis of the gastric cancer. The final pathological stage was T3N3aM1 (GAL) stage IV.
The patient was discharged on the 11th postoperative day in a good condition. The patient and his family members refused postoperative chemotherapy. There was no metastasis or recurrence other than lymphangitis carcinomatosa, and the patient died of respiratory failure 10 months postoperatively.