A 61-year-old man from Shenzhen presented with tracheostomal hemorrhage of 3 h duration. One year previously, the patient had been diagnosed with laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma by electronic laryngoscopy, and had undergone partial laryngectomy and tracheotomy under general anesthesia. Following these procedures, he was discharged and recovered well. The tracheotomy was maintained after discharge. The patient and his family cleaned the tracheal cannula themselves which may have resulted in inadequate care. The patient visited our hospital due to tracheostomal hemorrhage of 3 h duration.
Physical examination at admission showed peri-tracheostomal redness and correct positioning of the tracheal cannula. Bloody secretions were seen in the dressing. Electronic laryngoscopy showed postoperative changes in the glottic area, with scar formation; the airway was patent. The results of a complete blood count were 9.58 × 109/L white blood cells, 74.4% neutrophils, and 1.0% eosinophils. After admission, the tracheal cannula was removed, and the surface of the cannula was dirty. The stomal tissue was red and swollen. On the day after removal of the tracheal cannula, the patient coughed out maggot larvae through the tracheostomy, and several larvae were found in the peri-stomal area.
Computed tomography of the chest showed a hyperdense mass involving the trachea . The peri-esophageal and peri-tracheal fat spaces were blurred . Bronchoscopy confirmed the presence of live larvae in the left lower tracheal segment, with fibrous granulation and tracheal stenosis. Furthermore, heavy granulation was found in the upper and middle thirds of the trachea. A tracheostenosis with a smallest diameter of about 0.6 cm was noted ; it was resolved using electrocautery to burn the larvae , and by making linear and circular incisions in the larval burrow and removing the larvae using cryotherapy and forceps and clearing the basal granulation. This procedure resulted in improvement of the tracheal stenosis. Bronchoscopy showed that the left and right main bronchi and their upper and lower segments were patent. One week later, follow-up fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed granulation and membranous necrosis in the upper and middle trachea. The larval burrow was absent from the left lower trachea, but the site was covered with granulation and necrotic tissue. The trachea was restored to three-quarters of its normal size. We removed the necrotic tissue and granulation using forceps and freezing .
After the procedure, the patient experienced cough after taking food. Follow-up bronchoscopy showed a tracheal-esophageal fistula of about 1.5 cm in the lower trachea, 2 cm above the carina, so an indwelling gastric tube was placed which was visible on bronchoscopy passing through the tracheoesophageal fistula. The thoracic surgeon recommended conservative medical treatment, However, the patient continued to cough up food so bronchoscopy was performed 1 month later which showed that the tracheal-esophageal fistula had not properly healed. Next, a Y-type tracheal silicone stent was placed. The patient’s condition has been stable since that time. Follow-up gastroscopy performed 12 months after the procedure showed that the tracheal-esophageal fistula had not healed and covered the Y-type tracheal silicone stent , for which we suggested surgical repair.