A mass in the right pelvic cavity, with no symptoms, was observed in a 45-year-old woman during a gynecological examination. The patient was referred to our hospital due to tumor growth, despite 6-month hormone therapy. On physical examination, a palpable abdominal mass, which was hard and immobile, was observed. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a multilocular mass with calcification in the pelvic cavity . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an iso-signal intensity on T1 weighted images and hypo- and iso-signal intensity on T2 weighted images . Positron emission tomography (PET) showed an increased uptake of 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose in the calcified part with no increased uptake in the other lesions . It was necessary to collect tissue from a calcified lesion inside the tumor, which was found to be accumulated on PET-CT. Because the ventral approach had risks of vascular and organ damages and dissemination of tumor tissues in the intraperitoneal space, the patient underwent CT-guided CNB using the dorsal approach with an 18-gauge needle, . The CNB procedure was repeated twice and no subcutaneous hematoma was observed after the needle biopsy. Spindle cells with no atypical cells and with a low cell density were observed and a spindle cell tumor of benign or low-grade characteristic was suspected .
The patient underwent marginal excision through the anterior approach. The tumor was located close to the abdominal wall and wrapped by a capsule, and there was no adhesion to the surrounding tissue. The size of the resected tumor specimen was 13 × 10 × 12 cm. Pathologically, the tumor was composed of short spindle cells with relatively uniform epithelioid cells arranged in cords and nets. The nuclei showed occasional irregularity and enlargement . The immunohistological analysis was positive for vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen (focal and weak) and negative for MUC4, S-100, desmin, CD34, and β-catenin . Based on these histopathological findings, the diagnosis of the tumor was that of a sclerosing epithelioid fibrosarcoma.
Three years after the surgery, an enhanced MRI revealed a recurrent tumor in the right obturator muscle and the patient underwent heavy ion therapy.
Five years after the surgery, the MRI showed a recurrent tumor in the subcutaneous tissue of the left buttock, measuring 1.2 cm at the greatest diameter . The site of the recurrent tumor was distant from the approach of the surgical resection of the primary lesion and was matched with the CNB tract. Therefore, it was considered that the tumor recurrence was caused by NTS. The patient underwent a wide excision of the recurrent tumor. The resected specimens had similar features to the specimens of the primary tumor .
Approximately 2 years after the second surgery, the patient was alive and experienced no recurrence.