A 66-year-old woman with WPW syndrome was admitted to the hospital because of frequent paroxysmal tachycardia attacks occasionally accompanied by dizziness, which started when she was 58 years old. She suffered repeated chest distress and palpitations for eight years without treatment. An electrocardiogram from the emergency department showed atrial fibrillation with type A pre-excitation syndrome . The serum troponin I level was 0.415 ng/mL, the creatine kinase isoenzyme level was 5.9 ng/mL, and the myohemoglobin level was 288.3 ng/mL. Physical examination showed a blood pressure of 128/70 mmHg, normal breath sound, normal heart borders, a heart rate of 200 bpm, irregular cardiac rhythm, pulse deficit, and no audible murmur or pericardial friction sound. The patient converted to a sinus rhythm under external direct current cardioversion after unsuccessful drug cardioversion with amiodarone. The echocardiogram after the conversion to sinus rhythm revealed no organic heart disease, an estimated left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 62%, and mild tricuspid valve regurgitation.
Because of the possibility of recurrence of atrial fibrillation with the complication of pre-excitation, the patient underwent RF catheter ablation the following day. A ten-polar coronary sinus (CS) catheter was placed into the CS and an electrophysiological examination catheter was positioned in the right ventricular apex through the left femoral vein. During the sinus rhythm, the earliest anterograde ventricular activation was recorded at the site of CS 34 (the third and fourth poles of the coronary sinus catheter, Fig. a). This site was also the earliest retrograde atrial activation site during ventricular pacing . Therefore, an accessory pathway (AP) was thought to connect the posterior wall of the left ventricle. The medium curved temperature-controlled bipolar ablation catheter was then inserted into the right femoral vein and advanced to the mitral annulus via the atrial septal puncture. An atrioventricular (AV) fusion wave was identified in the electrogram of the distal end of the ablation catheter (ABLd) when ablation was performed over the left atrial endocardium near CS34 and CS56 . However, AP conduction remained present after multiple RF applications with power settings ranging between 30 and 40 W. The bipolar ablation catheter was then pulled into the CS and RF applications were administered near CS34 and CS56. Before ablation within the CS, angiography was performed to estimate the CS size. The diameter of the CS proximal end was 7.7 mm while the middle portion was 6.1 mm. With a power setting of 20 W, a prolonged AV interval and smaller delta wave were identified in the local electrograms. Concentric decremental retrograde conduction of the V-A wave phenomenon was observed via repeated right ventricular apex extra-stimuli with overdrive pacing mode (RVA S1S1, Fig. h). This finding indicated that retrograde conduction of the AP was blocked. Anterograde conduction of the AP could not be completely blocked even after multiple irrigated ablations, because the delta wave did not completely disappear. The total amount of RF application energy in the CS was 6800 J. When the bipolar ablation catheter was again sent to the mitral annulus, an AV fusion wave was identified in the electrogram of ABLd when the catheter was at the 5 o’clock position in the left anterior oblique position of the mitral annulus near CS34 . The anterograde conduction of the AP disappeared 4 s later with an RF application power setting of 30 W . Anterograde and retrograde conduction of the AP could not be induced by the high-frequency atrial and ventricular stimuli. The patient was free of palpitation attacks, and the electrocardiogram was normal immediately after ablation .
Another electrocardiogram was performed the following day, revealing a sinus rhythm with frequent atrial premature beats, paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, widespread concave ST-segment elevation, T-wave changes, and left ventricular high voltage . The serum troponin I level was 8.700 ng/mL, the creatine kinase isoenzyme level was 23.2 ng/mL, and the myohemoglobin level was 325.0 ng/mL. Repeated electrocardiograms showed sustained widespread concave ST-segment elevation without dynamic changes in QRS and with ST-T morphology. Echocardiograms revealed mild pericardial effusion with an estimated LVEF of 59% and mild tricuspid valve regurgitation. The patient did not show any symptoms such as chest pain or chest distress, thus leading to a suspicion of myocardial injury and pericarditis caused by ablation-related injury. The patient was not scheduled for any specific treatment for pericarditis but was instead monitored, asked to rest and take aspirin 100 mg orally daily for a month which was used to prevent postoperative embolic events. The patient was discharged five days after the procedure with significantly decreased levels of troponin I (0.036 ng/mL) and myohemoglobin (94.7 ng/mL). A repeated electrocardiogram after three weeks revealed normal findngs .