A 57-year old Caucasian male patient with acute pneumonia and a progressive dysphagia was referred to our department. He reported episodes of painless swallowing difficulties, associated with xerostomia, hoarseness and an uncomfortable sensation of a mass in the upper esophagus. His general medical condition includes type II diabetes, chronic bronchitis, chronic gastritis, urate nephropathy with a history of nephrolithiasis and coronary artery disease. The patient reported daily alcohol and nicotine abuse over a period of 40 years.
On physical examination he showed a distinct bilateral eyelid ptosis combined with a mild facial weakness. Wet voice and an insufficient cough reflex after solid and liquid intake followed by consecutive aspiration were observed. Laryngoscopy showed an incomplete glottic closure and impaired vocal cord mobility. Video-radiological barium examination revealed intra- and- postdeglutive aspiration . Contrast enhanced CT scans showed an unclear homogeneous mass (1.5 × 2 cm) located in the preepiglottic space, dorsal to the hyoid bone.
We performed a panendoscopy under general anesthesia and esophagus-gastroscopy, suspecting a malignant process. Endoscopic findings neither confirmed a tumorous process nor revealed any other obvious cause for the progressive dysphagia. Therefore a deep incision biopsy of the preepiglottic space was performed, but no suspect structures other than fat tissue were noted. Histopathological evaluation of the preepiglottic mass confirmed solely fatty tissue without malignant pathology.
Family history revealed that he has eight siblings, four of which developed similar symptoms at around 50 years of age. One brother has only mild dysphagia. Furthermore the patient's father, one paternal uncle, one paternal aunt and her son suffer from dysphagia and eyelid ptosis. The patient's family is native German without French-Canadian or Jewish roots. The patient underwent bilateral blepharoplasty surgery to correct eyelid ptosis one year ago.
Considering the family history of swallowing disorders, we suspected a hereditary cause of the dysphagia and initiated genetic counseling. DNA testing revealed a heterozygous (GCG)10 expansion of the (GCG)-mini-repeat, located in exon 1 of the poly(A) binding protein, nuclear 1gene (PABPN1), thus verifying oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy .
After the diagnosis was confirmed and therapeutic options were discussed, the patient refused a cricopharyngeal myotomy. Therefore a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) placement was carried out to improve the overall nutritional situation. After a period of five months, he reported on unsteady functional improvements of his swallowing. Other neurological functions remained unchanged. The PEG probe was left in place since sufficient oral deglutition did not occur.