An 81-year-old Caucasian woman with a medical history of hypertension and cholecystectomy for perforated acute cholecystitis was admitted to a community medical ward. At the time, she presented with asthenia, weight loss, occasional vomiting, abdominal pain and anemia. At clinical examination a parietal swelling was observed and at surgical consultation an incisional hernia through the previous cholecystectomy incision was suspected. A gastroscopy revealed the presence of a neoplasm shrinking the gastric antrum. In the following days a small cutaneous ulcer above the parietal swelling was observed followed by the appearance of a fistula a few days later. After surgical consultation she was moved to our university surgical ward.Our laboratory tests revealed hypoproteinemia (4.6g/dL), hypoalbuminemia (2g/dL) and anemia (8.3g/dL) which required transfusion of three blood units. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a huge mass (10×14×15cm) arising from her gastric antrum, without a clear cleavage from the left lobe of her liver with internal necrosis and hemorrhage. The mass appeared to infiltrate her transverse mesocolon and her rectus abdominis muscles bilaterally, and to overrun them anteriorly causing a large parietal deficit and a complete external fistula. Furthermore the CT scan did not show large vessel infiltration or distant metastases.At surgery, laparotomy was performed using a skin elliptical incision centered from the neoplastic lesion surrounded by 2cm of healthy perilesional skin tissue . Lateral margins of elliptical incision were enlarged with two other linear incisions.
An en bloc resection of stomach, colon and abdominal wall was performed along with systematic lymph node dissection, followed by mechanic gastrojejunostomy and hand-sewn ileocolic anastomosis. Two intra-abdominal drains were positioned and the parietal defect was reconstructed by positioning a biological prosthesis. The skin defect was closed with reverse abdominoplasty flap . The intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) through intravesical measurement was lower than 10mmHg during the operation and during the postoperative course.
Histology reported a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with growth pattern and differentiation phenotype of neuroendocrine type. At microscopy, extension had reached the transverse colon mucosa and the extraserosal tissues up to the skin. . The immunohistochemistry was positive for pan-cytokeratin chromogranin and CD56, while negative for vimentin, synaptophysin and S-100.
The immediate postoperative course was satisfactory. The patient did not present relevant laboratory abnormalities except for a mild anemia which was treated with hemotransfusions on the first three postoperative days. On day 3 her bowel movements began. On day 6, after an oral X-ray contrast examination, she started drinking and eating.
Unfortunately, on day 10 she experienced severe respiratory distress that resulted in pneumonia. Despite antibiotic therapy and her transfer to the intensive care unit, she died 20 days after surgery (Additional file ).