A 47-year-old man was admitted to hospital with a 9 day history of abdominal pain and diarrhoea and an incidental fluctuant swelling on his back. He had a previous medical history of alcoholic liver cirrhosis, anaemia and hypothyroidism. Examination revealed a fluctuant tender swelling on the left side of his back extending to the inferior angle of scapula. His blood tests demonstrated raised inflammatory markers (WCC 12.3, CRP 169, normal LFTs). On CT he was found to have a large left pleural enhancing collection with adjacent rib destruction corresponding to the clinically palpable mass. At that time note was made of incidental mild acute cholecystitis . The patient required rib resection, drainage of his pleural empyema and antibiotics.
On day 7 post op he suffered a massive fresh PR bleed. Hb measured 61 g/L having been 103 g/L on admission. There was no evidence of coagulopathy and liver function tests were unremarkable. The patient was treated with blood transfusion, FFP and tranexamic acid. Flexible sigmoidoscopy revealed no cause for fresh PR bleeding. Triple phase CT was performed. The pre-contrast images demonstrated layering of variable density fluid in the gallbladder with the hyperdense fluid also within the colon at the hepatic flexure, which was located adjacent to and inseparable from the gallbladder . On the post-contrast images there was a blush within the gallbladder in keeping with a cystic artery pseudoaneurysm . The patient was transferred to IRU where DSA confirmed the cystic artery pseudoaneurysm . This was embolised with a single 2 × 3 mm Tornado coil (Cook Medical) . Ideally the coil would have been deployed more distally relative to the origin of the cystic artery, however despite prolonged attempts, the microcatheter would not advance distally and so the coil was deployed as demonstrated.
Following embolization, the patient was transferred to ITU but suffered no further episodes of bleeding. Repeat CT scan demonstrated successful embolization of the cystic artery pseudoaneurysm. The patient was stepped down to the ward 2 days later and discharged 1 week after embolization on oral antibiotics for his pleural empyema with a surgical outpatient appointment regarding future cholecystectomy.