A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of fever, abdominal pain and hematochezia for 2 months. He was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (ceftizoxime and imipenem) in local hospital. However, symptoms aggravated along with persistent diarrhea. One week later, he was transmitted to our hospital. Nine months before admission, the patient was diagnosed as MDS-RAEB2 and received 4 courses of azacytidine and micro-transplantation. The number of primitive cells in bone marrow declined from 25 to 5% after 4 courses of treatment. There was no family history of autoimmune diseases or inflammatory bowel disease.
On admission, he was conscious and anemic. There was tenderness on palpation of the right lower quadrant with mild rebound pain. Blood tests showed that white blood cells count was 13 × 109/L, hemoglobin level was 82 g/L, platelet count was 93 × 109/L. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 53 mm/h (reference, < 18 mm/h), high sensitivity C-reactive protein was 247 mg/L (reference, < 3.1 mg/L). Fecal calprotectin was 872 μg/g.
The computed tomography enterography (CTE) showed bowel wall thickening and mural hyperenhancement of terminal ileum and cecum. Gastroscopy revealed multiple erosions in stomach. Colonoscopy showed multiple round ulcers in terminal ileum and ileocecal valve and multiple yellow dotted pseudomembranous attachments throughout colon. Capsule endoscopy also revealed multiple irregular ulcers in lower ileum. Histological analysis showed partially thickened with hyaline degeneration in the wall of small blood vessels.
During multidisciplinary team meeting, diagnosis and differential diagnosis was discussed as infectious colitis, cytotoxic drug-related intestinal ulcer, BD, Crohn's disease and intestinal tuberculosis, etc.
Firstly, stool samples, blood samples and previous colonoscopy biopsy specimen were sent to the laboratory to be tested for infection (including bacteria, tuberculosis, virus and fungus). Intriguingly, the clostridium difficile toxin A and B in stools was positive and clostridium difficile infection was confirmed. The patient received vancomycin 125 mg 4 times per day orally . The fever and diarrhea relieved soon after medication. The test of clostridium difficile toxin A and B were negative after two weeks treatment. Colonoscopy showed that the pseudomembrane disappeared but the intestinal ulcers have no tendency to shrink . Thus, opportunistic infections not enough to explain the whole state of the symptoms.
Secondly, azacytidine has been reported to induce hematochezia and intestinal ulcer in literature. Since our patient's symptom occurred between the 3rd and 4th course of azacytidine, we assessed the relationship between azacytidine and intestinal ulcer in our case. According to literature, the intestinal ulcers induced by azacytidine occurred shortly after medication and relieved 7 to 20 days after stopping the medication. However, the intestinal ulcers of our patient existed 54 days after last course. The Naranjo adverse drug reaction probability score of this patient is suspicious (2 scores) which not enough to confirm the diagnosis of drug-related bowel disease.
Recently, studies show that trisomy 8 positivity MDS with Behçet’s-like disease often performed as gastrointestinal ulcers. The bone marrow cells analysis of this patient showed a karyotype of 47 XX, + 8 accompanied with BCOP, IDH1, PHF6 and RUNX1 gene mutation. Detailed inquiry of medical history revealed epifolliculitis and frequently recurrent oral ulcers 2 months before admission. Based on the International Criteria for BD which point score system that scoring ≥ 4 indicates BD, this patient scored 4. Above all, a diagnosis of trisomy 8 positivity MDS with BD was considered. The patient received glucocorticoid for BD along with the 5th course of azacytidine. Symptoms relieved and follow-up endoscopy showed significantly improved intestinal ulcer 2 months after treatment with glucocorticoid.