A 26-year-old man was admitted to the hospital due to a mass that developed 5 years ago in the anterolateral aspect of the proximal thigh. No treatment was prescribed owing to lack of any discomfort. The mass increased progressively over the past 1 year. One month prior to his admission, hypoesthesia in the anterior aspect of the right thigh and the medial aspect of the calf appeared. During the physical examination, a mass, measuring approximately 11.0 × 9.0 × 4.0 cm, near the hip joint in the upper right thigh could be palpated. The mass had a slightly clear boundary and medium texture and was movable. The muscle power with hip flexion and knee extension was grade 3. Color Doppler ultrasound examination showed a near-isoechoic mass approximately 9.0 × 8.0 × 4.5 cm in size located in the muscular layer of the upper right thigh, with a few blood flow signals inside and around the tumor. The mass was in a slightly irregular shape, with the edge of some portions showing polygonal shapes. The boundary between the cortex and medulla was clear. Radiograph showed no abnormality in the right hip joint. Computed tomography (CT) showed a massive low-density shadow in the medial side of the tensor fascia latae with a regular shape, a larger slice size of about 108 × 59 mm, and a CT value of about -61 HU. The adjacent muscle was compressed and deformed. No abnormality was found in the right hip joint. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a lumpy shadow with an abnormal-signal in the lateral soft tissue space of the right hip joint. The boundary of the shadow was clear. In the T1-weighted sequence, there was a high-intensity signal shadow with a cord strip and cloud-like low-intensity signal shadow. The fat-suppressed T2-weighted sequence showed a low-intensity signal shadow with a cord strip and cloud-like high-intensity signal shadow. The adjacent muscles were compressed and deformed. An abnormal signal was not observed in the right hip joint. The patient was diagnosed with a fatty tumor in the right thigh, with femoral neuropathy (compression?).
After necessary preoperative examinations, the tumor was resected under general anesthesia. During the surgery, a mass measuring approximately 10.0 × 8.0 × 5.0 cm was found in the medial side of the tensor fascia latae, adjacent to the joint capsule of the hip joint. The mass had an unclear boundary, of which the upper edge was close to the anterolateral aspect of the right hip joint, and the inner edge squeezed the rectus femoris inwardly and downwardly, resulting in the compression of the right femoral nerve, which come from the deeply compression of the rectus femoris . The tumor was removed completely, the surface compression of rectus femoris was removed, and the compressed femoral nerve caused by deeply compression of rectus femoris was also released. The longitudinal section of the mass was solid, grayish-yellow in color, and contained fat tissue . The histopathological findings indicated that the tumor was segmented by a fibrous interstitium. The tumor cells were round and polygonal, with a clear cell boundary and abundant cytoplasm. Eosinophilic particles and small fat droplets were found in the cytoplasm of some cells and the nuclei were small. Immunohistochemical analysis showed desmin (−), Ki-67 (−), SMA (−), and S-100 (+). The pathological diagnosis was a hibernoma. At the 4-month follow-up, the patient was in generally good health without tumor recurrence. The sensation and muscle strength in the right thigh had recovered to nearly normal levels.