The patient is a 15-year-old Caucasian female who was diagnosed with CRMO in 2007 at 5 years in the context of right thigh pain. provides a timeline of the patient's symptoms and course of disease. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multifocal abnormal bone marrow signal in the right femur, the left femoral neck, and the proximal epiphysis and metaphysis of the right tibia, which was associated with osteolysis and callus formation . Radio-nucleotide bone scan found increased uptake involving the left sacrum, left proximal femur, and femoral neck region as well as the midshaft of the right femur and the proximal right tibia. Bone biopsy of the lytic lesion involving the midshaft of the right femur was not consistent with malignancy and showed red blood cells and scattered neutrophils and lymphocytes. Over the next several years (2007–2015), she was followed by orthopedic surgery and was treated only with intermittent ibuprofen as needed for pain. She was noted to have a leg length discrepancy at the age of 7 years, and in 2014, at the age of 12 years, she had surgery to fuse the growth plate to prevent right leg growth (right leg was 4.5 cm longer than her left leg at that time).
She established Rheumatologic care in March 2015 at age 13, and right quadriceps muscle atrophy and failure to thrive with a weight and height under the third percentile were noted at this time. Bone scan revealed increased uptake in the right femur and asymmetry of activity in the growth plates of the knees and ankles with decreased activity in the right side compared to left. She was treated with naproxen 250 mg twice daily (8.7 mg/kg BID) and prednisone 20 mg per day (0.7 mg/kg), tapered by 5 mg weekly. Two months later, prednisone was discontinued, and she continued to have good control of her leg pain on NSAID monotherapy. After a few months, she developed new diarrhea with vomiting and weight loss. Her blood pressure was elevated, and a renal ultrasound and electrocardiogram were unremarkable.
She was referred for Gastroenterology evaluation and was found to have positive stool occult blood along with a perirectal skin tag. Laboratory studies revealed anemia with a hemoglobin of 7.1 g/dL (nl 12–16 g/dL), thrombocytosis with platelets of 744 k (nl 150–450 k), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 69 mm/hr (nl 0–10 mm/hr), and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 129 mg/L (nl 0–3 mg/L). There was no family history of autoimmune disease, and tuberculin testing was negative. Colonoscopy revealed pancolitis with crypt inflammation and crypt abscesses with no granuloma consistent with ulcerative colitis . NSAID therapy was discontinued, and treatment for UC with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day (40 mg) tapering by 5 mg weekly along with sulfasalazine was initiated. Infliximab 3 mg/kg infusions were added the following month.
At the visit for her second infliximab infusion, she presented with tachycardia, a blood pressure of 230/190, and headache and was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit for hypertensive emergency requiring nicardipine infusion. Her examination was notable for right-sided Horner's syndrome, decreased right leg pulse pressure, and an abdominal bruit. Echocardiogram showed a small pericardial effusion with reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. Laboratory studies revealed negative ANA and ANCA screens, normal C3 and C4, and normal von Willebrand factor antigen. CT angiogram (CTA) of the abdomen and pelvis showed narrowing of the mid-aorta, proximal renal arteries, celiac artery, and superior mesenteric artery . CTA of the chest showed marked descending thoracic and abdominal aortic wall thickening with progressive luminal narrowing and wall thickening of the visualized portion of the right common carotid artery and celiac trunk, enlarged left atrium, left ventricular hypertrophy, and a small pericardial effusion . MRI/MRA brain showed anterior and posterior circulations of the brain were without occlusion or aneurysm with the patent carotid and vertebral arteries of the neck . Given these findings, she was diagnosed with TA complicated by middle aortic syndrome. She was started on metoprolol 50 mg daily (1.5 mg/kg daily), amlodipine 5 mg daily, famotidine 20 mg twice daily, aspirin 81 mg daily, and increased dose and frequency of infliximab from 3 mg/kg every 8 weeks to 5 mg/kg IV every 4 weeks along with prednisone 20 mg daily (0.6 mg/kg daily) and mesalamine 1 g BID. The patient continued infliximab every 8 weeks rather than every 4 weeks as recommended.
Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis and Cardiac MR three months later showed luminal narrowing of the distal thoracic and upper abdominal aorta similar to previous CT studies, stenosis of origin of celiac axis, stenosis of proximal superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and moderate stenosis of bilateral proximal renal arteries. Echocardiogram noted concentric LVH with mildly reduced function, measuring 45%, and normal coronary arteries.
At this point, the patient transferred her care to our rheumatology clinic, and despite treatment with infliximab 5 mg/kg every 8 weeks, she continued to report right thigh pain and developed new inflammatory arthritis of the left ankle and increased inflammatory markers with an ESR of 55 mm/hr (nl 0–20 mm/hr) and an elevated CRP of 73 mg/L (nl < 3 mg/L). Additionally, interval imaging found new wall thickening around the right common carotid artery. This was concerning for uncontrolled TA and CRMO activity. There was an unfortunate delay in treatment escalation due to social circumstances. Two months later, she started treatment with parenteral methylprednisolone 1 gram weekly for 8 weeks, and her dose of infliximab was increased from 5 mg/kg to 10 mg/kg every 4 weeks. Based on adult data demonstrating a positive response to higher doses of infliximab, the decision was made to increase the dose of infliximab instead of trying another TNF inhibitor.
Multidisciplinary evaluation at Boston Children's Hospital, Center for Middle Aortic Syndrome by neurosurgery, nephrology, and rheumatology, led to recommendations of a prednisone dose increase and the addition of methotrexate 15 mg/m2 weekly to infliximab 10 mg/kg every 4 weeks. At this time, her echocardiogram revealed moderate left ventricle dilation and mildly depressed left ventricular systolic function. One month later, repeat head and neck CTA showed progression of her right carotid artery stenosis to 80%. Her ESR had normalized, and CRP decreased to 7.8 mg/L at this time. Given her worsening carotid artery stenosis, infliximab was increased from 10 to 15 mg/kg every 4 weeks. On a combination of moderate dose prednisone, weekly methotrexate, and infliximab, she denied joint pain, swelling, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or blood in stool. Follow-up brain MRI/MRA three months later was normal. Repeat chest and abdomen MRA showed all of the areas of stenosis appeared to be stable and inflammatory markers had normalized.
Currently, her clinical course is stable without further anatomic progression, and she has normal inflammatory markers. Thus, she has continued on her current regimen with infliximab 15 mg/kg every 4 weeks and methotrexate 15 mg/m2 once weekly. Prednisone decreased gradually and discontinued. She has not developed any infectious sequelae on this regimen. Her blood pressure is stable on carvedilol alone. We continue to assess blood work monthly. Given her use of prednisone, vitamin D level was followed and found to be low, and she has started on a vitamin D supplement. Dilated ophthalmologic exam was normal. Repeat MRI of the lower extremities and bone scan show that her CRMO lesions are inactive. Repeat MRI/MRA of the brain, chest, abdomen, and pelvis in June of 2018 show stable changes without the need for stenting. Given the predisposition for autoinflammatory conditions in this patient, the authors are considering genetic testing in search of a monogenic cause that may support a unifying diagnosis.