E.B., a 13-year-old Caucasian boy with SMA type III, came to our attention in September 2014. Motor impairment had been evident since the age of 14 months. SMA was diagnosed at the age of 32 months through genetic tests. To slow down motor function progressive loss, after diagnosis E.B. periodically underwent physiotherapy cycles, including hydrokinesis and swimming. His medical history was characterized by a mild restrictive ventilatory defect, frequent falls, low physical endurance, and increased fatigability.
A fall occurred in May 2013 resulted in a fracture of the left femur metaphysis. The traumatic injury was fixed with a conservative treatment through a 6-week application of a plaster cast. In the following 3 months, the patient used an orthopedic support and attended an intensive rehabilitation program based on daily sessions of physiotherapy. Despite the treatment, recovery was incomplete: E.B. was able to walk independently but manifested lower limb weakness, decreased physical endurance, reduced gait speed, and increased fatigue and inability to climb stairs. This led to a reduction in autonomy and self-sufficiency with significant implications for his QoL.
In September 2014 at the first visit in our center (T0), physical examination showed remarkable atrophy of the thigh muscles, moderate scoliosis, absence of the patellar reflex with reduction of the other deep tendon reflexes, predominantly proximal muscle weakness (with the pelvic girdle more affected than the shoulder girdle), and inability to rise up from the floor. E.B. could stand and walk without support only for short paths and had a waddling gait with a compensatory exaggerated lumbar lordosis. Functional evaluation included quadriceps strength measurement through maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) , gait and balance evaluation through Tinetti scale , and motor functions evaluation through Hammersmith Functional Motor Scale-Expanded for SMA (HFMSE) . During this initial assessment, E.B. underwent also transcutaneous neuromuscular electrical stimulation (NMES) to assess the presence of elicitable contractions of the quadriceps muscles and ascertain patient's tolerability to ES. Given the favorable response and good tolerance of the subject, we proposed him a personalized program for motor recovery centered on ES applications for lower limb strengthening. E.B.'s parents gave an informed consent for his participation to the program. At the end of the program, they signed a written informed consent for the publication of the results. The local Ethical Committee was informed about the case report.
The program was divided into two phases (Phase I; Phase II). Due to quadriceps weakness and deconditioning, EB was initially not able to properly exercise on the FES cycle-ergometer (i.e., maintaining cadence and power in the minimum range provided by the device) for more than 5 minutes. We therefore started with a preliminary (home-based) strengthening program to improve quadriceps force and power (Phase I).
Following recent ES recommendations, we defined the optimal electrode configuration for E.B.'s right and left quadriceps muscles (see later in the text for details), as well as the proper stimulus amplitude and parameters able to attain strong visible muscle contractions without discomfort [, ]. After a brief training to familiarize with the device and the technique, E.B. started a home-based NMES treatment protocol (Phase I; October-December 2014, 8 weeks). The adopted portable stimulator (Genesy 600, Globus, Italy) was used five times a week. Electrodes (size: 5x5 cm) were placed on the individualized motor points which were preliminary identified by mapping the muscle surface with a pen-electrode . The motor points were marked on the skin and photographed.
The NMES protocol lasted 22 minutes and consisted of a warm-up phase (2 minutes), composed of single twitches (frequency = 5 Hz; stimulus width = 380 μs). After the warm-up, a strengthening protocol (20 minutes) was provided with tetanic contractions (duration = 2 seconds; frequency = 35 Hz; and pulse width = 380 μs) alternated by periods of recovery (9 seconds of single twitches at 3 Hz). The amplitude of stimulation was based on personal tolerance. Since the beginning, the stimulus amplitude was able to elicit well-tolerated strong visible contractions. E.B. was instructed to progressively increase the amplitude of stimulation each week in order to increase the muscular workloads. We supervised the treatment course through home telemonitoring and dairy compilation to continuously-constantly assess program adherence and NMES parameters as well as to check for potential side effects.
After this initial muscle strengthening phase, we decided to add 10 sessions of voluntary cycling exercise assisted by functional electrical stimulation (FES-assisted cycling) with the aim of promoting broader beneficial effects (Phase II; December 2014-March 2015; 10 weeks). Once a week, E.B. went to our clinic to attend the FES-assisted cycling program. The FES cycle-ergometer (Pegaso, Biotech, Italy) provided coordinated bilateral stimulation to the quadriceps, hamstring, and gluteal muscles. The resulting evoked muscle activations support the patient's weak voluntary contractions during cycling. The protocol had duration of 25 minutes and was performed at the velocity of 30 rpm with pedal resistance gradually raised from 5 to 9 Nm. The stimulation amplitude was fixed at 45 mA for quadriceps, 30 mA for hamstring, and 25 mA for gluteal muscles. As for NMES, electrodes were placed on individualized motor points that were precisely searched with a pen-electrode. The device provided interactive videogame feedback in order to maintain motivation and increase volitional muscle engagement during the exercise. The ES program and the stimulation protocols used are resumed in .
To evaluate the energy expenditure during FES-assisted cycling, oxygen consumption (VO2) and heart rate were recorded using a portable metabolimeter (K4b2, Cosmed, Italy). The attained exercise intensity was estimated through the calculation of the metabolic equivalents of task (METs). We adopted both standard and measured MET calculation. The standard MET value is classically computed by taking the energy costs (VO2 expressed in ml/kg/min) and dividing them by 3.5 ml/Kg/min, which is a proxy value for the resting metabolic rate of 1 MET . Nevertheless, the level of physical activity estimated through standard METs may not be accurate for individuals with disability who may, actually, present resting VO2 values significantly lower than 3.5 ml/Kg/min . For this, in order to provide more accurate estimates of the individual level of physical activity, we additionally computed the MET values by considering the measured VO2 during the resting state in sitting position (1 min). The VO2 peak value during FES-assisted cycling was the maximum VO2 value obtained by averaging each minute during the exercise session. The same procedure was adopted to calculate the basal and peak heart rate values.
At the end of Phase I, after 8 weeks of home-based treatment (T1), quadriceps isometric strength significantly increased from 1.7 to 2.2 kg for the right side and from 0.8 to 2.0 kg for the left leg. The growth of thigh circumference (at 10 cm and 15 cm from the patella) was, respectively, 7 and 3 mm for the right leg and 5 and 3 mm for the left one.
At the end of Phase II (T2), thigh circumference (at 10 cm and 15 cm from the patella) grew compared to baseline, respectively, of 15 and 9 mm for the right leg and 12 and 6 mm for the left one. Dynamometry reported a significant gain in quadriceps isometric strength of both legs: MVIC increased by 70.6% for the right quadriceps and was nearly tripled for the left quadriceps (from 0.8 to 2.3 kg). Motor function evaluation by HFMSE showed an improvement of 7 points (from 35 to 42/66). Tinetti score increased by 8 points (+4 for balance, +4 for gait). Energy expenditure during FES-assisted cycling increased progressively from an initial value of 2.3 METs to a final value of 3.1 standard METs and from an initial value of 2.6 to a final value of 3.4 measured METs. Powers during cycling changed from 7 watts (average) and 14.4 watts (maximum) during the first session to 9.8 watts (average) and 16.8 watts (maximum) obtained during the last session. The main outcome measures are detailed in .
From the patient's perspective, E.B. always showed good treatment compliance and did not complain of pain, discomfort, or any other side effects during the whole treatment period. E.B. reported the maximum level of satisfaction (+2) related to the achievement of individual expected goals and to perceived treatment effectiveness (Goal Attainment Scale ). He never perceived excessive muscle fatigue and soreness. The patient reported improved gait abilities in terms of quantity, quality, and safety, as well as a reduced fear of falling. After the treatment, in March 2015, the subject recovered the ability to climbing stairs in complete autonomy. In light of these beneficial effects, E.B. applied for a 70% cofunding to acquire a FES cycle-ergometer. In June 2015, he obtained the device, which allowed him to continue the whole rehabilitation protocol at home.