A 30-year-old male living in South Korea visited a secondary general hospital (hospital A, as follows), complaining of multiple skin lesions that had started 1 week prior. He was also experiencing lower abdominal discomfort and a yellowish discharge from the anus that had begun 2 days prior. The skin lesions were present throughout his body, including the hands, feet, and anogenital area. Inguinal tender lymphadenopathy was also noted during the physical examination. The skin lesions consisted of ulcers, umbilicated pustules, and erythematous plaques with central erosion. He had no travel history to mpox endemic countries, such as Central or West Africa, nor to recent outbreak countries in Europe or the United States within 3 weeks before symptom onset. He reported having had receptive sexual intercourse with an anonymous male partner 1 week before the symptoms initiated. A polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test result was positive, with a cycle threshold (Ct) value of 24.23, obtained from a penile ulcer and left wrist pustules.
He was transferred to a university-affiliated tertiary hospital (hospital B, as follows) for isolation and treatment for mpox and this is Hospital Day (HD) 0. Some of the skin lesions had formed scabs at the time of hospital admission. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) antibody testing was negative, and all routine laboratory tests were normal except for an elevated C-reactive protein level of 6.59 mg/dL (normal range: 0–0.3 mg/dL). Tecovirimat was administered orally at a dose of 600 mg every 12 hours due to the infection site being the anal area, and because he complained of anal pain. On HD6, scabs formed on most skin lesions, and the anal pain improved. On HD8, scabs formed on skin lesions, and by HD11 all skin lesions had lost their scabs. After ensuring the absence of new lesions for over 48 hours, the patient was discharged on HD12. Tecovirimat was administered for 12 days during the first hospitalization. A diagram of the patient’s clinical course is shown in Fig. . One day after discharge (HD13), the patient experienced massive hematochezia and revisited the emergency room of hospital A which was he had initially visited when his symptoms appeared. On sigmoidoscopy, spurting bleeding was observed 3 cm above the anus, and hemostatic clipping was performed on the lesion . He was transferred to hospital B after initial hemostasis for further treatment. After transfer, real-time PCR tests were conducted for both monkeypox virus and herpes virus using rectal swab specimens (HD15) as well as rectal tissue obtained through follow-up colonoscopy . The results were positive for monkeypox virus with Ct values of 31.23 and 28.48, respectively, but negative for herpes simplex virus 1 and 2. From HD15 to HD26, the patient presented with intermittent episodes of hematochezia, and the lowest hemoglobin level recorded was 8.2 g/dL. Abdominal angiographic computed tomography (CT) on HD15 showed proctocolitis and a perirectal abscess without contrast extravasation . The perirectal abscess size was 4.8 cm × 1.6 cm. Intravenous administration of ampicillin/sulbactam was initiated from HD16 to HD28. Same dose of tecovirimat was reintroduced for 7 days after a positive monkeypox virus PCR result was reported from the rectal tissue.
After HD26, the patient did not experience any additional signs of bleeding, such as hematochezia or decreasing hemoglobin levels. Follow-up sigmoidoscopy and abdominal CT showed improvement in the several linear ulcers in the distal rectum and a decreased abscess size compared to the previous examination on HD26 and HD27. Antibiotics were switched to oral amoxicillin/sulbactam from HD28, and the patient was discharged on HD30.