A 39-year-old female with pelvic congestion syndrome had undergone coil embolization of the left internal iliac and ovarian veins three months earlier. For the prior month, the patient endorsed right-sided pleuritic chest pain and dyspnea with orthopnea. Differential diagnosis included a viral or bacterial pulmonary infection, pulmonary embolism, acute coronary syndrome, pericarditis, and less likely pneumothorax, aortic dissection, or congestive heart failure. Outpatient chest radiograph (CXR) demonstrated an ectopic coil in the right pulmonary vasculature, with a second coil still in place in the left ovarian vein on subsequent abdominal radiograph.
On emergency department evaluation, the patient had normal vitals including 100% oxygen saturation on room air with a respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, clear breath sounds, and no leg edema. Labs were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm at 84 beats per minute. CXR and computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed an ectopic pelvic coil in the right main pulmonary artery extending into multiple upper and lower lobe segmental branches .
Coil artifact somewhat limited the identification of thrombus, but there were peripheral wedge-shaped opacities in the right middle and lower lobes concerning for infarcts and a small right pleural effusion . There was no evidence of right heart strain on CT.
Following consultation with vascular surgery, it was decided that vascular interventional radiology (VIR) would be the least invasive yet most likely successful method for coil retrieval when compared to an open surgical approach. The patient was consented and transported directly to VIR, where the groin was prepped in standard fashion. The right common femoral vein was accessed with a micropuncture kit using ultrasound guidance. A pulmonary angiography catheter was advanced over a guidewire into the right main pulmonary artery via a 7 French sheath. Contrast phase did not show significant clot within the artery.
The sheath was exchanged for a long 7 French sheath with the tip in the right pulmonary artery. Multiple snares were passed through the sheath to engage the 20-millimeter (mm) Nester coil pack (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN); however, the coil unraveled into small pieces, until eventually a large piece was snared and retracted to the right femoral vein. Interventional radiology then performed en bloc removal through the right groin access site given the coil was too large to pass through the sheath; however, a piece of coil remained in the right femoral vein . Multiple attempts to snare the coil via an upsized 11 French sheath were still unsuccessful.
Similarly, the left femoral vein was accessed and upsized to a 9 French sheath, which finally allowed for successful snare removal of the remaining coil. Repeat imaging showed a small residual coil fragment in the right mid-lung that was deemed not to cause increased injury, thus was left in situ. An intact, 16mm Nester coil pack was noted in the left gonadal vein.
The patient was observed in the hospital overnight and went home the following day without anticoagulation or other acute complications. The patient followed up with vascular surgery clinic several months later for recommendations on her remaining gonadal vein coil with no additional interventions.