A 35-year-old female was seen at the emergency department of St. Antonius Hospital, Koekoekslaan, The Netherlands. She presented with fever up to 40 degrees Celsius, shaking chills, dry cough, nausea, headache and right-sided chest pain. These symptoms were present for 1 week. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable; she didn’t use any medication and was a non-smoker. The diagnosis of pneumonia was made by physical and laboratory examination. The chest radiography showed a large right-sided lobar infiltrate .
Because of impending respiratory insufficiency and hypotension, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and immediately intubated. Treatment with penicillin and erythromycin was started.
Streptococcus pneumoniae was detected as the causative microorganism by a blood and sputum culture and positive urine antigen testing, and identified as serotype 9V. A pharyngeal swab showed no signs of respiratory viruses on PCR testing. Antibiotic treatment was converted to penicillin only.
Following 9 days of mechanical ventilation, she was transferred to the ward where she made a good recovery and was discharged after 16 days.
Antibody titers against the capsular polysaccharides of 14 pneumococcal serotypes were measured on a multiplex immunoassay (Luminex 200, Luminex Corporation, Austin, Texas, United States [US]) as previously described (serotypes 1, 3, 4, 6B, 7F, 8, 9 N, 9V, 12F, 14, 18C, 19A, 19F, and, 23F; Danish nomenclature) . Samples were taken at the day of admission and 42 days later. In the recovery sample the patient showed a low antibody titer and no titer rise against pneumococcal serotype 9V. She had not been vaccinated with a pneumococcal vaccine in the past.
Three months after admission to the hospital, the patient was seen at the outpatient department for a work-up according to the diagnostic protocol developed by the European Society for Immunodeficiency . In that context, 23vPPV was administered. Pneumococcal polysaccharide antibodies against 8 pneumococcal serotypes were measured on a Luminex platform before vaccination and 4 weeks after vaccination (serotypes 3, 4, 6B, 9V, 14, 18C, 19F, and 23F; Danish nomenclature). The results showed that the patient had a sufficient antibody response to 5 of the 8 pneumococcal serotypes tested , but no response whatsoever against her infecting serotype 9V. The patient therefore did not have an adequate antibody response specifically to pneumococcal serotype 9V either after natural exposition or after vaccination with 23vPPV. Immunological work up showed no other abnormalities; i.e. serum immunoglobulins, IgG-subclasses and complement were all normal . The patient has had no severe or recurrent infections during the 9 years that have followed this first episode of pneumonia.
Recently the patient was included in the so-called CAPolista study (patient #6) . In this study, patients who have experienced an episode of community-acquired pneumonia were vaccinated with 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and antibodies were measured before and after vaccination. Antibodies were measured on a Luminex platform as previously described (serotypes 1, 3, 4, 5, 6A, 6B, 7F, 9V, 14, 18C, 19A, 19F, 23F; Danish nomenclature) . Quite unexpectedly, a high anti-9V titer of 4 μg IgG/ml was found in the pre (conjugate) vaccination serum, which increased 3.8-fold after vaccination . Also for serotype 6B the antibody titers had increased substantially in the 10 years after pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccination. For serotype 4 the antibody levels were and remained low .