A 56-year old woman was presented to the orthopaedic department with a 3-month history of a painless mass in the upper external area of the left gluteus.
Two years, previously she underwent an abdominal hysterectomy because of an enlarging mass found in the pelvis, located between the uterus and the recto-sigmoid area. CA 125 was moderately elevated at 61.9 U/ml. The resected mass was bilobular (9 × 7 × 6, 5 cm and 5, 2 × 5 × 5 cm) with hard and partially soft elements. Multiple intramural uterine leiomyomas were also identified. The tumor was diagnosed as "a leiomyosarcoma" composed of cellular bundles of spindle cells with medium grade atypia and presence of giant cells. The range of mitosis was very high, up to 50/10 H.P.F (high power field). Immunohistochemical analysis with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex showed positive reaction for vimentin, smooth muscle actin and desmin . The patient was treated post-operatively with radiotherapy and chemotherapy (Gemcitabine and docetaxel).
One year after the hysterectomy, a single metastasis was diagnosed during a routine follow up in the left upper lung lobe treated surgically with lobectomy. The histological diagnosis was compatible with the known primary tumor. One year later, the patient was presented in the orthopaedic department with a painless mass in the left gluteus area. The clinical examination revealed a focal lump in the left gluteal area. The subsequent magnetic resonance imaging study, showed a mass with central necrosis located in the subcutaneous fatty tissue, in close proximity to the gluteal muscles. In addition, a second small lesion with similar findings was detected in the right gluteal muscle .
A diagnosis of soft tissue metastasic disease was suggested and a surgical resection of both masses was undertaken. The post-operative period was uneventful. The histological diagnosis confirmed the presence of a spindle cell sarcoma with central necrosis and morphologic features similar to the patient's previous sarcoma . A routine abdominal CT-Scan showed changes of the previous hysterectomy and an edematous appearance of the sigmoid colon wall, as well as presacral fat edema attributed to previous radiotherapy.
Four years after the hysterectomy the patient was presented at the emergency department with symptoms of intestinal obstruction. During laparotomy, a mass of 10.5 × 4.5 × 4 cm was identified infiltrating the bowel wall and protruding into the sigmoid lumen. A colectomy combined with colostomy was performed. Microscopically, the resected mass composed of interlacing bundles of spindle and epithelioid mesenchymal cells with morphological features similar to the previously described tumors. The immunohistochemical analysis of the cells showed positive for vimentin and a focal positivity for actin (α-SMA). This time, a CD117(c-KIT) immunohistochemical stain was performed and the neoplastic cells showed extensive positivity. A diagnosis of a mesenchymal stromal tumor was established . A retrospective analysis of the original tumor performing immunhistochemistry, showed a focal positivity of the neoplastic cells for CD117(c-kit) Based on these features, the primary pelvic tumor was most probably an EGIST originally misdiagnosed as leiomyosarcoma. Post-operatively the patient underwent therapy with Imatinib Mesylate (Gleevec, Novartis) and one year after surgery is now free of symptoms.