We present the case of a 79-year-old woman, with no prior history of neurological disease, no history of anti-SARS-COV-2 vaccination, and known to have chronic venous insufficiency. The patient presented in the emergency department with episodes of confusion, and speech and walking difficulties. Symptom onset was 2 days prior to admission. Due to her state, the setting of an acute stroke was taken into an account, a possibility that was later ruled out. For this reason, she was admitted to the neurology department and not in the infectious disease–COVID-19 designed area, although a rapid severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2) antigen test returned positive. The oxygen saturation level in the emergency department was between 90% and 92%. Her family reported fatigue and body temperature slightly above normal in the last 4 days, and nausea and vomiting.
A neurological examination revealed a state of confusion, partially oriented to time, and her speech was difficult, slow, fragmented, slurred, and hard to understand. She had no signs of meningeal irritation and had general rigidity and hyperreflexia in both the upper and lower extremities. Muscle strength was preserved but she had difficulties in changing position and sitting up. The patient also experienced gait difficulties, as she could not walk unassisted. She experienced pain during passive movements of her limbs and also while attempting to walk, which she was reluctant to do. Spasms were predominantly affecting the axial and the proximal muscles of the lower limbs.
Blood work showed leucopenia (3,81k/microliter), hyponatremia (134 mmol/L), and hyperfibrinogenemia (627 mg/dL). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 44 mm/1 h, Creatine Kinase (CK) was elevated (253 U/L), Creatine-kinase MB isoform was normal, and C-reactive protein and procalcitonin were also in the reference range. The lung Computer tomography (CT) indicated an area of alveolar condensation in the inferior right lobe, and also on the left, but of lower amplitude, with bilateral adjacent pleural effusion (A,B). CT scan and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain were normal ( C,D). Oral antiviral treatment was started with Molnupiravir 1600 mg daily alongside oxygen therapy. In evolution, a blood test showed leukocytosis (16 k/mL) and elevated inflammation markers in a crescent trend (C-reactive Protein was 181 mg/dL on day 4 and Procalcitonin 2.04 ng/mL). A set of blood cultures were taken but did not detect any microorganisms. Urine culture detected E. Coli (>100,000 cfu/mL). Intravenous antibiotic therapy with Linezolid (according to the antibiogram) 500 mg every 24 h was associated on day 3 with clinically and biologically favorable outcomes. Creatin-kinase enzyme correlated well with the grade of rigidity, as described in . There were no other biochemical and hematological relevant values. Antineoplastic markers were negative and other immunological tests including serum anti-Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase (GAD) antibodies as well. Although with certain difficulties regarding the epidemiological state (COVID-19 positive), an electromyographic test was performed on day 4. Electromyography showed characteristic continuous motor activity in agonists and antagonist muscles, with unmodified morphology. Nerve conduction studies were normal. The outcome was favorable: upon discharge (seven days later) there was no rigidity and no pain during passive mobilization. The patient regained full autonomy and could walk unassisted. She was fully oriented to time and space. Given the suggestive clinical picture and the electromyographic-specific findings, the clinical and paraclinical settings were highly suggestive of stiff-person syndrome. The absence of GAD antibodies and complete regression of her spasticity are unusual for SPS. The hypothesis of acute stroke was also taken into account upon admission due to speech and gait difficulties. The patient presented for a follow-up 6 months later and the neurological exam was normal.