A 12-year-old girl presented to the local general hospital with symmetric palpable purpuric lesion in lower limbs, left hip pain and also a morning stiffness for 30 minutes. She was diagnosed with IgA vasculitis and just took conservative care. She gradually improved and discharged from hospital subsequently. Nine months later, she was presented to Mofid Children’s Hospital with purpuric lesion in lower limbs, significant morning stiffness (from 3 days before admission), severe parietal headache, and 3-week history of pain in the thighs, arms, and shoulders.
In physical examination there were no signs of photosensitivity, malar rash, oral ulcer, lymphadenopathy, pericarditis, and arthritis. Furthermore, there were no signs and symptoms of sinus involvement.
Due to the patient headache, brain MR imaging, and angio-MRI were done with normal results. Ophthalmology consult reported keratitis, peripheral ulcerative and episcleritis. Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR) was 33 mm/h. Anemia, and normal leukocyte and platelets number were finding of complete blood count (CBC) test.
Urinalysis revealed proteinuria (1+) and hematuria (Blood 3+ and red blood cell (RBC) 70-80/hpf). Proteinuria was calculated quantitatively (300 mg per 24 hours). Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN) and Creatinine (Cr) were in normal range. Lupus profile autoantibodies, Perinuclear Anti-neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody (P-ANCA), immunologloblins (Igs) level, wright, 2-mercaptoethanol (2ME), and anti-streptolysin O antibody (ASO) titer level were normal. C-ANCA was highly positive (C-ANCA > 300 U/ml, cut-off >18 positive). Considering hematuria, proteinuria, and high level C-ANCA renal biopsy was considered. Its result revealed focal crescentic and sclerosing glomerulonephritis ANCA associated with pauci-immune vasculitis.
Regarding the C-ANCA assay which was significantly positive and the histopathologic findings in the renal biopsy, the GPA was diagnosed. Subsequently, the patient treated with azathioprine (100 mg/day), prednisolone (27.5 mg/day), and captopril (12.5 mg/day). After 6 months follow-up, the symptoms resolved, inflammatory marker dropped, and the disease was in remission. After 2 years, the patient is in the complete remission with azathioprine (50 mg/day) and prednisolone (5 mg/day).