A 46-year-old female complained of prolonged menses, heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) and severe anemia for 2 years, which led to a severely reduced quality of life.
In July 2019, the patient presented with intermenstrual bleeding and was diagnosed with a 2 cm submucosal leiomyoma in a local hospital but received no treatment. Half a year later, the patient began to experience HMB (sanitary towel changed every 1-2 h), prolonged menses (20 d), and severe anemia (minimal serum hemoglobin level 4.2 g/dL). Blood transfusion and iron supplementation were required on the heaviest days. Unfortunately, her cardiopulmonary function was not amenable to general anesthesia for hysteroscopic surgery. Therefore, the regimen was switched to medical therapy. Between July 2020 and June 2021, the patient underwent intramuscular injections of goserelin acetate 36 mg every three months, but the efficacy was unsatisfactory. Her menstrual length was 10-15 d, the pictorial blood-loss assessment chart (PBAC) scale score was 810, and the secondary anemia had not been corrected. In July 2022, the patient sought help at our clinic. The symptom severity score (SSS) and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) score were 75 and 12.07, respectively, according to the uterine fibroid symptoms and quality of life questionnaire. Considering the patient’s strong willingness to undergo radical treatment, we proposed a new plan: (1) Correct the anemia with pseudomenopausal therapy with combined oral contraceptive pills (COCs); and (2) determine a way to remove the prolapsed myoma under local anesthesia to permanently eliminate the source of the AUB. After taking COCs for 3 mo, the patient’s serum hemoglobin (Hb) level increased to 8.9 g/dL. Then, she was admitted to our hospital for further treatment.
Her medical history mainly included congenital scoliosis and thoracic deformity, pulmonary insufficiency, and pulmonary heart disease. The heart function stabilized to New York Heart Association Cardiac Function Classification I or II while on long-term cardiotonic (ivabradine hydrochloride tablet bid 5 mg) and diuretic medication (spironolactone bid 20 mg and hydrochlorothiazide bid 25 mg).
No family history of AUB or other tumors was identified.
Vaginal examination revealed a 6 cm, dark red mass prolapsed into the vagina without significant mobility. The patient refused bimanual examination.
Laboratory tests revealed mild anemia with an Hb of 9.2 g/dL and an estradiol level below 18.35 U/L, consistent with previous hormonal therapy. Pregnancy tests, vaginal bacteriology, cervical cytology, and tumor biomarkers were all negative. Studies for systemic coagulation disorders, von Willebrand disease, and thyroid dysfunction were also performed, but the results were unremarkable.
Chest X-ray showed that the patient's bilateral thorax was asymmetric, with severe scoliosis and increased and thickened bilateral lung markings . Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia, and Doppler echocardiography showed mild pulmonary hypertension and mild regurgitation of the aortic, mitral, and tricuspid valves. Transabdominal ultrasound (TAUS) imaging revealed a mass prolapsing into the cervical canal with a large blood vessel embedded in the pedicle . Contrast-enhanced ultrasound imaging (CEUS) showed that the two arteries in the pedicle were the main blood supply sources of the lesion , one measuring 2.7 mm and the other 3 mm in diameter. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated that the pedicle was attached to the posterior uterine inner wall , and no evidence of malignancy was found on T2-weighted imaging or enhanced T1-weighted imaging.