A 73-year-old male patient came to our clinic complaining of total missing teeth. When the intraoral examination was performed, an erythematous tissue in the form of epulis and a slight pus flow was found in the edentulous alveolar crest region of the
right upper central and lateral tooth . The remaining root thought to belong to the right upper lateral tooth was observed on the panoramic radiograph. Due to long-term edentulism, the height of
the alveolar crest was quite low. The patient was advised not to use any dental prosthesis for a week and pay attention to oral hygiene, and then he was called for an observing session.
After coming to the session, a swab sample was taken from the tissue folds, where there is minimal pus flow. The swab sample was placed in a tube containing 3 mL of 0.1% buffered peptone water and sent to the laboratory for microbiological examination. The sample was then vortexed for 30 sec, and suspension from 0.1 ml dilution was inoculated onto Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA)(Merck, KGaA 64271, Darmstadt, Germany) and eosin methylene blue agar (Merck, KGaA 64271, Darmstadt, Germany), and it was then incubated at 37°C. An apparent growth of black colonies with a granular appearance was
obtained after 3 days on both media . Subculture of initial growth was performed on PDA and revealed fungal colonies that were initially white and turned black with the
conidial production after 48 h of incubation . Microscopic examination of the colonies revealed smooth and colorless conidiophores. A closer examination showed a globose conidial head, which was dark brown in color divided into a number
of columns and covered with dark or dark brown spores .
Confirmation of the species level of the isolate that was identified with classical methods was confirmed with MALDI-TOF by İzmir Atatürk Training and Research Hospital, Medical Microbiology Laboratory, Medical Mycology Unit. After unexpected results of the microbiological examination, cone beam computed tomography was taken from the relevant region. In the examination of the sections created from dental volumetric tomography performed for the maxilla with a 6×4 cm imaging area and a section thickness of 0.085 mm, a radix of 5×2.4×2.1 mm was observed in the upper right canine tooth. There was a distinct resorptive appearance in the alveolar bone in the imaged area and a radiolucent lesion measuring 10×6.1×9.4 mm in the widest part of the upper right center of the tooth. The lesion was found to be associated with the floor of the nasal cavity and appears to be responsible for the mucosal thickening in the relevant area.
Within this lesion, a radiopacity of 2.1×3.4×2.3 mm that was irregularly shaped and was more radiopaque than bone was observed. Mucosal thickening is observed in the right maxillary sinus as far as it is
included more peripherally in the image . This described appearance is consistent with the characteristic of FB due to Aspergilla species . The patient was referred to an otolaryngologist for systemic involvement investigation. Blood tests and chest X-ray were requested, and the final results revealed no systemic spread as well as no other chronic disease in the medical history of the patient.
The patient, who was diagnosed with Aspergillus niger, was brought to the general operating room following routine pre-operative preparations.
He was placed under general anesthesia with a nasal tube. A tampon for the throat was placed, and the mouth was irrigated with povidone-iodine
solution (BATTICON®, 10%; Adeka, Samsun, Turkey) + Saline serum solution. For intraoperative hemostasis and postoperative analgesia, regional and infiltrative anesthesia
with a total of 6 cc adrenaline-containing local anesthesia was carried out for the right side of the maxilla, which is the operating area of the patient.
An incision was made under the mucogingival junction with the number 15 scalpel. The full-thickness flap was removed, the granulated tissue described was excised,
and the adjacent radix was removed . This area was irrigated with saline and bleeding control was achieved. After the flaps were sutured mainly with 4-0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl), the surgery was completed by removing the packaging from the throat, and the patient was extubated. Following the awakening, the patient was referred to post-operation room with appropriate recommendations and post-operative order. The patient was prescribed 1000 gr amoxicillin oral tablets for prophylactic purposes. One week later, after the sutures were removed, he was referred for a total denture. Two months after, he started using her prostheses, and he was called for an observing session. He had no complaints, and his overall oral health improved. Moreover, the patient stated that his inhaling comfort was also enhanced. Pathological examination revealed the presence of aspergillosis-associated hyphae and eosinophilic body cysts in the active chronic inflammatory connective tissue. All these results are a strong confirmation of our diagnosis.