In this case report, we present a 37-year-old man with known unoperated secundum ASD and Eisenmenger syndrome. The patient was diagnosed for the first time 6 months before, with symptoms of typical angina on exertion that had worsened for the last 2 months. He was referred due to resource limitations from another hospital to the CHD division for follow-up in the cardiology department outpatient clinic and underwent scheduled examination. The patient had no other medical history, no family history of congenital disease and no prior invasive procedures. Physical examination showed a cyanotic appearance with finger clubbing, 86% oxygen saturation by peripheral pulse oximetry, signs of right heart congestion, cardiomegaly, accentuated P2, and pansystolic murmur at the lower left sternal border, with Carvallo’s sign on auscultation. The haematology parameters showed secondary erythrocytosis with a haemoglobin level of 19.5 g/dL and a haematocrit fraction of 55.5%. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a regular sinus rhythm with right axis deviation (RAD), right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH), deep T-wave inversion in the inferior and anterior lead suggestive of ischemia or strain, and incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB; Fig. ). Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with prominent pulmonary conus and increased pulmonary vascularity . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed secundum ASD with bidirectional shunt, mainly right to left (R to L) shunt, D-shaped left ventricle (LV), dilation of the right chamber (right atrium [RA] and right ventricle [RV]) and left atrium (LA), normal systolic function with paradoxical septal movement, moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR), and a marked dilated main PA (diameter of 48 mm; Fig. ). The TTE examination conclusion based on ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of PH was secundum ASD with a high probability of PH and marked main pulmonary artery (MPA) dilation.
Based on the presented data, the patient was scheduled for elective right heart catheterization (RHC), as well as angiography due to suspected ischemia suggesting a mechanical complication due to marked dilation of the PA. The RHC revealed secundum ASD with bidirectional (mainly R to L) shunt, mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAp) pre–oxygen test of 78 mmHg decreasing to 70 mmHg after oxygen test, with low flow (flow ratio pre–oxygen test of 0.98 and post-oxygen test of 1.09) and high resistance (pulmonary vascular resistance pre–oxygen test of 35.3 decreasing to 31.1 Wood units after oxygen test), with a non-reactive oxygen test as the conclusion. Angiography revealed severe stenosis at the ostium part of the LMCA, without significant stenosis at other coronary arteries. To confirm the diagnosis, the patient was then sent to the radiology department and underwent a contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) scan. The cardiac CT showed a dilated MPA (56.8 × 51.9 mm in diameter), MPA-to-aorta ratio of > 1.5, left main (LM) take-off angle of 32° and severe LMCA compression. Based on coronary angiography and cardiac CT findings, the patient was then referred to a coronary interventionist for further assessment and intervention. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) evaluation showed dynamic compression in the ostium LM without atherosclerosis . After a thorough examination, the patient was diagnosed with LM compression syndrome due to dilated pulmonary artery caused by the severe form of PH Eisenmenger syndrome.
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with a new-generation zotarolimus-eluting stent, size 4.5 × 22 mm, was successfully implanted with IVUS guidance, and the evaluation showed good stent placement .
The patient was discharged after 7 days of hospitalization with no complication and given dual antiplatelet therapy (81 mg of acetylsalicylic acid and 75 mg of clopidogrel once daily). PH was treated with a combination of sildenafil, a potent and selective inhibitor of phosphodiesterase type 5; and beraprost, a prostacyclin analogue. On clinical follow-up a week and then a month after hospitalization, the patient showed no recurrence of angina symptoms and was scheduled for evaluation 3 months after the procedure. Angiography evaluation after 3 months revealed no significant stenosis and good patency of the stent. The patient underwent routine follow-up in the outpatient clinic of the CHD division, with marked improvement in regular activities and good compliance.