A 35-year-old female with initial weight of 103.4 kg and body mass index of 35.8 kg/m2 was considered for bariatric surgery due to significant impairment of quality of life and failure of intensive lifestyle modification to maintain weight loss for 1 year. Her past medical history was notable for hypothyroidism, which was controlled with 0.5 mg of Levothyroxine daily. She did not have diabetes, hypertension, or any other obesity-related co-morbidities except fatty liver grade 1 with an increased liver span of 18.3 cm found on abdominal ultrasonography. Nutritional evaluation, including micronutrient measurements, was unremarkable.
Her menstrual cycles had been regular and she had no history of infertility. Her obstetric history was significant for one full-term pregnancy ended by an uncomplicated elective cesarean section 7 years ago and one first-trimester spontaneous abortion 6 months ago. She was also found to have a negative serum β-hCG level 1 week before surgery.
She underwent successful and uncomplicated laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, creating a gastric tube over a 36-F bougie with the exclusion of 80% of the stomach, and was discharged on postoperative day two. She missed her first menses on the third week following surgery and was found to have positive serum β-hCG levels at that time. She discontinued oral hormonal contraceptives 3 months before surgery for personal reasons and her last menstrual period was precisely 11 days before surgery. Retrospectively, she acknowledged a history of unprotected sexual intercourse 3 days before surgery for which she took a dose of 1 mg of Levonorgestrel + Ethinyl Estradiol 100 mcg (2 pills of Contraceptive HD/Ovocept-HD) within 1 h after intercourse and then repeated it after 12 h. Two months later an intrauterine gestation of approximately 11 weeks (CRL = 41 mm) was identified by an obstetric ultrasound. Although adequate counseling was provided for the couple regarding the potential adverse effects of surgery and rapid weight loss phase on pregnancy outcome, they decided to continue with the pregnancy.
She was monitored throughout her pregnancy for proper weight gain, nutritional supplementation and surveillance, and for fetal wellbeing by a multidisciplinary team including high-risk obstetrics, bariatric surgeons, and nutritionists. She was also prescribed prenatal vitamins Naturemade® tablets daily (containing 27 mg ferrous fumarate, 11 mg zinc, 800 mcg folic acid, 5.2 mcg vitamin B12, vitamins A, B group, C, D, E, K, and biotin) and one Calcicare tablet daily (200 IU vitamin D, 400 mg calcium, 100 mg magnesium, and 4 mg zinc) up to the end of pregnancy. Her pregnancy continued uneventfully, and she underwent an elective cesarean section at 39-weeks to deliver a healthy full-term girl weighing 2900 g (between 10th and 25th percentile), and 51 cm in length with a head circumference of 33 cm. The infant reached all expected milestones during the first 6 months of her life, and the mother achieved 94.4% excess body weight loss. Her BMI at 12 months post-surgery were 25.6 kg/m2 .