A 34-year-old Chinese male who had received 3 years of continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) therapy was admitted to our hospital with complaints of abdominal pain and vomiting. He has been diagnosed as having type 1 diabetes mellitus for 15 years and received conservative treatment, including treatments with insulin injection and antihypertensive drugs. Unfortunately, diabetic nephropathy gradually progressed, and he began receiving CAPD for end-stage renal disease at 31 years old. One month prior to hospitalization, the patient had frequent diarrhea which was relieved by norfloxacin (0.1g, every day, P.O.). One day prior to admission, he developed abdominal pain, vomiting but afebrile, followed by a cloudy peritoneal dialysate on the day of admission.
Laboratory investigation revealed white blood cell count of 6.76×103/ul, C-reactive protein (CRP) 44.67 mg/L (0–10 mg/L), and procalcitonin 4.96 ng/mL (0–0.5 ng/mL). The peritoneal dialysate was cloudy, and microscopic examination showed a concentration of 5.45×103 cells/ul with 87.5% of neutrophils. In addition, gram-positive rods were detected in the peritoneal dialysis fluid cultures, suggesting the development of CAPD-related peritonitis.
Peritonitis remains one of the most serious and life-threatening complications of CAPD. It is closely related to permanent peritoneal membrane damage, as well as to the necessity of catheter removal and conversion to hemodialysis. So, the patient was treated empirically with meropenem (1g, every 12 h, i.p.) to resistant bacterial infection and fluconazole (100mg, every day, P.O.) to prevent fungal infections. According to the International Society of Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) guidelines in 2016, the Committee recommended that vancomycin should preferably be administered intermittently (in one exchange every 5–7 days) and not continuously (in every exchange). In our case, the dosage and frequency of vancomycin was also administered empirically and based on clinical experience (2g, i.p. on day 1, day 4, day 9 and day 18). After 5 days of antibiotic treatment, the peritoneal dialysis fluid was clear and the white blood cells count recovered to 67 cells/ul with 6% of neutrophils. On the 18th hospital day, the patient was uneventfully discharged after a full course of antimicrobial therapy.
As described above, the peritoneal dialysate cultures were positive in aerobic bottles of the Bact/Alert 3D system (bioMérieux, France) after 29.2h of incubation. Anaerobic cultures were negative after 5 days of incubation. The specimens from the positive bottles were plated onto Columbia blood plate medium and incubated at 35°C in 5% CO2 chamber. After 48h of incubation, odourless, yellow-greyish, dry and membrane-like colonies were observed on blood agar . Gram staining showed straight, gram-positive rods .
The isolated strain was identified as Tsukamurella species by MALDI-TOF MS with a confidence level of 99.9% . Further identification was carried out by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. We performed PCR sequencing for 16S rRNA using the forward primer 27F (5’-AGAGTTTGATCATGGCTCAG-3’) and the reverse primer 1492R (5’-TACGGCTACCTTGTACGACTT-3’). The sequence were compared with the 16S rRNA gene sequence of known bacteria in the GenBank database. The concordance rates were as follows: T. inchonensis ATCC700082, 100% (1381/1381 bps); T. inchonensis G-53 KY949477.1100% (1381/1381 bps). By constructing a phylogenetic tree, we found that the isolate was located in the same branch as T. inchonensis . The nucleotide data were registered in the NCBI database with accession numbers of ON004908 (16S ribosomal RNA).
An anti-microbial susceptibility test was performed using dry plate broth microdilution panels. We used cation-adjusted Mueller Hinton Broth and cultured for 24 hours under 35°C ambient condition. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of the tested antimicrobials are shown in . The susceptibilities were interpreted by the criteria established by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI), referring to the criteria for Nocardia species. The strain was sensitive to imipenem, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin and linezolid, but resistant to SXT. However, T. inchonensis isolated from our case show intermediate-level resistance to vancomycin and resistance to cephalosporins, which is usually an empiric antibiotic regimen for peritonitis.