A 41-year-old man was transferred to our emergency department (ED) with a deteriorated level of consciousness. The patient had a cardiac resynchronization therapy defibrillator implanted for dilated cardiomyopathy 8 years prior and was treated with paroxetine for major depression. He did not have underlying bronchial asthma or episodes of acute exacerbation of cardiac failure. The patient’s family reported that he had ingested 300 mg carvedilol and 7 mg lorazepam, which were his usual medications, along with alcohol, in a suicide attempt after a quarrel with his mother 8 h before arriving at the hospital.
The patient’s vital signs on arrival to the ED were as follows: blood pressure, 72/44 mmHg; pulse, 90 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 26 breaths/min; oxygen saturation, 80% on ambient air; and Glasgow Coma Scale score 13 (E3V4M6). On physical examination, the wheezing was audible with normal cardiac sounds. Arterial blood gas analysis under 5-L facial mask oxygen showed mild respiratory acidosis (pH 7.32; PaO2, 92.1 mmHg; PaCO2, 52.0 mmHg; and HCO3, 26.2 mmol/L). The level of B-type natriuretic peptide was 9.3 pg/mL and other laboratory examinations were within the normal limits. Chest X-ray showed no infiltrate or cardiac enlargement . The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm followed by ventricular pacing . We suspected that the hypotension was due to hypovolemia, because ultrasonography showed a collapsed inferior vena cava and the blood pressure increased to 90 mmHg following administration of 500 mL fluid.
The wheezing and hypoxia persisted, requiring oxygen supplementation. The patient was admitted to our intensive care unit for continued monitoring of respiratory status. Cardiac ultrasonography showed reasonable left ventricular contraction (ejection fraction rate of 45–50%) and respiratory collapse of the inferior vena cava, indicating a hypovolemic status. In the absence of a known diagnosis of bronchial asthma, we suspected that the wheezing or bronchospastic reaction was triggered by carvedilol. The patient was treated with inhaled procaterol hydrochloride hydrate on demand in addition to activated charcoal. The patient’s mental status normalized on day 2. The wheezing and hypoxia gradually improved and disappeared by the morning of day 3. The course of the hospital stay was uneventful without bradycardia or hypotension, and the patient was discharged on day 5. Because there has been no recurrence of wheezing for 2 years, a diagnosis of wheezing caused by carvedilol intoxication was supported.