A 57-year-old woman presented with a chronic cough and dyspnea. The patient had a history of a total hysterectomy for leiomyoma 8 years ago. The histological diagnosis was benign leiomyoma. A thoracic computed-tomography scan (CT-scan) showed a 4 cm solitary, intraparenchymal and proximal nodular tumor of the right lung. The histological analysis of biopsies from this nodule revealed a benign leiomyoma of the lung. At multidisciplinary meeting (MDM), a regular surveillance has been decided as the surgery would be a total pneumonectomy given the proximal location of the tumor. The patient has been lost to follow-up as she did not come back to hospital for her regular surveillance. However, a year later, she was back to hospital for increased cough, dyspnea and a chest pain. The physical examination revealed a shortness of breath with wheezing at respiratory auscultation of the right side of the thoracic wall. There was no other organomegaly detected. A new CT-scan showed a significant increase in size (of about 4 cm) of the initial tumor discovered a year ago, with compression of the right bronchus . A leiomyosarcomatous transformation has been suspected and biopsies have been performed. The histopathological analysis disclosed the diagnosis of a benign metastasizing leiomyoma (BML) of the lung. The prescription of an anti-aromatase drug has been decided at the MDM for the patient (letrozole 2.5 mg, 1 tablet per day). Six months after this treatment, the patient had no clinical symptoms and the tumor had stable size (8 cm) on CT-scan .
The histological analysis has been performed on a paraffin-embedded and formalin fixed tissue stained by hematoxylin–eosin-saffron (HES). The immunohistochemical analysis has also been performed on paraffin-embedded and formalin fixed tissue. We have used the antibodies according to the manufacturer’s guidelines, with an automated immunohistochemical stainer (Ventana BenchMark ULTRA®). At our pathology department, for all antibodies, positive and negative controls were routinely performed, including processing of normal tissue or tumor sections known to be positive (normal breast tissue, breast carcinomas, normal uterine wall, normal nerve tissue, etc.). We have used these antibodies: anti-smooth muscle actin (1A4, Cell Marque®), anti-desmin (DE-R-11, Ventana®), anti-Ki-67 (30-9, Ventana®), anti-Estrogen receptor (SP1, Ventana®), anti-Progesterone receptor (1E2, Ventana®), anti-CD34 (QBEnd/10, Ventana®), anti-S100P (16/f5, Cell Marque®).
The histological examination showed a similar pattern with the initial biopsies submitted previously. It consisted of a benign proliferation made of spindle cells disposed in intersected fascicles beneath the respiratory mucosa. Tumor cells had elongated cigar-like nucleis with minimal atypia and without mitotic figures. Tumor cells had amphophilic to eosinophilic cytoplasm with ill-defined borders . There was no tumor necrosis.
At immunohistochemistry, tumor cells showed a diffuse and strong staining for desmin, smooth muscle actin (SMA) , oestrogen receptor and progesterone receptor. Tumor cells were negative for CD34 and S-100 protein. The Ki-67 index was low, approximately 5% . Based on these histopathological patterns, the diagnosis of a benign metastasizing leiomyoma (BML) of the lung has been made.