A 4-month-old Japanese boy was referred to our institute for stridor that had been present since he was 2 months of age. Prenatal ultrasonography had revealed an RAA but no structural heart disease . He was born at 38 weeks with a birth weight of 3066 g. At 2 months of age, he suffered from bronchitis and was admitted to the hospital; since then, he had shown stridor. A fiber laryngoscopy examination revealed no findings of congenital laryngeal stridor.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed an RAA, a retroesophageal left subclavian artery (LSCA), and Kommerell’s diverticulum (KD) leading to tracheal compression . No intracardiac anomaly was detected by transthoracic echocardiography. Vascular ring repair was performed when the patient was 5 months old.
Under general anesthesia, bronchoscopy showed pulsatile compression from the right and left sides of the distal trachea. With the patient in a right lateral decubitus position, a muscle-sparing thoracotomy was performed. The chest was entered through the third intercostal space. The ligamentum arteriosum was divided. The 12-mm-diameter KD was resected, and the ostium on the descending aorta was closed with a running suture in two layers under the aortic partial clamp. The LSCA was transected at its origin from the KD and was anastomosed to the left carotid artery.
Once the left carotid artery was cross-clamped, the regional oxygen saturation in the left cerebral hemisphere was ~ 20% lower than that on the right side, and the lowest value was ~ 40%. Hypoventilation with high-concentration oxygen was then applied to achieve hypercapnia during the LSCA anastomosis. At the end of the surgery, bronchoscopy revealed that the pulsatile compression of the distal trachea had disappeared.
Postoperative CT demonstrated the release of tracheal compression . The patient was discharged 12 days after the operation, with no complications. At 1 year after the operation, the patient was asymptomatic, and no right-left difference in the blood pressure of the upper extremities was detected.
The pathological examination of the resected KD revealed a marked difference in the arterial wall thickness between the aortic side and the distal side, severe disruption and fragmentation of elastic fibers associated with a disarray of smooth muscle cells in the tunica media, and cystic medial necrosis with mucoid extracellular matrix deposition .