A 20-year-old woman with a recent (6 months) diagnosis of idiopathic chronic anterior uveitis was referred to our cornea service because of persistent central corneal edema in her left eye. The patient was being treated at another hospital for anterior uveitis, which was treated with topical steroid therapy, but after 3 months, the central corneal edema developed. At the first examination, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in the right eye and hand movement in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed a normal anterior segment, a clear lens in the right eye, and central corneal edema with an extensive central DMD, posterior synechiae, and dense cataract in the left eye. No signs of active intraocular inflammation were visible through the paracentral cornea. The intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg in the right eye and 20 mmHg in the left eye. No iris atrophy was present. We tried to perform an endothelial cell count, but given the condition of the cornea, the machine was unable to perform it. An AS-OCT scan was performed, confirming DMD in the central cornea. A customized uveitis workup was planned.
The patient was treated with oral 25 mg Prednisone once a day (tapering down the dose over 14 days), 125 mg oral Acetazolamide thrice a day, topical Dexamethasone four times a day (tapering down the dose over ten days), topical Timolol-dorzolamide twice a day, and a topical hypertonic saline solution four times a day. After two months, given the persistent DMD, an intracameral injection of 20% sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) and an inferior basal iridectomy were performed . Complete re-attachment was not achieved , so a new 20% SF6 injection was performed, obtaining a definite resolution of the DM at subsequent follow-up. Slit-lamp examination at three weeks follow-up showed significant fibrotic changes at the posterior corneal stroma–Descemet membrane interface, which was responsible for limited visual recovery . BCVA after treatment was 20/28. We performed an endothelial cell count that showed a low endothelial cell count .