A 22-year-old man presented with a history of breathing difficulty during exercise along with haemoptysis. One year prior, he had experienced a similar episode of breathing difficulty, requiring ventilator management owing to haemoptysis. Computed tomography (CT) at that time indicated diffuse alveolar haemorrhage, and echocardiography showed severe apical asynergy. He was successfully treated with supportive care. His family history was significant with his father’s undergoing ectopic paraganglioma resection.
His blood pressure was normal without other specific symptoms. Past medical history was indicative of cardiomyopathy induced by excessive catecholamine. Further investigation revealed an abnormally high serum noradrenalin value (1.70 ng/mL) and normetanephrine in the urine (1.6 mg/day upon 24-h collection). Other laboratory data, including plasma catecholamine and urinary vanillylmandelic acid levels, were normal. Radiological examination did not reveal any respiratory lesions; however, contrast CT unexpectedly indicated lobular tumorous lesions with internal homogeneity that enhanced aridly, followed by a delayed anterior inferior vena cava (IVC) washout. T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 28 × 32 × 50 mm tumour with slightly higher intensity than the muscle between the IVC and pancreatic head . Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy revealed strong accumulation at the site, which was consistent with presence of a tumour , leading to a diagnosis of paraganglioma. After blood pressure stabilization (within 130/80 mmHg) with alpha-adrenergic antagonist and doxazocin, tumour resection was performed. An appropriate volume of fluids was administered in the hour preceding the resection. During surgery, a 30-mm tumour was found below the retroperitoneum on the caudal side of the mesocolon . Despite intraoperative blood pressure fluctuations of up to 200 mmHg, surgery was completed without significant complications. Anaesthesia time, operation time, blood loss, and urine output during the surgery were 210 min, 110 min, 10 mL, and 1250 mL, respectively.
His postoperative recovery was generally good, and he was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8. Pathological findings demonstrated a well-circumscribed, lobulated mass 42 × 28 mm in size. The microscopic findings showed diffuse patterns of clustered oval cells abundant with eosinophilic cytoplasm separated by delicate fibrovascular stroma. Immunostaining was synaptophysin-positive, S100 protein-positive in the supporting cells, and chromogranin A-positive, leading to a diagnosis of paraganglioma . Hormone levels returned to normal after surgery. No malignant findings or any apparent signs of recurrence were observed during the 5-year follow-up period since surgery.