Sudden onset chest pain.
A previously healthy 33-year-old Hispanic female with no significant medical history presented to the emergency room with sudden onset of chest pain while she was cooking dinner. The pain originated in the neck area on the left side and mid-back region, radiated to the anterior chest, was 10/10 intensity, pressure-like, lasted for 15 min, and resolved with aspirin. Chest pain was associated with nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, shortness of breath, and lightheadedness. A month ago, she delivered her third child by normal vaginal delivery at 37 wk of gestation. The review of systems was otherwise unremarkable.
The patient had no prior history of coronary artery disease, aortic dissection, or pulmonary embolism.
She had no significant social history including smoking, alcohol or recreational substance use. She denied use of any over the counter medicines and denied use of any hormonal contraceptives before. Her only medications included prenatal vitamins and iron supplements. There was no history of sudden cardiac death or early myocardial infarction in the family.
Her physical examination was unremarkable. Blood pressure was 104/56 mmHg and heart rate was 82 beats per minute. Equal intensity pulses were palpable in both arms. There were no cardiac murmurs, jugular venous distension, crackles on auscultatory lung areas, and pedal edema.
Laboratory markers showed low hemoglobin of 11.6 g/dL (normal 12-15.5 g/dL) , white blood cell count of 6 × 109 cells/L, creatinine of 0.6 mg/dL, ESR of 16 mm/h (normal range, 0-20 mm/h) and CRP of 2.7 mg/L (normal range, 0-10 mg/L). Serial Troponins (Troponin T) were abnormal and trended up from 0.01 ng/mL and peaked at 15.5 ng/mL.
Her initial electrocardiogram (EKG) was normal. Subsequent EKGs showed dynamic T wave inversions. Chest radiography did not reveal mediastinal widening or any fractures and dislocations. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed 48% LVEF, moderate-sized apical wall motion abnormality with akinesia of the anteroseptal segments.