We reported the case of a 50-year-old female, who presented at the hospital for intermittent pain in the left knee joint accompanied by movement limitation for 9 years and aggravated 1 year earlier. The disease had started insidiously in the absence of an obvious cause. The symptoms were aggravated after standing or walking for a long time but remitted after rest, accompanied by noose and jamming. The patient subsequently underwent a digital radiography (DR) examination and received conservative treatment in a local hospital. Unexpectedly, her pain worsened so she sought medical care in our hospital. The patient had no previous history, personal history, family history of hereditary tendencies or infectious diseases.
The general conditions were normal through physical examinations. The specialist examinations presented normal skin color in the left knee joint. No subcutaneous congestion, venous irritation, or sinus tract was revealed and the skin temperature was normal. Tenderness was reported in the interarticular space of the left knee. The floating patella test of the left knee joint was negative (−). The dorsalis pedis artery was palpable and the skin sensation was normal. Range of motion of the left knee revealed: 30° ~ 0° ~ 110°, left McMurray sign (+), anterior and posterior drawer tests (−), Lachman test (−), lateral stress test (+), patellofemoral grinding test of the right knee (−), and tibiofemoral grinding test of both knees (−). The muscle strength of both knee extensors and flexors was at V level. No obvious abnormality was observed in other limbs. The preliminary diagnosis was a loose body of the knee joint (left lateral).
Imaging examinations included an anteroposterior DR and an MRI plain scan of the left knee joint . After a case discussion in the department, the patient was introduced to surgical treatment. Preoperative chest CT plain scan findings revealed several scattered stripes and minor patchy shadows in both lungs, with unclear boundaries. The patient was therefore diagnosed with probable chronic inflammation in both lungs. Laboratory examinations indicated a mild increase of leukocytes in urine. The levels of total cholesterol, apolipoprotein A1, apolipoprotein B, low density lipoprotein, and free fatty acid in the blood were increased slightly. The lymphocyte count and percentage were decreased whereas the neutrophil percentage was elevated. The rest were normal.
Arthroscopic surgical exploration was performed 2 days later and intraoperative samples were delivered for pathological examination. The procedure was “arthroscopic knee joint synovectomy + arthroscopic removal of the knee joint free body + arthroscopic resection of the knee lesions + arthroscopic knee joint examination + therapeutic drug injection for the knee joint” . The detailed procedures, intraoperative findings, and treatment were as follows:
After successful anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position with the left knee in 90° of flexion. A 0.8 cm incision was made for entry on both sides of the horizontal patellar ligament to the articular cavity from the joint space of the left knee joint. An arthroscope was inserted from the lateral entry to examine the articular cavity orderly. During the exploration, the patellar articular surface of the knee joint was roughly distributed and seriously degenerated. The medial femoral condyle and the cartilage of the corresponding tibial articular surface were partially injured. More synovial folds were revealed in the lateral intersulcus. Synovial hyperplasia was found in the articular cavity. Numerous free rice-like bodies were visible in the suprapatellar bursa and the intercondylar fossa. Probe examination revealed the presence of anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments. The lateral meniscus structure was fine, while the medial meniscus was worn and degenerative. The posterior external and posterior medial approaches were available and plenty of free rice bodies were explored in the posterior articular capsule. The remaining structures of the knee joints were intact. Tissues with synovial hyperplasia were removed and the cartilage was separated. The free bodies in the suprapatellar bursa, intercondylar fossa, and posterior joint bursa were removed. The articular cavity was rinsed with a large amount of normal saline and withdrew the arthroscopic devices following the presence of all devices was counted. The skin was sutured layer by layer, and ropivacaine and sodium hyaluronate were injected into the articular cavity after anastomosis. An elastic bandage was applied to the lower limb and the patient was transferred to PACU until recovery from anesthesia .