A 76-year-old man with known history of chronic kidney disease, cardiac disease, hypertension and chronic obstructive lung disease was admitted to our hospital with pulmonary edema. The patient had kidney disease of unknown etiology with baseline serum creatinine of 4.0 mg/dL (calculated glomerular filtration rate, 14 ml/min/1.73 m2) and was not on dialysis.
On examination, blood pressure was 170/75 mm Hg and respiratory rate 24/min and laboured. He required accessory muscles for respiration. There were bilateral rales over both lung fields. His heart and abdominal examination was not remarkable and there was no peripheral edema. Serum sodium was 143 mEq/L; potassium, 5.9 mEq/L; blood urea nitrogen, 70 mg/dL; serum creatinine, 5,0 mg/dL; albumin, 3.7 g/dL. Hemoglobin level was 11.8 g/dL, hematocrit 35%, and white blood cell (WBC) count was 12 × 103/μL. Urinalysis showed proteinuria, with protein of 30 mg/dL, and moderate blood, with 20 to 30 red blood cells/high-power field. Chest X-ray showed pulmonary edema. Renal ultrasound revealed small right kidney. Patient refused dialysis treatment and was admitted to ICU. On the third hospital day he remained volume overloaded and hypertensive despite of intravenous furosemide, his creatinine rose to 5.5 mg/dL, urea nitrogen to 91 mg/dL, and patient consented to HD. After two HD sessions, his volume status and blood pressure improved but the patient complained of mild right upper quadrant abdominal pain and nausea at the end of his second treatment. He was afebrile and denied having diarrhea, chills or vomiting. On examination, his abdomen was slightly distended with hypoactive bowel sounds and right upper quadrant tenderness. An abdominal computer tomography (CT) scan revealed distended gallbladder with sludge and diverticulosis of the sigmoid colon. Upper endoscopy (EGD) showed gastritis. Intravenous antibiotics with ceftriaxone and metronidazole started for presumed acute acalculous cholecystitis. Over next week the patient had few hypotensive episodes during HD with systolic blood pressure of 70–80 mm Hg associated with marked increase of abdominal pain. Rebound abdominal tenderness and leukocytosis with WBC count of 24.5 × 103/μL with 90% neutrophiles noted. Repeated abdominal CT scan with intravenous contrast showed mild ascites and increased small bowel distention . Hepatobiliary (HIDA) scan was unremarkable. A diagnostic laparoscopy converted to exploratory laparotomy revealed ischemic small bowel of the distal ileum with at least two areas of necrosis that was resected with anastomosis and insertion of feeding catheter per jejunostomy tube. Histopathology examination of the small bowel demonstrated transmural ischemic necrosis with hemorrhages and non-occluded mesenteric artery . Patient maid a steady recovery, and was discharged on the 11th post-operative day.