A 41-year-old pregnant Japanese woman, gravida 4, para 3, underwent three consecutive cesarean sections. She became aware of abdominal distention 3 months after her third cesarean section, which was performed in a private clinic. Therefore, she visited the general hospital, and she was diagnosed as having an abdominal wall incisional hernia . She underwent an operation of hernia repair with use of monofilament polypropylene mesh 7 months after her third cesarean section. However, a surgical site infection associated with the mesh occurred 2 months after the hernia repair. Although she received intravenous infusions of antibiotics for 14 days, pus continued to discharge from a cutaneous fistula. She was found to be pregnant at that time.
The patient and her spouse did not desire termination of the pregnancy. She was referred to Kobe University Hospital at 13 weeks and 2 days of gestation, at which time she was found not to have fever, abdominal pain, or peritoneal irritation signs. Her body mass index prior to pregnancy was 24.4 kg/m2. Her white blood cell count (8800/μl) and serum C-reactive protein level (0.87 mg/dl) were slightly increased. A cutaneous fistula was present in the lower abdominal wall, and pus discharged from the fistula . Streptococcus agalactiae and Peptostreptococcus micros were isolated by bacterial culture of pus. Magnetic resonance imaging performed at 14 weeks of gestation clearly demonstrated an accumulation of pus surrounding the surgical mesh .
Surgeons performed an operation to remove the infected mesh at 16 weeks and 3 days of gestation. During the surgery, it was found that an infection had spread to the soft tissue surrounding the mesh and that the infected tissue strongly adhered to the bladder, omentum, and small intestine. The bladder wall and the serosa of the small intestine developed defects during the adhesiolysis, resulting in a 4-cm, full-thickness opening in the dome of the bladder and a defect of the serosa of the small intestine with a 2-cm width. The bladder mucosa was repaired by using interrupted sutures with 0.2-mm polydioxanone monofilament sutures, and the muscular layer and the serosa of the bladder was repaired by using a continuous suture with 0.2-mm multifilament absorbable sutures. The defect of serosa of the small intestine was repaired by interrupted sutures with 0.2-mm multifilament absorbable sutures. An interrupted one-layer mass closure with 0.35-mm polydioxanone monofilament sutures was used on the peritoneum and abdominal fasciae, and a vertical mattress suture with 0.2-mm nylon sutures was used for skin closure.
The patient received intravenous infusions of ampicillin/sulbactam (12 g/day) and ritodrine hydrochloride for prophylaxis of uterine contraction for 2 weeks. After this operation, the pus discharge completely stopped. The patient was discharged from the hospital 32 days after the operation, when her white blood cell count and serum C-reactive protein level had returned to normal without a uterine contraction or a fever. Neither hernia nor infection at a surgical site recurred during the rest of her pregnancy as well as during the puerperal period.
A cesarean section with an upper abdominal incision, followed by a transverse uterine fundal incision, was planned with the patient’s informed consent. A female newborn weighting 2478 g with Apgar scores of 9 (1 minute) and 9 (5 minutes) was delivered successfully by cesarean section at 37 weeks and 3 days of gestation. The same procedure used in the previous operation to remove the infected mesh was performed for the upper abdominal wall closure. The patient’s blood loss volume was 820 ml. The patient and her child were discharged 8 days later, and the remainder of the hospital course was uneventful. However, an incisional hernia of the upper abdominal wall occurred 4 months after this cesarean section . Seven months after the cesarean section, surgeons repaired this hernia by open surgery without use of surgical mesh and by the same procedure for abdominal wall closure used in the previous operations. The incisional hernia of the abdominal wall did not recur for at least 10 months thereafter.