A 52-year-old female was referred to us with diffuse thyroid swelling since 8 months. The patient was not having dysphagia, dyspnoea or hoarseness of voice, with no significant medical illness in the past. Pertinent physical examination revealed a large lobulated mass on anterior aspect of the neck with separate fusiform swelling laterally in the right side of neck; initially it appeared to be a nodal metastasis. Her pulse was 88 beats/min, blood pressure was 136/78 mmHg and normal heart sound with no audible murmur. Fine-needle aspiration cytological examination revealed clusters of atypical follicular cells. The serum thyroglobulin level was elevated to 23,500 ng/ml. Axial post contrast computed tomography (CT) scan images of the neck demonstrated diffuse large thyroid growth involving both lobes and intra-venular extension of the malignant thrombus into the IJV, left innominate vein, SVC and reaching to the RA, occupying 80% of the total RA volume with suspicious adherence (B). Though CT-scan was showing extensive tumor thrombus, clinically patient was not having symptoms of SVC syndrome or cardiac failure. Taib et al. described the importance of the positive ring sign, which indicates possibility of surgical removal of thrombus by thrombectomy. Coronal reformatted post contrast enhanced CT image demonstrated a large heterogeneous enhancing soft tissue mass replacing the thyroid gland with venular extension through the superior thyroid vein into the IJV and through the inferior thyroid vein into the innominate vein. The same thrombus was extending down to reach SVC and RA (A, C). Furthermore on metastatic work-up there was no evidence of pulmonary embolism or distant metastasis.
2D echo-cardiography for cardiac evaluation showed tumor thrombus formation as mentioned above. Surprisingly rests of the cardiac functions were normal.
Only few cases of thyroid carcinoma with an extensive tumor thrombus in the atrium have been reported in the literature. Yamagami et al. described a single staged approach in a similar case of thyroid carcinoma with RA thrombus . We anticipated complex surgical procedure, since thrombus was adherent to the anterior wall of RA. We planned surgery in two sequential stages by a team of head-neck and cardiovascular surgeons: Stage 1, Median sternotomy for removal of RA & SVC Thrombus. Stage 2, Total thyroidectomy and extensive thrombectomy of neck veins.
Stage 1:- To avoid the sudden death due to pulmonary embolism, it was decided to resect the intracardiac extension of the tumor before going to definitive neck surgery. Median sternotomy was performed and pericardium was opened. Patient was given heparin sodium 2 mg/kg before handling great vessels. Aortic cannulation was performed for cardio-pulmonary bypass purpose. Inferior vena cava (IVC) and right innominate vein was also cannulated with minimal manipulation of RA. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established under normothermia with IVC drain and ascending aortic perfusion. Patient’s body temperature was reduced to 22ºC and heart beating was arrested with cardioplegia. Cardiopulmonary bypass was stopped and Total circulatory arrest achieved. Right atriotomy was performed and tumor adhesions were separated from RA wall. SVC venotomy was done by separate incision and tumor thrombus along with its extensions was delivered out through right atriotomy (B). Right IJV & right inferior thyroid vein openings into innominate vein were closed using intraluminal purse string sutures. SVC and RA incisions were closed separately using running sutures (A). Patient was slowly re-warmed to normal body temperature i.e. 37 °C and cardiopulmonary bypass was started. Total circulatory arrest time was 22 min, patient recovered without any complications.
Stage 2: Neck surgery for thyroid cancer was planned after complete recovery from cardio-thoracic procedure. U-shaped neck incision was given and skin flap was raised. There was diffuse thyroid swelling with distinctly seen separate lateral neck swelling on right side, which was thrombus in the IJV . Prophylactic Bilateral neck and central compartment dissection was done; which was followed by dissection for total thyroidectomy. Right IJV was opened with proximal and distal control and tumor thrombus extraction was done (A). While dissecting Inferior Thyroid vein we found 2nd tumor thrombus, so again inferior thyroid venotomy performed and tumor thrombus was extracted through the venotomy (B). Neck veins ostia (IJV and Inferior thyroid vein) draining into right innominate were obliterated by using purse string suture at the time of previous cardiothoracic part, so there was no fear of accidental migration of tumor thrombus into the SVC.
Total thyroidectomy specimen was removed in continuity with IJV and inferior thyroid vein thrombus. Final pathological diagnosis was follicular thyroid carcinoma with extensive intravenous tumor thrombosis. (T4b, N0, M0, stage IVA).
Cardiothoracic surgery part was done first followed by 4 days recovery in intensive care unit. Neck surgery was performed after 10 days of first surgery. Patient recovered without any complication and discharged from the hospital 7 days after the second surgery, total hospital stay was around 17 days.
Patient followed up closely, and after 1 month, radio-Iodine isotope-scan followed by Radioactive-iodine-131 (RAI-131) ablation with 100 mCi dose was done. Patient was monitored with serum thyroglobulin levels every third month. Patient is asymptomatic with no evidence of recurrence on RAI scan at the end of 12 months follow-up.