A 73-year-old cachectic Asian man (Iranian) presented with a general feeling of being unwell and an acute loss of vision on his left eye accompanied by a severe headache. He did not have pain in any other parts of his body. He had a history of skin lesions on his buttocks, back and arms that were painless, dry and mobile. A malignant process that was mainly pancreatic in origin was thus suspected.
Through a brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) scan on the patient, multiple brain masses with contrast enhancement and edema were detected . His chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed few cavities in the upper lobes of his lung. Results of his abdominal CT and ultrasonography scans were also normal. The patient underwent lumbar puncture, which was negative for TB in direct smear or polymerase chain reaction tests. The culture and cytology of the specimen also showed a negative result. Tumor markers such as PSA, CA125, CA 19-9, and AFP were all within normal ranges. Meanwhile, his elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (first hour was 70 mm/hr) and highly reactive C-reactive protein were of significance. Fine needle aspiration of the patient's skin lesions revealed evidence of bacterial infection but was negative for mycobacterium tuberculosis.
The PPD (purified protein derivative) skin test was positive and showed 20-mm indurations. A Tc-99 m-methylene diphosphonate bone scan demonstrated multiple regions of intense activity on the patient's appendicular and axial skeleton, including his skull (right occipitoparietal and right orbitofrontal areas), left clavicle, right lower sternal border, right sternoclavicular region, ribs, right distal humerus, left forearm, wrists, hands, lateral condyle of the right femur, right tibia, right ankle and right first metatarsophalangeal joint. All were suggestive of metastatic involvement .
Based on the patient's clinical presentation, laboratory, radiological and scinitigraphic findings, a presumptive diagnosis of TB was made and quadruple anti-TB chemotherapy (rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) was started. The patient later showed a marked improvement with weight gain and increased appetite after one month. Six months post-treatment, he was doing extremely well and had already returned to his normal daily life.