A 71-year-old male with past medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes, stage 3 chronic kidney disease, kidney stones, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm status post distal pancreatectomy, and 50-pack-year smoking history, was incidentally found on surveillance chest CT of pulmonary nodules to have bilateral thyroid nodules. Thyroid ultrasound confirmed a dominant 3.3 × 2.2 × 1.8 cm right thyroid nodule with heterogeneous echogenicity, mixed solid and cystic composition, lobulated borders, without echogenic foci, and without increased vascularity . Multiple sub-centimeter left thyroid nodules that were hypoechoic, cystic, wider than tall, with smooth margins, without echogenic foci, and without increased vascularity, were also noted . No lymphadenopathy in the neck was identified. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the dominant right thyroid nodule reported a hypercellular aspirate with follicular epithelial cells in sheets and microfollicles, some with Hurthle cell changes and colloid in the background, without significant atypia . Repeat FNA of the same nodule three months later showed benign appearing follicular epithelial cells in few microfollicles groups and many with Hurthle cell changes amid scant colloid, consistent with a benign colloid nodule, Bethesda classification II. Molecular testing was not completed with either FNA. Follow-up thyroid ultrasound completed annually for the next two years showed gradual growth of the right dominant nodule to 3.2 × 2.3 × 1.8 cm at one year (1% increase in volume) and 3.3 × 2.5 × 1.8 cm at two years (14% increase in volume compared to baseline); the smaller left nodules remained sub-centimeter in size without interval change in ultrasound features.
Two months prior to the second annual thyroid ultrasound, the patient underwent CT of the abdomen and pelvis for evaluation of new onset microscopic hematuria and was incidentally noted to have a 4.1 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the right adrenal gland. No enlarged lymph nodes were observed. In retrospect, this had grown from the heterogeneous 1.8 cm nodule on imaging completed two years prior (on the same CT that first identified the thyroid nodules, though the adrenal finding was not reported at the time) and new when compared to imaging nine years prior. On whole body 18F-FDG PET/CT, the adrenal nodule had minimal FDG avidity (maximum SUV of 2.7) , but the right thyroid nodule had high peripheral FDG avidity (maximum SUV of 12.7) . Biochemical evaluation was negative for primary aldosteronism (plasma renin activity 13.7 ng/mL/hr, aldosterone 18.4 ng/dL) and pheochromocytoma (plasma metanephrines 0.24 nmol/L, plasma normetanephrines 18.4 ng/dL). Overnight 1 mg dexamethasone suppression resulted in a borderline morning cortisol of 3.2 µg/dL, but late night salivary cortisol was measured twice thereafter and within normal range, 0.055 µg/dL and 0.060 µg/dL; 24-h urinary free cortisol testing was not completed. The patient did not have any clinical signs or symptoms suggestive of cortisol excess. The patient then underwent laparoscopic right adrenal gland excision due to concern for malignancy. Pathology revealed metastatic follicular thyroid carcinoma, which stained positive for thyroglobulin .
Total thyroidectomy was then performed. Pathologic evaluation reported a 4.8 cm well-differentiated FTC of the right lobe , a 0.5 cm noninvasive follicular thyroid neoplasm with papillary-like nuclear features (NIFTP) of the left lobe, and a 0.1 cm papillary microcarcinoma of the left lobe with negative margins (Fig. . Background multinodular hyperplasia and lymphatic invasion were observed, but the margins were negative and no extra-thyroidal extension noted; lymph node dissection was not completed. Serum thyroglobulin was 7.8 ng/mL seven weeks after total thyroidectomy. Thyrotropin-stimulated 131I whole body scan reported normal physiologic uptake of the remnant thyroid tissue without evidence of other iodine avid disease. The patient then received 106.8 mCi of 131I, and post-radioactive 131I whole body scan revealed no new foci of iodine avid disease. Eight months after total thyroidectomy, serum thyroglobulin decreased to 0.1 ng/mL with negative thyroglobulin antibodies. At follow-up 14 months after total thyroidectomy, the patient’s thyroglobulin level remained low, 0.1 ng/mL, and he was continued on suppressive levothyroxine treatment with thyroid stimulating hormone level of 0.019 uIU/mL.