A 37-year old Caucasian man, with no co-morbidity, was admitted to the National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani in Rome, Italy, due to a 5-day history of fever (39 °C), headache and asthenia. Since 2013, he had been living in Angola without taking any anti-malaria chemoprophylaxis. On admission, the patient was in good condition; blood test showed only thrombocytopaenia (platelet count 63,000/mmc) with normal renal and liver function. Pan-malarial rapid test for malaria was negative while thick blood smear was positive and thin blood smear showed the presence of trophozoites and schizonts of P. ovale, with a 0.1% (5000/µl) parasitaemia. Oral chloroquine, 10 mg/kg as initial dose followed by 10 mg/kg on the second day and 5 mg/kg on the third day, was prescribed. In-house nested-polymerase chain reaction (PCR) confirmed the diagnosis of P. ovale excluding mixed infections . Plasmodium ovale wallikeri was identified by using a nested PCR followed by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis (a 245 bp band confirmed P. o. wallikeri) and verified with amplicon sequencing . After 2 days of well-tolerated chloroquine treatment, the patient’s condition suddenly worsened: he developed dyspnoea at rest, cough with blood-tinged sputum and high fever (39.8 °C). Chest auscultation revealed bilateral crackles in both respiratory phases. Fluid balance (input–output) was negative. Respiratory rate was 37 breaths per minute, blood oxygen saturation was 92% under oxygen supplementation with 31% fractional inspired oxygen (FiO2) Venturi mask, arterial blood gas showed an acute hypoxemia (PH: 7.45, PO2: 57 mmHg with an arterial oxygen tension (PaO2)/FiO2 ratio of 183) and serum albumin concentration was within normal ranges (3.9 g/dl). The patient had a persistent parasitaemia (0.1% parasitaemia) on chloroquine treatment . PCR and serology for zika, chikungunya, dengue, and respiratory viruses, serology for Leishmania species, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, Salmonella typhi and paratyphi, Rickettsia conorii and Treponema pallidum were all negative; urinary antigens of Legionella and Streptococcus pneumoniae were not detectable; blood and sputum cultures were negative. Posterior-anterior chest X-ray showed bilateral infiltrates and chest computed tomography scan with intravenous contrast confirmed interstitial ground glass opacities involving upper and inferior right and left lobes with bilateral pleural effusion and cardiomegaly . Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal heart function and ruled out cardiogenic oedema. Intravenous (iv) artesunate (2.4 mg/kg given twice daily at the first day then once daily), oral doxycycline (100 mg every 12 h), iv piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g every 8 h) and iv methylprednisolone (40 mg) were started. After 24-h artesunate treatment, parasite clearance was achieved and the patient’s condition improved . Oral primaquine (30 mg daily for 14 days) was given. The patient was discharged in good clinical condition after 10 days of hospitalization. After 2 months, during the follow-up visit, a second chest X-ray was performed with unremarkable results and no evidence of sequelae, relapse or haemolytic anaemia was reported.