A 73-year-old male long-term cigarette smoker with no significant past medical history presented for right nephroureterectomy and radical cystoprostatectomy with ileal conduit diversion for bladder and ureteral cancer. Prior to the induction of general anesthesia, a T10-11 epidural catheter was placed to be utilized intraoperatively and for post-operative pain management.
The epidural catheter was placed with components from a B. Braun Perifix® continuous epidural anesthesia tray (B. Braun Medical Inc., Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA). A 20-guage closed tip epidural catheter was inserted into the epidural space at T10-11. This was accomplished using a loss-of-resistance technique through a midline approach with a 17-gauge Tuohy needle and a Perifix™ plastic luer slip loss-of-resistance syringe. The epidural catheter was inserted five cm into the epidural space. The epidural catheter was then connected to a clamp style catheter connector which was then attached to a 0.2 μm filter connector.
A test dose of 3mL of 1.5% lidocaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine was administered without significant resistance through the filter connector with a 20mL luer lock plastic syringe. The test dose was negative, general anesthesia was induced, and the procedure began as planned. The anesthetic was maintained in this patient using a combination of inhaled sevoflurane through an endotracheal tube and a continuous infusion of 0.0625% bupivacaine through the epidural catheter. A B. Braun Perfusor® Space Infusion Pump was used to deliver the continuous epidural infusion. Infusion rates varied between 2 and 8mL per hour for the duration of the operation, and high-pressure alarms on the pump never activated during the case.
At the conclusion of an uneventful and successful surgical procedure, the patient was extubated smoothly. The patient endorsed incisional pain, and the patient’s blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate were all mildly elevated from baseline. The continuous epidural infusion was stopped. A bolus of 5mL of 0.25% bupivacaine with 1:200,000 epinephrine was delivered by hand using a BD 10mL Luer-Lok™ syringe (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, USA) via the epidural filter connector. Midway through the hand delivered bolus, the epidural filter connector top popped off from the rest of the mechanism spraying the contents of the syringe several feet in multiple directions . The bottom half of the epidural filter connector that remained connected to the clamp style catheter connector and epidural catheter itself recoiled and struck the patient near his shoulder which did not cause any immediate noticeable harm.
It was estimated that the patient received 2mL of the epidural bolus before the filter connector broke. An additional 3mL was then administered to the patient via the clamp style catheter connector without significant resistance. The patient was then taken to the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) where a new filter connector was attached to the clamp style catheter connector. A BD Alaris™ patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) pump was then used to deliver 0.0625% bupivacaine with 10mcg/mL hydromorphone at 6mL/hour with a 2mL every 20 minutes demand option. The epidural catheter was removed on post-operative day (POD) 3 as the patient transitioned to oral pain medications. The patient was discharged from the hospital on POD 5 in stable condition.