We report 2 cases of patients with extradural thoracal schwannoma.
The first case is 60 years old male who presented to us with paraparesis and spastic for more than 3 months. The patient also had low back pain. He had no abnormality of bladder dan bowel habits. His past medical history and family history were insignificant. On examination of the lower extremity, there was paraparesis with a power of 3/5, increased physiological reflex, and positive Babinski pathological reflex. No sensory level defect was detected and no sign of spinal deformity.
His laboratory and thorax X-ray showed no apparent abnormalities as well. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) revealed findings of benign soft tissue consisting of proliferating cells with a spindle shape partly with hypercellular areas and partly with hypocellular areas. The conclusion was that the tissue was a schwannoma tumor. .
A Male 20 years old was admitted to the neurosurgery department with a main complaint of paraparesis 6 months ago. The patient also suffered low back pain and spastic. He had no abnormality of bladder dan bowel habits. His past medical history and family history were insignificant. His physical examination was normal. Neurological examination reveals paraparesis with the power of 2/5 in both lower limbs, hypertonia in bilateral lower limbs, and increased tendon reflexes in the lower limbs. Babinski reflexes were positive in bilateral lower limbs. No sensory level defect was detected and no sign of spinal deformity.
His laboratory and thorax X-ray showed no apparent abnormalities as well. In imaging contrast, an MRI of the spine showed tumor extradural mass lesion extending from thoracal 1–2 vertebral level . The patient underwent hemilaminectomy and complete surgical resection. Histopathological examination showed polymorphic spindle cells with area hypercellular and hypocellular, without malignancy signs. The final opinion was compatible with schwannoma .
We diagnose the patient from clinical findings and imaging methods and MRI is the best method for diagnosis and differential diagnosis. The size and specific margins of the mass demonstrate the localization and invasion of the contiguous structures. We treat all patients with hemilaminectomy and complete surgical resection, after follow-up 3 months after surgery, the patient becomes normal from paraparesis and spastic .
In these two patients, we only performed a hemilaminectomy and excision of the tumor with a guiding microscope, we did not install a pedicle screw because it was unnecessary and too excessive in our opinion, in principle, according to the surgical procedure, we could reach the tumor without destroying the stability of the spine. in both patients we used a guiding microscope without IOM (intra operative monitoring), our center is rural area, we don't have IOM but we try to give the best for patients.