A 22 yr old multigravida (G3P2L1A1) from Jumla, Nepal was brought to the emergency department of Karnali Academy of Health Sciences (KAHS) and admitted with the concerns of multiple erythematous papular rashes with fluid-filled vesicles that had erupted over her face, then on her neck, arms, thorax and back regions. The patient was the first in her family to develop such eruptions and she has no known history of allergies.
Thorough history revealed that the patient is a diagnosed case of epilepsy for which she has been taking sodium valproate since she was 13 years of age. Eighteen days before the admission, the patient had gone for her antenatal care (ANC) visit where she was switched to carbamazepine due to its low teratogenicity compared to sodium valproate. On the 8th day of use of carbamazepine, she developed a cough, sore throat, malaise, fever, and loss of appetite followed by irritation over the eyes. Then, on the 12th day of exposure, in addition to all the above symptoms, she developed erythematous rashes and fluid-filled vesicles that firstly appeared on her face, then spread to the neck, arms, thorax, and back regions.
The patient was brought to the hospital on the 19th day of exposure, before that she visited faith healers. At this time we noticed that she had multiple erythematous papular lesions with fluid-filled vesicles/bullae over her face, then on her neck, arms, thorax, and back regions. She had areas of denuded skin with BSA involvement of 21 % (face: 9 %, right and left upper arm: 2 % + 2 %, back: 2 %, chest and abdomen: 2 % + 2 %, right and left lower limb: 2 %). Nikolsky's sign was positive. Also, ocular examination revealed matted cilia with blepharitis and congested conjunctiva with normal findings in the fundus. Whereas oral mucosa and vermillion border showed painful hemorrhagic erosions, and also, the tongue was edematous. The patient was in pain and couldn't swallow for which a nasogastric tube was introduced.
On the 2nd day of admission, in her 8 weeks and 3 days of gestation, she had per-vaginal bleeding and fleshy clot were passed which was suggestive of spontaneous abortion. So, suction and evacuation were carried out (, , , ).
First sign of ADR was seen on the 8th day of exposure and the worst with 21 % BSA involvement was seen on the 19th of exposure to carbamazepine At the time of presentation, body temperature was 37.33° Celsius, blood pressure was 100/70 mm Hg, pulse rate was 128/min and respiratory rate was 22/min. Test of C-reactive protein came positive and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 50mm/hr. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) measured 44.5 u/l and 50.3 u/l respectively. Other parameters were not deranged and serological tests to rule out infections (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and Treponema pallidum) came out negative. Considering the history of exposure to carbamazepine, prodromal symptoms, nature of the lesions, and laboratory reports, diagnosis of SJS/TEN overlapping was made.
Carbamazepine was stopped immediately and sodium valproate (200mg, per-oral, once a day) was reinstated. The patient was put on chlorpheniramine (20mg for 7 days), ceftriaxone (1 gm for 14 days), dexamethasone (6mg for 10 days), metronidazole (500mg for 10 days), and paracetamol (500mg for 14 days), all intravenously once in a day. Intravenous fluid was given by maintaining a strict in/out chart. Eye care was done for fourteen days through the administration of eye drops of carboxymethylcellulose (0.5 %) and eye drops having a combination of chloramphenicol (4 mg/ml), polymyxin B (5000 IU/ml), and dexamethasone (1 mg/ml). For oral care chlorhexidine (0.2 %) gargle and topical gel having a combination of lidocaine (2 %), chlorhexidine gluconate (1 %), and metronidazole (1 %) were used. Mupirocin (2 %) ointment was applied in skin lesions after dressing for two weeks. As prophylaxis enoxaparin (40mg, subcutaneously, for 10 days) and ranitidine (30mg, intravenously, in two divided doses for 2 weeks) were used. Abstinence to carbamazepine and supportive measures have worked well for the patient. The patient is recovering well with no trace of new issues and adverse reactions .
The patient and her family were well counseled about her clinical state and the medications she was put under. Discharge is being planned for the patient with sodium valproate tablets (200mg), chlorhexidine(0.2 %) gargle, mupirocin(2 %) ointment and pantoprazole tablets (40mg for 10 days). She will be asked to visit for a follow-up after two weeks for assessments.