A 60-year-old Japanese man presented to the emergency department (ED) with pelvic and lower leg pain. He was working on a dump truck with the bed raised position for inspection. Unfortunately, the bed came down suddenly, and his body was crushed and injured. When he showed up ED, he was hemodynamically stable, and there was no sign of shock except tachypnea and tachycardia.
Primary CT and chest X-ray showed a right lung contusion and elevation of the right diaphragm but no apparent liver injury . The pelvic and lower extremities fractures were observed. At this point, the right-sided diaphragmatic injury could not be ruled out. However, the patient was under observation because of the hemodynamically stable and had no thoracoabdominal injuries requiring emergency surgery.
The right pleural effusion gradually worsened after admission, and a chest tube was inserted on the fourth day of admission, which showed drainage of bloody pleural effusion. Pleural effusion from the chest tube continued to more than 300 mL daily. Therefore, the contrast CT scan was re-performed on the ninth day of admission, as the traumatic diaphragmatic injury was suspected.
Repeat CT showed aggravation of elevation of the right-sided diaphragm, narrowing of the inferior hepatic vena cava due to left cephalic deviation of the liver, and formation of a 13 cm × 3 cm thrombus in the IVC . There was no apparent worsening of bilateral leg edema or physical findings in the abdomen. No adverse hemodynamic effects were observed due to thrombus formation, and we performed thrombolytic therapy with urokinase and heparin. The dose of urokinase was halved every 2 days, starting at 4400 IU/kg, and continued for 6 days, and unfractionated heparin 20,000 units per day.
The day after starting thrombolytic therapy, the patient developed pulmonary thromboembolism due to a dropped in SpO2 needed oxygen, and dyspnea triggered by coughing . Fortunately, the patient’s hemodynamic status was not adversely affected, and the decision was made to continue the current thrombolytic therapy.
However, a follow-up ultrasound on the day urokinase administration was terminated showed residual thrombus in the IVC, and there was no apparent change in the thrombus size before or after the initiation of anticoagulation. The patient was considered ineligible for further thrombolytic therapy and prepared for surgical thrombectomy because of the high risk of developing a fatal PE.
Open-heart surgical thrombectomy using cardiopulmonary bypass with a median sternotomy and an IVC filter placement was performed on the 26th day of admission. A Hybrid Operating room was used, because fluoroscopic equipment was needed during surgery.
Through a median sternotomy, the pericardium was incised and taped to the ascending aorta and superior vena cava. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with cannulation of the ascending aorta, the superior vena cava, and the right atrium. The pericardium around the IVC was lifted, and the IVC was exposed. Then, opened the right atrium and blood flow from IVC was confirmed. An introducer sheath was inserted into the right external iliac vein, and a guide wire was advanced and caught in the right atrium. Intravascular ultrasound confirmed a large amount of thrombus in the IVC from the renal vein junction to the hepatic vein junction. At the beginning of the thrombectomy, an intravenous occlusion balloon was advanced from the right atrium to the IVC. However, the balloon could not be advanced to the proper position due to the flexure of the IVC. Therefore, a balloon was pushed up from the external iliac vein to guide the thrombus into the right atrium, and 15 g of fresh thrombus was removed. Thrombectomy for pulmonary artery was not performed, because it did not affect hemodynamics and did not require surgical thrombectomy.
The postoperative course was not eventful, and an anticoagulant therapy with direct oral anticoagulant (DOAC) was started on post operative day 6. The patient was on bed rest for a while due to the pelvic fracture, but the bed rest level was gradually increased, and rehabilitation treatment was continued.
After orthopedic surgery for a right ankle fracture, the patient was transferred to the hospital on the 62nd day for rehabilitation. All tests performed to evaluate congenital thrombophilia were negative.