A 61-year-old right-handed male was referred to our department presenting shoulder pain for 12 months, without any known trigger event. The patient described a dull intermittent right shoulder pain, reporting acute exacerbations and tenderness. His complaints persisted despite medical treatment, including physiotherapy and long-standing medication with oral NSAIDs.
During physical examination, there were no visible asymmetries between the shoulders and the patient exhibited no inflammatory signs. The neurologic and vascular examination of the right upper limb was normal. The shoulder range of motion and strength was preserved and painless. There were no evident or palpable masses, but the patient presented trigger-point tenderness at the posterolateral surface of the right shoulder.
Plain radiographs were normal . Ultrasonography of the right shoulder denoted a hypoechoic nodular formation in the point of tenderness, measuring 13 mm . Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a well-limited oval-shaped mass located in the posterior fibers of the right deltoid muscle, measuring 25 × 10 × 6 mm, which was hypointense in T1 and hyperintense in T2-weighted images and exhibited strong enhancement with contrast .
It was decided to perform an excisional biopsy of the lesion. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in 30 degrees left-lateral position and a 5 cm incision was made directly over the point of tenderness which had been priory marked. Surgical exploration identified a well-limited nodular lesion between the posterior fibers of the deltoid muscle, which was completely excised .
The patient was discharged in the next day after surgery and presented pain-free by the time of stitch removal.
Gross examination of the specimen revealed a brownish nodular mass with 10 × 10 × 6 mm in size, while microscopic examination showed a well-limited lesion formed by ovoid epithelial cells without signs of atypia. No mitoses were observed. The lesion displayed a rich vascular network. Marginal excision was confirmed. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for expression of actin (alpha-SMA). These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of glomus tumor .
The patient did not undergo any other treatment besides surgical excision of the lesion.
After 4 years of follow-up, the patient is asymptomatic and showing no clinical or imagiological evidence of local or systemic recurrence.