A 16-year-old Japanese female patient was referred to Kanazawa University Hospital with pain in the left lower leg lasting 2 years. She and her family had no history of malignancy. A plain radiograph of the lower leg revealed an osteoblastic lesion at the diaphysis of the left tibia that was diagnosed as a low-grade central osteosarcoma via open biopsy. No distant metastasis was detected. Wide tumor excision (24 cm) and reconstruction with a tumor-bearing frozen autograft were performed (first surgery; Fig. ). Briefly, the tumor-bearing bone was frozen in liquid nitrogen for 20 min , thawed at room temperature for 15 min, and rinsed in distilled water for 10 min. Bone union was achieved 7 months after surgery.
At 17 months after surgery, local recurrence on the surface of the frozen autograft and lung metastases were detected. A metastasectomy was performed to confirm the histological diagnosis because of the rarity of the distant metastasis of a low-grade central osteosarcoma . The pathological diagnosis was conventional osteosarcoma. Five courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy were administered, after which tumor excision (hemicortical excision of the frozen autograft) and ipsilateral free fibular grafting were performed (second surgery, 5 months after metastasectomy; Fig. ). The local recurrence was histologically confirmed on the surface of the resected frozen autograft. The pathological findings were massive necrotic tumor cells in the osteoid matrix, and the viable tumor cell was eventually detected. Moreover, the viable osteocyte and osteoblasts were detected in the small area of frozen bone. Subsequently, a varus deformity gradually developed, with massive callus formation at the lateral side of the frozen autograft .
Five years after the second surgery, the varus deformity (19°) was conspicuous despite the achievement of fibular bone union . The center of rotation of angulation (CORA) was located in the frozen bone graft; thus, the patient underwent an osteotomy in the frozen bone, application of a Taylor Spatial Frame (TSF) , and acute correction (third surgery; Fig. ). At the time of osteotomy, a thin slice of the frozen bone that had prevented correction was resected from the osteotomy site. A histological examination revealed the presence of wide areas of viable osteocytes and osteoblasts . The residual deformity was subjected to gradual correction, and new bone formation was observed in the gap left in the frozen autograft . After correction and partial bone union were achieved, TSF was removed, and internal fixation was accomplished using a locking plate (fourth surgery, 9 months after the third surgery; Fig. ). Two years after the fourth surgery and 10 years after the initial diagnosis of tibial osteosarcoma, the patient’s deformity was completely corrected, and osteotomy site union was achieved . The patient exhibited excellent limb function .