An 18-year-old male fell from a height of 15 feet at construction site over rusted iron rod which penetrated through his left upper thigh. The rod was cut with a saw to facilitate transport to hospital. On presentation, he was conscious, well oriented, and hemodynamically stable (GCS-E4M6V5). The patient didnot have any other major injury except abrasions over left forearm,elbow, and left lower back. Entry wound of the rod was through the posteromedial aspect of the left upper thigh, with an exit through anterolateral aspect ofthigh( and ). Patient’s distal pulsations were well felt. No attempts were made to remove the rod in the procedure room. PlainX-rays of thigh confirmed trajectory of rod( and ). Complete hemogram, arterial blood gas analysis, and serum electrolytes were all within normal limits.
The patient was taken in the operation theaterkeeping a team of vascular and plastic surgeons stand by. General anesthesia was administered in right lateral position . The exit wound of the rodwas extendedand soft tissue dissection was carried out to make the rod free from the adjacent neurovascular structures . We found that rod had penetrated vastus medialis and sartorius muscle through substance, femoral and profundal vessels were just medial to it. We checked for any breach in vessel lumen and inspected nerves carefully by exploring them proximally and distally. Neurovascular structures were found to be intact. In deeper dissection, rodwas found between adductor group of muscles on one side and femoral bone on another. Once we were sure of integrity of neurovascular structures, the protruding part of the rod was gently pulled posteriorly along its length through wound track, with continuous monitoring of the distal pulsations.
Multiple side holes were created on a wide bore drain tube with scissor; free end of this tube was attached to the anterior end of the rod and it was passed through the exit wound following railroad technique . Wash with copious amount of normal saline was given .Both the wounds were closed primarily over negative suction drain. Iron rod was 15mm in breadth ( and ). Broad-spectrum antibiotics were administeredalong with booster dose of tetanus and anti-tetanus serum. Wound check was clean and suture lines were dry on the 3rd and 6th post-operative day. The patient was dischargedon the 7th day postoperatively. There were no signs of wound infection even at 1-year follow-up.