A 76-year-old Caucasian man presented with a long history of a left temporal lesion that had progressively enlarged only recently. Initial surgical excision yielded a mass measuring 2.5 × 2.2 × 1 cm. Histological examination revealed tumor islands infiltrating the dermis and connecting to the epidermis with a lobulated morphology . Since the deep resection margin was positive for malignant cells, a re-excision was performed and negative margins were verified microscopically. Eight months later, our patient presented with a 2 cm firm mass overlying the left parotid gland with minimal mobility on physical examination . Whole body imaging in the form of a positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed increased uptake in the left parotid gland, which was consistent with metastasis. Our patient underwent left parotidectomy with facial nerve preservation and cervical lymphadenectomy. Surgical pathology specimens revealed a moderately differentiated carcinoma with growth pattern and morphological features consistent with porocarcinoma. Microscopically, nests of polygonal malignant cells were seen infiltrating the papillary and reticular dermis . A surrounding dense fibrous stroma could be visualized . The cervical lymph nodes (14 in total) were negative.
Given the aggressive behavior of EPC described in the literature and evidence for the effective use of radiation therapy , our patient was offered intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT). After initial consultation at the Head and Neck Radiation Oncology Clinic of the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC) Hollings Cancer Center, a consent form was obtained. Treatment planning consisted of a contrasted head and computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck with our patient lying supine, using a head and neck thermoplast mask with bite block immobilization. Thin (3 mm) axial images were imported into the ADAC Pinnacle planning system (ADAC Laboratories, Milpitas, CA, USA). In this case, IMRT was designed using an inverse-planning algorithm.
The six-beam heterogeneous plan entailed delivering a total of 60 Gy in 30 treatment fractions over six weeks. A CT scan with isodose distributions and a dose-volume histogram for the final treatment plan are shown in Figure . Particular attention was directed to regions of interest such as the left inner ear and optic nerve, to minimize radiation exposure well below the reported tolerance doses of 40 Gy and 50 Gy, respectively .
Weekly on-site treatment visits were documented during the treatment phase of our patient, followed by scheduled three-month follow-up visits. Our patient tolerated the radiation treatment well, and developed only mild xerostomia and mild paresthesias. Further follow-up revealed that our patient remains disease-free 10 months after completion of the treatment course.