A 62-year-old woman developed tonsil changes. For malignancy screening, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was scheduled. MRI revealed a left middle cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation aneurysm. Further, computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed eight intracranial aneurysms on the left side – MCA bifurcation, M2, A3, A4, and A5 segments; on right side – MCA and internal carotid artery bifurcations, and distal posterior cerebral artery aneurysms. The patient had multiple risk factors for intracranial aneurysm formation (family history of cerebral aneurysms, female gender, current smoking status). The decision of active multistage treatment was chosen. In the first stage, the left MCA bifurcation and left M2 aneurysms were successfully clipped. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on 4th postoperative day.
One month later, the patient was admitted again for clipping of the DACA aneurysms. Three DACA aneurysms were located on a left pericallosal artery [ and ]. All of them arose from the bifurcation sides. The smallest aneurysm was at the A3 segment (saccular, neck 2 mm, width 2 mm, length 2 mm), and the biggest was at the A4 segment (saccular, neck 3 mm, width 5 mm, length 8 mm). The most distal was the aneurysm at the A5 segment (saccular, neck 2 mm, width 3 mm, length 4 mm).
The patient was placed in the supine position. The head was in the neutral position and slightly elevated above the heart level. Then, we performed a standard anterior interhemispheric approach with a one-layer flap.
After opening the dura mater in a semicircular fashion around the superior sagittal sinus, dissection of the interhemispheric fissure was carefully performed. Bipolar with aspirator are very effective for dynamic retraction in this stage. All DACA aneurysms were explored under direct visual control. The key issue of navigating within the interhemispheric fissure is reaching the corpus callosum. Transverse fibers and white color are distinctive features of the corpus callosum that differentiate it from the cingulate gyrus.
First, in the anterior part of the operative field, A3 aneurysm was clipped with one straight clip and the dome was coagulated. Following this, dissection around the A4 aneurysms was done. After utilizing proximal and distal temporary clipping (temporary trapping of A4 segment), we occluded the aneurysm with one curved clip. However, the wall of the aneurysm had sclerotic plaque content, and hence, clipping occlusion of the neck with a single clip proved ineffective and another curved clip was applied. Time of temporary artery occlusion was 110 seconds. The A5 aneurysm was dissected next. After verifying that no perforators were inside the clip, occlusion of the aneurysm with one straight clip and coagulation of the dome were performed.
Intraoperative indocyanine green proved patency preservation of the parent artery and surrounding branches. Three DACA aneurysms were completely excluded from the circulation [Figure and ].
The patient awoke without any new neurological deficit. The postoperative period was smooth and uneventful. Control CTA showed occlusion of the three DACA aneurysms without any neck remnants and preserved flow in parent artery and its branches . The patient was discharged on the 4th postoperative day.
Four months after the described operation, the patient underwent uneventful clipping of the right MCA and right ICA bifurcations aneurysms; 3 months later, clipping of the distal PCA aneurysm was done. One year after the previous operation, the patient showed a lack of any neurological deficit and demonstrated full daily activities (modified Rankin Scale 0).