A 54-year-old male of Ethiopian origin who presented back in 1993 with variceal bleeding leading to a subsequent diagnosis of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension with splenomegaly and PVT with cavernous transformation.
The presence of granulomas and periportal fibrosis with preserved hepatic architecture on liver biopsy, together with positive serologic tests for antischistosomal antibodies and the patient origin suggested the diagnosis of hepatosplenic schistosomiasis. Further work up revealed protein C deficiency. Whether the patient received anthelmintic therapy upon diagnosis is unclear, however, prior to transplant no specific prophylactic treatment was administered as there was no evidence of active hepatic or systemic disease.
The patient in 1993 with variceal bleeding leading to a subsequent diagnosis of non-cirrhotic portal hypertension with splenomegaly and PVT with cavernous transformation.
The patient has none personal and family history.
Medical management of portal hypertension complications included diuretics, beta-blockers and periodic upper endoscopy with sclerotherapy and esophageal varices ligation. The patient eventually presented with severe decompensation and model for end-stage liver disease score of 25 necessitating LT.
His physical examination revealed signs of cachexia, jaundice, abdominal distention, umbilical hernia, caput medusa and impression of moderate to large volume ascites. Laboratory results showed total white blood cell count of 2.67 × 109/L, hemoglobin levels of 8 g/dL, platelet count of 33 × 109/L, international normalized ratio 2.43, total bilirubin of 7.5 mg/dL (and direct bilirubin of 3.6 mg/dL), serum sodium 140 mEq/L, serum creatinine 1.1 mg/dL and albumin levels of 2.5 gr/dL.
Preoperative esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed grade III esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy. Imaging revealed liver cirrhosis, extensive portal and mesenteric vein thrombosis with cavernous transformation, splenomegaly, with the spleen measuring 20 cm in diameter, and splanchnic varices comprising a large left gastric varix .