A 67-year-old female patient was admitted to another hospital for “rheumatic heart disease combined with mitral stenosis and regurgitation” and underwent “mitral valve replacement” surgery. During the hospitalization, a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen was performed and it was found that the left kidney and ureter had hydrops. Three months later, in order to treat left kidney and ureteral hydrops, she was admitted to the Urology Department of our hospital. She has no symptoms such as frequent urination, urgency, abdominal pain, hematuria, and dysuria. She had no history of prior abdominal surgery, trauma, or congenital defects. Local examination showed no bulge or percussion pain in both kidney area and bilateral ureters. Laboratory examinations revealed a decrease in the glomerular filtration rate on both sides (70.15ml/min) and an increase in urine bacteria (7682.5/µL). After the physical examination, in order to further understand the degree of renal and ureteral hydrops, we recommended that she perform a computed tomography (CT) scan of the urinary tract. The results suggested that her left kidney and ureter were still present . In order to clarify the cause of her kidney and ureteral hydrops, CTU imaging of the urinary tract was performed, and it was found that the left ureter pelvis herniated into the parietal pelvic fascia was accompanied by tortuosity and left hydronephrosis. In order to assess the function of the kidneys, she underwent nephro-dynamic imaging. The results suggest that the blood perfusion and function of the left kidney are slightly impaired, the excretion is significantly delayed, and the filtration rate of the left glomerulus is reduced (27.50ml/min); the glomerular filtration rate of the right kidney (38.60ml/min). The initial diagnosis was that the left ureter and hydronephrosis caused by pelvic perineal hernia, and general surgery consultation was invited, and laparoscopic exploration + tension-free repair of the left pelvic floor hernia was planned. We placed the patient in a lithotomy position, and placed trocars 1 cm above the navel, 5 cm on both sides of the navel, McBurney point and anti-McBurney point, and no hernias were found in the pelvic cavity through laparoscopy. Cut the left peritoneum during the operation and open the left side Toldt space.Toldt’s space is the fusion fascia space, which is formed by the fusion of the mesangium and the following tissues (mesenia or parietal peritoneum) after the midgut volvulus during embryonic development. It is called Toldt’s fascia, and the potential gap is called Toldt’s gap. Next, look for the left ureter, cut the peritoneum along the surface of the ureter to the pelvic floor. Later, observation of the pelvic cavity revealed that the left obturator space became larger, the ureter passed through the obturator area, and the upper ureter was significantly dilated . Therefore, we changed the diagnosis to left obturator hernia with left ureteral hydrops and left hydronephrosis, and decided to perform left obturator hernia repair. And implemented the left ureterolysis, see the expansion of the ureter has returned to normal. The incised pelvic peritoneum was continuously sealed with a 3 -0 Barbed thread behind the ureter. Pelvic part of the ureter was moved into the abdominal cavity. No obvious bleeding was seen after flushing the abdominal cavity, and the incision was sutured layer by layer. The result of the operation was very successful. One week after the operation, she had a follow-up visit. Color Doppler ultrasound of the urinary system showed that the upper dilatation of the left ureter was better than before. And the patient is very satisfied with the treatment.