A 20-year-old male army personnel belonging to the Kirati ethnicity with no known comorbidities presented to the neurosurgery outpatient department of our hospital (a tertiary care facility) with the chief complaint of swelling over the nape of the neck on the right side. According to the patient, the swelling first presented at 20 days of his life, which was the size of a pea that gradually increased to a size of a tennis ball spontaneously. There was no history of trauma. His past history, family history, drug history, and allergic history are nonremarkable. He is a nonsmoker, does not consume alcohol, and has normal sleep and bowel habit. On clinical examination, the solitary swelling was 4×4 cm on measurement, soft on consistency with regular margin, fluctuant, with no skin changes over the swelling, nontender, no restriction in range of motion of the neck, and no pulsation felt. His vital parameters were normal, with no significant findings in systemic examinations.
Ultrasonography was ordered, which showed an ill-defined anechoic cystic lesion with thick echogenic internal septation and strands in the subcutaneous plane. A contrast-enhanced MRI revealed fat saturated heterogeneously high signal intensity intramuscular lesion suggesting intramuscular hemangioma involving the right splenius capitis muscle with no extension to adjacent muscles and minimal extension to the subcutaneous tissue .
All of his laboratory parameters were within the normal range. He was then scheduled for surgery. The patient was informed about the risks and benefits of the procedure, along with an explanation of other alternative procedures. He wanted the lesion to be surgically removed. Thus, he underwent excision of the lesion along with the excision of splenius capitis with minimal blood loss. The specimen was sent for histopathology examination, which showed prominent arteriovenous and lymphatic components associated with adipose tissue dissecting through skeletal muscle fibers with no malignant features (features consistent with an intramuscular hemangioma with a predominant arteriovenous component). He was shifted to the postoperative ward with stable hemodynamic parameters. On his second postoperative day, he was on a liquid diet, and he had decreased mobility of the neck due to the surgery. His diet was changed to solids on third postoperative day. He was discharged from the hospital on his third postoperative day because he was hemodynamically stable and asymptomatic. During his scheduled follow-up after a month of discharge, he was asymptomatic with a normal range of motion on his neck and no signs of any new swelling or recurrence.