Twenty-three year old man was hospitalized in General Hospital Tesanj due to injuries he sustained in motorcycle accident. On admission the patient was haemodynamically and respiratory stable with Glasgow Coma Score 12. Small laceration on face was surgically debrided and sutured. During physical examination there were no visible signs of trauma of the chest, abdomen and extremities. Findings on CT scan of the brain, cervical spine and abdomen (without contrast enhancement) didn’t suggest existence of any major injury. Since the conducted diagnostic evaluation didn’t verify the existence of traumatic changes, the patient was treated conservatively. However, two days after admission, his clinical status started to deteriorate. In order to evaluate the patient’s status, control contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan was made which suggested suspicion of a possible pancreatic injury. After that, patient was referred to University Clinical Center Tuzla for further diagnostic and therapeutic evaluation.
On admission to our hospital, the patient was haemodynamically and respiratory stable. Physical examination revealed abdominal tenderness with signs of diffuse peritonitis. During preoperative evaluation laboratory tests and contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen were made. Laboratory tests showed the elevation of leukocytes (17.42, reference values 4.40 to 11.60), C-reactive protein (180.5, reference values 0.0 to 3.3) and mild elevation of serum amylase (618 U/L, reference values 23 to 135). Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen showed the presence of larger amounts of free fluid in the abdomen, and voluminous, inhomogeneous pancreas, transected at the body. CT scan also recorded laceration of the spleen, as well as diffuse imbibitions of adipose tissue and edema in the gastrocolic ligament (contusion). Given the clinical findings and the results of diagnostic evaluation, we decided for urgent surgical treatment.
During surgery we found larger amount of free serohemoragic fluid inside the abdominal cavity, as well as incomplete transection of pancreas with disruption of the main duct to the patient’s left of the superior mesenteric vein. According to AAST organ injury scale it was grade III injury of the pancreas. We also found traumatic laceration in the lower third of the spleen. These intraoperative findings were consistent with CT scan we did during preoperative evaluation. With regard to intraoperative findings, we decided for distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy with external drainage (, ).
After surgery, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. The first postoperative day we started with oral nutrition of patient. The second postoperative day, the patient was haemodynamically and respiratory stable, moved from intensive care unit to the Department of Hepatobilliary and pancreatic surgery. Further postoperative course was normal, without any complications. On the eight postoperative day, the drains were removed and the patient was, on the next day, discharged home for outpatient follow-up.