A 41-year-old Cameroonian man of black African ethnicity was brought to our primary care hospital because over the previous 6 hours he had been experiencing persistent involuntary twisting movements of his body and he no longer had control of his limbs. Earlier that day, he had presented to our hospital with low-grade intermittent fever of nocturnal predominance associated with headache, anorexia, and mild general weakness for 3 days. On that occasion, he was mildly ill-looking and calm. He was alert and oriented in person, place, and time. His vital signs were: temperature, 38.7 °C; blood pressure, 122/83 mmHg; pulse, 91 beats/minute (full and regular); and respiratory rate, 17 breaths/minute. His conjunctivae were pink. His neck was supple. There were no palpable enlarged lymph nodes. His cranial nerve functions as well as deep tendon and cutaneous reflexes were symmetrical and normal. His muscle bulk was good and his muscle tone was normal. Muscle strength was full force. He could execute coordinated movements and he had a normal gait. There was normal sensation to fine touch, crude touch, and vibrations. There was no focal neurological sign and both plantar reflexes were up-going. Chest wall expansions were symmetrical and the cardiac apex beat was located at the left fifth intercostal space in the midclavicular line. Percussion note on his chest wall was resonant. Breath sounds were vesicular and there were no heart murmurs. His abdomen was symmetrical and moved with respiration. There was no abdominal tenderness and no palpable enlarged abdominal organs. The percussion note on his abdomen was tympanic. Bowel sounds were active and normal. The rest of systemic examination was unrevealing as well. Based on those findings, he was presumptively diagnosed with simple malaria. Moderate Plasmodium falciparum parasitemia was found on microscopy (blood film analysis). He was prescribed DHA-PPQ at a dose of 2.1/16.8 mg/kg (total of three tablets of DHA 40 mg-PPQ 320 mg) in a single daily dose and 2 g of paracetamol tablets in two divided doses per day. These dosages were estimated for his 71 kg body weight and both drugs were prescribed for 3 consecutive days. Approximately 3 hours after ingesting the first dose of the drug, there was progressive onset of the bizarre movements which were rather amusing to his brother who first thought our patient was joking. However, the movements which were initially intermittent progressively became continuous.
Our patient was not on any other medication prior to the diagnosis of malaria and he had never experienced abnormal movements before. His past history was negative for known chronic illnesses like hypertension, diabetes, neuropsychiatric disorders, chronic kidney disease, or cancer. He had no history of head trauma or neurological disorders like encephalitis or cerebrovascular accident. He had no known history of rheumatic fever. He had no known records of adverse reactions to specific drugs or food and as far as he could remember, he had not ingested DHA-PPQ before. He did not consume tobacco or recreational drugs including traditional medicines. He seldom consumed beer and did not smoke tobacco. He had been a subsistence farmer for 20 years. He lived in the city center and consumed pipe-borne water. He had no known history of exposure to environmental hazards such as pesticides, industrial wastes, or other toxic chemicals at home or at work. He was married and had three children. His wife and children were well. He was fifth in a family with four siblings; his siblings and parents were well. His family history was positive for first-degree relatives with hypertension but negative for movement disorders and other chronic illnesses. There were no known genetic disorders in his family.
On his second visit, a systemic review was unremarkable. His Glasgow Coma Score was 15/15 and he was oriented in person, place, and time. His blood pressure was 133/87 mmHg, temperature 37.4 °C, and pulse 83 beats/minute. He was very unsteady (making his respiratory rate difficult to appreciate) and displayed continuous irregular twisting movements of his face, neck, extremities, and trunk combined with abrupt forceful low amplitude flinging of his limbs. These movements were precipitated and exacerbated by any voluntary attempts to move such that he could not execute purposeful movements requested by the examiner. Examination of his cranial nerves and grading of muscle strength were difficult because he was unsteady. Muscle tone as well as deep tendon and cutaneous reflexes were normal. The rest of the physical examination was normal.
In view of the historical and clinical data, DHA-PPQ-associated acute generalized choreoathetosis was suspected and dystonia was retained as differential diagnosis. Further laboratory investigations such as complete blood count, blood electrolytes, and tests of renal function were without particularities . He was sedated with 10 mg of intramuscular diazepam and DHA-PPQ was discontinued. The antimalarial drug was replaced with artemether-lumefantrine combination (20 mg to 120 mg strength – single initial dose of four tablets, followed by four tablets after 8 hours and then four tablets 12 hourly to reach a total of 24 tablets) which was better tolerated. His clinical progress was good and he was discharged home after 72 hours. No further abnormal movements were noted during 3 weeks of regular follow-up. Monthly reviews over the following 7 months were unrevealing.