A sixty four years old female presented to the END OPD with the complaints of left ear blood stained discharge, decreased hearing and ear pain for 30 days. She was hypertensive and on medication for last 10 years. On examination there was an irregular blackish mass was found filling the entire left EAC with blood clots along the floor .
On probing the mass was found to be attached along the anterior and anterosuperior walls of the EAC. Tympanic membrane was not visualised. Rinne was negative on the pathological side with Weber being lateralised to left. Right EAC was clear with intact tympanic membrane and positive Rinne’s test. Pure tone audiogram revealed moderate conductive hearing loss with 56.67dBHL hearing loss in left ear and mild sensorineural hearing loss in the right ear with 30 dBHL hearing.
Fine Needle Aspiration Cytology was done which showed numerous mature squamous epithelial cells and anucleatesquames with no evidence of atypia or malignancy. Many horn cysts and squamous eddies were noted along with focal areas of basaloid proliferation and keratin pearl formation in the superficial layers with no dysplastic changes in the squamous epithelium. All these features were consistent with Seborrhoeic keratosis.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Temporal bone revealed a 1.5 x 2.9 x 1.2 cm sized lesion in the left EAC involving both the cartilaginous and bony part which was isointense on T1 and hyper intense on T2 with diffusion restriction on DWI and intense post contrast enhancement .
Anteriorly, the lesion was found to cause subtle erosion and thinning of the anterior wall of bony EAC with no extension into the TMJ. Anterolaterally it extends up to the tragus with no infiltration. Posteriorly, no extension was noted into the mastoid air cells. Medially, the lesion was found to cause mild concavity of the left TM. Medial edge of the lesion lies around 11.8 mm away from the TM. On corresponding CT cuts, no evidence of ossicular erosion was noted. Superiorly, no intracranial extension and inferiorly no parotid space invasion were seen. No significant lymph node enlargement was detected. The mass was excised and all the attachments were cauterised. Post excision tympanic membrane was found to be intact. ( & ).
Post-surgery, patient improved symptomati- cally. Histopathology of the excised specimen revealed multiple tissue bits lined by hyperplastic stratified squamous epithelium giving rise to a lesion having shoulder and squamous cells, basaloid cells, horn cysts and pigment (seborrhoeic keratosis). At many foci, lesion gave rise to an invasive tumour arranged in nest sheets and intertwining islands. Tumour cells were polygonal to spindly, more hyperchromatic, show high N: C ratio and eosinophilic cytoplasm. Keratin formation and individual cell keratinisation were also seen. Dermis showed marked pigment incontinence and evidence of dermal infiltration.