A 58-year old black male who was 18 mo’ post LT presented to our Emergency Department with abdominal pain.
On the 9th of March, he developed epigastric pain radiating to the right hypochondrium as well as nausea and vomiting. He had no fevers, cough, shortness of breath, anosmia or dysgeusia.
The liver transplant had been performed in July 2018 for hepatocellular carcinoma and end-stage liver disease secondary to hepatitis B (HBV). He was on tacrolimus-based immunosuppression in mono-therapy since July 2019 and took a nucleoside analogue for HBV graft reinfection prophylaxis. He had stopped mycophenolate mofetil because of repetitive urinary infections.
Unfortunately, this gentleman’s early and late post-transplant course was complicated by the need for further surgical and endoscopic interventions. In November 2018, he underwent emergency laparotomy for adhesional bowel obstruction during which a colostomy was formed. In January 2019, he presented with repetitive cholangitis and iatrogenic acute pancreatitis. This was related to issues with biliary drainage and thus, was resolved after undergoing an endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography.
In terms of other relevant medical history, he took aspirin as thromboprophylaxis for prevention of hepatic artery thrombosis and was on amlodipine for arterial hypertension. He denied any history of recent foreign travel or exposure to others infected/suspected of COVID-19.
The patient did not smoke or consume alcohol. There was no noteworthy family medical history.
His physical examination was unremarkable.
On the 10th of March, his laboratory results revealed; low lymphocyte count, percentage of lymphocytes and a slightly increased C-reactive protein (CRP) at (12.4 mg/L). There were no other abnormalities identified .
His abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was unremarkable from the abdominal perspective however, the lower chest slices identified multiple bilateral patchy ground-glass density shadows. For this reason, the 12th of March, he underwent a formal chest CT scan, which revealed an extension of the multiple patchy ground-glass density shadows to the upper lobe of the left lung too . All of this was suggestive of COVID-19 pneumonia and the patient was hospitalised in infectious disease department of our hospital the same day.
At admission, he remained afebrile and his clinical observations such as blood pressure, pulse, blood oxygen saturation (98%) were all within normal ranges. The body mass index was 22 kg/m2. He thus did not require intensive support neither oxygen therapy. On examination of his chest, there were no positive cardiac- or pulmonary-related findings. However, upon abdominal examination, he continued to have epigastric pain radiating to the right hypochondrium.
His laboratory results revealed an exacerbation of the lymphocyte counts and percentages as well as an increase in his CRP (112.28 mg/L) . There were no abnormalities in his liver and kidney biochemical markers. In terms of confirming COVID-19, his nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab specimens came back as positive using the real-time polymerase chain reaction.