A 59-year-old male with a history of diabetes mellitus type II, coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease status post right foot amputation, and ESRD on hemodialysis was admitted to our hospital in October of 2017 for chest pain and swelling of legs for 5 days. Notably, the patient is a resident of Puerto Rico, but due to delays caused by Hurricane Maria, was unable to receive his last three dialysis sessions. As a result, 3 days prior to admission, the patient travelled to the continental United States to obtain dialysis.
In the emergency department, the patient had a temperature of 36.8 °C, blood pressure of 180/83, heart rate of 84, respiratory rate of 20, oxygen saturation of 96%, and was found to have lower extremity edema and right stump ulceration with distal necrotic tissue. Labs revealed a potassium level of 5.1, blood urea nitrogen of 67, anion gap of 9, creatinine of 9.990 and a Troponin T of 0.21. An electrocardiogram did not show peaked T-waves. The patient was admitted to reinstate dialysis and rule out acute coronary syndrome. Chest pain resolved after dialysis, and troponins trended down. It was concluded that the mild troponin elevation was likely demand ischemia secondary to fluid overload. To manage the right foot ulcer noted on admission, podiatry was consulted and recommended wound care services for the patient. Social work also recommended outpatient transportation to dialysis given his limited mobility. The patient was then medically cleared for discharge 2 days after admission, after five inpatient dialysis sessions.
Given the recommendation for these outpatient services, social work was consulted for discharge planning. Though the patient was insured through Puerto Rican managed Medicare, the patient’s coverage was not transferable for these services in the continental United States. The team consulted a hospital financial officer who found that to be eligible for New York State Medicaid, the patient would need to change his social security information, mainly his address, to reflect New York residence. While New York State Medicaid remained a potential option, the application process can take as long as 2 months and requires that the applicant maintain state residence for at least a month. This process was therefore not feasible for our patient who wanted to eventually return to Puerto Rico after being discharged to his parents’ home in Brooklyn. As a result, 9 days after admission, the patient was discharged to his parents’ home with local outpatient dialysis set up, but without access to either outpatient wound care or dialysis transportation. Ultimately, the patient was readmitted back to our hospital a month and a half later for non-ST elevation myocardial infarction.