A 62-year-old male with a 2-year medical history of coronary atherosclerotic heart disease was admitted to our emergency department after acute onset of neurological symptoms. The patient presented with aggravated slurred in speech and abnormal gait in the prior 24 h, accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Additionally, he described having persistent hiccups of at least 2 h. Her cognitive decline was noted with a Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) score of 13 and a Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score of 18 showing difficulties in areas of short-term memory, orientation and calculation. Emergency brain computed tomography (CT) revealed no acute process. The patient was transferred to department of neurology. The next day he developed symptoms of occasional jerky movements in the right face and twitching right leg, which would gradually increase in frequency. Continuous electroencephalogram monitoring was interpreted as background slowing without electrographic seizures. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed irregular lesions in the left caudate nucleus, putamen and insula with restricted diffusion . Medulla oblongata was not affected . No obvious enhancement was noted . Blood tests showed moderate hyponatraemia (118.04 mmol/L [reference range 137–147 mmol/L] ). The patient was therefore diagnosed with ischemic stroke and empirically treated with levetiracetam and sodium supplement. The patient was discharged after a nearly normal workup of serum sodium (135.03mmol/L) with recommendations to follow up with outpatient neurology. The patient was improved upon discharge.
Two days later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital for communication impairment, incessant hiccups and increasing frequency of jerking on both right face and upper extremity despite compliance with the prescription. His serum sodium was 120.22 mmol/L and MRI examination demonstrated new lesion in the left hippocampus . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) workup results revealed a normal level in white blood cell count, glucose and protein. Anti-LGI1 antibodies were detected both in CSF and serology. CV2, anti-Ri, GAD65, Tr, Ma2, SOX1, Titin, Recoverin, amphiphysin, anti-Yo, Zic4, anti-Hu, and PKCγ antibodies in CSF and serum returned negative. CT scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated unremarkable for malignancy.
His episodes were consistent with faciobrachial dystonic seizures. The patient was diagnosed anti-LGI1 antibody-mediated autoimmune encephalitis and treated with pulse methylprednisolone 1000 mg daily for 3 days, reduced by a half every 3 days. There were immediate improvements in his cognition and behavior and hiccups disappeared. However, neurological symptoms deteriorated when methylprednisolone was reduced to 120 mg. A course of intravenous immunoglobulin was therefore added. He was discharged several days later and continued on regular oral prednisolone. At 5-month follow up, he demonstrated obvious improvements in clinical symptoms. Besides, serum sodium was normal. But brain MRI showed the left hippocampus was smaller than the contralateral side .