A 59-year-old Lebanese woman was started on the FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy protocol for metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma with irinotecan (180 mg/m2), 5-FU (2400 mg/m2), leucovorin (400 mg/m2), and oxaliplatin (85 mg/m2). She presented to the hospital 1 week after her first cycle with weight loss and decreased oral intake owing to odynophagia. She was diagnosed with grade 4 mucositis and was started on fluconazole and later acyclovir. Owing to very poor oral intake, total parenteral nutrition with electrolyte correction was necessary until the patient was able to better tolerate food. At presentation to the hospital, she also reported three or four episodes of watery bowel movements per day. All stool study results were negative, so she was considered to have grade 1 chemotherapy-induced diarrhea and was started on loperamide. On the second day of hospitalization, the patient developed febrile neutropenia, so piperacillin and tazobactam were initiated along with vancomycin. Subcutaneous filgrastim was administered daily for 9 days and then twice daily for 3 days until the neutropenia subsided. During her stay, the patient also developed a drop in hemoglobin and platelet count, as well as an erythematous rash over the trunk with desquamation of the skin under the breasts. Owing to the severe side effects, FOLFIRINOX was discontinued despite a decrease in tumor marker, and the protocol was changed to gemcitabine and nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel with a good initial response to treatment. With most regimens for the treatment of advanced pancreatic cancer including 5-FU, its oral prodrug capecitabine, irinotecan, or oxaliplatin, and because of the severe reaction the patient experienced, we decided to test the patient for DPD and uridine diphosphoglucuronate-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) deficiency. UGT1A1 deficiency is associated with Gilbert’s syndrome and increases the toxicity of irinotecan. Those two tests would help us determine which of the two drugs was the culprit and guide us to use either or both drugs in a reduced dose. The functional activity of the DPD enzyme was not measured, but the DPYD gene was analyzed by next-generation sequencing of both DNA strands of the entire coding region and highly conserved exon-intron splice junctions. The patient was found to have three different variations of the DPYD gene as follows: heterozygous pathogenic variant DPYD*2A (splice site variant 1905+1G>A, also called IVS14+1), heterozygous deficiency-associated variant c.1601G>A (p.Ser534Asn) [, ], and heterozygous deficiency-associated variant c.2194G>A (p.Val732Ile) [, ]. All three variations are proposed to cause a reduced activity of the DPYD enzyme. The phase of the three variants (cis or trans) could not be determined, because both parents were not available. The patient also had UGT1A1 deficiency and hence Gilbert’s syndrome.