A 56-year-old female patient was transferred to our department of critical care medicine, Huashan hospital in Shanghai in June 2016 after she received treatment in a local hospital for productive cough, tachypnea and respiratory distress. She complained of recurrent fever and asymmetric edema of the lower extremities for over 1 month, as well as painful swelling both in the thyroid and labium majus for 2 weeks. In the previous hospital, due to the finding of multiple bilateral cysts which were palpable nodules in her thyroid gland by ultrasound examination, a left lobe thyroid puncture and drainage had been conducted and an aspergillus fumigatus infection was detected. She had a history of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and lupus nephritis for 8 years, and received prednisone treatment for these diseases. But from November 2015, prednisone was switched to methylprednisolone, and hydroxychloroquine has been added because of lupus nephritis aggravation, and tacrolimus has also been added to the medications in the following month. She was also diagnosed with renal hypertension and diabetes induced by steroids, and received antihypertension and antihyperglycemic therapy. She had no history of pulmonary diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, or any repeated infections, and had no addiction to drugs, smoking or alcoholism. Previous examinations showed no evidence of neutropenia. The ratio of CD4/CD8 was 0.33. Only one aspergillus test was positive in repeated sputum cultures. The galactomannan aspergillus antigen and culture tests in BALF were negative, so were blood and urine cultures including fungi. Our chest computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed bilateral patchy lung opacities in the middle and lower lobes, along with multiple shadows of fibrotic streaks, high-density nodules and mediastinal calcification of lymph nodes . The diagnosis of pulmonary infection was established, and pathogen was highly suspected of aspergillus according to the previous finding of thyroid puncture and drainage. An ultrasound examination showed thrombosis in the bilateral femoral veins and popliteal veins. In addition, a 51 × 16 mm hypoechoic lesion was detected in the left subcutaneous perineal region. We continued voriconazole therapy in a standard treatment dose (200 mg twice a day), but her body temperature was still up to 37.6 °C intermittently. Her white blood cells were 15.61 × 109/L (neutrophils 90.8% and lymphocytes 5.4%), hemoglobin was 93 g/L, and platelets were 295 × 109/L. Except hyperglycemia, proteinuria, and hypoproteinemia, other routine laboratory tests were unremarkable, which including thyroid hormone levels. A neck CT showed findings consistent with a fluid collection in the right thyroid lobe . Cultures of aspirated purulent fluid showed aspergillus fumigatus growth, which was obtained from fine needle aspirations in both thyroid and perineum. Five days after being transferred to our hospital, the patient’s thyroid drainage tube was removed because no further fluid was drained out. We continued the voriconazole dose 400 mg per day as anti-aspergillosis therapy with 16 mg methylprednisolone and 400 mg hydroxychloroquine per day as immunosuppressive therapy, along with a therapeutic 4100 iu q 12 h dose of nadroparin calcium. The patient’s fever was relatively controlled and white blood cells decreased to 10.74 × 109/L (neutrophils 91.7%, and lymphocytes 4.7%). Lesions in the thyroid and subcutaneous labium majus became significantly smaller, and the pain was greatly relieved. On the eighth day of hospitalization, the symptoms had improved and the patient was discharged from our hospital. She continuously took voriconazole orally (400 mg per day) for 6 months, combined with caspofungin for the initial 2 weeks (first day 70 mg, then 50 mg per day). After 1 month of antifungal treatment, she was afebrile and all the clinical symptoms were relieved. The patient is on a follow-up for 1 year and has been free of aspergillosis for 6 months. Hydroxychloroquine treatment ceased in April 2017, and methylprednisolone dose was reduced in a tapered manner.