A 62-year-old woman presented with complaints of epigastric pain and vomiting for a few weeks. She had a history of traffic trauma followed by a brain abscess and had also undergone a total hysterectomy for a uterine myoma. She was given an antiepileptic agent, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug and a proton pump inhibitor at a local hospital. She had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. On physical examination, her blood pressure was 123/65 mmHg, her temperature 36.8 °C, her respiratory rate 18/min, and her heart rate 56 beats per minute. There was epigastric tenderness on palpation. Laboratory results indicated a white blood cell count of 7090/mm3 (67.5% neutrophils and 0.8% eosinophils), a hemoglobin level of 12.6 mg/dl, and a platelet count of 275,000/mm3. Other blood biochemistry data were normal. Serum anti-Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) immunoglobulin G antibody was negative (4 IU/ml, < 10 cut-off). Computed tomography (CT) showed a 27-mm, hyper-enhancing tumor in the submucosa of the prepyloric antrum as well as thickening of the muscularis propria layer and a hyper-enhancing lesion in the subserosa . Upper endoscopy also showed a submucosal tumor originating from the posterior wall of the prepyloric antrum . The tumor caused subtotal obstruction of the gastric outlet. Multiple biopsy specimens obtained from the surface of the submucosal tumor revealed infiltration of inflammatory cells. To obtain further histopathological information, endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration was conducted. The endoscopic ultrasound showed a hypoechoic tumor with slightly heterogeneous internal echoes originating from the submucosal area . The tumor was punctured using a 22 G needle. The results indicated a small number of spindle cells, but a definitive diagnosis was not made. Considering her clinical findings, a diagnosis of GIST was suspected. Thus, distal gastrectomy was performed. The resected specimen revealed thickening of the submucosal layer and the muscularis propria layer at the antrum . Histopathological examination revealed a submucosal tumor containing proliferating bland fibroblast-like spindle cells with inflammatory infiltrates . There was also a proliferation of small blood vessels. The inflammatory infiltrate contained lymphocytes and plasma cells. The spindle cells invaded the muscularis propria layer and extended to the subserosal layer . Regional lymph node metastasis was not detected. Immunohistochemical examination revealed that the spindle cells were diffusely positive for CD34, focally positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin and CD68, and negative for CD117, discovered on GIST-1 (DOG-1), S100 protein, desmin, cytokeratin AE1/AE3 and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK). The Ki-67 (MIB-1) labeling index in the spindle cells was less than 1% . Nuclear positivity for beta-catenin was not observed. IgG4-positive plasma cells were rare in the lesion. For mutational analysis, the tumor tissue was scraped from unstained slides, and DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The PDGFRA gene (exons 12, 14 and 18) was amplified by PCR using KOD FX Neo (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). The PCR products were separated by electrophoresis and purified with a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). The purified PCR products were sequenced using an ABI 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The results indicated the lack of mutations in the PDGFRA gene. While the invasive characteristics were atypical, the histopathological and immunohistochemical findings were consistent with an IFP. Thus, we finally diagnosed the tumor as an IFP. After resection, the patient’s clinical course was good: she has been closely followed up and has shown no recurrence.