A 59-year-old woman of Chinese Han origin presented with a complaint of a left pulsatile tinnitus. She had been extremely depressed for 10 years because this tinnitus was constant and prevented her from sleeping. She had visited the otological clinics at different hospitals several times. At each presentation, the tympanic membrane was carefully examined otoscopically and was found to be normal. A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the temporal bone was also performed 9 years prior to her presentation to our hospital with a negative finding. With the initial diagnosis of venous hum, she received no effective treatment.
The patient was referred to us for further evaluation on January 17, 2007, due to the unbearable left tinnitus and a new awareness that her hearing had gradually deteriorated for 2 years. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable except for hypertension, which was under treatment. On examination, the pulsatile tinnitus could be completely suppressed by digital pressure over the ipsilateral internal jugular vein or when the patient was asked to turn her head towards the side of tinnitus. Cranial, carotid and chest auscultation were negative. Other examinations including carotid ultrasonography, electrocardiography, thyroid function tests, and chest X-ray were normal. Careful otoscopic examination revealed a vague and reddish mass behind the superior-posterior portion of the intact left tympanic membrane. A pure tone audiogram showed a moderately severe conductive hearing loss in the left ear, especially at lower frequencies; middle ear impedance testing ascertained a flat tympanogram of the same ear. High resolution CT scans of the temporal bone showed a slightly ill-defined left middle ear soft tissue mass involving the posterior mesotympanum and epitympanum, and the mastoid antrum with erosive changes of the facial fallopian canal . The margin between the lesion and incus was vague. There was no erosion of the lateral semicircular canal.
With the suspicion of a neoplastic lesion, the patient underwent an exploration surgery through a postauricular approach. During this procedure, the lesion was noted to center in the fossa incudis which apparently encased the incus and eroded through the second genu of the fallopian canal, but the lateral semicircular canal and facial nerve were not involved. There was extension of the mass into the posterior mesotympanum. Intraoperative frozen sections were obtained and documented a chronic inflammation. The patient then underwent complete removal of the lesion followed by stage I ossicular reconstruction. The facial nerve was carefully decompressed meanwhile without incision of the neural sheath.
The histopathologic study of the mass showed proliferation of myofibroblasts and fibroblasts within an edematous and mucous-degenerated stroma, with scattered infiltration of inflammatory cells ; mitotic activity was not observed. On immunohistochemistry, the spindle cells stained with smooth muscle actin but were negative for activin receptor-like kinase 1 , epithelial membrane antigen, desmin, ki-67 and S-100. These features are consistent with an IMFT.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient’s pulsatile tinnitus disappeared immediately after surgery. She was discharged home at the third postoperative day. During a 5-year follow-up period, no signs of recurrence were noted.