An 11-year-old Caucasian girl was referred to our Allergy Unit because of a delayed appearance (that is after 12 hours) of an itching papular rash at the site of an injection of benzathine benzylpenicillin 1,200,000 UI (Biopharma, Rome, Italy) delivered via prefilled syringe .
From the past medical history, at three years of age, our patient had edema of the lips and difficulty in breathing after eating a soy ice-cream. For that reason, she underwent a blood test analysis to measure the level of serum-specific IgE to milk, egg, soybean, tomato, peanut, whey and fish. Specific IgE to soybean resulted weakly positive (0.21 KUA/l) and she was put on a soybean-free diet.
At nine years of age, because of a post-traumatic spleen breakage, our patient was splenectomized and from that moment she was put on antibiotic prophylaxis with intramuscular benzathine benzylpenicillin (Biopharma) every 21 days. Our patient tolerated 14 injections of the drug in the formulation powder and using solvent for reconstitution. On January 2012, because of the exit from the market of this formulation, a new formulation, packaged as a prefilled syringe, was used. After the first use, our patient presented with a delayed papular rash at the injection site, as mentioned above.
A skin prick test and intradermal test with benzylpenicillin at a concentration of 10,000 UI and a patch test at 5% full-strength concentration were all negative. Moreover, the detection of serum-specific IgE to penicilloyl V, penicilloyl G, ampicillin and amoxicillin was negative; a skin prick test with soybean was negative and a serum-specific IgE to soybean was weakly positive (0.21KUA/l). Three months after the reaction mentioned above, and after receiving informed consent from the girl and her parents, we decided to perform an oral provocation test (OPT) with cefpodoxime proxetil (200mg) that yielded a negative result. We also performed an OPT with soymilk (50ml divided into three doses) with no reaction after two hours of observation on the first day; however, on the second day, she presented with diarrhea and abdominal pain. We provide a summary of our patient’s clinical findings .
Taking into account the following factors: (a) the presence of soy lecithin among the constituents of benzathine benzylpenicillin (Biopharma) both in the prefilled syringe and in the formulation powder and solvent for reconstitution; and (b) the positive medical history for soy allergy, a cause and effect link between soy lecithin and the allergic reaction was suspected. Moreover, the positive OPT with soymilk reinforced the hypothesis of a delayed allergy to soy proteins contaminating the lecithin contained in the prefilled syringe.
According to the current guidelines , we decided to change the antibiotic prophylaxis to orally administered cefpodoxime proxetil every 21 days and she had no further reactions.