A 10-year-old Tunisian girl presented to our hospital with prolonged fever during 2 months. Her parents were first-degree relatives and she had no past medical history. She received the Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) vaccine as a child and had no prior contact with a family member with TB infection. On physical examination, there was generalized butterfly-rash-like erythematous eruption, high fever, and arthralgia. Blood pressure measurement revealed hypertension with different levels between the two upper limbs (145/80 mmHg on the left arm and 160/90 mmHg on the right arm). Both carotid left artery and left para umbilical bruits were assessed and palpation of all peripheral pulses was normal. She had no lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly, and dipstick test was normal. Labstix strip test was negative.
Laboratory tests showed microcytic anemia (hemoglobin at 9.5 g/dl) with normal leukocytes and platelets counts. The C-reactive protein was at 82 mg/l and erythrocyte sedimentation rate was elevated at 118 mm/hour. Other analyses were within normal reference ranges as following: urea 2.9 mmol/l, creatininemia 37 μmol/l, sodium 136 mmol/l, potassium 4.5 mmol/l, and calcium 2.45 mmol/l. Repeated blood cultures were negative. Protein electrophoresis revealed elevated alpha-2 and gamma globulins without nephrotic syndrome. Serum ferritin, fibrinogen, and liver function tests were normal. Immunological tests including rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibodies complement components C3 and C4, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic were negative. Viral serologies, including coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, herpes, parvovirus, and hepatitis C and B, were negative. Bone marrow aspiration showed no significant abnormalities. Both Quantiferon-TB-Gold in Tube and tuberculin skin tests were positive. Chest and knee X-rays were normal. BK detection in bronchial sputum was positive to mycobacterium TB. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed alveolar syndrome in the upper left lobe. Electrocardiogram showed signs of left ventricular hypertrophy, and transthoracic echocardiography was normal. Ophthalmological examination was unremarkable. Renal Doppler ultrasound showed a small right kidney with increased circulation velocities in the left renal artery.The cervical Doppler ultrasonography showed a low flow of the right subclavian artery and a circumferential and stenotic thickening of the left carotid artery. CT angiography showed diffuse artery thickening with luminal irregularity, inducing multiple stenosis and aneurysms, located in the aorta and its branches, aortic arch, descending thoracic, and abdominal aorta up to its infrarenal segments , left common carotid artery , right subclavian artery , celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery, and the two renal arteries .
TAK diagnosis concomitant to TB infection was diagnosed and we prescribed a four-drug anti-TB regimen including rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and etambutol during 2 months. We then maintained only rifampicin and isoniazid in association to methyl prednisolone pulses of 1 g/day during 3 days relayed by prednisone at 1 mg/kg/day. In addition to corticosteroid treatment, the patient received methotrexate at 10 mg/m2/week with folic acid, calcium, and vitamin D. Although inflammatory biological syndrome and anemia vanished, hypertension was not easy to control and required a combination of three drugs: calcium channel blockers, beta blockers, and alpha blockers. Follow-up was favorable clinically, biologically, and radiologically.