We conducted a single-case study to evaluate the effectiveness of a neuropsychological rehabilitation program directed to favor attention, memory, visuospatial abilities, and executive functioning together, in a patient with severe TBI-associated DAI, using a pretest-posttest design.
A 26-year-old Hispanic woman attended to our center complaining of memory problems, dysarthria, and difficulty in planning. Nine months earlier, she suffered a severe TBI after a car crash requiring intensive medical care at another hospital. A non-contrasted brain CT scan at admission showed Fisher IV subarachnoid hemorrhage affecting right frontal and parietal sulci, ambiens cisterna, anterior midbrain, pons, medulla oblongata, and a proximal portion of the spinal cord at the level of the foramen magnum. The patient progressively recovered her neurological functioning and was discharged four weeks after injury without a sensitive and motor sequel. A control brain MRI scan revealed multiple non-hemorrhagic focal lesions compatible with DAI of grade III . However, the patient did not receive any medical follow-up nor neuropsychological rehabilitation during the following months before attending our center. During such a period, she tried to return to her usual professional activities but noticed a diminished performance in tasks that did not represent a challenge before the trauma.
Besides the recent TBI, her past medical history was no relevant. She had a high level of education (master of forensic science). On admission, the patient was evaluated by a clinical neurologist and a neurosurgeon, which did not detect any physical examination abnormality. Then, she was assessed for deficits in several cognitive domains using various neuropsychological tests . During the pre-intervention assessment, the patient was awake, alert, and oriented to person, place, and time. Evaluation of impressive and expressive language revealed dysarthria. Dysfunction in sustained, selective, and divided attention and a decrease in attentional volume and speed-of-processing were found. She presented alterations in memory explained by difficulties in encoding due to attentional deficits aforementioned and showed problems in memory retrieval due to low usage of organizational strategies for learning. We found alterations in the planning and organization of executive behavior, as well as in auditory working memory in its central executive component, which were more evident during tasks demanding a higher level of concentration. Finally, difficulties in managing spatial relationships and coordinates were also observed.
Then, the patient underwent a two-phase 24-session cognitive intervention program . Phase 1, which had a duration of 12 weeks, was directed to sustained selective auditory and visual attention through tasks of cancelation and counting of different verbal and visual elements. Briefly, the patient had to select among different proposed strategies of verbalization and organization of such elements in order to complete each task correctly. This phase also favored visuospatial and visuoconstructive skills using tasks of copying symmetrical drawings, mosaics, tangram, and copying drawings in grids. Phase 2, which lasted another 12 weeks, favored memory, specifically in the encoding stage, through tasks requiring recall of stories, learning of word lists, taking errands, and reading news. Different strategies were proposed to improve the organization of information to be encoded. These included the division of a story into paragraphs or the classification of written information by semantic groups. We trained selective memory by asking the patient to write a sentence consisting of a pronoun, noun, and adjective summarizing the content of each paragraph of a text. Phase 2 also focused on executive functions such as planning and organizing using labyrinth tasks. Also, we used cards with questions like "what do I have to do?" and "how am I going to do it?" which had to be answered by the patient before executing certain activities.
The patient was able to complete all phases and sessions of the intervention program after 24 weeks of follow-up (15 months after trauma). We found a general improvement of the patient's performance during the postintervention cognitive assessment . Specifically, we observed better performance in tasks requiring sustained, selective, and divided attention. Moreover, the attention volume increased, allowing the patient to record all the information presented to her. The encoding and retrieval memory problems significatively improved, and the patient used strategies for organizing information that promoted learning. She also improved her usage of spatial relationships and coordinates, allowing constructive task solving. We found a modest improvement in the planning and organization of behavior skills. Improvement in visual-spatial working memory was observed; however, in terms of auditory working memory, differences in patient performance were discrete.
Finally, we scheduled a follow-up appointment at our outpatient clinic to evaluate the general condition of the patient six months after the end of the cognitive intervention. During such an evaluation, the patient scored average in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) test and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test. Also, she reported the recovery of her independence and return to her professional activities. The patient provided written informed consent for publication of the case.