We report the case of a 23-year-old male patient admitted to our hospital in June 2018. The patient had a 4-month history of foamy urine prior to admission. His medical report revealed proteinuria (+++), mild edema of the lower limbs, elevated serum creatinine (259 μmol/L) levels, and mild hypertension (145/78 mmHg). The patient had no prior history of renal problems.
The patient was hospitalized due to nephrotic syndrome and renal failure. Laboratory testing revealed the following: blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 7.1 mmol/L; serum creatinine (Scr), 282 μmol/L; urine albumin/creatinine (UACR), 2701.53 mg/g; urine protein/creatinine (UPCR), 3360 mg/g; urinary protein quantitative (24 h), 6.678 g; serum albumin, 34.3 g/L; serum uric acid, 561 μmol/L; total cholesterol, 7.63 mmol/L; low density lipoprotein, 5.18 mmol/L; hemoglobin (Hb), 130 g/L; anti-PLA2R, negative; parathyroid hormone (iPTH), 135.79 pg/mL; and homocysteine (HCY), 22.23 μmol/L. Interventricular septal thickness was found to be 12 mm using cardiac ultrasound. As renal ultrasound revealed renal cortex thinning and an unclear boundary of the renal cortex and medulla, renal biopsy was not performed.
After discharge, the patient was prescribed α-keto acid, atorvastatin calcium, and febuxostat tablets to control proteinuria and edema. Unfortunately, the patient’s proteinuria was not improved, and his serum creatinine levels rose rapidly . Prednisone (Starting dose 1 mg/kg) was administered for several months but was not effective as renal failure rapidly progressed. In March 2020, the patient started hemodialysis. In June 2020, the patient underwent renal transplantation. The transplantation was successful, and the patient has not shown any sign of proteinuria or hematuria since.
Eight years ago, the patient’s mother had manifested proteinuria, elevated serum creatinine levels (142 μmol/L), high blood pressure, and hyperuricemia. Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) treatment was ineffective, and renal failure rapidly progressed. Peritoneal dialysis was initiated 3 years later (12/31/2014), and kidney transplantation was performed after another 2 years (03/03/2017). After transplantation, proteinuria was completely resolved; blood pressure and uric acid returned to normal; renal function improvement was also recorded (recent serum creatinine, 114 μmol/L) .
Given the patient’s familial history of renal failure, whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed. Genomic DNA from the patient, his mother, and a control was extracted from buccal swab samples, using a QIAmp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen China Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China). Target capture sequencing was performed on the extracted DNA. All coding exons were enriched. Genetic analysis, variation annotation, and identification of candidate pathogenic mutations were performed. For our study, a total of 16 members of the patient’s family were recruited. Three individuals were affected in this pedigree, including the patient, his mother, and his maternal grandmother. Sequencing of exon 4 of autosomal INF2 revealed a nonsynonymous missense variant, wherein a C was substituted with T (c.640C > T), resulting in the p.Arg214Cys mutation .
We conducted a review of the literature to compare the phenotypes of our patients with other patients reported to have been carrying the INF2 p.Arg214Cys mutation .