The patient was a 72-year-old man (height: 163 cm, weight: 69 kg) who presented at our facility with a diagnosis of cT2N0M0 prostate cancer. He was being treated at the department of cardiology for hypertension on an outpatient basis with paroxysmal atrial flutter (P-AFL) , for which he was taking oral calcium antagonists and direct oral anticoagulants. A first-degree atrioventricular block had been previously identified with no subjective symptoms. Preoperative echocardiography revealed good cardiac function with no valvular disease. Under general anesthesia, RARP was performed using the da Vinci X® Surgical System (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Pneumoperitoneum was commenced at a CO2 insufflation rate of 1L/min, which was changed to ~ 40 L/min ~ 1 min later. Intra-abdominal pressure was set to 10 mmHg. Then, systolic blood pressure was maintained at ≥ 100 mmHg. However, the patient's heart rate dropped to 30 bpm, indicating bradycardia, and on the electrocardiography monitor, CAVB was observed . After lacing the ports for the robot-assisted surgery and adopting the Trendelenburg position of 22°, the patient developed bradycardia. Therefore, pneumoperitoneum was stopped and the patient was returned to a horizontal position. First, transcutaneous pacing was performed to temporarily enhance the heart rate because of the observed medical emergency. When the pacing was switched off, spontaneous circulation disappeared (for ≥ 3 s), which compelled us to recommence the pacing immediately and to perform pacing more reliably by inserting a TPM via the right internal jugular vein , thus conducting the pacing at VVI set rate of 60 bpm. The patient's sustained stable hemodynamics with the TPM. Upon obtaining informed consent from the subject's family, surgery was performed as planned (operation duration: 313 min, duration of pneumoperitoneum: a total of 175 min, blood loss: 50 ml, and resected specimen: 100 g). After the surgery, while continuing to monitor our patient by electrocardiography, the pacing was gradually withdrawn. Electrocardiography performed on postoperative day 2 revealed no CAVB. Then, the patient's heart rate did not go below 40 bpm, and coronary angiography (CAG) performed on postoperative day 6 showed no predominant lesion. Accordingly, the Department of Cardiology deemed the insertion of the permanent pacemaker to be unnecessary; thus, the TPM was removed, and on postoperative day 9, the subject was discharged, as planned. The radical prostatectomy specimen was then diagnosed as adenocarcinoma with Gleason Score 3 + 4 and pT2c EPE0 RM0. At present, one year after surgery, there has been no recurrence of prostate cancer, and the subject is progressing without any arrhythmia-related symptoms.