A 54-year-old, Greek woman was admitted to our Internal Medicine Department with a high-spiking fever accompanied by rigor. She also complained of myalgias and sore throat. The symptoms started 3 days earlier. A few hours before admission, a severe headache started and led her to seek medical advice.
Her medical history was not significant. She did not report any visits to the dentist or any dental-related disease in the recent past. She had not undergone any invasive endoscopic procedure, nor had she exhibited any symptomatology in the weeks before her admission. She was not immunocompromised and did not regularly take any medications. On clinical examination, her temperature was 39.50C, and her blood pressure normal. There were no clinical indications of active pulmonary or cardiac involvement, and a brief neurological examination detected no abnormalities. Nuchal rigidity was absent. A laboratory examination revealed anemia (hemoglobin 11 g/dL), and increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (72 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein (321 mg/L). During paraclinical work-up, the patient developed multiple purpural lesions on her legs. There was no nail hemorrhage or petechial lesions on her soles or palms on clinical examination.
Multiple cultures were drawn and a brain computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. Its findings were further assessed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which revealed multiple cerebellar, white matter, and sub-grey matter, low-signal T1-weighted and high-signal T2-weighted lesions. Some of these lesions exhibited no-signal T2-weighted areas, consistent with a hemorrhage.
Immediately following the MRI results, and upon strong suspicion of endocarditis leading to cerebral embolization, transesophageal echocardiography was performed, revealing two 20 mm mitral valve vegetations.
The patient was started on ceftriaxone, 2 g intravenously b.i.d. and vancomycin, 500 mg intravenously q.i.d., and mitral valve replacement surgery was performed later that day, embolization being an indication for valve replacement in infective endocarditis in the case of large vegetations such as the ones present in this patient . Following valve replacement, antibiotic therapy was continued.
Four days after the valve replacement, blood cultures were positive for H. parainfluenzae. Throat swab specimens were cultured after the initiation of antimicrobial therapy and were negative as expected. The strain was susceptible to a variety of antibacterials, including amoxicillin-clavulanate. A decision was made to continue on ceftriaxone though, while vancomycin was discontinued. Ceftriaxone was administered, uneventfully, for six more weeks, together with gradual initiation of warfarin therapy.