A 22-year-old male who is not a known case of any medical illness, presented to the clinic following a local hospital referral, with a 2-year history of right shoulder pain. The pain started gradually and increased in severity over time. It was worse at night awakening the patient from sleep. There was no history of trauma or shoulder injury. The patient was referred to physiotherapy with the impression of impingement syndrome based on X Ray and clinical examination findings, yet there was no improvement . He was then advised for arthroscopic sub acromial decompression following failure of the conservative management.
The pain did not improve after the arthroscopic sub acromial decompression surgery. Following this, the patient started to experience increased pain at rest. Further imaging was ordered including an MRI of the cervical spine and brachial plexus along with a nerve conduction study, all of which were reported to be normal. The patient received a total of 3 intra-articular corticosteroid injections which still did not relieve the pain.
A non-contrast MRI of the affected shoulder was performed which showed a suspicious lesion at the base of the coracoid. Common coracoid process tumors such as chondrosarcomas, osteoblastomas, and chondroblastomas` were ruled out as subsequent contrast-enhanced MRI and CT scans of the scapula confirmed the presence of a benign “OO” (, , ).
After the radiological diagnosis of “OO” of the coracoid process was made by the referring local hospital, the patient was booked for a 2nd arthroscopic shoulder surgery which was performed by a senior consultant of orthopedic surgery. The patient was placed in a beach chair position and image intensifier-guided drilling of the osteoid osteoma lesion was done under general anesthesia. The surgery involved identifying the lesion using a C-arm X-Ray machine followed by the insertion of a guide wire through the lesion and ultimately drilling it with 4.5 mm and 6 mm drills respectively. Arthroscopic shaving and debridement of the lesion followed. The patient was discharged home on the same day in a stable condition with a cuff and collar brace and oral analgesics.
Following surgery, at the 1-week follow up in clinic, the patient reported complete resolution of pain and expressed satisfaction towards the treatment received. The subsequent follow-ups confirmed complete resolution of symptoms and the patient was then advised to mobilize the arm and engage in normal daily activities.