A 59-year-old European man crashed his car into a concrete dam . Bystanders attending to the accident found him in cardiac arrest and started cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) immediately. Sufficient CPR efforts were continued until the emergency services had arrived. The first recorded heart rhythm was ventricular fibrillation (VF). On inspection, no signs of injury were immediately visible and no skid marks were found. CPR was continued by physician-staffed emergency medical services (EMS) according to the current advanced life support (ALS) guidelines . Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) was achieved after 30 minutes. He remained unconscious without any sign of muscular activity. He was intubated, mechanically ventilated, and treated with catecholamines during and post CPR.
Although the car was severely damaged, the prehospital physician deemed a traumatic cause for out-of-hospital cardiac arrest (OHCA) unlikely. Based on findings indicative of myocardial ischemia in a post-ROSC electrocardiogram (ECG), acute coronary syndrome was suspected as the etiology of cardiac arrest. After telephone consultation with the trauma leader of the regional trauma center, the patient was transported to the trauma center with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)-capability primarily within 120 minutes of the accident.
On arrival at the trauma center, the patient appeared clinically stable. His heart rate was 65 per minute, systolic blood pressure was 150 mmHg, oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetry was 94%, and body temperature was 34.2 °C. Signs of myocardial ischemia were found in the ECG . His pupils were found to be equal, round, and reactive to light.
After primary evaluation in the emergency room a whole-body CT scan revealed findings listed in Table . An MRI scan of his head and neck was obtained immediately due to the severity of the CT findings. Additional findings in the MRI scan are summarized in Table .
The medical and social history of our patient were provided by his family. Subjective overall health assessment found the married man, who was a father and grandfather, to be in good health. He had suffered a fall leading to a fractured scapula 8 years before this accident, which was treated non-operatively. Two years ago, he was assessed for suspected coronary heart disease by a specialist in cardiology, who could not substantiate this suspicion.
He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further treatment. Halo fixation was installed because only ligamentous structures were disrupted in this case. This procedure is common and adequate in AOD when no cervical spine fractures are present .
Due to several episodes of severe bradycardia, transient transvenous pacing was conducted. Cardiac diagnostics showed an ischemic cardiomyopathy with recurrent episodes of ventricular tachycardia. Assessment via echocardiography was performed in the trauma room, 3 weeks and 2 months after the accident and revealed akinesia of the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) region and hypokinesia of the inferior wall after a suspected myocardial infarction and VF. Early coronary angiography could not be performed due to severe brain injuries.
Although he was initially assessed to have a poor neurological prognosis from the perspective of the neurologists and neurosurgeons because of his severe brain injuries, he could be discharged from the ICU after 23 days; he was responding to verbal contact and was able to move all his extremities.
After 23 days of treatment at the trauma center he was transferred to a hospital close to his home. Further in-patient treatment was continued by local protocol for further 33 days (timeline in Table ).
He was discharged to a neurological rehabilitation facility, where care and rehabilitation efforts were continued with great success. Three months after the incident the tracheostomy was surgically closed.
Coronary angiography was performed 4 months after the primary event and revealed no coronary artery disease. Subsequently, he had to wear a life vest due to arrhythmia. He was defibrillated once by the LifeVest® 3 months after the trauma during his stay at the neurological rehabilitation facility. Finally, 6 months after wearing the life vest an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) was installed.
Six months after the trauma, he was fully conscious, spontaneously breathing, independent of help in everyday life, and mobile with walking crutches. However, he was unable to swallow granular feed due incomplete bilateral paresis of the hypoglossal nerve. His neurologic status is continuously improving; treating neurologists attested a high potential of restitution.