A 5-year-old male presented to our pediatric surgery clinic with a painful mass in the chest wall.
The patient had been diagnosed previously with HME at the age of 1 year. He had multiple bony lesions affecting his chest wall, upper and lower extremities. Despite occasional pain over the bony lesions, his overall functional status was excellent. Since the age of 3 years, his parents noticed a bony lesion over the right side of his chest that was growing. It started to cause significant pain and affected his sleep, right arm movement, and overall ability to attend his school.
Besides diagnosis of HME, the patient had no other illnesses nor any known allergies.
The patient had a strong family history of HME, affecting both his brother and uncle.
The patient had normal vital signs. His chest examination revealed a 10 cm irregular, hard mass over the right anterior chest centered along the anterior axillary line. The overlying skin was normal . Another 2 cm lesion was felt below the main lesion and close to the right costal margin. A third small lesion was present on the left side of his chest, which was located at the costal margin. Several small bony lesions were felt over his upper and lower extremities close to his elbow and knee joints.
Blood analysis revealed the following: White blood cell count, 12.5 × 109/L (reference range: 5.0-15.5 × 109/L); red blood cell count, 3.5 × 1012/L (reference range: 3.9-5.0 × 1012/L); hemoglobin, 114 g/L (reference range: 110-138 g/L); and platelet count, 284 × 109/L (reference range: 150-350 × 109/L). Biochemical analysis revealed normal levels of total protein (58 g/L), albumin (34 g/L), creatinine (28 µmol/L), and urea nitrogen (4.1 mol/L).
Chest X-ray showed a distorted right middle of the chest. An enlarged osseous/cartilaginous lobulated exophytic lesion compatible with known exostosis demonstrated a dense matrix compatible with cartilaginous matrix. The heart was not enlarged, and the lungs were otherwise clear .
Computed tomography of the chest revealed large exostosis arising from the anterior portion of the right fourth rib extending to the costochondral junction measuring about 8.70 cm × 3.45 cm × 8.60 cm in the craniocaudal, transverse, and anteroposterior dimensions respectively. It had a mass effect on the lower ribs, which caused a chest wall deformity. There was also pseudo-articulation with the third rib. There was extension to the right hemithorax primarily at the level of the upper and middle lobes associated with adjacent middle lobe atelectatic changes. The intrathoracic extension of the exostosis was close to the right pulmonary vasculature. An intrathoracic extension portion measured 0.5 cm × 3.3 cm × 3.7 cm. Scattered exostoses were noted along the third, seventh, and eighth right ribs and the seventh left rib. Three-dimensional reconstruction was created to improve the understanding of the lesion and better guide the surgical operation .