We describe the case of a 33-year-old Caucasian male patient who developed his first episode of psychosis in 2017 at the age of 29 years. This resulted in a psychiatric admission that lasted two months but led to no significant improvement of his psychotic symptoms. Prior to this admission he had no previous mental health issues or contact with psychiatric services.
Over the two-month in-patient period he was trialed on an antipsychotic, Paliperidone Palmitate long acting injection, that was later switched to oral Aripirazole as the former caused excessive sedation. He was discharged on the latter but remained psychotic in the community, hence, his treatment was switched to Lurasidone 80 mg for three months, yet his symptoms were still unresolved. He was subsequently admitted to an inpatient rehabilitation unit for one year.
The patient reported tobacco smoking of 20–25 cigarettes daily and 4–5 g of cannabis every 2–3 days but denied other substance misuse. Despite the service’s endeavours to encourage him to stop smoking tobacco and cannabis, the patient declined changing his habit. During his lengthy rehab admission, his Lurasidone dose was increased from 80 to 160 mg but he continued to experience polymorphic psychosis in the form of persecutory, grandiose delusions, thought broadcast and delusion of control. In addition, he experienced auditory hallucinations to which he was attending.
Due to the nature of his treatment resistant psychotic symptoms, he was started on Clozapine and the dose was gradually titrated to 450 mg daily. His psychotic symptoms remained active but were less disabling as he stopped responding to the auditory hallucinations and started to actively engage in rehabilitation programming,
Following a dose reduction of Clozapine to 400 mg, in response to the patient’s request, he became noticeably psychotic, responding to unseen stimuli. Attempts to increase the Clozapine dose back to 450 mg was consistently declined by the patient, and he was eventually discharged to the community on 400 mg Clozapine. Of note, during his admission to rehab he was not using illicit drugs and managed to quit his long-term habit of tobacco smoking; thus, his Clozapine dosage was within the target dose for his gender and non-smoker status.
Upon his discharge he was referred to the community rehab team and on initial assessment he reported severe psychotic symptoms in the form of delusion of control via a microchip that he believed had been implanted in his brain by nurses. He reported that via this microchip nurses were able to insert, withdraw and broadcast his thoughts, as well as determine his thoughts a few seconds prior to him experiencing them. In addition, he reported constantly hearing nurses’ voices, in an extracampine manner, from a different city. Despite the severity of his reported psychosis he requested reduction of his Clozapine; but he later disclosed that he had unilaterally reduced the dose to 200 mg, which could explain the worsening of his symptoms.
The patient then agreed to consider alternative antipsychotic treatment that included oral Risperidone; but his non-compliance with oral treatment became an issue. Depot medication of Zuclopenthixol decanoate IM was then trialed; this initially dampened his psychotic experience, but later caused severe akathisia and agitation that was unresponsive to a beta blocker and Diazepam in combination. This triggered a third admission to acute psychiatry services where his psychotropic medication was switched to Olanzapine.
He continued to be treated on Olanzapine 20 mg daily in the community, which as such did not ameliorate his psychotic symptoms but reduced their consequential effect on his mental status. In his most recent mental state examination in March 2021, he disclosed complex systematized delusions, describing a state of ‘over-ride’ by God, of his self-control, directing him to do or not to do certain things e.g., smoking, working, etc. He also believed he is being controlled by the government via a microchip implanted in his brain and reported constantly hearing four benevolent voices ‘keeping him company’. He currently lives in a state of harmony with his psychosis and reported no distress and his affect became indifferent.
Personal and family history for this patient were both unremarkable. The patient disclosed that he started to use recreational drugs at the age of 17; he was smoking 1–2 joints of Cannabis daily but stopped using that during his rehab admission. He experimented on LSD once at the age of 17. He reported a single use of MDMA in his early 20s. He also used Cocaine between the age of 22 and 24 of 0.5–1 g a few days weekly. He denied excessive alcohol drinking or any binge-drinking.
The patient’s significant medical history goes back to when he was 22 years of age, i.e. 7 years prior to his first episode psychosis. He started to complain then of progressive claudication in his right leg over 1–3 years before he experienced pain at rest in this leg. When investigated by CT angiography in 2011, his right superficial femoral artery was found to be occluded (mid-thigh level) along with the right popliteal artery (mid-calf level). The other remarkable medical finding was that he had congenital deafness seemingly inherited from his paternal grandfather.
Primary inflammatory vasculopathy and primary autoimmune processes were ruled out. An extensive battery of autoimmune and inflammatory markers were negative that included lupus, anticardiolipin antibodies, homocysteine and antiphospholipid antibody.
Hereditary aneurysm syndrome and other vasculopathies were also ruled out via an extensive battery of investigations, and there was no family history of mid-vessel occlusion; hence, early Buerger’s syndrome was suspected. Subsequently, in 2011 he had a successful right femoral bypass using a reverse right saphenous vein graft. In 2012 the graft became occluded, and the patient was admitted for thrombolysis. Between 2012 and 2015, the same was repeated on three occasions and was ascribed to heavy smoking. He, therefore, had three further admissions to vascular surgery for graft occlusion that was associated with severe claudication. This was treated by thrombolysis, catheter insertion for tPA (tissue Plasminogen Activator) infusion to dissolve the thrombosis and he was maintained on conservative treatment in the form of Pentoxifylline 400 mg SR BID; Clopidogrel 75 mg OD; Rosuvastatin 10 mg OD; and Omeprazole 20 mg OD.
The deterioration of his vascular condition was attributed to heavy smoking compounding the manifestations of thromboangiitis obliterans.