The patient was a female in her 60s, hospitalized in the psychiatric department of a different medical institute for bipolar disorder. In April 2018, we performed a laparoscopic partial resection of segment four (S4) of the liver in our hospital, as a local treatment for HCC. Disease recurrence was identified in September 2019, during follow-up observation, and the patient was readmitted to our hospital for surgical treatment. Her medical history indicated primary biliary cirrhosis, ovarian cystoma, bipolar disorder, and cholecystolithiasis (asymptomatic). She did not have any allergies, never smoked, and only consumed alcohol occasionally. Upon admission, her body weight and body mass index were 53.0 kg and 27.85 kg/m2, respectively.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a tumor at S4 with well enhancement in arterial phase and with washout in portal phase, 27 × 18 mm in size. We also confirmed the presence of splenomegaly and splenorenal shunt but did not observe any gastric/esophageal varices or distant metastasis in the lungs or bones. In a gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), we confirmed a tumor in the same region (S4), which showed high intensity in the arterial phase and low intensity in the hepatobiliary phase, adjacent to the S4 Glisson’s capsule and the hilar plate.
Preoperative blood test results revealed a low platelet count (103 × 103/μL), hypoalbuminemia (3.0 g/dL), renal dysfunction (55 mL/min/1.73 m2 of estimated glomerular filtration rate), and an increased Na level (151 mEq/L) .
The indocyanine green 15 min retention test value was 49.2%, with a Child-Pugh score of 7 (class B). Preoperative chest radiography showed a 45.3% cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) with no evidence of pleural effusion.
We performed an open S4 sectionectomy in October 2019 to resect the tumor. The duration of the operation was 248 min, and the blood loss was 595 mL. The intraoperative infusion volume was 2110 mL, and we administered 480 mL of fresh frozen plasma together with 10 units of platelet concentrates. The intraoperative urine volume was 680 mL.
On postoperative day (POD) 1, the patient’s level of consciousness was normal, and other vital signs were stable. Her weight increased from 53 kg (before the surgery) to 56.7 kg, and whole-body edema, as well as right pleural effusion in the chest X-ray image were evident . Despite an oxygen flow of 3 L/min, her peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) level dropped to 92%. The CTR was significantly increased (66.7%) when compared to preoperative levels. We determined that this was due to the postoperative pleural effusion, and thus the patient was started on oral administration of tolvaptan and spironolactone at 7.5 and 25 mg/day, respectively. The Na level was unchanged when compared with preoperative levels (151 mEq/L).
On POD 2, the patient’s body temperature was 39 °C and she suffered from dyspnea and general fatigue. Since she showed delirium symptoms, anemia progression, decreased platelet count, increased inflammation, and hepatic transaminase levels, we performed a contrast-enhanced CT. Although the abdominal CT showed normal postoperative changes, the chest CT allowed us to confirm a right pleural effusion and bilateral pneumonia . We then fasted the patient and started the administration of antibacterial agents (tazobactam piperacillin hydrate, 13.5 g/day). The Na level was normal on POD 2 (143 mEq/L).
On POD 3, her body temperature subsided to 37.2 °C. She showed signs of clear consciousness, and the SpO2 level improved to 96% under an oxygen flow of 3 L/min. The daily urine volume was 4350 mL. The CTR did not change significantly, but there was an improvement in the right pleural effusion . The Na level increased to 161 mEq/L.
On POD 4, at around 19:00, she showed disturbance of consciousness. We suspected that this condition was due to postoperative delirium, as confirmed by a psychiatrist.
The blood test on POD 5 showed an extremely high Na level (174 mEq/L), which led us to determine that the delirium was due to hypernatremia. We suspected that this could be a side effect of tolvaptan and immediately terminated its administration. The Na level gradually improved with fluid infusion therapy, dropping to preoperative levels on the ninth day; her consciousness also gradually improved .