A 59-year-old woman was admitted to our department with 1-month history of rapidly progressive headache, nausea, and weakness in the right lower extremity. Physical examination revealed slight hemiparesis in the right lower limb (muscle power grade IV). A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a right lateral ventricular mass lesion and TTH, as well as diffuse brain edema . Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) verified the lesion site in the trigone with temporal horn expansion. The space-occupying lesion was solid, cystic, brim enhancing, and heterogeneous. The maximum diameter of the lesion was 5 cm .
In fact, the tumor had been detected incidentally by CT and MRI when the patient visited our hospital 18 months ago. CT revealed a 1-cm round high-density lesion in the body of the right lateral ventricle and punctate calcification in the center. Minimal enhancement was observed on enhanced MRI . Based on imaging characteristics, ependymoma was the most probable diagnosis. The patient chose observation treatment. At the sixth month of follow-up in another hospital, no change in tumor size was noted, and she had not been followed since then until she developed progressive headache.
A right parieto-occipital surgical approach was used, and surgery was guided by neuroendoscopy. The tumor appeared grayish and predominantly soft and was so infiltrative that no obvious interface between the ependymal layer and lesion was differentiated. Due to the large tumor volume and deep location, subtotal resection was achieved. Histopathological examination of the tumor revealed endothelial proliferation, atypical nuclei, and necrosis. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated strong positivity for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), negativity for IDH1, and Ki67 index of 20% . The final pathological diagnosis was consistent with glioblastoma IDH wild type (2021 WHO CNS5). The patient recovered unevenly, the TTH was more distinct than that preoperatively, and external ventricular drainage through the temporal horn and ventriculoperitoneal shunt were performed one after another. The patient remained comatose postoperatively. After the patient’s family was informed about the disease prognosis, they chose to pursue palliative care and comfort measures. However, the patient died 36 days after the first surgery.