A 39-year-old man presented with a 20-month history of severe nocturnal pain in the left ankle and difficulty walking with no history of trauma. The patient was treated at local hospitals with some pain relief medications such as acetaminophen and NSAIDs. The pain was lessened but recurrent when medicines were stopped. In the sixth month of the disease, after a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, the patient was admitted to a hospital with a diagnosis “narrow of the anterior chamber of the ankle”! An arthroscopy was performed to debride the ankle joint but the situation was still unchanged. Four months after the arthroscopy procedure, an aspiration at the tenderness site was made, and the specimens were sent for a tuberculosis test and biopsy with negative results. The second MRI was performed 6 months later, but there was no confirmed diagnosis yet. Besides the severe pain in the ankle at night, the patient revealed the foot was gradually medially deviated, and walking was difficult. Twenty months after the beginning of the disease, the patient came to our hospital. At the admission, the left ankle was in a medium varus position, the left foot was medially deviated along with normal dorsi-plantarflexion, contrary to the right ankle was normal. Swelling and tenderness were located anteroinferior to the left lateral malleolar without redness or high temperature . A new MRI was performed and an intra-articular and typical lesion of osteoid osteoma in the calcaneus was seen in the lateral side and at the anterior rim of the posterior facet of the calcaneus .
The subtalar joint was aspirated with a puncture at the place anteroinferior to the lateral malleolar, getting a little fluid in a red-brown color. For treatment, an open procedure was made with a lateral incision going to the subtalar joint. At the opening of the joint, an amount of red-brown synovial fluid was exuded .
The lesion was removed with a curette and a piece of tissue was sent for microscopic examination. A little bit of synovial fluid was sent for microbiologic analysis. The defect was left without any graft. After the joint was carefully lavaged, the wound was closed. Microscopic pathology confirmed an osteoid osteoma with irregular trabeculae of woven bone rimmed by a single layer of osteoblasts and scattered osteoclasts . The microbiology test gave a negative result. Five months after the operation, the ankle varus disappeared, and the patient has returned to normal activities pain-free . For now, the patient is very happy and consented to the publication of his disease.