Skin rash on the right lower abdomen for 3 d and, abdominal pain with bloating for 1 d.
A 40-year-old female patient underwent a laparoscopic appendectomy at Baotou Central Hospital in April 2022. By day 2 after abdominal surgery, the patient transitioned to her regular diet and was successfully discharged from the hospital. On day 4, the patient developed clusters of erythematous rashes in the right lower abdomen, causing itching and pain at the site of the rash, along with intermittent radiating pain in the bilateral iliolumbar region. On the day 7, the patient experienced abdominal pain localized to the center of the abdomen, accompanied by nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, and cessation of exhaust, with passage of only a small amount of stools. The abdominal pain later increased paroxysmally and persisted without relief, leading the patient to seek further treatment at Baotou Central Hospital.
The patient had been vaccinated against varicella in early childhood and experienced a varicella infection for the first time in 2017. The patient underwent laparoscopic appendectomy at Baotou Central Hospital in April 2022 and was in close contact with a patient who developed herpes zoster after abdominal surgery.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
After admission to the hospital, the patient's temperature was 37.1 ºC. Physical examination revealed clusters of red rashes in the right lower abdomen , tenderness in the middle and lower abdomen, and active bowel sounds.
Laboratory examination revealed an elevated white blood cell count (11.28 × 109 cells /L), neutrophil ratio (86.40%), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (50 mm/h).
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed the presence of fluid inside the abdominal cavity. An upright abdominal plain radiograph indicated gas accumulation and scattered fluid levels in the abdominal intestine, suggesting intestinal obstruction . Whole-abdominal computed tomography confirmed considerable dilation and fluid accumulation in the abdominal and pelvic bowel, supporting the diagnosis . Furthermore, it revealed fluid accumulation in the abdominal and pelvic cavities . Additionally, at the coronal level, we could observe the position of the hem-lock clamp used during the patient's previous laparoscopic appendectomy .