A 62-year-old female patient presented to us with headache on November 13, 2022, having had headache for 3 days. She had no clear history of trauma before the onset of the disease, while she had a history of rheumatoid arthritis. She was treated with long-term oral hormone. The physical examination on admission showed that the body temperature was 36.8 °C, the BP was 132/75 mmHg, and she was clear in mind. There was an abscess about 5 cm×5 cm in size on her left face, in which we could reach the sense of wave motion, and she did not present other positive signs. MRI showed that multiple intracranial abnormalities were enhanced, meningitis was considered, and brain abscess in the left temporal lobe was formed, bilateral frontal and left temporo-occipital regions were filled with pus under the skull inner plate and the dura mater of the longitudinal fissure pool, multiple swelling of the left temporal region, facial region, internal pterygoid muscle and external pterygoid muscle was considered, inflammatory lesions were considered, and left middle ear mastoiditis . In that case, we suggested craniotomy to deal with the subdural abscess and brain abscess. The patient and her family members refused craniotomy. Blood routine examination: white blood cells 7.56×109/L, neutrophils accounted for 88.1%. After admission, the patient was treated with vancomycin and meropenem for anti-infection, and the cerebrospinal fluid examination was conducted. The cerebrospinal fluid results are shown in . At the same time, the patient was punctured in the left facial abscess, and the yellow–green pus was punctured, and the bacterial culture and the Third Next Generation Sequencing and Gene Diagnosis (TNGS & GD) was performed. On the fifth day after admission (2022-11-18), the patient had a deeper consciousness disorder and was in a coma state. CT examination showed that the left frontotemporal crest, right frontal part, and left subdural low density shadow of the longitudinal fissure pool were significantly larger than before, and cerebral hernia was formed . We suggested craniotomy to deal with the subdural abscess and brain abscess again, and her family members chose craniotomy. In that case, she got the operation, the left frontotemporal and parietal subdural abscess was removed, the left temporal brain abscess was removed, with decompression. The images of intraoperation were as shown in . The patient’s consciousness gradually improved after the operation. The TNGS & GD results of the left facial abscess and intraoperative pus showed the total length of the Porphyromonas gingivalis covering the genome was 2933 bp, the coverage was 3.21% , while the result of bacterial culture was nothing. The patient was diagnosed with Porphyromonas gingivalis, and treated with meropenem and metronidazole. On the second day after operation, the CT scan of the skull showed that the arc density shadow under the skull inner plate of the left frontotemporal part disappeared, the compression of the adjacent sulcus and gyrus was slightly reduced, and the structure is centered . Postoperative blood routine examination: white blood cells 19.68×109/L, neutrophils accounted for 94.3%. On the 3rd day after operation, there was no obvious fluid outflow from the drainage tube, and the drainage tube was removed. The body temperature remained normal until 2 weeks after the operation. The results of cerebrospinal fluid examination before discharge were normal. At the time of discharge, the patient was clear, the tension of the flap in the original operation area was not high, and the abscess did not recur.