A 76-year-old woman was undergoing a routine follow-up outpatient visit after surgery. She had no complaint and routine computed tomography (CT) revealed an abdominal mass.
Two years prior to the routine outpatient visit, the patient had been admitted to our hospital complaining of melena. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a submucosal tumor (SMT) with ulceration located at the greater curvature of the gastric body. CT revealed inhomogeneous density and an extramural mass measuring 4.5 cm. She underwent laparoscopic local resection of the gastric SMT with a non-touch lesion-lifting method called CLEAN-NET. Immunohistochemical examination showed c-kit- and CD34-positive cells. The tumor was 4.5 cm × 4.0 cm in size, and the mitotic count was under 5 mitoses per 50 high-power fields (HPF). The patient was diagnosed with gastric GIST with intermediate recurrence risk. Therefore, adjuvant imatinib therapy was not administered. After surgery, she underwent regular outpatient visits and routine periodic examinations. Two years after the operation, periodic CT revealed an abdominal mass.
The patient’s medical history included hypertension for more than 5 years.
The patient had no subjective symptoms, such as abdominal pain or bloating. Physical examination revealed normal abdominal findings, and the intra-abdominal mass could not be palpated.
A laboratory examination showed a decreased level of hemoglobin (Hb = 11.5 g/dL). Blood tests for liver and kidney function and electrolyte levels showed results within the normal range.
CT revealed an abdominal mass between the dorsal side of the right hepatic lobe and the right kidney . The tumor size was 12 mm with uniform enhancement. CT did not show any other intraperitoneal masses or ascites. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumor with high signal intensity with uniform contrast . Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) showed the accumulation of fluorine-18 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-D-glucose (FDG) in the tumor, with a standardized uptake value of 5.5; no other definitive intra-abdominal lesions were noted . Other imaging tests did not reveal any additional abnormalities.
Based on the clinical course, we suspected a solitary recurrence of gastric GIST but could not distinguish whether the source of the suspected metastases was from the liver or retroperitoneum.