A 37-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) with chest pain beginning during his dialysis session earlier in the day. The pain was left sided, without radiation, and without changes in quality or severity with positional manoeuvres. He completed his dialysis session, but the pain persisted, prompting presentation to ED.
Past medical history was significant for end-stage renal disease, uncontrolled hypertension, and type 1 diabetes mellitus. He had no history of anginal symptoms and was active without limitations. There was no known family history of early coronary artery disease, sudden cardiac death, or cardiomyopathies.
At presentation, he was hypertensive (blood pressure 192/126 mmHg) and tachypnoeic, saturating 98% on 3L via nasal cannula. On exam, he appeared uncomfortable and was noted to be tachycardic with grade 2/6 systolic murmur at the apex without significant radiation. There was jugular venous distention to the angle of the mandible and crackles noted in the bilateral lung bases. Electrocardiogram was performed, demonstrating infero-lateral ST-segment elevations .
The differential diagnosis for ST-segment elevations includes: acute coronary event due to plaque rupture, stress-induced cardiomyopathy, coronary vasospasm, embolic coronary event, pericarditis, myocarditis, and pulmonary embolism. Despite his young age, the acuity of symptoms, distribution of ST-segment abnormalities, and presence of multiple cardiac risk factors made acute coronary occlusion due to plaque rupture or embolic event most likely on this patient’s differential diagnosis.
Given the concern for coronary occlusion, patient was taken to the cardiac catheterization lab. Initial angiogram (Video 1) demonstrated thrombotic occlusion of the distal left anterior descending artery, which was a large wrap-around vessel supplying the antero-lateral and portions of the inferior wall of the left ventricle. Rheolytic thrombectomy was attempted with successful retrieval of some thrombus, and patient was started on intravenous GPIIb/IIIa inhibition in addition to oral P2Y12 inhibitor following 3.25 × 26 mm Resolute Onyx (Medtronic, Warsaw, IN, USA) stent placement.
Transthoracic echocardiogram was performed per European Society of Cardiology guidelines, which recommend early echocardiography for all patients presenting with ST-elevation myocardial infarction to assess left ventricular (LV) systolic function, identify potential complications of obstructive coronary disease, and identify potential sources. This demonstrated preserved LV performance with apical hypokinesis. There was no evidence of LV thrombus, but the mitral valve demonstrated echo-bright, mobile densities on the ventricular side of the anterior mitral leaflet as well as a heterogeneous echodensity on the atrial side of the posterior mitral annulus . The brightness suggested calcification, but mobility of the lesions was also concerning for vegetation. Blood cultures were drawn, which remained negative. No leucocytosis was noted and the patient remained afebrile without signs or symptoms or infection. He denied any previous infectious symptoms, intravenous drug use, or indwelling lines within the last year.
Transoesophageal echocardiogram was performed, which confirmed the presence of at least three discrete bright, echo-dense lesions involving both leaflets of the mitral valve, the largest of which measured 0.9 cm by 0.8 cm (Video 2, , ). One lesion was noted to protrude into the LV outflow tract, and all lesions were highly mobile at their attachment site. Valvular function was not affected, with only mild mitral stenosis and regurgitation, and no other valvular disease.
Following initial percutaneous coronary intervention, the patient had improvement in his ST segments and resolution of chest pain. However, 48 h after initial presentation, he had recurrent chest pain with associated diaphoresis and tachycardia. Electrocardiogram again demonstrated ST-segment elevation in the inferolateral leads, and he was taken back to the cardiac catheterization lab. The previously placed stent was patent, but distal to this there was an occlusive lesion. Aspiration thrombectomy was performed with removal of thick, white material that appeared consistent with calcification. Serial balloon dilations were made and overlapping stent was placed to achieve thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) III flow in the vessel.
The patient had two additional events during the next 48 h, which were managed conservatively with nitroglycerine drip and anti-platelet agents. After multidisciplinary discussion, decision was made to proceed with mitral valve replacement with patch reinforcement of posterior annulus. Prior to this, despite his lack of neurologic symptoms on regular exams, the patient underwent computed tomography scan to rule out large territory stroke or intracranial haemorrhage per American Association of Thoracic Surgeons (AATS) guidelines. Previous studies have not demonstrated any significant difference in mortality between mechanical and bioprosthetic valves in patients with end-stage renal disease undergoing mitral valve replacement, and those with bioprosthetic mitral valves tend to have lower rates of perioperative complications due to lower bleeding risk., Given this, his multiple co-morbid conditions, and concerns with anticoagulation compliance, decision was made to proceed with a 27 mm Epic bioprosthetic valve in this patient.
Intraoperatively, gelatinous, ‘toothpaste-like’ material was noted (Video 3) and surgical pathology confirmed fibrocalcific disease of the valve. Histologic examination demonstrated fibrosis and exophytic calcification without any evidence of inflammation or inter- or intracellular organisms , consistent with negative blood cultures and lack of clinical symptoms suggestive of infective endocarditis.
The patient was discharged home after an unremarkable post-operative course. At 3-month follow-up, he reported no recurrent episodes of chest pain or functional limitations and was able to exercise at baseline level. Echocardiogram demonstrated preserved LV systolic function despite apical akinesis, with normally functioning bioprosthetic valve gradients and no evidence of significant calcification on or around valve leaflets.