A 53-year-old, disheveled male presented to the ED with complaints of anxiety and depression with concomitant suicidal ideation. The patient noted worsening depression over the prior four to six months. His anxiety and depression led him to quit his job of 28 years as a bakery manager due to the inability to concentrate or follow directions. He attributed this to his worsening depression. The patient quit driving six days prior to presentation after an episode of forgetfulness caused him to run off the road. Review of systems revealed intermittent chest pain as well as decreased appetite and a 20-pound unintentional weight loss in the preceding several months, which the patient attributed to overwhelming anxiety. His wife also described multiple episodes in which he would blankly stare at nothing for seconds before returning to baseline.
The patient had a history of depression for many years prior to this presentation. However, the patient had never considered suicide or had difficulty with activities of daily life (ADL) prior to the last four months. His primary care physician documented normal physical examinations on an office visit within the prior month for depression and anxiety. His sertraline dose was increased by his primary care physician without improvement in symptoms.
In the ED, the patient’s physical examination was remarkable only for slow, tangential speech with repetitive answers. Initial laboratory testing, including toxicology, was unremarkable. Due to his chest discomfort at initial presentation, two serial troponins were obtained before deeming the patient medically stable. He signed a voluntary commitment for psychiatric treatment and was admitted to the behavioral health unit. On the inpatient psychiatric unit, the patient continued with depression and anxiety. While he no longer felt suicidal, he developed significant paranoia. His inattention worsened and he became increasingly disoriented. His speech, while slow, remained clear. However, despite several trials of antidepressants and antipsychotics, his symptoms persisted.
Due to the progression of his symptoms over several weeks, the patient was reevaluated medically. It was felt that his neurologic status was related to his psychiatric illness. Several days later, he developed brief episodes of an arm drop, as well as frequent staring episodes. At that point, neurologic consultation discovered deterioration when compared to previous neurologic examination. His speech was now solely confabulation. While strength and sensation remained intact, the patient now had mildly increased tone. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain, with and without contrast, a lumbar puncture (LP), and an electroencephalogram (EEG) were obtained.
MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging demonstrated high signal intensity/restricted diffusion in bilateral cerebral cortices and basal ganglia. As depicted in the , the abnormality was more pronounced in the right hemisphere. Such findings can be seen with CJD, encephalitis, toxic/metabolic processes, and ischemic injury.
The EEG demonstrated slowing over the right hemisphere with anterior rhythmic slowing consistent with a diffuse encephalopathy. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) evaluation demonstrated large amounts of T-tau protein and was positive for CJD protein 14-3-3. These test results confirmed the diagnosis of CJD. The patient continued to decline cognitively; he was transitioned to hospice care and expired within one month of initial presentation to the ED.