We present a case of a 72-year-old white man presenting with general weakness, progressive dyspnea, and cough during the last days. His medical history was significant for chronic lymphatic leukemia (CLL), which had been stable without treatment, arterial hypertension, multiple squamous cell carcinomas of the scalp, and alcohol overuse. His regular medication consisted of atorvastatin, irbesartan, propranolol, and occasional use of chlorprothixene and diazepam. On physical examination, his temperature was 36.5 °C, blood pressure was 109/76 mmHg, pulse rate was 167 beats/minute and irregular, and respiration rate was 28 breaths/minute. A pulmonary examination revealed widespread rales. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation, which we judged as stress-related due to pulmonary infection. Blood tests showed increased C-reactive protein (CRP) levels (343 mg/L, normal < 6 mg/L), predominantly lymphocytic leukocytosis (68.9 × 109/L) with a known baseline around 45 × 109/L due to his CLL, elevated lactate level (3.6 mmol/L, normal < 1.6 mmol/L), hyperglycemia (10.3 mmol/L), mildly elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase 105 U/l, normal < 51 U/l; alanine aminotransferase 110 U/l, normal 35 to 50 U/l), coagulopathy (international normalized ratio 1.3, normal 0.9 to 1.2), and mild macrocytic anemia (hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL, normal 14.0 to 17.5 g/dl). An arterial blood gas analysis showed hypoxemia and hypocapnia: partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) 66 mmHg, normal 70 to 90 mmHg; partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 24.9 mmHg, normal 35 to 45 mmHg; bicarbonate 16.6 mmol/l, normal 22 to 24 mmol/l. An initial chest radiography was normal. His history of cough, new focal chest signs on clinical examination, and laboratory findings were consistent with community-acquired pneumonia. Because of his history of CLL and poor general condition, we started a broad-spectrum intravenously administered antibiotic regimen with piperacillin/tazobactam. In addition, anticoagulation with heparin (bolus and infusion) was started for atrial fibrillation.
Within a few hours, he developed rapidly progressive respiratory failure leading to cardiac arrest. As the cause of this respiratory failure, we identified pulmonary infection. Notably, there were no clinical signs of anaphylaxis or any known drug allergies from his history. Chest radiography excluded pneumothorax. Acute pulmonary embolism seemed unlikely as therapeutic anticoagulation had already been started for atrial fibrillation. After cardiopulmonary resuscitation and intubation, he was stabilized in our ICU. Oxygenation remained impaired and consequent chest radiographies demonstrated progressive bilateral infiltrates . Echocardiography showed normal left and right ventricular function, thus we diagnosed mild acute respiratory distress syndrome. Weaning from mechanical ventilation was prolonged, so a dilatation tracheostomy was performed. After initially decreasing CRP levels and leukocyte counts, he remained febrile and inflammation markers remained elevated even after addition of clarithromycin to the antibiotic regimen. All microbiologic samples initially taken, including blood cultures, tracheobronchial secretions culture and Gram stain, and Legionella and pneumococcal urinary antigen, were negative. A BAL was performed and HSV-1 PCR from BAL fluid tested positive. Due to a too small sample volume, we used tracheobronchial secretions for testing HSV-1 in viral culture, which also tested positive. The BAL fluid culture showed growth of Candida albicans. All other microbiologic examinations were negative, including serology for Mycoplasma, Mycobacterium tuberculosis PCR, microscopy, and culture as well as Pneumocystis jirovecii PCR and microscopy, galactomannan enzyme immunoassay (EIA), and PCR for adenovirus, influenza A and B, and other respiratory viruses from BAL fluid. He was started on intravenously administered acyclovir 10 mg/kg three times daily. Concomitantly, the antibacterial treatment was escalated to imipenem/cilastatin for suspected bacterial superinfection given a mildly elevated procalcitonin (1.54 mcg/L, normal < 0.10 mcg/L). Defervescence occurred rapidly, his CRP level decreased to 25 mg/L, leukocyte counts returned to the former baseline of 40 to 50 × 109/L, and the infiltrates on consequent chest radiographies improved markedly. Antiviral treatment was continued for 14 days; antibacterial treatment was given for 10 days. After successful weaning from mechanical ventilation he was transferred to the ward and discharged to home after 29 days (Additional file : Figure S1).