A 67-year-old Japanese man gave a history of being diagnosed with a cystic lesion in the right third molar region of the mandible by X-rays 11 years earlier. Subsequently, a tooth extraction had been performed. However, cyst enucleation and histopathological examination had not been carried out at that time. Eight years after the tooth extraction, he noticed a gingival swelling which lasted for three years. The medical history was only prostatic hypertrophy. On examination, a slight swelling was palpable in the gingiva of the right third molar region of the mandible. There was no fistula but a part of the bone had a defect. A panoramic radiograph revealed a radiolucent cystic lesion, measuring 10 × 12 mm in the same area . A computed tomography (CT) showed an unilocular radiolucent lesion along with cortical bone resorption of the mandible on the lingual side . On the basis of clinical and radiological findings, a presumptive diagnosis of an odontogenic cyst was made and a biopsy was performed . The incisional biopsy resulted in a diagnosis of central MEC arising from a GOC as described below. Chest and abdominal CT findings were within normal limits. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a contrast defect in the same area . Cervical lymph node metastasis was absent on MRI. Due to the malignant nature of the tumor, as well as a history of previous surgeries, a partial mandibulectomy was performed to remove the lesion with a sufficient surgical margin and the tumor was surgically excised under general anesthesia. Following a final diagnosis of central MEC, the patient made an uneventful recovery and demonstrated no clinical evidence of recurrence in the two years following the surgery.
Microscopic examination of the biopsy material showed an enlarged unilocular cyst . The cystic lumen was lined by epithelial cells and was surrounded by thick fibrous connective tissue. Additionally, a solid polycystic lesion was also seen on one side . Numerous microcysts and mucous goblet cells were observed in the lining epithelium . The intraepithelial mucin in the mucous goblet cells was positive for mucicarmine staining . Eosinophilic cuboidal cells and ciliated cells were scattered within the non-keratinized squamous epithelial cells. These histopathological findings were suggestive of a GOC. In addition to the cyst wall consisting of fibrous connective tissue and the above-mentioned non-keratinized squamous epithelium coating the fibrous stroma , the proliferation of many cystic nests containing mucous materials was observed in another part of the cyst wall . The lining epithelium inside several cysts consisted of a mixture of epidermoid, mucous, and intermediate cells . These findings served to confirm the diagnosis of central MEC arising from a GOC.
We evaluated the cytokeratin (CK) profile by immunostaining to compare the CK expression patterns between central MEC and GOC in the biopsy specimen. The lining epithelium comprising non-keratinized squamous cells in the GOC part showed immunopositivity for CK 7 , CK13 , CK14 , CK18 , and CK19 . On the other hand, the central MEC part was positively stained for CK7 , CK14 , CK18 , and CK19 , whereas immunoreactivity for CK13 was not detected . In the final surgical specimen obtained after mandibular partial resection, the tumor with several cystic spaces could be seen to expand into the submucosal area under the gingival mucosa from the mandibular bone in the cut surface . The resected specimen contained only central MEC . The keratin immunohistochemical profiles of CKs were similar to those of central MEC in the biopsy specimen, which was not positive for CK13 but was positive for CK18 . The histopathological examination of the final surgical specimen confirmed the presence of central MEC arising from a previous GOC after consideration of the histopathological findings of the biopsy specimen.
We sought to clarify the relationship of GOC to central MEC by performing MAML-2 molecular analysis of the lesion. Break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for MAML-2 was performed. The component of central MEC in the biopsy specimen exhibited the MAML-2 rearrangement . In cystic areas of the GOC, the MAML-2-split was also present . Additionally, MAML-2 rearrangement was also detected in central MEC of the final surgical specimen .