An 81-year-old female who received had undergone transarterial embolization (TAE) and TVE for the left CSDAVF 27 years ago. Postoperatively, her modified Rankin Scale (mRS) was 0. However, she had been experiencing tinnitus and ocular symptoms on the right side for several months. She was transported with consciousness disturbance (Glasgow Coma Scale: E1V1M4) and seizure, and head computed tomography (CT) showed a right frontal subcortical hemorrhage. The patient was diagnosed as CSDAVF on cerebral angiography. The feeders were middle meningeal artery (MMA), artery of foramen rotundum, accessory meningeal artery, and ascending pharyngeal artery (APA) . The shunt flow was draining to the right SOV and right superficial middle cerebral vein (SMCV) with pseudo phlebitic pattern (PPP), which was considered as the cause of subcortical hemorrhage. There was also a small amount of draining into the basal vein of Rosenthal. On angiography of internal carotid artery, IPS was not visualized . CT venography [CTV; ] and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging did not show IPS. The flow to the SOV, FV, and internal jugular vein (IJV) were visualized well, so we decided to perform TVE through the FV. The FV and SOV were very long and strongly tortuous. A tri-coaxial system was used to select this route. First, a 7 Fr long sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the right femoral vein, and a 7 Fr FUBUKI (Asahi Intecc, Tokyo, Japan) was guiding to the right IJV. A 4 Fr long sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the right common femoral artery, and a 4 Fr diagnostic catheter was placed in the right external carotid artery for imaging as needed . The FV was selected with Synchro SELECT SUPPORT (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA) and SL-10 (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA) and it was navigated as far as possible. The Guidepost 120 cm (outer diameter: 3.2 Fr, inner diameter: 0.035 inch; Tokai Medical Products, Kasugai, Japan) was used as a DAC, which provided high support even in a strongly bent and tortuous FV. The SL-10 catheter could be navigated to the SMCV by turning back the catheter through the CS . A total of 17 coils were then used for embolization. The CS was packed and the regurgitation into the SOV was attenuated. Finally, the shunt point supplied by the APA was also embolized, and the disappearance of the drainer was confirmed. Six vessel studies were performed to confirm complete occlusion of the CSDAVF . Postoperatively, ocular symptoms improved promptly. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital with mRS: 3 due to dysarthria and facial paralysis caused by cerebral hemorrhage.