A 46-year-old female, known case of rheumatoid arthritis on Methotrexate, hypothyroidism on Levothyroxine and unremarkable surgical history referred to otolaryngology clinic as a case of recurrent epistaxis from the left nostril for the last 7 months, required nasal packing at one point. Her chief complaint was associated with hyposmia, nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, left ear fullness, mouth breathing and dryness. She had intentional weight loss, insignificant for the past 3 months, decrease in appetite with on and off night sweat.
She had unremarkable family history except of a sister with breast cancer. She had no known allergies. Upon examination, 0-degree rigid nasal scope was used and showed an easily bleeding swelling. It was blocking the left nostril with difficulty in determining its origin whether it was from the septum or lateral nasal wall. Scope through the right side revealed patent nasal cavity and clear nasopharynx.
Urgent sinus computed tomography (CT) revealed large left nasal cavity heterogeneous and hypodense mass with faint central enhancement. It was seen extending to the left maxillary sinus, with opacification of anterior ethmoid air cells and left frontal sinus and widening of the left osteo-meatal unit. It showed as well severe thinning of the left maxillary sinus wall, nasal septum and inferior left orbital wall with possible dehiscence of the left lamina papyracea, bilateral cribriform plate and medial part of the fovea ethmoidalis with clear nasopharynx .
Patient underwent examination of nasal cavity under general anaesthesia and debulking of the left nasal mass. Left nasal cavity was completely obstructed with a nasal mass, its origin could not be identified precisely but it was seen below and separable from the middle turbinate. It seemed attached to the inferior turbinate and to the nasal septum. Multiple biopsies were taken for histopathology and debulking was done using a debrider and forceps until reaching the nasopharynx which was clear from any obstruction. After that, left middle sac was opened through the natural ostium which revealed some secretions.
On histological examination, the biopsy showed monotonous population of plump to spindle cells with indistinct cytoplasm and oval dark stained nuclei, arranged in solid sheets and short fascicles. These are alternating with less cellular areas showing myxoid change and perivascular hyalinization ( A&B). The tumor shows few mitotic figures. The tumor cells are positive for EMA (. C) and Bcl-2 (. D) with focal immunoreactivity to SMA, while being negative for S100, desmin, myogenin, myo D1, CD99, SOX-10 and CD34. The morphological features and the immunoprofile of the tumor are highly diagnostic of monophasic synovial sarcoma.
Patient was later admitted for full workup of left nasal high grade spindle cell sarcoma. Sinus magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed left nasal cavity mass expanding to the left frontal recess with extension to the left frontal sinus. The lesion showed involvement of the left lamina papyracea and cribriform plates with small extension to the left intra-orbital compartment. The lesion showed an intermediate to low signal lesion in T2 weighted images with heterogeneous enhancement. It was approximately 3 × 2.7 × 3.5 cm in dimension . Neck CT showed prominent upper cervical lymph nodes. Chest, abdomen and pelvis CT were clear from any metastasis.
Patient’s clinical, radiological and pathological results were discussed in tumor board. Final decision with medical oncology, radiation oncology, and neurosurgery was to go for surgery followed by adjuvant chemoradiotherapy.
Rheumatology advised to stop Methotrexate 2 weeks prior to surgery.
Patient underwent anterior cranial tumor resection, bicoronal craniotomy and skull base reconstruction, by otolaryngologist and neurosurgeon.
Left external ethmoidectomy, left medial maxillectomy, bilateral sphenoidotomy were performed with ligation of the left anterior ethmoidal artery. lamina papyracea and periorbital fat on the left side were resected. The nasal septum was separated from the face of sphenoid and maxillary crest with anterior preservation of the nasal caudal septum. Bicoronal incision, pericranial flap and frontal craniotomy were performed. Resection of the tumor from the anterior cranial fossa was done; at the area from the right cribriform plate to the left fovea ethmoidalis, anterior to the level of crista galle and posterior to the face of sphenoid. Left temporalis muscle fascia was harvested to reconstruct the left periorbital area.
Post operation, patient was kept intubated in the intensive care unit (ICU). CT done day one post operation and revealed no intracranial haemorrhage . Patient was extubated and taken to a regular ward. Then, patient developed central diabetes insipidus and was treated by one dose of desmopressin. Family noticed behavioral changes in the patient and new brain CT revealed right frontal hemorrhage and edema that improved with time.
Patient was discharged home on second week after surgery with normal facial nerve and vision, healing wound and stable condition. She was given follow up with otorhinolaryngology, neurosurgery, medical and radiation oncology and rheumatology.
Patient completed full course of adjuvant radiotherapy with monthly follow up in otorhinolaryngology clinic for debridement and examination.
Seven months post-operation, findings using 30 degree rigid scope revealed healed nasal cavity mucosa except for a small frontal area with no water discharge.
Patient is following on regular basis with new MRI every 4 months with no evidence of local recurrence .