A 57-year-old female with history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease status post-coronary artery bypass graft, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, anxiety, and depression presented to the emergency department (ED). She reported five days of progressive, uncontrolled right arm movements and facial twitching that she could only briefly suppress. Her arm movements were also increasing in magnitude. On the day of her presentation, she also started to have “slurred speech” described as having difficulty enunciating words. She denied a prior history of traumatic brain injury, seizures, and/or stroke. Her home medications included insulin, aspirin, clopidogrel, risperidone, and venlafaxine, and no other relevant medications. The referring hospital read the patient’s head CT as an intracerebral hemorrhage and she was promptly transferred to our Comprehensive Stroke Center for further management.
Upon arrival to the ED, the patient’s vital signs were recorded as follows: blood pressure 117/58 millimeters of mercury, heart rate 77 beats per minute, temperature 36.7°C, saturating 94% on room air with respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute. Point-of-care glucose was 203 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range: 70–99 mg/dL). On physical exam, she was alert and oriented to person, place, and time. She did not have objective speech difficulties. She had choreiform movement of her right upper extremity and simultaneous right-sided facial grimacing that she could briefly suppress (1). She had right upper extremity ataxia and drift due to choreiform movement. She also exhibited right lower extremity drift. She denied any sensory deficits.
A repeat head CT revealed a “hyperdensity within the left caudate and lentiform nucleus with apparent sparing of the anterior limb of the internal capsule” . She also had a remote lacunar infarct near the left caudate. The neurovascular stroke team simultaneously evaluated the patient with the emergency physicians. As the patient’s exam was not consistent with a hemorrhagic stroke in the left caudate and lentiform nucleus, an emergent MRI of her brain was obtained. T1-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense signal with T2-FLAIR and diffusion-weighted hypointense signal abnormalities without surrounding edema was observed on MRI. This was supportive of nonketotic hyperglycemia rather than acute hemorrhage .
The patient’s laboratory findings were significant for hemoglobin A1c of 14.8% (4.7–5.6%) and negative urine ketones. She was admitted to a medicine service where she was followed by endocrinology and neurology. Her insulin regimen was increased, and carbohydrate-correction education was provided. After a four-day inpatient hospitalization, the patient’s chorea improved with decreased amplitude of the movements. The neurology team projected gradual improvement with improved glucose control. The patient was ultimately discharged home with advice for close follow-up.