An 18 year old Syrian female, daughter of first-cousins parents, presented with recent deterioration of visual acuity in her left eye, she reported a history of decreased vision bilaterally that started many (undefined) years ago. Visual acuity was (OD: 0.16) and (OS: Perception of light), examination revealed marked relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) in the left eye, cycloplegic refraction was OD: +8.00(−1.50X70) and OS: +10.50(−1.25X15), Axial length measurements were: OD: 18.80 mm and OS: 19.10 mm. Cornea and anterior segment examination was within normal limits and dilated fundus examination revealed:
OD: abnormal foveal reflex , peripheral nummular pigmentations in the superior attached retina and infero-temporal exudative retinal detachment not threatening the macula, with severe telangiectasia and very dense hard exudates all over the inferior detached retina. Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed areas of capillary non-perfusion with diffuse capillary and focal leakage in the areas of abnormal vessels with extensive leakage in late phases.
OS: mildly elevated subtotal exudative retinal detachment with extensive hard exudates and telangiectatic vessels all over the detached retina, with the same pigmented patches noted in the right eye . FA revealed extensive leakage beginning from the early phases and continuing during the whole study time .
ERG revealed severely reduced scotopic and photopic responses; suggestive of a severe form of rod-cone dystrophy consistent with LCA. Ocular coherence tomography (OCT) revealed serous retinal detachment involving the fovea in left eye.
Examination of family members revealed two younger male siblings (12 years old, and 2 years old) having profound visual loss. The clinical presentation of the two siblings is presented in Table , and it was suggestive of LCA, one more sibling (8 years old male) and the two parents revealed no ocular abnormalities.
CRB1 mutation was suspected to be responsible for the pathologic presentations of the patients, and gene sequencing was performed searching for mutations in the entire coding sequence of the CRB1 gene using fluorescent sequencing, which revealed that the three siblings share the same variant c.2555T >C (p.I852T) in the homozygous state. Accordingly, diagnosis of LCA8 was confirmed in the three siblings.
As there are no definitive guidelines for the management of coat’s like vasculopathy associated with retinal dystrophies, decision was made to perform pan-retinal photocoagulation (PRP) over the inferior detached retina in the left eye with close follow up, and only close follow up in the right eye as the parents refused any type of management in the better seeing eye. The retinal detachment remained stable over the following 6 weeks. On the eighth week post laser the patient complained of sudden decrease of visual acuity in her better right untreated eye to perception of light (PL) with no right projection, and to no perception of light (NPL) in the left previously treated eye. The decision to perform pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) for the right eye was made, advantages and disadvantages of surgical treatment were explained to the patient and parents and informed consent was taken. Standard PPV with extensive intraoperative PRP was done with the use of silicone oil tamponade at the end of surgery. No surgical treatment was done for the left eye as the patient refused surgery for this eye.
Over 6 months follow up period, the retina of the right eye remained attached with no improvement in visual acuity (perception of light with no light projection), while the left eye continued to have subtotal retinal detachment, which appeared to increase in height and finally developed neovascular glaucoma.