On 24 December 2018, a previously healthy young Yemeni girl aged 5 years and 9 months presented to her physician in Yemen accompanied by her parents for evaluation of inward bending of her right knee. Her parents first noticed the genu valgum of her right knee in 2017, with progressive worsening since then. In addition, parents noticed yellow teeth discoloration and teeth malocclusion as shown in Fig. . The child was developmentally normal up until 2017, meeting all developmental milestones appropriately. She had an unremarkable birth history: born via spontaneous vaginal delivery with a normal birth weight and an uncomplicated delivery and neonatal period. All her vaccinations were up to date, and she had no history of feeding difficulties. The family history was unremarkable except for consanguinity of her parents (they are first cousins). Notably, the patient has three sisters and one brother; one older sister of 14 years old who is healthy, and two sisters of 7 and 4 years old, both of them suffering from teeth discolorations, who also look shorter than other average children (based on the parents observation). This is the same as her 9-year-old brother. However, none of the siblings have officially been diagnosed with bone, teeth, or growth abnormalities.
Physical examination revealed a short, frail girl with a height of 95 cm (< 3rd percentile) and a weight of 12 kg (< 3rd percentile). A detailed musculoskeletal exam revealed bilateral genu valgum and frontal bossing. There were no signs of rachitic rosary, widening of the wrists. Upper limb examination was normal. There was no evidence of skin hyperpigmentation, dry scaly skin, or coarse brittle hair. The remainder of the systems examinations were unremarkable.
Laboratory workup was notable for normal calcium level (8.8 mg/dL, 8.8–10.32 mg/dL) elevated alkaline phosphatase (369 U/L, < 269 U/L), and low vitamin D (16.5 ng/L, > 30 ng/L). Complete blood count, antistreptolysin O (ASO), and C-reactive protein (CRP) were normal. A bilateral plain film radiograph of the patient’s knees showed slight genu valgum of both legs and widening of the growth plates. The patient was diagnosed with vitamin D deficiency and started on vitamin D 2000 IU per day, which was later increased based on serum vitamin D levels.
A year later, at the age of six years and nine months, the patient was reevaluated given continued progression of her symptoms despite vitamin D and calcium supplementation. Over the elapsed period, her height only increased by 1 cm, reaching 96 cm. In addition, the child started developing tooth decay and peridental abscesses. Further investigations revealed a normal thyroid panel, low phosphate levels (2.4 mg/d, 3.4-6.2 mg/dL), low growth hormone (GH), and low insulin-like growth factor 1 (ILGF-1). At this point, a diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency was considered, and the patient was started on the growth hormone replacement agent Norditropin at a dose of 0.17 mg/kg/week.
Over the next year, the patient continued Norditropin therapy. After starting growth hormone therapy, she experienced significant worsening of her condition, with complete halting of her vertical growth, continued worsening of her genu valgum, and increased weakness leading to difficulty ambulating. Her parents decided to pursue additional workup in Egypt.
On 1 March, 2021, she presented for reevaluation in Egypt. Bilateral lower extremity radiographs showed significant deterioration of the genu valgum compared with her initial x-ray . This prompted further investigation with a bone scan, which indicated a bone age of 28 months for the now 8-year-old girl. Official bone densitometry was also performed, reporting a total bone mineral density of 0.413 g/cm2, total body mineral content is 336.7 g, total bone mineral density of the lumbar spine is 0.316 g/cm2 (Z score −4). The patient’s bone mineral density readings were compared and plotted against peak bone mineral density readings and bone mineral density readings of age- and sex-matched healthy subjects. A Z score of −4.0 is lower than normal limits for the patient age and sex indicating osteoporosis [estimation of the bone mineral density was achieved at the lift hip and lumbar spine (L1–L4) as well as total body using dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) technique].
Repeat labs at that time were significant for decreased serum phosphorus (1.5 mg/dL, 2.5–6.8 mg/dL), mild to moderate vitamin D deficiency (18 ng/L, 10–25 ng/mL) and increased 24-hour urinary phosphate (362 mg/24 hours). Given the abnormal urine studies, concerns for renal involvement led to a renal ultrasound, which was significant for bilateral bulky kidneys with non-homogeneous texture and prominent medullary pyramids, suggesting parenchymal insult. A detailed ophthalmic exam, including slit lamp exam, was performed to evaluate for cystinosis, which was normal. Considering these results, growth hormone treatment was suspended, and phosphate and vitamin D supplements were restarted.
At the age of 8 years and 9 months, following treatment for 9 months with potassium citrate, phosphorus, and vitamin D supplementation, the patient’s weight started to improve, increasing from 11 to 14 kg. Repeat phosphate levels showed a rise to 2.9 mg/dL. There was mild improvement in the patient’s genu valgum. Orthopedic surgery was consulted, and the patient underwent surgery for the correction of the genu valgum. Postoperative radiographs are shown in Fig. .
In addition, to the extensive laboratory workup done, genetic studies were sent out to evaluate for a genetic cause for her signs and symptoms. The result of next generation whole genome sequencing identified a new homozygous missense variant of ROGDI gene classified as a variant of unknown significance according to the American College of Medical Genetics.
A total of 18 months following the surgery there was a significant improvement in her gena valgus. The patient is now 10 years and 6 months of age, and her height is 116 cm which is in the 3rd percentile. She is still taking Polycitra-K 15 mL, phosphorus 10 mL three times daily, and alpha vitamin D 15 drops/day. Her weight is now up to 18 kg. The patient additionally underwent multiple procedures in attempt to correct her teeth malalignment with noticeable improvement as shown in Fig. .