A 45 year-old British Caucasian male, awaiting a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine for longstanding back pain, experienced a sudden onset of severe chest pain radiating to the back and collapsed. On arrival at the scene, the paramedics found him hypothermic (34.5°C) but cardiovascular parameters were within normal limits. Electrocardiogram confirmed sinus tachycardia. His significant past history included previous hospital admission six years ago with acute gallstone pancreatitis (computerized tomography (CT) confirmed), followed by laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Following this, he continued to have intermittent pain for which he was admitted twice with slightly elevated alkaline phosphatase and amylase. As an ultrasound scan of the abdomen was normal, subsequent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (with sphincterotomy) was performed but did not show any residual stones in the common bile duct. He was discharged from follow up a year later after a three-month pain free period and normalised blood tests.
In the Emergency department, clinical examination revealed a soft abdomen without any tenderness, mottling of the lower abdomen and flaccid paraplegia. Absence of tenderness was probably related to the acute onset of paraplegia with sensory and motor loss below the level of 6th thoracic vertebra. Initial blood tests showed haemoglobin of 15.1 g/dl (range = 12 - 18), white cell count 8.5 × 109/l (range = 3.5 - 11), amylase 80 (range = 28-100) and C reactive protein <1 (range = 0 - 4). The rest of the blood tests were also within normal limits. However arterial blood gas examination revealed severe metabolic acidosis with elevated lactate levels (pH: 7.14, HCO3: 13.2 mmol/l, base excess: -15.1 mmol/l, lactate: 10.29). Chest X-ray did not show any mediastinal widening or pneumothorax.
Based on the clinical presentation, aortic dissection had to be ruled out. Urgent contrast-enhanced CT of chest and abdomen showed a non-enhancing 7.5 cm lesion in the tail of pancreas with small amount of free fluid in the left flank and pelvis in addition to features suggesting acute pancreatitis . Following the scan, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. His condition subsequently deteriorated with onset of hypotension, acidosis, coagulation abnormalities and drop in haemoglobin levels and he died despite resuscitation.
Post-mortem showed a 9 cm pancreatic pseudocyst in the tail of pancreas with perforation in its inferior aspect and evidence of bleeding into the cyst. Three litres of blood was found in the peritoneal cavity. No clear source of bleeding was identified though the cyst wall was closely apposed to the splenic artery. No evidence of a splenic artery pseudoaneurysm was seen. Unfortunately the spinal cord was not examined and paraplegia was presumed to be due to cord ischemia due to an unexplained cause.