A previously asymptomatic 15-month-old girl presented with mild dyspnoea and fever (up to 38.5°C for the last 4 days). She did not present with cough or feeding difficulties; there was no previous history of breathlessness or recurrent infections, either. On initial presentation, the patient was euvolaemic, the heartbeat was regular with a heart rate of 105 b.p.m., and heart sounds were normal without murmurs. Arterial blood pressure was 90 × 50 mmHg, and oxygen saturation in room air was 96%. The respiratory rate was 26 b.p.m. Pneumonia was diagnosed, and antibiotics were started (amoxicillin-clavulanate—90 mg/kg/day PO divided in two doses for 14 days). The clinical examination remained abnormal after antibiotic treatment, and low-intensity vesicular breath sounds were present in the right thorax. A chest X-ray revealed cardiac dextroposition, a small right lung, and a vascular shadow behind the heart border, which raised suspicion of scimitar syndrome. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a 4-mm ostium secundum atrial septal defect (ASD) in the fossa ovalis region, with left-to-right shunt, and right inferior pulmonary vein connected with the IVC, thus supporting the diagnosis of scimitar syndrome .
A computed tomography angiography scan evidenced small ostium secundum ASD (5 mm), hypoplasia of the right lung, agenesis of the right pulmonary artery, normally connected pulmonary veins , and a collateral artery arising from the abdominal aorta supplying the hypoplastic right lung . Surprisingly, the collateral artery accounted for the scimitar sign on the chest X-ray, and there was no anomalous vein drainage to IVC as shown by echo. The chest computed tomography (CT) scan also showed altered bronchial segmentation with a blind-ended right bronchus to the intermediate lobe.
Cardiac catheterization confirmed the diagnosis and showed systolic left pulmonary artery pressure of 34 mmHg (slightly increased), systolic aortic pressure of 74 mmHg, and systolic pressure of 22 mmHg at the distal collateral vessel due to stenosis at its origin. The mean pressure values at left and right atria were respectively 13 and 10 mmHg, pointing to a small, restrictive ASD. Catheterization also confirmed that the scimitar sign was due to the collateral vessel .
The patient recovered well from pneumonia. Because she had no anomalous venous connection and presented very good clinical evolution, the clinical group decided to re-evaluate the ASD in the near future. Eighteen months after the initial diagnosis, the patient remains asymptomatic, and the transthoracic echo did not show any alterations compared with the initial one.