A 58-year-old woman visited the emergency department due to a sudden onset of lower abdominal pain. She had a history of appendectomy, cerebral hemorrhage, and hypertension controlled by an anti-hypertensive drug. Her son had a history of EDS and died from hepatic vessel rupture. However, she had not been examined for EDS. The patient had no characteristic facial features of EDS. Plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed abdominal free air with a small amount of effusion surrounding the edematous descending colon. The preoperative diagnosis was panperitonitis due to the perforation of the descending colon, and emergency surgery was performed. We found a perforated descending colon with contaminated ascites and subsequently resected the lesion and performed ileostomy (first operation).
Her initial postoperative course was typical. However, she had perforation in the transverse colon 51 days post-operation and thus underwent the Hartmann procedure (second operation). In addition, she was diagnosed with small-bowel perforation 53 days after the first operation, and thus partial resection of the jejunum with functional end-to-end anastomosis (FEEA) was performed (third operation).
Fifty-eight days after the first operation, she complained of acute abdominal pain. A bile-contaminated fluid was detected in the drain near the jejunojejunal anastomosis. In addition, plain abdominal CT showed fluid collection near the jejunojejunal anastomosis . Therefore, anastomotic leakage was suspected, and we performed another operation (fourth operation). During this operation, we detected dehiscence at the entry hole of the linear stapler used for FEEA . However, there were no signs of anastomotic leakage. Therefore, we partially resected the affected jejunum and performed single-hole jejunostomy. The postoperative course of the fourth operation was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from our hospital 98 days after the first operation. Two months later, we performed the closure of the jejunostomy, followed by colostomy. Minor leakage suspected to be caused by anastomotic failure of closure point occurred the next day but was successfully treated via conservative management .
Genetic examination of a blood sample from the patient revealed a missense mutation in the COL3A1 gene (c.2095G>T, p.Gly699Cys). Moreover, the same missense mutation was detected in a blood sample from his son, who had suddenly died from hepatic vessel rupture. This mutation is not registered in the Clinvar database, but a similar mutation (c.2095G>C, p.Gly699Arg and c.2095G>A, p.Gly699Asp) has been reported as a pathogenic mutation of EDS and registered in the Clinvar database . Based on the clinical course of the present case, which is strongly associated with EDS, we concluded this novel variant as likely pathogenic. During the follow-up 22 months after the first operation, the patient was found free of intestinal perforation.
We also collected detailed information about the family history of the patient. Her family tree is shown in Fig. . Among all the immediate family members assessed, only the patient and her son had apparent symptoms of EDS. Two of her grandchildren died from hepatic failure and renal agenesis in their infancy, but there was no clear relationship between their disorders and EDS. We provided the patient and family members with a multidisciplinary support involving genetic counselors during the follow-up period.