An 18-year-old adolescent male patient was admitted to our hospital with complaints of a three-year history of chest tightness and shortness of breath.
The patient’s symptoms became noticeably worse one week before his admission, with increased chest tightness, an inability to lie supine, and anuria.
The patient was seen at a hospital in Beijing with complaints of chest tightness and was diagnosed with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, a small pericardial effusion, and chronic bilateral lung inflammation with a few interstitial changes. Additionally, the patient suffered a cerebral infarction during the hospitalization, which improved slightly after treatment.
The patient denied any family history of genetic disorders or similar conditions.
Upon physical examination, the patient exhibited evidence of hypotension, with a blood pressure of 92/62 mmHg. He exhibited normal development, intelligence, consciousness, and retinal features. Limb muscle strength was graded as level 5 upon the first hospitalization, and muscle tone was normal; however, at the time of the final hospitalization, muscle strength in the right upper limb was grade 4, while muscle strength in the left lower, left upper, and right lower limbs were grade 1. Unfortunately, the hospital staff did not perform electromyography, skeletal muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or a pathological examination. Atrial/ventricular premature beats and ventricular blocks were visible on resting electrocardiography, although no pre-excitation was observed.
Laboratory testing revealed elevated levels of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (0.187 ng/mL) and N-terminal pro-B-type brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP; 6,554 pg/mL), while liver function tests revealed elevated levels of creatine kinase (1075 U/L, 1545 U/L, and 936 U/L), creatine kinase-MB (63 U/L, 61 U/L, and 58 U/L ), lactate dehydrogenase (728 U/L), alanine transpeptidase (206 U/L), and aspartate aminotransferase (273 U/L). The patient’s troponin T and myocardial enzyme levels were also elevated, suggesting secondary myocardial damage.
Left ventricular centripetal and right ventricular hypertrophy were observed on transthoracic echocardiography (ventricular septal thickness, 20-31 mm; lateral wall thickness, 26 mm) . Tissue Doppler imaging revealed increased end-diastolic filling pressure, with an E value of 70 cm/s , a ventricular septum e′ value of 3 cm/s, and a lateral wall e′ value of 4 cm/s .
The patient underwent coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography with maximum intensity projection, excluding acute coronary syndrome, which revealed the patency of the lumen of the coronary trunk and its branches . To further characterize the cardiac phenotype, a cardiac MRI (CMRI) was performed, which revealed bilateral ventricular hypertrophy, severe trabecularization of the biventricular wall, and minor pericardial effusion. Additionally, myocardial strain analyses of the entire left ventricle , as well as each segment, were performed. The 16-segment bullseye diagram and longitudinal strain map revealed varying degrees of strain reduction in each segment of the patient’s left ventricle, indicating myocardial injury . The ventricular myocardium exhibited substantial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) on MRI, sparing the mid-basal septum but involving the apex , which is a unique imaging characteristic of DD.