A 70-year-old British Caucasian man with end stage renal failure (ESRF) secondary to IgA nephropathy received a deceased donor kidney transplant on the 14th January 2008. He had been diagnosed with ESRF 15 years previously, and was initially dialysing via peritoneal dialysis and later via haemodialysis. At the time of transplant, his only remaining vascular access was a long-term intravenous catheter. Many years previously he had undergone a total parathyroidectomy for tertiary hyperparathyroidism and therefore took regular calcium supplements and alfacalcidol at a dose of 0.25 μg/day. Both pre- and post-kidney transplant parathyroid hormone (PTH) and serum calcium levels were within normal ranges with a calcium-phosphate product of less than 4. Post-transplant recovery was complicated by delayed graft function requiring dialysis for 14 days, transplant wound dehiscence requiring V.A.C.® dressing, and bladder outflow obstruction requiring intermittent self-catheterization. Despite these complications, he continued to improve with a good urine output and a glomerular filtration rate of 38.9 ml/min and was discharged home.
During routine follow-up at the outpatient clinic, the patient's calcium supplements were modified. He was admitted four months later with a complaint of sudden onset of painless lesions bilaterally on the medial aspect of his thighs. They appeared within the 48 hours prior to admission and were not associated with a history of trauma. Serum levels of calcium, phosphate, PTH and calcium-phosphate product were found to be normal. Clinically, both lesions were well demarcated, gangrenous in appearance and foul smelling . Peripheral pulses were intact. Swabs taken from this lesion grew Pseudomonas and coliforms sensitive to meropenem. A wedge biopsy of the lesion confirmed the diagnosis of calciphylaxis . Intravenous antibiotic was immediately introduced and all calcium supplements were stopped. Over a period of one month, the lesions had fully resolved.