A 68-year-old woman was referred to our Department of Orthopaedic Surgery Group for evaluation of a chronic left knee PJI. She had a significant medical history, including diabetes that had been diagnosed 9 years earlier and was in remission after treatment with insulin and coronary heart disease that had been diagnosed 8 years earlier and was being treated with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and clopidogrel 50 mg once daily over a long period, along with lercanidipine 10 mg per day and losartan 50 mg per day. Based on data from her previous hospital treatment, she had undergone bilateral total knee arthroplasty (TKA) at an outside institution 2 years prior due to osteoarthritis in both knees. After the TKA, she developed pain, swelling and eventually drainage from a sinus tract around the left knee. Cultures of synovial fluid aspirates revealed fungal infections. (The original culture report was not available, and specific information could not be retrieved as it has been simply described as a fungal infection in her previous treatment records.) Over the following 2 years, she was prescribed multiple oral antifungal drugs and joint cavity injection therapy, but there was little improvement. As a result, she was referred to us for further assessment and treatment.
At the time of referral, the patient reported ongoing knee pain, with no fevers or chills. A physical examination indicated slight crusting over the anterior of the left patella. The results of the laboratory evaluation were considerable, with an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 40 mm h−1 (normal range, 0–20 mm h−1) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 3.22 mg l−1 (normal, 0–8.0 mg l−1). Synovial fluid analysis exhibited 6977 cells mm−3 (normal, < 3000 cells mm−3) with 57 % neutrophils (normal, <70 %), aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures were negative, and C. tropicalis was found in the fungal culture. At the bone–cement interface of the tibial component, a radiolucent line was seen in radiographs, with reactive sclerotic changes that might suggest septic loosening. The inflammatory arthritis treatment was discontinued and she was kept additional antibiotics in anticipation of surgery. The patient had her TKA resected 5 months later as part of a two-stage exchange arthroplasty procedure. Purulent material and necrotic tissue were observed during surgery. Pathology revealed acute and chronic inflammation.
Knee implants were removed from lesion debridement intraoperatively through the use of a femoral knee prosthesis with a tibial rotating platform liner and no tibial prosthesis with bone cement, as part of a planned two-stage exchange arthroplasty. Purulent material, as well as necrotic tissue, were found intraoperatively. Three specimens of periprosthetic tissue were cultured for 2 weeks. Both the aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures were negative, whereas Candida was detected in the fungal cultures. One of these samples was maintained at −80 °C for the metagenomic shotgun sequencing (mNGS) test. Lyticase lysoase (RT410-TA, TIANGEN BIOTECH, Beijing, PR China) was employed to break down the enzyme wall. Following the second step of DNA extraction recommended by the TIANamp Micro DNA kit (DP316, TIANGEN BIOTECH, Beijing, PR China), the sample was sequenced utilizing the BGISEQ-50/MGISEQ-2000 system . Furthermore, in line with the use of the BWA alignment, which can be found at , the remaining data were matched with the Huada PMDB pathogen database after low-complexity reads had been eliminated. A total of 43 996 027 reads were obtained from periprosthetic tissue, and C. tropicalis was detected, with 3 reads collected from this organism (2.08 % of microbial reads, 18.75 % of fungal reads). The other micro-organisms detected by mNGS are listed in and , although they were not thought to be responsible for the PJI. As a result, we regarded C. tropicalis as the definite causative pathogen.
A batch of 40 gr of bone cement containing 3 g of meropenem antibiotic non-articular pads was placed. A drainage tube was subsequently inserted after closing and injecting 200 mg of voriconazole into the joint cavity. The patient underwent a 3 week course of intravenous voriconazole and a 2 week course of voriconazole injections into the joint cavity every other day.
At the end of the antifungal treatment, laboratory evaluation was substantial for erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 37 mm h−1, CRP of 18.7 mg l−1 and white blood cell count of 9.5×109 l−1, while 824 cellsmm−3 with 23 % neutrophils were revealed in synovial fluid analysis. ESR and CRP remained elevated, but the total number of polymorphonuclear cells, as well as the percentage of neutrophils in the joint fluid, were reduced. Hence, oral voriconazole 150 mg was administered once daily. After 2 months, ESR was 19 mm h−1, CRP was 5.2 mg l−1 and leucocyte count was 6×109 l−1. Synovial fluid analysis showed 910 cells mm−3, of which 41 % were neutrophils. Under histopathological microscopy of 10 high-powered fields, fewer than five per high-powered field were intraoperative. A revision knee arthroplasty was consequently performed. Three tissue specimens were dispatched for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial and fungal cultures as well as mNGS testing; the culture results were negative. No disease-related pathogens were found during the mNGS testing. The micro-organisms detected by mNGS are presented in and .
Two months following the revision, the patient again experienced walking difficulties and swelling of the left knee with ESR of 74 mm h−1, CRP of 69.47 mg l−1 and white blood cell counts of 7.8×109 l−1. The synovial fluid analysis showed 9480 cells mm−3 with 82 % neutrophils. After reimplantation, the patient was infected with fungal (C. tropicalis) and bacterial infections, and thus underwent an intravenous course of voriconazole and meropenem after the procedure.
The patient was reassessed 3 months after revision surgery and reported that the knee was healing well, with no sign of infection with ESR of 22 mm h−1, CRP of 2.35 mg l−1 and a white blood cell count of 5.6×109 l−1.
displays the entire timeline of the patient’s diagnosis and treatment.