A28 year old male presented with pain and swelling in the left ankle following fall from a tree. He had taken first aid elsewhere and presented on the same day to our hospital. There was no history of comorbidities.
His vitals were stable. Tense diffuse swelling around ankle was present. Tenderness was present over the lateral malleolus and over the heel. Attempted ankle movements were painful. There are no distal neurovascular deficits. The ankle was immobilized in below-knee plaster splint and radiographs were taken after stabilizing the patient. X-ray showed lateral talar process fracture with probable fracture line extending into body . CT scan revealed coronal plane talus fracture in which fracture line was found extending from posterior aspect of lateral talar process into the body medially and anteriorly (,,) and 3D images (3d, 3e). This atypical fracture does not fit into any classification but close to Martin and Weber’s classification type-2.
Surgery was deferred for few days in view of swelling. The goals of surgical management are anatomic reduction of talus fractures and maintaining subtalar joint congruency. Minimal residual displacement or joint incongruency can adversely affect subtalar joint mechanics. Ollier’s approach was used to reduce the fracture using clamps and temporarily held in reduction using K-wires . Fracture was stabilized using two Herbert screws. Using a separate mini incision from the anteromedial foot , a partially threaded 4-mm cannulated cancellous screw was inserted from head into the body. The screws head was countersunk.
Post-operatively ankle was immobilized in neutral alignment with below-knee plaster splint. Later changed to a cast after suture removal and once wound healed. The patient was followed up at 6 and 12 weeks (,). At 6weeks, cast was removed and partial weight bearing was allowed. At 3months, full weight bearing started once and radiographs showed union at fracture site. Our patient has full range of ankle movements and ambulant pain free. Long-term follow-up is needed to assess the late complications such as avascular necrosis, malunion, and joint stiffness due to post-traumatic arthritis. Implant removal can be considered if there is persistence of pain limiting ankle movements or after 2years once, fracture united.