We report on a 71 year-old female patient who presented with fever, worsening of her general condition, neck stiffness, impaired vigilance and strong pain in the lower lumbar spine. Two weeks before, the patient had presented with weight loss and blood in her stool at a regional hospital. In a subsequent colonoscopy, a colorectal adenocarcinoma was diagnosed histologically. Staging consisting of a computed tomography (CT)-scan revealed infiltration into the uterus and also into Os sacrum. A CT-guided biopsy from the mass infiltrating Os sacrum also confirmed the carcinoma. The caregivers opted for a neo-adjuvant treatment plan including radio- and chemotherapy with capecitabine. Irradiation had been applied once. The neurologic examination at admission to our hospital revealed a somnolent patient with nuchal rigidity and bilateral positive Babinski sign, all of which had developed in less than 12 h.
Due to the clinical presentation, meningitis in the course of a spondylodiscitis was suspected. An antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone and ampicilline was started, which lead to a rapid improvement of the patient’s consciousness. Extensive imaging including spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), lumbar MRI, small pelvis MRI and CT scans of the lumbar spine and the brain were performed (results see Neuroradiological findings) and could rule out several differential diagnoses. There was no sign of spondylodiscitis. Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed a pleocytosis of 80,000 cells/μl, dominated by neutrophilic granulocytes. Microbiologic work-up of CSF found the typical gastrointestinal germ Fusobacterium nucleatum as the causative agent of the bacterial infection, no other germs, e.g. E. coli, were detected. The antibiotic treatment was changed to ceftriaxone and vancomycine and continued for 14 days (see also Fig. ).
Neuroradiological diagnostics including CT scans and MRI of the lumbar spinal column and the pelvis were performed. The CT-scan showed multiple spots of gas accumulation in the region of the lumbar vertebral disk between the vertebral bodies L4 and L5. MRI revealed, in addition to contrast-enhancing meninges illustrating the severe leptomeningits, a presacral mass filled with CSF isointens content. This mass could not be discriminated from necrotic cell debris. Initially, either necrotic tumor tissue of the adenocarcinoma or a malformation of the spinal dural sac seemed possible. Further anatomic abnormalities were an unusually low ending of conus of the spinal cord at L3/4 and a partial agenesis of the left sacral bone. A comprehensive work-up of the neuroradiological images revealed evidence of the presence of an anterior sacral meningocele. The carcinoma had infiltrated neighboring structures in the lower pelvis including bladder, and the sacral bone. Furthermore, a connection between the distended rectum and the spinal canal was visible. Through this pathway, bacterial invasion may have occurred and lead to a meningeal infection with typical gastrointestinal germ Fusobacterium. An interdisciplinary tumor board opted for surgical treatment to close the connection between gut and the anterior meningocele, which would prevent further pathogen invasion.
To avoid recurrent meningitis, neurosurgical treatment was necessary. Since surgical therapy of the colorectal carcinoma after a neoadjuvant treatment would include creating terminal stomas of both bowel and urinary tracts, we opted for detachment of the local structures and closure of the thecal sac and amputation of the meningocele as far distal as possible. This was achieved distal of the S2-roots via a dorsal laminectomy from S1 to S3 . We detached the cauda equina intradurally and sectioned and closed the thecal sac. Around and between adherent roots of the cauda equina postinflammatory debris was found. Moreover we could visualize the connection of the meningocele through the ventral defect of the Os sacrum into the small pelvis extra- and intradurally. The patient recovered well after surgery. Motor function was unchanged postoperatively. Bladder function could not be assessed due to an inserted urinary catheter. Histology of the surgical specimen showed meningeal cell layers invaded by leucocytes and macrophages.
Oncologic treatment consisting of radio- and chemotherapy resumed three weeks after the initial surgery. Radiotherapy of pelvis and os sacrum was applied in fractions of 1.8 Gy leading to a total of 54 Gy. In parallel, capecitabine was administered twice daily (825 mg/m2 body surface). At a clinical follow up 3 months later, the patient’s gait was normal, she denied abnormal functions of bladder or rectum. An abdominal CT-scan 24 weeks after initial admission showed necrotic consolidation of the tumor mass but a mild progression of lymph node size. In week 25, total mesorectal excision and ultralow anterior resection of the colon was performed. The patient had no children; there were no additional family history details. Siblings and parents were reported to be healthy. There were no other cutaneous or orthopedic stigmata pointing to a dystrophic condition. The patient had no foot deformities. The patient reported voiding problems, which had been present for many years. Unfortunately, the patient refused further genetic testing or urodynamic investigations (see also Fig. ).