A 50-year-old female patient presented with a one-week history of decreased vision in her left eye. She had a 15-year history of seropositive RA treated with methotrexate and deflazacort. Because of an unsatisfactory response to those regimens, she was initiated on 25 mg per week of etanercept 8 months prior to presentation.
On presentation, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.8 OD and 0.1 OS. There were no cells in the anterior chamber of either eye. Funduscopic examination showed granular infiltration at the temporal macula in the right eye and the foveal area in the left eye . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography showed a swollen ellipsoid zone and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) irregularities in the right eye and an ellipsoid zone disruption and RPE irregularity in the left eye . Fundus autofluorescence showed parafoveal granular hyperautofluorescence in both eyes .
Based on the negative results of various blood tests, she was diagnosed with noninfectious uveitis and started on oral prednisolone. She noticed mild improvement 1 month after treatment, but 2 months after treatment she showed a visual loss to 0.1 in her right eye. Compared with the initial visit, the swollen ellipsoid zone area extended under the fovea and subRPE yellow-white deposits were newly developed in the inferotemporal area . Also, mild vitreous opacity with haziness was noticed in the right eye. We suspected primary intraocular lymphoma (PIOL), and a 25-gauge microincision vitrectomy in right eye was performed. Vitreous cytology revealed atypical mononuclear cells with positive CD20 immunostaining. PCR of the vitreous fluid was negative for herpes and cytomegalovirus.
The patient was evaluated by an oncologist, and no lymphoma involvement in the brain was found. She was treated with high-dose systemic methotrexate as well as intravitreal methotrexate injections (400 μg/0.1 mL) twice weekly for 4 weeks for induction, once weekly for 8 weeks, and once monthly for 9 months in the right eye. Given the potential causal relationship between PIOL and anti-TNFα agents, etanercept was discontinued.
Three months after treatment, her right eye showed a decrease in subretinal infiltration and subRPE deposits, which further resolved at 6 months following treatment . Over the course, her left eye also showed gradual improvement in funduscopic examination as well as SD-OCT findings without intravitreal methotrexate injection, potentially due to systemic chemotherapy. Because of severe photoreceptor disruption, BCVA was 0.1 OD and 0.4 OS at the final visit.