A 57-year-old Vietnamese (Kinh ethnicity) man presented with a speech disturbance, facial palsy, and severe weakness of the left arm and leg after awakening; the average time from symptom onset to presentation was 6.5 h. His medical history included biological aortic valve replacement 7 months ago, pacemaker implantation, and hypertension. On admission, a neurological exam revealed dysarthria, left-sided hemiparesis, and head deviation to the right side; the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale 12 (NIHSS 12) revealed the neurological score.
An urgent non-contrast computed tomography of the brain showed no hemorrhage, with an Alberta Stroke Program Early Computed Tomography Score (ASPECTS) of 8 on the right brain . After that, computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed right proximal ICA occlusion . He was then transferred to the angiography suite for mechanical thrombectomy.
Transfemoral cerebral angiography confirmed an occlusion at the cavernous segment of the right ICA . The clot was removed after the third pass using a 4 × 20 mm stent retriever. The final angiogram of the right ICA showed modified Thrombolysis in Cerebral Ischemia 3 (mTICI 3) and without occlusion of the right ophthalmic artery. Postoperatively, the NIHSS score improved by 7/42. In the following hours, blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg. Internal carotid artery and ophthalmic artery vascular anatomy are shown in Fig. .
After 10 hours, he complained of right orbital pain . Clinical examination revealed acute visual loss, ptosis, proptosis, chemosis, and complete ophthalmoplegia. However, we did not discover any audible bruit in the orbit. The funduscopic examination showed papilledema with no retinal hemorrhage. Intraocular pressure in the right eye was measured at 50.5 mmHg.
To rule out a possible carotid–cavernous fistula, CTA was performed, and the result showed no sign of carotid–cavernous fistula, but slight enlargement of the right medial and lateral rectus muscles .
He was treated with steroids and drugs attributed to reducing intraocular pressure, such as mannitol and acetazolamide. His ophthalmological symptoms improved after 7 days , and intraocular pressure in the right eye ranged between 17 mmHg and 20 mmHg, but the left had loss of visual acuity. The patient made a meaningful neurological recovery with an NIHSS score of 6 and was discharged home 7 days after the initial episode (Additional file ).