An asymptomatic 76-year-old woman underwent follow-up fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) after radiotherapy for uterine cervical cancer (T4N0M0 Stage IVA) and showed strong FDG accumulation in the stomach. She had no history of trauma. She had hypertension and cholangiectasis of unknown origin. Physical examination revealed nothing of note. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed an elevated lesion, 30 mm in diameter, at the lesser curvature in the antrum of the stomach, and biopsy indicated well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Chest X-ray revealed that the right hemidiaphragm was exceptionally high . Preoperative CT performed to rule out metastatic disease showed protrusion of the right hepatic lobe into the right hemithorax, and right-sided BH was therefore diagnosed incidentally . We re-evaluated images from CT performed 5 months earlier for the staging of the cervical cancer, to compare the condition of BH. No differences were apparent in terms of sizes of the defect or herniated liver between preoperative CT for gastric cancer and the CT for staging cervical cancer . The patient was diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer without lymph nodes or distant metastases (T2N0M0 Stage IB), accompanied by right-sided BH. We planned to perform distal gastrectomy with lymph nodes dissection for gastric cancer and simultaneous repair of the right-sided BH using the laparoscopic approach. Laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with lymph nodes dissection and cholecystectomy was performed under 10 cmH2O pressure of pneumoperitoneum. Intraoperatively, laparoscopic evaluation revealed herniation of the right hepatic lobe into the right hemithorax. However, we did not perform surgical repair of the BH because the right hepatic lobe that had herniated into the thoracic cavity was adherent to the remnant right anterior hemidiaphragm and covered the huge defect in the right hemidiaphragm . No intra- or postoperative pneumothorax was observed accompanying the pneumoperitoneum. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 14 days postoperatively. On follow-up at 3 months postoperatively, the patient was well and remained asymptomatic.