A 42-year-old man underwent IH repair at age 3. His wife was 32 years old. He was diagnosed with OA. ICSI was performed repeatedly using TESA for infertility treatment at a hospital, but the wife did not become pregnant. Later, he decided to have V-V. Testicular size was normal (right 20 mL, left 24 mL). The epididymis swelled slightly, and bilateral vas deferentia were dilated. Serum follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, estrogen, and testosterone levels were 2.67 IU/L, 2.03 IU/L, 21 pg/mL, and 4.28 ng/mL respectively. Semen analysis revealed azoospermia. Chromosomal examination revealed 46XY, t(1:21)(p34.1:q22.3).
First, testicular sperm extraction was performed for the left testis for sperm cryopreservation. Then, we exfoliated the spermatic duct toward the cranial side. We opened the left inguinal canal but could not identify the obstructed vas, so we performed laparoscopy with head-down position. A 10-mm port was placed at the inferior umbilical crease, and the laparoscope was inserted. The abdominal pressure was 10 mmHg. Two 5-mm ports were placed between the anterior superior iliac spine and umbilicus . The peritoneum overlying the vas was incised on the left internal ring. With the laparoscope, the obstruction and vas defect were easily observed. Consequently, we judged that the left vas defect was too long to be repaired with V-V. Furthermore, the right inguinal canal was opened; since the laparoscope was already inserted, the obstruction distance was 1 cm . A 5 cm length of the distal vas could be freed from the surrounding structures under laparoscopy. The vas was then drawn out from the internal ring, enabling V-V under microscopy. V-V was performed with mucosal and muscle layers, which were sutured by 10-0 and 9-0 nylon sutures respectively . Finally, we checked the anastomosed part of the vas for tension using laparoscopy . The peritoneum was not closed. The left and right wound lengths were 10 and 5 cm respectively . Testicular histology was “only a spermatozoa was present, and the Johnsen score was 8.” Two months later, sperms were observed in the ejaculated semen. Semen analysis at 6 months post-operation was 28.1 × 106/mL, with progressive motility rate of 38.0%. However, natural pregnancy was not achieved at 12-month post-operation, so they chose ICSI with ejaculated sperm.