A 65-year-old man with past medical history of type 2 DM for 22 years, diabetic sensory neuropathy involving feet, obesity with a BMI of 32.7 kg/m2, hypertension and heart failure with reduced ejection fraction presented with progressively worsening exercise tolerance and shortness of breath for two weeks. On admission, he was in mild respiratory distress with a respiratory rate of 28 per minute and blood oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. The patient was afebrile. Examination revealed excessive use of accessory muscles of respiration, decreased bilateral breath sounds with rales and wheezes. Chest x-ray was unremarkable for acute pulmonary edema but did show bibasilar changes suspicious for atelectasis. Laboratory investigations were significant for brain natriuretic peptide of 322 picogram per milliliter (pg/mL) (5-100 pg/ml) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) of 8.2 % (4.0-6.0%). The patient was started on diuretic therapy for acute decompensated heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Echocardiogram was unchanged when compared to prior study and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 57%.
However, one day later, patient became disoriented and confused with his physical examination and blood gas analysis consistent with hypercapnic respiratory failure with partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood (PaCO2) of 100 millimeters of mercury (mmHg). Patient was intubated and started on mechanical ventilation. His flow volume loops were suggestive of restrictive lung disease. Even after three days of mechanical ventilation and optimal heart failure therapy, he failed a spontaneous breathing trial and remained obtunded from persistent carbon dioxide narcosis (PaCO2 of 64 mmHg). Diaphragmatic muscle palsy was suspected based on the nocturnal need for assisted ventilation and radiographic evidence of elevated diaphragmatic domes on inspiration. Nerve conduction studies showed reduced phrenic nerve and diaphragm compound action potential amplitude bilaterally ( and ), consistent with an advanced diabetic polyneuropathy.
Patient was managed with non-invasive bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) ventilation and over the course of a few days, his condition improved. He was discharged 2 weeks later on home BiPAP and was found to be maintaining his baseline level of functionality on post hospital follow up visits. He was then lost to follow-up and later died of cardiopulmonary arrest as per the spouse.