A 52-year-old menopausal woman complained of intermittent vaginal spotting for 1 month. She denied any systemic disease, dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia, body weight loss, abdominal pain, or abdominal fullness. Gynecologic history was gravida 2 and para 2. Transvaginal ultrasound revealed a 10-cm multi-lobular cystic pelvic mass containing the mixed heterogeneous solid component, fluid and papillary growth in the inner surface of cystic wall Significant venous flow was detected in the solid part and papillary growth lesion. Serum AFP (< 20 ng/ml), cancer antigen (CA)-125 (< 35 U/ml), and carcinoembryonic antigen (< 5 ng/ml), and CA19–9 (< 37 U/ml) were 60,721, 38.1, 84, and 97 ng/ml, respectively. All of these tumor markers from serum have their own specific cut off values and sensitivities, and they come from the same assay methods and from the same laboratory. All are elevated. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 9-cm heterogenous mass probably developed from the left adnexa and a 4-cm well-defined mass located at the right subphrenic region , suggesting the diagnosis of left ovarian carcinoma with peritoneal seeding.
The patient underwent optimal debulking surgery, including total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and para-aortic lymphadenectomy . All gross tumors were almost completely resected. Histologically, sections of the left ovarian tumor showed a clear cell carcinoma . The tumor is composed of polygonal, cuboidal to columnar cells with clear cytoplasm arranged in solid nests and tubule-cystic growth patterns. Numerous hyaline globules are present. Some tumor cells also showed high-grade anaplastic nuclear features. Right ovarian tumor showed metastatic clear cell carcinoma . Typical yolk sac tumor differentiation and Shiller-Duval body were absent. Sal-like protein 4 (SALL4) was strongly positive . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for glypican-3 (GPC3) and AFP and negative for CD30. Meanwhile, the tumor cells showed weak positive staining for hepatocyte nuclear factor1-beta (HNF-1beta) . The tumor cells were focally positive for cytokeratin (CK) 20 and Cdx2 (caudal type homeobox 2) and negative for CK7 . To rule out potential artifacts due to antibody issues, we titrated the antibody used for AFP staining . For every immunohistochemical stain, positive controls were included. As a negative control, we also stained the classical clear cell carcinoma . Combination of all made a diagnosis of AFP-producing clear cell type EOC with fetal gut differentiation, FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) IIIc.
After surgery, the patient received adjuvant multi-agent chemotherapy (carboplatin and paclitaxel). After treatment, CT showed a 2-cm hypodense nodule at the right subphrenic region and wedge-shaped hypoperfusion over segment 7 of the liver, suspicious tumor seeding, and liver metastasis and serum level of AFP was 1831 ng/ml. Tumor excision for liver metastasis was done. Dose-intensity chemotherapy with weekly paclitaxel was given. CT scan, 1 year later, showed a lobulated mixed solid and cystic lesion at the right paracolic gutter measuring 5 cm in size in favor of peritoneal seeding . Exploratory laparotomy was done, including the use of Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator. After operation, chemotherapy was given through intraperitoneal route. After additional 18 months, tumor recurrence was found, including persistent liver metastases , with increasing serum level of AFP of 330,014 ng/ml. The patient finally died of disease.
Based on our search of PubMed (from January 1960 to July 2018; search terms: “Alpha-fetoprotein”, “clear cell”, “ovarian cancer”; ), there are a few cases of AFP-producing clear cell type EOC available in the literature [–].
A total of three articles are included and the detailed information, including microscopic finding and immunohistochemical staining results are summarized in Table .
All patients were middle aged (range, 54–63 years). Tumor size ranged from 14 cm to 22 cm, but all were advanced FIGO stage (IIb–IIIc). Among these [–], including the current case, half of patients died of disease.