A 47 year-old African-American man presented to an ophthalmologist for progressive worsening in his vision. He had no prior history of reversible neurological deficits that would be concerning for demyelinating disease and no episodes of sudden visual loss. The temporal field of vision in his left eye was impaired due to an injury he sustained in a football game 25 years earlier, however he noted progressive visual loss bilaterally over the last several years. Examination of his visual acuity with a Snellen chart at the time revealed 20/30 acuity in the right eye and 20/70 acuity in the left eye. Four years earlier, he had 20/30 acuity on the right and 20/50 on the left. Ophthalmological evaluation revealed normal corneas, normal intraocular pressures, optic atrophy bilaterally , and a swinging flashlight test revealed a left afferent pupillary defect. Given the diagnostic possibilities of a chiasmatic tumor or multiple sclerosis, a brain MRI was ordered and showed diffuse white matter disease involving the pons and the subcortical frontoparietal regions concerning for microischemic small vessel disease. The optic nerves and optic chiasm were also thought to be atrophic by the interpreting neuroradiologist. The patient had no history of exposure to optic neurotoxins such as methanol, ethambutol, or chloroquine. He was diagnosed with hypertension around this time and treated with fosinopril and hydrochlorothiazide. There was no personal or family history of a genetic disorder. The patient’s mother died of diabetes complications at an unknown age and his father died at age 68 of “old age”. There was no known optic atrophy or progressive significant visual loss and no movement disorders in his parents. His brother was known to have “fidgety” movements of his limbs concerning for chorea, but he was never formally diagnosed with any disease. His two children were deceased (one due to a gun-shot wound to the head) and neither child ever displayed any visual problems or neurological problems. He had nine grandchildren and five great grandchildren, none of whom had visual problems or neurological problems.
On initial neurological evaluation he was noted to have dysmetria on both finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin on the left and an unstable tandem gait. A work-up revealed an unremarkable trans-thoracic echocardiogram, elevated total cholesterol at 261, a negative ANA, ESR of 4, a non-reactive RPR, normal vitamin B-12 level, normal blood glucose, normal CBC, negative HIV-1 testing, and a normal serum lactate.
His vision and ataxia progressively worsened and a brain MRI at age 53 revealed severe leukoencephalopathy . In addition, cerebellar atrophy with fourth ventricle ex vacuo dilatation and brain stem volume loss was evident . Given the progressive nature of his disorder we undertook a search for possible genetic causes of ataxia. Following appropriate counseling, commercially available genetic testing was performed for autosomal dominant causes of ataxia including SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7, SCA8, SCA17, and DRPLA. While negative for all other SCAs, the patient had 62 CAG repeats in one DRPLA allele and 12 CAG repeats in the other allele. He was diagnosed with DRPLA and counseled about the testing results. OPA1 (autosomal dominant optic atrophy) genetic testing was not commercially available and this genetic test was not performed.
At age 57, the patient remained fully oriented, retained 3/3 immediate and remote recall and displayed pseudobulbar affect. He no longer drove due to incoordination and visual problems, but managed his activities of daily living. He had dysarthric, scanning speech, slowed vertical and horizontal saccades, and dystonic posturing of his right upper extremity and face at times. There was no choreoathetosis or myoclonus evident. He had significant dysmetria on finger-to-nose and heel-to-shin bilaterally, dysdiadochokinesia and significant gait ataxia requiring a cane for ambulation.
His uncorrected visual acuity had declined to being able to only count fingers from one foot inward OS and 20/300 OD. Visual fields were severely constricted OS. Slit lamp examination revealed corneas with 2-3+ guttata and endothelial haze bilaterally most likely representing endothelial degeneration due to DRPLA. Intraocular pressures remained normal bilaterally and he had mild bilateral cataracts. Fundoscopy again showed bilateral pale optic discs consistent with optic atrophy, more pronounced in the left eye.
Eleven years after initial presentation the patient was admitted to a nursing home due to inability to care for himself secondary to DRPLA. The patient eventually died after 14 years of disease.