A 47 year-old female with refractory metastatic SS was treated with fludarabine-cyclophosphamide lymphodepletion followed by adoptive transfer of NY-ESO-1c259 T-cells. Prior oncologic treatments included radiotherapy followed by surgical resection of a 9.4 cm right paraspinal mass with negative margins. Upon presentation to our institution, she was found to have metastases involving the right inguinal lymph nodes, lungs, and T-spine, for which she received ifosfamide for 4 cycles followed by doxorubicin monotherapy for 6 cycles, with positive response. Upon progression, she received pazopanib and palliative radiation to osseous metastases in the thoracic and lumbar spines. She was then enrolled in the Adaptimmune ADP-04511 protocol. Her tumor had had low NY-ESO-1 expression, defined as ≥1+ by IHC in ≥1% cells but not exceeding 2+ or 3+ in ≥50% cells.
She tolerated lymphodepletion and T-cell infusion well, with grade 1 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) manifesting as almost daily fevers > 38.3 °C, with associated chills and tachycardia, until Day 6. She was noted to have an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) and elevated serum ferritin. Empiric antibiotics were initiated, but no infectious organisms were identified by serial cultures. The patient developed a diffuse, macular, blanching rash on day 10 that was biopsied and found to be a drug rash (sparse perivascular lymphohistiocytic infiltrate, rare dyskeratotic keratinocytes, pigment incontinence), which improved when levetiracetam and meropenem were discontinued. She developed grade 1 neurotoxicity (mild confusion), which fully resolved on day 18. She was discharged on day 28 due to delayed neutrophil recovery. Restaging evaluation on day 32 demonstrated interval reduction in size and number of lung and nodal metastases.
On day 42, she presented to the emergency room with a one-week history of numbness, paresthesia, and heaviness to both legs progressing to difficulty walking on the day of presentation. Physical exam revealed loss of strength to the iliopsoas groups and absent deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) in bilateral lower extremities (BLEs). MRI-C/T/L spine revealed no evidence of cord compression or transverse myelitis. Patient declined admission; therefore, she was discharged with a neurology consultation scheduled on day 46.
On the day of the neurology consultation, she reported numbness and paresthesias with associated hypoesthesia that started with her feet and ascended to her hips bilaterally, progressing to leg weakness first involving the distal aspect of her legs, which were more affected at that time than her proximal legs. She denied bowel/bladder dysfunction, dysphagia, dyspnea, or back pain. Vital signs were remarkable for sinus tachycardia. Patient was fully alert and oriented. The cranial nerve exam was unremarkable. The motor exam was notable for bilateral bicep and lower extremity weakness involving the non-antigravity muscles to a greater extent than the antigravity muscles. Mild pseudoathetosis was noted on legs. DTRs were markedly diminished in BLEs. The sensory exam revealed stocking distribution in the decremental response distally with reduced sensation to all modalities (light touch, pinprick, vibration, temperature, proprioception). Patient required assistance to stand with an ataxic gait. The patient was admitted for further workup.
An MRI-brain performed on day 47 was unremarkable. As the majority of cases of GBS are caused by the immune response following a preceding infection, infectious workup was conducted. Comprehensive infectious disease workup was negative (including Coxiella-Rickettsia, Lyme disease, Zika, CMV, EBV). Of note, camphylobacter jejuni was not tested for via GI multiplex as the patient did not develop diarrhea. Lumbar puncture (LP) was performed on day 49, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed no pleiocytosis, malignant cells, infectious processes (including HHV6, HSV1/2, VZV, CMV, Enterovirus, West Nile), or albuminocytologic dissociation. Of note, LP was performed after IVIG therapy was initiated. Regarding the patient’s autoimmune laboratory workup, oligoclonal bands were identified in serum but not in CSF protein immunofixation electrophoresis. CRP and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was elevated at 44.9 mg/dL and 30 mm/hr. respectively. All other autoimmune laboratory workup, including anti-nuclear panel, paraneoplastic panel, acetylcholine receptor binding antibody, ganglioside antibody panel were negative. Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) of the BLEs and right arm performed on day 48 revealed normal and symmetric brisk responses, except borderline slowed conduction velocity in the distal segment on the left recording extensor digitalis brevis. The consulting neurologist’s impression was that the electrophysical findings were suggestive of a very mild, distal, motor, axonal polyneuropathy.
The patient received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days starting on day 48 for a working diagnosis of acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) likely related to NY-ESO-1 targeting T-cell therapy. After 3 doses of IVIG, the patient reported improvement in symptoms and strength. By day 60, the patient was able to ambulate with a walker under supervision. The patient was transferred to an inpatient rehabilitation medicine service. During the patient’s neurology follow-up on day 95, she reported only mild left lower extremity weakness, that she was continuing to work with physical therapy, and was largely independent; thus, the neurology team decided she did not require another course of IVIG.
With regard to the patient’s synovial sarcoma, day 87 (week 12) restaging scans revealed stable disease, but unfortunately, day 122 (week 17) restaging scans revealed progression of pulmonary metastases , enlarging soft-tissue mass near lumbar spine, and stable thoracic and lumbar spinal metastases. Patient elected to delay the next line of therapy and passed away on day 206 (week 29), likely secondary to disease progression.