A 61-year-old male, was diagnosed with 5.5 mm thick, Clark level IV, nodular melanoma without ulcerations on his right back in May of 2007. He underwent a wide local excision of the primary melanoma and a sentinel node biopsy in the right axilla, which revealed one lymph node positive for metastatic melanoma. He subsequently underwent a lymph node dissection of the right axilla; none of 32 lymph nodes was positive for metastatic melanoma. After the lymph node dissection, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the body revealed no evidence of metastatic disease. He was fine until September of 2009, when he had a solitary metastatic melanoma in the left lung, for which he underwent left upper lobe lingular-sparing lobectomy with the resection of the nodule in November of 2009. He remained free of disease until November of 2011, when he was found to have new metastatic lesions in the right middle lobe of lung and peritoneum, and he received 4 doses of ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) and then, 2 doses of the combination of TPI-287 (abeotaxane) and temozolomide with further progression of the peritoneal lesions and stable disease in the lung. Subsequently, in June of 2012, the peritoneal lesions were surgically resected. However, in April of 2013, a MRI scan of the brain revealed multiple parenchymal metastatic lesions and clear leptomeningeal enhancement spread to the left cerebellar sulci and the left frontal cortical sulci . His spinal MRI was normal. He had no neurological symptoms related to the LMD. A CSF analysis demonstrated the presence of few melanoma cells. A CT scan of the body also revealed progression of the lung lesions and new peritoneal masses. He started treatment with vemurafenib at 960 mg twice a day since a molecular analysis showed that his primary melanoma harbored a BRAF V600E mutation. He tolerated the treatment well with mild photosensitivity. In June of 2013, a MRI scan of the brain revealed improvement with decrease in size of parenchymal metastatic lesions and regression of leptomeningeal disease . A CSF examination showed no malignant cells. In addition, a CT scan of the body also demonstrated clinical response in the lung and peritoneal metastatic lesions. Follow-up scans revealed further improvement of LMD in August of 2013. Unfortunately, he had disease progression in the brain, leptomeninges, peritoneum and subcutaneous lesions in October of 2013 . He was treated with whole brain radiation followed by the combination of dabrafenib and trametinib in November of 2013. He developed moderate fatigue from the treatment, which resolved with decreased dose of dabrafenib and trametinib. A MRI scan of the brain demonstrated improvement of the LMD and brain parenchymal metastatic disease in December of 2013 and February of 2014. As of the most recent follow-up evaluation in April of 2014, a MRI scan of the brain showed continued disease response in all metastatic sites including the leptomeninges and brain parenchyma . The patient remained free of neurological symptoms throughout the treatment duration. However, his extracranial metastatic disease progressed in the peritoneum and the subcutaneous tissues and he expired in October of 2014 which is 19 months after the diagnosis of brain and leptomeningeal metastases.