A 48-year old man was admitted to the Dermatology department of the Craiova County Hospital with a round-oval tumor mass that was hyperkeratotic, with central ulceration, covered by a hematic crust, approximately 1.5cm in size, localized at the distal phalanx of the third finger of the left hand, with perilesional edema and erythema .
The wart-like lesion appeared 8 months before presentation to the hospital.
The patient mentioned that he had cut the tumor with his nail clippers (repeatedly traumatizing the lesion) and applied Duofilm.
Past medical history: unremarkable
Social history: smoker, 20 cigarettes a day for 15 years
Physical examination: phototype III, BMI 32.65 (grade I obesity)
Laboratory tests revealed normal CBC, GOT, GPT, creatinine, GGT, glucose, blood urea nitrogen, urine analysis, ESR.
X-ray revealed external margin osteolysis of the distal epiphysis in the third finger, left hand.
Soft tissue ultrasound: the left elbow pit and axilla without adenopathy.
We have excised the tumoral mass which was followed by curettage while noticing the presence of fragile tissue that extended deeply until reaching the bony structure of the phalanx.
Histopathological report: fragment covered by epidermis with marked keratinization and exulcerated areas, acanthosis, papillomatosis, marked pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia , solid invasion front, with parakeratosis centers corresponding to foci of typical aspect of an well-differentiated squamous carcinoma, minimal atypia and rare atypical mitosis .
At the deep limit of the fragment it is noticed a very abundant inflammatory infiltrate with lymphocytes and plasma cells and dermis edema, dilated, tortuous blood vessels within the dermal papillae .
Given that the lab and imaging tests corroborated the clinical exam, we diagnosed the patient with Acral verrucous carcinoma.
The patient was transferred to the Plastic surgery department where the distal phalanx of the third finger, left hand was amputated .
The repeated histopathological examination from the tumour in toto, following radical surgery, reconfirmed the diagnosis of verrucous carcinoma.
The postoperative outcome was favorable. The patient will be clinically examined quarterly over the next three years, although the probability of recurrence after amputation is minimal. We will recall the patient and explore the regional lymph node groups each semester.