A 16-year-old female presented to the neurology outpatient department with complaint of acute onset involuntary weird and quirky movements of all four limbs for last four days, which were irregular, asymmetric, rapid, unpredictable, purposeless, jerky and flowing from distal to proximally and that disappeared completely during sleep. Her past medical history was unremarkable. No associated febrile episode, seizure, headache, visual disturbances, behavioral changes, personality changes, forgetfulness, attention problems, or self-care inadequacy were noted. She had no history of any drug intake for any disease or substance abuse in recent past. No history was suggestive of any connective tissue disorder or thyroid dysfunction. Nobody in family had any neurological disease. On completion of an unremarkable general survey, detailed neurological examination revealed generalized chorea involving all extremities (right > left) with classic Jack in the box tongue and Milkman’s grip signs. Precise and meticulous cognitive assessment failed to unveil any impairment. Neither motor weakness, nor sensory deficits, nor signs of meningeal irritation and cranial nerve deficits were noted. Slit lamp examination ruled out Kayser-Fleischer ring.
No cognitive domain seemed to be affected and family history was negative; therefore, Huntington’s disease, Huntington’s disease-like syndromes, dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy, and deposition disorders were virtually excluded. Hence, working diagnosis kept was acute onset generalized chorea without cognitive impairment. Differentials considered were: 1) metabolic chorea, 2) rheumatic chorea, 3) dysthyroidism associated chorea, 4) autoimmune chorea, 5) vascular chorea, and 6) chorea gravidarum.
Complete hemogram, thyroid, liver, kidney functions, electrolytes, arterial blood gas analysis and HbA1C were normal. A urine beta human chorionic gonadotropin and abdominal ultrasound ruled out any pregnancy. Serologies for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C, and hepatitis B were negative. 24 hours urinary copper and serum ceruloplasmin levels were within normal range. Echocardiography, serial anti-streptolysin O titers, and anti-DNase B antibodies levels ruled out possibility of Sydenham’s chorea. Anti-Nuclear Antibody (ANA) screening using HEp-2 cells, ANA profile, antiphospholipid antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (cANCA and pANCA) were found to be negative. Autoantibodies directed against voltage gated potassium channel and anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antibodies were also negative. Magnetic resonance imaging of brain, electroencephalogram and cerebrospinal fluid analyses were otherwise normal.
Serum anti-TPO antibodies were found to be strongly positive (>1200 IU/ml) along with anti-TG and anti-thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibodies. Patient was put on pulse intravenous methylprednisolone therapy (1 g/day for five consecutive days). All the movements seized and she was discharged with oral prednisolone 30 mg/day with gradual tapering over next three months. Tests were rerun with similar results, but anti-thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibodies, which were within normal range this time around. At present, after one year of follow-up, she remains stable, drug-free and without any other problems.