A 66-year-old male had abdominal distension, sour regurgitation, and heartburn, aggravated by full eating and spicy food for 1 month, but did not receive treatment for his symptoms, came to our hospital in April 2022. The patient was previously a taxi driver with an irregular diet and a history of Helicobacter pylori infection and did not receive eradication treatment. He had a history of hypertension, and arrhythmia, and taken oral valsartan, hydrochlorothiazide, and metoprolol medications, and no family history related to tumors. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status (PS) was 2. Physical examination: no palpable enlargement of superficial lymph nodes throughout the body, no tenderness or rebound tenderness in the abdomen, and no palpation under the hepatic subcostals. His laboratory findings, including AST, 100 U/L; ALT, 127U/L; and total bilirubin (T. Bil), 75.4μmol/L, indirect bilirubin (I. Bil), 55.1μmol/L, suggested severe hepatic injury. Laboratory tests suggested that his kidney function was normal. Tumor marker detection indicated CEA>2000ng/ml, CA50 105.66U/ml, CA199>1000U/ml, CA72-4 251.88U/ml, and CA24-2 57.36U/ml. Cardiac ultrasound indicated that the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was normal. Gastroscopy revealed an ulcerating mass in lesser gastric curvature near the gastric antrum . Gastroscopic biopsies showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, as shown in . Immunohistochemistry assay showed HER2 positive staining, microsatellite stability, PD-L1 CPS 0, and Ki-67 (80%). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a lump in the gastric antrum, accompanied by enlarged lymph nodes in the hepatogastric space; Multiple enlarged nodules were observed in the liver, as shown in . Thoracic CT showed no signs of lung metastasis. Bone scintigraphy showed no evidence of bone metastasis. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated no signs of brain metastasis.
Considering the large tumor burden and liver metastases, we devised a therapeutic regimen consisting of targeted drugs and HAIC. The treatment regimen included intravenous Trastuzumab, hepatic arterial infusion of oxaliplatin, and fluorouracil, and the treatment was repeated after one cycle (21 days). The initial load dose of trastuzumab was 8 mg/kg, followed by 6 mg/kg every 3 weeks. During the regular treatment of trastuzumab, we monitored the patient’s cardiac enzymes, electrocardiogram, and cardiac color ultrasound, and did not reduce or discontinue the drug due to adverse reactions. For HAIC, after ultrasonic positioning, the Seldinger method was used to puncture the femoral artery, and after successful insertion of 5F arterial sheath, the catheter guide wire was sent along the sheath, selective insertion of abdominal trunk arteriography, the catheter with a drug delivery device and insert the tip into the common hepatic artery after imaging confirmation. Oxaliplatin (80 mg/m2 for 2 hours) and fluorouracil (2,600 mg/m2 for 72 hours) were administered through the port catheter system . After one cycle of HAIC combined with intravenous trastuzumab, jaundice quickly subsided and total bilirubin decreased to normal. The level of tumor markers significantly decreased. Partial response was observed after 1 month. After receiving six cycles of treatment, the patient achieved maximum efficacy . Gastroscopy showed no mass and ulcer ; Pathological biopsy showed no tumor cells . The patient’s ECOG score returned to a level of 1. The significant adverse reactions during HAIC were fatigue, neuropathy, and mild nausea, which improved after symptomatic treatment, with no grade 3-4 adverse effects.
To improve the patient’s quality of life and prolong his survival time, maintenance therapy is recommended. The optimal mode of maintenance therapy in the first-line advanced gastric cancer has not been established. Targeted therapy combined with monochemotherapy as a maintenance regimen may be the choice in clinical practice. We recommend the combination of intravenous trastuzumab and capecitabine for maintenance treatment, with a specific dose of 6mg/Kg of trastuzumab; Capecitabine 1000mg/m2, taken orally for 2 weeks, stopped for 1 week, every 3 weeks. During the oral administration of capecitabine, the patient experienced nausea, acid reflux, and neuropathy, and capecitabine was reduced by 20%. At present, the tumor markers of the patient are normal , and the imaging assessment is stable . In the follow-up maintenance treatment of trastuzumab combined with capecitabine, the patients have been followed up for more than 16 months.