A 30-year-old, previously healthy male presented to the emergency department with a three-day history of a persistent, throbbing headache. He described the headache as worse in the morning upon awakening and exacerbated by bending over, lying down, and sneezing. The patient reported headaches in the past, but this episode had not responded to ibuprofen as usual. He denied any medical history aside from a diagnosis of Lyme disease approximately 10 years prior. This was treated with a full course of doxycycline and yielded no further complications. He had received his first COVID-19 vaccination 12 days prior to presentation, but otherwise had only taken daily ibuprofen since the onset of his headache. He denied sick contacts, recent travel, and tobacco or drug use history. Review of systems was negative for fever, changes in vision, photophobia, chest pain, shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, rashes, or recent traumas.
His vital signs were within normal limits. On physical exam, pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light. The patient had no focal neurologic deficits. Cranial nerves II–XII, sensation, motor strength, speech, and coordination were intact. His neck was supple with full range of motion and no rigidity. There were no rashes or skin lesions.
Complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were unremarkable. A non-contrast computed tomography of the head revealed no evidence of acute intracranial hemorrhage or midline shift, mass, or intra-axial or extra-axial fluid collection. A lumbar puncture was performed and was significant for opening pressure of 29 centimeters (cm) water (reference range: 6–25 cm water). Cerebrospinal fluid was significant for 706 white blood cells/microliter (WBC/uL) (reference range 0–5 WBC/uL), with 95% lymphocytes; 4 red blood cells (RBC)/uL (0 RBC/uL); protein of 144 milligrams/deciliter (mg/dL) (15–45 mg/dL), and glucose 52 mg/dL (40–70 mg/dL). The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) meningitis/encephalitis panel detected VZV. The patient was empirically started on intravenous (IV) vancomycin, ceftriaxone, dexamethasone, and acyclovir. Further questioning revealed that the patient had chickenpox as a child.
The patient was hospitalized and continued treatment with high-dose IV acyclovir (10 mg/kilogram every eight hours). Blood cultures and testing for Lyme disease and HIV returned negative. After a 48-hour hospitalization, the patient requested discharge, and the infectious disease service recommended switching the patient from IV acyclovir to a 10-day course of valacyclovir (1000 mg every eight hours). The patient’s headache had resolved prior to discharge, and he was recommended to follow-up with his primary care provider (PCP). Unfortunately, we reviewed the chart a month afterward, and the patient had not followed up with his PCP.