A 63-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with anterior chest discomfort which began the previous night after she had a verbal altercation with her 11-year-old nephew, who also hit her several times on the chest. She took an over-the-counter pain pill for immediate relief and went to bed only to wake up with 10/10 chest pain the next morning. On review of symptoms, the patient denied diaphoresis, palpitations, lightheadedness, shortness of breath, nausea, and vomiting; she also denied having had any prior occurrence of her symptoms. Her past medical history was negative for hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, angina, or congestive heart failure. She had no smoking history or family history of CAD.
On physical examination, her systolic blood pressure ranged from the high 80s to low 90s. SO2 was 88–90% on room air, increasing to 92–93% with 3 LPM O2 via nasal cannula. Cardiac examination revealed mild chest wall tenderness and a reduced S1 intensity with normal S2. There was no S3 gallop. A grade 3/6 holosystolic murmur was heard across the precordium and radiating to her back. No pericardial friction rub or thrill was appreciated. Scarce bibasilar crackles were heard in the lungs bilaterally. Peripheral pulses were strong, and she was without lower extremity edema or cyanosis.
The patient's laboratory results were significant for an elevated troponin of 6.6 which increased slightly to 8.2 over 6 hours before trending downward to 5.6. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (EKG) showed isolated ST-T segment elevation in lead V2 (a) from baseline (b). Her CXR revealed new-onset vascular congestion. A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed moderately severe MR with pulmonary hypertension and extreme hypokinesis of the lower half of the septum, apex, and adjacent inferior wall (data not shown).
Because the patient's symptoms warranted treatment as an acute coronary syndrome (ACS), cardiac catheterization was performed. Surprisingly, however, coronary angiography revealed the epicardial arteries were clean with exception of the mid-RCA having a non-obstructive stenosis of about 30% (data not shown). Of concern was the left ventriculogram, which showed severe hypokinesis, bordering on akinesis, in the anteroapical area and a balloon-like dilation of the LV apex during systole (c and d). Estimated LVEF was 40%. There was also evidence of moderate to severe MR, which was further supported by the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of approximately 20 mmHg with large V waves (data not shown).
Of importance, the left heart catheterization revealed an LVOT obstruction. As shown in a and b, during pullback from left ventricle to aorta, there was a progressive pressure drop as the catheter passed through the LVOT, indicative of LVOT obstruction. Lack of this pressure drop from the LVOT to the aorta essentially ruled out presence of aortic stenosis (b).
Based on the aforementioned findings, the patient was diagnosed with TCM complicated by MR and LVOT obstruction and mild hemodynamic instability (i.e., mild hypotension and pulmonary edema). Upon diagnosis, nitroglycerin was discontinued, metoprolol and aspirin were continued, and ACE inhibitor was initiated, according to conservative therapy guidelines.
A subsequent transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed to further elucidate the patient's mechanism of MR. TEE with color Doppler confirmed severe MR (c), but found no definite prolapse, flail mitral valve leaflet, or papillary muscle rupture. More significantly, the TEE revealed obvious SAM of the anterior mitral valve leaflet (d). SAM is associated with elevated velocities in the LVOT, consistent with LVOT obstruction. The aortic valve, however, was a normal tri-leaflet valve without stenosis.
A cardiac MRI confirmed the absence of delayed gadolinium enhancement, effectively ruling out myocarditis, fibrosis, and myocardial infarction, all of which can mimic TCM.
With the diagnosis and etiology confirmed, the patient began conservative therapy, to include beta-blocker, ACE inhibitor, aspirin, and gentle hydration, and continued to improve daily. Once her chest pain resolved and vital signs normalized, the patient was discharged and instructed to follow up regularly with her cardiologist. Repeat TTE in 1 week showed remarkable improvement of LV function and complete resolution of MR.