A 61-year-old male patient, with iron deficiency anemia for 1 year treated by iron supplementation, consulted for purplish, poorly limited, non-itching and painless erythematous cupboards of the forearms and legs. The patient had no previous medical history of a similar eruption and there was no similar cases in the patient's family. Clinical examination revealed confluent, purpuric and ecchymotic plaques in the back of both hands, forearms and the right shoulder. We also noted bluish macules located on the palmar face of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd finger of the right hand and the palmar face of the 2nd left finger, with mega capillaries in the capillaroscopy. On anogenital examination, the patient has purplish nodular lesions in the intergluteal area with a several thromboses seen by dermoscopy and multiple papular lesions of flesh color and other pinkish lesions in the scrotal area. The patient hasn't organomegaly, lymphadenopathy, or auscultatory abnormality. A biopsy of the anal lesions was done and the anatomopathological study revealed papillary and especially reticular dermis invaded by nodular deposits of an anhist and cracked eosinophilic substance condensing around the vessels and adnexal structures (, ). This substance was PAS positive and was enhanced by Crystal Violet and Red Congo with yellow-green dichroism in polarized light. The salivary gland biopsy revealed a discreet and chronic sialadenitis grade 1 of Chilsholm and Masson with no evidence for dry syndrome nor amyloidosis. Differential diagnoses included condyloma, lichen and Buschke-Lowenstein tumor. Further clinical evaluation showed systemic amyloidosis. Cardiovascular examination revealed irregular heart sounds without heart murmur and the EKG showed atrial fibrillation with average ventricular rate of 70 bpm, left axis, micro voltage in peripheral leads, left anterior hemiblock with monomorphic ventricular extrasystoles. A holter ECG objectified a baseline atrial flutter rhythm with sinus rhythm passages and the trans-thoracic ultrasound was in favor of a nonobstructive, restrictive symmetrical cardiomyopathy, most likely secondary to amyloidosis with Ejection Fraction at 57%. The electrophoresis of serum proteins showed hypoglobulinemia, hyper alpha1-globulinemia, a doubling of the alpha2-globulinemia zone with restriction of the heterogeneity of gamma globulins and serum immunofixation demonstrated the presence of light chains lambda. Urinary protein electrophoresis and Bence Jones proteinuria demonstrated a free lambda-like protein. The assay of the serum kappa and lambda free light chains revealed high figures suggesting multiple myeloma. A sternal puncture was therefore performed objectifying a 30% plasmacytosis, which confirmed the diagnosis. The biological assessment also revealed a hypercalcemia at 113 mg/l (The normal reference of serum calcium level: 4.6–5.3 g/dl). The evaluation suggested AL amyloidosis and indicated a malignant course with skin and cardiac involvement. The patient was candidate for chemotherapy and was referred to the oncology department. The patient presented to the emergency department one week later for an acute dyspnea and died.