A 69-year-old Caucasian female woke up with acute typical chest pain. Her previous history was negative for cardiovascular disease or cardiovascular risk factors. An electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed upon arrival of the ambulance . This showed an acute anterolateral ST-myocardial infarction and she was immediately transferred for primary percutaneous coronary intervention. Her vitals and cardiopulmonary exam were normal at admission (heart rate 91 b.p.m., blood pressure 133/97 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air). Shortly following arrival in the catheterization laboratory, her clinical condition rapidly deteriorated. She developed pulmonary oedema as a result of a cardiogenic shock and required intermittent cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) due to pulseless electrical activity. A coronary angiogram was performed while performing CPR with a chest compression system (Lund University Cardiac Assist System, LUCAS), which showed no evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease. Subsequently, a transthoracic echocardiogram was performed. Despite the poor image quality due to the critical situation, pericardial effusion and significant left-sided valve disease could be excluded as a possible cause of the cardiogenic shock. There were no direct or indirect signs of pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection. Due to further deterioration with no detectable treatable cause of the condition, the team of health professionals decided to discontinue CPR. She died of cardiogenic shock of unknown origin. As the cause of her death was unclear, permission for autopsy was obtained. Autopsy found a mobile mass of 2.5 × 2 cm attached to the bottom of the left coronary cusp of the native aortic valve, which was large enough to occlude the ostium of the left main coronary artery ( and ). The pathologic examination of the myocardium revealed an acute anterolateral infarction (≥4 h duration; ). Histology showed a thrombus of unknown origin . Further investigation of the aortic valve and of the heart revealed no significant abnormalities.