The patient was a 78-year-old man. Systemic examination prior to tongue cancer (TC) treatment identified GC and IPMN of the pancreas. A 10 mm GC was present in the middle stomach and was clinically diagnosed as T1N0 based on the 8th edition of the TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors. The IPMN was located on the pancreatic body, was of the main pancreatic duct type, and had a maximum diameter of 10 mm. No mural nodules or enlarged peripancreatic lymph nodes were observed , and biopsy of the papillary epithelium revealed adenoma . TC was clinically determined as T1N2b , the most advanced of the three tumors; hence, partial resection of the right tongue and cervical lymph node dissection were performed first. Two months after the patient’s condition improved, the patient underwent simultaneous resection of the GC and IPMN. Robotic surgery using the da Vinci Xi (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) was performed. The port placement for the surgery was the same as that in conventional robotic DG , and no changes were made for pancreatic resection. First, gastrectomy was performed. Initially, lymphadenectomy and vascular division of the greater curvature were performed, and the duodenum was dissected. Subsequently, the lesser curvature was approached from the right to the left side, the right and left gastric artery/vein were dissected, and suprapancreatic lymphadenectomy was performed. The perisplenic arterial lymph nodes were dissected to facilitate subsequent pancreatectomy.
The near-infrared ray-guided method was applied to identify the localization of the small gastric tumor . The stomach was transected along the markings using the near-infrared ray-guided method, and the specimen was removed from the abdomen to confirm complete tumor resection.
Following gastrectomy, pancreatic resection was performed. Tunneling was conducted between the pancreas and superior mesenteric vein, and the pancreas was divided using an automated suturing device. The parenchyma of the distal pancreas was detached from the splenic artery (SA) and vein using Maryland bipolar (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Furthermore, multiple branches of these splenic vessels were dissected: the branches of the splenic vein were dissected with Vessel Sealer Extend (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and the branches of the SA were clipped on the central side before dissection with Vessel Sealer Extend. After complete resection of the distal pancreas, indocyanine green was administered intravenously (0.05 mg/kg), and sufficient blood flow in the splenic vessels and perfusion of the remnant stomach were confirmed 25 s after injection using the Firefly mode . Finally, Billroth II anastomosis was performed. The operative time was 551 min, the volume of blood loss was 216 ml, and the postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological diagnosis was pT1bN0 pStage IA for gastric cancer and intraductal papillary mucinous adenoma for pancreatic tumor, and no postoperative chemotherapy was administered.
The patient was 155 cm tall and weighed 48.2 kg before surgery. The patient experienced the greatest amount of weight loss during the first postoperative month, reaching 46.5 kg (3.5% loss), and regained his original weight of 48.5 kg in the second postoperative month. The patient maintained the same weight for more than 2 years. However, 2.5 years postoperatively, TC recurred and chemotherapy was initiated.