A 39-year-old Chinese immigrant woman had been aware of a subcutaneous nodule in her left lower back for a year and sought medical attention. In her past history, she had frequent opportunities to have been exposed to drunken crab (raw crab soaked in rice wine), especially before she emigrated in Japan seven years ago. Additionally, she had been a cigarette smoker in her twenties (5 cigarettes per day). No specific family history was addressed. The nodule was initially suspected of being soft tissue tumor, particularly lipoma, and followed up on for over a year without any treatment. However, the nodule gradually indurated and surgical resection was chosen as treatment. Her physical examination before the resection revealed neither fever nor abnormal pulmonary sounds. Her white blood cell (WBC) count was 6740/μL (reference range: 3500 to 8700/μL), and neither her eosinophil count nor serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) level was examined.She was suspected of having lipoma and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed. A cystic lesion was found in the subcutaneous tissue on her left lower back, suggesting a closely-aggregated tortuous and inflected tubular architecture. In the lesion, inhomogeneous low-signal intensity was observed on a T1-weighted image (T1WI) , and inhomogeneous high-signal intensity was observed on a T2-weighted image (T2WI) . A contrast-enhanced MRI scan revealed a high-signal intensity was not detected in the inside while the rim of the nodule was enhanced . No infiltrative lesion to the muscle layer or retroperitoneum was detected. The signal intensity of the contents of the lesion was similar to that of water, suggesting serous or mucinous fluid rather than blood. Based on these imaging findings, the preoperative diagnosis of the lesion was lymphatic vessel malformation or mucinous nodules. Subsequently, a surgical resection was performed.
Macroscopically, the resected specimen was an abscess-like nodular lesion beneath the skin. On the cut surface, a nodular lesion consisted of creamy yellowish material containing a small hematoma-like fragment and was surrounded by a subcutaneous adipose tissue. Microscopically, this lesion was composed of one large tubulo-cystic structure and several small cysts . The cyst walls showed a granulomatous change with scant eosinophilic infiltration . A number of parasite ova were observed in necrotic debris inside the cystic structures. The ovular shell thickness was uneven and some were distorted. There were several cells with round nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm in the ova, suggesting yolk cells . Each ovum was approximately 80×50μm in size. They were also intensely birefringent under polarized light . These findings were compatible with those of the ova of Paragonimus, particularly P. westermani, in terms of size. No apparent operculum was detected in the hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections. Furthermore, histologic analysis of the hematoma-like fragment in the main cyst revealed a parasite body with a presumed oral sucker and reproductive organ . These finding are compatible with the characteristics of adult trematodes, raising the possibility of subcutaneous Paragonimus infection. In addition, only a single worm was found in the lesion, suggesting that this worm was a triploid form of P. westermani producing ova via parthenogenesis, not a diploid form of the Paragonimus species.
On serological examination using multiple-dot enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with antigens of P. westermani and P. skrjabini miyazakii, which are two major species causing human paragonimiasis in Japan , serum obtained from the patient was positive for P. westermani antigen rather than P. skrjabini miyazakii. However, no abnormal finding was found in both the lungs and pleura in her chest computed tomography (CT) scan. We made a diagnosis of subcutaneous paragonimiasis by P. westermani. One month after the resection, the WBC count in her peripheral blood was 6450/μL with an eosinophil count of 200/μL, and her serum IgE value was 51.7IU/mL, which were all within normal range. No further medication or treatment was assigned as she did not have any other symptoms and no lesion was detected in her chest CT scan.