The patient is a 20 year old female tennis player who presented with a complaint of worsening of her chronic foot pain. She stated that she had a condition with a “funny name” affecting her right foot that began around age thirteen. The condition caused pain in the top of her foot that worsened when she participated in tennis. Forcefully pushing off on the right foot, while making lateral direction changes from right to left, exacerbated her pain. The pain previously occurred only with tennis but for over a year had been present most of the time with variable intensity. The quality of the pain was aching and usually only moderate in intensity. It did not affect her activities of daily living but had affected her practice. She guarded against putting direct pressure on the mid foot by planting more medially or laterally during direction change in practice. She did not let the pain affect her push off during competition and usually had the most severe pain post competitive play. She had recently increased the intensity of her practices from a relative rest over the summer. She denied any mechanical symptoms of the foot. She had used various over the counter non steroidal anti inflammatory medications without much relief. She did get some relief from prescription carbon fiber shoe inserts and padded insole supports , prescribed by a podiatrist, and regularly replaced her tennis shoes. She wanted to know if anything more could be done to relieve her pain.
She had a past medical history of forearm fracture at around one year of age. Her family history was non-contributory. Her social history found that she enjoyed competitive tennis, was doing well in school, and denied substance abuse. Review of symptoms was negative.
She was a healthy appearing female. There were no lower extremity color changes or edema. Ankles had symmetric active eversion, inversion, dorsiflexion and plantarflexion. Active dorsiflexion and plantarflexion of the toes revealed a limitation in the range of motion of the second toe of the right foot . Passive dorsiflexion of the second toe was blocked at 30 degrees and plantarflexion was painful at 30 degrees. She had dorsal and plantar tenderness to palpation over a bony deformity at the second metatarsophalangeal joint but no other tarsal, metatarsal or phalangeal tenderness. Single leg toe raise was painful on the right. She had normal arches and gait. The lower extremity neurovascular exam was normal.
The differential diagnosis included metatarsalgia, Morton neuroma, stress fracture, Freiberg infraction
X-ray of the right foot revealed second metatarsal head bony changes which included flattening of the bone, sclerosis, and fragmentation.
The final diagnosis was osteochondrosis of the second metatarsal head - Freiberg infraction .
She was unwilling to give up competitive tennis at the time. She was advised to continue her carbon fiber foot plate which limits motion at the metatarsal head and continue her medial posted shoe insert to offload the second metatarsal head. Additionally, the athletic training staff worked with her on additional custom padding for comfort and offloading of the painful foot. We also prescribed scheduled oral indomethacin 75-mg extended-release capsules once daily for three weeks. We discussed the possibility of future steroid injection into the diseased joint.
The patient was evaluated at three weeks post initial consultation. She had just returned from a tournament where she won second place and stated that she was back to her baseline level of symptoms.