A 5-year-old male neutered domestic shorthair cat presented with a 1-month history of weight loss and an inability to groom or eat.
Two months previously the cat was involved in a suspected road traffic accident (RTA) resulting in a traumatic palatal separation. The hard palate was separated along the length of the palate, with communication between the nasopharynx and oropharynx visible, especially caudally, where there was 3 mm gap. There were multiple skull fractures, including marginally displaced fractures of the right nasal bone, nasal septum, orbits (bilaterally), a fracture of the right zygomatic arch, an oblique fracture of the left zygomatic arch with minimal displacement and a parasagittal fracture of the left mandible involving the root of the canine. The TMJs appeared normal. The patient was treated conservatively without any surgical intervention.
Four weeks after discharge the cat began to exhibit difficulty with grooming behaviour, followed by progressive difficulty with feeding.
On presentation, the cat was bright, alert and responsive, with a body weight of 4.9 kg and a body condition score (BCS) of 2/9. Body weight and BCS at the time of admission following the RTA were 6.4 kg and 5/9, respectively. The coat had an unkempt appearance, consistent with a lack of grooming. Physical examination revealed pale mucous membranes. Palpation revealed atrophy of the masseter and temporal muscles, particularly on the left, and an inability to open the mouth. When offered food the cat demonstrated a ravenous appetite and tried to ingest the meal; however, it was only able to protrude its tongue by a few millimetres, making food ingestion impossible.
Serum biochemistry revealed significantly elevated serum creatine kinase concentration (1830 IU/l; reference interval [RI] <150 IU/l) but was otherwise unremarkable. Complete blood cell count revealed a regenerative microcytic, hypochromic anaemia (haematocrit 12% [RI 25.0–45.0]; mean cell volume 36.4 fl [RI 40.0–55.0]; mean cell haemoglobin concentration [MCHC] 29.1 g/dl [RI 30.0–35.0]). Iron was low (7.2 µmol/l [RI 12–39]) with low transferrin saturation (15.0% [RI >25]), consistent with chronic haemorrhage and iron-deficiency anaemia.
Oral examination was performed with the cat heavily sedated and revealed that with firm manual distraction it was only possible to open the mouth by 4 mm. Multiple ulcerative lesions were identified associated with the tongue where they contacted the molar teeth.
Repeat CT revealed findings consistent with those reported previously; however, there was radiographic healing of the palate. There was a small amount of mineralisation associated with the left TMJ, with no other evidence of temporomandibular disease. Marked atrophy of the left masseter muscle was noted .
Electromyography (EMG) of both masseter muscles, performed under general anaesthesia, showed spontaneous electrical muscle activity (fibrillation potentials ++ and positive sharp waves ++), indicative of denervation or myopathy disease processes. No other EMG abnormalities were detected in other muscles of the head .
Biopsy of the temporalis muscles revealed a histological appearance consistent with myofibril degeneration. There was no evidence of ongoing inflammation. Immunofluorescent antibody assays revealed an increased Toxoplasma IgG titre (400 [RI <50]), although Toxoplasma IgM antibody titre was within normal limits (<20 [RI <20]).
Attempts were made over the following 2 days to manually distract the mouth to increase aperture width with the cat sedated. This was unsuccessful. Therefore, the decision was made to perform a rostral mandibulectomy.
Preoperative haematology documented a moderate hypochromic microcytic regenerative anaemia with blood type AB. Cross-matching identified a suitable donor and 40 ml of fresh whole blood was administered. Packed cell volume increased from 12.2% to 23%.
The cat was premedicated with methadone (0.4 mg/kg IV), and anaesthesia was induced with propofol (6 mg/kg IV) and midazolam (0.4 mg/kg IV). Endotracheal intubation was achieved using endoscopic guidance. A rostral mandibulectomy was performed caudal to the mandibular canine teeth. The gingiva was sharply incised onto the underlying bone 0.5 cm rostral to the third premolar. The gingiva was elevated from the mandible and the oral mucosa was dissected off the mandible. The mandible was transected with an oscillating saw and the mandibular artery cauterised. The mucosa was apposed over the mandible using absorbable sutures (Polyglactin 910, USP 4/0). An oesophagostomy tube was then placed. Following surgery, the patient was administered 50 mg of iron dextran by deep intramuscular injection (CosmoFer; Pharmacosmos). A buster collar was applied.
The cat made an uneventful recovery from surgery and was administered analgesia (buprenorphine [Vetergesic; Ceva Animal Health]) and meloxicam (Metacam oral suspension for cats [Boehringer Ingelheim]). Nutrition was provided by the oesophagostomy postoperatively for 4 days. Soft food was offered on the third postoperative day (Hills a/d). The cat promptly started to eat without difficulty and the oesophagostomy tube was subsequently removed.
The cat was discharged 6 days postoperatively with a 3-day course of meloxicam and a 5-day course of cephalexin (75 mg q12h PO [Rilexine; Virbac]). Pâté-style food, along with mashed meat-and-jelly-based food, was recommended. Follow-up at 2 months revealed the patient’s body weight and BCS had returned to that reported prior to the onset of clinical signs. Anaemia resolved following surgery, with haematocrit and MCHC returning to normal limits (haematocrit 29.3% [RI 25.0]; MCHC 33.2 g/dl [RI 30.0–35.0]).
Five months after rostral mandibulectomy, the patient re-presented owing to the development of sneezing and right-sided nasal discharge. Examination and repeat CT revealed an oronasal fistula affecting the caudal hard palate to the right of the midline. A 30 mm silicone nasal septal button was used to obturate the oronasal fistula. The nasal portion of the button was trimmed to fit the right inferior nasal meatus and the oral side trimmed to fit the palate. The obturator was well tolerated and effective, producing a consequent reduction in sneezing and nasal discharge.
Follow-up at 2 months revealed that the nasal septum button was in place and there was no evidence of palatal inflammation. Clinical signs had improved considerably. There was some accumulation of calculus on the premolars with associated gingivitis. At the follow-up at 30 months after the rostral mandibulectomy, the owner reported that the cat had maintained body weight and BCS, and was continuing to eat a modified diet, as detailed earlier. The owner was very satisfied with the outcome.