A 31-year-old male teacher of African origin presented to Ocean Road Cancer Institute (ORCI) with a four-year history of an itchy rash on the face, trunk, and limbs. The rash initially appeared as macules and papules over the trunk, 2–3 in number. After several months, the lesions gradually progressed to involve limbs, buttocks, face, and the entire trunk. The rash eventually ulcerated. He had received multiple topical treatments (steroids and moisturizing creams) as an eczema case from 2017 to 2020 without a clinical response. He denied a similar illness in the past and had no history of chronic diseases. There was no history of exposure to occupational chemicals, drugs, radiation, or infections before the appearance of the lesions, and none of the family members had a similar illness or history of atopy. The patient neither took any form of alcohol nor tobacco products. The rash was associated with on-and-off diarrhea episodes, though denied a history of evening fevers, night sweats, loss of weight, or arthralgia.
On examination, the patient was alert, afebrile, not dyspneic, not pale, not jaundiced, and had no lower limb edema, vitals, blood pressure 137/81 mmHg, pulse rate 87 beats per minute, respiratory rate 15 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 98%. He had a functional status of ECOG 1. On local examination, multiple well to ill-defined hyperpigmented erosive plaques, nodules, and tumors were present on the trunk, all limbs, and face, occupying more than 95% of the body surface area, including the non-sun-exposed location. The lesions had various sizes ranging from 6 cm in the widest dimension to 2 cm. There was an ulcer of about 8*10 cm on the left knee and a small ulcer on the left elbow, approximately 2*3 cm . There was no significant peripheral lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly. On systemic and neurological examinations, the patient had a GCS of 15/15, oriented to time, people, and place, with normal speech and good long- and short-term memory. Cranial nerves (1-XII) were all intact, and no signs and symptoms of meningeal irritation, with normal tone and reflexes with power of 5/5 on both lower and upper limbs; superficial and deep tendon reflexes were normal, sensory system intact with normal coordination, gait and balance. Cardiovascular System: S1 and S2 were heard with no added sound. Respiratory system: normal chest cavity with good air entry, no crackles or wheezes heard. Abdominal examination: normal abdominal contour, no palpable mass, with normal bowel sounds. The differential diagnoses were atopic dermatitis (AD), chronic eczema, and psoriasis.
A skin biopsy revealed MF with prominent spongiosis . Immunohistochemistry showed CD3 positivity. Immunohistochemistry for CD4, CD5, and CD8 was not done.
Urinalysis and Microbiology were not done.
HIV1 serology test was negative. Peripheral blood smear and bone marrow aspirate were not done. Chest x-ray and abdomen ultrasound were normal .
Upon completion of this evaluation, the patient was scored to have 6 points (Persistent and progressive patches/thin plaques-2 points; Non-sun-exposed location and Size/shape variation-2 points; Superficial lymphoid infiltrate-1 point; Lymphocytic atypia-1 points and CD3 + − 1 point) according to International Society for Cutaneous Lymphomas (ISCL) diagnostic algorithm and the diagnosis of MF was rendered. The TNMB stage was stage 3 (T3N0M0BX) according to the International Society for Cutaneous Lymphoma (ISCL) and the Cutaneous Lymphoma Task Force of the European Organization of Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) .
The initial treatment after being admitted was oral Prednisolone 10 mg b.i.d for 30 days and oral Ampiclox capsules 500 mg q.i.d × 10 days.
The patient was after that treated with a low-dose TSEBT. He received 12 Gy in 3 fractions at a daily dose of 4 Gy in October 2021. The radiotherapy technique was 3D conformal radiotherapy (3DCRT) using a linear accelerator (LINAC). The patient stood upright and half-naked during treatment, exposing all the skin to radiation. A 12 MeV beam was used to treat this patient using three anterior and posterior fields. The fields were then separated into Upper and Lower half bodies to ensure coverage of the open field size. The gantry angles were 1080 and 720 for the upper and lower halves, respectively. The source-to-skin distance was 110 cm, and the field size was 25 × 25 cm .
After three sessions of TSEBT, the patient had remarkable improvement in lesions, itching, and pain subsided . After completion of TSEBT, he was put on maintenance oral methotrexate (50 mg weekly with 1 week of rest after every 4 weeks). He attained a complete response (CR) of all the lesions within three months after completing TSEBT . He did not experience any acute or late effects of radiotherapy.
Five months later, the patient developed a recurrence lesion in his left leg . He was treated with localized TSEBT (12 Gy in four fractions) with a complete response .
The patient is in remission two years post initial treatment and is still on maintenance oral methotrexate 50 mg weekly. Summary of important events have been highlighted .