A 53-year-old male of Aboriginal descent with a history of hypertension, coronary artery disease, and diabetic nephropathy leading to ESRD requiring chronic PD was seen in July 2016 for insertion of a double-cuffed PD catheter. The patient tolerated the procedure well without any immediate complications. Five weeks later, he noticed an ulcerated area 5 mm from the catheter exit site surrounded by a bed of mild erythema and swelling. The lesion improved marginally following oral cephalexin and topical mupirocin cream application to the affected area, but it eventually worsened .
Given the lack of systemic signs of illness and occasional improvement of the lesion with antibiotics, it was treated as an ongoing exit site infection. The lesion gradually extended along the subcutaneous tunnel, with multiple small areas of ulceration on a bed of worsening purplish erythema. There was associated nonpurulent drainage from the ulcerating dermis . As the ulcerated lesion failed to improve after 56 weeks of intermittent courses of antibiotics , we decided to remove the catheter and offer renal replacement therapy in the form of hemodialysis.
Blood cultures taken at the time of PD catheter removal failed to reveal any growth after 5 days of incubation. A biopsy of the skin and subcutaneous tissue was sent for Gram staining, culture, and histological examination. The Gram stain of the biopsied ulcerated lesion was unremarkable, and the culture revealed a mixed flora. The histology report commented on focally ulcerated areas in the epidermis and on a sinus tract lined by inflamed granulation tissue extending into the deep dermis. There was no evidence of malignancy. The patient was reviewed by a dermatologist, who wondered whether the painful, indurated, and erythematous ulcerated sclerotic linear plaque on his lower abdomen was consistent with PG. The case was discussed with the histopathologist, and the microabscesses, fibrosis, and inflammation were felt to be due to PG.
Following the diagnosis of PG, topical and oral steroids were initiated, which led to an impressive resolution of the erythema and gradual healing of the ulcerated lesions . Unfortunately, the systemic steroids elevated the patient's blood glucose levels and made his diabetes difficult to manage. It was also noted that tapering the dose of systemic steroids led to worsening of the lesions, and the patient was transitioned to cyclosporine at approximately 5 mg/kg for a total dose of 150 mg b.i.d. The introduction of a calcineurin inhibitor led to a sustained response and eventual resolution .