A 53-year-old man complained of a painless swelling of the right upper lid for 2 months accompanied with foreign body sensation and lachrymation. The mass had rapidly developed within 10 days, which could be enlarged and purplish blue after rubbing the eye. The patient denied the history of trauma, infection or surgery. A cystic mass could be felt at the superior-medial of the orbit, which was smooth, mobile, fluctuant and without tenderness. There was some underactive motility when the patient looked upward . No mass was evident on everting the upper lid. The anterior segment and fundus examination were normal. The corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 12/20 and was 20/20 in the left eye, the intraocular pressure (IOP) is 36 mmHg and 18 mmHg respectively. The anterior segment and fundus examination were normal. Visual evoked potential (VEP) test showed significant delay of the P100 component peak time in the right eye for 19.8 ms. Axial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies revealed the presence of an isolated 16.2 × 13.7 mm cystic lesion occupying the superior right orbit, adjacent to the trochlea and superior oblique muscle. The content of the cyst showed medium intensity on T1 and hyperintensity T2 weighted imaging . Under general anesthesia, we performed a surgical excision through a transcutaneous approach. Intraoperatively, the cyst was found extending posteriorly behind the orbital septum, with mild adhesion to surrounding tissues. It ruptured during removal separation towards the conjunctiva and spilled out clear, colourless, thin watery fluid, similar to tears. The cyst wall was completely excised and a reconstructive conjunctivoplasty was performed. The specimen consisted of a collapsed cyst measuring 18 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm, the cyst wall was about 0.1–0.2 mm. On light microscopy, the surface of the capsule was lined with double cubic epithelium. Noticeable apocrine differentiation was evident as the epithelium seems to present villous projections into the lumen at its apex. Adjacent to the cyst wall contained a mild to moderate chronic inflammatory cell infiltration. Lacrimal gland tissue was found. The final diagnosis was consistent with a cyst of ductal origin. The first day after the operation, the corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, the IOP was 18.2 mmHg in the right eye and 18.4 mmHg in the left eye, the ocular motility returned to normal. There had been no post-operative complications or signs of recurrence over a five-month follow-up.