A 19-year-old man was transferred to the emergency department at the Chonnam National University Hospital because of painful swelling of the left mandibular area due to a bicycle accident that had occurred 12 hours prior. His medical history was nonspecific except for a fatty liver. A physical examination revealed stable vital signs but he was in acute distress. Head and neck examination indicated severe tenderness and swelling over the left mandibular angle and left periorbital regions. A CT scan and clinical examination showed that the patient had sustained a left mandibular angle fracture and left infraorbital wall fracture, requiring surgical intervention. Open reduction of the mandibular angle fracture was planned at the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery; the surgery was planned to include general anesthesia with nasotracheal intubation. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for the surgical procedure. The results of pre-anesthesia evaluation, including routine investigations (e.g., chest X-ray, electrocardiography, and blood chemistry), were within normal limits. The patient was classified as American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status II. He had no unusual findings on upper airway examination; however, he exhibited restricted mouth opening, presumably due to pain. The nasal septum deviated slightly to the right; mucosal edema on both sides of the nasal cavity was evident on preoperative facial CT . At the preoperative visit, the patient reported easier breathing through the right side of his nose on the nasal obstruction test.
Standard monitoring (e.g., electrocardiography, oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry, noninvasive sphygmomanometry, and capnography) were placed upon arrival in the operating room. Anesthesia was induced with 1 μg/kg intravenous remifentanil and 2 mg/kg intravenous propofol, followed by 0.5 mg/kg intravenous rocuronium after full preoxygenation. When neuromuscular blockade was achieved, a 7.0-mm cuffed nasal preformed endotracheal tube (Portex®; Smiths Medical International, Hythe, UK), lubricated with 2% xylocaine jelly, was inserted into the right nares with moderate resistance. There was resistance in the attempt to enter to the right, so we attempted to enter again through the left nostril, but gave up due to greater resistance. Advancement of the tube through the right nostril, with the bevel of the tube facing medially, was ultimately achieved into the hypopharynx. The tube was further inserted into the trachea without difficulty with the assistance of McGill forceps under direct visualization via laryngoscopy. Manual ventilation was initiated with 100% oxygen; however, airway pressure increased to 40–50 cmH2O, and capnography revealed a wider Q angle and steeper slope of the alveolar plateau, indicating airway obstruction. An endotracheal tube obstruction was regarded as the probable cause; an unsuccessful attempt was made to pass a suction catheter through the lumen of the endotracheal tube. The nasotracheal tube was removed and replaced with a new 7.0-mm nasotracheal tube through the right nostril again. After the tube had been replaced, intubation was confirmed with bilateral equal breath sounds, good chest excursions, and capnography assessment. Inspection of the removed tracheal tube revealed a 4-cm mass partially occluding the tube. The mass was identified as a turbinate, and the Department of Otorhinolaryngology was consulted. Open reduction and internal fixation of the mandibular fracture and orbital wall reconstruction using Medpor® were performed. After completion of the surgical procedure, the patient was extubated uneventfully in the operating room and transferred to the recovery room. There was no evidence of gross hemorrhage from the nose or the oral cavity.
An otolaryngologist performed a bilateral endoscopic nasal cavity examination on 1 day postoperatively. Inspection of the right nares revealed that the septum deviated to the right, especially at the level of the uncinate process; residual bloody spots and the stalk remnants of the middle turbinate were observed. The maxillary crest was wide and the mucosa was damaged. A tilted vomer and perpendicular ethmoid plate made an acute angle. However, there was no bleeding or leakage of cerebrospinal fluid. No endoscopic cauterization of the remaining right middle turbinate stalk or nasal packing was required to achieve hemostasis. Inspection of left nares also revealed mucosal damage. A facial CT scan taken 1 day postoperatively revealed remnants of the right middle turbinate stalk . The patient was followed up at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology before discharge, but he denied any nasal complications, bleeding, or obstruction.
At the 3-month postoperative follow-up, the patient had symptoms and signs of nasal obstruction in the traumatized nasal cavity; he also reported sleep disturbance. Ipsilateral synechiae had formed between the nasal septum and lateral nasal wall, as determined by a right rhinoscopic examination and facial CT . A home sleep test was performed to determine the degree of sleep apnea, which revealed a respiratory disturbance index of 11.3 events per hour. The synechiae resolved rapidly after simple lysis with concurrent septoplasty, and the signs of nasal obstruction and sleep disturbance were much improved. The patient remained recurrence-free beyond simple lysis of the synechia for the next 65 months.
At the 2-year follow-up, the patient exhibited nasal fullness and a yellowish discharge. Although right rhinoscopy indicated that no new synechiae had formed, ipsilateral maxillary sinusitis was observed on facial CT . The symptoms of maxillary sinusitis improved after medical treatment.