A total of 75-year-old obese female with body mass index (BMI) of 36.5 (obese Class II; according to WHO classification), came with complaint of pain in both knees (left >> right) with difficulty in walking for last 10 years with swelling on left leg for last 1 week. She had severe pain in the left knee which badly affected her activities of daily living. She was a known case of hypertension for last 8 years and hypothyroidism for last 20 years. She was recently diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. X-rays of the left knee showed advanced osteoarthritis, and she was advised for left TKA. On physical examination, the patient had swelling and mild tenderness over the left leg without apparent signs of venous thrombosis. Distal pulses of the left leg were feeble and Homan’s Sign was negative. Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremity was done which showed acute thrombosis involving femoral and popliteal vein in the left leg .
The patient was subsequently evaluated by a senior vascular surgeon. She was advised treatment for DVT and to wait for at least 3 months before TKA. However, the patient was so disabled by the knee pain that she insisted on scheduling the surgery as early as possible. Published literature did not show any case report in which TKA was done in a diagnosed case of DVT. Although a number of surgical procedures had been done in last in patients with DVT [, , ]. In all such patients, inferior vena cava (IVC) filter was implanted to prevent serious complications of DVT due to thromboembolism, during and after surgery. The goal of IVC filter was to prevent fatal PTE. Therefore informed consent was taken, explaining to the patient, all the pros and cons of the surgery. Retrievable IVC filter (OPTEASE® Retrievable Vena Cava Filter, Cordis Corporation) was implanted through right femoral vein under fluoroscopy guidance one day before the surgery . The patient was given enoxaparin sodium injection 40 mg (Clexane, Sanofi) 12 h before surgery.
TKA using PS 150 (Depuy Orthopaedics, Inc. USA) on the left side was done ( and ) under general anesthesia. The patient was not given regional anesthesia in the form of spinal or epidural anesthesia to prevent from intradural bleeding which may cause subdural hematoma leading to neurological deficit. Tourniquet was applied only at the time of cementing of implants. Wound was closed in multiple layers and suction drain was not used.
Postoperatively the patient was put on therapeutic dose of DVT management. Injection enoxaparin 30 mg twice a day, subcutaneously was given for 6 days and then she was put on tablet rivaroxaban (Xarelto, Bayers) 15 mg twice a day for 3 weeks and then on 20 mg once a day for 3 months. DVT Foot Pump was applied immediately after surgery in the recovery room. DVT Stockings were applied on 2nd post-operative day after change of dressings. Physiotherapy and walker aided mobilization was started on 1st post-operative day. Patient developed swelling over the knee with multiple ecchymotic patches. The surgical wound heals well at 2 week time. The pain and swelling over the lower limb had subsided over the period of 3-month. The patient is now 1 year post-operative follow-up and is doing well.