The patient was a 72-year-old woman with a medical history of atrophic gastritis, variant angina, uterine myomectomy, and Helicobacter pylori infection (5 years since eradication). For 2 months, she experienced appetite loss and epigastric discomfort. Subsequently, she sought medical attention at a nearby clinic and was prescribed proton pump inhibitors; however, her symptoms did not improve. She occasionally visited the emergency department because of severe nausea. Notably, she experienced weight loss due to a decreased appetite. The patient was referred to our hospital because of persistent symptoms.
Gastroscopy and an upper gastrointestinal contrast series revealed an elevated lesion, 20 mm in size, near the pylorus, similar to a submucosal tumor (SMT) . Computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed that the elevated lesion was a submucosal cyst . Differential diagnoses included a simple cyst, gastrointestinal stromal tumor, including leiomyoma or neuroma as an atypical submucosal tumor, lymphangioma, cyst-forming ectopic pancreas with or without cancer, GCP, and submucosal tumor-like gastric cancer developed from GCP, among others. Diagnosing the lesion pathologically was difficult, even when using EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA). Thus, a decision was made to proceed with surgical intervention for diagnosis and treatment.
The submucosal cystic lesion was resected using a submucosal dissection technique after an incision of the gastric wall during open laparotomy. Intraoperative rapid pathological examination revealed a cystic lesion lined by columnar epithelium resembling a hyperplastic polyp without dysplastic or cancerous changes and no findings suggestive of malignancy. Therefore, gastrectomy with lymph node dissection was unnecessary.
GCP was pathologically diagnosed in a permanent specimen. In the permanent specimen, multiple cystic lesions lined with columnar epithelia appeared in the submucosal layer. The walls of the cystic lesion were MUC6-positive and pepsinogen1-negative on immunostaining, suggesting a submucosal cystic lesion lined with a pyloric gland-like epithelium. No dysplastic or cancerous changes were observed in the epithelial cells. Finally, the lesion was diagnosed as GCP without adenocarcinoma development .
The postoperative course was uneventful. Follow-up examinations performed 1 year after surgery did not detect any residual or recurrent lesions. Additionally, the patient’s weight increased owing to symptom improvement.