A 79-year old Caucasian male, non smoker, was referred to our Department for a tracheal tumor. He reported a 3-year history of dyspnea, tirage and cornage, initially misdiagnosed as asthma. A chest X-ray was normal. During a flu episode, dyspnea became extremely severe making the patient bedridden. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed revealing a 34×29×31 mm tumor in the upper third of the trachea with almost complete airway obstruction. The lesion had an inhomogeneous density characterized by the presence of osteo-cartilaginous clods and solid tissue without significant contrast enhancement, and involved the anterior extra tracheal soft tissues . Videobronchoscopy showed a gray-white, firm, well-circumscribed mass, originating from the first cartilaginous rings of the trachea. The respiratory lumen appeared virtually obliterated with a supposed respiratory lumen of about 1 mm at the level of the uninvolved pars membranacea . An additional movie file shows this in more detail (see Additional file ). Standard tracheal intubation was deemed impossible and extremely risky, even if the tumor didn’t bleed.
Although severely symptomatic, amazingly the patient did not require an emergency procedure; indeed, the tiny respiratory space slightly expanded during inspiration and expiration because of the flaccidity of the uninvolved pars membranacea.
Electively, we smoothly inserted a pediatric 4 mm rigid bronchoscope on the posterior side of the trachea beyond the tumor allowing the positioning of a thin airway exchange catheter through the instrument. The bronchoscope was then removed and a n. 5 endotracheal tube was gently guided into the distal trachea, without scratching the tumor surface. We subsequently performed a cervical tracheal resection and reconstruction with interrupted sutures. Pathologic examination of the surgical specimen (33×32×30 mm, four cartilaginous rings, Fig. ) showed a completely excised, well-differentiated chondrosarcoma. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 10 without complications.
The videobronchoscopy, performed 3 and 9 months after surgery, showed a wide, well-healed tracheal anastomosis, without evidence of recurrent disease (see Additional file and Fig. ). Ten months after surgery, the patient is alive and disease free. The case is summarized in the flow diagram shown in the Additional file .