Our patient is a 64-year-old Chinese man who works in a department of radiology. Our patient, who has been misdiagnosed as having transient ischemic attacks (TIAs) for many years, was admitted to the Tongji Hospital of Shanghai Tongji University reporting paroxysmal homonymous blurred vision for more than 30 years. He experienced the first paroxysmal homonymous vision anomaly with no obvious cause when he was about 30 years old, he felt ‘curtain-like’ fuzziness on the sides of his visual fields . Afterward, the visual symptoms occurred once to twice every year, and presented different shapes located on the side or above his visual field, for example patchy, cord-like, zigzag, curtain-like or irregular shapes. The shapes were inconsistent during each attack . The symptoms occurred three times in the week before our examination and the last attack was described as ‘many bright, small, block diagrams above the center of the visual field’, similar to a local ‘mosaic’ , accompanied by paroxysmal position vertigo. The color of the visual onset was mainly gray or light blue. During each attack, the visual symptoms gradually disappeared in about 30 minutes, and were not accompanied by headache attack, nausea, photophobia or phonophobia, amaurosis, diplopia, limb weakness or speech disorder.
Our patient did not have a medical history of hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, stroke, headache and family genetic diseases. He never drank but has smoked about 20 cigarettes daily for 40 years.
Our patient’s test result from a neurological examination was normal.
An eye examination of his vision and visual field was normal. A three-dimensional optic coherence tomography scan showing the thicknesses of the macula, optic disk and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) was normal.
His routine laboratory tests (a full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, platelets, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, glucose, lipids, and transaminases) were normal, his thyroid hormone values and anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody level, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), cellular and humoral immune indexes were normal, and his HIV and syphilis serological test results were negative.
A chest X-ray, electroencephalogram (EEG), echocardiogram and visual evoked potential examination results were normal. A carotid Doppler ultrasound indicated no carotid plaque and his common carotid artery (CCA) intima-media thickness (IMT) was 0.7mm.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), brain CT angiography (CTA) and neck magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) examinations displayed normal results.
After admission, our patient took flunarizine, 5mg per day, and had no similar visual symptoms in the six-month follow-up period.