A 51-year-old female patient with a known SCD, on maintenance deferasirox and hydroxyurea therapy, presented to our outpatient service with the complaint of bilateral hip pain. Patient’s surgical history contained splenectomy and cholecystectomy. There was no prior use of steroid for any medical condition in patient’s medical history according to national health insurance system database.
In the emergency room, where she admitted with cough and fever, COVID-19 swab test had been performed and PCR results came positive for COVID-19 2 months before her first orthopedic consultation. She was hospitalized with the diagnosis of pneumonia for 7 days. Although there was no lung involvement in her chest computer tomography images, D-Dimer, and C-reactive protein levels were high in laboratory tests, 690 ng/L and 12,8 mg/L, respectively. Low molecular weight heparin, Proton Pump Inhibitor, and Favipiravir medications were added to her treatment.
After discharge, she complained of bilateral hip pain. She admitted to orthopedic outpatient clinic 2 months after the first sign of COVID-19 infection. On physical examination, she could not bear her weight on her right lower extremity and had difficulty even walking. Plain radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging revealed bilateral Stage I AVN of the femoral heads according to the Modified Ficat classification . Core decompression was been planned and performed on the right hip with guidance C-Arm. 4,5 mm drill was used to decompress the femoral head in two different locations. Weight bearing was not allowed for the post-operative first 6 week, immediate physical therapy was for range of motion. Follow-up examination at 10 weeks showed that she had less pain, pre-operative VAS score improved from 8 to 3, and was able to walk without crutches. At the end of the 1st post-operative year, VAS score improved to 2, and WOMAC hip score for functional status improved from 14.8 to 54.7. No femoral head subchondral bone collapse was observed in the anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis for radiological . This case report was conducted in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of Principles and informed consent has been obtained from the patient.