A 17-year-old woman presented to the emergency department of our hospital with diffuse abdominal pain and distention. Physical examination revealed severe tenderness in the left upper abdominal quadrant, a palpable abdominal mass, and hemodynamic instability; in particular, the patient's systolic arterial blood pressure was 75 mmHg and her heart rate was 135 beats per minute. After initial resuscitation with the administration of isotonic fluids, the hemodynamic status of the patient was normalized and further investigations were performed. Apart from moderate weight loss and sporadic episodes of dizziness, the reported medical history was unremarkable up to the day before admission. Laboratory investigations revealed anemia (hemoglobin 7.0 g/dl) and thrombocytopenia (platelets 70 × 109/liter). An abdominal ultrasound showed a large quantity of intraperitoneal free fluid and an enlarged spleen. These findings were confirmed by an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan , which further demonstrated hemorrhage originating from the spleen and a heterogeneous, low-density signal within the splenic parenchyma, which showed varying degrees of contrast enhancement. Chest X-ray and CT chest scan were normal.
Laparotomy revealed a huge, actively bleeding spleen; more than one liter of blood had filled the intraperitoneal cavity. No abnormal adhesions were detected between the spleen, the diaphragm, or other organs, and macroscopic examination of all four abdominal quadrants did not reveal any other pathology. Splenectomy was performed along with peritoneal lavage with warm saline to evacuate the clots. Intraoperatively, the patient received two units of packed red blood cells, one unit of platelets and two units of fresh frozen plasma.
The splenic weight was 1530 g, its greatest diameter was 19 cm, and macroscopically it appeared nodular and spongy with hemorrhagic characteristics , excluding the diagnosis of idiopathic rupture. The pathology examination of the excised spleen demonstrated an angiosarcoma, presumably of splenic origin . On immunohistochemical examination, the resected specimen showed positive immunostaining for CD31 and CD34. Owing to the highly metastatic potential of this malignant entity, and in addition to the negative macroscopic abdominal examination, a further CT scan of the abdomen, pelvis, and chest was performed with no evidence of metastatic foci.
After an uneventful recovery, the patient was discharged on the sixth postoperative day. The patient remains symptom and disease free after a follow-up period of 16 months, in contrast to the median survival of 4.4 months of patients with primary angiosarcoma of the spleen and associated splenic rupture .