A 2 week-old Caucasian, male infant was referred for congenital feet abnormalities and a “clicky” hip at the post-natal baby check. He had been delivered by elective caesarean section at 39 weeks, with no complications. He had appeared small for dates at the 12 and 20- week routine antenatal ultrasounds and had a birth weight of 5 lb 9 oz. He was the 2nd son (older half brother aged 4 years), with no family history of note.
On examination, the infant had “bean-shaped” rocker-bottom feet (left foot more flexible than right) with a right mid-foot break and excessive posterior prominence. He had bilateral up-going plantar responses. The hips were normal on both clinical and ultrasonographic examination, and the spine was straight with no palpable anomalies, pigmentations or hairy patches, and only the presence of a very small sacral dimple right side to the midline. Spinal ultrasound was normal but yielded an incidental finding of abnormal kidneys, differentially a horseshoe kidney or cross-fused renal ectopia, and it was planned for these to be evaluated further with an interval Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan.
The diagnosis was vertical talus of the right foot and oblique talus of the left foot. It was planned to carry out bilateral reverse Ponseti casting followed by limited surgery (open talonavicular reduction and wiring). A neurology opinion was obtained because of the known association between neuromuscular abnormalities and vertical tali. It returned no abnormal features.
Treatment involved plaster casts in the reverse-Ponseti position (plantar-flexion and medial deviation), with weekly recasting to reduce the talonavicular joints until surgery 16 weeks later. Casting was thought to have reduced the left side after 2 weeks, whilst the right side remained dislocated.
Surgical correction involved bilateral open talonavicular reduction, stabilisation with threaded Kirschner-wires and Achilles tenotomies . The right foot was more complex, requiring more extensive talonavicular release to allow reduction. Finally, long leg casts were applied. Post-operatively, casts were changed at 18 days, and the left wire removed at 5 weeks, and the right removed at 8 weeks.
The correction was maintained and the feet remained in good positions at each follow-up (now at 3 years), and orthotic casts (boots and bar) were made to maintain position. General concern over the infant’s development, failing to reach appropriate milestones, namely sitting up, sitting up unsupported, and cruising, prompted paediatric referral. At first instance, it was suggested that this might simply be a direct consequence of his orthopaedic and surgical interference delaying his gross motor development. However, increasingly, worry for other areas of development (including both cognitive and fine motor) grew, as he failed to reach milestones. Genetic analysis was finally carried out, giving a diagnosis of Cri du Chat syndrome at two and a half years of age.