A 45-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of epigastric pain lasting 1 wk.
The patient felt persistent upper abdominal pain in the previous 1 wk without obvious inducement, nausea or vomiting, or intolerance of cold or fever. Abdominal ultrasound at a local hospital demonstrated a honeycomb structure in the left lateral lobe of liver. He then presented at our hospital for further treatment.
He was in good health and did not have a medical history of hepatitis, liver cirrhosis or parasitization.
The patient had a 20-year history of smoking and alcohol abuse but did not have other risk factors. His parents and family members were healthy.
The patient's skin and sclera were not yellow and the abdomen did not appear floppy. A mass approximately 6 cm in size was palpable below the subxiphoid process in the upper abdomen, which was soft and had a fair range of motion, clear boundaries and local tenderness. There was no significant tenderness or rebound tenderness in the remaining abdomen. The liver and spleen were not palpable under the ribs, and normal bowel sounds were observed. Shifting dullness was noted, and Murphy’s sign was negative.
Laboratory findings included a decreased erythrocyte count (3.46 × 1012/L, normal range: 4.3-5.8 × 1012/L), decreased hemoglobin count (122 g/L, normal range: 130-175 g/L), decreased hematocrit (0.37%, normal range: 40%-50%), elevated mean corpuscular volume (MCV, 105.2 fl, normal range: 82-100 fl) and elevated mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH, 35.1 pg, normal range: 27-34 pg). The leucocyte and platelet counts were normal. Liver function and renal function tests revealed no abnormalities. Tumor marker tests showed strongly elevated carbohydrate antigen (CA)19-9 (119.3 U/mL; normal range: 0-37.00 U/mL) and elevated CA50 (27.34 IU/mL; normal range: 0-25.00 IU/mL), but alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA-125, CA-242, and CA72-4 were within their normal ranges.
Sonographically, a round anechoic area measuring 83 mm × 68 mm was located in the left lateral lobe of the liver. The wall was homogeneously thickened, with clear borders, a regular shape, and septations . Color Doppler ultrasound revealed no blood flow signal inside the thick-walled anechoic area. CEUS was performed after a 2 mL injection of the ultrasound contrast agent SonoVue (known as Lumason in the United States; Bracco, Milan, Italy) followed by a bolus injection of 5 mL of a 0.9% sodium chloride solution. At 14 s of the arterial phase, the intrahepatic thick-walled anechoic area manifested peripheral ring homogeneous enhancement, while the central part presented no enhancement with no enhancement of separation . The enhanced portion began to subside slowly at 50 s during the portal phase, but the cyst wall was still above the surrounding liver tissue .
Computerized tomography (CT) revealed that the size and shape of the liver and spleen were normal, with an intact capsule. A thick-walled, low-density, and clear-boundary shadow measuring 83 mm × 68 mm in size, and with a CT value of approximately 23 HU was observed in the left lateral lobe of the liver. The cyst fluid density was uniform, with a CT value of approximately 17 HU. In addition, intracapsular septa were absent . Enhanced CT revealed wall enhancement in the arterial phase with a CT value of approximately 41 HU and homogeneous enhancement in the portal phase . There were multiple small cystic lesions without enhancement. The density of the remaining parenchyma was uniform. The biliary tract was not significantly dilated, and the gallbladder and pancreas showed no abnormalities.