A 49-year-old Asian woman underwent video-assisted thoracic surgery for right upper lobe lung adenocarcinoma and was diagnosed with pT2aN1M0 stage IIB (tumor size 16 mm, pleural invasion+, PD-L1 Tumor Proportion Score (TPS), 50%). There was no previous or family history of cardiac disease, and no abnormal findings in the cardiac function were detected before surgery. The patient had a history of hypertension, fatty liver disease, and chronic thyroiditis. The patient received a total of three courses of adjuvant chemotherapy. Initially, treatment with cisplatin and vinorelbine was started. However, it was discontinued after one course due to Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) (v5.0) grade 4 neutropenia, and 6 weeks after the initiation of adjuvant chemotherapy, the drugs were changed to carboplatin and paclitaxel, which were administered for two courses, but were discontinued due to CTCAE (v5.0) grade 2 dysesthesia. Then, 10 weeks after the completion of the platinum doublet, administration of atezolizumab was started as postoperative adjuvant systemic therapy. There was no history of autoimmune disease, active hepatitis B, hepatitis C, active tuberculosis, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, organizing pneumonia, drug-induced pneumonia, or idiopathic pneumonia. Additionally, no abnormal findings were observed in general blood biochemical tests. Therefore, we determined that it was reasonable to administer atezolizumab to this patient. The patient was hospitalized and followed up from day 1, and was discharged from the hospital on day 8 without any major problems.
On day 9, fever (38 °C) appeared and persisted, and the patient visited our department on day 13. She was admitted to our department for symptomatic treatment of persistent fever and appetite loss. Upon arrival at the hospital, the patient was conscious, her body temperature was 40.3 °C, her blood pressure was 134/80 mmHg, and her pulse was 116 beats per minute. Blood tests revealed elevated hepatic enzyme levels. Table A presents the blood test findings at our department’s visit. Chest radiography did not demonstrate any obvious findings . Computed tomography (CT) revealed an enlarged and painful right cervical lymph node. Blood tests showed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, and subacute necrotizing lymphadenitis was diagnosed. On day 16, dyspnea on exertion worsened, and dyspnea at rest appeared on day 17. Chest radiography performed on the same day showed pulmonary congestion . Her systolic blood pressure was less than 90 mmHg, and she was in a state of shock. She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). A blood test showed aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 86U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 53U/L, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 566U/L, and troponin I 538.8 pg/mL, with a significant increase in the myocardial enzyme level . After admission to the ICU, the patient was suspected to have cardiac disease because of elevated troponin I levels on blood tests. Electrocardiography, echocardiography, cardiac catheterization, and myocardial biopsy were also performed. Electrocardiography revealed tachycardia (125 beats per minute). Echocardiography revealed circumferential wall hypokinesia and pericardial effusion. Cardiac catheterization revealed cardiac index (CI) 2.05 L/m2 and right ventricular pressure (RVP) 35 mmHg (Forrester type 4). Coronary angiography was negative for myocardial infarction. On the basis of these findings, cardiogenic shock due to myocarditis was diagnosed. The patient needed to be intubated and supported via mechanical ventilation and treated with a combination of cardioactive drugs (dobutamine 3 μg/kg/minute, noradrenaline 0.2 μg/kg/minute, and adrenaline 0.15 μg/kg/minute). The patient also had an intra-aortic balloon pump placed via the left femoral artery to assist in circulatory support, however, she remained hypotensive. The patient was transferred to the cardiology department of another hospital on the same day for the use of an assistive circulatory device.
The patient underwent placement of an IMPELLA, which is a percutaneous cardiopulmonary support device. The patient was treated with pulse steroid therapy (methylprednisolone 1000 mg, days 17–19). The patient was weaned from the ventilator on day 24 and was discharged home on day 71. All tested viral antibodies were negative. A myocardial biopsy showed myocardial infiltration of CD8-positive cells . These results were consistent with myocarditis caused by irAEs. The course from the introduction of atezolizumab to the onset of myocarditis is shown in Fig. . Retrospectively, total lymphocyte count (TLC) decreased and the neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (NLR) increased before the onset of myocarditis, and creatine phosphokinase (CK) remained in the normal range.
More than 1 year has passed since atezolizumab was discontinued, and no increase in cardiac troponin or recurrence of lung cancer has been observed.