A 74-year-old White man presented to the emergency department of our institution with a 7 × 6 × 4 cm tumor on the right parietal region of the scalp. Figure shows the patient at the time of presentation. The patient was conscious and painless. He suffered from psoriasis vulgaris and advanced psoriasis arthropathy, with contracture of the shoulders and gibbus of the thoracic spine. He gave a history of immunosuppression and intense ultraviolet exposure without a family history of cancer. The patient reported that the tumor had begun as a small lesion approximately 5 months prior, and continued to expand to its measured size at presentation. The patient record showed that the patient had a cSCC in the middle of the scalp 6 years ago, which was resected with a narrow resection margin of 6.8 mm and covered with a split skin graft of the right thigh (pT2 cN0 cM0, stage II). A new histological confirmation of the recurrent cSCC was obtained. The patient had a clinically negative neck without evidence of metastatic spread. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 7.2 × 6.8 × 5.5 cm tumor with widespread destruction of the skull and suspected infiltration of the dura mater and superior sagittal sinus . Fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography-computed tomography (18 F-FDG-PET-CT) revealed the known tumor of the skull. The TNM stage was cT4a cN0 cM0, stage IVA using the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) staging system (8th edition). There was no useful operative option. Definitive RT was recommended. The patient underwent planning computed tomography (SOMATOM Sensation open of Siemens AG Medical Solutions). He was simulated for RT in a reproducible position with lifted upper body. A thermoplastic head mask was used for immobilization and fixation. A bolus material was placed over the tumor to ensure sufficient surface dose. Monaco external beam-planning software (Version 5.11, Elekta) was used for contouring and volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) planning. Figure shows CT planning sagittal slices through the tumor with isodoses from the original RT treatment plan. The planning target volume (PTV) covered the gross tumor volume plus an appropriate margin, and he was treated with a total dose of 60 Gy at 2 Gy per daily fraction over 6 weeks (biologically effective dose; BED 10 72 Gy). We performed VMAT at Elekta Synergy Agility Linear Accelerator with a 160 multileaf collimator by 6 megavoltage (MV) photons and a dose rate of daily 478.77 monitor units. The physical treatment plan consisted of two arcs.
The tumor response correlated with the dose received. The patient had a massive tumor necrosis secondary to rapid tumor shrinkage after 18 fractions (36 Gy, BED 10 43.2 Gy). We found visible dura mater on the base of the ulcer. There was no leakage of cerebrospinal fluid . Acute side effects included radiation-induced dermatitis CTC grade 3 using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v. 4.0) and spotty bleeding. Daily visits and nursing care were provided to prevent infection. The patient had a clear regression of the initial tumor on the final day of RT (60 Gy, BED 10 72 Gy). The base of the necrosis appeared mainly to comprise granulation tissue . The patient was painless at any point in time. He did not require treatment breaks for complications. Granulation and reepithelialization proceeded from the wound edges within 10 days after RT. The large wound healed rapidly with the resolution of the tumor and inflammation by secondary intention without infection or new tissue breakdown. We found no late complications. The patient did not need surgical or reconstructive interventions. RT permitted a clinical complete remission at 82 days follow-up . MR images obtained 3 months after irradiation showed residual inflammatory tissue on the base of the initial ulcer . The patient started a PD-1 inhibiting antibody therapy with cemiplimab 350 mg every 3 weeks, administered as an infusion 2 months after the last RT. The treatment with cemiplimab was well tolerated without adverse events. The patient is now at 10 months follow-up without clinical evidence of tumor recurrence and continues therapy with cemiplimab .