A 16-year-old male presented with 2 months of mid back pain and left-sided radiculopathy with the acute onset of the left lower limb monoparesis (MRC – 3/5). Other accompanying neurological findings included a T10 sensory level with loss of pin prick, temperature, vibration/position appreciation with hyperreflexia, and a left-sided positive Babinski response. The computed tomography (CT) scan of the thoracic spine demonstrated an expansile lytic lesion with the classical “egg shell layer” occupying the left side of T9 vertebral body destroying the lamina and pedicle with epidural extension [ and ]. The MR showed a bony, cystic mass with internal septation and fluid-fluid levels within the T9 vertebral body; on T1- and T2-weighted images, the lesion was heterogeneous with evident spinal cord compression [-].
The patient had SAE; intercostal feeders were embolized using coils and gel foam [-]. Within 48 h, he underwent a single stage posterior spinal decompression, with left- sided complete intralesional excision . This was accompanied by bone grafting/and cage placement for anterior column reconstruction; posteriorly, an instrumented fusion was performed utilizing titanium screws/rods from T7 to T11 [ and ].
Grossly, the T9 tumor was a gray-red 3–4 cm fleshy mass containing multiple blood-filled cysts. Histopathological examination showed cavernous spaces filled with blood surrounded by fibrous septa with marked cellular proliferation of band fibroblasts, few spindle cells, and scattered giant cells consistent with the diagnosis of an ABC .
The pain was reduced, and his deficits improved significantly. Within 3 months, he was walking independently and performing routine activities.
At the 5th postoperative months, he presented with a new right-sided thoracic radiculopathy without any focal neurological deficits. The repeat CT scan showed recurrence of the lesion; it now involved the right side of the T9 vertebral body [ and ]. He underwent SAE alone, following which his radicular pain markedly improved. Subsequently, he was also treated with bisphosphonate therapy (intravenous zoledronic acid) at a dose of 0.04 mg/ kg every 4 months intervals, for 1 year (3 doses). At 2 years follow-up with MRI and CT studies, there was complete bone formation within the lytic areas [ and ] and good pain relief.