A 42-year-old woman with no significant past medical history presented with a painless nodular mass in her left upper lid, which had had slowly enlarged over 1 year. On clinical examination, a non-tender, nodular mass (5.5 mm × 4.5 mm) was palpable in the left sub-brow region and was freely mobile over subcutaneous tissue . A diagnosis of presumed pilomatrixoma of the eyelid was made. Computed tomography with contrast of the orbit showed a 7-mm nodular homogenous enhancing mass that was adherent to the left upper lid skin . This implied that the tumor had originated from either skin or a dermal appendage.
A total excisional biopsy was scheduled. Unfortunately, the tumor’s infiltrative growth pattern made it difficult to completely excise it from surrounding tissues. The tumor was pinkish to brown in color, poorly circumscribed, and had a rubbery surface.
Histology revealed that the mass had a dense lymphocytic infiltration with lymphoid follicles, moderate plasma cell infiltration with a few eosinophils, and interstitial fibrosis . Immunohistology showed increased CD20+ B-cells with slight marginal zone expansion, focal CD3+ T cell infiltration, a polyclonal plasma cell population with an even distribution of kappa and lambda light chains, and a low Ki-67 proliferative index (5% of all lymphoid cells). The number of IgG4+ plasma cells, counted in a high power field (HPF: X10 eyepiece and x 40 objective lenses), was >50 and the IgG4/IgG ratio was 50% . The resulting final pathologic diagnosis was inflammatory pseudotumor with increased IgG4+ plasma cells; possible association with IgG4-SD, but extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma could not be excluded.
Therefore, the patient underwent testing to determine tumor malignancy and systemic IgG4-SD involvement. Laboratory testing showed normal IgG and IgG4 serum levels. [1030 mg/dL (reference range, 700–1600), 21.1mg/dL (reference range, 6.1-121.4), respectively]. Serum Lactate dehydrogenase concentration was within normal range. Except for a 3 cm sized uterine myoma, imaging studies including chest CT, abdomen and pelvic CT, and positron emission tomography scanning demonstrated no remarkable findings.
For the management of possible remnant lesion and prevention of recurrence of disease, oral prednisolone was administered at a 40 mg/day initial dose and was slowly tapered to a 2.5 mg/day maintenance dose. One year after initiating therapy, there was no evidence of relapse. The patient is under close surveillance for signs of recurrence, systemic involvement, and potential malignant transformation.