A 10-year-old female patient reported to a private dental clinic with a chief complaint of a slowly growing, painless swelling of 6 months’ duration in the maxillary anterior region. On general examination, she was apparently healthy. Medical and family history did not reveal anything of significance. On extraoral examination, no abnormalities were detected.
Intraoral examination revealed a solitary firm nontender enlargement (1×0.5 cm) of marginal and attached gingiva covering the cervical third of the tooth in relation to a palatally displaced 21 . It was a slowly growing swelling. The colour of the lesion was pale pink. The lesion was asymptomatic with no pain, bleeding on probing, or pus exudation. There were deep periodontal pockets (>10 mm) in the buccal aspect of 21. Intraoral periapical and occlusal radiographs did not reveal any significant findings .
Based on the clinical findings of deep pockets and with radiography showing no findings, it was decided to conduct cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) of the region to get a three-dimensional view of the lesion. CBCT revealed a well-defined corticate radiolucency on the buccal aspect of 21 . The lesion extended from the alveolar crest up to the middle third of the root. It displaced tooth 21 palatally. The superior margin of the lesion was connected to the alveolar crest. There was thinning and expansion of the buccal cortical plate. No abnormality was seen in relation to the crown of 21. A single root with single-root canal and partially closed apex was noted. No evidence of fracture line or lateral canal was noted in relation to 21. Based on the clinical and radiological findings, a differential diagnosis of pyogenic granuloma, fibroma, peripheral ossifying fibroma, or peripheral giant-cell granuloma was made and excisional biopsy of the lesion planned. Routine blood examinations were done, which were within normal limits. The lesion was carefully enucleated and curettage done under local anesthesia . The tissue was sent for histopathological examination.
Microscopy analysis showed nodular proliferation of the odontogenic epithelium in nests, whorls, and strands. A few duct-like structures of varying size lined with columnar cells with an eosinophilic rim inside and basophilic inhomogeneous material within the lumen were noted. Trabecular patterns with numerous small ovoid and larger irregular basophilic calcifications and eosinophilic material between spindle and polygonal cells, as well as in the duct-like structures, were seen . Based on the clinical, radiological and histological findings, a confirmatory diagnosis of PAOT was established. The patient was recalled periodically and follow-up examination done till 18 months. Within this period, there was no recurrence of the lesion