A 56-year-old Chinese woman, an active smoker, presented with hearing deficit and persistent tinnitus for a few months, associated with nasal congestion. Nasal endoscopy identified a mass in the nasopharynx. Histopathological evaluation of a tissue biopsy revealed nasopharyngeal carcinoma (non-keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma, undifferentiated type with no evaluation of EBV). She was counselled for chemoradiotherapy, but refused, citing personal reasons.
She was subsequently lost to follow up, but presented a year later with right eye ptosis for two weeks, associated with progressive worsening of diplopia and blurring of vision. On examination, the right eye was proptosed, with complete ptosis and complete ophthalmoplegia. The left eye had moderate limitation of extraocular movements in all directions of gaze . Right eye visual acuity (VA) was hand movements, with a right eye relative afferent pupillary defect, while the left eye VA was 6/9. Anterior segments, intraocular pressure and fundi were normal bilaterally. She was unable to read the Ishihara chart with her right eye. The left eye was able to read all 15 plates. Her right eye Humphrey Visual Field test showed a severely depressed visual field. However, the test was not reliable due to poor vision. Her left eye Humphrey Visual Field test also showed insignificant findings. Systemic examination revealed enlarged cervical lymph nodes. However, there was no cervical lymph node biopsy proceeded.
Computed tomography scan (CT scan) showed a heterogenous enhancing soft tissue mass within the nasopharynx, obliterating fossa of Rosenmuller and torus tobarius bilaterally, with infiltration of the skull base and the right cavernous sinus . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed extension of the mass into the orbital apex and both optic canals, with greater involvement of the right side . The mass extended superiorly, touching the midline of the optic chiasm. The mass also extended laterally into both cavernous sinuses, pushing the internal carotid vessels laterally.
The patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg four times a day for three days. Over this time, VA improved to 6/36 in the right eye, while the left eye vision was maintained at 6/9. Motility of both eyes also improved significantly. She was subsequently switched to oral prednisolone 1 g/kg/day, which was tapered over a period of seven months until she completed her concurrent chemoradiotherapy. This consisted of two cycles of cisplatin and fluorouracil, as well as radiotherapy 70 Gy/35#. By the end of this period, her vision was 6/9 in the right eye and 6/6 in the left, with normal colour vision and pupil responses bilaterally. The right eye motility had minimal residual limitation of abduction, while the left eye motility had normalized. Precautions and monitoring of corticosteroid side effects such as blood sugar level, blood pressure, risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and risk of secondary infection were taken into action throughout the treatment process. Patient was very fortunate as she did not experience any of these side effects.
Unfortunately, four months later, her condition worsened, with complete loss of right eye vision, associated with poor oral intake, lethargy, cachexia and loss of weight. Ocular motility showed bilateral limited abduction and right eye VA of no light perception. CT scan showed progressive disease with enlargement of the previously noted nasopharyngeal mass and metastases to the liver, lymph nodes, adrenal glands and bones. She was restarted on another cycle of chemoradiotherapy.