A 43-year-old right-handed Caucasian man experienced an electrical burn after contact with a 440 volt line while working on a roof. Upon standing up from the squatted position, the right side of our patient’s head came into contact with an exposed wire, resulting in electrocution with a loss of consciousness. Witnesses called the emergency medical services, and our patient was intubated at the scene. He was transferred from a local community hospital to our institution’s burn unit for a higher level of care. Second and third degree burns covered 21% of his total body surface area. The entry wound was through his scalp, traversing through his neck and chest, into his groin, and exiting from his left foot. No spinal fractures were identified.
Initially, our patient was alert and able to move all four limbs. Over the ensuing days, he was observed to move his legs less than his arms. Two days after our patient received multiple skin grafts and a calvarial flap, sedation was held and he was noted to have absent limb movements during routine dressing changes. A neurological consultation was obtained on his 10th day of hospitalization because of his evolving weakness. On examination, our patient was intubated, and his head, chest, groin and bilateral lower extremities were covered by dressings. He was awake with eyes open, alert and able to follow simple commands. A cranial nerve examination revealed reactive pupils, intact extraocular movements and symmetrical facial movement to smile, eye closure and eyebrow elevation. Our patient indicated normal light touch sensation on his face with nodding. He was breathing over the ventilator and able to shrug his shoulders. A motor examination showed normal muscle bulk with flaccid tone and only intermittent, trace movement in his left fingers. Our patient acknowledged pain with nodding on light pressure to all limbs. His deep tendon reflexes were diminished and plantar responses were equivocal.
On admission, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his cervical spine demonstrated changes suggestive of edema from C3 to T2 levels with an intact spinal cord. Given the changes noted on the neurological examination, a repeat MRI was suggested. Repeat imaging performed eight days after the first MRI revealed an interval development of cord swelling and acute ischemic infarction . MRI of his brain showed restricted diffusion in the bilateral medullary pyramids and pons, indicating infarction of the corticospinal tracts at the pontomedullary level .
Our patient was treated with fluid resuscitation, electrolyte replacement and nutritional support as well as wound care and pain control. Intravenous steroids were considered however not pursued due to the risk of infection and imaging findings of ischemia. A tracheostomy and percutaneous gastrostomy tube were placed. Our patient’s hospital course was complicated by pneumonia and the development of pulmonary emboli, requiring placement of an inferior vena cava filter. Over the next two months, our patient showed minimal improvement in motor function. Repeat imaging was obtained. MRI of his brain revealed near complete resolution of the ischemic changes . A cervical spine MRI suggested a persistent, abnormal signal posteriorly from the cervicomedullary junction to the C6 level with an interval decrease in cord edema . His course showed an ability to hold his head up with more movement in his left arm against gravity; some flexion of his right elbow and wrist was also noted. No improvement was observed in his lower extremities. Our patient was subsequently transferred to an inpatient rehabilitation facility, and unfortunately was lost to follow-up thereafter.