A 48-year old woman was being treated for a malignant neoplasm of her left breast. The tumor was a moderately differentiated invasive ductal carcinoma (clinically T1 N0) that was discovered on physical examination and identified on subsequent mammogram. The various surgical options were discussed in depth with the patient, who decided not to undergo a breast conservation procedure or breast reconstruction. In addition, she elected to undergo a contralateral prophylactic mastectomy in order to address the approximate 0.5 – 1% per year risk of breast cancer in the unaffected breast. Therefore, her operative procedure was scheduled as a left modified radical mastectomy with SLNB and right prophylactic mastectomy. Her past medical history included migraine headaches and chronic sinus infections. Her past surgical history was significant for tonsillectomy, ankle surgery, dilation and curettage, and sinus surgery, all of which were performed under general anesthesia. The patient reported no drug, food, or other allergies. No previous perioperative anesthetic complications were reported by the patient.
On the morning of surgery, the patient was premedicated with 2 mg midazolam intravenously prior to the induction of anesthesia. General anesthesia was induced using fentanyl, propofol, and rocuronium, after which the patient was intubated in standard fashion. Anesthesia was maintained with nitrous oxide, oxygen, and isoflurane. The patient's left breast was then injected intraparenchymally with 5 mL of Lymphazurin 1% blue dye, which was followed by 5 minutes of light breast massage to mobilize the dye. Approximately 15 minutes later, after her chest wall had been prepped and draped, the patient experienced an acute episode consistent with cardiovascular collapse that was characterized by O2 desaturation and systolic blood pressures in the range of 30–40 mm Hg. The surgical procedure was halted (no incision had been made) and the patient was placed in the Trendelenburg position and given 100% oxygen. The possibility of a tension pneumothorax was eliminated by physical examination, which revealed robust breath sounds bilaterally. Intravenous fluids were administered (~2000 cc total) and 0.1 mg epinephrine (1:10 000) was given intravenously. Decadron (100 mg) and diphenhydramine (50 mg) were administered when the blood pressure failed to improve. She exhibited hives on her lower extremities bilaterally, but there was no blue discoloration to the skin. The patient was diagnosed with an anaphylactic reaction to the blue dye after these events. Her blood pressure stabilized and at that point she was placed on an epinephrine drip at 2 μg/min. The patient was then transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU) for hemodynamic monitoring and ventilation management.
Approximately 2 hours after injection of the blue dye, the patient experienced a second hypotensive episode during which her systolic blood pressure dropped to 65 mm Hg. She received additional fluid resuscitation along with 50 mg benadryl, and the epinephrine drip was increased to 4 μg/min. The patient soon stabilized and the epinephrine was weaned the next day. She was discharged from the SICU 36 hours after admission. She was maintained on methylprednisolone, diphenhydramine, and famotidine, and given instructions on the use of an epinephrine pen and albuterol inhaler. The patient did well and exhibited no further allergic symptoms. She underwent the planned surgery 2 weeks later utilizing radioactive colloid alone to identify the sentinel lymph node. Two sentinel lymph nodes were identified that were negative for metastatic disease. Further examination of the lymph node specimens revealed a 3 mm metastatic focus in the first lymph node and a 6 mm metastatic focus in the second. The patient underwent completion lymphadenectomy 4 weeks later.