A 10-year-old Taiwanese boy was admitted to our hospital because of blood-tinged stool and chronic abdominal pain. He was healthy until a few months before admission when he complained of intermittent, colicky abdominal pain, constipation and abdominal fullness in addition to exhibiting body weight loss. Medical or congenital as well as family histories were unremarkable. We performed colonoscopy examinations on the patient’s parents and sibling, which revealed no colonic polyp. Physical examination revealed abdominal distention. He exhibited an enlarged, palpable right upper quadrant abdominal mass, and his stool contained bright red blood. Laboratory tests indicated a normal serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level. Past medical and familial histories were unremarkable for colonic malignancy.
Colonoscopy revealed a nearly 4/5 circumferential obstructing ulcerative tumor in the proximal transverse colon near the hepatic flexure, and pathological examination involving colonoscopic biopsy showed signet ring cell carcinoma . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed annular wall thickening in the transverse colon with mild pericolic fat infiltration and visible clustered lymph nodes in the adjacent mesenteric space, compatible with transverse colon cancer .
First, a loop ileostomy was performed to divert stool from the ileum. Exploratory laparotomy was performed 1 week later, detecting a tumor near the hepatic flexure in the wall of the transverse colon. A radical extensive right hemicolectomy was performed, and a segment of the mesentery including the vessels draining this area was resected. The liver, terminal ileum, and peritoneum were normal to palpation. The resected specimen contained a firm, sessile, ulcerative tumor 4.0 cm long and 5.3 cm wide. On the basis of the aforementioned imaging and pathology results, the patient was finally diagnosed with grade 3, UICC stage IIIB (T3N2bM0), and poorly differentiated transverse colon cancer and signet ring cell carcinoma with lymph-vascular and perineural invasions.
Genetic features of the postoperative surgical specimen revealed wild-type BRAF without mutation in codon 600, wild-type KRAS without mutation in codons 12, 13, 61, and 146, and wild-type NRAS without mutation in codons 12, 13, 59, 61, 117, and 146. We collected tumor samples and subjected them to an immunohistochemistry (IHC) test, and the results revealed no loss of nuclear expression of mismatch repair (MMR) proteins, including MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2, indicating a low probability of tumors with high microsatellite instability (MSIH). Otherwise, screening for TP53 mutations found that blood DNA and tissue DNA own the same genetic mutation TP53 c.215C > G.
Notably, we identified a missense mutation (point mutation) in exon 15 of APC. In addition, we determined a heterozygous germline mutation at c.5465 T > A and a heterozygous somatic mutation at c.7397C > T. These both germline and somatic mutations may be the predisposing cause of CRC. The family pedigree for the APC germline mutation at c.5465 T > A was derived using blood samples .
After operation, we administered a regimen of modified FOLFOX-6 to the patient as adjuvant chemotherapy. No chemotherapy-related grade 3 or higher toxicities were noted in the first six treatment cycles. Chemotherapy was tolerated adequately with excellent performance along with the normalization of all liver enzymes, and the absence of distant metastases, confirmed through CT, was considered to indicate disease stabilization. In total 12 cycles of modified FOLFOX-6 were administrated to the patient, and he was followed-up closely at our clinic .