A man in his early 40s presented to our hospital with a complaint of bilateral visual impairment starting approximately 2 years prior. He had noticed this visual impairment because any glasses failed to correct his decimal visual acuity up to 1.0 at an eyeglass shop. The patient had no ocular or family histories. At the first examination in our clinic, his decimal best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.7 (equivalent to 0.155 on logMAR visual acuity) with a spherical refractive error of −0.25 diopter (D) and cylinder –1.00 D Axis 170° and 0.6 (0.22 on logMAR) with a cylinder refractive error of–1.25 D Axis 5° in the right and left eyes, respectively. The ocular tension was within the normal range in both eyes. Slit-lamp examinations showed mildly senile cataracts bilaterally and no other abnormalities in the anterior and medial segments. Dilated fundus examinations showed no apparent abnormalities in either eye . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) images showed sustained macular structure but diffuse thinning of the entire retinal layers in the macular area in both eyes (, Cirrus HD-OCT model 4000, Carl Zeiss, Germany). Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed no apparent abnormalities . A static visual field test using a Humphrey field analyzer (HFA II 750, Carl Zeiss, Germany) showed slight relative visual field defects in both eyes . A kinetic visual field test using the Goldmann perimeter did not reveal any obvious abnormalities . During several ophthalmic examinations, especially the indirect ophthalmic scope and FA, the patient experienced photophobia such that he was unable to keep his eyes open and complained of intolerable discomfort due to the bright light. Thus, we avoided examinations with bright light or reduced the luminance of the light source as much as possible. Reducing the luminance enabled us to perform these ophthalmic examinations. Some retinal diseases, including inherited retinal dystrophy, were suspected to be the cause of visual impairment and photophobia; however, a clear diagnosis was not possible as he was reluctant to undergo further examinations. There was no abnormality in the fundus or visual field; however, OCT demonstrated diffuse retinal thinning, which could be considered as the major cause for his visual impairment and photophobia. Follow-up ophthalmic examinations were performed every 6 months. His visual acuity and visual field were stable for over 10 years .
Twelve years later, the patient reported multiple floaters in his left eye. A slit-lamp examination revealed multiple pigments in the vitreous of this eye. Dilated fundus examination showed partial rhegmatogenous retinal detachment that did not include the macula. The RD occurred in the superior retina with five atrophic holes and one retinal tear and in the inferior retina with lattice breaks. We first planned cataract surgery with phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation and vitreous surgery under local anesthesia with RBA. In the preparation for surgery using a surgical microscope (OPMI Lumera 700, Carl Zeiss, Germany), the patient reported severe photophobia with body motion. After RBA, the photophobia was reduced and cataract surgery was completed without any complications. However, after inserting the fiber optic light pipe into a cannula for vitrectomy with Constellation instruments (Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX, USA), with a light level set to 100% (approximately 3.2×105 cd/m2, at 40 cm by PR-655 Spectrascan®, Photo Research, Inc., CA, USA), the patient experienced intolerable photophobia with body motion (, ). Although we reduced the light dose to 60% (1.9 × 105 cd/m2) and administered pentazocine and hydroxyzine hydrochloride as analgesics, the intolerable photophobia persisted. After consultation with the patient, we interrupted the surgery and performed the second surgery under GA 7 days later. Retinal reattachment was achieved after vitrectomy, laser photocoagulation (LPC), and 20% SF6 gas tamponade.
Seventeen months after vitrectomy for his left eye, the patient reported multiple floaters in his right eye. His right BCVA was 0.8. In the right eye, slit lamp examination revealed multiple pigments in the vitreous. Dilated fundus examination showed partial RD in the superior retina with a giant retinal tear, which did not include the macula. Similar to his left eye, we performed cataract surgery, vitrectomy, LPC, and gas tamponade with 20% SF6 under GA, which resulted in retinal reattachment. However, the RD recurred in his right eye 16 days after the operation. For the next operation (the fourth operation in total), we proposed to him and obtained his agreement to use an HUS system with minimal illumination under RBA as the patient had felt nausea and complained of throat pain after GA. In case that the patient experienced the bright light from the light pipe to be intolerable, we requested anesthesiologists to be on standby during the operation. We performed vitrectomy, LPC, and gas tamponade with 12% C3F8 under RBA with the HUS system, which was consisted of an NGENUITY 3D® visualization system (Alcon Laboratories) attached to a VISU 210 microscope (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena, Germany). We set the brightness of the light pipe to 15% (4.8 x 104 cd/m2) and inserted the light pipe into a cannula, which provided excellent intraoperative visibility with minimal illumination (, ). The patient did not complain of photophobia during the operation, and retinal reattachment was achieved. Twenty-six days after the re-operation, the RD recurred. For the second RD recurrence, and the fifth operation in total, we performed vitrectomy, encircling, LPC, and gas tamponade with 12% C3F8 under RBA with the HUS system under the same conditions as the fourth operation. After approximately 60 min of encircling and 25 min of vitrectomy, we inadvertently set the brightness of the twin light chandelier to 100% (1.9 × 105 cd/m2) as the default brightness setting. Upon noticing the wrong setting, we immediately reduced the brightness to 30% (5.9 × 104 cd/m2) and asked the patient if he felt photophobia (, ). Interestingly, he did not experience photophobia. Retinal reattachment was achieved and was sustained until 18 months after surgery. His decimal BCVAs were 0.6 and 0.9 in the right and left eyes, respectively (0.22 and 0.046 on logMAR).