A 41-year-old Persian woman presented to the emergency department with complaints of severe left flank pain, nausea, vomiting, gross hematuria, and vaginal bleeding. She has been experiencing intermittent left flank pain for the past 3 months, which had exacerbated over the past few days. The onset of hematuria and vaginal bleeding occurred 3 weeks previously.
In reviewing the patient’s medical history, she denied any prior history of trauma or relevant underlying medical conditions. Concerning gynecological and obstetric history, she reported a regular menstrual cycle and three pregnancies, which included an abortion, an uncomplicated full-term pregnancy terminated by a cesarean section 4 years previously, and a molar pregnancy. Two years previously, the patient experienced delayed menstruation, prompting further evaluations that revealed a serum β-hCG level of 110,000 mIU/mL, along with a suspected hydatiform mole on abdominal and transvaginal ultrasound. Consequently, she underwent endometrial curettage, and histopathological evaluation confirmed the diagnosis of a complete hydatiform mole. Although the serum β-hCG level decreased after initial treatments, the patient declined further follow-up, including regular measurements of β-hCG level. For the past 2 years, she remained uncomplicated until the onset of the symptoms mentioned above. A timeline detailing the patient’s history and symptoms is provided in Fig. .
Upon admission, the patient was pale and moderately distressed due to severe pain, and the following vital signs were recorded: heart rate of 95 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 24 breaths/minute, blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg, and temperature of 39 °C. Physical examination revealed unremarkable findings except for increased sensitivity on the left flank and tenderness on the left-side costovertebral angle.
Laboratory tests showed elevated levels of serum β-hCG (60,000 mIU/mL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (40 mm/hour), and C-reactive protein (50 mg/L), as well as neutrophil-dominant leukocytosis (white blood cells 33,000 /mm3 and neutrophil count 29,700/mm3), anemia (hemoglobin 9.2 mg/dl), and hematuria (3+ blood and 50–60 red blood cells per microscopic high-power field). All other biochemical parameters were within normal limits.
Considering the patient’s clinical presentation, an abdominopelvic ultrasound was conducted in the emergency department. The results demonstrated an empty uterine cavity, accompanied by a hypoechoic lesion within the lower pole of the left kidney. Furthermore, moderate fluid collection was identified in the left pararenal and perisplenic spaces. Subsequently, an abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast (arterial phase) identified a hypodense lesion (30 × 25 × 20 mm3) with mild heterogeneous enhancement in the lower pole of the left kidney. Hyperdense foci within the renal mass with CT number of 160 Hounsfield Units (HU) on arterial phase images were suggestive of active bleeding. In addition, a hematoma (130 × 108 × 90 mm3) was observed in the subcapsular, perinephric, and anterior and posterior pararenal spaces. This hematoma caused anterior displacement of the left kidney, attributed to pressure effects . Moreover, findings regarding the endometrial cavity and myometrium were unremarkable except for a defect in the superior segment of the uterine anterior wall. Furthermore, owing to the observation of pleural effusion in the limited view of the thorax in the abdominopelvic CT scan, the patient underwent a chest CT scan, which disclosed bilateral pleural effusion, more prominent on the left side, with adjacent passive lung collapse. No evidence of pulmonary nodules or masses was detected.
Considering the enhancing hemorrhagic lesion within the left kidney, spontaneous renal hemorrhage (SRH) with potential underlying causes, including renal cell carcinoma, metastatic lesion, and angiomyolipoma, was proposed. In light of the patient’s previous history of complete molar pregnancy with inadequate follow-up and a high serum β-hCG level, renal metastasis from choriocarcinoma was considered. As a result, a laparotomy exploration was planned on the basis of the patient’s clinical condition and the surgical team’s preference in our center. During the laparotomy, an extensive left retroperitoneal hematoma was discovered. Additionally, a lacerated mass was actively bleeding at the lower pole of the left kidney. Consequently, a partial nephrectomy was performed using the wedge resection technique with a 5-mm margin. Further exploration of the intraperitoneal cavity revealed a left para-ovarian cyst without evidence of an ectopic pregnancy. Thus, a cystectomy was carried out. The patient also underwent endometrial curettage. Throughout the surgery, all specimens were documented for pathology evaluation.
The histopathological findings of the renal mass strongly aligned with characteristic features of choriocarcinoma, including a disorganized mixture of various types of trophoblast cells, significant cytologic pleomorphism, nuclear enlargement, extensive mitotic activity, a hemorrhagic or necrotic background along with viable tumor cells at the periphery, and lymphovascular tumor thrombi . Moreover, the immunohistochemical analysis revealed that tumoral cells were strongly positive for β-hCG, cytokeratin 7, and Ki 67. In this regard, among all gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, only invasive mole and choriocarcinoma demonstrate a high expression of β-hCG, serving as a pivotal biomarker . Furthermore, considering choriocarcinoma as a hyperproliferative tumor, the high expression of Ki 67, an index for mitotic activity and proliferation, is a distinctive feature of choriocarcinoma . In light of these findings, the histopathology results confirmed the final diagnosis as choriocarcinoma renal metastasis . Notably, no malignant cells were observed in endometrial curettage specimens, and a corpus luteum cyst was identified within the left para-ovarian cyst.
After the surgery, although the patient did not experience complications associated with central nervous system involvement, she underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium for precise staging before initiating chemotherapy. The results indicated no pathological enhancement or metastatic lesions. Additionally, a thoracentesis was performed, revealing the absence of malignant cells in the pleural fluid cytology.
Taken together, these findings clarified that the patient had high-risk gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (stage IV:11 according to The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics /World Health Organization (WHO) staging and scoring system ). Owing to the choriocarcinoma histological diagnosis, immediate initiation of chemotherapy was planned. A multi-agent regimen was selected to prevent drug resistance . Considering the acceptable rate of complete response and long-term survival, as well as the lower toxicity of the etoposide, methotrexate, actinomycin D, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine/oncovin (EMA-CO) regimen , this regimen was preferred. The patient was referred to the oncology department to receive a standard EMA-CO regimen. After receiving chemotherapy courses for 3 weeks, the serum β-hCG level decreased to 5 mIU/mL.
After being discharged from the hospital, the patient has been undergoing monthly measurements of β-hCG level while on hormonal contraception. Over the past 6 months of follow-up, the β-hCG levels have consistently remained within the normal ranges, showing no evidence of relapsing disease or new-site metastasis. With regard to the rarity of our case and the highest risk of recurrence within the first year of treatment cessation among patients with high-risk gestational trophoblastic neoplasia , we planned to continue monthly monitoring of β-hCG levels for at least 1 year in this patient.