A 57-year-old male with a smoking history of over 30 years and multiple nodules in both lungs was present to our department. After assessing the bilateral solid nodules in his Positron Emission Tomography–Computed Tomography (PET/CT) scan, malignant lesions at the left lower lung, right lower lung, and right middle lung are suspected. Without surgical contraindication, wedge resection by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was first applied to the left lower lobe’s nodule. The postoperative pathological of the left lower nodule (LLL) confirmed adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC). Two months later, the procedure was used again to nodules in the right middle lobe (RML) and right lower lobe (RLL). Adenoid cystic carcinoma was confirmed in all lesions. Unfortunately, the pathological distinction between primary and metastatic lesions is unclear, impeding personalised decision of postoperative treatment and follow-up plans.
At first, clinical approved 425 cancer-relevant genes capture-based NGS test was done for all three pulmonary lesions (GeneseeqPrime) and genomic alterations among the lesions were compared (, ). The oncoplot for genetic alterations show that MCL1 gene amplification was detected in the LLL lesion. For the shared frameshift mutation in exon 2 of PIK3R1 gene p.I68Yfs*8 were detected in LLL and RML lesions, it implies a role in tumorigenesis and metastasis from left to right side .
Recently, it has been reported that gene expression profiling can distinguish primary and metastatic lesions in varied cancer types. To further assess the origin and the relationship of these lesions, we profiled their global gene expression using the Affymetrix GeneChip® PrimeViewTM Human Gene Expression Array. Transcriptomic data from resected paracancerous lung, LLL, RML, and RLL tissue revealed their intrinsic relationship. A total of 2262 differential genes against control tissue are shared among three ACC samples, but the number of differential genes is imbalanced between the left and right lung . Further coexpression analysis of gene expression within groups showed distinct expression patterns between normal and cancer tissue while a close relationship among cancer samples is observed, indicating intrinsic similarities among ACC samples . Next, principal component analysis on differentially expressed genes further confirmed that the transcriptomic similarity is transitionally higher between RML and RLL compared with RML and LLL, suggesting right-side lesion could be derived from the left-side lesion . The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis on the top 200 differential genes by clusterProfiler revealed metastasis-associated cell pathways (focal adhesion, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, and ECM–receptor interaction) are progressively activated from left tumor tissue to right tumor tissues . We also observed similar transition in Gene Ontology overlapping based on the top 10 terms of biological process, molecular function and cellular component . Taken together, the mutation characteristic, gene expression similarity, and cell signaling shift indicate that this patient had a left-side primary peripheral pulmonary ACC with contralateral lung metastasis.
Since primary pulmonary ACC is a low-grade malignant tumor, surgical treatment of patients with early lung adenoid cystic carcinoma is preferred. Due to the small size and complete removal of the tumors, chemotherapy and radiotherapy after complete resection is not considered. However, due to our suspicion of intrapulmonary metastatic ACC in this patient, a closer follow-up schedule based on translationally assisted by multi-omic information was prescribed. Fortunately, the patient was followed up for three years without recurrence, and the mutations detected in tumors were not found in blood by the same 425 cancer-relevant genes NGS panel.