A 67-year old woman with a history of mastectomy and sentinel node procedure due to breast cancer three years ago, was seen in an outpatient clinic of a non-academic hospital for progressive perioral numbness and dizziness. At first, a Cerebrovascular accident (CVA) was suspected, so treatment with carbasalate calcium 80 mg once a day was started, see timeline .
Despite therapy, the symptoms progressed and the patient was admitted for further analysis. The initial diagnosis of CVA in the vertebrobasilar region was rejected, because the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed fully intact vasculature. However diffuse white matter lesions around the fourth ventricle with extension into the pons and medulla oblongata were seen .
A cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) sample showed pleocytosis of 240 cells/μL with 30% lymphocytes and a glucose of 3.7 mmol/L. Blood and CSF cultures were negative. With these results, Herpes encephalitis with secondary vasculitis was considered for which acyclovir and dipyridamole was started. A second CSF sample showed pleocytosis of 102 cells/μL with 96% lymphocytes and a glucose concentration of 3.2 mmol/L. Unfortunately, the patient deteriorated, despite the initiated therapy.
At initial presentation the Borrelia serology was negative. However 15 days later the Borrelia IgG became positive with a negative IgM. Because of this unsuspected Borrelia sero-conversion, in combination with a confirmed and recent history of a tick bite, Lyme’s disease was diagnosed. Hence, intravenous therapy with ceftriaxone and dexamethasone was initiated. However after four days, the situation worsened dramatically. The patient developed spiking fever, a complete hemi-paresis and brain nerve palsy progressed. Because of the neurologic deterioration and the diagnostic impasse, the patient was transferred to an academic hospital, three weeks after initial admission.
At presentation in our center, the patient was somnolent (Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 14) with a complete left-sided hemiparesis. She had a fever (40.2 °C), high blood pressure (167/70 mmHg), tachycardia (100 beats/min) and tachypnea (25/min). During admission on the neurological ward, the situation rapidly worsened, so transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU) was necessary that same day. On the ICU the patient was intubated because of the risk for aspiration due to a GSC of 7 (E1M4V2), with a concomitant full left sided hemi-paresis. A new CSF sample showed mild pleocytosis of 23 cells/μL and a glucose concentration of 3.4 mmol/L.
A new interview with the family directly after ICU admission revealed important and until then unknown information: firstly, the patient appeared to be a professional cat breeder and secondly she was fond of soft French cheeses. This specific and important information had for unexplained reasons not been retrieved until then. Toxoplasmosis had already been ruled out, so Listeriosis appeared to be a likely diagnosis. Intravenous therapy with amoxicillin (2 g, every 4 h) and gentamycin (7 mg/kg once a day) was promptly initiated. Two days later, the blood cultures taken in the non-academic hospital on day 22 of the illness as well as the CSF cultures taken in the academic hospital, showed gram-positive rods, identified as Listeria monocytogenes, confirming the diagnosis. A new MRI showed diffuse hyperintensity and swelling of the basal ganglia, with enhanced ring-shaped areas that indicate necrosis .
Because of further detoriation, persisting GCS 3, absence of brainstem reflexes and in the absence of epileptic activity, intensive care treatment was withdrawn, for reasons of dispropriate care. The patient died a few hours later. Proxy consent for autopsy was obtained.
Autopsy revealed no signs of recurrence of breast cancer. There was focal pyogenic meningitis with a mixed nuclear inflammatory infiltrate extending throughout the Virchow Robin spaces, along the vessels, recognized as a myelo-radiculitis. There were signs of vasculitis in almost the entire brain, with complete destruction of the vessels in the basal ganglia . Also the midbrain showed active vasculitis with diffuse hemorrhagic infarction . In the right caudate nucleus some active abscesses were still visible.