A five-year-old female child admitted to the hospital due to fever (40 °C), dyspnea and chest pain spreading to the right shoulder and arm. The patient had history of recurrent pneumonia since the age of 6 months, which was always treated using antibiotics. Heart rate, blood pressure and oxygen saturation were within normal range. Clinical examination showed diminished respiratory sounds in the right lung field, mainly at the base, with dullness on percussion with increased resonance.
Lab results showed increased count (22,100*109/L / N=74% / L=21%), platelets count (764,000*109/L), and hemoglobin was decreased (10.4 mg/dl). Electrolytes were within normal range. Chest X-ray (CXR) showed diffused opacification in the middle and lower right lung field. A computed tomography scan showed alveolar opacification within the right middle pulmonary lobe, implying the presence of lobar pneumonia in addition to condensation between the previous opacification and the heart, implying the presence of an idiopathic cyst.
The child was given antibiotics, but with no improvement. Then the patient was put on (vancomycin, ceftriaxone, amikacin). Clinical improvement was noticed in the following days with no radiological improvement on the CXR. Therefore, a contrast CT scan was repeated which showed a 50 mm diameter cyst near the heart, with calcified walls; regressed alveolar infiltrates were also noticed in comparison to the previous CT .
Based on the current findings, the child was transferred to the “Children's University Hospital” so that the mass can be further studied. The child regiment was changed again to (gentamicin and amoxicillin) upon admission. Based on the radiological findings, the diagnosis of Hydatid cyst or lung abscess was considered most likely as they are common in eastern Syria. However, serum antibodies (Echinococcus Ab 1H) were ordered for hydatid cysts which yielded negative results.
Nevertheless, a surgical approach was deemed appropriate. The procedure was done through an anterior lateral incision on the fifth intercostal space. A mass was found filling the mediastinum in between the heart and the aorta, with adhesions to the pericardium but no adhesions to the lung. The mass compressed the left lung entrance, with no noticeable effects on the heart.
During the procedure, the mass was treated as if it was an abscess, and during the drainage, a clear viscous liquid was extracted from it. The mass was measured (5.5 ∗ 5.5 ∗ 2.5 cm) and connected to another triangular mass measured (3 ∗ 2 ∗ 1 cm), and it was completely removed after releasing the adhesions .
Pathologically, a presence of different sized cystic formation was found, with varying epithelial layers (Malpighian layer, columnar layer), mucous glands, pancreatic islets, connective tissues with chondrocytes and adipose, cartilage and osseous tissue with granuloma ( + ).
Based on the pathological findings the diagnosis was made as mature cystic teratoma with a secondary infection.
Due to low resources, it was decided to do an αFP test only after the surgery, which returned a value within the normal range (1.4 IU/ml), supporting the pathological diagnosis and ensuring that the cystic teratoma is mature and has no malignant aspect.
The thorax drainage tube was removed, and the patent was later discharged with a good general condition. A two years' follow-up was done.