Patient is a 52-year-old male with past medical history of hyperlipidemia and past surgical history of open appendectomy in his 30s. The patient presented to the emergency department (ED) with nausea and left lower quadrant pain that had been worsening for two weeks, in the setting of six months of pain. On examination he had a left lower quadrant mass, tender to palpation, that was unable to be reduced. The patient had no signs of peritonitis, no fever, and all vital signs were normal in the ED. White blood cell count was normal, 7.3 k/uL (4.8 – 10.8 k/uL), hemoglobin 15 g/dL (14 – 17.4 g/dL), and normal kidney function.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a focal area of fatty infiltration adjacent to the junction of sigmoid and left colon, which extended out of the abdominal cavity through a small left sided spigelian hernia. On the scan, the fascial defect appeared to be approximately 2.8 cm. The inflammation extended onto the abdominal wall. Findings were consistent with epiploic appendagitis. .
The patient was positioned in a supine position and the abdomen was prepped and draped in the usual sterile surgical fashion. After 15 mmHg was established with a Veress needle, we positioned an 8-mm robotic optical trocar in the right upper quadrant with no injury during entry and positioned two additional 8-mm ports on the right flank, each three inches apart. We docked the robot from the left side of the patient and could observe incarcerated epiploic appendages in the small left sided spigelian hernia . We created a large preperitoneal dissection pocket . We were able to reduce the incarcerated visceral content and a large amount of preperitoneal fat.
The defect measured around 2 × 2 cm . We could appreciate the interparietal hernia space with intact external oblique muscle, typical of SH. We closed the defect with a 3–0 slow-absorbable barbed suture . An additional defect of 1 × 1 cm was found just caudal to the larger one. We dissected posteriorly until the psoas muscle was identified as well as the area medial to Cooper's ligament. We safely preserved and dissected the vas deferens and the spermatic vessels on the left side and reduced a small cord lipoma. No inguinal hernia was identified. We obtained hemostasis and trimmed a self-gripping mesh to be 15 × 15 cm and centered it into the defect that provided coverage of the deep inguinal ring as well. The mesh was completely opened with no significant wrinkles or folds and we then closed the peritoneal flap with a running suture of 3-0 barbed suture . The patient had an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged home with oral pain medication from the post-anesthesia care unit. He was seen in clinic the following week with a well healing surgical incision and with no specific complaints.