A 75-year old Caucasian lady presented with acute onset of painless visual loss in her left eye, which she noted on waking up that morning. She denied any associated headaches, jaw claudication or any clinical symptoms suggestive of temporal arteritis. Past ophthalmic history was not significant apart from one episode of transient visual loss in the left eye of about 5 minutes duration with zigzag lines three months earlier. This was accompanied by spontaneously resolving short-duration headache. The general practitioner diagnosed an episode of migraine with no further investigations or recurrence. She had treated essential hypertension and suffered especially in cold weather with Raynaud's phenomenon for 20 years; this had worsened in severity in the last few months.
On examination visual acuity of 20/20 in the right and CF (counting fingers at 0.5 m) was noted in the left eye with a left relative afferent pupillary defect. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable with normal intraocular pressures. Dilated fundal examination showed a cherry-red spot in the left foveal area. No visible arteriolar embolus was noted . Apart from presence of two cotton wool spots in the right eye the fundal examination was unremarkable . Superficial temporal arteries were palpable, non-tender and not thickened or nodular with good flow. Cardiac examination & carotid artery auscultation was unremarkable. A clinical diagnosis of left acute central retinal artery occlusion with cotton wool spots in the right eye led to a suspected diagnosis of temporal arteritis. Urgent blood investigations were requested but the ESR, CRP, platelets counts and liver function tests were within normal limits. Fundus fluorescein angiography was carried out on the third day showing no evidence of choroidal ischaemia . She was initially started on 80 mg of oral prednisolone daily but with availability of all the blood tests, the angiogram features and lack of any clinical symptoms, the steroids were stopped after 3 days as temporal arteritis was deemed unlikely. She was commenced on 150 mg of aspirin. A closer examination of her hands showed tethered skin with spindly fingers. She was duly referred for a rheumatology opinion to rule out any vasculitic aetiology linking her hands, Raynaud's & ophthalmological features.
Further investigations revealed a positive ANA's at 8.1 U (0–1.0 reference range) with a positive anti-centromere antibody and a negative anti-Scl-70 and anti-ds DNA antibody. X-rays of the hands did not reveal any significant calcinosis or erosions. Barium swallow was unremarkable but echocardiography showed mild concentric hypertrophy of ventricular walls consistent with long-standing systemic hypertension.
Mild non-flow limiting plaque was also detected on coronary angiography. Her pulmonary hypertension was attributed to her cardiac status with atrial fibrillation and systemic hypertension rather than connective tissue disorder related. Carotid duplex scans revealed minor calcific plaques with no significant stenosis in either carotid arterial system. She remains under joint rheumatology and ophthalmology review on immunosuppression with methotrexate 10 mg per week, prednisolone 7.5 mg daily and anti-platelet therapy with no further visual symptoms after 12 months of follow up.