A 15-year-old boy, weighing 50 kg, presented to an urban clinic in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, with clinical features of TB disease. He had been diagnosed with type 1 DM 5 years earlier, and had been treated with insulin. However, the monitoring of his blood sugar levels had been erratic and his glycaemic control had not been optimal. A sputum sample was culture-positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with a drug susceptibility test (DST) profile demonstrating resistance to isoniazid, rifampicin, streptomycin, kanamycin, capreomycin, and amikacin and susceptibility to pyrazinamide, ethambutol, and ofloxacin. He was started on a regimen of pyrazinamide, ethambutol, capreomycin, moxifloxacin, prothionamide, cycloserine, linezolid, amoxicillin/clavulanate, and clofazimine. Linezolid was initially started at a dose of 600 mg once daily . Treatment included initial hospitalisation with attention to blood sugar management, and after discharge, logistical support for sugar monitoring and regular endocrinologist follow up were instituted.
After 6 months, the boy showed a good clinical and bacteriological response and, in light of the risk of adverse effects, the dose of linezolid was reduced to 450 mg once daily. During the eighth month of treatment he developed peripheral neuropathy (paraesthesia and mild intermittent pain) in both feet. There was no objective clinical evidence of cranial or peripheral nerve palsies; sensory perception, muscle tone, power, and deep tendon reflexes were normal. Ishihara tests performed each month did not show any abnormalities indicative of optic neuritis. Detailed examination by an ophthalmologist was normal. Diabetes control was optimized with increasing insulin requirements. The dose of linezolid was further reduced to 300 mg once daily and pyridoxine increased from 150 mg to 200 mg once daily. Although there was transient improvement in pain, nerve conduction and electromyography studies demonstrated sensory and motor peripheral nerve damage in both lower limbs with more severe involvement of the right-sided motor components. Colour duplex ultrasonography of the lower limb arteries did not reveal any abnormalities. Linezolid was stopped with the rest of the regimen continuing.
The boy showed clinical improvement following cessation of linezolid and was declared cured following a total of 21 months of treatment. Nerve conduction studies were repeated 10 months after the initial evaluation. A significant improvement in motor nerve function on the right side was seen. The amplitude of M response improved between the two evaluations: markedly in right tibial nerve from 0.12 to 6.38 mV (normal: 13 mV); and marginally in right peroneal nerve from 0.1 to 0.3 mV (normal: 12 mV). The area of M response also improved: right tibial nerve from 1.2 to 18.2 mV ms (normal: 34.8 mV ms); and right peroneal nerve 1.2 to 4.2 mV ms (normal: 8.12 mV ms). Although sensory impairment was clinically less prominent than motor impairment, the amplitude of the action potential in the right sural nerve improved from 4 to 7 μV (normal: 11.4 μV). The boy also developed a transient thrombocytopenia after 6 months of therapy, which resolved prior to any dose reduction.