The case included in the current study was that of a 39-year-old man with no family history of NIID or any other neurodegenerative disease. He was admitted to the hospital in May 2020 after primarily complaining of headache (sharp pain), paroxysmal blurred vision (no abnormalities were found in visual acuity or color vision), tinnitus, and numbness of the hands over the preceding 6 months. Upon admission to the hospital, cognitive slowing and impaired memory function were detected by neurological examination; no abnormalities were found in other physical examinations. The following relevant scales were completed: the Mini-Mental State Examination scale (score, 27/30), the Montreal Cognitive Assessment scale (score, 27/30), and Barthel Index measure of activities of daily living (score, 100).
The results of blood biochemistry, routine blood panel, anti-endothelial cell antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, antikeratin antibody, antiperinuclear factor, and routine and biochemical cerebrospinal fluid tests were all normal.
An MRI scan of the head revealed multiple round hypointense lesions on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and hyperintense lesions on T2WI/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) analysis (,,) in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. On diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) , multiple round hyperintense lesions were found to be located in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum. Contrast-enhanced MRI revealed multiple round hypointense lesions on T1WI and hyperintense lesions on T2WI in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum; no lesion enhancements were found . The patient’s electroencephalogram demonstrated paroxysmal short-range (5–7 Hz) slow waves in the eye-closed resting state. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) of the (left and right) eyes (,) demonstrated the presence of a dilated macular capillary and fluorescein leakage from dilated blood vessels. The patient had not experienced any hearing loss and there were no abnormal otolaryngological findings.
Anamnesis suggested that the patient’s nervous, visual, and auditory systems were likely to have been affected simultaneously, an onset of disease symptoms similar to that seen with SS. Moreover, the symptoms themselves resembled the typical SS symptom triad (encephalopathy, visual disturbances, and hearing loss) , and SS-characteristic radiology changes were observed. Notably, multiple round hyperintense lesions in the corpus callosum were evident on DWI, a finding that is an important indicator for SS diagnosis . The patient’s neurological symptoms improved upon completion of a combined pharmacotherapy plan consisting of high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (80 mg/d for 5 d), oral aspirin (an anti-platelet agent, 100 mg/d for 14 d), and oral idebenone tablets (a synthetic analogue of the antioxidant ubiquinone used for neuroprotection and cognitive enhancement, 90 mg/d for 3 months). Subsequently, the patient was given a maintenance prescription of oral methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg bodyweight with slow tapering) and idebenone tablets (90 mg/d). After 2 weeks, the patient’s headache and blurred vision symptoms gradually improved, and he was discharged from the hospital.
One month after being discharged, a brain MRI showed multiple round hypointense lesions on T1WI and hyperintense lesions on T2WI/FLAIR/DWI (–) in the genu and splenium of the corpus callosum; no significant changes were observed in the lesions, and the patient had fully recovered, except for a slightly impaired memory. Treatment was continued with oral methylprednisolone, and the dosage was gradually decreased. Three months after the patient’s discharge from the hospital, his brain MRI findings remained unchanged relative to the diagnostic MRI findings (–), but the patient had no disease symptoms or signs at this time.
The patient was readmitted to the hospital in April 2021 after complaining of a paroxysmal visual field defect, headache (sharp pain), and hypoesthesia of the right hand. Cognitive slowing and reduced tendon reflex responses were found by neurological examination; no abnormalities were observed during other neurological examinations. The findings of his brain MRI (–) and contrast-enhanced MRI remained unchanged from his initial admittance. His electroencephalogram showed paroxysmal short-range (4–7 Hz) slow waves in the eyes-closed resting state; following hyperventilation, slow waves with a slower rhythm and sharp slow waves (epileptic waves) appeared. His nerve conduction velocity revealed no peripheral nerve damage, but F-wave latencies were prolonged in both lower limbs. Electromyography showed no signs of neurogenic injury or of myogenic lesion.
Genetic testing was conducted with repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction (RP-PCR) and guanine–cytosine-rich PCR (GC-PCR). We observed a 101 GGC (guanine, guanine, cytosine) repeat in the 5′-untranslated (5’UTR) region of the NOTCH2NLC gene [normal range < 40 ] []. A skin biopsy was performed via light microscopy (3DHistech) on samples obtained above the patient’s ankle and thigh; hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed eosinophilic spherical inclusion bodies within some sweat gland epithelial cell nuclei . However, the patient refused to undergo immunohistochemical staining (p62 and ubiquitin staining) due to reasons of its own. Based on these findings, the patient was given a revised diagnosis of NIID. He was then prescribed symptomatic treatment, including oral analgesics (sibelium, 10 mg/d for 14 days) and oral idebenone tablets (90 mg/d for 3 months). Over the subsequent months, the patient reported a gradual relief of his symptoms. Follow-up by telephone 18 months after the patient was discharged revealed that the patient no longer had a paroxysmal visual field defect or hypoesthesia of the hands and that he suffered from only occasional headaches.
The timeline of the patient’s disease course is shown in .