A 53-year-old male presented to the emergency room with a 3 day history of fever and myalgia, with a maximum temperature of 103°F. This was followed by confusion for one day and a severe frontal headache. There was no history of sick contacts, recent travels, or any recreational use of drug. He has no history of chronic alcoholism, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, or any cardiac disease in the past. He has no history of a recent throat infection or skin infection. He became more confused and lethargic in the emergency room and was closely monitored. Upon examination, the patient was lying in bed, exhibiting moderate distress with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 10, and could not follow commands. Neck examination demonstrated rigidity on flexion, and his motor function revealed rigidity in the left upper extremity, with increased tone on the left side compared to the right.
The patient’s white blood cell count was 10×10^9/L with a hemoglobin level of 13.4 g/dl with thrombocytopenia with a platelet count of 54×10^9/L. The patient’s laboratory findings showed a sodium level of 134 mEq/l, a calcium level of 8.4 mg/dl, a magnesium level of 1.7 mg/dl, and a phosphorus level of 3.2 mg/dl. The patient’s bicarbonate level was 24 mEq/l, and the blood glucose level was 142 mg/dl. The patient’s troponin level increased from 0.16 ng/ml–0.38 ng/ml, but the electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. The patient’s ammonia level was 47 mcmol/l. The thyroid-stimulating hormone level and liver function tests were within normal limits. The patient tested negative for flu, respiratory syncytial virus, and coronavirus disease 2019. The results of the patient’s urine analysis, urine toxicology screen, and salicylate and alcohol levels were negative.
A lumbar puncture was performed, which showed an elevated white blood cell count of 682×10^9/l (neutrophil 81%), red blood cell count of 10×10^9/l, a protein level of 117 mg/dl, and a glucose level of 58 mg/dl suggestive for possible bacterial meningitis.
The patient was admitted to the MICU and received an empirical therapy for meningitis, consisting of vancomycin, cefepime 2 g every 8 h, and ampicillin 2 g every 4 h, as per the recommendation of the Infectious Diseases team. While in the ICU, he developed new-onset left-sided weakness. The stroke team was called. Computed tomography scan showed no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage but an incidental finding of a 778 mm mass concerning an aneurysm. Neurosurgery recommended a neuro interventional radiology consultation for the aneurysm. His blood grew Methicillin-sensitive staphylococcal aureus in the blood. The antibiotics were deescalated to Oxacillin 2 g to cover Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcal Aureus bacteremia and bacterial meningitis (which crosses the blood-brain barrier). The steroid was stopped as there was no evidence of streptococcal infection. A transesophageal echo showed vegetation in the aortic valve suggestive of IE, as shown in Figure .
The patient was intubated for respiratory distress while in the ICU. He remained persistently bacteremic and febrile, and ceftaroline was added as the infectious diseases team recommended. The MRI showed a large posterior cerebral artery infarct, as shown in Figure .
The cardiothoracic surgery team was consulted for aortic valve replacement due to IE with an embolic stroke. However, surgery was not deemed appropriate due to the patient’s recent large posterior cerebral artery infarct and the high risk of intracerebral hemorrhage during open heart surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass. A repeat computed tomography head scan showed an intraparenchymal bleed in the right frontal area. The results were discussed with the stroke team, and the patient was deemed not cleared for open heart surgery due to the intraparenchymal bleed. The patient’s lactic acid level started rising with worsening kidney function. Bicarbonate was administered.
Unfortunately, the patient’s oxygen saturation levels decreased to 40%, and he had a cardiac arrest. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was immediately initiated, and advanced life support measures were employed. Despite these efforts, the patient could not be revived and was pronounced dead.