A 59-year-old woman was admitted to the oncology department of our hospital (the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University) due to vaginal metastasis of CC, seeking further treatment.
Chemotherapy could not be continued due to grade IV myelosuppression induced by chemotherapy.
The patient presented to the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University in June 2021 with a 2-month history of abnormal vaginal bleeding. Specialized examination revealed the presence of a cauliflower-like mass in the cervix. After laparoscopic extensive total uterus removal, bilateral adnexectomy, bilateral pelvic infundibular ligament high ligation, and pelvic lymphadenectomy, postoperative pathology confirmed the diagnosis of extensive squamous cell carcinoma involving the entire uterus and both adnexa. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy was administered following the surgical intervention.
In November 2021, a mass was identified in the vaginal wall and confirmed to be squamous cell carcinoma through biopsy and related pathological and immunohistochemical findings. A total of 28 radiotherapy sessions were performed at the Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, starting in December 2021. Additionally, the patient received three cycles of intravenous chemotherapy with paclitaxel combined with carboplatin from January to April 2022. Chemotherapy was discontinued due to the occurrence of grade four bone marrow suppression.
The patient had a documented history of hypothyroidism and consistently adhered to the prescribed medication. She had a family history of genetic disease, history of other chronic diseases, history of cancer, etc.
A detailed general examination of the patient was performed and no obvious positive signs were found.
On July 8, 2022, the female tumor marker levels were as follows: CEA, 146 ng/mL; CA125, 94 IU/mL; and CA199, 83.1 IU/mL . The following three indicators of thyroid function were measured: T4, 54.9 nmol/L; TSH, 31.5 µIU/mL; and TPO-Ab, 941 IU/mL . No abnormalities were found in routine blood, biochemical, or cardiac activity.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed notable metastases in both the lungs and liver .