A 64-year-old man presented with abdominal pain and melena and underwent a jejunal examination with an endoscope which revealed a 2-cm length circumferential hemorrhagic tumor in the upper jejunum . A biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of well-differentiated and papillary adenocarcinoma. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a tumor of the jejunum and multiple intraperitoneal nodules . The patient was diagnosed with jejunal adenocarcinoma with peritoneal metastasis, cT3N0M1, cStage IV (8th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control TNM classification of malignant tumors). An expandable metallic stent (Boston WallFlex® Duodenal Stent 22 × 60 mm) was implanted and he was subsequently referred for chemotherapy .
After 6 months, 11 course of palliative chemotherapy of modified FOLFOX 6 (5-fluorouracil, calcium levofolinate, and oxaliplatin), the primary lesion and peritoneal metastases were significantly reduced in CT , and a biopsy of the primary lesion was negative . Although the patient had achieved a clinically complete response (CR) according to RECIST classification , chemotherapy was continued with 5-fluorouracil and calcium levofolinate without oxaliplatin at the oncologist’s direction. Over 4 years, 92 course of chemotherapy, no disease progression was observed, although the patient experienced persistent small hemorrhages from the stent site leading to anemia. In addition, general malaise got worse and became problematic. CS was therefore planned to control these adverse events after confirming the absence of peritoneal metastases and tumor cells in ascites by staging laparoscopy .
Partial jejunectomy was performed. An examination of the entire gastrointestinal tract and grater omentum revealed that the peritoneal metastases had vanished. After the duodenum dissected from the ligament of Treitz and the transverse mesocolon, the resection margin was set 4 cm on the oral side (3rd portion of the duodenum) and 6 cm on the anal side from the stent. Lymph nodes in the region of the first to second jejunal artery were dissected, and the plexus of the superior mesenteric artery was preserved. The jejunum was elevated through the dorsal side of superior mesenteric artery and overlap anastomosis was performed . The operating time was 193 min and blood loss were 301 ml. Grossly, no discernible tumor was identified in the stent lumen . Pathologically, no residual malignancy was detected, and a pathological CR was determined . The patient had no problems during his postoperative course and was discharged on the 9th postoperative day. No adjuvant chemotherapy was performed, and he was alive at 30 months after the operation without recurrence.