A 54-year-old female with severe malnutrition and newly diagnosed ESRD was
admitted for medical stabilization. Two months prior, she had presented to
another hospital with an elevated serum creatinine of 9.56 mg/dL (normal range
0.50-1.39 mg/dL), necessitating initiation of dialysis, and hypokalemia with
serum potassium level of 2.7 mmol/L (normal range 3.6-5.1 mmol/L). Her baseline
creatinine was unknown. She had never required dialysis prior to that
admission.
She was admitted to this medical stabilization unit, for patients with severe
forms of eating disorders, after failure to gain weight in the outpatient
setting and was still reliant on dialysis. Her past medical history was
significant for chronic (of more than 10 years) hypokalemia, AN, hyponatremia,
psychogenic polydipsia, osteoporosis, and hypophosphatemia. She reported being
“excruciatingly itchy” for 2 years prior to her ESRD diagnosis, and had been
diagnosed with food allergies by a dermatologist. Her itching resolved with
dialysis and was ultimately attributed to uremic pruritis from her undiagnosed
chronic kidney failure. She reported having been in denial of having an eating
disorder until her ESRD diagnosis.
On the day of admission, her physical exam showed cachexia, with a height of
170 cm and weight of 44.2 kg (body mass index [BMI] of 15.2 kg/m2 and
percent ideal body weight [IBW] of 71.8%). Her temperature was 36.5°C, blood
pressure 110/66 mmHg, heart rate 71 beats per minute, respiratory rate 15
breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. Admission
orthostatic vital sign were within normal limits. Her mucus membranes were dry
and her conjunctival capillaries were pale. Cardiopulmonary, abdominal, and
neurological exam were benign. She had a tunneled dialysis catheter in her right
chest, and complained of edema in her legs. Laboratory workup on admission (see
) was
significant for hyponatremia, hypokalemia, low prealbumin, low thyroid
stimulating hormone, and multiple lab abnormalities congruent with kidney
failure (such as elevated creatinine, phosphorus, BUN, and magnesium). See for list of
her home medications. Chest x-ray on admission confirmed appropriate location of
the dialysis catheter.
Urinalysis results from the other hospital were not available, however, the
admitting physician there wrote that her urinalysis showed moderate blood and
protein. Kidney ultrasound performed at the other hospital revealed small
kidneys with increased echogenicity of the cortex and cortical thinning,
consistent with chronic kidney disease. No hydronephrosis, nephrolithiasis,
renal mass or cysts were present. Renal biopsy had not been performed.
There was concern of ongoing laxative abuse given her hypokalemia on admission
(see ).
Patient however denied using laxatives (or diuretics) other than docusate as
prescribed (see ). Her hypokalemia resolved with one oral dose of 20 mEq potassium
chloride. She maintained normal potassium until week 2 of her hospitalization,
when she developed hyperkalemia. She was then managed with dietary reduction of
potassium along with dialysis. The complications of her ESRD were managed with
nephrology consult, thrice weekly dialysis, a dialysis diet which was geared
toward weight restoration, and routine medical care for ESRD—including treatment
with phosphate binders, calcitriol analog cinacalcet, and a weekly darbepoetin
alfa injection for anemia.
Given that her thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) was suppressed on admission,
with normal free T4, there was concern for excessive dosing of levothyroxine.
Her thyroid medication was reduced, and then discontinued, when her TSH remained
suppressed on recheck. This patient also experienced nearly daily episodes of
hypoglycemia on fingerstick glucose checks, usually after waking up or
immediately after dialysis. She also frequently complained of edema and would
become upset when she felt not enough fluid was removed at dialysis, though
edema was not observed on physical exam. Her hyponatremia on admission also
resolved quickly with nutrition and dialysis. This patient arrived on a 1 L
fluid restriction, and required extensive education to allow liberalization of
fluids to facilitate her weight restoration. She also frequently complained of
constipation, which was not always supported by objective evidence from her
abdominal x-ray, and fullness, and had difficulty completing all of her
prescribed meals and snacks; however, she declined medications to manage her
suspected gastroparesis. Despite struggling to tolerate, both psychologically
and physically, the weight restoration process while hospitalized, she reported
a desire to return home as she felt confident she would be able to weight
restore on her own.
Given the ego-syntonic nature of her AN, her minimization of the impact of her
behaviors on her medical instability, and her hesitancy to continue with ongoing
weight restoration, she required support from a multidisciplinary team,
including a psychologist, psychiatrist, and registered dietician.
This patient met with a clinical psychologist 4 days per week. At the beginning
of her hospitalization, this patient presented as hyperverbal with pressured
speech and tangential thought process. This was assessed to be due to anxiety,
as well as having difficulty concentrating and focusing, largely as a result of
malnutrition and uremia. During her intake session, she disclosed her history of
AN-BP, explaining that it began in her late 30s secondary to stress. This
patient only admitted to laxative abuse with bisacodyl when directly questioned
about this behavior, and connected it to a need to alleviate constipation. She
demonstrated extremely limited insight into the connection between her severe
laxative abuse and renal dysfunction. Additionally, she remained guarded about
the extent of her bisacodyl abuse, and she endorsed reluctance to gain weight
due to her eating disorder cognitions. Through building trust with her treatment
team, she was able to acknowledge a degree of connection between her stimulant
laxative abuse and her ESRD, although required continued and frequent provider
education regarding this fact.
This patient met with a consulting psychiatrist approximately twice a week. The
patient noted a recent history of depression and anxiety and admitted to the
unit on mirtazapine 15 mg QHS for mood, anxiety and insomnia, along with
hydroxyzine 25 mg every 6 hours as needed for anxiety or sleep. She was able to
provide only limited clarity on her symptoms of depression other than feeling
sad at times, and she denied hopelessness, suicidal ideation or a history of
suicide attempts. Her anxiety centered around stressors, and identified her
profession and recent diagnosis of kidney failure as her main current stressors.
Given the lack of a clear history of a mood and anxiety disorder predating her
eating disorder, and the known impacts of malnutrition on mood, the patient was
diagnosed with unspecified mood disorder and unspecified anxiety disorder, with
the expectation that once the overlay of malnutrition resolved, a more
definitive diagnosis could be given. She denied a family history of psychiatric
illness. The patient was given extensive education about levels of available
eating disorder care and the effects of malnutrition on the brain and body,
along with the need for appropriate nutrition to optimally benefit from any
psychopharmacologic or therapeutic interventions and to avoid dietary
indiscretion in the setting of her ESRD. Her family provided collateral
information regarding the severity of her eating disorder and they were also
given education and support during her stay.
Five days per week, the patient met with a registered dietician (RD) who assisted
the patient in making appropriate food choices that complied with the dietary
restrictions of ESRD but also promoted weight restoration. Upon admission, the
patient was put on a 1400 kcal diet with a 1 iter (L) all fluid restriction, 2 g
sodium restriction, 2 g potassium restriction, and 1 g phosphorus restriction.
After conferring with the renal team, the patient’s fluid restriction was
liberalized to and maxed out at 2 L, as the 1 L all fluid restriction was
difficult to maintain given the need for meal plan increases. The patient’s
dialysis sessions caused difficulty with trending weights and managing meal plan
increases, as the patient’s weights would be falsely elevated prior to dialysis,
and then much lower after dialysis. The patient’s meal plan advanced by
400 kcals every 3 days until she was ultimately on a 3400 kcal/day meal
plan.
This patient struggled with the quantity of food, and she was also very limited
in her dietary choices due to her ESRD-induced restrictions of phosphorus,
potassium, and sodium. Furthermore, her eating disorder thoughts encouraged her
to choose foods that she deemed “healthy” or foods that would promote “muscle
gain” versus “fat gain.” The RD assisted the patient in incorporating Nepro Carb
Steady (a nutrition supplement for patients on dialysis) into her meal plan so
it could be included in her fluid restriction while helping reduce the volume of
the food she needed to eat. Upon discharge, she was completing her meal plan of
3400 kcal and slowly restoring weight.
With support from her family and the multidisciplinary care team, this patient
ultimately opted to continue on to a residential level of eating disorder care
for increased focus on the psychological aspects of her illness and ongoing
weight restoration, while still receiving dialysis 3 times per week.