A 68-year-old female (body mass index 34.75 kg/m2), with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus, prior smoking, and a myocardial infarction (status post 1-vessel coronary artery bypass graft), presented with a 5-year history of low back pain/right hip/groin pain and numbness of the anterior aspect of the right thigh. When the lumbar myelogram/myelo-CT documented L4-5 stenosis with Grade I spondylolisthesis, the patient underwent a L4-5 lumbar decompression/fusion. When she failed to improve, she underwent a negative exploratory arthroscopy of the right hip. She underwent an abdominal aortoiliac CTA which documented marked aortoiliac calcification.
Now, the patient presented with a normal neurological examination, except for loss of pinprick sensation over the anterior thighs bilaterally. However, the vascular examination of the lower extremities revealed an absent right-sided posterior tibial pulse and loss of bilateral dorsalis pedis pulses.
On the CTA and abdominal subtraction arteriogram, there was diffuse atherosclerotic disease and moderate to high-grade stenosis involving the right common iliac artery near its origin . A plaque in the right common iliac artery caused 90% stenosis at the origin, <50% stenosis of the left common iliac artery, but bilateral patency of both the external and internal iliac arteries. Doppler studies also confirmed significant ischemia of her right lower extremity.
When the abdominal aortoiliac CTA confirmed severe bilateral aortoiliac calcification, she underwent appropriate bilateral endovascular stenting procedures. An 8.0 mm × 57.0 mm ExpressTM LD stent (Boston Scientific; Marlborough, MA) was placed on the right, and an 8.0 mm × 37.0 mm ExpressTM LD stent was placed on the left. These kissing stents extended from the distal aorta into the common iliac arteries bilaterally and were deployed simultaneously by inflating the delivery balloon to 10 atmospheres. Following stent placement, the common iliac arteries were widely patent with no significant residual stenosis noted on the intraoperative arteriogram .
Postoperatively, the patient’s right hip and buttock pain completely resolved within 1 week of stent placement. She was asymptomatic while walking a mile. The right lower extremity demonstrated mild arterial insufficiency at rest with an ABI of 0.89 and digit pressure of 91 mm Hg 1 week postoperatively.