A 51-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes, more than 1 week-long chest distress, and night sweats in July 2014. The patient had no personal or family medical history of a malignant neoplasm. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes. An excision biopsy of the left cervical enlarged lymph node revealed AITL. The immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive staining for CD3, CD10, BCL6, CXCL13, PD1, CD21, and negative staining for CD20, CD30, LMP1, MUM1, Cyclin D1, as well as high proliferation (30% of Ki-67 staining positive cells). The Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA was positive. A further 18FDG positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan confirmed that multiple FDG-avid enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral cervical, bilateral axillary, mediastinal, retroperitoneal, bilateral pelvic, and bilateral inguinal regions . PET-CT scan also showed pathological uptake in the bilateral parotid gland, nasopharynx, tonsil, and spleen, which were considered as lymphoma infiltration. Bone marrow biopsy was negative for lymphoma. The patient was diagnosed with stage IVB AITL.
Two cycles of CHOP (cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2, day 1; adriamycin 50 mg/m2, day 1; vincristine 2 mg, day 1; prednisone 100 mg, days 1–5) were administrated considering the poor performance status of the patient at the time of the initial diagnosis. After 1 cycle of chemotherapy with CHOP, the cervical enlarged lymph nodes reduced. It was unexpected that the cervical lymph nodes increased rapidly 12 days after the second cycle of chemotherapy. We changed the third cycle chemotherapy regimen to a biweekly regimen GEMOX (gemcitabine 1000 mg/m2, days 1 and 15; oxaliplatin 100 mg/m2, days 1 and 15) considering the rapid proliferation of tumor. However, the cervical enlarged lymph nodes reduced after chemotherapy and increased again after 11 days of chemotherapy. Herein, the patient was diagnosed as the refractory AITL because of the poor response to the first-line treatment. Therefore, we continued two cycles of chemotherapy with CHOEP (cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2, day 1; adriamycin 50 mg/m2, day 1; vincristine 2 mg, day 1; etoposide 750 mg/m2, days 1–3; prednisone 100 mg, days 1–5). The CT scan revealed that the lymph nodes reduced significantly in mediastinal, retroperitoneal, bilateral pelvic, and bilateral inguinal regions, but the cervical lymph nodes increased slightly. Considering that AITL was highly aggressive and refractory, the addition of lenalidomide (20 mg, po, days 1–14, q21d) to CHOEP for 3 cycles and simultaneous intensity-modulated radiation therapy with the dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions were given with adequate support treatment of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, thrombopoietin. The clinical target volume of radiotherapy included the regions of the bilateral parotid gland, bilateral cervical lymph nodes. The response was complete remission at the end of the salvage treatment, which was confirmed by the PET-CT scan . She refused stem cell transplantation as consolidation treatment. Lenalidomide (20 mg, po, days 1–21, q28d) and prednisolone (10 mg, po, days 1–21, q28d) were used as a maintenance treatment to reduce the risk of lymphoma relapse. The reexamination every 3 months confirmed that the response was complete remission during the first year.
Unfortunately, she returned with fever, weakness after 12 months. The complete blood cell count showed anemia with hemoglobin (Hb) 71 g/L. The continuous laboratory findings showed that anemia worsened quickly, and thrombocytopenia occurred 15 days later. The lowest number of Hb was 46 g/L, and the lowest number of platelets was 15 × 109/L. The direct Coombs test was strongly positive. The level of serum platelet-associated immunoglobulin G was significantly higher than normal. Elevated indirect bilirubin and lactate dehydrogenase were observed. The bone marrow biopsy was negative for lymphoma. The further 18FDG PET-CT scan confirmed that multiple FDG-avid enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneal and bilateral pelvic regions . The patient could not receive re-biopsy of the enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneal and bilateral pelvic regions considering the risk of bleeding because of thrombocytopenia. In view of the history of AITL, refractory/relapsed AITL combined with secondary Evans syndrome was diagnosed in this patient according to the diagnostic criteria reported by Jaime-Perez . However, the patient showed poor response to the first-line treatment for Evans syndrome including prednisone (2 mg/kg/day, po) for 2 weeks and intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/day, intravenous) for 5 days. Anemia and thrombocytopenia worsen progressively. Given the patient’s poor performance status, anemia, and thrombocytopenia, the second-line intensive salvage chemotherapy for refractory/relapsed AITL was not recommended. The combination regimen of chidamide (30 mg, po, biw) and cyclosporine were administrated. We set 2 mg/kg/d cyclosporine as an initial dosage and tapering by 50 mg every 3 weeks when the number of platelets and the red blood cells recovered to grade 2 anemia and thrombocytopenia. The direct Coombs test turned to be weakly positive 1 week later. The anemia and thrombocytopenia gradually improved after oral chidamide and cyclosporine, which was shown in . Three months later, the laboratory findings including complete blood cell count, indirect bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and serum platelet-associated immunoglobulin G recovered to normal, and the direct Coombs re-test was negative. The CT scan showed that the enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneal and bilateral pelvic regions were shrinking significantly, and the response was complete remission. Five months later, chidamide (30 mg, po, biw) alone was used as the maintenance treatment up to now without serious adverse effects. The follow-up tests every 3 months were performed according to the NCCN practice guideline of T-cell lymphoma.
As of the write-up of this manuscript, the patient still lives a good quality of life without tumor progression till now and has already survived for more than 70 months.