A 42-year-old Japanese man noticed a mass in the right submandibular region of his neck in June 2010. He visited the department of otolaryngology at a nearby general hospital the next month and was referred for medical treatment. More than two weeks later, he visited our University Hospital. A hard 3.0 × 2.8 cm tumor was noted on the right side of his hyoid bone. The mass was immobile and moved with deglutition. No spontaneous or tender pain was noted.
Laryngeal endoscopy revealed no contributory abnormal findings. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a gourd-shaped distension of bone in the area extending from the body of the hyoid bone to the right greater horn. A multilocular cystic area of low density was observed inside the distension, and central ossification was evident in the anterior lesion . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his neck revealed a gourd-shaped nodular lesion of 2.5 × 2.2 cm (upper part) and 1.6 × 1.0 cm (lower part) on the right side of his hyoid bone. The signal intensity was low in T1-weighted images and high in T2-weighted images, with a mosaic pattern being observed in the high signals . Based on these findings, a cartilaginous tumor originating from the right side of his hyoid bone was diagnosed. No abnormal accumulation was detected by bone scintigraphy or fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) . Therefore, high-grade malignant chondrosarcoma was diagnosed by exclusion. An analysis of his blood samples revealed no contributory abnormalities.
Surgery was performed to extirpate the tumor. His geniohyoid, mylohyoid, sternohyoid, and thyrohyoid muscles were detached from his hyoid bone. The tumor mass and surgical margins were resected bilaterally on the left side of the body of his hyoid bone and the right greater horn. There were almost no adhesions between the tumor and the tissue around it. Following a favorable postoperative course, our patient was discharged from hospital.
A macroscopic examination identified the cartilaginous tumor as a semi-lobular mass covered by a thin fibrous coat. Histopathological examination revealed that it was relatively well differentiated, but with a somewhat high cell density and many binuclear cells. An open chromatin pattern was evident and intranuclear structures were observed in many cells. The condition was diagnosed as chondrosarcoma, grade one . No additional surgical treatment was required. Our patient has been periodically followed up at our outpatient clinic. Twelve months postoperatively, the clinical course has been favorable and no local recurrences or remote metastases have been detected.