A 78-year-old man presented to our emergency department (ED) with a complaint of melena for 2 days. He had a medical history of cerebral infarction, which had been treated with 100 mg/day aspirin, hypertension, and duodenal ulcer. He stopped taking aspirin on the day before arrival at our ED. His blood pressure was 77/53 mmHg, with a heart rate of 90 b.p.m. and a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min. The Glasgow Coma Scale score was E4V4M6, and his body temperature was 36.7°C on arrival. Physical examination showed significant facial and conjunctival pallor. Laboratory findings revealed anemia (Hb, 6.4 mg/dL) and high blood urea nitrogen to creatinine ratio (62 mg/dL and 1.25 mg/dL, respectively). Given his symptoms of anemia and melena, upper gastrointestinal bleeding was suspected as the cause of hemorrhagic shock.
Transfusion with 2 units of red blood cells was initiated in the ED. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a gastric ulcer with a visible vessel. The heat probe coagulation method was undertaken immediately to treat the visible vessel in the base of the gastric ulcer .
On day 6 and day 8 following his admission, the patient suffered massive hematemesis. He underwent a repeat EGD accordingly, the result of which was unremarkable. On day 11 after admission, he had recurrent massive hematemesis along with passing of black stools. He had no nasopharyngeal symptoms. His circulatory status was again compromised with blood pressure of 74/56 mmHg and heart rate of 124 b.p.m. Hb decreased from 8.9 to 7.6 g/dL, but no coagulopathy developed. He was intubated, and 6 units of red blood cells and 8 units of fresh frozen plasma were given. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy did not reveal any obvious source of bleeding in the upper gastrointestinal tract. However, fresh blood was incidentally noticed to be dripping from the pharynx into the esophagus and stomach. Posterior nasal bleeding was strongly suspected, and we carried out posterior nasal packing on both sides with Foley catheters. Transnasal endoscopy revealed nasal polyps with bleeding in the right superior nasal meatus. Endoscopic sinus surgery for cauterizing the bleeding sites was carried out . He developed a hemorrhage again and underwent endoscopic sinus surgery for radical treatment to the nasal polyps on day 16. The pathological diagnosis was “nasal polyp,” characterized by an infiltration of inflammatory cells including neutrophilic leukocytes, lymphocytes, and plasma cells, and epithelial metaplasia. It is important to note that, throughout his hospitalization, he did not have coagulopathy or thrombocytopenia.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course during the rest of his hospital stay and was discharged on day 26.