9-hour-old female conjoined twins with one torso and two heads were brought into the sick babies unit (SBU) by a 25-year-old Nigerian mother of the Ekoi tribe in Cross Rivers State who just had her first delivery. She had limited antenatal care (ANC) in a primary health centre where no antenatal ultrasonography had been carried out. The pregnancy, which was carried to term, was characterized by regular use of an herbal enema from the onset and polyhydramnios. The delivery had been completed vaginally at home without any obstruction to labour. The normal head presented first. Only the normal twin cried after several minutes of stimulation. The combined weight of the conjoined twins at the time of admission was 2.85 kg.
Clinical examination revealed two discordant heads . The normal and anencephalic heads had an occipito-frontal circumference of 34 cm and 24 cm, respectively. There was a single thorax with two neurologically independent upper limbs, single abdomen, one complement of genitalia and an anus as well as two neurologically independent lower limbs.
At presentation in the SBU, the anencephalic twin was unresponsive to painful stimulus with dilated and unreactive pupils. An orogastric tube was inserted that ended in the neck of the twin.
The normal twin remained stable for a short while but soon experienced repeated apneic attacks with cyanosed extremities. Though prompt resuscitative measures were taken, the twin died within 9 hours of birth from cardiopulmonary failure. As a result of their unstable condition and the short duration of life, thorough investigation of the twins was not possible.
Post-mortem plain X-ray findings showed a fully developed cranium with normal facial structures continuous with the main body. The second head was devoid of a cranium. Each cranium was connected via a separate spine that terminated abruptly at the fifth lumber vertebrae with no evidence of any sacral component . The ribs on the medial side of each twin were fused with each other creating 12 instead of 24 posterior ribs, but the other ribs had not fused. Each upper limb and clavicle appeared borne by the twin on that side.
The lungs and heart were not demonstrable but the single pelvis and lower limbs are clearly defined.
The head with normal calvaria contained a well-formed brain whereas the anencephalic head had no forebrain. Two complements of neck organs and two vertebral columns were demonstrable. The right trachea continued to a right-sided pair of normal lungs while the left trachea joined a pair of collapsed and hypoplastic lungs. A single intestinal tract opened to the exterior as a well-formed anal canal. The other abdominal and pelvic organs were not duplicated.
Two pairs of great vessels , two aortic and two superior vena cavae entered the single heart. There were two atria, two rudimentary auricular appendages and two ventricles.