A 76-year-old woman visited a local doctor immediately after she experienced headaches in the left and right temporal regions of the head. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results showed no remarkable abnormal findings, and the doctor took a wait-and-see approach. The headache resolved spontaneously and did not relapse afterward. The patient had a history of hypertension and was undergoing treatment with oral antihypertensives.
Three months later, the patient visited our hospital because she suddenly experienced slurred speech and lightheadedness. Physical findings included disorientation, dysarthria, ataxic symptoms in the right upper and lower limbs, and inability to walk. MRI revealed infarction lesions in the left and right sides of the pons and cerebellum , while the left internal carotid artery (ICA) and the right vertebral artery (VA) were not well visualized in magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed occlusion of the V4 portion of the right VA , stenosis of the V4 portion of the left VA , and occlusion of the left supraclinoid ICA . No clear stenotic lesion was observed in the superficial temporal artery (STA) . Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm, and echocardiography showed no finding suggestive of cardiogenic cerebral embolism. The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 1.06 mg/dL in blood testing, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was not measured. The patient was diagnosed with atherothrombotic brain infarction and treated with the oral administration of aspirin and clopidogrel.
However, dysarthria was aggravated 2 weeks later. MRI revealed a new cerebral infarction in the left pons . DSA showed aggravation of the stenotic lesion in the left VA and laminar flow in the right posterior cerebral artery and superior cerebellar artery due to blood flow through the right posterior communicating artery . Moreover, multiple stenotic lesions were observed in the STA . We obtained images acquired at the onset of headaches from the previous doctor. As the MRA data showed no vascular lesions, such as stenosis or occlusion, in cerebral vessels , we understood that the vascular lesions were aggravated rapidly within 3 months. In addition, T1 black-blood post-gadolinium imaging sequence MRI revealed vessel wall enhancement (VWE) in the left and right VA, left ICA, and left and right STA [-]. The CRP level was 0.66 mg/dL and the ESR was 17 mm/1 h in blood testing. The level of myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, serine proteinase3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, anti-double stranded DNA immunoglobulin G, and anti-Sm antibody was normal. The patient was suspected of having vasculitis, and a temporal artery biopsy was performed before she was finally diagnosed with GCA [ and ].
Oral administration of prednisolone 60 mg/day was initiated. Afterward, cerebral infarction did not relapse, the prednisolone dose was gradually reduced, and antiplatelet drugs were changed to aspirin alone. The patient recovered sufficiently to walk independently and was discharged 2 months later. As of 9 months after discharge, the oral prednisolone dose was gradually reduced to 10 mg/day, and MRA showed no aggravated intracranial vascular lesions , and very mild dysarthria was the only residual neurological symptom.