A 72-year-old male patient was referred to the Stomatology Department complaining of an increased gingival volume in the region of the mandibular anterior teeth. According to the patient, the lesion grew within one month. The patient also reported being alcoholic and a former smoker. His medical history included hypertension and diabetes mellitus type 2 and the patient reported a basal cell carcinoma detected five years ago. No additional information about infectious disease as C hepatitis or AIDS was reported. The extraoral examination revealed no lymphadenopathy. The intraoral examination revealed poor oral hygiene, general periodontal disease, and a sessile nodular lesion located on the buccal and lingual gingiva of the mandibular incisors extending to the floor of the mouth. The patient had lost all maxillary teeth in the past because of periodontal disease. The lesion presented a lobulated surface, flabby consistency, and dark red color, measuring 2 cm in diameter . The teeth involved had biofilm accumulation, calculus, and mobility, hampering masticatory functions. A panoramic radiograph showed significant horizontal bone loss adjacent to the anterior teeth, extending to the mandibular left first premolar (#34).
Accumulation of calculus was also observed, suggesting a condition of chronic periodontal disease . The hypothesis of a reactive hyperplastic lesion related to the severe gingival inflammation was considered. In this context, the potential diagnoses included pyogenic granuloma, focal fibrous hyperplasia, peripheral giant cell granuloma, and peripheral ossifying fibroma. Additionally, squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma were also suspected in face of the rapid progression of the lesion.
Considering these hypotheses, an incisional biopsy was performed under local anesthesia. The histopathological exam showed a diffuse proliferation of atypical large lymphoid cells, displaying numerous mitotic figures .
Predominantly, the neoplastic cells presented round nuclei, multilobate, or irregular folds, with looser chromatin with multiple nucleoli surrounded by membrane (centroblasts). Areas of necrosis were also observed. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that tumor cells expressed immunopositivity for CD20 and Ki67 (100%) and negative expression for CD3, CD30, and CD15. The histology and immunohistochemistry were consistent with DLBCL. The patient was referred to an Oncological Hospital where he started chemotherapy but progressed to death in nine months.