A 37-year-old woman was referred to our department in August 2019 due to an increase in the levels of hepatobiliary enzymes.
After four months of prednisolone (PSL) administration, the neurological symptoms improved; however, the levels of hepatobiliary enzymes, which were normal before the pulse therapy , had increased . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed in March 2019 as a screening examination to detect potential infectious lesions or malignancies before the pulse therapy showed no gross lesions in the gastrointestinal tract, lungs, liver, gall bladder, pancreas, spleen, kidneys, and adrenal glands and no swelling in the lymph nodes .
She had no familial history of cancer but had a history of Henoch–Schönlein purpura (HSP) diagnosed in 2017 via a renal biopsy and was treated with corticosteroids starting at 30 mg/d oral PSL, which was tapered down to 1 mg till February 2019. In March 2019, she presented with neurological symptoms of headache, dizziness, and focal numbness in the right upper and lower extremities, with no evidence of infarction or bleeding in clinical and imaging tests. She was diagnosed with recurrence of the purpura with neurological symptoms and was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy, followed by continuation of oral PSL administration.
She had no personal and family history of the malignancies.
Other than the palpable abdominal masses in the epigastric lesion with mild tenderness and a symmetric pitting edema in her lower legs, no abnormal findings in her vital signs and other physical examination were noted.
The results of a laboratory test performed on the day of admission revealed elevated white blood cell counts and levels of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase . During the four-month period after re-dosing of PSL in March 2019, the levels of the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 significantly increased from 1.1 ng/mL to 97.0 ng/mL and 14 IU/mL to 255 IU/mL, respectively. To investigate the cause of the elevation in liver enzyme levels, further examinations were conducted.
Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a suspicious tumor in the ascending colon with an irregularly thickened intestinal wall and swelling in multiple lymph nodes (six regional lymph nodes) surrounding the ascending colon tumor. In addition, multiple low-density liver tumors showing poor enhancement effect with expanding growth pattern were observed, and the intrahepatic bile duct exhibited mild dilatation due to the tumors . No other suspicious lesions for the primary were seen. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple tumors in the bilateral liver lobes up to 80 mm in size with heterogeneously high echoic patterns . Colonoscopy revealed a large, solid, multinodular epithelial tumor in the ascending colon. The tumor was on the epithelial layer and covered with whitish mucus and debris on its surface with an abnormal vascular structure on its surface and was easily bleeding . In addition, the tumor showed a semicircular depressive lesion at its center . The histological analyses of the tissue collected from the tumor (black arrow shown in Figure ) revealed an abundant amount of extracellular mucin within the tumor on the mucosal epithelia. The tumor cells in the mucin appeared to be adenocarcinoma cells showing a high level of cellular atypia and tended to resemble cells of the glandular tissue . The tumor cells positively stained for Mucin 2, oligomeric mucus/gel-forming and Mucin 5AC . Based on these CT, endoscopic, and histological analyses, the case was diagnosed with the ascending colon mucinous adenocarcinoma.