A 54-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our emergency department for heart failure associated with dyspnea and bilateral lower limb edema, which had persisted for two months. Her past medical history is significant for hypertension and obesity (body mass index: 34 kg/m2).
On admission to hospital, her blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg and heart rate 90/min; there was a systolic murmur (3/6) which was predominant at the apex; distension of the jugular vein indicating elevation of central venous pressure and there was pitting edema of both legs. Thoracic percussion revealed a right basal dullness that was compatible with pleural effusion. These signs were suggestive of heart failure. On abdominal auscultation, a systolo-diastolic murmur was audible. Furthermore, we observed hematomas on both arms and legs. Ultrasound showed an AAA, a vascular structure behind the AAA, as well as a massively dilated inferior vena cava with arterial flow velocity features . The results of laboratory tests revealed liver dysfunction (aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) 120 IU/L, reference value (rv): <40 U/L; bilirubin 51.1 μmol/L, rv: 3.1-18.8 μmol/L and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 979 IU/L, rv: <450 IU/L), renal failure (serum creatinin 241 μmol/L, rv: 50-95 μmol/L), thrombocytopenia (80 G/L, rv: 150-300 G/L) as well as coagulation disturbances (PT: 33%, rv: 70-100%; PTT: 42 s, rv: 26-35 s; fibrinogen: 0.7 g/L, rv: 2-4.5 g/L). A computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed a partially thrombosed AAA with a maximal antero-posterior diameter of 4.2 cm. A flush of intravenous contrast product was detected in the left (aberrant) renal vein immediately after injection due to a fistula between the AAA and the aberrant left renal vein .
Arteriovenous shunt resulted in an increase of venous return, pressure and volume with simultaneous fall in the peripheral resistances: heart rate, stroke volume, cardiac output and cardiac work increase as a physiological response to the overload. It induced hyperdynamic cardiac failure; this explains the perturbation of the liver and renal function . Moreover, the increase of the renal venous pressure aggravated this dysfunction.
A xyphopubic laparotomy was performed on the same day. The surgeon clamped the aorta, both iliac arteries and the inferior vena cava upstream and downstream the retroaortic renal vein. The hematoma inside the aneurysm was removed. The retro-aortic left renal vein was ligated. The fistula was plugged with parietal tissue and a ligature. For the aneurysm, a straight silver graft (with a diameter of 16 mm) was interposed; the aorto-prosthetic and termino-terminal anastomoses were completed without complication. During the operation, the cell saver collected 6200 mL. A biopsy of the aneurysm wall was sent to a pathology institute; analysis revealed rare elastic fibers, a fibro-muscular hyperplasia of the tunica intima and atheroma. Microbiological analyses were negative. Her post-operative course was favorable with both liver and renal function tests returning to normal.