A 15-year-old Caucasian female was diagnosed with CVID at 3 years of age during work-up for recurrent infections and chronic lung disease. During the first 2 years of life, she had multiple hospitalizations for wheezing, pneumonia, bronchiectasis, severe pseudomonas ear infections, and failure to thrive. First wheezing episode occurred at 3 months of age and required chronic home bronchodilator nebulization therapy. Initial immunology work-up revealed low CD4 count, poor T-cell function by mitogen studies, B cells within normal range, and near-normal serum immunoglobulin levels (IgG, IgM, IgA). No numerical details were available to us. She was found to have “functional antibody deficiency” due to absence of detectable titers to tetanus, despite routine childhood immunizations, and no protective antibody titers to Haemophilus influenzae type b following at least 3 attempts at revaccination. She was maintained on chronic intravenous (IV) or subcutaneous (SQ) immunoglobulin therapy and did well overall until she developed West Nile meningoencephalitis at the age of 12 years, leading to severe residual motor deficits, in the form of quadriparesis requiring a wheelchair, and cognitive changes. Her CVID treatment included 20% SQ immunoglobulin (Cuvitru, Shire Pharmaceuticals, Lexington, MA, USA) every 2 weeks, but there was evidence of nonadherence. Poor adherence was suggested by not picking up the immunoglobulin from the pharmacy and multiple hospitalizations/urgent care visits during that time for flare of wheezing and ear infections. She presented to the ED with progressive fatigue along with rapid weight gain of 4.5 kg in 6 weeks, and decreased urine output with facial and leg swelling. She was found to have hypertensive urgency with manual BP of > 99th percentile for height. Physical examination showed mild generalized anasarca, no hepatosplenomegaly, no lymphadenopathy, no skin rash, and normal chest examination. Labs showed elevated serum creatinine of 486.2 µmol/L (53 – 97 µmol/L) and BUN 21.7 mmol/L (1.8 – 7.1 mmol/L) along with mild hyperkalemia (6 mmol/L, normal 3.5 – 5 mmol/L) and anion gap acidosis. Her prior renal function testing performed 6 weeks prior during an episode of painless gross hematuria (“cola-colored urine”) had shown normal electrolytes with serum creatinine of 17.68 µmol/L. That episode of gross hematuria lasted for ~ 3 weeks and then resolved spontaneously. She did not have fever, loin to groin or abdominal pain, joint pains, skin rash, sore throat, cough, nausea, hematemesis, vomiting, or diarrhea. Blood pressure was not documented. Urinalysis at that time showed 2+ proteinuria, 703 red cells, 36 white cells, negative nitrites and leukocytes. Urine culture was positive for > 100,000 cfu/mL lactobacillus and 10,000 – 50,000 cfu/mL coagulase-negative staphylococcus. She was treated for urinary tract infection with levofloxacin. Serum complements were not checked.
In the ED, other labs showed white blood cell count of 12.5 × 109/L (4.5 – 11.0 × 109/L, hemoglobin 8.7 g/dL (12 – 15 g/dL), and platelet count of 402 × 109/L (150 – 450 × 109/L). EKG showed tall peaked T waves, and her hyperkalemia was treated with kayexalate, calcium gluconate, insulin/glucose, sodium bicarbonate, and nebulized albuterol. Renal sonogram showed slightly enlarged echogenic kidneys with right kidney of 13.6 cm and left kidney of 12.7 cm with poor corticomedullary differentiation but no nephroureterolithiasis. In the past, she had a history of left-sided nephrolithiasis. Urinalysis showed ≥ 500 protein, 52 red cells, 4 white cells, negative nitrites, and leukocytes with a specific gravity of 1.019 and pH of 6. Serum albumin was 30 g/L (35 – 50 g/L). A spot urine protein (mg/dL) to creatinine (mg/dL) ratio was 29.4. Hypertension was managed with IV nicardipine, which was later switched to oral antihypertensive agents, including losartan, amlodipine, clonidine, labetalol, and doxazosin. Serum IgG level was 1,273 mg/dL (658 – 1,534 mg/dL), IgM 91 mg/dL (48 – 186 mg/dL), and IgA 320 mg/dL (57 – 300 mg/dL). Both C- and P-ANCAs were negative. Antinuclear antigen was slight positive at 1 : 40 in a speckled pattern with negative anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-Smith and anti-RNP antibodies. SSA and SSB antibodies were negative. Serum anti-GBM antibody (IgG) was elevated at 194 AU/mL (normal: 0 – 19 AU/mL) by multiplex bead assay (ARUP laboratory, Salt Lake City, UT, USA). Serum complements were normal.
A renal biopsy showed severe glomerular injury characterized by crescentic glomerulonephritis . Out of 11 glomeruli in the light microscopy, 1 glomerulus showed active cellular crescent with progression to fibrous crescents in 3 and fibrocellular crescents in 2 glomeruli along with global glomerulosclerosis (50%). There was patchy, interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, involving at least 40% of the cortical parenchyma. There was acute tubular injury, characterized by patchy tubular dilatation, epithelial attenuation, and luminal casts. Focal moderate intimal thickening of the small arteries was evident without any vasculitis. Immunofluorescence showed 5 globally-sclerotic glomeruli without any intact glomeruli. The glomeruli were negative for IgM, C1q, and albumin. Deeper tissue level immunofluorescence revealed both smudgy and linear staining for IgG, κ-light chain, and λ-light chain in glomerular capillary walls compressed by crescents . Electron microscopy revealed no electron-dense deposits in the available 2 glomeruli. CT of the chest did not show any alveolar hemorrhage, and she never had hemoptysis. Pulmonary function test showed evidence of severe intrinsic restrictive ventilatory dysfunction, most likely related to her neuromuscular illness, unchanged from her pre-illness tests. Diffusion capacity showed anemia and decreased alveolar volume with no evidence of pulmonary hemorrhage or pulmonary fibrosis.
She was treated with IV methylprednisolone 10 mg/kg/dose for 3 days, 2 doses of cyclophosphamide 1 week apart (10 mg/kg followed by 600 mg/m2), rituximab 750 mg/m2 q2 weeks × 2 doses and 10 sessions of plasmapheresis every other day. Her anti-GBM antibody titer decreased from 194 to 3 U/mL after the above therapies. She was continued on 60 mg prednisone daily along with azathioprine, following which her anti-GBM level decreased to 0 U/mL (negative). Her prednisone dose was then tapered to 5 mg every other day. She remained without hemoptysis, cough, or respiratory difficulty. However, despite aggressive therapies, she became anuric and progressed to ESRD. Renal replacement therapy in the form of hemodialysis was required early during the course of her illness and was subsequently maintained on nightly chronic peritoneal dialysis. She was discharged home on prednisone, azathioprine, pentamidine IV every 3 – 4 weeks for pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia prophylaxis, and previously prescribed SQIG (she had been receiving IVIG while an inpatient). Her illness was further complicated by an episode of hypertensive encephalopathy and CMV meningoencephalitis along with CMV viremia requiring IV ganciclovir and then chronic oral valganciclovir therapy. Azathioprine was discontinued as a result. After few months, she developed otitis media, lower respiratory tract infection, candida urinary tract infection, micrococcus septicemia, and status epilepticus, all of which were treated appropriately. A week after her latest hospitalization, her mother informed the office by telephone about her worsening respiratory secretions, despite using vest and cough assist, and postponed the medical care citing extreme weakness of the patient. The following day, she passed away at home, most likely secondary to lower respiratory tract infection.