A 54-year-old obese female (body mass index, 28.4 kg/m2) presented to the Emergency Department of the West China Hospital with a 2-d history of intermittent abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal enlargement with an inability to pass stool and flatus.
She had undergone laparoscopic subtotal hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy in another institution 8 d prior because of uterine fibroids. During the operation, three trocars were applied: Two 10 mm trocars at the umbilicus and in the left lower quadrant, respectively, and a 5 mm trocar in the right lower quadrant, all of which were the bladed type. Additionally, a 24 FR soft silicon tube was drained through the 10 mm trocar port-site in the left lower quadrant. The fascial planes of the umbilical and right lower quadrant port sites were separately stitched with absorbable sutures, while the 10 mm port site in the left lower quadrant was left unclosed (only skin and subcutaneous tissue were sutured to fix the drain). The postoperative recovery was smooth, and gastrointestinal function recovered within 48 h. The drainage tube was removed 4 d after the operation under direct vision when the collected drainage liquid was less than 30 mL per day. One day later, she was discharged to home without discomfort. Six days after the operation, she felt dull pain at the site of the left drain accompanied with nausea, but she did not have difficulty passing stool or flatus. The patient thought the problem was probably due to the incision and did not pay much attention. From that day on, the abdominal pain and distension were gradually aggravated, with the onset of the inability to pass stool and flatus.
The patient had a history of uncontrolled diabetes mellitus and uterine fibroids.
The patient had no remarkable personal and family history.
The primary symptoms were a distended abdomen, strong sensitivity at the left lower quadrant with a rebound, a tender 8 cm in size palpable mass in the left lower quadrant just above the drainage site, and hyperactive bowel sounds.
All hematological parameters were within normal limits. The biochemical values were significant for Na+ (131 mmol/L), Cl- (89 mmol/L), glucose level (21.5 mmol/L), alanine aminotransferase (114 IU/L), and aspartate aminotransferase (120 IU/L).
The emergency computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the small bowel herniated through the 10 mm drain-site, with diffuse bowel distension and multiple air-fluid levels with gas in the small intestines .