A 58 year old Caucasian male with a history of iron deficiency anemia and severe depression presented with weakness and shortness of breath, along with a loss of appetite and thirty pound weight loss. He also has a long history of psychological issues, including extensive illicit drug use, bipolar personality disorder, anxiety, chronic depression, and suicidal tendencies. He denied any constipation, diarrhea, tenesmus, melena, hematochezia, nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain. He did, however, report feeling a firm mass in his right upper and lower abdominal quadrants, which he claims has grown in size over the years.
Upon physical examination, the patient was found to appear thin, pale, but comfortable. He was found to have normal bowel sounds in all four quadrants; however, there was a large firm, non-tender mass palpated in the right upper and lower quadrants. Also, bilateral mildly reducible inguinal hernias and a large umbilical hernia were detected. Patient's exam was otherwise normal.
The patient presented with a hemoglobin/hematocrit ratio of 7/25.7 and an albumin level of 2.9. He was therefore admitted for blood transfusions and further workup of a mass detected in his upper and lower right abdominal quadrants. Computed Tomography (CT) with contrast was performed which showed a large 13 × 12 × 16 cm right-sided ill-defined soft tissue mass involving the ascending colon . CT-guided fine needle aspiration and core biopsy were also performed which revealed adenocarcinoma. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 69.7.
After a week of total parenteral nutrition, the patient was taken to the operating room to undergo tumor resection under general anesthesia. Adequate exposure was attained by a vertical incision across the midline of the abdomen with a transverse extension to the right. Surgical planes were created to resect the colonic mass en bloc with the invaded appendix, ascending/transverse colon, loop of ileum, and right abdominal wall/retroperitoneum. Liver, ileocolic mesentery, and para-aortic regions were without adenopathy or mass. Proximal and distal surgical margins were clear and no residual tumor was left behind. Pathology reported the greater than 6 lb mass to have 0/16 nodes positive for metastatic adenocarcinoma.
The patient has recovered well without complications, except for mild ileus, and was discharged on postoperative day fourteen to follow up for possible adjuvant chemotherapy.