A 47-year-old Japanese woman, who was treated for cervical carcinoma with conization, returned to her gynecologist for a follow-up visit with a complaint of mucous hypersecretion and urinary leakage. Suspecting VVF, her gynecologist instilled 2ml of crystal violet dye diluted to 1% concentration. No VVF could be identified but the physician was unable to drain the dye from her bladder as his patient refused catheterization. She then developed an irritable bladder, frequent urination and gross hematuria. She was diagnosed to have acute cystitis and prescribed antimicrobial agents for one week. However, her symptoms did not improve and she was referred to our urology department.
A blood examination showed only a mild degree of elevated C-reactive protein. Her urinary sediment showed a red blood cell count of >100 cells/high-power field and a white blood cell count of >100 cells/high-power field. Her condition was gradually getting worse, with severe urgency to urinate every 10 minutes and gross hematuria with clots. Cystoscopy showed abnormal mucosa of her bladder. The surface of her bladder was hemorrhagic with a lot of necrotic tissue . Her bladder capacity was about 100mL.
We diagnosed our patient with chemical cystitis and started therapy with nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). An abdominal computed tomography scan showed thickening of her entire bladder wall with spotty high-density lesions of >100 Hounsfield units. We suspected these to be the dye, which had adsorbed into the mucosa . After two weeks, her urinary urgency had been relieved to some degree. However, her bladder capacity was only 50mL. We wanted to do a urodynamic study but our patient was not willing to undergo the procedure. We added glucocorticoids to her NSAID therapy to prevent scarring of her bladder as a result of inflammation. Her bladder capacity improved to 75mL, and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed an improvement in the thickening of her bladder wall and a normal muscle layer, which may indicate that the damage had not progressed to the muscle layer .
One month later, our patient had recovered from her severe symptoms. We changed the medication from a glucocorticoid to an anticholinergic agent. Two months after the change of medication, her bladder capacity had increased to 150mL, with a urination interval prolonged to 2 hours. Six months after our patient’s first visit, there were no obvious abnormalities in her bladder on cystoscopy or computed tomography.