A 30-year-old female with no medical history was admitted to a local hospital with fever, cough, and dyspnea for 3 days. She was neutropenic with a white cell count of 1.2 × 109/L and the C-reactive protein was 124 mg/L on admission to the outside hospital (from now on considered as day 1 for the case timeline). A Gram stain of sputum revealed MRSA on day 4. Antibiotic therapy included meropenem, moxifloxacin, and teicoplanin.Rapid clinical deterioration prompted intubation and mechanical ventilation (day 2). After 3 days of conventional management with ventilation at a peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) of 30 cm H2O, positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 18 cm H2O, and a FiO2 of 1.0, she developed a right lung pneumothorax and the oxygenation could not be maintained despite a right-sided intercostal chest drain (day 5; Fig. ). The arterial blood gas was as follows: pH 7.36, PaO2 57 mmHg, PaCO2 39 mmHg. She was referred to our hospital, the Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital Respiratory Intensive Care Unit (RICU), for ECMO support on day 5. Venovenous ECMO (VV-ECMO) was established through the right internal jugular and right femoral vein at the bedside of the local hospital, and she was transferred to the RICU with an ambulance across a distance of 290 km.
Upon arrival at our RICU (day 5), ventilation was at a very low pressure and low FiO2 lung protective settings (PIP 10 cmH2O, PEEP 0 cmH2O, and FiO2 0.4). The diagnosis of PVL-expressing CA-MRSA pneumonia after influenza was confirmed by culture and influenza A nucleic acid PCR during support with ECMO. PVL genes was detected with polymerase chain reaction method, as described in previous reports by Lina et al. . The procalcitonin level was 44 ng/mL; MRSA was also cultured from the right thorax drainage fluid, and empyema was diagnosed. The antibiotic regimen was changed to imipenem/cilastatin, vancomycin (1.0 g every 8 h). Because aspergillosis was reported in influenza patients in recent study , and positive galocomannan was detected in her serum and bronchoalveolar fluid samples, voriconazole was used at her admission to our RICU. The serum trough vancomycin levels were monitored two days after its initial dose was given. The trough vancomycin levels range from 4.8 to 8.9 mg/L for 5 days (from day 7 to day 12); vancomycin was thus changed to linezolid on day 13. As Acinetobacter baumannii was cultured from her sputum on day 16, tigecycline and cefoperazone/sulbactam was started to used on days 17 and 30, respectively.
Chest computed tomography showed bilateral necrotic pneumonia with massive consolidation, especially in the right lung (day 7; Fig. ). Because of a persistent air leak from the right lung, ventilation was converted to HFOV at a mean airway pressure of 15 cmH2O and amplitude of 50 cmH2O (day 7). HFOV was used for 23 h per day, and the patient was changed to PCV (PIP of 10 cmH2O, PEEP of 0 cmH2O) for less than an hour to evaluate her respiratory mechanics, such as tidal volume. Bedside bronchoscopy was performed daily and demonstrated a large amount of necrotic secretions from the left and right main bronchus. The tidal volume was evaluated daily on conventional mechanical ventilation, and showed <100 ml. The patient was deeply sedated, thus a spontaneous cough for sputum was unavailable. Bronchoscopic suction did not fully clear the accumulated necrotic secretion in the bilateral lower lobes. For better drainage of the secretions from the lower lobe of the consolidated lung, the patient was placed in the prone position with ECMO and HFOV(day 6); 8 h daily for 12 days. The prone positioning was arranged by a trained respiratory therapist team with nurses . The air leak was closed and the tidal volume subsequently improved to 200 ml. The consolidated lung was re-opened by HFOV and the prone position, as evidenced by a chest X-ray 2 days after combination therapy was initiated (day 9; Fig. ). No adverse and unanticipated events was observed.
ECMO was weaned on day 19 and mechanical ventilation was weaned on day 25. She was discharged home on day 48. CT scans on days 16, 27, 41, and she was followed up after 1 year of discharge showed a rapid repair of the necrotic lung . A time line of the events, antibiotics, and ventilation modes is illustrated in Fig. .