A 53-year-old man presented at the emergency department with chest pain, radiating towards his left shoulder, which had lasted for half an hour. ECG showed signs of left ventricular hypertrophy but similar abnormalities had been noted 2 years earlier in conjunction with surgery for nasal polyps. The patient had a history of asthma diagnosed 5 years ago, celiac disease, ulcerative colitis treated with sulfasalazine, and anemia treated with cyanocobalamin and folic acid. At arrival, troponin T was elevated at 0.469 ng/mL, but did not show any dynamic change. Medications for acute coronary syndrome were started and he underwent a percutaneous coronary intervention without stenting to address a suspected occlusion of the left posterior descending artery. Echocardiography revealed hypertrophy of the left ventricle, suspected mild hypertrophy of the right ventricle, and a normal ejection fraction. At discharge he was prescribed atorvastatin, bisoprolol, acetylsalicylic acid, and clopidogrel instead of ticagrelor due to dyspnea.
Chest pain recurred 20 days after discharge and while at home the patient had experienced tiredness, general weakness, dyspnea, loss of appetite, and weight loss. Troponin T was once again elevated but without dynamic changes and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide increased to 13,377 pg/mL. A computed tomography of the thorax and abdomen was performed to rule out malignancy. Due to dysphagia and dysarthria, a computed tomography of the head demonstrated a minor intracerebral hemorrhage in the left parietal lobe and pansinusitis, following this antiplatelet therapy was discontinued. Echocardiography showed a marked increase in biventricular thickness compared to 3 weeks earlier, as well as a decreased biventricular ejection fraction . Notably, his eosinophilic count was 3800/μL. It was decided to transfer the patient to a tertiary center for further evaluation.
EGPA was suspected so the patient started pulse treatment with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg three times daily and changed after 3 days to prednisolone 60 mg daily. The patient was ANCA negative. A new computed tomography showed a low attenuating area in the right frontal lobe of the brain, and angiography revealed a thin vertebral artery on the left side. A bone marrow biopsy showed marked eosinophilia, but no signs of primary bone marrow disease. In fact, prior colon biopsies had also shown eosinophilic infiltrates. Serum creatinine levels were increasing from previously normal values up to 132 μmol/L, which suggested renal involvement. A fat tissue biopsy ruled out amyloidosis.
Biventricular hypertrophy was confirmed by cardiac magnetic resonance tomography performed after 4 days of corticosteroid treatment. Generalized fibrosis was present but no edema or regional hypokinesia. After 6 days of corticosteroid treatment, hypertrophy was in regression on echocardiography . Endomyocardial biopsy after 6 days of corticosteroid therapy showed myocyte necrosis but no signs of active inflammation. A nasal mucosal biopsy demonstrated necrosis with inflammatory infiltrates of plasma cells and eosinophils. It was then decided to add cyclophosphamide to the treatment and the eosinophilic count had normalized. At discharge the patient reported remarkable improvement and claimed he felt better than he had had for a several years.