A 58-year-old, Chinese, lady with recurrence of non-Hodgkin MALT B-cell lymphoma, was evaluated for the problem of acute kidney injury. She first presented 15 months prior to the current admission with melena and hematemesis. Endoscopic evaluation showed a gastric ulcer on the lesser curvature, overlying a mass lesion, and biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of MALT lymphoma of B-cell origin. Staging of the lymphoma performed classified the disease to be Stage 1, with the tumor limited to the lesser curve of the stomach and sub-centimeter regional lymph nodes. She underwent and completed definitive radiotherapy treatment 3 months after her initial presentation and had been well since. Her last serum creatinine prior to her current presentation was 0.38 mg/dL (34 umol/L). The patient then presented currently with lip swelling and multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Computed tomography revealed multiple enlarged cervical, axillary, mediastinal and external iliac lymph nodes, and excision biopsy of a cervical lymph node confirmed the recurrence of MALT B-cell lymphoma. Initial laboratory investigations demonstrated an elevated serum creatinine of 1.67 mg/dL (148 umol/L), with proteinuria of 4.84 g/day. Urinary microscopic examination was significant for pyuria (181 cells/uL) and microscopic hematuria (57 cells/uL) with coarse granular and hyaline casts. Ultrasound examination of the kidneys revealed normal sized kidneys (left 13.1 cm; right 11.1 cm) with increased echogenicity. Blood leucocyte count was 2,900/uL, hemoglobin was 10.4 g/dL and platelet count was 162,000/uL. All serologic test results for hepatitis B and C, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative. The antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive (1:80 titer, homogenous) [Normal < 1/:80 titer] and the anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody was mildly elevated (132 IU/mL) [Normal < 25 IU/mL]. Complement levels were normal and serum cryoglobulins, utilizing the qualitative precipitation technique at 4 degrees Celsius, were absent on repeated testing. Serum protein electrophoresis and immunofixation revealed a band in the gamma region, consisting of monoclonal IgG kappa. Serum kappa free light chains was elevated at 49.9 mg/L [Normal: 3.3 - 19.4 mg/L] with a kappa/lambda ratio of 2.35 [Normal: 0.26 - 1.65]. Her renal function continued to deteriorate over a period of one week, with the serum creatinine peaking at 4.07 mg/dL (360 umol/L). A kidney biopsy was performed.
Of the 42 glomeruli sampled by light microscopy, none were globally sclerotic. The glomeruli appeared markedly enlarged and hyperlobulated, with diffuse and global narrowing or occlusion of the glomerular capillary lumina by eosinophilic deposits associated with infiltrating mononuclear leukocytes and few neutrophils . This was associated with proliferation of mesangial cells and endothelial cell damage and activation. The deposits were massive, forming large intraluminal and subendothelial aggregates that appeared to displace the endothelium. With the silver stain, occasional double contours of glomerular basement membrane were noted. A few of the glomeruli also had nodular mesangial expansion. This material stained eosinophilic, weakly PAS-positive, trichrome-orange and nonargyrophilic. Congo red stain for amyloid was negative. The tubules displayed widespread acute injury with epithelial simplification and interstitial expansion by edema and mild inflammatory infiltrates of mononuclear leukocytes. There were scattered proteinaceous casts. No atypical crystalline casts of the myeloma type or giant cell reaction to cast material were identified. There was mild intimal sclerosis of small and medium-sized arteries and no arteritis was seen. No renal infiltration by lymphoproliferative disorder was identified. Immunofluorescence showed global positivity in the distribution of the glomerular intraluminal and endothelial deposits for IgG (2+), IgA (2+), IgM (1+), C3 (2+), C4 (1+), C1q (2+), kappa (2+) and lambda (1+); and there was negative staining for albumin and fibrinogen. Electron microscopy showed glomerular capillary lumina that were severely narrowed or occluded by marked infiltration by macrophages and neutrophils associated with subendothelial and intraluminal deposits that appeared moderately electron dense . Most of the deposits had a granular, amorphous texture with the exception of several that contained delicate randomly oriented thin fibrils . Several capillaries also displayed partial mesangial interposition and duplication of glomerular basement membrane enclosing the subendothelial and mesangial electron dense deposits. In some areas, the massive deposits also infiltrate the mesangium associated with mesangiolysis and detachment of mesangial cell processes from the glomerular basement membrane reflection over the mesangium. Foot process effacement was severe, involving over 90% of the total glomerular capillary surface area.
The immunofluorescence findings of intense immune staining support an immune mediated glomerulonephritis. In the setting of widespread B-cell lymphoma with a monoclonal IgG-kappa band, coupled with the more dominant staining of IgG and kappa, the possibility of cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis (possibly type 2) containing a monoclonal IgG-kappa component must be considered. Differential diagnosis includes lupus nephritis, which is suggested by the full house staining on the immunofluorescence, which would require clinical confirmation for more definitive diagnosis. The quality of the immune deposits by immunofluorescence and electron microscopy including the presence of some fine fibrillary substructure is more typical of cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis, possibly containing a monoclonal IgG-kappa component complexed to IgA. The presence of few thin fibrils within some deposits is not characteristic of fibrillary glomerulonephritis, which typically has thicker fibrils that infiltrate the glomerular extracellular matrix and exhibits dominant immunofluorescence staining for IgG.
1. Diffuse endocapillary proliferative and exudative glomerulonephritis with abundant intracapillary and subendothelial immune deposits.
2. Diffuse acute tubular injury.
Chemotherapy treatment with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone (R-CHOP) was initiated. The renal function improved rapidly with just the first cycle of treatment and the serum creatinine improved from a peak of 4.07 mg/dL (360 umol/L) to 0.29 mg/dL (26 umol/L) over a 4-week period. ANA and Anti-dsDNA levels became undetectable immediately after just one round of R-CHOP therapy (Rituximab 513 mg, Cyclophosphamide 822 mg, Doxorubicin 54 mg and Vincristine 1.6 mg; with Prednisolone 100 mg daily for 5 days). Serum cryoglobulins remained consistently absent. However, the patient developed multiple complications from the disease and chemotherapy, including pancytopenia, hospital acquired pneumonia with respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, disseminated herpes infection and severe drug induced cardiomyopathy. The patient subsequently decided for palliative care and declined further chemotherapy after the first cycle of R-CHOP. She was treated symptomatically and discharged home 3 months after her first initial presentation. At the last follow-up in the outpatient clinic, 12 months from her admission, she had a bland urinalysis, no proteinuria and a normal renal function without any treatment.