A 25-year-old female patient who presented with an 8-month history of dull, non-radiating abdominal pain, and a progressively increasing mass in the right upper quadrant. She also noticed yellow discoloration of the eyes and body itching. She reported history of passing dark urine, but had not noticed clay-coloured stool. She denied any episodes of fever or chills, nausea and vomiting or recent weight loss. There was no significant medical history. She was from a rural part of Uganda and started soliciting medical attention two months after the symptoms initiated, and was driven mainly by the development of abdominal pain and the mass. At the time of presentation to our institution, she had been referred to two other hospitals, over a five-month period. Ours was the third, and nearly 100 km away from her home. The other facilities she had visited had no further diagnostic equipment available, other than baseline blood work and ultrasonography that were inconclusive.
On physical examination, she had obvious jaundice with a large mass arising from the right hypochondriac region, occupying the right side of her abdomen and slightly crossing the midline. The mass was soft, non-mobile, with a smooth surface and slightly tender on palpation, measuring approximately 20 x 20cm, and gave the impression to be separate from the liver. There were no collateral vessels, no periumbilical mass, and no palpable cervical lymphnodes .
Blood work included complete blood count, serum electrolytes, liver function tests, INR and hepatitis, and tumour markers . Ultrasound showed a large, well-defined, echo-free mass in the right hypochondriac region, extending to the lumbar region, indenting with the liver laterally. A computed tomography (CT) scan was requested shortly after admission and it revealed a huge thin-walled, non-enhancing cystic mass rising from the right wall of common hepatic duct, displacing the surrounding structures including right kidney, IVC, portal vein, pancreas, mesentery and bowel loops, outwards. Intrahepatic ducts are dilated and common bile duct (CBD) not visualized .
She underwent an exploratory laparotomy via an extended midline incision. Upon entry to the peritoneum, there were no ascites and no lymph nodes. Greater omentum was adherent and covering the cyst anteriorly, the duodenum adhered and outstretched over the left anterior-medial aspect of the cyst. The pancreas was thinned-out and adhered to the medial wall of the cyst. After prolonged and careful latero-medial dissection, these attachments were separated from the mass, without discernible injury, using blunt dissection and monopolar cautery. This allowed clearer visualization of the mass, noted to be a very large diffuse extrahepatic biliary cyst measuring 20×15×20 cm, mainly involving the common bile duct (CBD). The cyst had a blind-ending distal border, with no obvious tailing or tapering. Dissection was then carried out proximally towards the hepatic ducts. With the gall bladder notably dilated and cystic duct (CD) forming the superior-lateral border of the cyst, cholecystectomy was also done ( and ). Both hepatic ducts and the common hepatic duct (CHD) were also dilated. The cyst was transected 1cm proximal to the confluence of the CHD and the CD, and complete extrahepatic cyst excision was performed without prior decompression of the mass. Biliary reconstruction was achieved through hepaticojejunostomy and jejunojejunostomy anastomosis. A drain was left in proximity to the hepaticojejunostomy anastomosis and removed 7 days later, after having spent two days without any collection. The specimen was sent for histopathology examination and it was reported to contain chronic inflammatory infiltrate with no evidence of malignancy. The patient had an uneventful post-operative period and was discharged on the tenth day after surgery.
Patient was reviewed 2 weeks after discharge and reported improvement, with no new complaints. Her control liver function tests showed reduction in liver enzymes. At the last review, the patient was 8 months post-operative, with no complications and the jaundice had cleared. She was doing well and had experienced resolution of the abdominal pain and jaundice.