We present the case of a 28-year-old Caucasian female who sustained a single abdominal gunshot wound (GSW). She underwent emergent laparotomy where a proximal jejunum perforation was discovered and repaired. Postoperative computed tomography (CT) imaging showed bullet fragments in and adjacent to the left L2 pedicle, without obvious spinal canal compromise . Her postoperative course was complicated by the discovery of a left ureteral injury requiring placement of nephrostomy tube and intra-abdominal drains by urology. She was discharged postinjury day 8.
The patient then returned to the emergency department at our center postinjury day 13 with headache, photophobia, and nausea. On examination, she was found to be febrile to 38.6 Celsius, lethargic with meningismus, but fully oriented with an otherwise nonfocal neurologic examination. Contrasted CT of the abdomen was unremarkable. CSF studies were obtained through lumbar puncture which revealed cloudy CSF with elevated nucleated cells (7925 cells/μL) and red blood cells (168 cells/μL), low glucose (<5 mg/dL), and elevated CSF protein (318 mg/dL) suggestive of bacterial meningitis. Gram stain revealed >25 polymorphonuclear cells per low-power field, but revealed no organisms, and aerobic and anaerobic culture did not identify causal organisms. Her intra-abdominal drain contents were sampled and negative for β2-transferrin. A pyelogram revealed a persistent ureteral leak, for which the patient received a ureteral stent. Empiric IV antibiotic therapy with vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole was initiated for the treatment of meningitis and sustained for 14 days. A lumbar CT myelogram was obtained, revealing an area of contrast leakage ventrally into the retroperitoneum in the area of the left L2–L3 neuroforamen without myelographic block . Given these findings, the patient underwent fluoroscopy-guided dorsal epidural autologous blood patch graft placement at the L2–L3 level . After the blood patch, the patient’s meningitis subsequently resolved. There was no clinical evidence of additional CSF leakage or intracranial hypotension, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 2 weeks after blood patch placement.