A 56-year-old woman with NF1 was hospitalized because of an incidental pelvic mass.
Ultrasonography of the pelvis performed at another hospital showed a mixed echoic mass approximately 4.5 cm × 4.5 cm × 4.0 cm in size in the left lower abdomen. Boundaries were clear and shape was irregular. No internal fluid echoes were visualized. Color Doppler flow imaging showed abundant blood flow signals within the mass. Clinically, the patient denied any gastrointestinal symptoms.
The patient had multiple café-au-lait patches and cutaneous nodular masses on the head, face, trunk, and limbs which had been increasing in number and size for more than 30 years. She had no symptoms of itchy skin. Biopsy of a nodular upper limb mass 10 years previously was consistent with neurofibroma. She had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy for a gallbladder stone 10 years previously and partial ileal resection for a strangulated bowel obstruction associated with adhesions 8 years previously. She had no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or heart disease.
The patient had no history of smoking or drinking. One sister and one brother had NF1.
The patient exhibited soft cutaneous nodular masses of 0.2 to 3 cm in diameter on the head, face, trunk, and limbs as well as multiple café-au-lait patches . Examinations of the eyes, lungs, and heart were normal. Hearing testing was normal. Freckles were seen in the axilla and inguinal region. No lymphadenopathy was detected in the neck, axilla, or inguinal region. The abdomen was soft and without tenderness or palpable masses. Bowel sounds were normal. Digital rectal exam was unremarkable.
White blood cell count was 7.2 × 109/L. Red blood cell count was 4.45 × 1012/L. Hemoglobin concentration was 136 g/L. Platelet count was 260.0 × 109/L. C-reactive protein concentration was 3.65 mg/L. Fecal occult blood testing was negative. Concentrations of carcinoembryonic antigen, cancer antigen 125, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were all within normal range.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed an irregular cystic mass with an oblique diameter of approximately 44 mm in the left pelvis. Its solid component exhibited contrast enhancement and had no clear border with the adjacent intestinal wall. GIST of the small intestine or solitary fibrous tumor was suspected.