A 56 year old male presented with complaint of acute onset painless diminution of vision in the right eye of 3 days duration followed by similar complaint in left eye after 1 day which deteriorated over the next 2 days. This was associated with headache and pain on ocular movements. There was a history of being bitten by a stray dog 8 days before the visual symptoms, and the patient had received three injections of chick embryo cell anti-rabies vaccine (Rabipur, Hoeshst Marion Roussel) on day 0, 3 and 7 after the dog bite. He developed these symptoms after the third injection. There was no history of any other ocular or systemic problems.
The general physical examination was within normal limits. The best-corrected visual acuity was 6/60 in the right and 6/24 in the left eye. IOP was 16 mm of Hg by applanation tonometry. Anterior segment examination using slitlamp was normal. Fundoscopy using + 90 D revealed hyperemic optic disc with blurred margins and disc edema. Vessels were tortuous and macular star was present in the nasal part of macula of both the eyes . Pupils were sluggishly reacting in both the eyes. Goldmann perimetry revealed centrocaecal scotoma in both eyes which was more dense in the right eye as compared to the left.
The routine blood investigations were all within normal limits. The aerobic and aerobic cultures were sterile. The VDRL test and indirect haemagglutination test for syphillis and toxoplasmosis were normal. Serology for bartonella was negative. Mantoux test showed a reading of 8 mm. and the chest X-ray was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain and optic nerves revealed slight signal enhancement of both the optic nerves with slight increase in optic nerve thickness on axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. No other significant abnormality was seen in MRI of brain.
A diagnosis of bilateral neuroretinitis was made. As the dog which had bitten the patient was kept under observation and was alive after one week, further injections of antirabies vaccine were stopped. The patient was given three doses of pulse dexamethasone 100 mg in 150 ml of 5% dextrose. The visual acuity improved to 6/6 in both the eyes over the next two weeks. The disc oedema start resolving within one week but macular exudates took 4 months to resolve.