A 15-year-old female presented with the swelling over distal 1/3rd right forearm from the past 5 years, as shown in . The swelling was insidious in onset and slowly increasing in size. The swelling was associated with mild pain which was non-radiating to the right forearm or arm but localized to the dorsal aspect of distal 1/3rd of the right forearm which was 3 cm away from the articular surface of the right wrist. There was no history of injury, infection, sinus, or other swellings on her forearm. On examination, there was a diffuse, oval-shaped, solitary swelling measuring about 3.5 × 2.5 cm with its surface smooth, edges being indistinct, non-pulsatile, non-fluctuant, non-transilluminant, non-compressible, and non-reducible present over distal 1/3rd of radial side of the dorsal aspect of the right forearm. The swelling was non-adherent to the skin and underlying structures. No muscle wasting was present. There were no arterial bruits and venous hum on auscultation. The distal neurovascular status was intact. Finkelstein’s test was negative, which rule out de Quervain’s tenosynovitis. The range of motions of the right wrist was full and free without any pain. There was no regional lymphadenopathy. A wide range of differential diagnosis of intramuscular lipoma, muscular fibroadenoma, hemangioma, angiofibroma, lymphangioma, neurofibroma, nodular fasciitis, and peripheral nerve sheath tumors was considered.
Plain radiograph of the right wrist revealed a calcified spot in the distal end of the right radius, as shown in . Ultrasound of the right wrist revealed numerous irregular hypoechoic areas suggestive of low flow vascular tumor. MRI of the right wrist revealed a lobulated lesion (showing T2 and PD/SPAIR hyperintense signals) in the intramuscular plane measuring about 1.8 × 1.2 × 4.2 cm at the radial side in the extensor aspect involving the muscles of abductor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis, as shown in .
Under general anesthesia, an excisional biopsy of the mass, which was arising from the musculotendinous junction of APL and EPB, was done with an uneventful post-operative period, as shown in . Grossly, it was partially circumscribed soft-tissue mass measuring 5.5 × 2.5 cm. The cut section of the mass showed numerous vessels of variable sizes containing thrombus and hemorrhage. Histopathology of the biopsied muscle revealed an infiltrating tumor composed of variable sized vascular spaces with a predominance of larger sized blood vessels, which are lined by endothelial cells and show RBCs in the lumen. Irregular thin-walled vascular channels were infiltrating within skeletal muscle bundles and fat, as shown in . The surrounding area showed mature fatty tissues which are suggestive of cavernous hemangioma. The patient has been followed up at regular intervals for 6 months postoperatively during which the patient showed a full range of movements of the thumb. No recurrence was noted during the follow-up period. The patient was still under follow-up.