A seven-year-old male mongrel dog, weighing 10 kg, was taken to the Laboratory of Clinical Research on Dermatozoonosis in Domestic Animals, Evandro Chagas Clinical Research Institute – Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), with a clinical suspicion of visceral leishmaniasis by Secretaria Municipal de Saúde do Rio de Janeiro (Municipal Health Department of Rio de Janeiro). The clinical examination revealed the presence of a single ulcerated cutaneous lesion with well-defined borders, measuring 0.5 cm in diameter, in the left ear, emaciation and lethargy. The mucous membranes were pale and the animal had signs of hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. There was no evidence of epistaxis, and the rectal temperature was 38.8°C.
Bleeding time (BT) was assessed with an automated spring-loaded device (2.4 mm - Unistik 2 Normal, Owem Mumford) in dry, clean and hairless skin of the inner right ear. Blood from the incision was blotted with Whatman nº2 filter paper every thirty seconds untill all bleeding stopped [,]. BT was 600 seconds (reference value 138 seconds).
Blood samples were collected by cephalic venipuncture and placed in three sets of tubes, one without anticoagulant for serological reassessment (Indirect ImmunoFluorescence – IIF), another with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (10 percent) for hematological evaluation and the third with sodium citrate (3.2 per cent) for coagulation tests. The serum sample was tested for anti-Leishmania antibodies with the IFI-Leishmaniose-Visceral-Canina-Bio-Manguinhos test (Bio-Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) and the dog was seroreactive with titer ≥ 1/160. According to standards established by Ministério da Saúde (Health Department) , this canine patient was humanely euthanized with an intravenous administration of sodium thiopental 5%. After euthanasia, cutaneous lesion and spleen fragments were collected and immersed in saline containing 100 μg of 5’fluorocytocine, 1000 IU of penicillin and 200 μg of streptomycin per milliliter and stored at 4°C for 24 h. Afterwards, the fragments were transferred aseptically to a biphasic culture medium (NNN supplemented Schneider’s medium with 10% fetal bovine serum) and stored at 26–28°C. The fresh culture was monitored weekly for thirty days. Multi-locus enzyme electrophoresis (MLEE) was adopted for characterization of isolates, in accordance with Cupolillo et al. . The parasite was isolated and, after isoenzyme analysis, was identified as Leishmania (Leishmania) chagasi.
The serum sample was also tested for the Dirofilaria immitis antigen as well as the antibodies against Borrelia burgdorferi and Ehrlichia canis (SNAP 3Dx – IDEXX), the results being negative.
Complete blood count (CBC) was performed with an automated cell counter (Coulter Model T-890) and the blood smears were stained by the Romanowsky method with Giemsa stain (Giemsa Stain Modified, Sigma-Aldrich). Hematological findings included PCV 26% (reference value 46%), RBC 3.6x106/μL (reference value 6.5x106/μL), hemoglobin 8.4 g/dL (reference value 15.4 g/dL), platelets 128x103/μL (reference value 273×103/μL) and total plasmatic protein 9.0 g/dL (reference value 7.1 g/dL).
Prothrombin time (PT) (Thromborel® S, Dade Behring) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) (Pathromtin SL, Dade Behring) were determined with a fully-automated coagulation system – Sysmex Serie CA – 500 (Sysmex America, Inc.). A group of healthy dogs (n=18) was recruited for reference values of the hemostasis parameters. The animals, clinically and laboratory healthy (data not shown), were serologically negative for the Dirofilaria immitis antigen as well as antibodies against Borrelia burgdorferi and Ehrlichia canis (SNAP 3Dx – IDEXX) and not reactive to Leishmania sp. by the IIF test (Bio-Manguinhos, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil). PT and APTT were considered prolonged when the subject’s time was at least 30% longer than the healthy control’s time . Hemostatic abnormalities included prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time 128.0 seconds (reference value, 37.2 seconds) and prolonged prothrombin time 9.8 seconds (reference value, 7.3 seconds).
The Dade® DIMERTEST latex assay was adopted for the rapid qualitative evaluation of circulating derivatives of fibrin degradation products (XL-FDP) (Dade Behring). The result was positive with sample agglutination.