A 12-year-old male patient, with a non-relevant medical history, consulted for 19 days of progressive hypo-responsiveness and hyporexia, with clinical decline and emesis, in the last days before admission. The mother reported a loss of 5 kg in the patient in the last 15 days. At the initial consultation, they reported severe hypercalcemia of 19 mg/dl (>14.5 mg/dl), hyperphosphatemia (6.6 mg/dl), elevated creatinine (1.45 mg/dl) as well as hyperuricemia (9.3 mg/dl) . An x-ray of the long bones showed a lesion with a periosteal reaction of lytic characteristics in the medial distal metaphysis of the right femur. Under the context of tumor lysis syndrome, hyperhydration and management with allopurinol were started.
Upon admission to our institution, the patient presented normal vital signs and appropriate anthropometry for his age. Mucocutaneous paleness was the only abnormal finding. Hyperhydration was continued and management with a single dose of rasburicase was indicated. A hypercalcemic crisis with kidney involvement secondary to volume depletion was confirmed, with acute kidney injury RIFLE I and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) at 48.8 ml/min/1.73 m2. Management with furosemide was added, and given the severe levels of hypercalcemia, methylprednisolone and bisphosphonate (a single dose of zoledronic acid 0.05 mg/kg/IV) were added.
Studies were performed for possible infectious, metabolic, renal, endocrinological, and neoplastic etiologies associated with acquired hypercalcemia . A malignant bone neoplasm was initially ruled out; magnetic resonance imaging of the lower limbs only showed a lesion compatible with osteochondroma, discarding a possible malignant bone neoplasm. Paraclinical follow-up tests showed heterogeneous hypochromic microcytic anemia, with a slight decrease in platelets, without compromise of other cell lines and elevated lactic dehydrogenase .
Endocrinological studies were expanded; parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels were found to be in the suboptimal range, calcitriol was normal, and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 levels were optimal. As the patient had no history of drug use to justify serum calcium levels and had not presented any state of prolonged immobilization, severe PTH-independent hypercalcemia was diagnosed. Among secondary causes, thyroid function disorders were ruled out by normal thyroid ultrasound. Normal alkaline phosphatase levels and reported imaging studies made the bone origin of hypercalcemia less likely.
Regarding the nephrological study, the abdominal ultrasound was not suggestive of nephrocalcinosis, as evidenced by the hypercalciuria (a slightly elevated calcium/creatinine ratio of 0.7), which was justified by the severity of the hypercalcemia, making a tubular reabsorption disorder unlikely.
There were no clinical or paraclinical signs of infection; the elevated level of C-reactive protein (9 mg/dl) was justified by acute inflammation of unknown etiology. The patient persisted with anemia and elevation of indirect bilirubin, ruling out hemolytic etiologies. A subsequent paraclinical follow-up showed thrombocytopenia in addition to heterogeneous hypochromic microcytic anemia. The control blood count reported 7% immature cells, which had not previously been discovered. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels remained high (453 U/L). Suspicion of the lymphoproliferative syndrome was considered; a biopsy and a bone marrow aspirate were indicated on the third day of hospital admission.
The biopsy report demonstrated precursor B acute lymphoblastic leukemia, of intermediate-risk, central nervous system (CNS) 1 status. Translocations (4; 11), BCR/ABL (12; 21), and 46 XY leukemic karyotype were all ruled out, and therapy according to the Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia Intercontinental 2009 protocol was subsequently started. The patient continued multidisciplinary management and his renal function normalized on the fourth day of admission, reaching a GFR of 71.17 ml/min/1.73 m2. He never developed any additional complications beyond acute renal failure secondary to the hypercalcemic crisis. He completed treatment with allopurinol for 7 days, achieving normal uric acid levels from the second day of admission and his calcium levels normalized 72 h after the application of zoledronic acid, subsequently requiring replacement due to hypocalcemia without additional severe adverse reactions .