An otherwise healthy 37-year-old Tunisian woman presented to the emergency department with a 3–4 month history of right upper quadrant pain. She also reported general malaise and a 2–3 kg weight loss. She denied any jaundice, fever or infectious symptoms. She had been living in Tunisia up until the previous year, and had been exposed to dogs and sheep. On physical examination, she had mild right upper quadrant tenderness, without peritoneal signs. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 7.1 × 6.5 × 10.7 cm complex, multi-loculated cystic mass with partially calcified septations, partially embedded within the liver (segments V/VIII) and causing deviation of the right portal vein . There was no biliary dilatation or portal venous thrombosis. White blood cell count (5.5 × 10^9/L), eosinophil count (0.2 × 10^9/L) and liver function tests (Bilirubin 6, ALT 19, AST 19, ALP 48, GGT 15) were within normal limits. Tumor markers (including Ca19–9) and serum IgE level were not performed. She was discharged with outpatient hepatobiliary follow-up.
Given her history of proximity to livestock in an endemic area, the diagnosis of a hydatid cyst was strongly favored. However, echinococcosis and amoebiasis serologies were both negative. At the multidisciplinary tumor board discussion, the diagnostic value of a pre-operative biopsy was weighed against the risk of potential seeding. The Tropical Disease team deemed this lesion to be most likely a hydatid cyst, corresponding to a category CE 3A cyst according to the WHO classification . Although only the minority (5–20%) of CE 3 cysts are sero-negative , the recommendation was to proceed with surgical resection, following a one-week pre-operative course of albendazole.
She underwent a right hepatectomy through a right subcostal incision considering the size of the lesion and its proximity to the right portal vein. Intra-operatively, the cyst appeared white, quite thickened, and intimately associated with the portal vein. It was opened on the back table and found to contain murky fluid as well as another cyst within, which was originally thought to represent a daughter cyst . Her postoperative course was unremarkable, and she was discharged home on postoperative day 5. An abdominal ultrasound performed 6 months post-operatively showed no residual disease.
Final pathology surprisingly revealed a biliary mucinous cystic neoplasm, which was completely excised with negative margins. It contained ovarian-type stroma and dystrophic calcifications. The cyst wall was composed of a single layer of cylindrical to flattened cuboidal epithelium . Cytokeratin 19, an epithelial marker, was positive (would be negative in hydatid cyst) . The estrogen receptor protein and CD10 were expressed, highlighting the ovarian-type stroma, which is typically seen in BMCN . Vimentin and PAX-8 were negative, thereby excluding gynecological origin. The remainder of the liver parenchyma and gallbladder were otherwise normal.