An 86-year-old woman was referred to the emergency department (ED) for unrelieved chest tightness, shortness of breath and back pain for 6 h on November 7, 2016. Three hours before admission, she presented to her local hospital and was newly diagnosed with acute anterior myocardial infarction (MI), loading doses of aspirin and clopidogrel were orally taken but failed to relieve her symptoms. Five days prior, she had experienced chest tightness on exertion with shortness of breath and no back pain, and these symptoms resolved within a few minutes to two hours at rest and failed to draw her attention. Past medical history included previous pulmonary tuberculosis, besides, she had 40 years of smoking history but quit 16 years ago.
Physical examination revealed vital signs as follows: blood pressure 100/76 mmHg, heart rate 82 beats/min, respiratory rate 20/min. The cardiopulmonary examination was unremarkable, and no peripheral edema was present. The routine laboratory tests at ED revealed troponin I (cTnI) was 0.041 ng/ml (normal reference range 0–0.02 ng/ml), and creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) was 6.54 ng/ml (normal reference range 0–4.99 ng/ml). No abnormalities were observed in complete blood count, renal and liver function tests. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed abnormal Q-waves in leads I, aVL and V2-V9, ST-segment elevation in leads V2-V9, biphasic T-waves in V2-V9 and negative T-wave in V1 .
Echocardiogram was performed at ED admission, showing normal tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and right ventricular diameter of 19 mm, an enlarged left ventricle (LV) of 53 mm at end-diastole with a reduced ejection fraction (EF) of 36% and decreased motion of the left ventricular anterior, anteroseptal, anterolateral wall and apex, and mild tricuspid regurgitation was observed with an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) of 51 mmHg. Acute anterior wall and high lateral wall MI was initially diagnosed, thus emergency coronary angiography (CAG) was performed (Additional file : Video 1–2). Stable coronary plaques without signs of acute plaque rupture or coronary dissection were seen in the left anterior descending branch and right coronary artery. She was then sent to and managed in the coronary care unit after CAG. Dynamic changes of blood biomarkers and arterial blood gas results were summarized in Table1. Unexpectedly, CAG and dynamic alterations of cardiac biomarkers and ECGs seemed to rule out the initial diagnosis . Repeat echocardiogram on Day 1 displayed a normal-sized LV with left ventricular anterior, anteroseptal and apical hypokinesia and a left ventricular EF of 41%.
By detailly inquiring medical history again, many years of right lower extremity pain, weakness of bilateral lower limbs for half a year and inactivity in the train for 10 h half a month ago were complained of. Since D-Dimer was extremely high, lower extremity venous ultrasound was done on Day 2, indicating multiple thrombi in the right intermuscular vein, dilation of bilateral deep femoral vein and spontaneous echo contrast. The following chest computed tomography (CT) illustrated multiple emboli in bilateral pulmonary arteries, calcified nodules in left upper pulmonary lobe, posterior segment of the right upper lobe and the anterior basement of the lower lobe .
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) on Day 7 demonstrated paradoxical systolic motion of anterior left ventricular wall and akinesis of apex with an EF of 43%, and TTS could not be excluded. Filling defects in the right upper lobe and basal segments of the right lower lobe corresponded with pulmonary thromboembolism.
She received aspirin 100 mg qd, clopidogrel 75 mg qd, isosorbide dinitrate 10 mg tid, atenolol 3.125 mg bid, atorvastatin 20 mg qn, nicorandil 5 mg tid, furosemide 20 mg qd and spironolactone 20 mg qd and enoxaparin 0.3 ml qd on admission. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors were not used due to low blood pressure. Dual antiplatelet therapy was terminated and enoxaparin was changed to 0.3 ml q12h while PE was suspected, and enoxaparin was switched to rivaroxaban 15 mg bid after one week, the latter was used for three weeks and was adjusted to 15 mg qd in consideration of her old age and bleeding risk. She was in a stable condition at 3 months follow-up after discharge, no chest tightness, chest pain or shortness of breath were complained of. Serological biomarkers and blood gas results were within normal ranges . Echocardiogram revealed normal-sized LV with an EF of 68%, mild aortic valve regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation, but no regional wall motion abnormalities were detected . No any evidence of PE was spotted in CT. CMR demonstrated improvement in left ventricular systolic function in comparison with the former . Hence, her final diagnosis was corrected as TTS with PE and bilateral deep venous thrombosis.