A 70-year-old South-Asian woman who was known to be a diabetic with dyslipidaemia having good follow up care without a prior history of ischemic or hypertensive heart disease presented to us with transient loss of consciousness following an accidental electrocution. The electrocution occurred while attempting to change a household fluorescent bulb powered by low voltage alternating current of 220-240 V. Upon spontaneous recovery, the patient’s only complaint was left arm pain. Physical examination revealed a second degree burn injury of 1 cm diameter in both her hands indicating entrance and exit wounds . Systemic examinations of the neurological and respiratory systems did not reveal notable anomalies. Examination of the cardiovascular system revealed an irregularly irregular pulse with a moderate to rapid rate. Patient was haemodynamically stable with no overt features of heart failure and the rest of the cardiovascular examination was normal. Electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation with a moderate to rapid ventricular rate (115-150 beats per minute) without any ischemic features . Cardiac and muscle markers done immediately demonstrated elevated levels of Myoglobin-294.5 ng/mL, CK-MB-17.4 ng/mL and a normal Troponin I value of 0.2 ng/mL (Reference values: Myoglobin 0-80 ng/mL, CK-MB 0-5.0 ng/mL, Troponin I 0-0.5 ng/mL). Eight hours post incident, markers were rechecked and both Myoglobin and CK-MB had normalized and Troponin remained within normal limits. Serum sodium, potassium and thyroid function tests were also normal. A 2D echocardiogram gave a normal study and identified no prior indication of ischemic or hypertensive heart disease.
High dependency unit management was instituted with continuous electrocardiographic observation. In the absence of hemodynamic compromise, a rapid ventricular rate was the only feature which was controlled with atenolol. The atrial fibrillation reverted to sinus rhythm within 6 hours spontaneously . Patient was kept under electrocardiographic monitoring on day one and repeated ECG’s were taken and assessed on day two. Upon discharge patient was in sinus rhythm. She was reviewed one week later with an electrocardiogram which demonstrated atrial premature complexes .
Our patient had an electrocution precipitated first episode of atrial fibrillation. The short duration, spontaneous resolution coupled with an absence of a prior cardiovascular comorbid history and lack of structural anomalies favored electrocution induced AF. The electrocardiogram taken on review did demonstrate premature atrial complexes. As this phenomenon is yet to be reported as occurring de-novo following electrocution we could hypothesize that our patient already had atrial premature complexes from the outset. It is recognized that APCs increase the risk of arrhythmias both supraventricular and ventricular in origin but is commonly associated with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation [-]. Although associated with structural heart disease and chemical exposure such as alcohol and caffeine, APCs can also be an incidental and normal finding in otherwise healthy individuals . Therefore we could postulate that in the context of pre-existent APCs, the accidental electrocution may have been the necessary trigger to precipitate a PAF.
Commonly, high voltage electrocution is thought to precipitate cardiac abnormalities with a high incidence . Our subject developed AF from a low voltage (220-240 V) insult, an observation previously noted as well . In our patient the heart was naturally in the path of the electrical current as both the entrance and exit wounds were located in each hand. A study done by Purdue et al suggested that loss of consciousness following an electrical insult is an indication for observation by electrocardiographic monitoring a conclusion possibly reaffirmed by our case. Spontaneous resolution of electrocution induced arrhythmia has also been previously recorded [,,-]. Our case also proved, diligent watchful expectancy with rate control can be an alternate method of management.