A 60-year-old male presented with continuous dull aching upper abdominal pain of four months duration and a gradually increasing visible upper abdominal lump over the past two months. Clinical examination revealed an afebrile non-icteric man with mild pallor and pedal edema. The patient had a huge lobulated liver (span 22 cm) occupying both hypochondria and the right lumbar, epigastrium and umbilical regions with a localized cystic subfascial projection in the epigastrium of 8 × 8 cm. Laboratory investigations revealed haemoglobin 10 gm%, white blood cell count 7500/μl and eosinophils 900/μl. Serological test with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for echinococcus was positive. Liver function tests were within normal range. Radiography showed elevation of the right diaphragm with a soft tissue shadow in the upper abdomen. Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen revealed a 19 × 12 × 13 cm cystic lesion in the right lobe of the liver with multiple anechoic cysts within it. Spiral CT scan of the liver confirmed a hydatid cyst in the right lobe (segments – V, VI, VII, VIII), with multiple daughter cysts within, compressing the portal vein, inferior vena cava, hepatic veins, gallbladder, intra and extra hepatic biliary tree and the right kidney. The anterior aspect of the cyst demonstrated a cystic projection in the midline stretching the fascial aponeurotic layer. (Black arrow – Figure-)
The patient received Albendazole 10 mg/kg/day for 28 days with the aim of sterilizing the cyst contents. His abdomen was then explored under general anaesthesia using a 6 cm midline incision over the epigastric cystic swelling. After dividing the linea alba a close continuous suture of 2-0 silk was taken all around between the divided fascial aponeurosis and the projecting cyst wall to prevent the spillage and entry of cyst contents into the peritoneal cavity during the process of evacuation. Using a 16-gauge needle, a three-way stopcock, and a 50 ml syringe, we attempted aspiration of the cyst prior to instillation of a scolicidal agent through the exposed cyst wall. Due to the thick contents of the cyst, the attempt failed and was abandoned. We introduced a 10 mm laparoscopic trocar into the cyst cavity after stabilizing the exposed cyst wall with tissue forceps and isolating the area with gauze packs soaked in 0.5% Cetrimide solution. A suction cannula was applied to the mouth of the laparoscopic sleeve keeping the valve open. Alternate use of the suction tube applied to the mouth of the sleeve and a high pressure laparoscopic suction irrigation apparatus introduced into the cyst cavity resulted in a drainage of three liters of thick, viscid, cream-colored cyst contents containing abundant daughter cysts . After near total evacuation of the cyst, a 30° telescope was introduced through the trocar sleeve to visualize the cavity for adherent membranes and biliary leak. Adherent daughter cysts and membranes were then evacuated manually by a long thin spoon introduced through the trocar site after its removal.
We could not visualize any gross biliary leak. The cyst cavity was irrigated with 2.5 liters of 1% povidone iodine solution twice. A 24 F self retaining Foleys catheter was then introduced into the cyst cavity as a drain, the course of which was routed with the help of a long Robert forceps passed though the opening into the cyst cavity and then rail-roaded into position. The trocar site on the cyst was closed by continuous 2-0 Polyglactin sutures. After local irrigation of the site with 0.5% Cetrimide solution, the silk suture anchoring the cyst wall to the fascial layer was then detached and the linea alba was closed with continuous 1-0 Polypropylene sutures. Patient received liquids orally in the evening and solid food next morning onwards. The patient had received an injection of cefotaxime perioperatively. He was discharged on the third postoperative day with the drain in situ.
The cyst contents, which were sterile on culture, showed protoscolices, fragments of laminated membrane and hooklets. Skin sutures were removed on the eighth postoperative day. Other than postoperative biliary drainage of 500 ml/day that gradually decreased over one month, the patient's recovery was uneventful. We removed the drain after USG confirmed a collapsed cyst cavity with minimal collection. Follow-up USG after a period of four months revealed a collapsed residual cavity with no evidence of recurrent disease. Though a CT scan is essential to compare the pre and postoperative characteristics in hepatic hydatid disease, it was not feasible due to financial constraints.