A 32-year-old man with a history of hemophilia A presented to the emergency department (ED) with right shoulder pain, swelling, and decreased range of motion. The patient had previously been treated with factor VIII replacement every three days for maintenance therapy but currently lacked access to established outpatient care after relocating from a nearby city. He was experiencing homelessness and sleeping outside. He denied preceding trauma, numbness, or weakness. His vital signs included: temperature 36.6ºC, heart rate 93 beats per minute, respiration rate 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure 173/127 millimeters mercury, and blood oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. His physical examination was remarkable for right shoulder swelling and tenderness along the right deltoid with decreased range of motion secondary to pain . His distal motor and sensory function were intact.
The treating emergency physician performed a point-of-care ultrasound to evaluate for a right shoulder hemarthrosis. This exam was performed using a curvilinear 5–2 megahertz probe (Sonosite, Bothell, WA). While standing behind the patient, the probe was placed parallel to the ground just below the scapular spine. The probe marker was oriented to the patient’s left, which allows the anatomy on the screen to match the patient’s anatomy. The probe was then moved laterally until the glenoid, humeral head, and infraspinatus tendon were visualized. Both the affected and unaffected shoulders were evaluated using a similar technique.
In this patient, a collection with heterogeneous echogenicity was visualized above the humeral head and below the infraspinatus tendon, asymmetric to the unaffected side. These findings were consistent with a spontaneous hemarthrosis . He was admitted to the hospital. Hematology was consulted and the patient was restarted on factor VIII treatment with improvement in his shoulder symptoms. He established care with the local hematology clinic to initiate regular factor VIII maintenance therapy.