A 64-year-old man noticed an acne-like nodule in the left parotid region 2 years prior to this presentation. It was painless, but it increased up to a maximum diameter of 4.5 cm. Clinically, left parotid gland carcinoma was suspected, and FNA cytology was performed from the left parotid region. Clusters of epithelial cells were observed in a necrotic and hemorrhagic background. These cell clusters had a sheet-like arrangement and high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio. The nuclear shape was ovoid with hyperchromasia. Neither nuclear membrane thickening nor irregular-shaped nuclei were noted. One obvious nucleolus was observed in the central portion of the cytoplasm . Small lymphocytes, histiocytes and multinucleated giant cells were also seen. Malignant epithelial cells derived from salivary glands, including squamous cell carcinoma, myoepithelial carcinoma and carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma, were suspected. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-defined multilocular tumor located close to the outside of the left parotid gland. On T1- and T2-weighted imaging, low-intensity and heterogeneous gadolinium enhancement was seen . Radiologically, parotid gland cancer was suspected.
One month later, tumor resection of the left parotid region and superficial parotidectomy were performed. The cut surface showed a well-defined lobulated tumor containing yellowish-muddy materials . Histologically, the resected tumor was diagnosed as proliferating pilomatricoma composed of basophilic cells and shadow cells apart from the left parotid gland. The tumor was encapsulated by fibrous tissue without stromal invasion. Approximately 60% of the tumor cells consisted of shadow cells, and basophilic cells were confirmed at the periphery of the tumor. The basophilic cells were oval-shaped with a high nuclear cytoplasm ratio and had an obvious nucleolus. Two mitoses were observed per high-powered field. Focal squamous metaplasia, coagulative necrosis and apoptotic cells were also observed. Eosinophilic-stained shadow cells showed nuclear concentration and disappearance. Transitional histological findings were identified between basophilic cells and shadow cells, and supramatrical cells characterized by incomplete nuclear disappearance were also seen .
Immunohistochemically, basophilic cells and shadow cells were negative for anti-pan cytokeratin antibody (AE1/AE3, diluted 1:800; Leica) and high-molecular-weight keratin (34βE12, diluted 1:200; DAKO), but squamous metaplastic cells were positive. β-catenin (3-caten, diluted 1:400; DAKO) was positive for basophilic cells with nuclear and cytoplasmic staining. Ki-67 (MIB-1, diluted 1:30; Biogenex) labeling index for basophilic cells and shadow cells were 46.2% and 0%, respectively, and the p53 (Bp53–12, diluted 1:200; IBL) labeling index were 94.8% and 0%, respectively. S-100 protein (2A10, diluted 1:400; IBL), HMB-45 (HMB-45, diluted 1:200; DACO) and Ber-EP4 (Ber-EP4, diluted 1:400; DAKO) were negative for basophilic cells and shadow cells. Fibrosis, calcification, foreign body granulomatous reaction, foamy macrophage aggregation, and lymphocyte infiltration were observed in the tumor stroma. The tumor was completely resected. There was no metastasis to the lymph nodes around the parotid gland.
On a re-evaluation of the cytological specimens, the ovoid-shaped epithelial cells were considered to be basophilic cells. Shadow cells with nuclear disappearance were also confirmed. Keratin fibers were found in the cytoplasm of the shadow cells . Ultimately, we concluded that these cytological findings were consistent with pilomatricoma.