A 45-year-old Greek man with IACF was prospectively evaluated. The patient presented with right closed IACF in March 2007 at our Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department. The treatment consisted of a closed reduction technique combined with balloon-assisted fracture augmentation with CPC. The mechanism of trauma was axial loading. Standard radiographic evaluation and MDCT scans were performed preoperatively . The calcaneal fracture was classified as a type III according to the Sanders classification .
A calcaneus traction wire was placed from the posterolateral area of the calcaneus perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the calcaneus and the varus, valgus malalignment was corrected . Fluoroscopy was used to determine the quality of the calcaneal alignment and the degree of fracture reduction. A stylet and cannula were placed into the calcaneus followed by insertion of a bone tamp attached to a digital manometer (Kyphon®, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) . The balloon was inflated gradually under fluoroscopy . At this time the bone cement was prepared immediately prior to its injection into the defect and the balloon was removed. The fracture void was cleaned of blood with NS solution and a bone filler device was inserted through the cannula to augment the calcaneal body. No arrest of blood supply was needed and no cast was applied.
Passive ankle ROM was applied at the end of the procedure. The duration of surgery was 20 min. The patient showed immediate pain relief from the 1st postoperative day. Limb elevation and foot pump were used to prevent ankle swelling.
Clinical follow-up was performed 6 to 24 months postoperatively, using the Maryland foot score for the calcaneal fractures . Postoperative MDCT scan was obtained for the evaluation of the cement position, the integrity of the joint surface and the calcaneal alignment. Active and passive motion exercises were performed under physiotherapeutic support. The patient was able to walk with partial weight-bearing beginning on second day. Full weight-bearing was performed after the first week postoperatively when the ankle swelling decreased. No superficial or deep infections were recorded. There was no need to undergo a secondary reconstruction procedure. Bone healing was seen on plain radiographs at 12 weeks. The immediate postoperative radiographs and CT scan revealed no loss of fracture reduction and good calcaneal alignment. Complete filling of the bone defects was seen. Radiography and CT scan evaluation at 2 year follow-up showed good fracture alignment . No significant difficulty in toe-walking, heel walking or impingement of the peroneal tendons was observed.