The authors report a case involving a 57-year-old male, weight 85 kg, height 185 cm, with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, obstructive sleep apnea, and high-risk idiopathic PAH diagnosed 5 years previously and treated with upfront triple combination therapy (sildenafil [40 mg/8 h], bosentan [125 mg/12 h], and intravenous treprostinil infusion [50 ng/kg/min] via subcutaneous abdominal implantable pump). Initially, treprostinil infusion was started subcutaneously with an external pump. Due to pain at the infusion site and repeated infections, intravenous infusion was carried out by subcutaneous implantation of the pump in the abdomen. The patient came to our hospital every 28 days to fill the pump reservoir for two years. A nurse from the Pulmonary Vascular Unit trained to fill the pump in a sterile environment proceeded to manually locate the silicone port on the top of the device . To ensure that the medication was injected into the reservoir, the silicone membrane was punctured, and the medication residue was removed. Once the needle position was fixed, the reservoir was progressively filled, with repeated aspirations to guarantee that the needle remained in the reservoir until the procedure was completed.
In one of the refills of the drug reservoir, accidental administration of 1 months' supply of treprostinil (200 mg) into the subcutaneous tissue occurred, causing circulatory collapse. The accident probably occurred after the needle inadvertently came out of the reservoir during one of the last control aspirations. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and started on perfusions of norepinephrine (up to 3 mcg/kg/min) combined with epinephrine (1 mcg/kg/min) and vasopressin (0.03 IU/min). An additional 1 mg terlipressin and 1 mg/kg methylene blue were administered. Despite multiple high-dose vasopressor infusions, the patient experienced refractory shock (blood pressure 60/30 mmHg and anuria, with a serum lactate level >15 mmol/L). Chest x-ray showed bilateral alveolar infiltrates compatible with volume-overload pulmonary edema, resulting in hypoxemia (high flow nasal cannula FiO2 70% for SpO2 96%). Physical examination revealed generalized vasodilation, with an erythematous and edematous area around the subcutaneous pump . Arterial blood gas analysis showed pH: 7.29, pCO2: 30.8 mmol/L, pO2: 121 mmHg, and HCO3: 16.4.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed hypercontractile left ventricle, with anomalous movement of the septum due to pressure overload with preserved systolic function, dilated right ventricle with preserved function. Estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 60 mmHg.
Attempts were made to reduce subcutaneous absorption of the drug, diluting it with peribomb injection of 100 ml of saline solution. Cold gauze was applied to cause vasoconstriction of the subcutaneous tissue and delay the absorption of treprostinil. Also, incision and drainage of the injection site was performed to remove the treprostinil, with no clinical improvement .
Due to refractory shock within 2 h and, given that the terminal half-life of treprostinil is 3.5 h, peripheral venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was planned as the rescue therapy. Cannulation was performed with semi-Seldinger technique under general anesthesia (right femoral artery cannula 19 fr × 15 cm with distal perfusion cannula 8 fr; right femoral venous cannula 23 fr × 55 cm). Pump flow was maintained at 4.5 L/min, 3,500 revolutions per minute, sweep gas flow of 4 L/min, FiO2 of 0.7 and activated clotting time of between 150 and 180 s. Baseline cerebral oximetry values was 76/70%, right and left side respectively, and remained within the normal range during ECMO therapy.
In the following hours, the patient's blood pressure increased to 90/60 mmHg. Improvement of indirect signs of cardiac output, with recovery of diuresis and normalization of lactacidemia (serum lactate level 1.8 mmol/L) was observed. After achieving hemodynamic stability 12 h post-ECMO, epinephrine was gradually withdrawn. Because of the decrease in inotropic drugs and the high afterload due to the retrograde flow of ECMO, pulseless electrical activity occurred. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a dilated left ventricle with biventricular dysfunction without aortic valve opening. Promptly epinephrine was reintroduced up to 0.17 mcg/kg/min, and pump flow was decreased up to 2 lpm to reduce afterload. After 20 min of mechanical cardiopulmonary resuscitation [LUCAS (Physio-Control/Jolife AB, Lund, Sweden)], recovery of spontaneous circulation occurred. One day later, sildenafil and bosentan were gradually re-introduced . The patient was progressively weaned from pump, guided by echocardiogaphy, maintaining velocity–time integral (VTI) around 10 cm, which allowed for decannulation of the patient at 96 h and subsequent extubation.
Twenty-four hours after ECMO withdrawal, intravenous perfusion of treprostinil (2.38 ng/kg/min) was progressively titrated up to the initial dose. The patient was transferred to the intermediate respiratory care unit and 28 days later discharged.
As mentioned above, due to the possibility of pump malfunction, treprostinil perfusion was started via central venous catheter, given that the abdominal area was swollen after subcutaneous drainage. Subsequently, although the patient was reluctant, the subcutaneous implantable pump was restarted, initially with saline, and later with treprostinil, noting the decrease in infusion rate to 0.06 ml/day. Simultaneously, intravenous treprostinil perfusion with external pump was maintained at home for 4 months until it was switched to the implanted pump. Currently, the patient remains clinically stable, and satisfied with the pump's restart, with a good quality of life.