A 54-year-old male patient was admitted to Kyung Hee University Medical Center complaining of progressive weakness and atrophy of the proximal parts of both legs.
The patient’ s symptoms started about a year ago, 2 years after the presentation of the cardinal symptoms of BD, which continued to progress over time; the patient could not walk without assistance on admission.
The patient had been experiencing recurrent oral and genital ulcers and skin folliculitis for several months before being diagnosed with BD approximately 3 years ago. Clinical pictures fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for BD.
The patient had a free personal and family history.
On admission, the patient had multiple ulcers on the tongue and palate. Few erythema nodosum lesions were observed in the lower extremities. The genitalia were free of ulcers. The motor powers for flexion, abduction of the hip, and flexion of the knee were evaluated as Grade IV, and those for the dorsiflexion of the ankle and great toe were assessed as Grade II bilaterally, whereas muscular atrophy was localized bilaterally to the thighs. Deep tendon reflexes were diminished in both the knees and ankles. No additional abnormalities were found during the neurological examination.
Laboratory findings were normal except for the slight elevation in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (29 mm/h) and creatine kinase (CK: 278 U/L) that remained unchanged compared with previous results. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis detected no significant abnormalities.
Electrophysiological study of the bilateral upper and lower extremities was performed 2 mo before admission, and motor nerve conduction study (NCS) showed low compound motor action potentials and slow motor nerve conduction velocities on the bilateral peroneal nerves. Although sensory NCS indicated conduction block of the left ulnar nerve near the elbow, the patient’s left arm showed no clinically correlating neurological symptoms or signs. No other abnormalities were found in the motor and sensory NCS. Electromyography of the lower extremity muscles showed denervation potentials with reduced interference patterns, while that of the upper extremity muscles showed normal results. Specific features indicative of muscle disease were not found in any of the four extremities.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the proximal parts of both lower extremities showed slightly high signal intensity and heterogeneous enhancement at the adductor muscle groups and the vastus lateralis and intermedius muscles bilaterally, as well as at the right rectus femoris and sartorius muscles unilaterally . No significant abnormalities were found in MRI of the brain and spinal cord.
The patient was further evaluated by histological examination of both thigh muscles for differential diagnosis. Examination of the biopsy samples of the right vastus lateralis muscle, sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin, showed marked myofiber size variability under light microscopy and also displayed myofiber degeneration that exhibited traces of regenerating myofibers with compensatory hypertrophy. Endomysial fibrosis and fatty changes were moderate. Other sections stained with adenosine triphosphatase and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphatase showed atrophy of both fiber types. Electron microscopy showed varied myofiber sizes with evidence of severe myofiber atrophy. The atrophic myofibers displayed redundant external lamina, while other myofibers showed rarefaction of myofilaments and vacuolar changes . These findings were indicative of denervation atrophy with superimposed myopathic changes.