A 65-year-old man was referred to our hospital for evaluation of abnormal shadows on chest X-ray. He was a current smoker with a 25-pack-year history of smoking. He had worked in the construction industry and had a history of asbestos exposure. He had no symptoms.
Physical examination on admission revealed a blood pressure of 128/70 mmHg, pulse rate of 78 beats per minute, temperature of 36.2 °C, and percutaneous oxygen saturation of 97% on room air. There were no palpable lymph nodes in the neck, cardiovascular examination was normal and breath sounds were clear. His neurological examination was completely normal and no skin lesions were observed.
Laboratory evaluations showed elevated levels of white blood cell count (11,850/µL), serum C-reactive protein (4.34 mg/dL), γ-glutamyl transferase (62 U/L), and serum tumor markers, such as squamous cell carcinoma related antigen (3.8 ng/mL) and Cyfra21-1 (7.3 ng/mL). Sputum cytology indicated squamous cell carcinoma. Contrast-enhanced CT showed an irregularly shaped nodule, 56 mm in maximum diameter, in the upper lobe of the right lung, along with mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy .
PET-CT scan demonstrated strong FDG uptake in the primary lung lesion (maximal standard uptake value (SUVmax = 19.61)) and moderate FDG uptake in the hilar (SUVmax = 4.01), mediastinal (SUVmax = 5.30) and right supraclavicular lymph nodes (SUVmax = 3.89) .
Bronchoscopy revealed a protuberant lesion at the orifice of the left upper bronchus . Endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) for the mediastinal lymph nodes (#4R, #7) and simultaneous evaluation of the protuberant lesion in the left bronchus were performed. The bronchial tumor was histopathologically diagnosed as leiomyoma . No malignant cells were identified in the lymph node specimens. Therefore, he was diagnosed with clinical stage cT3N0M0 cStage IIb squamous cell lung carcinoma in consultation with thoracic surgeons, and a right upper lobectomy and a right S6 segmentectomy were performed. Postoperative pathological assessment showed pneumoconiosis in the dissected lymph nodes, with no evidence of metastasis . He was finally diagnosed with pT2bN0M0 pStage IIA squamous cell lung carcinoma .
Since the right supraclavicular lymph node was not palpable externally and biopsy was judged to be difficult, we decided to follow up the patient using imaging examinations after surgery. To date, 2 years after the surgery, there has been no recurrence.