A 27-year-old Hispanic man with no significant prior medical history presented to the emergency room with shortness of breath and a cough for three weeks. He also complained of mild precordial chest pain and generalized fatigue. His family history was contained type 2 diabetes mellitus in both parents but reported no history of cancer or genetic diseases. His social history revealed that he worked as a gardener, was married with two kids, was a non-smoker, occasionally consumed alcohol and had no history of drug abuse. He gave no history of any psychological illnesses. A physical exam revealed sinus tachycardia, distant heart sounds and elevated jugular venous pressure and a normal blood pressure. Chest X-ray showed an impressive mediastinal enlargement. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a large pericardial effusion and collapse of the right atrium during diastole along with respirophasic changes consistent with cardiac tamponade physiology. The patient underwent an emergent therapeutic pericardiocentesis that yielded hemorrhagic fluid. Cytological analysis of the fluid revealed no malignant cells. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed persistent pericardial effusion and a left anterior mediastinal mass . Work-up for possible metastases performed using Gallium scintigraphy showed no evidence of involvement of any other organs. Left anterior thoracotomy, pericardial window and left anterior mediastinotomy were done, revealing a well-encapsulated gelatinous tumor originating from the pericardium. The tumor grew from the inner surface of the pericardium near the origin of the superior vena cava and ascending aorta . A portion of the pericardium where the tumor was attached was resected and the tumor was biopsied. Complete resection was not attempted due to the proximity and attachment to the great vessels.
Review of pathology on routine hematoxylin-eosin stain showed that the tumor was monophasic and was composed of numerous spindle to oval cells in a fascicular growth pattern. The cells showed scant cytoplasm, oval to spindle nuclei with granular chromatin and with inconspicuous nucleoli . The tumor was mitotically active and showed 3–4 mitosis per high power field . Some areas showed myxoid background and others showed large areas of necrosis . Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were strongly positive for BCL-2 , CD 99 , Vimentin , FLI1 and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) . Stain for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) showed focal scattered positive cells . Muscle markers (smooth muscle actin, desmin and myogenin), neural and melanoma marker (S-100), epithelial markers (AE1/AE3), CD57, CK5/6 and p63 were negative. Based on morphology and immunostaining results, a diagnosis of monophasic synovial sarcoma was made. Fluorescent
in-situ hybridization (FISH) was done to confirm the diagnosis and to exclude Ewing sarcoma. It showed the presence of SS18 (SYT) gene rearrangement on chromosome 18q11, substantiating the diagnosis. Also the FISH assay for rearrangement or dosage abnormalities of the EWSR1 oncogene at Ewing sarcoma locus 22q12 was negative.
The patent was treated neoadjuvantly with high dose ifosfamide (2000 mg/m
2/day intravenous over 3 hours for 4 days) and mesna (1200 mg/m
2) repeated every 21 days between July and December 2012. On repeat CT imaging prior to planned surgical excision, the tumor had substantially decreased in size (> 50%) and the patient was noted to have elevation of left hemi-diaphragm indicating likely involvement of the left phrenic nerve.
A median sternotomy was performed and access to the heart and great vessels was obtained. The pericardium was opened and the tumor was seen abutting the bifurcation of the pulmonary artery and distal aortic arch, and involving a portion of the pericardium including the left phrenic nerve. The portion of the mass that was attached to the distal part of the pulmonary trunk and a lateral portion of the pericardium were resected. The tumor appeared to encase the left phrenic nerve consistent with the finding of elevation of left hemi-diaphragm on CT scan. This nerve was transected and its edges were controlled with hemoclips. The hemoclips also served as markers for possible future radiation treatment. The entire outline of aortic arch and the pulmonary artery were visible after removal of the thymus and the tumor, with no evidence of direct invasion. Once the tumor was mobilized laterally towards the left lung, it showed possible involvement of the wedge of the left upper lobe. The lung parenchyma was divided and a portion of the lung was transected from the left upper lobe. The entire tumor was removed en bloc with the surrounding tissue. The level 5 (subaortic) lymph node was also resected and sent for pathology.
The resected mediastinal mass (6.5 × 4 × 3 cm) was confirmed to be a monophasic synovial sarcoma on histology and immunohistochemistry. The adjacent lung was not involved by sarcoma. The three lymph nodes resected along with the mass were benign with non-necrotizing granulomas. The level 5 lymph node also showed non-necrotizing granulomas and was negative for malignancy. One of the resection margins was positive for malignancy. The patient recovered well after the repeat thoracotomy and EBRT was initiated 1-month post surgery. He had no recurrence of tumor on CT imaging at the first and second three-month intervals post surgery. Chest CT repeated at 9 months (third three-month interval) showed local recurrence. The patient was noted to have an anterior mediastinal mass extending to the left upper lobe of the lung and a left pleural effusion. There was no evidence for any distant metastases. The patient underwent resection of the mass and left upper lobectomy, left video-assisted thoracoscopy, drainage of pleural effusion and total decortication of left lung. Pathology confirmed the recurrence but the resection margins were free of malignancy. The pleural fluid was also negative for malignant cells. Chemotherapy was reinitiated with docetaxel (100mg/m
2) every 21 days along with steroid premedication with dexamethasone (4mg) for 5 days prior to treatment. This resulted in minor improvement on repeat CT imaging, but more importantly there was no further symptomatic worsening. The patient is clinically stable 18 months after diagnosis.