A 40-year-old Turkish man who presented to our institution with shortness of breath was evaluated by computed tomography. A mass in his left adrenal gland was diagnosed incidentally. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a large mass measuring 8×9.5×10.4cm in diameter in the left adrenal gland area . His serum cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, total testosterone, urinary metanephrine, serum electrolytes (Na+, K+,Cl–), fasting blood glucose, and fasting insulin levels were normal. Plasma cortisol was suppressed after administration of 1mg dexamethasone. The patient was diagnosed with a non-functional adrenal mass, and a left adrenalectomy was performed. The resected tumor was 11×9×6cm in size and weighed 339g. The tumor was of high nuclear grade and had diffuse architecture, focal necrotic areas, more than 5 mitoses per 50 high-power fields, and an infiltrated capsule. Sinusoidal vascular infiltration was observed, but clear cells were less than 25%. Immunohistochemical studies showed that melan-A and inhibin were positive, and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and thyroglobulin were negative. The pathological findings were consistent with ACC. Treatment with adjuvant radiotherapy with concurrent mitotane was planned for the patient.
Evaluations of thyroid function tests were normal before treatment and anti-thyroglobulin antibody was positive, but anti-thyroperoxidase antibody was negative. Ultrasonographic evaluation of the thyroid revealed the following: There was a nodule 3×4×4mm in size in the lower part of the left lobe and foci of microcalcification, and the edges were irregular and of mixed echogenicity.
The elastosonography score of the nodule was 5, and the strain index was calculated as 7.85 . The patient had neither a history of radiation exposure nor a family history positive for thyroid carcinoma. A fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the nodule was suspicious for malignancy. The patient underwent total thyroidectomy and central neck dissection. Tumors were detected in two foci with diameters of 0.9cm and 0.4cm in the left lobe. There was neither lymphovascular nor capsular invasion or lymph node metastasis. Immunohistochemical studies showed that thyroglobulin was positive. The pathologic diagnosis was multicentric papillary thyroid microcarcinoma.