A 42-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for severe paroxysmal axial myoclonus of the left shoulder and abdominal muscles. The patient had been quite well and was a member of a self-defense force team until he developed spontaneous involuntary movements about 20 times per minute. The myoclonic movement gradually involved muscles of the left trunk, left lower extremity and right extremities within one month. The myoclonic movement did not occur during sleep but worsened upon taking a bath, drinking alcohol, and whenever the patient was angry. The patient was first admitted to a University hospital and diagnosed as "combination of spinal segmental myoclonus and propriospinal myoclonus" . The patient was treated with clonazepam (3.5 mg/day) and carbamazepine (400 mg/day). However, this treatment had no major effect on the symptoms. The condition worsened after discharge. Tapping anywhere on the body, including the face and spine, with a neurological hammer induced myoclonic contractions. The patient visited another medical clinic because of dissatisfaction with the medical treatment. A few years later, the patient was referred to our hospital, Preventive Welfare Clinic, for consultation.
On admission, physical and neurological examinations showed no abnormal findings apart from the myoclonic involuntary movements. Routine laboratory tests and MRI study of the cervical and thoracic spinal cords showed no abnormal findings. The myoclonus consisted of continuous rhythmic muscle contractions of the thoracic and abdominal muscles bilaterally, with left-side predominance. Tapping on certain points on the body, for example the left pectoralis major muscle or spine, with a neurological hammer induced myoclonic discharge. However, sound or light stimulation and elicitation of tendon reflex did not induce the myoclonic discharge. Medical history was negative for major accidents such as trauma and fever, and there was no change of working circumstances after the patient developed the myoclonic movements. Based on the description of anger-elicited worsening of myoclonic movements, the patient underwent a battery of psychological tests. The hysteria scale on the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI) was very high (T score = 78). In the Cook-Medley Hostility Scale, the hostility and cynicism scales were high (above the average scale + SD). The score on the Cornel Medical Index (CMI) was within normal range, but the hostility scale was high.
Although clonazepam, carbamazepine, and other sedative medications were used at relatively high doses, the treatment failed to control the myoclonic movements. While it was concluded that the myoclonus was due to organic disease, anger/rage was associated with worsening of symptoms and the patient seemed to have a hostile character. Psychogenic myoclonus is known as a cause of movement disorders. Although this patient was not considered a case of psychogenic myoclonus, a "psychogenic factor" was definitely involved in the induction of the myoclonus. Our final diagnosis was a "combination of spinal segmental myoclonus and propriospinal myoclonus accompanied by features of psychosomatic disorders". Accordingly, we tried psychosomatic therapy; a combination of AT and EMG-biofeedback therapy, to reduce myoclonic movement and drug dosage.