A 78-year-old African-American male drove himself to the emergency department with dizziness. After a syncopal event in the parking lot, he recovered spontaneously and walked into the hospital. During initial evaluation, the patient again lost consciousness and was found to be in polymorphic ventricular tachycardia . Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, magnesium and amiodarone were administered, and the patient was defibrillated four times before return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC).
After ROSC, he was noted to have a heart rate of 30 beats per minute with repeated episodes of nonsustained polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Intravenous dopamine infusion was initiated, followed by temporary transvenous pacing. The patient was then transferred to a tertiary care hospital for further management.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for atrial flutter, hypertension, and prostate cancer. His atrial flutter was rate controlled without atrioventricular nodal blockade, and he was anticoagulated with apixaban for a CHA2DS2–VASc score of 3.
Prostate cancer had been diagnosed 12 years prior to his current presentation, with metastases to the cervical spine, as well as left greater trochanter, ankle, and toes. Treatments included triptorelin pamoate, diethylstilbestrol, enzalutamide, sipuleucel-T, and, most recently, abiraterone, an androgen synthesis antagonist, coadministered with prednisone. The patient had notably stopped prednisone several months prior when his prescription ran out.
Hypertension was initially poorly controlled, with hospitalization for hypertensive urgency 1 year prior. While his blood pressure had subsequently been controlled with amlodipine and losartan, he developed lower extremity edema, and amlodipine was switched to chlorthalidone approximately 9 months prior to his current presentation.
The differential diagnosis for a patient presenting with polymorphic ventricular tachycardia can be found in Table . For this patient, most pertinent diagnoses include ischemic heart disease, a particularly important consideration among individuals with both modifiable (hypertension) and nonmodifiable (advanced age and male sex) risk factors for coronary artery disease. Given the association of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia with prolonged QT intervals, consideration must also be given to acquired or inherited conditions including electrolyte derangements, specifically hypomagnesemia and hypokalemia, as well as familial long QT syndromes.
An ECG was performed, which demonstrated a regular accelerated junctional rhythm with premature ventricular contractions and right bundle branch block, with QT and QTc of 492 milliseconds and 568 milliseconds, respectively . Initial laboratory values following ROSC are found in Table . A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a mildly depressed left ventricular ejection fraction at 48%, without wall motion abnormalities or significant valvular lesions.
Despite receiving between 100 and 300 mEq of potassium repletion daily, the patient experience persistent hypokalemia , prompting exploration of potential secondary etiologies. Renin activity was measured at 0.21 ng/mL per hour (normal range 0.25–5.82 ng/mL per hour), plasma aldosterone level was undetectable, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level was 54 pg/mL (normal range 6–50 pg/mL), and morning cortisol level was 12.5 ug/dL. At this time, potassium was 2.7 mEq/L. A total of 24 urine potassium collection resulted inappropriately normal at 112 mmol per 24 hours (normal range 25–125 mmol per 24 hours).
As laboratory evaluations showed no other obvious etiology of hypokalemia, it was felt the presenting electrolyte abnormalities were likely secondary to abiraterone administration without glucocorticoid, causing excess mineralocorticoid activity. The patient was started on prednisone 20 mg daily, with minimal improvement in potassium requirement (160 to 120 mEq daily). He was then started on eplerenone 25 mg daily, with reduction of daily potassium requirement to 80 mEq daily.
The patient experienced persistent bradycardia with heart rates in the 50 seconds despite normalization of serum potassium. Heart rhythms observed during hospitalization included Mobitz I, ectopic atrial beats, atrial flutter and fibrillation, intermittent sinus arrest, and persistent bifascicular block with right bundle branch block and left anterior fascicular block. The decision was made to proceed with implantation of permanent pacemaker prior to discharge. While placement of an implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) was discussed, it ultimately was judged to be not indicated as initial VT arrest was secondary to severe hypokalemia. Specifically, the hypokalemic trigger was felt to be reversible with changes to the patient’s medical regimen, making risk of recurrent VT unlikely.
Following correction of the patient’s hypokalemia, no further episodes of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia were appreciated. QT and QTc intervals on ECG prior to discharge improved to 466 milliseconds and 477 milliseconds, respectively, while being ventricular paced. Given his lack of anginal symptoms or ECG changes concerning for ischemia, as well as another likely etiology for his initial presentation, coronary evaluation was deferred.
Abiraterone was stopped, the patient was weaned off prednisone, and he was discharged on lisinopril, eplerenone, and potassium chloride 40 mEq twice daily. The potassium was decreased to 40 mEq once daily 2 weeks post discharge and stopped completely 4 weeks post discharge visit, at which time serum K was 4.9 mEq/L.