A 53-year-old Caucasian woman was diagnosed with scimitar syndrome a few years ago during routine chest radiography, showing the typical right-sided paracardial curvilinear projection, pathognomonic for the typical anomalous pulmonary venous drainage. The syndrome was subsequently confirmed on computed tomography (CT; Figure ). During the following years, symptoms of fatigue and dyspnoea intensified correlating to significant left-to-right shunting, as demonstrated by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). As a logical consequence, she underwent surgical repair by means of the long baffle technique in which a long intra-atrial tunnel is created with the right atrial wall as bottom and an artificial pericardial roof, connecting the origin of the scimitar vein to the left atrium [-]. Postoperatively, she improved significantly leading to discharge after 7 days. Unfortunately, 1 month later she presented at the emergency department with symptoms of abdominal bloating, belching and postprandial epigastric pain. Routine laboratory tests revealed mild inflammatory parameters and a discrete elevation of gamma-glutamyl transferase. A contrast-enhanced CT of her chest and abdomen showed a de novo hypertrophic left liver lobe and hypo-attenuation of her right liver lobe accompanied with a small amount of ascites in her pelvis. There was also a significant dilatation of her right hepatic vein. Close re-evaluation of the surgical region revealed an anomalous drainage of her right hepatic vein into the scimitar vein, instead of straight to the infradiaphragmatic vena cava in the usual presentation of the scimitar syndrome , therefore rerouting drainage of the right hepatic lobe to the left atrium. Unluckily, this impeded venous drainage of her right hepatic vein, and led to congestive hepatopathy or Budd–Chiari syndrome. The mechanism for this congestion is dual. First, the increased venous return to the left atrium resulted in an elevated pressure in the scimitar vein and left atrium, denying her right hepatic vein to drain. In addition, the surgical repair resulted in a 180-degree turnabout of the blood flow of the scimitar vein, as the pulmonary vein descends below the diaphragm, and is then routed upwards toward the left atrium, thus inducing a local diminished flow rate, enhancing venous congestion in her right liver lobe. Compensatory left lobe hypertrophy led to extrinsic compression of the stomach, which was partially responsible for her symptoms. There was no need for corrective surgery because she experienced no evidence of liver insufficiency or threatening portal hypertensive complications. As time went by, her left liver lobe, through hypertrophy, gradually took over the function of her right liver lobe which became progressively atrophic. A symptomatic medical treatment was established with dietary changes and gastroprokinetic drugs combined with a close follow up of the patient for more than a year.