A 34-year-old Taiwanese man was a known HBV carrier for about 10 years. Headache, lightheadedness, neck stiffness, and nausea and vomiting had developed 3 weeks before admission. One week after admission, left hemifacial numbness, double vision, easily choking when swallowing, frequent hiccup, and unsteady gait developed and progressed.
The patient had no cough, rhinorrhea, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dysuria, urinary frequency, convulsive movement, consciousness disturbance, or body weight loss. He sought Chinese traditional medical therapy and acupuncture, but his neurologic symptoms persisted, especially the easily choking when swallowing. Therefore, he presented to our emergency room.
Upon admission, the patient’s initial blood pressure was 126/76 mmHg and his temperature was 37.3 °C. His pulse rate was 68 beats/minute. A neurological examination revealed impaired lateral gaze of both eyes and mild deviation of the tongue to the left side. Cerebellar dysarthria, wide-based gait ataxia, and bilateral upper limb dysmetria were detected. The patient’s brain MRI showed swelling of the pons with extensive hyperintensity on T2-weighted images that extended to the midbrain and medulla. Punctate and curvilinear enhancement was observed after contrast dye injection . A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study disclosed pleocytosis (106 cells/μl) with lymphocyte predominance (lymphocytes/neutrophils 97%/9%). Oligoclonal bands were detected (total protein 79.9 mg/dl, normal 15–45 mg/dl; immunoglobulin G (IgG) 9.72 mg/dl, normal <3.4 mg/dl). Test results for herpes simplex virus DNA and cryptococcal antigen in the CSF were both negative. Serial autoimmune serum examination results, including antinuclear antibodies, anti-DNA, cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid factor, complement C3 and C4 nephritic factors, IgM, IgG, were all within normal limits, except for a slightly elevated IgA level (409 mg/dl, normal 70–400 mg/dl). The patient’s anti-hepatitis B e (anti-HBe) antibody test was positive. His total bilirubin was 0.56 mg/dl, and his aspartate aminotransferase (AST) concentration was 24 U/L. An elevated HBV DNA viral load (2250 IU/ml, normal <20 IU/mL) was detected.
Corticosteroid therapy was considered based on a tentative diagnosis of CLIPPERS. Entecavir 1 mg/day was given before a high-dose corticosteroid (1 g/day) after consultation with a gastroenterologist. A maintenance dose of 0.5 mg/day was started subsequently, followed by prednisolone 70 mg/day. The patient’s bilateral lateral gaze limitation, unsteady gait, dysarthria, and dysphagia improved promptly. The patient was discharged 3 weeks later with a good clinical response, and treatment was continued with gradual tapering of prednisolone to 30 mg/day over the course of 6 months. Six months later, nearly complete resolution of the brainstem lesion was seen on MRI scans . Normalization of the patient’s serum HBV DNA viral load (<20 IU/mL) and disappearance of his neurologic deficit also were noted.