A 22-year-old male presented to our emergency department with a complaint of persistent blunt abdominal pain in the left flank that first occurred 2 wk prior.
The patient stated that he vomited and had diarrhea a few days prior to the onset of pain. These symptoms were interpreted as gastroenteritis and resolved spontaneously. The patient denied a history of trauma or recent endoscopic procedures and was not taking anticoagulant medications. It is known that some patients, especially younger ones, do not mention abdominal trauma because they do not recognize it as a trauma or because they want to hide illicit or inappropriate behavior[,]. However, we ruled out these possibilities for this patient.
Chronic illnesses and bleeding disorders were absent. There was no history of trauma nor endoscopy procedures.
There was no family history of blood disorders, vascular diseases nor gastrointestinal diseases.
Physical examination revealed tenderness in the left flank and epigastric region but with no signs of peritoneal irritation. There was a palpable mass below the left costal arch. It was 10 cm in diameter, spheric, soft and mildly painful on palpation. There were no signs of any type of trauma such as bruises or excoriations. The vital parameters (blood pressure, respiration and pulse) were all within normal ranges. Digital rectal examination did not show any abnormalities.
Initial blood count showed slightly lower hemoglobin (123 g/L; normal range: 138-175 g/L) and hematocrit (0.367 L/L; normal range: 0.415-0.530 L/L). All other laboratory findings, including coagulation profile, were within normal ranges.
An abdominal ultrasound demonstrated a thickened and hypoechoic gastric wall. The radiologist determined the findings to be inconclusive but indicated a suspicion of an intramural hematoma. An abdominal contrast-enhanced multi-slice computed tomography examination confirmed a heterogenous intramural mass within the gastric wall, measuring approximately 15 cm × 11 cm × 9 cm . There were no signs of calcifications specific to malignant lesions nor gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST)-specific cystic masses. The described mass had the density of a hematoma.
Endoscopic evaluation was performed to assess the source of bleeding and to rule out any underlying pathology. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a large, submucosal mass occupying the greater curvature of the stomach . There were no signs of active bleeding, ulcers nor mucosal lesions. Neither endophytic growth nor lumen obstruction were present, providing additional support against the suspicion of GIST.