A 65-year-old healthy, non-smoking, male was referred to the plastic surgery department due to a growing mass on the scalp. The patient had first noticed the mass about 9 months earlier. He did not have any physical discomfort related to it but became worried because of the increasingly rapid growth. The patient did not report any symptoms of weight loss, fatigue or loss of appetite and had no history of previous malignancies.
Clinical examination revealed a 4 × 5 cm, erythematous tumor in the right occipital region . On palpation the tumor appeared pulsating, soft and non-adherent to the underlying bone. There were no palpable lymph nodes regionally. Differential diagnoses considered were other vascular tumors such as pyogenic granuloma, Kaposi sarcoma and angiosarcoma.
CT-angiography showed a richly vascularized, extracranial tumor with multiple large veins. The tumor was surgically excised under local anesthesia with a 5 mm margin and the defect reconstructed with a split skin graft.
Histopathological examination revealed a well-defined mass in the deep dermis and subcutis, partly enclosed in a fibrous pseudocapsule. The process was formed by alveolar, tubular and tubulocystic formations of cells with clear cytoplasm and central, round nuclei . Immunohistochemistry showed the lesion was positive for broad-spectrum cytokeratin, Vimentin and PAX8, and negative for S-100 and Leucocyte Common Antigen. The tumor was excised with radical margins and the morphology and immunophenotype were consistent with a metastasis from a clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
The patient was referred to the department of urology where a CT-scan and a PET-CT were obtained and revealed a 13 cm tumor in the left kidney, small lung metastases bilaterally and multiple suspicious mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient was discussed at a multidisciplinary team-conference and subsequently underwent a debulking laparoscopic nephrectomy, confirming a primary 10 cm clear cell renal cell carcinoma with vascular invasion , pT3a. No systemic treatment was initiated. Follow-up CT-scan three months postoperatively showed that one of the lung metastases had grown 3 mm, but otherwise no progression in the disease.