The patient was a 29-year-old Arabian woman with a known case of systemic lupus erythematosus, which had been diagnosed 5 years prior based on the criteria of the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR)/American College of Rheumatology (ACR). She was started on hydroxychloroquine at 200 mg orally once per day, and she had no comorbidities except for hypothyroidism.
The patient had not been followed up due to the COVID-19 pandemic, but in January 2023, she presented to the clinic with an incidental lab result showing a creatinine level of 4.3 mg/dL. Thus, a renal biopsy was planned, and she was diagnosed with class IV lupus nephritis. She received pulse methylprednisolone therapy at 500 mg intravenously for 3 days, which was then switched to a tapering dose of prednisolone. Induction therapy using MMF was initiated at 500 mg orally twice daily then titrated up weekly until she was discharged to home on 1.5 g orally twice per day, which is the maximum recommended dose of induction phase for lupus nephritis.
After 2 months, the patient presented to the emergency department with complaints of nausea, vomiting, and left-sided abdominal pain associated with diarrhea 5–6 times per day, which was watery but contained no blood or mucus. Her symptoms started at just 2 weeks after starting MMF therapy and had progressed over the last month. She denied having fever, weight loss, or night sweats. Upon physical examination, she was alert and oriented but in pain. The abdomen was tender, but there were no signs of peritonitis. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable apart from Cushingoid face. She was afebrile, and her blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation were within normal ranges. Her weight was 90 kg.
Upon admission, MMF was promptly discontinued due to the possibility that it might have led to an infection. The immediate care involved the delivery of intravenous fluids, a low-residue diet, analgesic medications like intravenous acetaminophen, and antispastic treatments. Routine blood tests performed at admission indicated leukopenia 3.800 × 106/L normal range (4–11 × 106/L), elevated creatinine 6.3 mg/dL normal range (07–1.3 mg/dL) while her baseline of creatinine was 2 mg/dL and GFR 60 ml/min, and noticeably increased inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 32 mg/dL normal range < 5 mg/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 40 mm/hour normal range < 20 mm/hour). The C3 and C4 complement levels were 0.6 g/L (0.8–1.6 g/L) and C4 0.18 g/L (0.20–0.65 g/L), respectively. Stool analysis indicated + 2 pus cells and a negative culture. Urine analysis indicated a protein level of + 1 with no red blood cell crystals or casts. An abdominal ultrasound was performed, but the result was unremarkable.
Later, computed tomography scan was performed, which did not reveal any other abnormalities and confirmed the ultrasound results. A colonoscopy showed erythematous patches with few erosions and rectal-sparing colitis. Multiple biopsies been taken . Infectious colitis, drug-induced colitis, newly diagnosed inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), gastro-intestinal involvement associated with systemic lupus erythematosus, and mesenteric ischemia were all considered in the differential diagnosis. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is the main concern among infectious causes of colitis in patients with impaired immune systems, and its possible endoscopic findings include diffuse erythema, ischemia, erosions, and ulcers.
The endoscopic appearance of drug-induced colitis can resemble that of ulcerative colitis, infectious colitis, and ischemic colitis. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are the most common cause of drug-induced colitis, but MMF was probably involved in the present case. Rectal sparing almost always occurs in MMF-induced colitis. Microscopically, the colonic mucosa displayed a mild architectural distortion, with ruptures of few dilated glands. Mild cryptitis is observed. However, no obvious apoptosis seen as been previously described in few cases of MMF induced colitis. There were no evidence of viral cytopathic changes, granuloma, dysplasia or malignancy ,
Following the cessation of MMF, the gastro-intestinal symptoms and the biomarkers for systemic inflammation gradually subsided and returned to base line levels after 14 days without further therapy, thus supporting the suspicion of drug-induced colitis. The patient was discharged 24 days after admission, MMF was discontinued, and the Euro-Lupus protocol was started with cyclophosphamide as induction therapy for lupus nephritis. The patient has been followed up closely and has shown improvement of active and chronic issues with 6 doses of cyclophosphamide completed. Azathioprine with a low dose of steroid was initiated. There have been no other gastro-intestinal manifestations.