We present the case of a 36-year-old female patient, without any significant personal or family history. The patient is not a smoker, and has no notion of drugs or allergies. The disease began 4 months ago with the onset of a scapular swelling and a hacking cough. The patient sought a private doctor; she had a thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan with a biopsy and was then referred to our oncology center for further treatment. The clinical examination showed a performance status of two, a firm fixed right scapular mass. The thoracic CT scan revealed a mediastinal-hilar tumor process of the right lower lobe measuring 98×60 mm, with a cutaneous parietal mass of the anterior arch of the fourth right rib. A right scapular mass biopsy under CT guidance revealed carcinomatous proliferation . The presence of TTF1 (thyroid transcription factor 1) +, Cytokeratin 7 +, and P40 - in poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas was confirmed by complementary immunohistochemistry .
Fluoro-deoxy-carboglucose positron emission tomography imaging was used as part of the extension work-up, identifying a mediastinal-pulmonary tumor process of the right lower lobe, active right parietal and scapular thoracic tissue lesions, the right diaphragmatic pillar, and a large right presacral latero-uterine hypermetabolic mass of primary or secondary origin .
A biopsy of the ovary and the endometrial lesions objectified an ovarian localization of adenocarcinoma and simple endometrial hyperplasia without atypical retrospectively.
Quantitative immunohistochemical evaluation of PD-L1 is positive with a percentage of 55%. epidermal growth factor receptor, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), and ROS1 mutations are negative.Tumor marker CA125 is at 152 IU/ml. Laboratory examinations show a hematological paraneoplastic syndrome withhyperleukocytosis at 42750/mm3 (predominance of neutrophils 36277/mm3), CRP at 112 mg/l, serum procalcitonin at 1.9 ng/ml, negative blood culture.
Following the multidisciplinary consultation meeting, it was decided to treat the patient with palliative chemotherapy using weekly carboplatin AUC 2 (area under the curve) 3 days 1, 8, 15, q4w in combination with weekly paclitaxel 80 mg/m² days 1, 8, 15 q4w as first-line therapy for three cycles, followed by an assessment. The patient did not receive immunotherapy based on pembrolizumab due to the unavailability of the drug at the oncology center, as well as the high cost and nonreimbursement of the treatment by the health insurance.
After three cycles of palliative chemotherapy (3 months), the evolution was characterized by an alteration of the general state, a disturbance of the C-reactive protein associated with a linear increase of the serum procalcitonin , a radiological progression of the mediastinal-pulmonary process with the appearance of mediastinal adenopathies and an increase of the right thoracic parietal mass, The patient received antibiotic therapy based on ceftriaxone 2 g for 15 days associated with Gentamycin 160 mg for 7 days, after which the patient was referred to the pneumology department for a bronchoalveolar lavage, which returned negative, with a cyto-bacteriological study showing no acid-fast bacilli.
The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary consultation meeting, the decision was to start the patient on a second line of chemotherapy based on Gemcitabine 1000 mg/m² 2 days 1, 8, q3w for three cycles then evaluation, The patient’s condition worsened with an increase in procalcitonin to 100 ng/ml with a CRP of 298 mg/l, the patient received 2 g of imipenem associated with amikacin 15 mg/kg for 7 days without improvement, the patient died of cardio respiratory arrest.