The patient was a 32-year-old female, mother of a 13-month-old boy who was directly breastfed since birth with complementary food added at 6 months of age. On January 20, 2020, the patient and her son had a family meal with relatives who returned to Yiwu from Wuhan for the Spring Festival. Two weeks later the patient had nasal congestion, and her son had a fever with a peak temperature of 38.4 °C, dry cough, and nasal congestion. Two days after the onset (February 2, 2020), tests for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid performed at the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, were positive in both the mother and the son, whereas the patient’s husband had a negative result. The results were confirmed by the Yiwu Center for Disease Control and Prevention. The patient suffered from postpartum depression, felt deeply anxious, and insisted on staying with her child. At the same time, the husband asked to accompany his wife and son due to concerns about the patient’s mental health. To respect the wish of the patient and her family, and after consultation with psychiatrists, the family was treated in the same negative-pressure isolation ward room.
On admission, the mother had nasal congestion, but no rhinorrhea, cough, sputum, fever, or fatigue. The physical examination revealed a body temperature of 36.4 °C, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, a pulse of 90 beats per minute, blood pressure of 102/74 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 98% while breathing ambient air. Lung auscultation indicated no abnormalities. The results of a routine blood tests (complete blood count, liver and renal function), C-reactive protein and chest Xray were normal. Respiratory virus antigen quadruplet test (Influenza A and B virus, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus) and the nucleic acid test for Influenza A and B virus were negative. The patient received atomized inhalation of recombinant human interferon α-2b 5 million International Unit (IU) in 2 mL sterilized water twice a day as the antiviral treatment from hospital day one to day 28 and traditional Chinese medicine as a supplemental therapy from hospital day four to day 28. She continued directly breastfeeding four to five times every day. The symptom of nasal congestion improved on hospital day 2, and white blood cell count declined to 2.7 × 109/L, while the lymphocyte count was 0.9 × 109/L. The nasopharyngeal swab specimens were positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid, but the serum was negative. On hospital day 3, the symptoms of nasal congestion disappeared, not to return. The mother’s body temperature and oxygen saturation without oxygen inhalation were monitored and remained within the normal range, and the patient was in stable condition. On hospital day 4, the plain chest CT scan indicated the presence of density-increased patchy consolidation and ground-glass shadow in the lower lobe of the right lung, and viral pneumonia was the likely diagnosis . Subsequently, on hospital day 10, white blood cell and lymphocyte counts returned to a normal level, and liver and renal function and myocardial enzyme tests continued to be normal. During the period of hospitalization, the mother’s serum, milk and feces specimens tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid, but the nasopharyngeal swabs were repeatedly positive. Chest CT scans on hospital days 10 and 23 showed the gradual clearing of the lungs. . On hospital days 9 and 25 after admission, the breastmilk tests yielded a positive result for SARS-CoV-2 IgG and negative for IgM. Similarly, the maternal serum was positive for SARS-CoV-2 IgG and negative for IgM on hospital days 16 and 20. On hospital day 28, the patient was discharged as three consecutive nasopharyngeal swabs were negative for SARS- CoV-2 nucleic acid. The major laboratory results of the patient are listed in Table .
The patient’s 13-month-old son had a fever, occasional dry cough, and nasal congestion at admission to the hospital. The physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37.6 °C, respiratory rate of 23 breaths per minute, a pulse of 105 beats per minute, blood pressure of 95/56 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 99% while breathing ambient air, and bodyweight of 10 kg. There was no abnormality in lung auscultation. During the hospitalization, antiviral treatment with atomized inhalation of recombinant human interferon α-2b 1.5 million International Unit (IU) in 2 mL sterilized water was performed twice a day for 8 days, from day 1 to day 8 of hospitalization. On the day of admission, the white blood cell count was low at 3.7 × 109/L, and lymphocyte count was 2 × 109/L. The infant’s serum tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 IgG and IgM. On hospital day 2, the temperature returned to the normal value, and remained normal thereafter, but occasional dry cough and runny nose continued. On hospital day 4, feces and nasopharyngeal swab specimens were positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid, and plain chest CT scan revealed ground-glass shadows in the lower lobe of the right lung . On hospital day 6, the child’s cough was essentially resolved, while occasional rhinorrhea persisted. At that time, the counts of white blood cells and lymphocytes were 6.9 × 109/L and 5.1 × 109/L, respectively. The child became free of symptoms on hospital day 7. On hospital day 14, the serum was negative for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid, but positive for SARS-CoV-2 IgG and IgM. Nasopharyngeal swabs and feces specimens repeatedly tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid. On hospital day 28, when the child tested negatively two consecutive times for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid in nasopharyngeal swabs and chest CT indicated that the ground-glass shadows in the lungs were essentially absorbed , the child was discharged. The major laboratory results of the child are listed in Table .