A 44-year-old man with a history of alcoholism and hypertension without regular medication control, presented with a sudden abdominal pain, dizziness, and loss of consciousness twice in 2 h. This patient was brought to our ED. At ED, the temperature was 36.5 °C, the blood pressure 84/42 mm Hg, the pulse 92 beats per minute, the respiratory rate 32 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 95% while he was breathing ambient air. The level of consciousness was E4V4M6 but lethargy. Physical examination revealed abdominal muscle guarding with whole area rebounding pain. The lab data at ED were white blood cell (WBC) 6360/ul; hemoglobulin (Hb) 5.9 gm/dl; prothrombin time (PT) 11.9 s; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 77 IU/l; alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 28 IU/l; total bilirubin (T/B) 1.0 mg/dl; and albumin (ALB) 2.8 gm/dl. Contrast enhanced abdominal CT presented hemoperitoneum without definite active contrast extravasation, irregular liver contour and one atypical hepatic lesion was noticed at S4 segment (Additional file : Figure S1). No contrast extravasation noted during emergent TAE. After emergent blood transfusion, adequate resuscitation, his condition became stable (temperature:36.7/puls:67/respiratory rate:16/blood pressure 173/108 mm Hg). Abdominal MRI revealed small liver nodules without typical hepatocellular carcinoma enhancing pattern at S2 and S4 segment of liver. The following angiography did not find the tumor and he was discharged.
Sixty-six days after last discharge, the patient was brought to our ED again due to aggravated abdominal pain and malaise for 2 days. Vital sign showed as follow: the temperature was 36.9 °C, the blood pressure 77/44 mm Hg, the pulse 95 beats per minute, the respiratory rate 19 breaths per minute, and the oxygen saturation 97% while he was breathing ambient air. The level of consciousness was E4V4M6 but obtundation. The blood test at ED showed WBC 9140/ul; Hb of 6.9 gm/dl; PT 10.9 s; AST 27 IU/l; ALT 20 IU/l; T/B 1.1 mg/dl; and ALB 2.3 gm/dl. Sonography showed massive ascites, and bloody contents were observed during abdominal paracentesis. Abdominal CT demonstrated a dilated tubular structure originated from falciform ligament with contrast enhancement. In non-contrast phase, there was an adjacent high-density content beside umbilical area and massive high-density contents were observed inside peritoneum . Those high-density contents were suspected to be blood clots. Exploratory laparotomy showed tortuous and engorged umbilical varix rupture with hemoperitoneum . Active oozing was noticed, and the ligation was successfully completed without complication (Additional file : Video S1). One week after the operation, the patient was discharged in a stable condition. No more spontaneous hemoperitoneum or hypovolemic shock was detected. The patient felt satisfied and received regular follow-up at our out-patient clinics due to the high recurrence rate of varicose vein rupture.