A 57-year-old Hispanic woman, a never smoker with a 20-year past medical history of well-controlled asthma, presented with fever, productive cough, and fatigue for 3 months. Her symptoms did not improve with three courses of antibiotics that included levofloxacin and doxycycline over these 3 months. She also reported symptoms of night sweats and a 10-lb weight loss during this period. She denied sick contacts and any significant environmental exposure history. She had a full-time job as an office worker. Two weeks prior to the presentation her activities of daily living (ADL) were limited to short-distance ambulation within her house. On the day of admission, our patient was not able to get out of bed due to shortness of breath. Her vital signs included a temperature of 38.9 °C, a blood pressure of 99/69 mmHg, a heart rate of 91 beats/min, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and an oxygen saturation of 94 % on 3 L nasal cannula. A physical examination revealed an ill-appearing woman. A pulmonary examination was notable for increased breath sounds and crackles at right middle chest and decreased breath sounds at the right lower chest.
Laboratory studies revealed leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 20.2 × 109/L with a markedly elevated 16 % eosinophils (3.3 × 109/L), 66 % neutrophils, and 12 % lymphocytes. Her hemoglobin level was 10.9 g/dL and platelet count was 392 × 109/L. Her blood biochemical profiles as well as serum immunoglobulins were all unremarkable. Infectious disease etiologies workup including serologies for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), coccidioides, blastomyces, cryptococcus, strongyloides, and toxocara were all negative. Her blood cultures, urine culture and sputum culture yielded no growth. Stool examinations for ova and parasites were negative. Vasculititides and connective tissue diseases workup including anti-nuclear antibody, anti-myeloperoxidase, anti-serine protease, anti-double-stranded DNA, rheumatoid factor, and cyclic citrullinated peptide were unremarkable. A chest X-ray showed multifocal consolidation predominantly in her right lung with a moderate-sized pleural effusion . A chest computed tomography scan confirmed the findings seen on chest X-ray . Echocardiographic findings were normal.
Our patient did not improve despite empirical antibiotic treatment with vancomycin and cefepime. She underwent thoracentesis of her right chest and bronchoscopy. Pleural fluid demonstrated a white blood cell count of 41,000 cells per mL with 38 % eosinophils, 32 % lymphocytes and 27 % neutrophils. Pleural fluid chemistries were consistent with a transudative profile with lactate dehydrogenous (LDH) of 70 U/L (serum LDH 184 U/L), protein 2.9 g/dL (serum protein 7 g/dL) and glucose 86 mg/dL. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid demonstrated a white blood cell count of 1985 cells per mL with 74 % eosinophils, 13 % lymphocytes and 7 % neutrophils. A transbronchial biopsy performed from the right lower lobe was suggestive of eosinophilic pneumonia with marked increased eosinophils without evidence of vasculitis, malignancy or fungal organisms . The diagnosis of chronic eosinophilic pneumonia was made based on peripheral eosinophilia, eosinophilic pleural effusion, high percentage of BAL eosinophils, the finding of eosinophilic pneumonia on transbronchial biopsy, and the absence of other causes of eosinophilia. Our patient was started on steroids (prednisone 1 mg/kg/day at 60 mg/day) and all antibiotics were discontinued given no convincing evidence of infection. She had an excellent rapid clinical improvement. She returned to work 2 weeks after hospital discharge. A chest X-ray obtained 1 month after steroid treatment showed complete resolution of the consolidations and pleural effusion. Peripheral eosinophilia was resolved. Steroids were tapered gradually over the course of 1 year. Our patient relapsed when the prednisone dose was decreased to 2.5 mg/day. She responded again when the prednisone dose was increased to 20 mg/day. She slowly tapered steroids over another year and she had been off of steroids for 2 months at the time of report. There was no adverse side effect from steroids over the course of treatment, except for 4 kg of weight gain.