A 44-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a 1-month history of appetite loss. A barium study and endoscopic examination revealed type 0–IIa + IIc gastric cancer with a pathologic diagnosis of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the lesser curvature of the gastric angle. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed no lymph node swelling or distant metastasis. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 0.6 ng/mL, and the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was 9.6 ng/mL. The preoperative diagnosis was cT1(M)cN0cM0cStageIA (Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma [The 13th Edition]). She underwent laparoscopic distal gastrectomy (D1 +) + Roux-en-Y reconstruction. Histopathologic examination of the surgical specimen revealed a superficial extension of moderately to poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and partial invasion of the serous membrane (T2:SS). Severe lymphatic invasion (ly3), moderate venous invasion (v2), and lymph node metastases in No. 1, 3, 7, and 9 lymph node stations (N2) were observed. The postoperative diagnosis was pT2(SS)pN2cM0pStageIIIA (Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma [The 13th Edition]) . The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with tegafur-uracil (400 mg/day) for 2 years. Blood tests, including tumor marker tests and a whole-body CT, were performed every 3 months and 6 months, respectively. Endoscopic examination was conducted at least annually. At postoperative year (POY) 5, a 19 × 12-mm lymph node was detected in the No. 16b1lat lymph node station (Japanese Classification of Gastric Carcinoma [The 13th Edition]) . However, positron emission tomography (PET) revealed no abnormal uptake, and the levels of tumor markers were within normal limits (CEA, 1.3 ng/mL; CA19-9, 20.3 U/mL) ; hence, the possibility of metastasis was considered to be low, and the patient was placed under observation. At POY 6, PET revealed no abnormal uptake. Annual whole-body CT showed no increase in tumor size, and the tumor marker expression levels remained within normal limits. At POY 10, a blood examination revealed that the CA19-9 level was elevated to 39.2 U/mL, although no increase in size was noted. At POY 12, the No. 16b1lat lymph node station was enlarged at 30 × 15 mm, the PET revealed abnormal uptake in the same lesion, and the CA19-9 level was further elevated to 72.6 U/mL . No other tumor was noted during esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, similar to the previous surgery specimen’s histology. The immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis showed that the HER2 score was negative; hence, a diagnosis of recurrence of gastric cancer was made. After two cycles of chemotherapy with tegafur–gimeracil–oteracil (120 mg/day) + oxaliplatin (100 mg/m2), the recurrent lesion decreased in size to 18 × 9 mm (RECIST: PR; partial response), and tumor marker levels also decreased (CEA: 1.1 ng/mL, CA19-9: 20.3 U/mL). Para-aortic nodal dissection (PAND) of No. 16b1lat and int stations was performed. In the dissected lymph nodes, proliferating adenocarcinoma cells demonstrating conjoined tubular structures were observed, a finding consistent with that of gastric cancer metastasis . Scar-like fibrosis and aggregation of foamy histiocytes were observed around the adenocarcinoma cells, indicating that a part of the tumor had undergone necrosis following chemotherapy. The immunohistochemical staining showed that CK7 was expressed in primary and recurrent specimens . Immunohistochemical staining for CK20 expression was negative in primary and recurrent specimens . The degree of staining for CD44 variant 9 (CD44v9) was attenuated in recurrent specimens compared with primary specimens . Based on these immunohistochemical findings and the exclusion of other malignancies on preoperative examination, gastric cancer recurrence was diagnosed. IHC test showed a HER2 score was negative in recurrent specimens. Postoperatively, the patient received chemotherapy with tegafur–gimeracil–oteracil (80 mg/day) for 1 year. At POY4, after PAND bone metastasis was confirmed in a needle biopsy specimen of bone metastasis, the pathological finding showed adenocarcinoma, and the IHC analysis showed a HER2 score of 3 + . The expression of CD44v9 was slightly positive. The patient is being treated with chemotherapy with FOLFOX + rastuzumab.