A 31-year-old Chinese man with underlying schizophrenia presented to hospital with aggressive behavior. He had a past history of schizophrenia which was diagnosed 2 years prior, but had no other past medical or surgical history. He was admitted to the psychiatric hospital and started on his regular medications, with an increase in the dose of olanzapine tablet from 5 to 10 mg daily. After 5 days in the ward, the patient was noted to have high fever (recorded at 38.9 °C), restlessness, confusion and increased muscle rigidity. He also had tachycardia, with a heart rate 120–130 beats per minute and tachypnoea, although his blood pressure was normotensive. Antipsychotic therapy was stopped in view of suspected NMS. The patient was immediately referred to the general hospital and admitted to the acute internal medical ward for further management. Further examination revealed a fully conscious man who demonstrated generalized rigidity, including all four extremities and neck. The initial laboratory test results for serum creatine kinase (CK) showed a markedly high level (256,020 U/L). His renal profile showed serum creatinine of 766.9 umol/L (baseline serum creatinine was within the normal range 2 months prior). Arterial blood gases showed compensated metabolic acidosis. Based on these clinical findings and the laboratory results, a diagnosis of NMS with acute kidney injury (AKI) was confirmed. Although the patient was given adequate intravenous fluid hydration with close monitoring of urine output, his renal function did not show improvement but continued to show a worsening trend. He was therefore started on urgent hemodialysis and was also started on oral bromocriptine 2.5 mg three times daily and oral lorazepam 1 mg three times daily upon admission. The psychiatric team was also consulted to co-manage the patient.
In the ward he required intermittent hemodialysis. Within a few days, his NMS symptoms improved and the CK level showed a reducing trend . His body temperature was back to normal after administration of the causative agent and intravenous fluid was stopped. Caution was taken, and the patient was not provided any antipsychotic drugs, including haloperidol, as these drugs might have worsened his condition. Oral lorazepam was tapered down to 0.5 mg three times daily as the patient did not show agitation. His muscle rigidity had markedly abated.
Close observation of the patient after the causative agent was stopped did not identify any psychotic symptoms. Following serial reviews by the psychiatric team in the hospital, the patient was continued on oral lorazepam at the same dose. His renal profile showed an improving trend with progressive increasing urine output. The patient was discharged well after 6 weeks of stay in the hospital. During outpatient review, it was noted that the patient had recovered from the AKI and did not require any further hemodialysis. He was kept on oral lorazepam during his outpatient review in the psychiatric clinic. He tolerated lorazepam well and did not have any symptoms, and he was able to independently carry out his daily activities and started working as a helper in a grocery shop.
A bedside ultrasound scan of the inferior vena cava was performed to help determine the fluid status of the patient before deciding on a hemodialysis regime. Close monitoring of his vital signs showed transient elevated blood pressure (highest being 155/95 mmHg) which was closely observed and did not require any antihypertensive medication.
The timeline of disease progression, treatment, and diagnosis of our patient is shown in Table .