A 55-year-old Japanese man who had returned from Nigeria was admitted to our hospital with a persistent high fever for 2 days. Blood smears revealed parasitemia with 0.05% of the erythrocytes containing ring forms . The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) detected P. falciparum. Upon presentation, he had dysarthria, expressive aphasia, urinary incontinence, and truncal ataxia; symptoms suggestive of cerebellar ataxia. He looked dazed, and he was unable to use appropriate words in conversation. Glasgow Coma Scale score was 13 (E4V4M5). He had no other signs or symptoms of severe malaria. Hematological investigations revealed a white blood cell count of 5.8 × 103 cells/μL, hemoglobin level of 18.8 g/dL, hematocrit level of 50.0%, and platelet count of 54 × 103/μL. The total bilirubin, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, lactate dehydrogenase, creatine kinase, serum creatinine, and C-reactive protein levels were elevated to 2.1 mg/dL, 407 IU/L, 175 IU/L, 1354 IU/L, 1593 IU/L, 1.54 mg/dL, and 6.56 mg/dL, respectively. A serum test revealed hyponatremia with a sodium level of 123 mEq/L. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain did not show any remarkable findings. He had no past medical history, nor had he received any vaccination in the past 5 years. On day 1 of the illness, the patient was started on oral artemether/lumefantrine treatment 3 times every 8 h at home. Since the medication was past the expiration date, we restarted another course of artemether/lumefantrine upon admission. On day 3 of the illness (day 2 of hospitalization), the parasites were undetectable by a blood test, though the neurological symptoms persisted even after the patient became afebrile on day 4. MRI of the brain demonstrated a high-signal lesion in the splenium of the corpus callosum on diffusion-weighted images with a decreased apparent diffusion coefficient . Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid upon recovery of the platelet count on day 10 revealed a slightly increased total cell count (6.3 cells/μL), and normal levels of protein and glucose. While renal function recovered by day 7, neurological symptoms gradually improved by day 12, and hyponatremia improved by day 21. Brain MRI on day 16 showed complete regression of the splenic lesion . The patient was diagnosed with mild encephalitis/encephalopathy with a reversible splenial lesion (MERS) due to malaria.