A 59-year-old man was referred to our hospital for treatment against M. fortuitum pulmonary infection. He underwent total gastrectomy for gastric cancer 15 years before the referral. After the surgery, he often had esophageal reflux symptoms and occasional episodes of vomiting. He was a current smoker of 25 pack-years and then quit smoking after referral. He did not use oily substances as constipation drugs or nose drops. Three years before the referral, he was diagnosed with M. fortuitum pulmonary infection according to sputum culture results, after which multiple antimicrobial therapy with rifampicin, ethambutol, clarithromycin, and levofloxacin was administered for a year. Eight months before the referral, treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and clarithromycin was reinstituted for the relapse; however, pulmonary involvement did not resolve.
At the time of referral to our hospital, he only had an intermittent cough and sputum. Chest radiograph showed consolidations in the right upper and left lower lung fields and nodular shadows in the middle bilaterally . Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed consolidations in the right upper and left lower lobes, nodular shadows in the right middle and lower lobes and left lingua , and dilated esophagus with food residue . Laboratory data including lymphocyte count, gamma globulin level, and anti-HIV antibody level were unremarkable. Although the sputum culture was positive for mycobacteria species identified as M. fortuitum, cultures from the transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) specimen were negative. Histological examination only showed nonspecific inflammation such as exudation of fibrin without granulomatous lesions. Treatment with rabeprazole for his esophageal reflux symptoms was administered, and he was followed up without treatment with antibiotics.
During the period following his referral, he occasionally had cough and sputum without fever and weight loss. Chest imaging showed migratory infiltrates . Although the sputum culture was continually positive for M. fortuitum, his symptoms did not worsen. At 14 months after his referral, we performed TBLB due to deterioration of consolidation in the right upper lung field . Cultures from the TBLB specimen were negative, and histological examination of the specimen revealed no remarkable findings for M. fortuitum infection. To investigate for evidence of NTM disease, CT-guided lung biopsy was also performed. The lung biopsy specimen revealed foamy macrophages and multinucleated giant cells, indicating lipoid pneumonia . The patient was continually monitored without any treatment because there was no evidence of NTM infection.
After the investigation, chest imaging continually showed migratory infiltrates . At 38 months after his referral, he developed aspiration pneumonia after an episode of vomiting . Even though his inflammatory response improved due to antibiotic treatment with meropenem followed by ampicillin sulbactum, the consolidations remained. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a large amount of food residue, which made it difficult to observe the esophageal mucosa. Treatment with camostat and mosapride improved his reflux symptoms partially, but the migratory infiltrates did not resolve. TBLB was performed again, and histological examination of the specimen revealed granulomatous lesions with necrosis , indicating NTM infection. Meanwhile, M. fortuitum was detected through microbiological analysis of cultures from sputum and intestinal fluid. Multiple antimicrobial therapy with imipenem/cilastatin (for 2 weeks), amikacin (for 3 months), clarithromycin, minocycline, and levofloxacin was then administered. The treatment improved his cough and sputum, as well as his pulmonary lesions. He continued the treatment for 5 years, during which the migratory infiltrates did not recur . The clinical course of the treatment is shown in Table .
The microbiological analysis was performed using random amplified polymorphic DNA polymerase chain reaction (RAPD-PCR) analysis, which revealed identical M. fortuitum strains in seven isolates from six sputum and one intestinal fluid specimens during the course of the disease . The drug sensitivity of these strains is shown in Table . There was no evidence of development of resistance during the course of the case.