A 66-year-old man was transferred to our hospital for multiple organ failure caused by severe pneumonia. He had pre-existing chronic heart failure (New York Heart Association class II), with 40% left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) caused by atrial fibrillation.
On examination, his vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale score, 15 (E4V5M6); blood pressure, 139/86 mmHg with 0.15 μg/kg/min norepinephrine infusion; heart rate, 192 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 24 breaths/min; body temperature, 38°C; and oxygen saturation, 92% with 10 L/min oxygen. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypoxia and metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia. Blood examinations revealed elevated inflammatory markers and impaired renal function . A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed diffuse left ventricular hypokinesis with 30% LVEF and no findings suggesting infective endocarditis. Computed tomography revealed consolidation of the lower left lung lobe. He was diagnosed with pneumonia, septic shock, acute kidney injury, and acute exacerbation of chronic heart failure.
After admission, antibiotics (meropenem, linezolid, clindamycin, and minomycin), hydrocortisone, vasopressors (norepinephrine and vasopressin), and landiolol were initiated. Continuous renal replacement therapy and mechanical ventilation therapy were also initiated. Before introducing ECMO, the ventilator was set to the airway pressure release mode (high airway pressure, 16 cm H2O; fraction of inspired oxygen, 0.6). Blood gas analysis showed pCO2 46.1 mmHg and pO2 116 mmHg. However, hyperlactatemia and tachycardia persisted, and purpura appeared over the limbs and trunk. The TTE findings on the second hospitalization day revealed refractory cardiac failure with 10% LVEF regardless of the improving oxygenation; thus, septic cardiomyopathy was suspected. His hemodynamics remained unstable; metabolic acidosis progressed despite intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) placement on day 2. Streptococcus pneumoniae was found in the blood and sputum cultures. Because of his intractable shock, V-A ECMO was implemented as a bridging therapy on day 3. The pre-ECMO implantation Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score was 15 points, and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II score was 26 points.
Once V-A ECMO was initiated, the patient gradually recovered from the infection and circulatory failure and showed decreased serum lactate levels and cardiac index and LVEF recovery. He was successfully weaned from V-A ECMO on day 12 and IABP on day 13 . Abscessed left lower pulmonary lobe resection was carried out on day 16. He was taken off mechanical ventilation and continuous renal replacement therapy on day 19 and discharged home in an ambulatory condition on day 107. The TTE at discharge showed that his cardiac function had returned to baseline.