An 11-year-old female child presented with the chief complaint of large swelling over her right iliac region which has progressively increased over a period of 4 months . She also complained of pain over her right hip region, which was dull aching, non-radiating, continuous, increased on walking, and associated with a limp. Patient walked with an antalgic gait and pointed out numbness over her right thigh which radiated along the medial aspect of thigh. There was no history of fever, any chronic illness or swellings in other body regions. Physical examination showed an approximately 16 cm × 10 cm mass over her right iliac region, which was non-movable with ill-defined margins. The swelling was warm, tender on deep palpation, and crepitations were felt over the most prominent part. Movements and power of right hip were normal except for pain during wide abduction. The neurovascular examination of right lower limb revealed hypoesthesia along medial aspect of right thigh. The blood investigations - hemogram, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver and renal function tests, fasting blood sugar levels, and coagulation profile were normal. Radiologically, there was an expansile cystic lesion involving the entire iliac bone from the crest to the superior border of the acetabulum with multiple septations . Magnetic resonance image (MRI) abdomen demonstrated the presence of a 14 cm × 10 cm × 8 cm large, well defined lesion, with internal septations forming cysts containing fluid levels . Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large honeycomb type lesion of the right iliac bone extending up to the superior margin of the acetabulum, with thinned shell of cortex peripherally indicative of an expansile bone cyst . The fine needle aspiration cytology confirmed the lesion to be an aneurysmal bone cyst. The lesion was approached using a modified Smith Peterson approach. At surgery, a psuedocapsulated lesion was observed in the right iliac bone extending from the superior margin of the acetabulum to sacroiliac joint posteriorly involving almost whole of crest of ilium . The mass was noticed to produce pressure effect over the emerging femoral nerve. It was highly vascular lesion with multiple blood filled cavities. Excision curettage of the tumor was performed in view of extension to the acetabular roof. In this region, the lesion was intralesionally curetted (debulked) preserving hip stability . After achieving hemostasis, the exposed hip joint and raw posterior border of the iliac bone was covered with abductor muscles. Histopathological examination of the excised mass reconfirmed the diagnosis of aneurysmal bone cyst . Postoperatively, she was advised complete bed rest for 4 weeks in view of the involvement of the superior margin of the acetabulum. Hip range of motion and strengthening exercises were started on the second postoperative day. By 5th week, ambulation was initiated with crutch support. Four weeks later, the crutches were discarded and patient was encouraged to walk independently. At 18 months follow up, the child is an independent walker, able to squat and sit cross legged, and had full range of movements in the hip joint . Her abductor group has a power of 4/5 with no other neurological deficits. X-rays and enhanced CT repeated at this time showed good remodeling of the acetabulum and no signs of recurrence of the lesion .