A 42-year-old woman presented to our department with slight visual deterioration . Intracranial computed tomography (CT) showed a high-attenuated mass, including granular-like dots in the sellar and suprasellar regions, accompanied by an expansion of the sella turcica [ and ]. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed well-circumscribed, globular masses. The solid part was isointense, but the inside part of the mass was low intensity on T1-weighted imaging (WI) and T2-WI, and homogeneously enhanced to a moderate degree with gadolinium (Gd). The tumor extended into the suprasellar region, compressing the optic chiasm. The Gd-enhanced anterior pituitary gland was displaced supra-anteriorly, and high intensity on T1-WI suggested that the posterior pituitary appeared [-]. Measurements of levels of hormones related to the anterior pituitary showed mild hyperprolactinemia (prolactin: 34.6 ng/ml; normal, <32.7 ng/ml). In terms of posterior pituitary function, there was not recognized diabetes insipidus. Preoperative differential diagnoses included pituitary adenoma, germ-cell tumor, sellar meningioma, pituicytoma, and glioma arising from the posterior pituitary. To confirm the histological diagnosis, ETSS was performed. Intraoperative findings demonstrated that this tumor was solid and extremely firm, including myriad yellowish granules without bleeding [ and ]. The tumor originated from the posterior pituitary gland and had a clear margin between it and the anterior pituitary gland . Subtotal resection was achieved to reduce compression of the optic nerve . Pathological examination with hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated round or polygonal cells with abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. Most nuclei were round to oval, with no evidence of cellular atypia or mitotic figures. In addition, perivascular lymphocytic aggregates were recognized [ and ]. Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining of cytoplasmic granules was resistant to diastase digestion [ and ]. Immunohistochemical studies were performed with antibodies for S-100, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), Ki-67, and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). Tumor cells were immunoreactive for S-100 protein, but negative for GFAP [ and ]. The Ki-67 (MIB-1) proliferation-related labeling index was low, at 2.0% . In addition, almost all tumor cells appeared strongly positive for TTF-1 . Taking all these results into account, the final diagnosis was GCT of the sellar region, belonging to tumors of the posterior pituitary in accordance with the WHO classification of central nervous system (CNS) tumors (2016). The patient remained clinically stable with a normal visual field, the residual tumor showed no enlargement at the next 1-year follow-up visit , and the hormonal dysfunction (hyperprolactinemia) improved to near-normal levels (prolactin: 15.5 ng/ml).