A 25-year-old Thai woman with HIV infection and Grave’s disease was referred to Siriraj Hospital (Bangkok, Thailand) in February 2017 due to symptoms that included high-grade fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, and multiple episodes of mucousy diarrhea for 3 days. Our hospital is Thailand’s largest university-based national tertiary referral center.
She was diagnosed with HIV infection in 2004, and she maintained a virologically suppressed status via the use of tenofovir, emtricitabine, atazanavir, and boosted ritonavir with an absolute CD4+ count of 419 cells/mm3, and a CD4+ percentage of 31% at 5 months prior to this admission. Her Grave’s disease was diagnosed in 2005, it was successfully treated with radioactive iodine therapy, and it was maintained with oral thyroxine.
This patient was initially admitted to a private hospital where she presented with a hypotensive blood pressure of 65/27 mmHg and severe metabolic acidosis. She was diagnosed with severe gastroenteritis and septic shock, and she was empirically treated with ceftriaxone and metronidazole. However, during that admission, she developed multiorgan failure, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute kidney injury, and profound hypotension, even after receiving a high dose of both vasopressor and hydrocortisone. She was then intubated and antibiotic therapy was changed to meropenem. Before referral to our center on day 3 of her private hospital admission, multiple hemorrhagic blebs were observed on all extremities, and Streptococcus pyogenes was isolated from blood cultures. In contrast, conventional stool culture reported no growth.
Upon her arrival at Siriraj Hospital with a diagnosis of S. pyogenes toxic shock syndrome and multiorgan failure, she received supportive care with continuous renal replacement therapy. On day 5, her condition improved and vasopressor was discontinued. Antibiotic therapy was de-escalated from meropenem to penicillin and clindamycin. However, she still had persistent fever, bloody diarrhea, and hemorrhagic blebs at both hands. Necrotizing fasciitis at the left hand was suspected, but the patient and family refused amputation.
On day 10, she developed feeding intolerance with continued bloody diarrhea, distended abdomen with ascites, hypoactive bowel sounds, and high-grade fever with septic shock. The abdominal fluid analysis was consistent with secondary bacterial peritonitis. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed pneumoperitoneum with a perforation at the jejunum and splenic flexure. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was then performed, which revealed multiple ulcerative lesions and multiple necrotic foci at the jejunum and ileum. Segmental resection of the small bowel with abdominal toilet and temporary closure was performed. A tissue specimen from the resected bowel was sent for histopathologic analysis. On day 11, a second-look laparotomy was performed and new multiple small bowel necrotic foci were observed in addition to one perforation at the proximal ileum. In response, total small bowel resection and side-to-side jejunoileal anastomosis were performed.
Since initial ascitic fluid culture grew pan-drug resistant Acinetobacter baumannii, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE), carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae (CRE), and unspecified yeast species, her antimicrobial therapy was changed to piperacillin/tazobactam and fosfomycin, linezolid, colistin, and fluconazole.
Histopathology of the small bowel revealed acute suppurative and necrotizing granulomatous inflammation, transmural necrosis, and vascular invasion with numerous broad, irregular, branching non-septate hyphae, which is consistent with Mucorales fungi. Moreover, peritoneal fluid fungal cultures grew a grayish cottony colony on Sabouraud dextrose agar following 3 days of incubation at 25 °C, and demonstrated large non-septate hyphae and spherical sporangia containing ovoidal sporangiospores. To exclude other possible co-infection causing bowel necrosis, immunohistochemical stain for cytomegalovirus and an acid-fast stain for Mycobacterium were additionally performed on the bowel tissue biopsies, and all tests showed negative results. A complete ITS1–5.8S-ITS2 region DNA sequence analysis of the fungus showed 100% homology with Rhizopus microsporus strains in GenBank, including standard strains ATCC 22959 and ATCC 200758 (GenBank accession numbers KU729104 and AY803934). However, a variety level could not be determined due to a limitation of the ITS method .
Finally, the definite diagnosis of GI mucormycosis was made based on the evidence of intestinal tissue invasion by a non-septate fungus, which was later identified as Rhizopus microsporus by fungal culture and ITS sequence analysis. The patient was then treated as GI mucormycosis with liposomal amphotericin B at a dosage of 300 mg per day (5 mg/kg/day). After 12 days of amphotericin B treatment (day 33 of her admission), she developed recurrent massive upper GI bleeding from Dieulafoy’s lesion and she succumbed to her disease.