A 77-year-old man has a history with blood in the stool for 4 months without clinical examination. He presented with a sudden onset of severe, sharp abdominal pain. He described generalized pain and fever 10 h before hospitalization. There was no nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Physical examination revealed tenderness at the hypogastric region, and rectal examination detected a large anorectal polyp. The white blood cell count was 161 G/l with 92% neutrophil. An erect abdominal X-ray revealed a peritoneal free air underneath the left diaphragm. Abdominal ultrasound (US) exposed minimal free fluid in the pelvic region. The whole abdominal CT showed free air and fluid in the peritoneal cavity. Therefore, laparoscopic surgery was indicated to resolve that. The fishbone that was found beside the penetrated sigmoid wall would be removed later. He was sutured the perforated hole in the sigmoid colon and performed ileostomy .
The patient’s symptoms were improved after 5 days. Due to the age of patient and to his history of rectal bleeding, a colorectal endoscopy was indicated and revealed the large pigmented polyp in the transitional zone of the anorectal area and some small polyps in the colon. These small polyps were removed at the moment by colonoscopy. The large pigmented polyp was removed subsequently by local excision. Histopathology showed features of malignant melanoma . And Immunohistochemical results determined the diagnosis of colorectal mucosa melanoma with Protein S-100, HMB45, vimentin-positive; AE1/3, CD68, and P53 negative .
He was supported and improved his health with oral and vein nutrition therapy. His overall condition was checked, and the malignancy-risk was calculated with chest, abdominal, pelvis CT scan. These examinations couldn’t find metastasis lesions. After the total body skin, ocular-retina, and nasopharynx examination, two pigmented skin lesions were detected and removed later. Histopathological results were benign pigmented tumors .
Two weeks after the local excision of the polyp, a 2nd colorectal endoscopy was done and showed a pigmented image spreading out from the resected polyp’s root that had been removed before. A pelvis MRI and anorectal endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) evaluated this remain lesion was limited in mucosa and submucosa, his anal canal staging was cT1N0. The patient was performed radical resection with abdominoperineal excision (APR) and total mesorectal excision (TME) by laparoscopic surgery + closure of loop ileostomy.