A 4-year-old male presented in our outpatient clinic with a long arm splint at the day after his fall. At first, his parents had taken him to another hospital where he has given the initial treatment as closed reduction and long arm splint. In our examination, capillary refill was good, there was no sign of compartment syndrome. The family was informed that the child might have the diagnosis of Monteggia fracture but we could not reach the radiographs. We took true radiographs of both arms to look for any other pathology involving elbow and wrist joints. Both forearm bones were fractured and radial head was still dislocated laterally, despite the reduction done in the first attended clinic. In Monteggia fracture dislocation, lateral dislocation of radial head is typically seen with ulna fracture in Bado type 3 while both bone forearm fracture normally exists with anterior displacement of radial head in Bado type 4 . The Bado classification system is primarily based on the direction of radial head dislocation. Therefore, we considered it as a Monteggia type III equivalent lesion and planned to do closed reduction with or without internal fixation under general anesthesia.
In operation, we tried closed reduction at first. Displacement of both fractures has decreased but the radial head could not been relocated. Hence, we decided to do internal fixation. We implanted an intramedullary K-wire into the radius from it’s distal tip. Intraoperative fluoroscopy images proved the radial head reduction and ulna fracture to be stable. Then, we applied a long arm splint and end the operation. Post-operative X-rays showed successful reduction of both bone fractures along with the radial head .
His splint has removed 3 weeks after operation and active motion was allowed thereafter. Post-operative radiographs were obtained in 2nd week, 4th week, and 2nd month. No displacement has been noticed in follow-ups. In the 8th week of operation, intramedullary K-wire was removed intraoperatively . His elbow and wrist movements showed no restrictions. There were no sensory or motor deficits.
We discharged the patient on the day after surgery. We followed him for 12 weeks. At the 8th week, intramedullary K-wire has been removed. The examination on 12th week shows no restriction in elbow movements .