A 35-year-old male came to the emergency with alleged history of roadside accident. The patient was hit from behind from a speeding vehicle and with the impact patient was thrown onto the road with both outstretched hands planted firmly on the ground (to break the impact of fall) with varus stress on both elbows . This usually produces ulna fracture with tension failure at radial side first and lateral radial head dislocation. There were no external wounds or any distal neurovascular deficit in both upper limbs. There was no history of loss of consciousness or any history of seizures or vomiting and the patient was brought to the emergency department. Here, the patient underwent radiographic imaging of both forearms with elbow with wrist anteroposterior and lateral views. Bilateral above elbow slabs given. X-rays showed proximal 1/3rd ulnar shafts with lateral radial head dislocation ( and ), which accounts for Bado classification typeIII Monteggia fracture bilaterally, which almost exclusively occurs in children, but a rare occurrence in adults as in this case report . Workup for surgery was done and was taken to the OR, where the patient was placed in a supine position, skin preparation and draping was performed for both upper limbs. A posterior skin incision was first performed on the right forearm. An anatomical reduction was achieved, and open reduction and internal fixation of the bilateral ulna were done with posterior anatomical plates and closed repositioning of radial head was done bilaterally. Fluoroscopy was used to confirm appropriate articular reduction, position of the devices, and ulnohumeral joint reduction. The elbow appeared stable through full range of motion and wound closed in layers and suction drain out bilaterally. Postoperatively, bilateral above-elbow pop slabs were given. Post-operative X-rays were performed (, , , ). Drains were removed after 48 h; at that time, the patient started passive-assisted exercises and active motion and pop slabs reapplied. Alternate day dressings were done, and skin sutures removed on 21st post-operative day along with the slabs. The patient was advised physiotherapy. X-rays were performed at 1 month of follow-up and then again at 5 months of follow-up along with clinical pictures after 5 months of follow-up (, , , , , ).