A 24-year-old healthy male was referred under the suspicion of an inguinal hernia. He was seen at our emergency department with a palpable mass in the lower right abdominal quadrant, which he first noticed 5 days earlier. He had no abdominal pain or symptoms of intestinal obstruction. During physical examination, a non-tender mass was felt which did not increase with the Valsalva maneuver. Sonography revealed a mass of 10.4 × 6.6 cm2. A computed tomography was done for further analysis, and showed an intra-abdominal located pear-shaped mass of 9.5 × 7.1 × 9.1 cm3 along the right ureter and surrounded by small intestines, without invasion of abdominal structures . It further revealed a congenital malrotation of the small intestine. The differential diagnosis included sarcoma, lymphoma and DTF. A sonography-guided biopsy was performed, and pathological examination confirmed DTF with positive beta-catenin nuclear enhancement. Additional analysis were negative for hormonal receptors. Family history, as well as colonoscopy, were negative for colon polyps. The patient was therefore diagnosed with a sporadic form of DTF. A watchful waiting approach was initiated, as the tumor was asymptomatic and surgery would probably imply significant intestinal resection.
Sonography after three months showed a reduction in size to 9.4 × 5.4 cm2. On request of the patient, who was anxious of having a tumor which was treated conservatively, a second opinion was performed at an University Medical Center. They acknowledged the conservative approach and advised follow up with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 1 year after diagnosis. This MRI showed regression of the tumor with a small residue of 2.2 × 1.2 × 1.9 cm2 along the right ureter and a minimal hydronephrosis of the right kidney without loss of renal function. A second MRI 6 months later and a third MRI 1 year later showed persisted regression without hydronephrosis. Both scans showed no other masses. The patient did not develop any symptoms during follow up.