In 2016, a unpalpable mass was discovered in a 43-year-old woman on the examination of ultrasound. Excisional biopsy revealed that it was a ductal carcinoma in situ of breast. Modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer was then performed for the patient in GUANGDONG GENERAL HOSPITAL in May 7th, 2016. The postoperative pathological diagnosis was high-grade ductal carcinoma in situ with microinvasion (the largest diameter of invasive region < 0.1 cm), without any lymph nodes involvement. The DICS presented both positive for the estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), positive for human epidermal factor receptor 2 (HER2), with a 30% expression of Ki-67. The grade of breast cancer for the patient was characterized as pT1micN0M0.
Endocrine therapy and Target therapy were administered for the patient after surgery. Exemestane was consumed 25 mg/day first, but it was replaced by letrozole on January 15th, 2018 due to the shortage of exemestane in Chinese pharmacy. Lapatinib was given 1000 mg/day from June 2016 to June 2017 since a 50% reduction in left ventricular ejection fraction indicting that Herceptin was not suitable on this occasion. Zoledronic acid was used to protect the bones and Leuprorelin was used to suppressed the ovarian function during the same period. On April 12th, 2018, an examination of Computed Tomography (CT) on bones was conducted under the patient’s complaint of convulsions and pain on the legs, the sign of multiple bone metastases were found by the result of CT. Besides, nodes at right abdominal wall and right paracolic sulci region were also under the suspicion of metastases through a further examination by positron emission tomography (PET) . Multiple metastases were confirmed by pathological examination after biopsy in the left ilium under CT’s guidance and in the sigmoid colon through colonoscopy .
The duration of disease-free survival of the patient was 1 year and 11 months. After the detection of multiple distant metastases, fulvestrant, anastrozole, Leuprorelin and Zoledronic acid were used at the same time to prevent the prognosis of metastatic breast cancer and the progression is stable now.