A 66-year-old man with a history of hypertension and maxillary cancer surgery with epidermization stumbled on a stone step, fell and landed on his lower abdomen. He had drunk approximately 1800 mL of sake and was heavily intoxicated. He did not feel pain at that time. He was aware of abdominal pain on the following day, throughout which he did not void any urine. His appetite was poor and he stayed in bed all day. Two days later, he presented at a urology clinic. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed ascites and a mass in the urinary bladder cavity. Cystoscopy confirmed coagulations inside the urinary bladder, injury to the bladder wall and extrinsic fat. He was referred to our hospital with suspected urinary bladder perforation. Upon arrival, he was fully conscious with a pulse of 88 bpm, blood pressure 168/95 mmHg and a temperature of 36.8°C. A physical examination revealed abdominal tenderness and distension without rebound pain. Laboratory findings were: leukocytes 11 600/mm3, hemoglobin 16.2 g/dL, hematocrit 44.7%, platelet count 277 000/mm3, serum creatinine 4.90 mg/dL, BUN 53 mg/dL, eGFR 10 mL/min/1.73 m2, potassium 4.2 mEq/L and C-reaction protein 8.29 mg/dL. Contrast-enhanced CT of his abdomen and pelvis identified damage to the urinary bladder dome, along with free intraperitoneal air and fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity . Retrograde cystography showed extravasation of the contrast material into the peritoneal cavity . These findings indicated a diagnosis of intraperitoneal perforation of the urinary bladder due to blunt trauma. Simultaneous perforation of the digestive tract was not ruled out at that time. We also considered that the high serum creatinine value was due to urine absorption through the peritoneum. We decided to proceed with exploratory laparotomy, which revealed a large volume of bloody fluid in the peritoneal cavity and a perforated tear of 20 mm at the dome of the urinary bladder . No other intraperitoneal injury could explain the free air and no other obvious feature such as a tumor, tuberculous foci or an inflammatory mass was found at the injured site. The damaged urinary bladder was intraperitoneally repaired in a two-layer fashion using absorbable 3-0 Vicryl sutures (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ, USA). The perforated peritoneum was also closed with interrupted 3-0 Vicryl sutures. The bladder could be filled with saline to its maximum capacity without leakage. Pseudo-renal failure status quickly improved. Laboratory findings were: serum creatinine 1.12 mg/dL, BUN 21 mg/dL, eGFR 51 mL/min/1.73 m2 on the first postoperative day. Postoperative cystography revealed complete recovery and the patient was discharged 14 days after surgery.