A 48-year-old female consulted our general surgery clinic due to a red macule in her right axilla; the macule had gradually enlarged from 1 cm × 1 cm to 4 cm × 3 cm in 4 years. The lesion repeatedly ulcerated and healed without itching or pain. The patient had not previously sought clinical treatment for the lesion. During its progression, she did not notice any breast masses, nipple discharge or skin changes in the nipple areola or anogenital area. She also denied having any other systemic symptoms or history of malignancy. Her previous history included the presence of a uterine fibroid for 10 years and a hysteroscopic endometrial polypectomy performed 1 year prior. Clinically, a well-demarcated 4 cm × 3 cm erythematous plaque was observed in the right axilla. A similar lesion measuring 0.5 cm × 0.3 cm was found 3.5 cm away from the primary plaque. Axillary nodes were not palpable on either side. Breast examination was unremarkable.
A biopsy of the large axillary plaque was performed, and Paget disease was diagnosed, characterized by the presence of Paget cells—large round cells with abundant pale or granular/dusty cytoplasm, pleomorphic vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Immunohistochemistry showed that Paget cells were diffusely positive for P63, CK7, and CK19 and negative for S-100.
We performed a local extended excision of both lesions with negative margins by frozen section . The final pathology results revealed that the two plaques were both Paget disease. Paget cells were arranged in small clusters and occupied the whole thickness of the overlying epidermis measured as carcinoma in situ, which was hyperkeratotic. There was tumor extension into the epithelium of the skin, consistent with a pattern of pagetoid spread, with focal dermal invasion . Supplemental immunohistochemistry showed weakly positive staining for gross cycstic disease fluid protein 15(GCDFP15), diffuse positive staining for Muc-1 and negative staining for CK20 .
The patient is currently at 20 months of follow-up and has shown no signs of recurrence.