A 74-year-old male patient, without previous medical history, presented with headaches, fatigue, low-grade fever, disorientation, and difficulty conceiving distance. Neurological examination revealed a right-sided homonymous hemianopsia. During observation, body temperature fluctuated between 36.5 and 38°C. Oxygen saturation was 95%. Arterial blood samples showed a PaO2 of 67.9 mmHg, PaCO2 of 31.4 mmHg, and HCO3- of 22.1 mmol/L. Further, blood examination showed a slight raise in CRP (10.9 mg/L) but no leukocytosis. CT of the brain revealed a cystic lesion in the left occipital lobe with surrounding brain edema. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed this lesion, with central diffusion restriction suggestive for brain abscess .
A contrast-enhanced CT of the chest, to exclude COVID-19 pneumonia, showed a solitary PAVM of the inferior lobe of the left lung . Routine workup for the source of the abscess showed no signs of endocarditis, (paranasal) sinusitis, mastoiditis, or dental problems. Although transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) could not visualize an ASD, there was an atrial right to left shunt suggestive of the presence of a pulmonary AV shunt.
Initial treatment consisted of stereotactic burr hole aspiration of 13 ml of purulent material and subsequent IV antibiotic therapy, consisting of ceftriaxone (2 g 2/d) and metronidazole (1.5 g 1/d). The antibiogram showed Streptococcus anginosus and Fusobacterium for which IV penicillin (4 million units 6/d) and metronidazole (1.5 g 1/d) were administered as definitive treatment. Despite a favorable biochemical evolution, the lesion progressively enlarged on MRI scan . Therefore, a resection of the abscess was performed 17 days after initial presentation. The remaining postoperative period was uneventful. To prevent recurrence of the abscess, the PAVM was embolized using an endovascular plug . After 4 weeks of IV therapy, another 2 weeks of oral antibiotic therapy were prescribed (Clamoxyl 1 g 3/d and metronidazole 500 mg 3/d) Although hemianopsia persisted, subsequent imaging and laboratory testing showed a positive evolution .