A 47-year-old woman was admitted to a local hospital because of memory disturbance. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a giant pituitary adenoma; therefore, she was referred to our hospital for more extensive diagnosis and specialized treatment. At the time of admission, mild cognitive deficit was revealed through a psychometric test: the scores of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Revised Hasegawa Dementia Scale (HDS-R) were 21/30 and 18/30, respectively. Her visual acuity was 1.0 (right) and 1.0 (left), and Goldmann perimetry testing revealed bitemporal hemianopia. In addition, bilateral papilledema was detected. A blood test showed hyperprolactinemia (PRL 386 ng/ml, normal range 4.1–28.9) and hypothyroidism (free T4 0.66 ng/ml, normal range 0.9–1.7; free T3 2.0 ng/ml, normal range 2.3–4.0), but no abnormality otherwise. MRI revealed an intrasellar and suprasellar contrast-enhanced mass lesion (maximum diameter of 55 mm) extending into the third ventricle causing the obstructive hydrocephalus [ and ]. Because of the presenting bilateral papilledema, an Ommaya reservoir was urgently placed to relieve the obstructive hydrocephalus, and subsequent radical tumor resection was planned. While waiting for the radical tumor resection, we tried cabergoline therapy, intending to decrease the tumor mass because the patient had hyperprolactinemia. However, the size of the tumor did not change.
Regarding the surgical strategy, we expected that most of the tumor could be removed by EES; however, we were afraid of the risk of postoperative hemorrhage from the residual tumor due to the marked tumor extension into the third ventricle. Therefore, we planned combined simultaneous EES and transventricular surgery so that we could resect or at least assist resection from above the uppermost part of the tumor. For the transventricular surgery, we selected the transcortical route because of the presence of ventriculomegaly, and we additionally used a port retractor system, the ViewSite Brain Access System (Vycor Medical Inc., FL, USA), to minimize the surgical trajectory.
The operation was started from above and below at the same time. The operative setting is shown in . The patient was in the supine position. The head was elevated approximately 10 degrees, slightly tilted to the left, and slightly rotated to the right.