A. K., a 48 y.o. male presented by himself to the emergency department with a history of macroscopic hematuria and lower back pain evolving for 2 months. The patient was a chronic smoker with a history of 20 pack-years. He reported an estimated weight loss of 10 kg in 6 months and denied any history of trauma, previous surgery, urolithiasis or past illnesses. He was pale, eupneic, afebrile with a tachycardia at 90 bpm. No other evidence was revealed on the physical examination. A blood sample was taken and the blood count showed an hypochromic microcytic anaemia with an heamoglobin level at 8,7 g/dL. The serum renal tests were at normal values (creatinimea: 8.8 mg/L; Urea: 0.42 g/L).
The patient was hospitalized and a contrasted CT-Urogram was requested as an investigation for the heamaturia. A massive right retrorenal collection was found with a mixed areas of fluid and blood densities. The renal pelvis was dilated with a lack of renal excretion at the late phase. In parallel, at the parenchymal phase, we noted a slight contrast enhancing lesion in the lumbar ureter, measuring 11 × 8 × 10 mm.
An MR-Urogram was performed for a further characterization. The signal on the retrorenal collection was both liquid and hemorrhagic . The renal pelvis was dilated with a hemorrhagic content. Indeed, the ureteral lesion was evident as a high signal on T2W with a diffusion restriction and enhancement on Gadolinium based sequences.
The patient benefited from a flexible ureteroscopic examination confirming the ureteral lesion and guiding biopsies. Herein, the pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of a papillary urothelial carcinoma, grade 2.
We discussed the management options for this patient, while no evidence of lymph node enlargement or metastatic lesions were noted on previous imaging. The patient elected to undergo a laparoscopic radical nephroureterectomy with a bladder cuff excision. He was operated by our team, 3 weeks after his first presentation. With the final pathological evaluation, the disease was staged pT2N0M0.
As an adjuvent therapy, a 21-day cycles of cisplatin and gemcitabin based chemotherapy were managed after three months from the surgical procedure. The patient had no further hematuria. Furthermore, serial follow-ups during one year, using cystoscopy and CTs showed no evidence of a disease recurrence.