An asymptomatic 17-year-old female was screened for COVID-19 due to her part time employment in a nursing home after a family exposure. Her nasal RT-PCR study was positive for SARS-CoV-2, and she was quarantined for 2 weeks without illness. 5 weeks later she developed chest pain, non-productive cough, low grade fever, and sore throat. She had no prior history of asthma, allergies, chest illness. The family history was negative for genetic syndromes or chronic lung diseases. The chest x-ray revealed two nodular opacities in the right lower lobe (RLL). CT angiogram revealed the posterior RLL had a large lobulated cystic mass with celiac arterial supply that was diagnostic for pulmonary sequestration (A).
The differential diagnosis at this time included chronic pneumonia from SARS-CoV-2 infection, pulmonary malignancy, post-infectious bronchiectasis, and congenital lesion of the lung with secondary infection. Flexible bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage showed only erythema suggesting tracheobronchitis but negative viral, bacterial, and fungal cultures. A rapid viral PCR panel was positive for only rhinovirus, and negative for SARS-CoV-2. She was treated with ceftriaxone 2 g IM, cefdinir 300 mg po BID for 10 days, and azithromycin 500 mg po daily for 3 days.
Her fever and sore throat resolved within ten days, but a dry non-productive cough persisted. Due to concern for persistent/recurrent pneumonia or malignant transformation of her intralobar sequestration, she underwent thoracoscopic resection of her RLL by an experienced board certified pediatric surgeon at our large pulmonary referral center two and half months later. Her post-operative course was complicated by persistent right-sided pneumothorax responsive to autologous blood patch instillation at 5 days post procedure. She was discharged two days later. At her one-year follow-up she has a normal chest exam, normal pulmonary function, and minimal pleural thickening of the RLL on chest radiograph. Her exercise capacity is reportedly normal. She feels much relieved after having the congenital lesion removed, and is now attending university.
The RLL (B) showed a large cystic mass in the posterior lower portion of RLL. The anomalous celiac systemic artery was identified on the pleural surface of the mass (C). Serial sections of RLL along the bronchial tree from hilum to the mass showed an ill-defined multicystic lesion (D). Upon dissection of the bronchial tree, no mucous plugs were identified within the lumen of bronchial tree. The bronchial tree was not communicated to the cysts. Microscopic examination demonstrated mixed features of CPAM type I and type II (A-F). No cartilage plate was present. There was no immature mesenchyma. No cytological or architecture atypia or mitosis was identified. There was a prominent acute and chronic inflammation, abscesses formation and fibrosis within the lesion (A-F). No features of diffuse alveolar damage or thrombi were seen. The anomalous branches of celiac artery demonstrated an elastic artery with hypertensive-like changes (A-C). No atretic bronchi were identified (D-F).