A 50-year-old male patient was suffering with skin problems like tiny nodules on scalp with serous discharge and mild itching since last six years. It was mild symptomatic to begin with, but started producing intense itching over his scalp since last four years, later associated with intermittent localized pain and scanty purulent discharge from erosion spontaneously formed on the multiple tiny nodules since last one year along with numerous progressive itchy papules. He was treated with antihistamines, topical corticosteroids, and a short course of systemic steroids, but there was no improvement noticed by patient. Skin examination revealed multiple, hyper-pigmented papules and nodules from 1 to 3 mm size in diameter with some central erosion and crusts distributed on the scalp and nape of neck (shown in a). The hair, nails, mucous membranes, and lymph nodes were normal. Neurological examination revealed normal pin prick sensations, no muscle weakness, and no nerve enlargement. The patient had no past history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hypothyroidism, koch's, cadio-vascular disease, HIV, lymphoma, malignancy, psychiatric illness, depression, anxiety, atopic dermatitis, eczema or any other skin related or general disease. However, these lesions were having the tendency to aggravate in extreme summer or winter season and relieve in pleasant weather. Patient was fully conscious, well oriented, and normal vitals. He had no other complain of bowel movement, urinary difficulty, sleep, poor appetite, drug allergy, addiction, past surgery, trauma or any significant family history.
In January 2019, the patient visited first of all at allopathic dermatology OPD of AIIMS, Bhopal. Here, he was clinically diagnosed as a case of PN and modern allopathic treatment was started since then. However, skin biopsy was not taken, but other pathological tests were done to rule out other causes of disease. All the reports were found within normal limit (Hb 14.0 gm/dl, WBC 11.24 × 103/μl, neutrophils 74%, lymphocytes 19%, monocytes 06%, eosinophil 1%, platelet 354 × 103/μl, ECG normal sinus rhythm, X-ray chest normal, Anti-HCV Elisa, HbsAg Elisa negative, HIV-1 & 2 antibodies non-reactive, Blood urea 24 mg/dl, S. Creatinine 0.92 mg/dl, FBS 118.5 mg/dl, PPBS 114.8 mg/dl, ALT 22 u/l, AST 26 u/l, urine routine and microscopy- normal). These investigations helped to exclude other differential diagnosis like psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, tinea capitis, lichen simplex chronicus, recurrent folliculitis, lichenified plaques, scarring alopecia etc. Initially the course was started with antibiotics like cefadroxil, doxycycline; antifungal like itraconazole; antihistaminics levocetrizine and local application of ointments like clobetasol, beclometasone, ketoconazole, methoxsalen, aminobenzoic acid, fusidic acid, fluticasone etc. Steroids like prednisolone 20 mg and delazacort 6 mg was also given in due course of treatment. Thalidomide 100 mg dose was also prescribed twice a day to patient. But no any fruitful result was obtained in one year. In March, 2020, patient consulted in AYUSH department in Ayurveda OPD for the same complains.
Patient was examined in OPD and detailed history was noted down as per the vidhi vimarsha (applied inference) of Charaka samhita. Doshanusar parikshyabhava (clinical picture) were examined to assess the predominance of doshas in this specific type of kushtha (skin disorder). Color of lesion was blackish, dusky or downy red (vata), texture was oily or soft, white hairlines, elevated with smooth and fixed margins, copious, thick, white and slimy discharge (kapha), macular and papular lesion (kapha), rough and hard consistency (vata), mild edema (kapha), numbness present in few areas (vata), cold to touch (vata, kapha), pricking pain, loss of sensation (vata), Itching, burning sensation, feeling of burning, foul smell (pitta), Itching (kapha), Chronic onset with Slow progression (kapha). This clearly signifies that this lesion was predominantly vata-kaphaj. Presence of nodules with pruritus and redness is main clinical feature of alasaka kshudra kushtha. This case was found quite similar to alasaka kshudra roga as given by Acharya Charaka in kushtha chiktsa adhyaya.
All symptoms present in this case was also evaluated on various subjective scores related to PN. Pruritus intensity was noted on Dynamic Pruritus Score (DPS), Numerical Rating Scale (NRS), Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Pruritus Severity Scale (PSS) and Verbal Rating Scale (VRS). Psychiatric co-morbidities were assessed through Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS). Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) scale was used to observe Quality of life.
The conservative treatment was started in OPD with amritadi guggulu, maha manjishthadi kwath for oral intake; panchvalkal kwath and bactimo oil (containing maha marichyadi oil, maha trunak oil, neem oil, karanj oil, kapur oil, jaitun oil, tuvarak oil) for local application for one week. Panchkarma therapy was planned and discussed with patient. It was advised him to start panchkarma procedure in next week. After taking informed consent, panchtikta ghrita (medicated ghee for internal oleation) in increasing dose of 10-20-40-80-160 ml oral once a day empty stomach, with ushnodaka anupana (luke warm water) was advised for five consecutive days. For the purpose of deepana and pachana, chitrakadi vati two tablets oral thrice a day with Luke warm water was also recommended. Samyak snigdh lakshana (symptoms of proper internal oleation) like vatanulomya (relieving flatulence), diptoagni (increased appetite), varch sasnigdham asamhata (Softness and unctuousness in stool), and mardav snigdhata cha-ange (softness and oiliness in body), were observed after five days. Snehana and sarwanga swedana (Oil massage and steam bath) was given for next three consecutive days. Virechana karma was planned on next day, which could not be possible due to lockdown. In this situation, we contacted to patient telephonically and advised to take Luke warm triphala kwath 20 ml orally in morning time empty stomach for next three consecutive days. Three to four vegas of virechana were observed each day. Sansarjana karma diet (gradual dietary regime) was then followed for next 10 days telephonically again. During this period, we kept close observation on his appetite, digestion and bowel movement. Suggestions were provided up to the normal diet was achieved by patient. After which oral medicines were started to take as earlier. Finally, the desired result was achieved in terms of reduced itching, decreased secretions, and drying of nodules started just after the virechana therapy without any procedural complications. Patient was in our contact telephonically during this period and he could come for follow up on 9th Oct, 2020. He was feeling well and all the previous symptoms were relieved.
The case was further assessed on same clinical parameters and changes were observed in due course of time (See: , , b). Almost the lesions on scalp were healed completely. Itching, oozing and nodules were reduced significantly. He is still in our follow-up and no relapse is observed till date (See ). Gradually the dosage of oral medicines has been also reduced.
It was instructed to patient to take light, non-spicy, less salty, low fat and fresh diet. He was advised to take fruits, salad, and liquids frequently. Fast food, beverages, non-vegetarian, heavy and fried foods were restricted. Use of chemical-based cosmetics products was also restricted in the form of soap, cream, oil, face wash or perfumes.