We report the case of a 33-year-old woman, otherwise healthy, complaining of intermittent and mild anterior knee pain, which was clinically diagnosed as pb. Hoffitis/tendinitis thus managed with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and electro-physical therapies, including local ultrasound and electric stimulation. With these, discomfort ceased up until the patient’s second trimester of pregnancy; again, physical therapy, and acetaminophen mitigated the symptoms. However, a year and a half later, the patient presented severe shooting pain and local swelling although no palpable mass could be detected. A MRI scan showed a discretely lobulated ovoid-shaped lesion, with well-defined borders, located below the patella and apparently involving the patellar tendon sheath. As seen in , the neoplasm showed discrete heterogeneous behavior of frank hyperintense predominance in density of protons with fatty saturation, MERGE, slightly hypotensive in T2 and hypotensive in T1; with the contrast medium, its enhancement is homogeneous, measuring approximately 22 mm × 14 mm× 28 mm in its longitudinal, anteroposterior, and transverse axes, respectively. MRI report also included minimum proximal patellar tendinosis, lateral inclination of the patella and mild edema of Hoffa’s fat pat pb. secondary to increased pressure due to the lesion. In accordance to the aforementioned imaging findings, giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath was suggested. Presurgical physical examination of the knee did not show neither positive meniscal signs nor evidence of ligament instability. The patient presented complete flexo-extension of the knee; arcs of movement were complete, although with the presence of pain at the maximum flexion. Muscular tone and strength preserved. Volume increase in the anterior region of the knee, with pain in the interlinear joint were detected after digitopression. No neurovascular involvement of the limb was found. Hence, an incisional biopsy was performed, and surgical could not be, at that time, completed, since transoperatory histopathologic findings -reported as mesenchymal fusocellular neoplasm to be further classified were not sufficient to discard malignancy. H and E staining yielded the following description: Lesion consisting of vacuolated and hyperchromatic large nucleus spindle cells, which are arranged in bundles that interlace with each other with densely cellular and collagenized areas; no abnormal mitotic activity is observed. The diagnosis was then proposed as ancient schwannoma.
To confirm the later, IHC markers were used for final staining, as seen in :
PS100 ++ (moderate, in patches) CD34 ++(besides vascular wall, some cells are positive) EMA +(focally weak on cytoplasmatic membrane) GFAP +(weak, scarce cells in cytoplasm).
Given the afore, the conclusive histopathologic diagnosis was neurofibroma. Hence, the patient underwent to surgical resection of the mass (measuring 2.3 cm, in its longest axis) -illustrated in Figs. and -; in brief, the neuroma was resected by an anterior approach of the knee, performing a dissection in planes, until Hoffa’s fat was localized. A wide resection of the lesion was performed with partial resection of the Hoffa, maintaining the tumoral content within the tissue of the fat pad, to achieve tumor-free surgical margins. There was no clinical or histological evidence that the Nf came from any large or important neurological structure, so it is assumed that it developed from the termination of a terminal sensory branch of the own fat pad. Prior diagnosis was confirmed by histopathological examinationaltogether with clear margins from adjacent tissues: dermis, deep dermis, tendinous and rotula -both superior and inferior- fragments with no sign of lesion. Thus further antineoplastic interventions, for example, radiotherapy, were not needed. At the moment (i.e., 6 months after surgery), the patient has recovered as expected, regained almost full function of the knee and quadriceps and has no alterations in the biomechanics of the knee nor pain. Moreover, there is no evidence of recurrence. Regular follow-ups were suggested.