A 62-year-old woman who underwent surgery and radiation therapy for a left temporal lesion at another hospital 40 years before presentation was admitted to our hospital due to progressive aphasia and right hemiparesis. She was found to have a 4 × 3 cm subcutaneous mass in the left temporal area of the head . Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed destruction of the left temporal bone and a partially calcified mass lesion . T1-weighted contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an enhancing mass with intracranial and extracranial cystic components (5 cm and 3 cm in diameter, respectively) [ and ]. Although detailed information related to the previous surgery and radiotherapy was not available, a semi-urgent surgery was planned because two of the cystic lesions were growing rapidly, and the patient’s symptoms continuously worsened after admission.
The surgical procedure was performed in the right semilateral position under general anesthesia. The scar of the previous operation was reincised, preserving a frontal branch of the superficial temporal artery. An additional skin incision was made around the subcutaneous mass lesion, and an island-shaped portion of skin and temporal muscle covering the subcutaneous mass was left intact on the tumor side. The surrounding skin flap was then flipped, and artificial bone constructed during the previous surgery was observed on the vertex side of the tumor . A small bone window was made just above the artificial bone using a high-speed drill. Subsequently, a continuous narrow craniectomy approximately 1 cm in width was performed surrounding the tumor and the artificial bone . This procedure was carefully performed using a ruler to maintain the safety margin of the tumor and to avoid tumor cell dissemination. A dural incision surrounding the tumor and the previous artificial bone were made using the space created by the narrow craniectomy . The middle meningeal artery, one of the main feeders of the tumor, was coagulated and cut during this procedure. The temporal bone, dura mater, and intracranial tumor were lifted gradually, and the branches of the middle cerebral artery and the cortical veins were carefully detached from the mass lesion. Subsequently, en bloc resection of the tumor with adjacent skin, temporal muscle, skull, dura mater, and a thin slice of the temporal lobe cerebral cortex was achieved . After completion of hemostasis, the dura mater defect was reconstructed with fascia lata, and the temporal bone defect was reconstructed with artificial bone (Cemex® Bone Cement, Tecres S.p.A., Italy). After repeated intraoperative tissue expansion of the adjacent scalp using a 30 ml balloon in a 20-French Foley catheter [ and ], a local rotation skin flap was created on the dorsal side of the skin defect [ and ]. The skin defect was covered with this rotation skin flap and the expanded surrounding scalp, and a primary closure of the skin of the head was achieved .
The temporal bone defect was shown to be adequately reconstructed with artificial bone on postoperative CT imaging . No residual tumor was identified on postoperative T1-weighted contrast-enhanced MRI [ and ]. Histological analysis revealed that the tumor was comprised atypical spindle cell components with focal cartilaginous differentiation [ and ]. The tumor was diagnosed as an OS, though the nature of the sarcoma remains unknown. Her symptoms, including aphasia and right hemiparesis, gradually improved within 2 months, and she was discharged from our hospital with no neurological deficits. Because a CT scan of the body revealed no evidence of tumor metastasis, and her blood test showed a mild leukocytopenia of unknown origin (leukocyte, 2860/µ; neutrophil, 1400/µ; and lymphocyte, 1200/µ9), she was carefully observed in the outpatient clinic without postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy. The condition of the skin of the temporal region remained excellent without any signs of infection , and no recurrence was found on follow-up MRI at 1 year after surgery [ and ].