A 54-year-old previously healthy woman was admitted to our hospital for progressive cognitive decline and memory loss since 5 days. The patient’s symptoms started with the inability to remember the names and the functions of the condiments on the first day. The next day, the patient had difficulty in recollecting the names of her close relatives, in addition to dizziness and fatigue. At the time of admission, the patient was conscious, but confused. History taking revealed no fever, headache, or significant weight loss during the past three months, and no family history of auto-immune diseases. On further clinical examination, long-term and short-term memory, the ability of calculation, as well as temporal and spatial perception were found to be impaired. No other neurological signs were present, expect for a positive Chaddok sign on the left side.
The first magnetic resonance image (MRI) obtained at the local hospital showed normal findings. The second MRI repeated on the next day at our hospital revealed patchy lesions in the left temporal lobe and hippocampal area. The lesions showed high signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted imaging and high signal intensity on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence . Electrocardiography (EEG) revealed paroxysmal delta waves in the left temporal lobe. Ultrasonographic examination showed enlargement of the thyroid gland (left thyroid lobe: 16 mm × 6 mm, and right thyroid lobe: 15 mm × 16 mm × 43 mm), with irregular echogenicity. However, ultrasonography examination of the abdominal organs, including the liver, kidney, pancreas and uterus, as well as other organs, such as mammary glands, did not reveal any abnormality. Pulmonary computed tomography (CT) scan was negative for neoplasia.
The findings of routine blood tests were normal, except for slightly low levels of sodium (133.9, normal range: 137–147 mmol/L) and chloride (97, normal range: 99–110 mmol/L). The screening assay for viral infection showed elevated levels of antibodies against herpes simplex virus I (HSV I) (8.023 S/CO, normal range: <1.00 S/CO), rubella virus (0.927 S/CO, normal range: <1.00 S/CO), and cytomegalovirus (CMV) (6.332 S/CO, normal range, normal range: <1.00 S/CO) in the serum but not in the CSF. The results of the lumbar puncture test showed increased intracranial pressure (230 mm H2O; normal range: 70–180 mm H2O). Routine analysis of the CSF showed increased concentration of protein (0.50 g/L, normal range 0.15–0.45 g/L) and elevated white blood cell count (63 × 106/L, normal range: 0–8 × 106/L), with 89% lymphocytes, 7% eosinophils, and 4% monocytes. The CSF was negative for oligoclonal bands. Further, the levels of the immunoglobulin (Ig) G were also found to be slightly increased (49.1 mg/L; normal range: 0–34.0 mg/L) in the CSF. The results of the autoimmune encephalitis test using cell-based assay (CBA) for antibodies against AMPAR2 were positive for both the serum and CSF , but negative for other antibodies, including NMDA-R, CASPR2, AMPA1-R, and LGI1. Screening tests were also negative for paraneoplastic markers, including Hu, Yo, Ri, paraneoplastic Ma2 (PNMA2), CV2/collapsing response mediator 5 (CRMP5), and amphiphysin. Additionally, tests for tuberculosis were negative. Thyroid function-related tests showed slightly lower levels of thyroid stimulating hormones (TSH) (0.26 mIU/L; normal range: 0.27–4.2 mIU/L), while the serum levels of free T3 and T4 were within the normal range. Levels of the antibodies against the thyroid globulin (TG) (2006 IU/ml, normal range <115 IU/ml), thyroid peroxidase (TPO) (276.9 IU/ml, normal range <35 IU/ml), and thyroid stimulating receptor (TSHR) (13.6 IU/ml, normal range 0.3-1.75 IU/ml) were found to be elevated. Tests for antibodies against and antigen of hepatitis B and C virus were all negative. Antibody tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis were also negative, as were the screening tests for the tumor biomarkers. The results of routine urine analysis and tests for liver and kidney function were normal. The blood levels of lipids and glucose were also within the normal range. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and levels of the C-reactive proteins were also within the normal range.
On the basis of the results of the preliminary physical examination and the laboratory tests conducted on the day of admission, viral encephalitis was suspected. Accordingly, the patient was treated with the anti-virus drug acyclovir. However, there was no significant relief in the patient’s symptoms. Four days later, the patient’s conditions worsened and the patient went into a coma; therefore, she was shifted to the intensive care unit. There, anti-AMPAR2 antibodies were detected in the serum and CSF, and accordingly, the patient was treated with intravenous injection of immunoglobulin (IVIG) for 3 days followed by dexamethasone. Once the IVIG treatment was initiated, the patient recovered from coma. Follow-up examination after 3 months showed that her memory function had improved to some extent, but not completely restored.