A 33-year-old male patient presented to our clinic with 2 months of low back pain and a half-month of right thigh numbness. The patient reported that both pain and numbness were activity related. When he presented, he did not have intermittent claudication. A CT scan was taken at an outside hospital, which revealed an obstruction at S2. The physical examination showed normal sensation and tenderness in his bilateral legs. At admission, the Lasègue test was conducted, and a negative result was obtained. Manual muscle testing is also employed and gastrocnemius muscular strength for both legs was scored at 5. Laboratory tests revealed that the patients' common blood cell count, C-reactive protein level, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and tumor markers were all within normal limits.
The CT scan showed an osteolytic lesion with local ossification at S2 level; the osteolytic lesion was located at the posterior of the vertebral column, and the calcified portion nearly reached the anterior of the vertebral column .
A magnetic resonance imaging scan of the sacral spine (MRI; Figure ) revealed an irregularly shaped but well-defined 2×2.5×2 cm mass in the spinal canal extending into the sacrum. On T1- weighted MRI, the lesion appeared hypointense in the spinal canal but hyperintense in vertebral part (T1WI; Figure ), and it was reversed on T2-weighted MRI (T2WI; Figure ). Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI (T1CE; Figure ) demonstrated remarkable contrast enhancement.
We did not perform a biopsy in this patient due to the risk of nerve injury, and a benign tumor was first considered for surgical operation.
The patient was considered to have a benign sacral tumor. The differential diagnosis for this tumor is extensive with osteoblastoma, enchondroma, schwannoma, or giant cell bone tumor being considered. The lesion occurred in the sacrum, which is a common location for giant cell bone tumor and schwannoma. The CT scan revealed an expanding mass to the sacral canal combined with osteogenic lesions and surrounded by a sclerotic ring. Such imaging manifestations are common in osteoblastoma and enchondroma, and in some cases of schwannoma, intralesional calcification can also present. Based on MR imaging, the lesion displayed mixed signal intensity on both T1-weighted MRI and T2-weighted MRI, but the gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI scan showed heterogeneous enhancement of the lesion. Such characteristic features can all be seen in osteoblastoma, enchondroma, schwannoma, and giant cell bone tumor.
For this patient, extended curettage surgery was preferred considering the potentially benign nature of the tumor based on clinical diagnosis and inevitable neurological function deficit due to en-bloc resection of the lesion. By opening the sacral canal, retracting and protecting the cauda equina, the lesion could be fully exposed for curettage and excision. The patient was put in a prone position and then S2 laminectomy was conducted. During the procedure, a firm, well-shaped, encapsulated, and vascular-rich blackish mass extending to the nerve sheath of the left S2 spinal nerve root was found. The dura was compressed and displaced to the right side of the spinal canal. A linear incision over the nerve sheath was conducted and a darkish hematoma was exposed. Due to its specific location, extended curettage surgery was performed for the intraosseous portion of the mass using high-speed drill, and piecemeal excision for lesion located within the sacral canal. The specimen was then sent for a frozen biopsy, and result showed that the tumor was a melanotic schwannoma. Moreover, the edge of the mass tissue was sent for pathological assessment and a negative margin was obtained. The sagittal CT scan and MRI demonstrated an adequate surgical margin was achieved postoperatively .
Following the operation, the pathological specimens were subjected to routine hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining and immunological marker reexamination. Melanotic schwannoma was confirmed by specialized pathologists. Under the light microscopy, the tumor cells were spindle-shaped, epithelioid, and arranged in fascicles, palisades, or nests under the light microscope. The nuclei were relatively uniform in size, and the nucleoli were not visible. Mitotic figures were uncommon, but abundance of melanin was observed. There was no obvious necrosis and only cytoplasm was found. Typical schwannoma tissue conformation can still be seen in some areas. The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for homatropine methylbromide (HMB-45), S-100 protein, partially positive SOX-10, and negative for epithelial membrane antigen. The labeling index for Ki-67 was approximately 5%–10% . The slides were also sent to the pathology department of UCLA School of Medicine, one of the collaborators of our hospital, for pathological consultation, and Dr. Sarah Dry reconfirmed this diagnosis.
The patient received total 56 Gy radiotherapy but no chemotherapy after surgery. The first outpatient review was scheduled for 1 month postoperatively. After that, the patient was regularly followed up once every 3 months. His symptoms were obviously relieved and there was no sign of local recurrence at the most recent follow-up, 18 months postoperatively . According to the patient-reported outcomes, postoperative complications such as neurological deficits, stabilization, or ambulatory issues were not observed.