The legal guardians have provided informed consent for the preparation and publication of this case report.
A previously healthy 2-year-old boy with speech delay presented to care with a four-day history of coryza, increased work of breathing, and progressive coughing, initially thought to have stridor. He was treated with an epinephrine nebulizer and oral dexamethasone, following which his symptoms progressed to bilateral expiratory wheezing. The patient was then treated with back-to-back dosing of salbutamol and ipratropium, followed by methylprednisolone and magnesium sulphate by intravenous (IV) route, started on heated humidified high flow nasal cannula (HFNC) at 2 L/kg/min, and transferred to the tertiary care hospital with a presumptive diagnosis of severe asthma.
Upon presentation to our care, he had severe work of breathing with bilateral wheeze and at times had a near silent chest, marked pulsus paradoxus, and an initial venous carbon dioxide (CO2) value of greater than 110 mmHg. Initial chest radiographs demonstrated bilateral hyperinflation, no consolidation, and no radio-opaque FB . He was quickly escalated to bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) support (inspiratory pressure 20 cmH2O, expiratory pressure 10 cmH2O) with continuous salbutamol nebulization and intravenous methylprednisolone. Given his severity of illness, the nebulized salbutamol was changed to an intravenous salbutamol infusion. Intravenous aminophylline and low dose ketamine infusions were also added for further bronchodilation.
After a period of relative stability with reduction in the work of breathing, a normalization of arterial CO2 levels, and minimal oxygen requirement, he deteriorated on day 3 of his admission with development of a pneumomediastinum and an acute rise in arterial CO2. He was intubated then cannulated to peripheral VA-ECMO through the right common carotid artery and the right internal jugular vein, due to inadequate oxygenation and ventilation on conventional mechanical ventilation . We performed a bedside flexible bronchoscopy shortly after cannulation to ECMO prompted by the unexplained deterioration after a period of improvement and that demonstrated multiple bilateral foreign bodies that were too large to aspirate. A rigid bronchoscopy successfully removed the foreign bodies, which were found to be peanuts, from the right intermediate bronchus and the left mainstem bronchus. Post-foreign body removal, the patient was weaned rapidly from bronchodilator therapy, VA-ECMO support and was decannulated on day 5 of admission. His VA-ECMO course was complicated by myocardial stun which improved post-decannulation, and findings on brain MRI suggestive of ischemic stroke, including acute infarcts in the right cortical and subcortical white matter and bilateral thalamic diffusion restriction. The patient was extubated on day 9 of admission and discharged from ICU shortly thereafter. At the time of manuscript preparation, the patient was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder, which was suspected prior to his acute illness. His only current medication is enoxaparin for secondary stroke prophylaxis, and he is undergoing nutritional rehabilitation. Clinically he is well and regaining previously attained motor milestones .