A 45-year-old man known case of achondroplasia was presented with a history of progressive headache and weakness of upper and lower extremities over the one year. He also had complained of paresthesia and gait disturbance since one month before admission. Neurological exam revealed the force of 4/5 at upper extremities and spastic paraparesis (proximal forces 3/5 and distal forces 4/5) and hypesthesia to pinprick and light touch. Deep tendon reflexes were increased, and plantar responses were extensor bilaterally. There were no bowel or bladder symptoms. Dynamic lateral x-rays and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were done, and occipitocervical instability was diagnosed. The patient underwent OCF with an occipital plate and lateral mass screws at C3 and C4. Gradually, over one year, all the symptoms were revealed, and the patient backed to his work. After six years, the patient was referred to our center with the complaint of wound discharge. Lab data including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, and complete blood count were investigated, blood and wound culture were provided, and further sepsis workups were done. According to our lab findings, no infection was found. Moreover, all the inflammatory findings were within the normal range. The patient was also complaining of recurrence of previous symptoms such as gain difficulty and hypesthesia over the last six months. A lateral dynamic x-ray was taken, which showed possible instability. Computed tomograph scan was done that showed the failure of the fusion construct . The patient underwent surgical exploration, and we found that all instruments are quite loose. All of them were removed, and a halo vest was fixed for the patients. The culture from instruments was negative, but the patient underwent eight weeks of intravenous (IV) antibiotic therapy (meropenem and vancomycin) following by eight weeks of oral therapy with clindamycin (600mg q8hours). The symptoms were improved, and the patient discharged. At three and nine months’ follow-ups, no significant problem were found.