A 41-year-old woman was admitted to our ward for rehabilitation due to ischemic stroke 3 mo prior.
The patient had ischemic stroke over the left corona radiata, bilateral frontal lobe, and parietal lobe 3 mo prior with right hemiplegia and Broca’s aphasia and received inpatient rehabilitation programs in other hospitals. There were no major accidents such as recurrent stroke, urinary tract infection, or pneumonia during the 3 mo. This time she was transferred to our ward for further rehabilitation. Upon admission, she had significant right hemiplegia but she still could ambulate with use of a quad cane for short distances. Her consciousness was alert but Broca’s aphasia was presented. Her symptoms included dizziness, vomiting, Kussmaul breathing, and lowered response to verbal commands on the morning of hospital day 2. There were no new appearances of limb weakness. Hyperglycemia persisted despite sequential subcutaneous rapid-acting insulin injections. Arterial blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis (pH 7.255, PCO2 15.9 mmHg, HCO3- 7.1 mmol/L, base excess -16.8 mmol/L). Urine analysis disclosed ketone 3+. DKA was suspected, and she was transferred to the intensive care unit for further care, which included aggressive hydration, insulin pump, bicarbonate infusion, and electrolyte correction. Serum ketone body on hospital day 3 was 5.5 mmol/L. After DKA, the patient was still conscious and alert, but her arterial blood gas had revealed metabolic acidosis with respiratory compensation from day 2 to day 5 . However, on the morning of hospital day 6, she became comatose and hemodynamic instability was also noted. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disclosed: (1) Acute infarction lesions over the bilateral MCA and bilateral ACA territory with brain swelling of infarction lesions and midline shift; and (2) Occlusion of bilateral ICA . Glycerol was administered for increased intracranial pressure, and endotracheal intubation was performed. Echocardiograms revealed normal left ventricle contractility and no evidence of thrombus or vegetation formation. Hemodynamic instability, respiratory failure, and severe hyperglycemia persisted. The patient was in a coma from hospital day 6 to day 29, and mechanical ventilation was needed. After discussion with her family about her poor prognosis, compassionate extubation was performed, and she expired on hospital day 29. The timeline of the patient is presented in Figure .
Three months prior, the patient had an ischemic stroke in the left corona radiata, bilateral frontal lobe, and parietal lobe as well as BICAO . There was no major accident in the 3 mo before this admission. The patient also had T1DM for 31 years, hypertension for 5 years, hyperlipidemia for 4 years, and hyperthyroidism for 3 years. She had regular subcutaneous insulin injections and medical control for the above diseases. The medications being taken were methimazole 5 mg once daily, aspirin 100 mg once daily, and atorvastatin 20 mg once daily.
The patient did not drink or smoke. The patient’s family history was negative.
At admission, the patient's body temperature was 36.1 °C, pulse was 84 beats/min, and blood pressure was 125/78 mmHg. Her breathing was steady, averaging 18 breaths per minute. Neurological examinations showed clear consciousness, right central facial palsy and right hemiplegia. The Brunnstrom stage of her right upper limb and right lower limb were III/III (proximal/distal) and IV, respectively. For functional status, she could ambulate with use of a quad cane for short distances. She was able to feed herself. Broca’s aphasia was noted.
The blood test on hospital day 2 showed a glycohemoglobin level of 7.8%, hyperglycemia (344 mg/dL), and normal thyroid function. Other levels were within normal range. Urine analysis on hospital day 1 showed neither ketonuria nor pyuria. The detailed blood examinations during hospitalization are listed in Table . The thyroid function at admission and stroke survey after the second stroke are listed in Table . The arterial blood gas analyses during hospitalization are listed in Table .
Brain MRI for the first stroke before this admission revealed left corona radiata, bilateral frontal lobe, and parietal lobe infarction as well as BICAO . Brain MRI for the second stroke disclosed: (1) Acute infarction lesions over the bilateral MCA and bilateral ACA territory with brain swelling of infarction lesions and midline shift; and (2) Occlusion of bilateral ICA .