A 36-year-old Hispanic woman presented with severe perineal pain radiating to the right gluteal area for one week. Her associated symptoms included fever, chills, nausea, fatigue and shortness of breath. She denied any vaginal discharge, dysuria, changes in stool color, bloody stools, vomiting or diarrhea. No past medical problems were noted. Her social history was relevant for a long-standing history of alcohol use and smoking. Her vital signs on admission revealed a temperature of 39.4°C, blood pressure of 85/56mmHg, heart rate of 109/min and respiratory rate of 25/min. A physical examination revealed rhonchi in both lung fields, no heart murmurs, and diffuse abdominal tenderness without guarding or rebound signs. An examination of the perineum/genital area revealed bilateral gluteal and perilabial edema and erythema, associated with increased local temperature and focal areas of necrotic tissue with purulent discharge.
Initial laboratory results upon admission were a white blood cell count of 6.09 × 103uL, hemoglobin of 17.9g/dL, hematocrit of 51.8%, platelet count of 53 × 103/uL, blood urea nitrogen of 32mg/dL, creatinine of 1.77mg/Dl and serum glucose of 196mg/dL. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed extensive necrotizing fasciitis at the right gluteal region extending into the pelvis, retroperitoneal space and the anterior abdominal wall. The posterior and medial compartments of the right thigh were also involved. Our patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit with a diagnosis of septic shock secondary to Fournier’s gangrene. The first surgery was surgical debridement of the right perineum, perirectal ischioanal and gluteus region. Additional surgical procedures included exploratory laparotomy, debridement of retroperitoneum and bilateral anterior abdominal wall and drainage of pelvic abscesses. She had multiple explorations of the abdomen and perineal area with debridement of necrotic tissue. She later developed a small bowel perforation of the ileum resulting in fecal peritonitis. She therefore had a small bowel resection with ileoileal anastomosis. One week later, she developed an anastomotic leak that required resection of the anastomosis and creation of an end ileostomy. Our patient subsequently developed pancreatic necrosis with abscess formation requiring exploratory laparotomy for drainage of the abscess and debridement of pancreatic necrosis. Eight weeks after admission, she developed dry gangrene and necrosis of all limbs ensued requiring amputation of all the fingers of her right hand, left wrist disarticulation and open disarticulation of all her toes.
Eleven weeks after admission, our patient developed hematochezia from the colostomy associated with a decrease in hemoglobin from 11.4g/dL to 6.4g/dL. Our patient was initially stabilized with continuous intravenous pantoprazole infusion and received four units of packed red blood cells. Colonoscopy through the ostomy revealed blood throughout the colon and a 3cm necrotic ulcer with an adherent clot in the transverse colon . Multiple biopsies were taken from the edge of the colonic ulcer. Pathological analysis of the specimen with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and Grocott’s methenamine silver (GMS) stain revealed septated hyphae with 45-degree-angle branching morphologically consistent with Aspergillus species. Our patient was then immediately treated with intravenous voriconazole, 360mg every 12 hours for a total of 30 days. One month after the initial colonoscopy, melena was seen in the ileostomy bag. An upper endoscopy revealed superficial non-bleeding erosions in the esophagus and gastric body. A pathological analysis revealed chronic gastritis and no fungal organisms. No further bleeding episodes were noted. She continued to have a complicated hospital course associated with pleural effusions, sacral decubitus ulcers, and intramuscular abscesses of her thighs and pelvic area. At eight-month follow-up, she was still in the hospital undergoing further care but had no recurrent gastrointestinal bleeding.