A 21-year-old woman with no relevant medical or family history of autoimmune disease was admitted to our hospital because of buccal rash, swelling and tenderness in the proximal interphalangeal joints of her hands. Other symptoms included morning stiffness, fatigue, dyspnea, numbness, hypoesthesia in the feet, dry mouth, and foamy urine. Laboratory examination showed that hemoglobin (107 g/L) and platelet (57 × 103/µl) levels were decreased, while the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (59 mm/h) was accelerated. The titer of antinuclear antibody (ANA) was 1:1280. Anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, anti-Smith antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, anti-ribosomal P protein antibody, anti-nucleosome antibody, and anti-Sjögren’s syndrome A antibody were positive. Other antibodies were negative. She had hypocomplementemia (C3 (44.7 mg/dl) and C4 (5.48 mg/dl)), and total proteinuria at 24 h was 0.6 g. Her serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) level was 7870 mg/dL (normal range, 751 to 1560 mg/dL). Results of immunofixation electrophoresis of peripheral blood were negative. No abnormal signs were observed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain . Ultrasonic cardiogram (UCG) and chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) showed pericardial effusion. Based on the 2019 European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) SLE classification criteria , 31 points were accumulated. After treatment with 80 mg/d methylprednisolone for 10 days and reduction to 40 mg/d for 5 days, 1.5 g/d mycophenolate mofetil and 0.4 g/d hydroxychloroquine for 10 days, the rash on both cheeks subsided; moreover, the patient’s other symptoms were relieved, and her condition gradually stabilized. On discharge, her IgG level had decreased to 2590 mg/dL.
Three days later, the patient had headache and dyspnea without fever or an epidemiological history of coronavirus disease-19. She suddenly experienced gnathospasmus, staring eyes, and five episodes of generalized tonic–clonic seizure. Therefore, she visited the emergency department. Physical examination showed grade II muscle strength of the limbs and decreased muscle tone, while no further abnormalities were found by other systematic neural examinations. MRI brain revealed multiple T1 and T2 linear or patchy signal shadows in the bilateral subcortical area of the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes; the white matter around the lateral ventricle; the basal ganglia thalamus area; the splenium of the corpus callosum; the brainstem; and the cerebellar hemisphere. Magnetic resonance angiography and venography of the head showed unremarkable findings. UCG showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 57%, and pulmonary hypertension was present (45 mmHg). There was no previous underlying heart disease. Chest CT indicated multiple diffuse consolidations and ground-glass opacities in both lungs . Combined with her dyspnea, NPE was considered after inflammatory lesions and cardiogenic pulmonary edema were excluded. Lumbar puncture revealed elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) (260 mmH2O). There were increased protein levels (3.54 g/L) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and cell counts, lactic acid, glucose, and chloride were all within normal limits. CSF cultures for bacteria and fungi were negative. The AMPAR2 antibody detected by cytometric bead array (CBA) was positive for both serum and CSF, whereas other autoimmune encephalitis-related antibodies were all negative in CSF or serum. Electrocardiography (EEG) revealed paroxysmal or sporadic medium amplitude theta activity and atypical sharp and slow waves. After treatment with methylprednisolone pulse therapy for three days (500 mg per day), the patient’s seizures stopped. However, she presented melena without nausea or vomiting several times. Abdominal CT showed a diverticulum in the horizontal part of the duodenum, peritoneal effusion, and pelvic effusion. The patient was treated with 40 mg/d Nexium, 0.6 mg/d octreotide, and 2 IU/d hemocoagulase for suspected gastrointestinal bleeding. Her stool returned to normal, and occult blood tests gradually became negative. No tumors were found by systematic examinations, including serum tumor marker analyses and chest and abdominal CT. The patient had epileptic seizures, and the results of CSF, MRI, and EEG analyses were abnormal. After ruling out infectious encephalitis, AMPAR encephalitis was diagnosed according to the diagnostic criteria of autoimmune encephalitis . She was treated with 200 mg/d methylprednisolone, 500 ml/d glycerol fructose, 1.2 g/d sodium valproate, and 1.0 g/d levetiracetam. The dosage of methylprednisolone was decreased according to her clinical condition until it was maintained at 40 mg/d. No seizures occurred thereafter. MRI brain and chest HRCT showed obvious improvement after 5 days. One week later, repeated lumbar puncture revealed that the CSF protein levels (0.68 g/L) decreased and her ICP was normal. Reexamination of EEG showed a medium-amplitude alpha rhythm (9 Hz). On discharge, the patient’s IgG level had decreased to 1630 mg/dL. The patient has not yet been followed up.