An 18-year-old man presented to our movement disorder clinic with attacks of tonic posturing of the trunk, neck and upper extremities. The attacks lasted a few seconds and were often provoked by rising from a chair. During an attack autonomic features were present, including pallor, nausea and sweating. The patient told that during an attack he felt like he was going to faint, but he never completely lost consciousness. In between attacks the neurological examination was completely normal. The attacks had started since the age of 14 years and had become more frequent over time, now occurring up to 7 times a day. This had resulted in considerable disruption of daily life, as the attacks significantly hampered his school performance and social activities. The past medical history revealed Asperger syndrome with normal cognition and simple motor tics in early childhood.
During the outpatient clinic visit and later during electrophysiology and autonomic function tests, we observed several attacks (see Additional file 1). All events started as the patient arose from a seated position. He rotated his head to the left with retroflexion. The trunk is subsequently extended and both arms showed some dystonic posturing and involuntary movements. The patient became pale and started to perspire. After several seconds the attack stopped abruptly, and the patient was able to sit down again. He did not proceed into a syncope, but indicated clouding of consciousness during the attacks.
The initial differential diagnosis included epileptic seizures, paroxysmal kinesiogenic dyskinesia (PKD), benign paroxysmal dystonia and Sandifer’s syndrome. An EEG during the attacks showed some background slowing but no epileptic activity. Mutation analyses of the PRRT2 gene (PKD) and CACNA1A gene (benign paroxysmal dystonia) were negative. Because of the prominent dysautonomia during the attacks, we performed autonomic function tests of blood pressure regulation. These tests, which included a tilt table test, showed no signs of autonomic dysfunction.
During these tests, however, it became clear that the patient could intentionally provoke the attacks. On closer observation, we noticed that the attacks were consistently triggered by taking deep breaths, and during the attack there were no respiratory excursions. It appeared that the combination of stretching of the neck and performing a Valsalva-like maneuver resulted in cerebral hypoxia. The observed attacks were all very similar, illustrating the stereotyped character.
The patient later endorsed a premonitory urge and brief ability to voluntary suppress an attack. There was no sense of relief afterwards. Based on these characteristics, and since the movements were self-induced, compulsive and stereotyped, the phenomenology can be described as a complex tic.
The patient was already treated by a psychiatrist, but psychotherapy and antipsychotic drugs had been insufficiently effective to improve his symptoms. Therefore, treatment with botulinum toxin was initiated in our patient to interrupt the tic-like extension of the neck and subsequent cerebral hypoperfusion. Over the past 2 years he has been receiving quarterly injections of 15–25 units of botulinum toxin in multiple muscles of the neck (left longissimus, semispinalis, levator scapulae, obliquus, splenius capitis and trapezius muscles; and right longissimus muscle). This has resulted in a strong decrease in both the frequency and severity of attacks, now only occurring incidental. He is again able to normally participate in study activities.