A 23-year-old female with end-stage renal disease of unknown cause received a living-donor kidney transplantation 10 months ago, in which an end-to-side anastomosis of the donor renal artery to the patient’s right external iliac artery was performed. After the transplantation, her renal function was stable with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of approximately 75 ml/min/1.73 m2. Seven months after the transplantation, her blood pressure gradually deteriorated, and there was no other remarkable medical history. Magnetic resonance angiography was performed in another hospital, and it revealed a bending and stenosis of the transplant renal artery. On the day of admission to our hospital, her serum creatinine was 140.1 μmol/l. After obtaining the patient’s consent, endovascular treatment was attempted under the guidance of digital subtraction angiography. A 5-French Berenstein catheter (Cook) was inserted into the right external iliac artery via the right femoral artery, and angiography revealed significant stenosis (the degree of stenosis was approximately 95%, and the range of stenosis was approximately 20 mm) in the proximal transplant renal artery . An 0.014-in. guidewire (Cook) was used to pass through the stenotic segment through the right femoral artery pathway but failed; then we attempted to pass the guidewire through the stenotic segment through the left femoral artery pathway but failed again. A 5-French Berenstein catheter (Cook) was then placed at the opening of the right external iliac artery for angiography, which showed that the transplant renal artery was not opacified at all. The surgeons believed that the frequent endovascular manipulations may have stimulated the transplant renal artery resulting in an arterial spasm. Vasodilators (papaverine 30 mg plus normal saline 30 ml and nitroglycerin 0.2 mg plus normal saline 10 ml) were administered by slow infusion into the opening of the transplant renal artery. An angiography was performed 10 min later and showed that the transplant renal artery was still invisible which indicates the possibility of complete occlusion . Then, the operation was stopped, and the patient was returned to the ward and received intensive care. After the operation, the patients’ serum creatinine increased (up to 639.8 μmol/l) and urine volume decreased (less than 100 ml) gradually. Urologists were consulted. They advised that the patient should receive another kidney transplantation operation or regular dialysis because of the serious adhesion between the transplanted kidney and the surrounding tissue after the first transplant operation. As a result, the patient began to receive regular dialysis (3 times per week) and no other medical therapy was offered.
Twenty-five days after the operation, the patient’s urine volume began to increase gradually, and then an ultrasound examination was performed which revealed that the proximal segment of the transplant renal artery was stenotic and the distal segment was patent. The patient was hospitalized and underwent endovascular treatment again. The preoperative serum creatinine was 335 μmol/l. After obtaining consent, the endovascular procedure was performed under the guidance of digital subtraction angiography (DSA). First, a 5-French angiographic catheter (Cook) was used to perform an angiography at the opening of the right external iliac artery through the right femoral artery, which showed that the proximal stenosis of the transplanted renal artery was approximately 95%, and the distal segment was unobstructed . Second, an 0.014-in. guidewire (Cook) was used to pass through the stenotic segment through the right femoral artery access successfully. Then, a 3 mm × 30 mm balloon (Boston ultra-soft SV) was used to dilate the stenotic segment , but the extent of stenosis was still greater than 50% after the dilatation. Subsequently, the surgeon attempted to implant a 4 mm × 23 mm stent (Firehawk rapamycin targeted eluting stent system) into the stenotic segment, but the stent system could not be accurately placed in the stenotic segment. After that, the stent delivery system was withdrawn, and left femoral artery access was established. The stent delivery system arrived in the stenotic segment, and the stent was eventually successfully released . After the operation, the patient’s renal function gradually improved, serum creatinine gradually decreased (102 μmol/l at the time of discharge), urine volume returned to normal, and she was able to discontinue dialysis.