A 33-year-old male Pakistani sailor presented to us with a 1-year history of generalized, vague abdominal pain. The pain was insidious in onset and aggravated by squatting. The patient also complained of bilateral dependent pedal edema that started 1 month after the onset of abdominal symptoms. Furthermore, he reported occasional nausea but did not divulge any history of vomiting, altered bowel habits, malaise, fever or weight loss.
At the onset of these complaints, the patient reported to a military hospital where a palpable epigastric/umbilical mass was discovered. Further evaluation with a computed tomography (CT) scan at the same time demonstrated a fat density mass in the retroperitoneum. A presumptive diagnosis of liposarcoma was made. A laparotomy was performed through a midline incision. Intra-operatively, a vaguely defined thickening was noted in the small bowel mesentery. Complete excision of the mass was limited by its close association with the gut loops. The bowel loops and peritoneal cavity appeared unremarkable. No lymph node enlargement was observed. In the histological evaluation, the excised specimen was described as benign adipose tissue with non-specific inflammatory infiltrates. There was no distortion of the tissue architecture or infiltration of vascular structures. The postoperative recovery was unremarkable.
Nine months after laparotomy, the patient presented to our institution due to persistence of the initial symptoms. A detailed history and review of systems did not provide any further clues. The patient reported no change in abdominal symptoms or pedal edema. His weight had remained stable and he had not experienced any constitutional symptoms. During the initial physical examination, we documented a healed midline laparotomy scar, generalized abdominal tenderness of moderate intensity and a firm, ill-defined mass in the epigastric/umbilical region. Bilateral, pitting pedal edema was also noted. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory studies, including complete blood count, peripheral blood film, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, serum C-reactive protein, amylase, lipase, liver function tests and autoimmune work-up all had negative results. A repeat CT scan was also contemplated but, unfortunately, was not a financially feasible option for our patient. Upon review of the pre-operative CT scan of the abdomen , diffuse stranding and generalized thickening of the mesentery was noted. A soft tissue density encircling the mesenteric vessels was also identified in the mesentery. There were no signs of bowel obstruction. No abnormality was observed in the lymph nodes, liver or spleen. A retrospective diagnosis of mesenteric panniculitis was established on the basis of CT features, histopathological findings and the benign clinical course.
The patient was started on prednisone 40 mg/day plus azathioprine 50 mg/day and was re-evaluated after 4 weeks. An acceptable symptomatic improvement was observed. The pedal edema resolved completely whereas the pain reduced from five points to two points on a scale of ten points. Azathioprine was discontinued and a tapering dose of steroids was prescribed. The patient declined follow-up.