The patient, a 23-year-old male, was hospitalized for abdominal pain and diarrhea of 10 years duration.
The patient developed diarrhea 10 years ago with a frequency of 7-8 times/d that was accompanied by abdominal pain. The patient was treated conservatively in the Department of Gastroenterology for a long time. In September 2020, a colonoscopy examination revealed ulcerative colonic lesions with strictures, and the patient was treated with prednisolone, mesalazine and adalimumab for the past 3 mo. In December 2020 the patient developed recurrent severe abdominal pain with an inability to pass gas or defecate, and he was hospitalized.
A genetic examination revealed GSD Ib due to a mutation in the LC37A4 gene. The patient was treated with oral cornstarch since childhood. The patient had a 20-year history of epilepsy and received long-term treatment with oxcarbazepine.
The patient had no remarkable family history.
The patient was 140 cm tall and weighed 44 kg (Body mass index, 19.6 kg/m2). The patient was small and had a childish face. The abdomen was distended, the lower margin of the liver was at the level of the umbilicus, and the spleen was palpable below the ribs. The patient had abdominal pain, but no rebound pain or muscle tension.
The clinical disease activity index score was 269, indicating that the patient had active IBD. The complete blood cell count revealed mild anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 109 g/L and a normal platelet count. The patient had a high C-reactive protein level of 152.54 mg/L and a low white blood cell count (2.4 × 109/L). The transaminases were slightly elevated (alanine aminotransferase, 56.1 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 58.7 U/L). The urea nitrogen and creatinine levels were normal with the exception of elevated uric acid (667.9 μmol/m2). The calcitonin original, blood electrolytes, hematologic tumor markers, prothrombin and partial thromboplastin levels were normal. An electrocardiogram, echocardiography and pulmonary function tests were also normal.
Computed tomography indicated changes in the left transverse colon wall and significant narrowing of the intestinal lumen, leading to proximal colonic obstruction and fecal accumulation. Magnetic resonance imaging showed multiple segmental intestinal lesions in the jejunum, ileum and colon with obvious intestinal strictures in the colon. Colonoscopy revealed hyperemia and edema in the colonic mucosa with multiple ulcers and intestinal strictures . The pathologic evaluation of a biopsy indicated acute and chronic colonic mucosal inflammation and granulation tissue formation.