A 65-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of stage IV moderately differentiated gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma diagnosed eight months ago presented with a witnessed syncope for 2 min at home. He received systemic chemotherapy with FOLFOX regimen (oxaliplatin, leucovorin, and 5-fluorouracil) since diagnosis. Nivolumab was started 7.5 months ago. He received nivolumab 240 mg every 2 weeks for a total of 12 doses with no significant side effects reported. Restaging workup 4 months before presentation showed decreased tumour size.
The patient had no history of pulmonary diseases. He reported progressive dyspnoea with walking to the bathroom for four weeks before presentation. Vital signs were heart rate 85 beats per minute, blood pressure 128/70 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 90% on 5 L/min supplemental oxygen.
Physical examination revealed clear lungs but bilateral leg pitting oedema. Electrocardiogram showed right ventricular strain pattern . High-sensitive troponin I levels were negative. B-type natriuretic peptide was 115 pmol/L (normal range < 9.5 pmol/L). CT pulmonary angiogram showed no pulmonary embolism or lung disease . His oxygen requirement improved to 2 L/min after diuresis. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 29%, severely enlarged right ventricle (RV) (base diameter 6.5 cm, mid-cavity 4.6 cm) with reduced systolic function (fractional area change < 25%), D shaped septum in systole and diastole, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and severe elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 74 mmHg.
An echocardiogram eight months ago (before systemic chemotherapy or nivolumab was started) showed an LVEF of 50%, normal RV size (base diameter 3.8 cm) and systolic function, and no tricuspid regurgitation. An echocardiogram six months ago (after cycle 2 of systemic chemotherapy and the second dose of nivolumab) showed an LVEF of 50%, borderline dilated RV (base diameter 4.0 cm) but normal systolic function, and trivial tricuspid regurgitation .
The coronary angiogram showed no obstruction. Left heart catheterization showed LV end-diastolic pressure of 6 mmHg (normal range 3–8 mmHg). Right heart catheterization showed mean pulmonary artery pressure of 45 mmHg (normal range < 25 mmHg), pulmonary venous capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 7 mmHg (normal range ≤ 12 mmHg), and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 15.7 Wood units (Fick method) (normal range ≤ 3 Wood units) .
The patient had pulseless electrical activity arrest while in the restroom 4 h after cardiac catheterization. The patient was pronounced dead after resuscitation failed.
This patient experienced progressive exertional dyspnoea over one month with quick deterioration to syncope, acute hypoxaemic respiratory failure, and ultimately pulseless electrical activity arrest. This most likely represents an aggressive and fast-progressing form of PAH.