A 36-year-old, white-haired Korean man visited the ophthalmology department complaining of loss of vision in the inferior visual field of his right eye. His face was characterized by lateral displacement of the inner canthus of both eyes with a medial eyebrow and a high broad nasal bridge . His medical history was significant for paralysis of one arm after a cerebral infarction 13 years earlier and right-sided sensorineural hearing loss. His father , who had had hearing impairment, died of a myocardial infarction in his 50s, and his brother had bilateral hearing loss and heterochromia iridis. His best corrected vision was 20/25 with myopic correction (− 2.50 diopters) on the right and 20/20 with myopic correction (− 3.50 diopters) on the left. His intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in the right eye and 13 mmHg in the left eye. A hypochromic left iris was observed on slit-lamp examination. Funduscopy showed an ischemic change at the posterior pole with sparing of the foveal center along with retinal hemorrhages and white patches along the superotemporal arcade . Optical coherence tomography revealed thickening and opacification of the retinal layers corresponding to the ischemic area . Both BRVO and BRAO were detected on fluorescein angiography . An intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (Avastin®, bevacizumab) injection (1.25 mg in 0.05 mL) was administered in the right eye for macular edema. After 2 months, the patient’s macular edema was significantly improved and his visual acuity was maintained at 20/25.
Single nucleotide polymorphism analysis was performed by comparing a peripheral blood sample with the NM_181457 reference, and a PAX3 mutation was confirmed in exon 2 on chromosome 2q35 . An ACTCC deletion was noted at c.91–95, causing a frameshift of protein Thr31. A diagnosis of WS type 1 was made on the basis of this genetic mutation and the patient’s clinical features. Further biochemical workup revealed a raised serum homocysteine level (28.3 μmol/L). Antiphospholipid antibodies, including anticardiolipin and lupus anticoagulant, were also detected. Other blood coagulation factors were in the normal range or negative. The electrocardiogram showed no significant abnormality.