A 68-year-old female with a thyroid mass was referred to our hospital. Thyroid function tests, including thyroid-stimulating hormone, free T4, free T3, and thyroglobulin, were within normal limits. Ultrasound examination revealed a well-defined, hypoechoic, and oval mass measuring 20 × 17 × 18 mm . It had a homogeneous echo texture and was not associated with any calcification. No peripheral halo signs were present. Doppler imaging revealed an increase in peritumoral blood flow. No so-called “tumor inferno” was found. No lymph node swelling was observed in the neck. This was interpreted as a follicular tumor.
Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology revealed moderate cellularity, composed of discohesive and naked cells. The nuclei were short-spindled in shape and bland . The nuclei showed a granular chromatin pattern and small nucleoli. No nuclear features characteristic of PTC, such as intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions, nuclear grooves, or powdery chromatin, were observed. The cytology report was “malignant; MTC.” However, the serum calcitonin and CEA levels (< 0.05 pg/mL, 4.3 ng/mL) showed no increase; moreover, the calcitonin stimulation tests were unresponsive (3 min 6.46 pg/mL, 5 min 4.99 pg/mL). The patient had no family history of MTC, and germline RET mutations were not detected. To make the diagnosis and treatment, a subsequent right lobectomy was performed.
The mass was encapsulated in a thick capsule. The cut surface was solid, whitish-yellow in color, and was associated with focal fibrosis under the capsule . Microscopically, the tumor was encapsulated and did not show capsular or vascular invasion . It was composed of thin and long trabeculae, and other growth patterns, including papillary, follicular, solid, and insular, were not observed. The trabeculae were straight or wigged . Lumina and colloids were not observed. The tumor cells were elongated or fusiform and arranged perpendicular to the axis of the trabeculae . The cytoplasm was amphophilic and no yellow bodies were observed. The nuclei were oval or short spindles and did not show the nuclear characteristics of PTC, such as intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions, irregularly shaped nuclei, ground-glass chromatin, and nuclear grooves. A thin fibrovascular stroma was intercalated between the trabeculae. Focally hyalinized or edematous stroma was observed. Amyloid deposition, necrosis, and mitosis were not observed.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for paired-box gene 8 (PAX8) (EPR13510, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) (8G7G3/1, Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA) . Thyroglobulin (polyclonal, Histofine, Tokyo, Japan) , calcitonin (polyclonal, Dako, Denmark, Glostrup), chromogranin A (polyclonal, Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; COL-1, Histofine) were negative. Membranous reactivity of MIB-1 (MIB-1, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) was not observed. No inter- and intra-trabecular accumulation of type IV collagen-positive materials (polyclonal; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) was observed . The Ki-67 labeling index (MIB-1, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) was less than 1%.
In molecular testing, we analyzed common genetic alterations to FTA, FTC, PTC, HTT, PDTC, and MTC using the next-generation sequencing custom targeted panel (Ion Torrent Genexus, Thermo Fisher Sci., MA, USA), including point mutations in BRAF, N/K/H-RAS, RET, TERT promoter, EIF1AX, AKT1, CTNNB1, PTEN, etc. We also analyzed the presence of PAX8/GLIS1 and PAX8/GLIS3 fusion genes, which are hallmarks of HTT, using RT-PCR (Nikiforova MN et al., PMID: 30,648,929). None of PAX8/GLIS1 and PAX8/GLIS3 and mutations in BRAF, HRAS, KRAS, NRAS, TERT promoter, CTNNB1, PTEN, and RET were detected.
No recurrence or metastasis was observed during the 2-year postoperative follow-up.