Patient is a 73 year-old right hand dominant female who initially presented to the office complaining of atraumatic right shoulder pain with activity and limited range of motion of longstanding duration. On physical exam, she was found to have significantly limited active range of motion of the right shoulder and clinical signs of impingement. Radiographs at that time demonstrated superior escape of the humeral head with impingement of the greater tuberosity on the acromion and early acetabularization of the acromion . MRI findings were consistent with her x-ray and also demonstrated a lack of contiguous supraspinatus or infraspinatus tendon. At this juncture, the patient was diagnosed with rotator cuff arthropathy and elected to proceed with reverse total shoulder arthroplasty.
The patient was brought to the operating room and placed in the beach chair position. An incision was made from just lateral to the coracoid to the medial border of the proximal humeral shaft in line with the axillary fold. Subcutaneous tissue was dissected and the cephalic vein was identified. As the cephalic vein was mobilized and the clavipectoral fascia was incised, a discrete, branching, fascicular nerve was identified lateral and deep to the cephalic vein within the deltopectoral groove . The nerve was further dissected and traced both proximally and distally. Distally, the nerve and all branches were found to be diving into the anterior deltoid muscle. Proximally, it was found to run deep to the conjoined tendon, towards the brachial plexus. The nerve was freed from the deltoid muscle belly, allowing enough excursion to access the glenohumeral joint via a small deltoid window. The remainder of the operation concluded without complication and the wound was closed primarily . The patient was neurovascularly intact post-operatively with intact sensation in the axillary nerve distribution and able to fire her deltoid muscle. She healed without complications. At 4-month follow-up, she was doing well and able to actively abduct and forward flex her right shoulder to approximately 120 degrees .