A 66-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus presented to the cardiology clinic with palpitations. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm with right bundle branch block (RBBB). She had an unremarkable transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) and nuclear stress test 1 year ago as part of the pre-operative evaluation for hip surgery. A 24-h Holter monitor detected a high premature ventricular contraction (PVC) burden of 25.6%, with a predominant monomorphic morphology . A repeat TTE at this time showed normal right ventricular and left ventricular systolic function without any signs of regional wall motion abnormality. Given her high PVC burden, she underwent stress perfusion CMR to evaluate potential ischaemic aetiology, along with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging for myocardial scar assessment. Both ventricular size and systolic function were normal on CMR with an ejection fraction of 60–65%. There was no definite evidence of coronary artery pattern ischaemia on regadenoson stress perfusion test (Video 1). However, LGE detected two myocardial lesions. The first, the subendocardial enhancement, was located at the basal inferolateral wall with ≤25% of the myocardium segment involved. The second enhancement was noticed within the mid-myocardium of the basal inferoseptal wall . There was no definite increased in signal intensity detected by T2 imaging. Non-calcified enlarged hilar lymph nodes were seen on scout images. Cardiac sarcoidosis was considered as a possible diagnosis, and prior myocarditis was another differential diagnosis based on the LGE pattern. The patient underwent cardiac PET with sarcoidosis-specific protocol for further evaluation. Although there was no myocardial uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), high FDG uptake was seen in the hilar lymph nodes. The results of PET imaging raised the suspicion of either lymphoma or extracardiac sarcoidosis . The patient subsequently underwent transbronchial biopsy of the mediastinal lymph nodes, which confirmed the presence of non-necrotizing granulomas, suggestive of sarcoidosis.