A 47-year-old male presented following acute onset right upper limb weakness and expressive dysphasia. The past medical history included well controlled epilepsy and hypertension. There was no history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension or previous smoking. Urgent CT angiography of the head and neck demonstrated a distal left MCA embolic stroke. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated left ventricular dilatation with severe systolic dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] 25%). Mobile thrombus was noted at the apex of the left ventricle, measuring 14 × 12 mm . The aortic valve was bicuspid with moderate stenosis and mild valvular regurgitation. The ascending aorta was mildly dilated at less than 40 mm. Subsequent cerebral MR imaging confirmed a left frontal lobe cortical infarct with evidence of focal haemorrhagic transformation and evidence of previous infarction in the MCA territory. The patient was commenced on apixaban and therapy (Bisoprolol and Ramipril) for left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Subsequent angiography demonstrated a significant (80%) proximal LAD stenosis, proximal 90% stenosis of a small non dominant circumflex and 80% stenosis of a large ramus intermediate.
Given the mobile nature of the LV thrombus and the history of stroke, the patient underwent early surgery to reduce the risk of further embolic episodes. The patient proceeded to coronary artery bypass grafting, mechanical aortic valve replacement and resection of the left ventricular thrombus. A repeat CT head scan performed prior to surgery (12 days following the infarction), demonstrated the frontal lobe infarct with no evidence of further haemorrhagic transformation. Apixaban was discontinued and the patient commenced on intravenous heparin in preparation for surgery.
The patient underwent surgery via median sternotomy and the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) was harvested as an in-situ pedicle graft. The left radial was harvested as a free graft. Systemic heparinisation commenced and cardiopulmonary bypass was instituted with bi-caval and distal ascending aortic cannulation. The left ventricle was vented via the right superior pulmonary vein. The aorta was cross clamped and the heart arrested via anterograde and retrograde cold blood cardioplegia. This was repeated at regular intervals to provide myocardial protection.
Intra operative transesophageal echocardiography confirmed a bicuspid aortic valve with moderate aortic stenosis, severe left ventricular dysfunction and apical left ventricular thrombus with a mobile component . The aorta was opened in a transverse fashion and the native aortic valve was excised and the annulus decalcified. A 5 mm zero degree Olympus® Videoscope was introduced into the left ventricle with excellent visibility of the left ventricular thrombus assisted by venting of the left ventricle . With visualisation of the apex under the 5 mm camera, the thrombi were removed using a single shaft grasper and rongeur . All fresh thrombi were removed, and a fine tipped suction catheter aided in removal of residual thrombus . One component of the apical thrombus was firmly embedded within the trabeculae and was not removed as it was felt unlikely to pose an embolic threat . The left anterior descending artery was bypassed with the LIMA, and the radial artery conduit was used to bypass the ramus branch. The aortic valve was replaced with a 25 mm St Jude mechanical prosthesis and the aortotomy closed. The patient was weaned off cardiopulmonary bypass on first attempt with inotropic support. The patient was discharged day 7 with no complications and maintained on warfarin (target INR of 2 to 3). The LVEF on echocardiography was 45% on discharge.
On review six weeks following surgery there was no evidence of left ventricular thrombus. The aortic valve appeared well seated and there was mild paravalvular aortic regurgitation. There was no residual sequelae from his previous stroke.