A 73-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with severe pain on the right side of her face. Ten years ago, she was diagnosed with TN in another hospital and managed with carbamazepine. However, the efficacy of the medication waned as the disease progressed. Two months before the present admission, the pain had worsened and the medication had become completely ineffective. The patient had been diagnosed with hypertension 8 years ago, and her blood pressure on admission was 164/87 mmHg. Neurological examination revealed a trigger point on the right side of the face, with no other discernible abnormalities. Three-dimensional time-of-flight magnetic resonance angiography and fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition revealed compression of a small artery in the pontine cisterna segment of the right trigeminal nerve. The abnormal artery was suspected to be a PPTA that might originate from the precavernous portion of the right ICA . After admission, the patient’s blood pressure was effectively managed.
Following comprehensive discussions with the patient and her family regarding the surgical options and associated risks, microvascular decompression (MVD) was performed via the right suboccipital retrosigmoid approach. Intraoperatively, the neurovascular structures within the right cerebellopontine angle were meticulously dissected, and the close anatomical relationship between the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) and the trigeminal nerve was revealed. An unidentified artery was observed superior to the trigeminal nerve. No contact between the superior cerebellar artery (SCA) and the trigeminal nerve was found when exploring toward the tentorial margin. Subsequently, the culprit unidentified artery was found to pass through Meckel’s cavity and reach the surface of the pons. A concomitant relationship between the culprit artery and the trigeminal nerve in the direction of Meckel’s cavity was observed. The culprit artery then descended to form a loop in front of the root of the trigeminal nerve before curving posteriorly and continuing as the AICA; thus, it was identified as a PPTAv. The PPTAv was cautiously detached from the trigeminal nerve. Following this, mini-volume Teflon felts were gently positioned between the trigeminal nerve and the PPTAv–AICA without exerting force (as a separation barrier, while the limited local space and intricate course of the artery and vein made it difficult to perform slinging technique). Special attention was paid not to leave any blood on Teflon felts. .
Postoperatively, the patient experienced complete resolution of symptoms without any complications. Postoperative computed tomography angiography showed the PPTAv continuing posteriorly as the AICA and supplying the cerebellar hemisphere, which confirmed the intraoperative judgment . Re-examination of the magnetic resonance angiography images revealed that the vascular compression in the cisternal segment of the right trigeminal nerve had disappeared and the right trigeminal nerve had become thicker . The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 9 and had no recurrence of pain in 12 months of follow-up.