A 65-year-old man, with no previous medical history, presented to the emergency room with significant trauma and brief loss of consciousness following a high speed motor vehicle accident, where he was pedestrian.
The clinical examination on arrival revealed an agitated patient, with Glasgow Coma Score of 11/15, without sensory-motor deficit, exquisite pain on palpation of the cervico-dorsal spinous processes. On the respiratory plan, he had an arterial oxygen saturation of 84% inambient air, he was polypneic at 24 breaths per minute; Pulmonary auscultation found decreased vesicular murmur in both pulmonary fields. Hemodynamically; Blood pressure was at 75/32 mmHg, heart rate of 135 beats/min. There were no external injuries on the chest or neck. The rest of the examination revealed a deformity of both lower limbs associated with ecchymosis and multiple abrasions.
The initial management consisted of oxygen therapy with a high concentration mask, a vascular filling, vasopressor support and analgesic treatment. Shortly, after his admission the patient has become agitated and altered his consciousness prompting his intubation after rapid sequence induction.
Arterial blood gases under FIO2 = 40% were as follows: pH: 7.34; PaO2: 106 mmHg; PaCO2: 32 mmHg; HCO3: 19 mmol/l; SaO2: 98%. Lactate: 3.2 mmol/l.
The blood count showed a hemoglobin concentration of 8.7 g/dl, hemostasis and blood ionogram were normal.
After stabilization of the patient, computed tomography (CT) scan examinations were performed: Brain CT revealed a pneumencephalus and meningeal hemorrhage without skull base or sinus fracture . Thoracic CT showed a bilateral hemothorax, a right pneumothorax of low abundance and a left pneumothorax of moderate abundance that was drained , subcutaneous cervico-dorsal emphysema and the presence of intradural air on several levels . There was no abdominopelvic injury. The rest of radiological assessment found a comminuted fracture of the left femur and a fracture of the right tibia and fibula.
The symptomatic treatment was continued and the evolution was unfavorable marked by the installation of a hemorrhagic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation leading to the death of the patient the day after his accident.