An 81-year-old woman was initially referred to our ward due to mild urinary frequency, urgent urination and painful urination that had lasted for 1 month. One month prior to referral, the patient had new-onset urinary frequency, urgent urination and painful urination without obvious inducement. During this month, the patient was treated with antibiotics at the local hospital, but the response was not satisfactory. After a CT examination at the local hospital, a bladder mass was found and then referred to our ward. The patient has suffered from hypertension and diabetes for 30 years, and her blood pressure is currently controlled within the normal range after oral medication. Laboratory investigations included the following: leukocytes: 4.31 × 109/L, hemoglobin: 128g/L; blood sugar: 8.45 mmol/L (reference range: 3.9-6.1umol/L); triglycerides: 3.55mmol/L (reference range: 0-1.7mmol/L); platelet :113×109/L (reference range: 125-350×109/L). Routine urine examination: urine occult blood: +-cell/UL; White blood cell: +-cell/UL; White blood cell:40/ul (reference range: 0-28/ul). Ultrasound examination showed a 34×21 mm solid mass in the left anterior wall of the bladder. MRI report : there is a 24×16×29 mm nodule in the left posterior wall of the bladder that can be obviously unevenly enhanced, no enlarged lymph nodes. Cystoscopy and biopsy confirmed high-grade bladder urothelial carcinoma. Pathology report : High-grade urothelial carcinoma, HER- 2 protein: (2+), PD-1 (positive tumor cell number 5%), PD-L1 (Combined Positive Score (CPS): 70). Preliminary diagnosis: 1. Bladder urothelial carcinoma T2N0M0; 2. High risk of hypertension grade 1; 3. Type II diabetes. Despite our patient communication, patients and their families still want to preserve the bladder and refuse surgery.
After fully communicating with the patient and his family and signing the informed consent, use the gemcitabine + cisplatin regimen for treatment. On February 14, 2022, the patient received intravenous cisplatin for the first time, and on February 15, she received gemcitabine intravesical hyperthermia under local anesthesia. Subsequently, the patient developed intolerance symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and fatigue. We considered the patient to be intolerant to platinum-based chemotherapy. After the patient and his family agreed and signed the informed consent, the treatment plan was changed to gemcitabine intravesical hyperthermic infusion combined with intravenous tislelizumab immunotherapy. On March 4, 2022, the patient received gemcitabine intravesical hyperthermia under local anesthesia and received intravenous tislelizumab for the first time. The patient subsequently received gemcitabine intravesical hyperthermic infusion combined with intravenous tislelizumab every three weeks. The patient received a total of 5 complete treatments of gemcitabine bladder hyperthermia combined with intravenous tislelizumab. On April 3, the patient was reexamined MRI , and the report: compared with before, the tumor has shrunk significantly, and the lymph nodes are similar to before. ECT report: no obvious abnormal bone metabolism was found in the whole body. On May 26, she reviewed the MRI : The thickness of the left posterior wall of the bladder was reduced, and the lymph nodes remained unchanged. The patient developed symptoms of bladder infection after the end of treatment in June, and subsequently received only intravenous tislelizumab intravenous infusion, but failed to receive bladder hyperthermic infusion therapy.