A 36-year-old, gravida 1, para 1 woman, who was 35 weeks pregnant, was admitted to another hospital due to syncope and massive hematochezia (estimated volume, 1 L). She was taking iron pills for iron deficiency anemia associated with pregnancy (hemoglobin value 1 month ago was 7.4 mg/dL). Even though her stools were usually black, she passed fresh bloody stools without abdominal pain. She had no family history of AVM or bleeding disorder.
On arrival at the previous hospital, the patient was in hemorrhagic shock, with a blood pressure of 60/38 mmHg, pulse rate of 92 beats/min, oxygen saturation of 100% with an oxygen mask inhalation of 10 L/min, and body temperature was 37°C.
A peripheral venous line was inserted, and crystalloid and blood transfusion were started. The patient was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital while being given rapid blood transfusions due to hemodynamic instability, requiring intervention for hemorrhagic shock. Her medical history was unremarkable, and she did not receive anticoagulant or antiplatelet therapy.
On arrival, her blood pressure was 98/72 mmHg, pulse rate 97 beats/min, and oxygen saturation 100% with an oxygen mask inhalation of 10 L/min .
Physical examination revealed fresh blood in the rectum. Laboratory tests revealed a hemoglobin of 6.5 g/dL, and coagulopathy was confirmed (fibrinogen, 175 mg/dL; platelets, 79,000/μL; prothrombin time, 13.0 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 35.4 s; and anti-thrombin 3, 37%). She had a white blood cell count of 9.2 × 109/L and a C-reactive protein level of < 0.3 mg/dL (undetectable).
An emergency cesarean section was deemed necessary. Before the cesarean section, a colonoscopy was performed to identify the bleeding source in the rectum. Bleeding from the rectum was easily controllable. However, the colonoscopy failed to secure a visual field because of the bloody fluid .
Immediately before entering the operating room, the patient exhibited a decreased level of consciousness, worsening blood pressure, and fetal bradycardia dysrhythmia (heart rate 60 bpm). An emergency cesarean section was then successfully performed (blood loss in the surgical field: 639 mL). The newborn had a birth weight of 2550 g, and the Apgar scores were 1 and 2 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The patient was transferred to the angiography room under general anesthesia due to persistent hemodynamic instability and hematochezia. A superior mesenteric angiogram revealed an ascending colonic AVM with extravasation of the contrast medium from a branch of the ileocolic artery .
Coils were placed as scaffolds to decrease the blood flow. An additional 33% N-butyl cyanoacrylate and iodized oil mixture were carefully administered to fill the coils. Localized blood flow control and hemodynamic stability were achieved via embolization. Postoperative contrast leakage was not observed .
When entering the intensive care unit, laboratory tests revealed a hemoglobin of 9.3 g/dL, and coagulopathy was confirmed (fibrinogen, 110 mg/dL; platelets, 66,000/μL; prothrombin time, 15.5 s; activated partial thromboplastin time, 51.9 s) . The patient required 20 units of packed red blood cells, 16 units of fresh frozen plasma, and 30 units of platelet transfusion throughout the resuscitation while using vital signs and blood tests as indicators. The patient had an uneventful medical recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 12. Six months after her discharge, elective colonoscopy showed no abnormal colonic findings, including in the ascending colon, where the AVM was previously located. The brain magnetic resonance imaging was also unremarkable. The patient remained asymptomatic. The newborn was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit. She successfully recovered and was discharged when she was 22 days old.