A 15-year-old boy was diagnosed with an ACL tear after sustaining an injury to the left knee while skiing. A few days after the trauma, he underwent arthroscopic ACL reconstruction using an ipsilateral hamstring autograft. During arthroscopy, no additional injuries beyond the ACL were detected. The patient had returned to normal-high physical activity levels 7 months after the surgery.
At 18 years, this patient presented to our clinic with persistent knee instability over 2 months after a knee injury during soccer practice. Physical examination revealed slight knee effusion, an active range of motion of 0-0-120° because of severe pain, and 6-10 mm of anterior tibial translation (Grade II) during the Lachman test, when compared with the uninjured side. A noticeable “clunk” associated with pain was observed during the pivot shift test. The McMurray test was positive for a lesion of the medial meniscus. The patient had pain on palpation of the medial joint line. The knee was stable during varus and valgus stress tests, as well as during the posterior drawer test.
MRI revealed a complete ACL graft rupture and a complex tear of the medial meniscus (ramp lesion and bony avulsion of the posterior root of the MM) .
Preoperative knee CT was performed to plan the ACL revision and assess the position of the tunnels and any osteolysis. The CT showed no significant widening of both tunnels. According to Bernard and Hertel's grid, the tibial tunnel was semianatomic, and the femoral tunnel was vertical-anterior in relation to the anatomic footprint (green dot in Fig. ). The CT also revealed a bone fragment in the intercondylar notch, indicating bony avulsion of the posterior root of the MM .
Under spinal anesthesia and after antibiotic prophylaxis, the patient was placed supine with the tourniquet at the proximal thigh. The surgery began with ipsilateral patellar bone-tendon-bone autograft harvest and its preparation on a separate table. Knee arthroscopy was performed using standard anterolateral and anteromedial portals with a 30° arthroscope. On arthroscopic inspection through the intercondylar view, we confirmed a complete ramp lesion (Thaunat classification: type 4) and bony avulsion fracture of the posterior horn of the MM (LaPrade classification: type 5) .
No remnants of the previous ACL graft were identified. The Posterior Cruciate Ligament appeared normal, and no other lesions were observed on the lateral compartment.
The ramp lesion was repaired using an all-inside technique with a dedicated hook. The first step was to recreate the anatomic attachment of the meniscus to the posterior capsule: a posteromedial (PM) portal was created, and using a 25° curved hook, a needle was passed through the medial meniscus and through the posterior capsule to a vertical suture. .
Once the ramp lesion was sutured, a transtibial technique was used to address the root tear: Using a meniscus root self-retrieving suture device, 2 sutures were applied on the root of the meniscus and retrieved from the anteromedial portal. A tibial guide was then used to create the tibial tunnel with a 2.4-mm K-wire from the anterior tibial cortex to the anatomic insertion of the posterior root of the MM, using the shiny white fibers as posterior reference. Then using a suture shuttling device, these sutures were retrieved through the tibial tunnel and then tied to the Attachable Button System (Arthrex) on the anterior tibial cortex .
Subsequently, the ACL revision was performed by creating 2 new tunnels and using a patellar bone-tendon-bone autograft. The tibial tunnel was semianatomic, and the femoral tunnel was vertical-anterior in relation to the anatomic footprint. To avoid convergence of the meniscal and ACL tunnels, it was crucial to create a meniscal tunnel that is more horizontally inclined and with a lateral entry point. To further stabilize the ACL repair, anterolateral stabilization was performed using the technique described by Ellison et al. applying a knotless suture anchor on Gerdy's tubercle.
The patient followed a non–weight-bearing protocol for 4 weeks to protect the meniscal sutures, while maintaining 0 to 90° knee range of motion. Starting from the fifth week, a progressive weight-bearing protocol was implemented, allowing for full weight-bearing by the eighth week. Clinical follow-ups were conducted at 1, 3, 6 months, and 1 year after surgery. The patient has completely recovered and returned to normal-high physical activity 1 year after surgery. There was a significant improvement in all subjective functional scores compared with presurgery measurements: The Lysholm score improved from 64 to 92, the Tegner activity scale increased from 2 to 9, the International Knee Documentation Committee score improved from 48.45 to 77.31, and the Western Ontario and McMaster University score was 100% after surgery .