A 54-year-old, overweight (BMI 29), Caucasian man with a history of tobacco smoking and gastroesophageal reflux presented to the emergency department with chest pain. He described it as sudden in onset, while he was working on his laptop. Location was substernal, radiating to his left arm and jaw. Initially, the pain was 7/10 in intensity but it improved spontaneously even before he reached the hospital or received any medications. On further probing, he reported that he had experienced intermittent episodes of chest pain for the last 3 weeks but it was mostly exertional and was relieved with rest. The pain was not associated with shortness of breath, diaphoresis, or nausea/vomiting. He denied any fever, chills, cough, abdominal pain, urinary or bowel complaints. He did not have any family history of significant cardiac events.
On presentation, the patient was hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 139/85 mmHg and heart rate of 81 beats per minute. His EKG did not show any ischemic changes, no left ventricular hypertrophy, or left bundle branch block. Three sets of serial troponin enzyme were less than 0.010. Lipid panel showed total cholesterol of 235, triglycerides 408, HDL 26, and LDL could not be calculated. His pretest probability of CAD was intermediate on the basis of age and sex. Since the patient was chest pain free since admission and was able to exercise, an exercise treadmill EKG stress test was ordered. The patient achieved 95% of maximum predicted heart rate and 10 METs of exercise with normalization of slight T wave inversions that were seen in leads V2, V3, and V4 at rest. Thus, it was read as maximum asymptomatic stress test with intermediate probability of ischemia. Echocardiogram was obtained which showed normal left ventricular function and no significant valvular or wall motion abnormalities. At this point, cardiology was consulted to evaluate the patient and they recommended coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) for further risk stratification.
CCTA results showed approximate 70% stenosis of the origin of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) secondary to noncalcified plaque extending over a length of approximately 4 mm , approximate 40–50% stenosis of the proximal ramus intermedius branch secondary to mixed calcified and noncalcified plaque and scattered calcified and noncalcified plaque along the circumflex and obtuse marginal branches with 30–40% luminal diameter stenosis. Fractional flow reserve–computed tomography (FFR-CT) revealed a high likelihood of flow-limiting stenosis with a value of less than 0.5 secondary to the significant stenosis at the origin of the LAD and a low likelihood of flow-limiting stenosis in the left circumflex, ramus intermedius, and right coronary arteries.
The patient was then taken for cardiac catheterization which showed a 95% stenotic lesion of LAD with partial perfusion (TIMI grade 2 flow) giving rise to diagonal 1, which has an ostial and proximal 70% stenosis; ramus intermedius with proximal 70% segmental stenosis; circumflex, nondominant vessel, which has mild disease in proximal distal segments, giving rise to obtuse marginal 1, which has proximal 70% stenosis. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted and the patient underwent bypass graft surgery.
The patient did well after the surgery. He stayed in the hospital for 4 days post-op without any complaints and was discharged home in stable condition. A referral to home care was made to provide for monitoring of the patient's progress and detection of any complications during the immediate post-op period. Cardiac rehabilitation referral was also provided and the patient was instructed to follow up with a cardiologist and cardiothoracic surgeon.