A 52-year-old caucasian male with severe arterial hypertension was admitted to hospital on 10 May 2020, due to uncontrolled blood pressure with acute kidney failure. The patient did not have fever or respiratory symptoms. He had a past medical history of refractory hypertension with hypertensive heart disease and chronic kidney disease, morbid obesity, dyslipidemia and sleep apnea–hypopnea syndrome. He was receiving therapy with five antihypertensive agents of different classes, including angiotensin receptor blockers. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) screening for SARS-CoV-2 performed on a nasopharyngeal swab (NPS) before hospital admission was positive [cycle threshold value (Ct) = 30]. Chest radiograph did not show any abnormal findings, and all the laboratory biomarkers, including neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, serum levels of C-reactive protein, interleukin 6, d-dimer, and ferritin, were within the normal range. After controlling blood pressure, he had an uneventful recovery and was discharged home 5 days after hospital admission. The patient did not receive corticosteroids, other immunomodulators, or antivirals.
He was contacted by phone 1 month after discharge and offered follow-up at the outpatient clinic to repeat serologic tests and NPS for SARS-CoV-2 at 2 and 6 months after hospital admission. Unfortunately, he missed the 2-month appointment but came to the clinic for the 6-month visit, on 14 December 2020. At that date, PCR on NPS was negative, and specific immunoglobulin G (IgG) against the SARS-CoV-2 internal nucleocapsid protein (N-IgG) and surface S1 domain of the spike protein (S-IgG) (anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG ELISA, Euroimmun, Lubeck, Germany) were not present.
On 11 January 2021, 240 days after the first infection, he presented to hospital with a 3-day history of fever, myalgia, and asthenia. The patient had not received any vaccination against SARS-CoV-2. Chest radiograph was normal, and oxygen saturation was 95%. SARS-CoV-2 infection was confirmed by PCR testing on NPS with a Ct value of 18. He had a serum creatinine level of 1.8 mg/dL (normal value, 0.66–1.25 mg/dL) and a mild elevation of liver transaminases. The rest of the laboratory results were normal as with the initial infection. He did not have SARS-CoV-2-specific IgG antibodies (anti-SARS-CoV-2 S-IgG and N-IgG, Virclia Vircell, Granada, Spain and anti-SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2-IgG, Liaison DiaSorin, Saluggia, Italy). Specific IgM (anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM, Liaison DiaSorin) and IgM + IgA (Virclia Vircell) were also negative. An extensive immunological investigation, including of lymphocyte subpopulations in peripheral blood, ruled out immunodeficiency. He received symptomatic care and oral dexamethasone with resolution of fever and myalgia, and was discharged on 13 January 2021. On 15 February 2021, PCR on NPS was negative. At that time, specific S-IgG, N-IgG and IgM + IgA (Virclia Vircell), and S1/S2-IgG (Liaison DiaSorin) were present. A summary of the clinical course observations made during first infection and reinfection is shown in Fig. .