Here we report four cases affected by GM1 gangliosidosis type II from three consanguineous families.
A 6.5-year-old girl was referred to the Pediatric Neurology Department in the Mofid Children Hospital, Tehran, Iran due to progressive ataxia and neurodevelopmental regression. She was born from a consanguineous marriage (first-degree cousins) with uneventful birth history. She had normal neurodevelopmental milestones up to the age of three years when she developed progressive ataxia. She gradually lost her lingual and motor skills and became wheelchair-dependent by the age of 5 years. Although she was reported to have normal intellectual abilities, her mental abilities decreased over the course of disease. Detailed neurological exam was performed in the first admission and in the subsequent visits, which revealed neurodevelopmental regression, reduction of age-related intellectual abilities and nystagmus. The “Fix and Follow test” of moving objects was not normal and she gradually lost her vision. Two magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (in the third and fourth) assessments revealed minor signal changes in the periventricular white matter without any progression . Ophthalmologic study did not show any pathologic signs and all metabolic studies were reported in normal range. Electroencephalography (EEG), Visual Evoked Potential (VEP) and Electroretinography (ERG) were normal. The leukocyte enzyme activity was tested and reported normal beta-Galactosidase activity. Regarding her family history, 4 members in her mother’s family died due to similar clinical presentations.
The family had two affected individuals who were referred to the Pediatric Neurology Department in the Mofid Children Hospital, Tehran, Iran due to neurodevelopmental regression. These two siblings, a 9-year-old boy and a 4-year-old girl, had normal developmental milestones up to the age of 3 years. The boy showed progressive ataxia, dystonia and mental decline. All metabolic studies and routine laboratory data were in normal ranges. MRI study showed mild cerebellar atrophy with mild signal changes in the periventricular white matter . The affected girl had similar symptoms with loss of her acquired motor and lingual abilities after the age of 3 years as well as progressive ataxia, speech problem and neurodevelopmental regression. The parents are first-degree cousins who have one unaffected child and positive history of multiple deceased individuals with similar clinical presentation in their extended family.
The patient is an 8-years old girl, who is already bed-ridden and living in the same village as the family II. She was reported to have similar findings to the family II which include progressive ataxia, neurodevelopmental regression, loss of speech and mental decline started around the age of 3 years. Her parents are first-degree cousins and have history of unexplained death of children in their extended families from both sides.
Whole exome sequencing utilizing next generation sequencing on an Illumina platform was carried out on DNA samples from two patients and a carrier mother. Detail of next generation sequencing data are provided in Table . The text files of sequences were aligned using BWA aligner tool and variants were identified using GATK and annotated with the use of annovar software. In total, more than 120 K annotated variations were identified with hetero/homo ratio of 1.6 to 1.8, which then were filtered based on their frequency, location, functional consequences, inheritance pattern and more importantly clinical phenotype. All three patients were identified as homozygous for a missense mutation in GLB1 gene (c. 601G > A, p.R201C, NM_000404). This single nucleotide variant (SNV) is located on exon 6 of GLB1 gene in position 33099713 on chromosome 3. Homozygous mutations in GLB1 gene have been previously reported to be the genetic cause of GM1 gangliosidosis, (OMIM number 203600), which has an autosomal recessive form of inheritance. This mutation (rs72555360) has the minor allele frequency (MAF) of less than 0.0002 and is predicted to be damaging and highly conserved using different bioinformatics software such as polyphen, SIFT, LRT, Mutation Taster, FATHMM, Radial SVM and Mutation Assessor . The mutation was reported to cause GM1 gangliosidosis type II and clinvar ID of RCV000000973.1 for its pathogenic mutation was previously assigned. The Arg201Cys mutation, eliminating a BspMI site, was previously identified in a late-infantile/juvenile patient who had psychomotor retardation/deterioration, dysostosis multiplex, and hepatosplenomegaly. In their study, they identified that the expression of enzyme activity was less severely affected in Arg201Cys mutant which was reported to be associated with late-infantile/juvenile forms . In our study, in addition to the confirmation of mutation with the use of different bioinformatics software, segregation studies using sanger sequencing was performed in family members and extended family members of the patients which confirmed the damaging possibility of the mutation in homozygote state in these patients .