A 58-year-old female patient with a 2-year history of breast cancer, a 3-mo history of BCBM and a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment after modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer.
The patient was diagnosed with BCBM at the time of admission. One year prior, the patient underwent modified radical mastectomy and, 3 mo ago, underwent unilateral resection of BCBM. The results of an aspiration biopsy of the ipsilateral breast at the first visit were as follows: ER (-), PR (-), HER-2 (3+), HER-2 (3+), and Ki-67 (55%-60%+) . The results of the biopsy after modified radical mastectomy were as follows: ER (1+, approximately 1%), PR (-), HER-2 (3+), and Ki-67 (approximately 60%+) . The results of the pathological biopsy after brain metastasis resection were as follows: ER (-), PR (-), HER-2 (3+), and Ki-67 (10%-20%+) . After the resection of brain metastases, routine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed irregular and abnormal signals in the right cerebellar hemisphere (original surgical area) with unclear boundaries (size, approx. 25 mm × 20 mm). An enhanced scan showed heterogeneous enhancement. The signal in the right cerebellar hemisphere was abnormal, and metastasis was considered.
The patient had a 12-year history of diabetes, was compliant with diabetes treatment (regular insulin injections), and had good blood glucose control.
The patient denied a family history of malignant tumors.
The breasts were asymmetrical. The right breast was absent, and a well-healed surgical scar (approximately 20 cm in length) was visible on the right chest wall. The left breast showed normal development. There was no obvious tumor palpable in the left breast, and no superficial swollen lymph nodes were palpable. The patient had an unstable gait and slightly slurred speech, physiological reflexes were present, pathological reflexes were not elicited, and the meningeal irritation sign was weakly positive.
The levels of tumor markers in the blood did not markedly exceed the normal range during the entire treatment process.
MRI of the brain metastasis, with recurrence in the original brain surgical area, is shown in Figure . After 10 cycles of systemic drug treatment, the tumor size decreased considerably . The brain tumor was larger after the 16th cycle of treatment . Although the treatment plan was adjusted, the original systemic treatment regimen was generally unchanged; radiotherapy for 12 cycles was added. Brain MRI showed that the tumor was in a stable state . The size of the tumor remained stable at 15 mm × 10 mm .