Patient
A 39-yr-old infertile man with infertility by three recurrent miscarriage, and 46, XY, t(2;8)(p24;p21)mat carrier was studied. Semen analysis revealed normozoospermia. The presence of recent illness, high fever, seminal hyperviscosity or primary hormonal abnormalities was discarded. The patient presented varicocele (8 years ago) treated by varicocelectomy. His wife (30 yr old) had a normal karyotype and no reproductive problems (son born in 1994 with another partner). Recently the couple had treatment of assisted fertilization; unfortunately, we lost contact with the patient.
For analysis of aneusomies and sperm DNA fragmentation, in healthy male controls, as it was not possible to include controls related to the case five healthy male donors (age range, 25-30 yr) with normozoospermia according to the criteria of the WHO 2010 and normal karyotypes were included as controls. Ejaculated sperm samples were collected after 3-5 days of sexual abstinence. After liquefaction and washing with PBS (pH 7.4; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), sperm samples were fixed with a fresh fixative solution (methanol: acetic acid, 3:1 v/v, -20oC) and then stored at -20oC until further use.
Cytogenetic analysis
Karyotyping was performed from blood lymphocyte cultures using G-bands by trypsin/Giemsa (GTG) analysis. Fifty metaphases were analyzed .
Slide preparation
Sperm samples were fixed with 3:1 methanol: acetic acid, spread onto slides and stored in a freezer at -20oC until the FISH procedure. The slides were incubated in a decondensation solution (NaOH 1N) for 2 min, rinsed in distilled water, passed through a series of ethanol 70%, 90%, and 100% for 1 min each and then air-dried. Next, the slides were incubated in formamide 70%, 72oC for 2 min, ethanol 70%, 90%, and 100% for 1 min each, and then air-dried. Fixed lymphocyte cultures were spread onto slides directly before FISH.
FISH
FISH was performed according to the manufacturer’s (Poseidon FISH DNA probe. Kreatech, Diagnostics. Leica Biosystems; Nussloch, Germany) protocol on lymphocytes and sperm cells using a set of fluorescent centromeric and subtelomeric probes. To determine the segregation type and nuclear chromosomal content of each sperm, we used subtelomeric probes of chromosome-2 pter (green) and chromosome-8 pter (red). The hybridization of centromeric probes of chromosome-8 (CEP 8) was marked in red (D8Z1, red), and of chromosome-8 was marked in green (D8Z1, green); results in yellow were used as internal control.
For analysis of the aneuploidy, we used centromeric probes of chromosome-8 (CEP 8, D8Z1 alfa satellite, red) and chromosome-Y (DYZ1, satellite III orange) (Vysis, Inc., Abbot Laboratories, Downers Grove, IL, USA). Probes were first tested on chromosomes using conventional cytogenetic and FISH techniques. The success of the FISH experiments was 97%. For analysis, 500 sperm cells /individual were assessed using a Zeiss AxioPhot microscope (Carl Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany) equipped with a proper filter set (DAPI/FITC/Red Texas/Triple) and 20× and 100× oil-immersion objectives.
The images were impressed using an AxioCam MRm Zeiss 16-bit black-and-white charge-coupled device in a 12-bit TIFF format. The same person performed the analysis.
Sperm DNA fragmentation
Three methodologies were used to evaluate DNA damage in sperm: SCD test, alkaline comet assay and DBD-FISH. In SCD test, fragmented sperm cells produce a characteristic halo, representing DNA loops after of extraction of nuclear proteins and acid denaturation. Non-fragmented sperm do not halo produce. The SCD test was developed as the Halosperm® kit according to the manufacturer’s (Halotech DNA, Madrid, Spain).
We analyzed 300 sperm cells per sample under a microscope with objective of 100×. Five categories of halos were considered according to Fernández and colleagues criteria ; (a) sperm with large halos and (b) medium-sized halos were considered as non-fragmented. Sperm cells with a very-small-sized halo (c) and, sperm cells without a halo (d) were considered as fragmented. Sperm cells without a halo, but weakly or irregularly stained were considered as severe DNA fragmentation or “degraded (e)” (see ). Sperm without these characteristics were excluded from the analysis.
The comet assay methodology was performing according with Singh and colleagues . The slides were stained with propidium iodide (1 µg/mL) in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA), and length of the tails (in µm; Mean±SD) of one hundred cells/individual was obtained. DBD-FISH consists in DNA protein depletion and ssDNA formation by alkaline treatment. It allows evidence ruptures in alkaline labile sites and abasic sites. Subsequently these ssDNA are hybridized with specific probes labeled with fluorescence and quantified by image analysis software Image J (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/)
DBD-FISH in sperm was performed according to Fernández and colleagues. When the DNA breaks increase, the alkali produces more single-stranded DNA and more probe hybridizes, increasing levels of fluorescence . Samples were analyzed in Zeiss Axiophot fluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss, Göttingen, Germany) with specifics filters (DAPI, FITC and Texas red). Image J (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/) was used to analyze 50 sperm nuclei by sample.
Cytogenetic study
Chromosomal analysis of the infertile patient revealed a balanced translocation involving chromosomes-2 and -8; 46, XY, t(2;8)(p24;p21)mat karyotype. Partial karyotypes from GTG banding with ideograms of the chromosomes involved in the balanced translocation are shown in . FISH confirmed the presence of this translocation.
Segregation pattern
The meiotic segregation pattern showed a schematic representation of the theoretically predicted tetravalent structure (pachytene stage of meiosis I) with a chromosome labeling system in the analyzed carrier. An analysis of meiotic segregation by FISH revealed that 61.6% of the sperm cells were genetically unbalanced. The following percentages were found in the different segregations: Alternate: 38.4%, Adyacent 1: 15.6%, Adyacent 2; 12.8%, 3:1: 24.8%, 4:0: 4% and others 4.4% ( shows representative examples of different spermatozoa FISH phenotypes that occurred because of the meiotic segregation patterns in the 46, XY, t(2;8)(p24;p21)mat carrier.
Sperm aneusomies
Analysis of the aneusomies of chromosome-8 (nullisomic and disomic) and chromosome-Y(disomic) in the t(2;8) (p24; p21) mat carrier revealed three- and 24-fold increases, respectively, in comparison with that of the control group . All aneusomy frequencies were significantly higher according to the mean control values (p<0.01). Representative examples of aneusomic spermatozoa are shown in .
Sperm DNA fragmentation
Interesting observations were made during sperm DNA fragmentation evaluation in the t(2;8)(p24;p21)mat carrier. The three tests used (SCD, alkaline comet assay, and DBD-FISH) showed a significant increase compared with those used for the control group . Interestingly, our patient showed a high percentage of sperm (20%) with severe DNA fragmentation (degraded) in comparison with controls (0.42%). Examples of sperm cells in the t(2;8)(p24;p21)mat carrier and controls after SCD test, the alkaline comet assay, and DBD-FISH are shown in .
Ethical consideration
All participants were notified of the purpose of the planned research, and written consent was obtained in accordance with to the guidelines of the Research Bioethical Committee, Centro de Investigación Biomédica del Noreste, IMSS. Patient consent was obtained for publication of this article and accompanying images.
Statistical analysis
Comparison of aneusomies (chromosome-8 and chromosome-Y) and DNA fragmentation of spermatozoa between the translocation carrier and control group was performed using the Mann-Whitney test. A value of p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. All analyses were performed using IBM SPSS for Windows 20.0 (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).