Herein is presented a case of a 63-year-old Hispanic female, a non-smoker with non-significant past medical history. In 2020, the patient presented to urgent care for upper respiratory symptoms. She tested positive for COVID-19, which was then treated on an outpatient basis. A month later, she returned to urgent care due to persistent dyspnea. A chest x-ray at that time revealed a lung mass, corroborated by further imaging studies, including computed tomography (CT) chest scan. Endobronchial ultrasound bronchoscopy (EBUS) was then completed which demonstrated adenocarcinoma metastatic to the right hilar and right paratracheal lymph nodes. Staging was described as IIIA non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma. Due to lymph node involvement, resection on initial diagnosis was not recommended.
At an outside facility and prior to next-generation sequencing, the patient was started on combination chemoimmunotherapy with pembrolizumab, pemetrexed, and carboplatin for 4 cycles. The reason for choosing chemoimmunotherapy over chemoradiotherapy is unknown as this was not included in patient outside records. Afterwards, single agent pembrolizumab was continued as maintenance therapy. Per outside records it appeared that the patient did not experience significant side effects on chemoimmunotherapy and the plan was to follow this treatment with surgery. Resection however, was unsuccessful and it was advised that patient have consultation at our facility. Upon arrival to our institution, results of tumor profiling revealed a PDL1 status of 99%, a low tumor mutation burden (TMB) of 3.2 Muts/mb, MSI stability, and EML-4 ALK fusion genomic variation. Due to the ALK mutation, treatment was started with a targeted agent, Alectinib at a dosage of 600 mg daily. As a result of change of care, time from her last pembrolizumab treatment to the initiation of Alectinib was 5 weeks.
Ten days after Alectinib initiation, the patient called to report a red rash of the arms, stomach, and thighs. It was accompanied by mild fever of 99.9 Fahrenheit. She was advised to either monitor symptom progression at home or go to the emergency room. The patient chose to monitor at home. The next day the patient called to report rash progression and fevers to 101.0 Fahrenheit. She was instructed to go to the ER and hold Alectinib. Due to the severity of the rash, she was admitted to the hospital. Routine labs were normal except for mildly elevated AST at 35. The rash was described as a diffuse morbilliform eruption that was moderately pruritic . She was given triamcinolone cream and Benadryl pending results of skin biopsy. Pathology results came back as basal vacuolar interface dermatitis with mild superficial perivascular and interstitial infiltrate of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and eosinophils most consistent with drug eruption. Due to this, the patient was started on methylprednisolone and discharged on prednisone taper. Within 2 weeks of initial rash presentation, the symptoms had completely resolved.
Following resolution, a desensitization protocol for Alectinib was started based on dosing found in a literature review. The agreed upon schedule with thus: 150 mg twice daily for 2 days followed by 300 mg twice daily for 5 days, then 450 mg twice daily for 8 days followed by 450 mg in the a.m. and 600 mg in the p.m. for 8 days until the standard dose of 600 mg twice daily was re-achieved . This protocol was begun at home, with the patient given explicit instructions to notify the medical team if any symptoms arose. Within one day of restarting Alectinib, patient reported developing sore throat, erythema of the chest, and fevers of 100.1 Fahrenheit. Due to the repeated nature of symptoms, the patient was advised to discontinue Alectinib. Despite lack of rash reformation, desensitization was not continued after the development of side effects.
With the failure of the desensitization to Alectinib, Brigatinib was chosen due to its different chemical structure. The patient was advised to begin 90 mg daily for 1 week and to then increase to 180 mg daily at standard dosing. Patient began Brigatinib and continued for approximately 1 month with minimal side effects. However, following a trip to South America, the patient decided upon alternative management with radiation therapy. She was advised that this was not recommended in the United States due to her NSCLC staging, ALK mutation, previous immunotherapy use, and recommendations per National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines. She discontinued Brigatinib and is currently being treated outside the country. Her health status is currently unknown as she has been lost to follow-up for several months.