A 53-year-old woman was referred to the First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University in April 2022 due to fever with cough and dyspnea for 15 d.
The patient had a fever without obvious precipitating causes for 15 d, and her body temperature was 38.5 °C, with cough, sputum and dyspnea. There was no chest pain, hemoptysis, or night sweats. Chest computed tomography (CT) at the local hospital suggested multiple exudative opacities in both lungs . She received penicillin and macrolide antibiotics as treatment for 9 d. However, she had persistent fever, and her symptoms of dyspnea worsened.
She denied a history of previous illnesses or autoimmune system diseases such as joint swelling and pain, dry mouth and eyes, mouth sores, and rashes.
She was a nonsmoker. She denied a history of exposure to occupational dust or keeping pets. She had no special drug history. She also denied a family history of lung disease.
On examination the patient was alert, with a temperature of 38.2 ºC, pulse rate 94/min, respiratory rate 18/min, blood pressure 120/70 mmHg, and oxygen saturation with room air 92%. Chest auscultation revealed increased breath sounds with no crackles. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
The patient’s laboratory test results are shown in Table .
High-resolution CT (HRCT) of the thorax on admission revealed patchy, diffuse alveolar opacities and consolidation with bilateral and peripheral distributions, which was significantly more extensive than before .
Twodimensional echocardiography and electrocardiography were normal. Blood and alveolar lavage fluid were both examined by next-generation sequencing (NGS), and no bacteria, fungi or viruses were found.
Ultrasound-guided right lung puncture biopsy revealed intra-alveolar fibrin in the form of “fibrin balls” without the formation of hyaline membranes .
Bronchoscopy followed by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was performed. The molecular diagnostic test for tuberculosis was negative; BAL galactomannan was unremarkable. BAL cultures were negative. Transbronchial lung biopsy was performed from the left lower lobe, and the corresponding report revealed AFOP .