A 74-year-old Japanese man with no particular medical history fell down from a ladder and sustained a left abdominal stab wound from an L-shaped metal peg on the ground, which he removed by himself. He was brought to the emergency department in our hospital. He had no relevant family or past medical history and no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. Physical examination showed a 5-cm, jagged linear wound on the left abdomen. Computed tomography (CT) showed the trace of the L-shaped metal peg from the left abdomen to the left rib and left kidney, anterolateral bone avulsion of the left T12 vertebral body, and fracture of the L1 left transverse process and the left 10th–12th ribs . The result of the patient’s neurological examination was normal. Surgical exploration was performed with the patient under local anesthesia in the emergency department, which showed no evidence of peritoneal penetration. The wound was washed with 6 L of physiological saline, and a drain was inserted; the patient was hospitalized for 6 weeks. Ceftriaxone sodium hydrate was administered for 7 days to prevent bacterial infection. One week after the event, the patient started to walk with a rigid corset, and he was discharged in 6 weeks. X-ray images showed narrowing of T11–T12 intervertebral disc space at 6 weeks and 10 weeks. He was readmitted to the hospital with complaints of back pain, numbness of both legs, and inability to walk 13 weeks after the fall. The patient was hospitalized in the orthopedic surgery department. CT showed numerous irregular osteolytic cavities in T11 and T12 vertebral bodies and destruction of the inferior endplate of T11 and the superior endplate of T12 . This appearance was highly suggestive of septic spondylodiscitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were typical of spondylodiscitis. Gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MRI indicated increased signal intensity at T11–T12 vertebral bodies and severe cord compression and epidural abscess at T11–T12 associated with infiltration of soft paravertebral tissues . Laboratory findings showed C-reactive protein of 0.51 mg/dl and a white blood cell count of 6100/ul. The result of the patient’s blood culture was negative. On the seventh day after readmission, he underwent partial laminectomy at T11 and posterior fusion at T9–L2. A. terreus was isolated from the material of T11–T12 intervertebral disc and vertebral bodies. His Aspergillus antigen was positive in the blood examination. The operative specimen from the T12 vertebra revealed inflammatory granulation between trabecular bone and the presence of numerous neutrophils in the granuloma. Histological examination showed chronic suppurative osteomyelitis . On the 35th day after admission, he underwent anterior fusion at T11 and T12 with a rib bone graft . Voriconazole (VRCZ) 600 mg intravenous was administered for 2 months, and VRCZ 600 mg oral was subsequently administered for 3 months. The patient wore a rigid corset for 5 months. Posterior partial laminectomy at T11 and anterior fusion at T11 and T12 resulted in a good clinical course. The patient’s neurological dysfunction was completely recovered, and his back pain had disappeared. Two years after the operation, CT showed bone fusion at T11 and T12 . MRI revealed no evidence of increased signal intensity at T11–T12 vertebral bodies and severe cord compression and epidural abscess at T11–T12 .