A 28-year-old Caucasian man presented with a 3-month history of low-grade fever, significant weight loss, and left upper quadrant pain. On admission, he was ill and febrile, with a blood pressure of 90/65 mmHg, heart rate of 110/min, a mid-systolic murmur in the second left intercostal space, splenomegaly, and left upper quadrant tenderness. There were no other signs in favour of endocarditis. Few months before the onset of fever, thrombocytopenia and splenomegaly were detected during follow-up visits, and a diagnosis of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura was considered based on the absence of clinical symptoms and lack of platelet morphologic abnormalities in the peripheral blood smear. Corticosteroid was initiated following the diagnosis.
The patient had a history of tetralogy of Fallot and underwent cardiac surgery four times including Blalock-Taussig shunt in 1994, tetralogy of Fallot total correction in 2001 (surgery was deferred to this time due to acceptable oxygen saturation), pulmonary valve replacement (PVR) with a bioprosthetic valve in 2010 due to the presence of severe pulmonary regurgitation, and Bentall procedure for native aortic valve endocarditis along with mechanical PVR in 2015. He was under regular cardiology follow-up since the last surgery.
As for the lab data, haemoglobin (Hb) level was 8 g/dL (13–16 g/dL), WBC count was 19400 × 109/L (4000–10 000 × 109/L) with 81% polymorphonuclear leucocytes, serum creatinine was 2.1 mg/dL (0.6–1.5 mg/dL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 80 mm/h (0–15 mm/h), and C-reactive protein was 56 mg/L (<6 mg/L). Blood cultures were negative. Due to abdominal pain, fever, and splenomegaly, an abdominal CT scan was performed that showed splenic infarction and subcapsular haematoma, which did not require specific interventions.
In transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), the left ventricular ejection fraction was 25%, and aortic and pulmonic prosthetic valves had normal pressure gradients with no evidence of paravalvular regurgitation or obvious vegetation. A suspicious pseudoaneurysm formation was detected in the anterior part of the aortic annulus. As prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) was highly probable, transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was performed, which showed no vegetation on native and prosthetic valves (Video 1, Video 2, Video 3). However, a 1.2 cm semi-mobile mass was detected in the distal part of the ascending aorta tube graft . TTE and TOE were repeated 2 weeks later, and the findings remained unchanged.
Empiric antibiotic treatment was initiated for endocarditis after TOE. The drug regimen included ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g intravenous (IV) every 6 h, vancomycin 1 g IV twice daily, gentamycin 80 mg IV every 8 h, and rifampin 200 mg oral every 8 h. The patient remained febrile despite treatment, and no improvement was noted in symptoms. Repeated blood cultures were still negative and there was no evidence of atypical IE pathogens, including a positive culture for the HACEK group or serum antibody against Coxiella burnetii. Moreover, no other sources were found for embolic infarction.
Due to persistent symptoms and the tube graft mobile mass, which did change after two weeks of treatment, the patient became a candidate for open surgery. Regarding the high surgical risk and the absence of definite echocardiographic data in favour of PVE, the surgery team refused to operate. We used a PET/CT scan, delayed up to this stage of disease against the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2014 guideline recommendation due to lack of insurance coverage, for detecting signs of inflammation around the prosthetic valves and tubular graft. Sixty minutes after intravenous injection of a 6.6 mCi 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), whole-body scan was done using an integrated PET/CT device (D-690, General Electric Medical Systems). There was increased metabolic activity in the aortic root up to the aortic arch with a standardized uptake value (SUV) max of 8.2. The root of the pulmonary artery also showed hyper-metabolism (SUV max = 5.4). The scan was indicative of abnormal hyper-metabolism of the tubular graft due to active inflammation/infection .
The patient was scheduled for cardiac surgery. Extensive involvement of the tubular graft was evident at the surgery with no pseudoaneurysm formation or prosthetic valve involvement. The patient underwent the Bentall homograft procedure. Antibiotic treatment with ampicillin/sulbactam, vancomycin, gentamycin, and rifampin was continued for 6 weeks at the same doses. The platelet count returned to normal, and corticosteroid was discontinued. At 1-year follow-up, the patient did well with no symptoms and normal inflammatory biomarkers. The homograft aortic valve function was normal with no evidence of infection in echocardiography.