The patient was a 26-year-old Caucasian female with a history of severe enduring anorexia nervosa. She was diagnosed with anorexia nervosa, restrictive subtype, at age 16, although symptoms began at age 13. She entered her first residential treatment at age 18, with multiple admissions for a total of 6 from ages 18–26. She had also been hospitalized for acute medical stabilization 7 times since age 15. The patient’s height was 5′5.5″. Her highest weight was 127 pounds at age 13–127 pounds with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 20.8; her lowest at age 19–82 pounds with a BMI 13.4. She returned to residential treatment at age 26 for 2 months, and almost immediately after discharge, lost 17 pounds over the course of the next 2 months, going from a weight of 116 pounds (BMI 19) to 99 pounds (BMI 16.2). At that time, she was seen initially in the emergency department for the chief complaint of “unintentional weight loss and nausea with a history of anorexia nervosa” but was discharged home with the diagnosis of “non-intractable vomiting with nausea, unspecified vomiting type” after laboratory studies were determined to be “normal.” She was subsequently seen again three weeks later in the same emergency department for additional complaints including “nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, unintentional weight loss (followed by a dietician), worsening pain, decreased intake.” She was discharged home a second time with the same diagnosis of “non-intractable vomiting with nausea, unspecified vomiting type” after “normal” labs were noted. On her third emergency department visit six days later, she was hospitalized for severe malnutrition and persistent nausea, vomiting, and inability to eat as well as early satiety and constant “fullness.” Of note, her physical exam revealed no abnormalities other than thin body habitus noted, and her lab studies again were “normal.” Her total weight loss at this time over the two-month period was 15.5% of total body weight, with a BMI trending from 19 to 16.2. While placing a DobHoff tube for enteral feedings, it was noted there was difficulty advancing the tube on fluoroscopic guided placement; SMA syndrome was suspected and then confirmed on ultrasound with the findings of “acute aorto-mesenteric angle which can be seen with SMA syndrome.” She was treated for three weeks with nutritional rehabilitation, and her symptoms consistent with SMA syndrome slowly improved with weight gain. Although the patient remained underweight, her SMA syndrome did resolve with consistent weight gain. Specifically, her abdominal pain and early satiety resolved.