A 58-year-old male patient presented to our emergency care unit with left loin pain and generalized fatigue. The patient is known to have a solitary functioning left kidney due to right kidney agenesis and has chronic kidney disease with baseline serum creatinine of 2.5 mg/dl. The patient had surgical history of left ureteroscopy (URS) and “stent” insertion 17 years ago at a different hospital. During this presentation, the serum creatinine was measured at 6.2 mg/dl, white blood cell count was normal at 5.79×109/l and no fever was present. An immediate non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed marked hydronephrosis due to a “neglected” DJS. In response, the patient underwent left percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) insertion, resulting in an initial urine output of 300 ml clear urine. Three days later when renal function tests returned to baseline (2.3 mg/dl), the patient was discharged with readmission scheduled a few weeks later to address the neglected stent.
During this new readmission, fresh renal function tests remained at baseline levels. Another NCCT of the abdomen and pelvis was performed, revealing a non-visualized right kidney, an enlarged left kidney with a PCN in situ and a left ureter with indwelling DJS without any stones. Additionally, the urinary bladder was identified, showing no stones but a 7 cm diverticulum and stranded peri-vesical fat indicative of infection (cystitis). The left stent was smoothly and uneventfully removed by cystoscopy, which also revealed a high bladder neck and severe pyuria. During this procedure, a diagnostic URS was also performed, demonstrating a widely patent left ureter, left PCN was closed, and a new left DJ stent was inserted and scheduled to be removed 6 weeks later. Postoperatively, the patient’s serum creatinine level measured 2.4 mg/dl. He was discharged with prescriptions for antibiotics and alpha blockers and an indwelling urethral Foley catheter, which was removed 2 weeks later together with the previously closed PCN.
Four weeks later, however, during a follow-up appointment, new renal function results exceeded the normal range, measuring 3.5 mg/dl. Another urethral catheter was promptly reinserted, initially draining 600 cc of clear urine. It was thus deduced that the patient also experienced an element of infra-vesical obstruction that was not alleviated merely by alpha blockers. Consequently, he was readmitted to undergo a transurethral resection of the prostate and removal of the new left DJ stent through cystoscopy.
On outpatient follow-up 1 week later, the patient’s serum creatinine was within baseline range (2.3 mg/dl), and successfully attempted voiding, with no residual urine on post-void ultrasound examination.