An 18-year-old boy was admitted to the Rasool Akram Medical Complex on July 20,2020 complaining of shortness of breath, cough, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and weakness.
As a routine assessment, the SARS-COV-2 RT-PCR (Reverse-Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction) test was performed which its result was positive. On admission, some other tests were requested to evaluate the patients’ status that their results have been shown in the Table . The patient was admitted to the COVID-19 ward and treated with a sofosbuvir and hydroxychloroquine regimen. A few days later, his respiratory status worsened and he was intubated and then treated with steroids and remdesivir. Ten days later, his condition improved, so he was extubated and discharged from the hospital. After 2 weeks, he was referred back to the hospital because of severe weakness, acute chest pain, and ECG abnormalities. His left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was around 30% on echocardiography, accompanied with global hypokinesia. Due to typical acute chest pain and ECG, coronary angiography was performed that found to be normal.
During the first days of the admission, his blood pressure was 80/40 mmHg not responding to fluid resuscitation. His other symptoms worsened since his first admission. He complained of severe abdominal cramps, ongoing watery diarrhea, headache, and was so weak that he could not to walk unaided.
In the evaluation of his laboratory results, hyponatremia and resistant hyperkalemia were detected .
Moreover, fluid resuscitation, respiratory support, thrombotic prophylaxis, and low dose aspirin (81 mg daily) were considered for him.
More specialized tests were conducted to make a more accurate diagnosis based on his symptoms, laboratory results, and suspicion of adrenal insufficiency. We detected an 8 am serum cortisol level of 1.8 (reference value: 9.3–25 µg/dl) and ACTH level of > 1800 (reference value: 7.1–56.3 pg/ml). The high dose ACTH stimulation test (250 µg intravenous bolus) raised plasma cortisol value from the base level of 1.8 µg/dl to 10.2 µg/dl after 60 min which confirmed the diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency.
After administering 100 mg of intravenous hydrocortisone, the blood pressure increased, nausea and vomiting and abdominal pain disappeared. Also, the level of electrolytes returned to normal after a few hours. The treatment was continued with 300 mg of intravenous hydrocortisone daily (divided doses). The prescribed amount was reduced to 200 mg daily on the third day. On the fifth day, hydrocortisone was replaced by prednisolone and fludrocortisone .
We also checked the level of 21-alpha hydroxylase antibodies, which indicated the diagnosis of Addison`s disease. Interestingly, the patient had no evidence of skin or mucosa hyperpigmentation.
The follow-up with echocardiography (eco) after one month showed a significant improvement in LVEF‒ received from 30% in the last echo to 50% in the next echo. The effects of the treatments on decreasing the cardiac chamber size were also significant.