A 64-year-old female began to suffer from paroxysmal left arm twisting 2 months ago. The abnormal movement usually last less than 30 s and occurred once or twice a week. Brain MRI revealed nothing other than an old lesion in the right frontal lobe 9 days before admission . She had no limbs weakness, numbness or sleep disorders. Five days ago, she developed obtuseness and sustained left-sided choreatic movements after she woke up in the morning. She was admitted on May 26, 2021. Past history was remarkable for brain metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma to the right frontal lobe in 2013. She received right frontal mass biopsy and radiotherapy in addition to systemic chemotherapy. However, detailed protocol of the radiotherapy was unavailable. Complete remission was achieved after treatment and she had no obvious neurological symptoms. The frontal lobe lesion on MRI remained unchanged during the past 8 years. None of her family members had similar problems.
On neurological examination, the patient was obtuse and uncooperative. No obvious ocular movement disturbance was observed. Pupils were qual, round, and reactive to Light. Bilateral nasolabial grooves were symmetric. Left-sided hemichorea was irregular, rapid, random, unpredictable and of high amplitude . Her face and tongue were not affected. No myoclonus or facial dystonia were observed. Right biceps reflex was 3+ and knee jerk was 2+. Muscle strength of right limbs was graded at least 4/5. Reflexes in her left extremities could not be evaluated due to hemichorea. Muscle strength of left limbs was graded at least 3/5. Babinski signs were present bilaterally. Sensory, cerebellar functions, and gait were unable to be evaluated. Laboratory tests which included blood glucose, liver function, renal function, thyroid hormones, parathyroid hormone, electrolytes, ammonia, ceruloplasmin, tumor markers (including CEA, NSE, CA125, CA199, etc.), anti-streptolysin-O antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-nucleus antibodies, anti dsDNA antibodies, antibodies to HIV and syphilis were negative or in normal range. Lumbar puncture revealed opening pressure of 220 mmH2O. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was acellular with slightly elevated protein level. Malignant cells were not found in CSF. Commercially available paraneoplastic antibody panel (anti Hu, Yo, Ri, GAD65, Ma2, CV2, Amphiphysin, Tr, ANNA-3, PCA) and autoimmune encephalitis antibody panel (anti NMDAR, AMPA1, AMPA2, LGI1, CASPRA2, GABAb, DPPX, lgLON5, mGluR5, MOG) were negative. Lung CT showed no sign of tumor relapse. Paraneoplastic syndrome was initially suspected, but a repeat brain MRI revealed acute infarction in the left frontal lobe, indicating problem in the left anterior cerebral artery . No abnormalities were detected in the basal ganglia on T1-weighted images, CTA revealed 90% stenosis of both anterior cerebral arteries . CT perfusion revealed decreased cerebral blood flow (CBV) in the left frontoparietal lobe but not in the bilateral basal ganglia regions . Total body 18FDG PET-CT showed no sign of cancer relapse but hypometabolism in the left frontal lobe and hypermetabolism in the right basal ganglia region and central sulcus . Electroencephalogram demonstrated diffuse θ waves, prominent in the left side. The patient was diagnosed with post-stroke hemichorea-hemiballismus and was given risperidone 1 mg QD along with aspirin 100 mg QD and atorvastatin 20 mg QN. Hemichorea soon alleviated and disappeared 1 week later. Neurological examination found muscle strength was 5/5 in all extremities.