A previously healthy 55-year-old woman was referred to our clinic for abdominal and right shoulder pain. A 40-mm ulcerative lesion within the gastric antrum on the posterior wall of the lower body was identified by esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), the surface of the lesion was irregular, erosive, and reddish . On admission, physical examinations were unremarkable, and the abdominal tumor could not be palpated. Laboratory data were essentially within normal limits, stool occult blood was negative, and the carcinoembryonic antigen level was 5 ng/dL (normal <5 ng/dL).
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) and Positron Emission Tomography-Computed Tomography (PET-CT) showed a mass in the mid-portion of the stomach with marked thickening of the gastric wall ( and ). Due to the uncommon immunohistochemical (IHC) presentation, repeated endoscopic biopsy and biopsy specimen examination were performed. Despite the previous IHC report, even our experienced pathologist was uncomfortable with a gastric angiosarcoma diagnosis due to its low probability of occurrence. In the immunohistochemical study, the tumor cells were positive for vimentin and CD34, focally positive for cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), and negative for CD117 ( and ). These findings confirmed the diagnosis of mixed epithelioid and moderately differentiated primary gastric angiosarcoma.
No standard guide or treatment experience was available for reference. The patient went to several hospitals without getting a standard answer. A multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion was conducted for the patient regarding what to do next, whether to do surgery, chemotherapy, or otherwise. Doxorubicin-based NAC was then proposed because our MDT was concerned about the “station 3” lymph node enlargement, and because the rate of short-term survival is uncertain. The patient received chemotherapy (90 mg/m2 doxorubicin on day 1, 65 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide on day 1, 80 mg/m2 cisplatin on day 1, repeated every 3 weeks). After two cycles of NAC, the tumor response to chemotherapy was evaluated using an abdominal and pelvic-enhanced CT scan and an EGD, following the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guideline. Complete response was defined by the MDT ( and ). Moreover, clinical symptoms were relieved. The patient underwent an open surgery after the third cycle, and an extended lymph node resection (D2) and gastrectomy were performed. Surgical specimens were assessed to complete the pathological response , the tumor was resected with negative margins and 0/42 lymph nodes being positive for metastatic disease. The regimens of NAC were selected in adjuvant chemotherapy treatment. During the adjuvant chemotherapy, the disease recurred in the first following reexamination 3 months post-operatively. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT showed multiple metastases of liver and retroperitoneal region . Then, the patient gave up treatment because of the family poverty. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this manuscript and any accompanying images.