A 74-year-old man with a history of AML presented to the emergency department (ED) for a complaint of nonresolving throbbing headache with nausea and vomiting after a witnessed fall without head trauma. He was on his second cycle of therapy with venetoclax and a hypomethylating agent.
At presentation to the ED, he had left upper extremity and left lower extremity drift with 4/5 left upper and lower extremity weakness, and scattered ecchymoses with a petechial rash. Laboratory studies were significant for severe thrombocytopenia of <2000/µL in the ED. Computed tomography of the head (hCT) revealed a right sided, mixed density 12 mm SDH with a 12 mm leftward midline shift and patchy acute subarachnoid hemorrhages . The patient received an initial infusion of 2 units of platelets with an increase to 11,000/µL. Neurosurgery was consulted and patient was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with a platelet goal of 100,000/ µL. Patient received regular platelet transfusions; however, platelet levels remained <50,000/µL . Given his refractory thrombocytopenia, neurologically intact status, and stable SDH on repeat hCT; conservative management was chosen over neurosurgical intervention. On hospital day 4, he was transferred out of the ICU and liberalized to a platelet goal of 50,000/µL and transfusion threshold of 40,000/µL. After receiving a total of 17 units of platelets, the patient underwent right eMMA with 150 µm of polyvinyl alcohol particles on hospital day 8 . Repeat hCT on hospital day 17 demonstrated a decreasing SDH . Patient received an additional 6 units of platelets for refractory thrombocytopenia, a course of levetiracetam for seizure prophylaxis and was discharged 24 days after admission with a platelet count of 19,200/µL. Discharge plans included a systolic blood pressure goal of <140 mmHg and a platelet count goal >10,000/µL. He continued to have platelet transfusions 3 times a week with an average platelet count of 14,000/µL . A hCT 30 days after discharge demonstrated a stable, panhemispheric acute on chronic SDH that was 15 mm in size with a 5 mm leftward midline shift .
Fifty days after his initial presentation, the patient was readmitted for acute kidney injury secondary to severe tumor lysis syndrome, acute colitis, acute left pyelonephritis, anemia with hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dL, and thrombocytopenia with platelet count of 9000/µL. On hospital day 2, hCT showed a grossly stable SDH. He was considered a poor candidate for hemodialysis due to AML, discharged to hospice on hospital day 7, and passed 4 days later.
The optimal management of cSDHs in patients with concurrent thrombocytopenia remains obscure. In this review, we sought to find case reports or series similar to our patient to identify management strategies and treatment efficacy for cSDH with severe thrombocytopenia currently documented in the literature.
The preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) reporting guideline were implemented for this review. A systematic search of PubMed and Web of Science data was conducted on October 13, 2021. The following search terms were utilized: thrombocytopenia OR pancytopenia; subdural; hematoma OR hemorrhage OR bleed*. Inclusion criteria required detection of isodense or hypodense areas in the subdural space on CT and report of individual patient data on platelet counts at intracranial cSDH confirmation, management of cSDH, platelet count following management, and outcome. Patients <18 years old and patients taking anticoagulants before cSDH presentation were excluded from the study. Reviews, editorials, and non-English articles were also excluded from the study. Two independent authors assessed the articles for inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Individual patient data on the following were collected: age, sex, risk factors/etiology of thrombocytopenia, location of SDH, size of SDH, presence of midline shift, platelet counts at the time of SDH confirmation and after management, management of SDH and thrombocytopenia, platelet goal for management, complications, recurrence of SDH, and outcome at last follow-up. These data were collected by one author and reviewed by another author.
Seven out of 242 studies met inclusion criteria.[,,,,,,] The PRISMA flow chart for the search strategy is depicted in . There was a total of seven patients whose data were extracted. A summary of these data is shown in [ and ]. The most common etiology of thrombocytopenia was immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP; 71.4%). Other etiologies included human immunodeficiency virus (14.3%) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) (14.3%). Location of SDH was in the frontoparietal region in 4 patients (57.1%), frontotemporal in 1 (14.3%), and hemispheric in 2 (28.6%). Four patients also had a midline shift on imaging (57.1%), with the majority having a shift to the right (75%). All seven patients had severe thrombocytopenia with a platelet count <5000/ µL at cSDH discovery. Five patients received medical management followed by surgical evacuation (71.4%), while one patient was managed conservatively (14.3%). Surgical evacuation included partial craniotomy (1; 20%) and craniotomy evacuation (4; 80%). Three cases reported a platelet goal of 2000/µL for management (42.9%). The final platelet counts were all above 20,000/µL, and all cSDHs were stable or completely resolved following treatment.