A 64-year-old woman was diagnosed with bronchial asthma at 40 years of age. Initially, her symptoms were mild and controlled with a moderate dose of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) and a short-acting beta-agonist. She reported a medical history of eosinophilic rhinitis. At 60 years of age, she experienced frequent wheezing exertion; spirometry revealed forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) of 62.6%, FEV1 of 0.92 L, and peak expiratory flow of 3.37 L/s. She was diagnosed with severe bronchial asthma and treated with an ICS/long-acting beta-agonist (LABA), a long-acting muscarinic antagonist (LAMA), a leukotriene receptor antagonist (LTRA), and theophylline. The patient exhibited purulent sputum, despite these medications, for 3 months and was referred to our hospital in 2013 because of persistent fever that had lasted 2 weeks. Laboratory examination showed a white blood cell count of 12,700/μL (27% eosinophils), C-reactive protein level of 11.79 mg/dL, serum IgE level of 3400 IU/mL, and positive Aspergillus-specific IgE (6.24 UA/mL). Serum proteinase-3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and myeloperoxidase-ANCA were negative (< 1.0 U/mL). Precipitating antibody to Aspergillus was positive by the technique of Ouchterlony. A chest radiograph showed opacity in the right lower field; a computed tomography (CT) scan showed infiltration in the right middle and lower lobes, as well as mucoid impaction in both lower lobes . Bronchoscopy revealed a mucoid impaction in the right middle lobe bronchus ; the differential specimen count obtained by bronchial washing from the right middle lobe was composed of 38% eosinophils. Notably, the bronchial washing culture yielded no bacteria or fungus. The patient was diagnosed with ABPA based on the history of bronchial asthma, elevated total IgE, the presence of serum precipitating antibody and elevated specific IgE antibody to A. fumigatus, and pulmonary infiltration. Systemic corticosteroid therapy (prednisone 30 mg/day) was initiated, and the patient’s symptoms dissipated. The corticosteroids were gradually tapered, then discontinued after 3 months. The patient developed “moon face” as a consequence of corticosteroid treatment; peripheral eosinophilia and pulmonary infiltration appeared again, 5 months after the cessation of corticosteroid treatment. Systemic corticosteroids (prednisone 10 mg/day) were re-initiated, and itraconazole (200 mg/day) was added as an anti-fungal agent. Systemic corticosteroid treatment was again tapered and discontinued after 4 weeks. The patient was free of corticosteroids, aside from treatment with a short course of systemic corticosteroids for asthma exacerbation, and clinically stable with itraconazole and asthma treatments for 3 years.
In 2017, the patient experienced significant deterioration. She complained of wheezing, productive cough, and dyspnea on effort. Laboratory examination revealed marked peripheral eosinophilia (3017/μL) and a chest CT scan demonstrated pulmonary infiltration in the left upper lobe, as well as mucoid impaction in both lower lobes . The patient was treated with high-dose ICS/LABA, LAMA, LTRA, and theophylline; spirometry showed severe airway obstruction (FEV1/FVC: 66.9%; FEV1: 1.01 L). An uncontrolled asthma state was indicated by an Asthma Control Test (ACT) score of 18. Mepolizumab (100 mg every 4 weeks) was initiated for the treatment of severe bronchial asthma with ABPA exacerbation. Bronchial asthma symptoms were dramatically improved, and ACT score was increased to 24 at 4 weeks after mepolizumab treatment. Peripheral eosinophil count decreased from 3017/μL to 230/μL and 174/μL, 1 and 4 weeks after mepolizumab, respectively. Spirometry showed improvement of lung function (FEV1/FVC: 69.8%; FEV1: 1.25 L after 1 week; FEV1/FVC: 69.2%, FEV1: 1.28 L after 4 weeks). The serum level of IgE did not change after mepolizumab. A chest CT scan demonstrated the disappearance of pulmonary infiltration and mucoid impaction .