A 70-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with itchy skin on his extremities for > 5 mo.
Five months before admission, without obvious inducement, the patient showed pruritus and red patches on the palms of both hands and soles of both feet. The patches protruded from the skin. He had no history of insect bites, no food or drug allergies, and no abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting. The patient paid no attention to these symptoms. The itching and rash did not subside for 3 mo and he attended the local hospital for treatment. A diagnosis of urticaria was made, and he was given antiallergic treatment with clavulvoxel gel but the details are unknown; after which, the itching symptoms improved. However, during this period, itching on the palms of both hands and soles of both feet occurred repeatedly, and spread to the limbs and face. The nature of the skin rash on the limbs was the same as before, and his face showed extensive redness and swelling, without itching and discomfort. One month before admission, he attended the local hospital for treatment in the Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine. The ingredients of this treatment were frankincense, Rehmannia glutinosa, Akebia quinata, Paeonia albiflora pall, licorice, Prunella vulgaris, chrysanthemum, Divaricate saposhnikovia, gentian, poria, myrrh, Angelica sinensis, Sophora flavescens, dandelion and Angelica dahurica. After > 1 wk of treatment, the rash dissipated, but there was still itching and discomfort in both hands and feet. Three days before admission, he attended Shaoxing People’s Hospital for treatment. Cetirizine and ebastine were given for antiallergic treatment. The patient then went to the Department of Gastroenterology Outpatient of Run Run Shaw Hospital affiliated to Zhejiang University Medical College for further treatment and was proposed to be admitted to the hospital due to eosinophilia.
The patient was previously healthy and generally in good condition.
The patient denied any family genetic history.
The patient’s vital signs were stable and his spirit was good. The skin and sclera were yellow, and asthma, fever and gastrointestinal symptoms were absent. Urine and stools were normal. The palms of both hands and the soles of both feet had red patches protruding from the skin. There was no enlargement of superficial lymph nodes throughout the body. Pulmonary and cardiac examinations did not show any significant abnormalities. The abdomen was flat and soft without tenderness or rebound pain. There was no percussion pain in the liver area, and the liver and spleen were not felt under the ribs. Murphy sign and mobile dullness were negative, and bowel sounds were 4 times/min. Edema in the lower extremities was not observed and pathological signs were not elicited.
Auxiliary examination of the hematological system after admission found that the platelet count was 75 × 109/L (normal range, 125–350 × 109/L), percentage of neutrophils was 31.4% (normal range, 40.0%–75.0%), percentage of eosinophils was 34.4% (normal range, 0.4%–8.0%), absolute number of eosinophils was 2.47 × 109/L (normal range, 0.02–0.52 × 109/L), eosinophil count was 2800.0/μL (normal range, 50.0–300.0/μL), and red blood cell count, white blood cell count, hemoglobin, and absolute number of lymphocytes were all within the normal range. Coagulation function tests showed that prothrombin time (PT) was 15.5 s (normal range, 11.5–14.5 s), PT% was 71.0% (normal range, 80.0%–120.0%), PT control was 13.0 s, international normalized ratio was 1.25 (normal range, 0.90–1.10) and D-dimer was 0.86 μg/mL (normal range, 0.0–0.50 μg/mL).
Blood and stools from the digestive system were negative for protozoa, fecal egg accumulation, parasites and fungi. Serum tumor marker tests revealed increased levels of carbohydrate antigen (CA)125 [743.30 U/mL (< 35.0 U/mL)] and ferritin [626.0 μg/L (30.0–400.0 μg/L)], but CA19-9, alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and total prostate-specific antigen were within normal limits. Blood biochemistry showed that alanine transaminase (59 U/L), aspartate transaminase (60 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (445 U/L), glutamyl transpeptidase (931 U/L), total bilirubin (31.5 μmol/L), direct bilirubin (20.6 μmol/L), total bile acid (21.28 μmol/L), and C-reactive protein (12.7 mg/L) were elevated, while albumin (35.1 g/L), albumin and globulin ratio (1.12), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (0.75 mmol/L), β-hydroxybutyric acid (0.01 mmol/L), retinol binding protein (24 mg/L) and cholinesterase (2951 U/L) were decreased. Lactate dehydrogenase was within the normal range.
Among the laboratory examination indicators targeting the rheumatic immune system, levels of IgG (17.50 g/L) and IgE (266.0 IU/mL) were increased. IgA, IgM, complement components C3 and C4, rheumatoid factor, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, IgG4, and antinuclear antibody profiles were normal.
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) surface antibody (12.55 IU/L) and HBV core antibody (4.68 S/CO) were increased, while HBV e antibody (0.99S/CO) was decreased. Antibodies against hepatitis C virus (HCV), Treponema pallidum and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) were negative. Epstein-Barr virus capsid antigen-IgG was high (616.0) while IgM was negative. Tuberculosis-infected T cells were unreactive and Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific antigen pore was 0. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG antibody was high (> 250.0) while CMV IgM antibody was negative.
Gastroduodenoscopy showed chronic superficial atrophic gastritis with erosion, predominantly in the gastric sinus and gastric horn and body, and ulceration in the duodenal bulb, with pathology suggesting chronic inflammation of the stomach and duodenum . No significant abnormalities were seen on colonoscopy, and pathology reported chronic inflammation of the mucosa of the terminal ileum, ileocecal region, ascending colon and rectum . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the upper abdomen suggested hepatic venule congestion with hydrothorax and ascites . Chest CT showed nodules beside the right oblique fissure, a few infectious lesions in the left upper lobe, and paraseptal emphysema in both upper lungs. There was a small amount of pleural effusion on both sides accompanied by pulmonary tissue distension, and inflammatory fibrous lesions scattered in both lungs. The apical pleura of the lungs was thickened. Cardiac ultrasound suggested mild aortic regurgitation.