Our patient was a 60-year-old Japanese woman. She had no relevant medical, family, or psychosocial history or past interventions. She had visited our department 3 months prior with a primary complaint of abdominal fullness and loss of appetite. She had not been to an obstetrician/gynecologist since a cancer examination 12 years prior; the result of uterine cervical cytology was negative. Her abdominal circumference was 85 cm. She had been pregnant and delivered twice. Her mother had breast cancer.
Transvaginal ultrasound and a contrast-enhanced computed tomographic (CT) scan showed a large quantity of ascitic fluid and thickening of the greater omentum, as well as thickening of the peritoneum at the pouch of Douglas, surface of the liver, and diaphragm; peritoneal carcinoma was suspected. A hematological test at the initial visit did not show anemia or increased leukocytes. However, all of the patient’s tumor markers were elevated (carcinoembryonic antigen, 14.8 ng/ml; cancer antigen 125, 39.8 U/ml; and cancer antigen 19-9, 500.9 U/ml), and her lactate dehydrogenase, C-reactive protein, and D-dimer levels were also increased, which were believed to be effects of the tumor. Images did not show overt abnormal findings, such as masses in the uterus or uterine appendages on either side, and the result of uterine cervix/body cytology was negative. Cytology by paracentesis showed findings suggestive of adenocarcinoma, and the treatment plan was two or three courses of preoperative chemotherapy followed by debulking surgery.
Cytology results showed tumor cells with alveolar, luminal, and cribriform structures . Given that the tumor markers were not as elevated as the severe imaging findings and clinical symptoms might have suggested, a hematological type other than serous carcinoma was considered, and an ascites cell block sample was prepared. The results of immunostaining with the cell block sample showed that cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and CK20 stained positive for periodic acid–Schiff (PAS), and a mucus-producing tumor was suspected. It was possible that the site of the primary tumor was in an area other than the ovaries, such as the pancreas or bile ducts. To render an exclusive diagnosis, upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy and a three-phase CT scan of the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas were performed; however, no obvious lesions were found. Tentatively, we diagnosed the patient with stage IIIC mucinous peritoneal carcinoma.
Clinically, the treatment plan for mucinous carcinoma is no different from that for stage IIIC peritoneal carcinoma. However, because mucinous carcinoma is likely to be more resistant to treatment than serous carcinoma, the originally planned three courses of preoperative chemotherapy consisting of docetaxel + carboplatin (CBDCA) (hereinafter referred to as “DC therapy”) was changed to two courses, and surgery was planned. The observed adverse events of chemotherapy included grade 3 neutropenia, grade 2 anemia, and grade 3 anorexia and hypoalbuminemia (occurring with abdominal fullness due to ascitic fluid retention). Paracentesis was performed twice during hospitalization for the first course of chemotherapy, removing 2500 ml of fluid each time, and concentrated ascites reinfusion therapy was performed with the second paracentesis. A CT scan following preoperative chemotherapy did not show an increase in ascitic fluid, and because no major changes had occurred in the peritoneal lesions, the disease state was considered stable .
In discussing surgery with the patient, the possibility of having to perform enterectomy and artificial anus creation as a result of removing the peritoneal and greater omentum lesions was explained. Subsequently, joint surgery was performed at our institution’s Department of Surgery at 3 months after the initial consultation. No visually abnormal intrapelvic findings were observed in the uterus or bilateral uterine appendages, though diffuse peritoneal lesions were observed on the vesicouterine pouch peritoneum, pouch of Douglas, and surface of the sigmoid colon. The ascites was serous, and no overt lesions were observed on the appendix. Our department extracted the uterus and bilateral uterine appendages and removed the peritoneum on the side of the bladder in the pelvic cavity, at which point we requested lower anterior resection from our institution’s Department of Surgery. The greater omentum exhibited hard thickening throughout, and resection was possible because the distance from the stomach had been maintained. However, the area near the left and right colic flexures had moved close to the intestines; therefore, only partial extraction of the greater omentum was performed, leaving behind part of the tumor. The residual lesion was less than 1 cm; the operation time was 3 hours and 30 minutes; the bleeding volume was 3310 ml; and 10 units of erythrocytes and 10 units of fresh frozen plasma were transfused. The uterine appendages were 110 g; the omentum was 400 g; the sigmoid colon was 220 g; and the ascites volume was 1500 ml.
The pathology results showed tumor cells with oval nuclei and clear nucleoli proliferating in an alveolar form and a luminal form in a mucus lake that stained positive for PAS and Alcian blue; some of the tumor cells produced mucus. Therefore, the diagnosis was mucinous carcinoma, which corresponded to the suspicion based on the preoperative cell block sample . Tumors were observed on the serous membrane side of the uterus and uterine appendages, the serous side of the sigmoid colon, and the peritoneal nodules, whereas no tumors were observed on either ovary, the endometrium, the cervix of the uterus, or the mucosa of the sigmoid colon. Hence, the primary tumor was believed to have originated from the peritoneum. Immunostaining results were positive for CK7 and CK20 and negative for CDX-2 (caudal type homeobox 2), TTF-1(thyroid transcription factor-1), p53, D2-40 (podoplanin), and ER (estrogen receptor), and no K-ras abnormalities were observed. The therapeutic effect of chemotherapy was grade 0, and the diagnosis was treatment-resistant mucinous carcinoma.
Because of treatment resistance, the postoperative chemotherapy regimen was adjusted to gemcitabine + CBDCA + bevacizumab therapy (hereinafter referred to as “GC + BV therapy”). During the nine courses of postoperative chemotherapy, the tumors did not grow. However, when the switch to bevacizumab monotherapy was made, the peritoneal dissemination lesions grew. The chemotherapy plan was changed but was unable to suppress the disease state, and the patient died of the original disease because of peritonitis due to intestinal perforation by the peritoneal dissemination lesions at 1 year and 9 months after the initial operation was performed.