A 24-year-old man was referred to our outpatient clinic due to ulcerations of palatal mucosa, nasal congestion and epistaxis two months ago. He had an episode of arthralgia that started one week ago.
Also, he had a history of unilateral blepharitis and upper eyelid edema five months ago . On physical examination, strawberry-like gingival and labial hypertrophy, erosive and ulcerative lesions on the hard palate, a few ulcerative papulonodules on the right elbow, palmar purpuric papules, and nasal crusted hemorrhagic debris were detected .
Eyelid edema had been resolved with a topical steroid. There was no history of constitutional symptoms. Past medical history and drug history were unremarkable. Laboratory work-ups were as follows: hemoglobin 11.8 g/dL, leukocyte count 8460 /µL with 5.6% eosinophils, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 47 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) 2+ , blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 9 mg/dl (reference, 7-21), creatinin 1 mg/dl (reference, 0.7-1.4), serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) 2300 IU/mL (reference, up to 200), anti proteinase 3 (C-ANCA) 67.5 Au/mL (reference, positive: >18), hematuria [many red blood cells (RBCs) in urine analysis], dysmorphic RBCs in urine sediment, cloxacillin- sensitive staphylococcus aureus growth in nasal culture. Anti-myeloperoxidase (anti MPO or P-ANCA), anti-nuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor levels, liver and thyroid function tests were within normal limit. Stool exam and culture and labial Tzanck smear had no specific findings. Viral serology for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B or C virus was negative. Labial and nasal mucosal biopsy showed focally ulcerated epithelium with marked spongiosis and irregular acanthosis associated with diffuse dense dermal infiltration of inflammatory cells mainly composed of neutrophils, admixed with large number of plasma cells and eosinophils as well as some lymphocytes, histiocytes and few multinucleated giant cells which formed vague granuloma. In addition, foci of vasculitis involving small-sized vessels as well as foci of RBC extravasation were evident . Direct immunofluorescence study was negative. Also previous eyelid biopsy had been done by an ophthalmologist showed the same pathologic findings without any giant cell formation. Renal biopsy under ultrasound guide was done due to significant hematuria. Serial cortical renal tissue sections showed 23 glomeruli. All glomeruli had fairly normal appearance, except for mild mesangial hypercellularity in 2-3 glomeruli. Basement membranes were thin and regular without spikes and hole in PAS & Jones stains. There was no endocapillary proliferation, crescent formation or fibrinoid necrosis. Some tubules contained RBCs and rare RBC casts. Interstitium and vessels showed no inflammation. Direct immunofluorescence study was negative. Electron microscopic evaluation was not available. Chest and orbital computed tomography (CT) imaging and echocardiography were normal and paranasal sinuses CT scan showed mild mucosal thickening of maxillary sinuses. According to these findings, the diagnosis of GPA without significant renal involvement was proposed.
All mucosal and skin lesions and hematuria significantly improved using oral prednisolone 60 mg daily tapere dose during two months. Topical mupirocin and oral cloxacillin were prescribed for nasal carriage of staphylococcus aureus. Adjuvant therapy was not recommended for him after nephrologist consultation had been done due to non-significant involvement of kidney based on the biopsy. Mild microscopic hematuria was sustained after four months follow-up without proteinuria, dysmorphic RBCs or changing in BUN and creatinine levels.