An eighty-seven year old woman was referred to our department because of a fast-growing, dark-brownish, indurated skin nodule sized 3 cm in diameter, which infiltrated the skin and the deeper soft tissue layers of the face Four months beforehand, a benign cutaneous histiocytoma (BFH) had been removed from the same location by excision biopsy , which had been a painless, slow-growing, brownish lump not exceeding 1 cm in diameter clinically. Surgical margins had been disease-free.
Excision biopsy of the current lesion revealed an infiltrative, well-vascularised mesenchymal neoplasm containing pleomorphic tumour cells, increased mitotic count with some atypical mitoses, and myxoid stroma rich in collagen fibres. Immunohistochemistry was strongly positive for vimentin, and negative for cytokeratin, smooth-muscle actin, desmin, S-100 and melanoma-specific antigen. The MIB1 positive proliferative fraction was 50% . The histological diagnosis of a "myxoid-type malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH)" with tumour-free surgical margins up to 3 cm was made [pT1a, pN0 (26/0), pMx, R0]. Histological re-evaluation of the primary tumour by an independent pathologist confirmed the original diagnosis of benign fibrous histiocytoma with ulceration, inflammation and increased cellularity ("irritated BFH").
Clinical staging investigations of the current malignancy [chest X-ray, MRI-scan of the neck and skull, abdominal and neck ultrasound, bone scintigraphy] showed superficial infiltration of the cutis and subcutis. Neither infiltration of the Masseter nor metastases in the regional lymph nodes or elsewhere were found. Radical excision of the tumour was completed by parotidectomy and modified neck dissection, which resulted in a cosmetic defect of the right face that was immediately corrected by a local bi-lobed flap . No postoperative radio- or chemotherapy was applied. Two years postoperatively, the patient was alive and well with full cosmetic and functional recovery. She died after a heart attack three years after surgery without any signs of tumour recurrence or metastasis. Autopsy was not carried out.