A 50 years old white man was sent to our outpatient clinic. He started to feel sick a month before with headache, muscle pain, appetite loss, yellow skin complexion and fatigue. His medical history was unremarkable except for two gout attacks years ago for which reason he was taking allopurinol for more than 5 years. He ceased taking it as soon as he felt sick. Alcohol consumption was three beers per day. Sexual history revealed intercourse with two women, homosexual contacts were negated. No intravenous or nasal drug use and no tattoos were reported. The clinical examination showed two red, erythrosquamous plaques of 10x10mm and 5x5mm in diameter in the décolleté and scleral icterus. Sonography of the liver revealed liver steatosis but no signs of fibrosis or cirrhosis. Liver enzymes were elevated above 50 times the upper limit of normal. HCV antibodies were positive. CMV, HIV and hepatitis A and B serology were negative, EBV serology consistent with past infection. The diagnosis of HCV genotype 1a was confirmed by HCV-RNA. Since a screening test for HCV was negative six months ago we considered this constellation despite a lacking transmission history as an acute HCV infection. For the following 12 weeks transaminases and HCV-RNA were monitored to follow a potential spontaneous HCV clearance . Because the patient remained viraemic we initiated a treatment for acute HCV with 180 μg peg-INF-α weekly and 1000 mg ribavirin daily. Two weeks after treatment initiation HCV-RNA was undetectable .
At treatment week 3 the patient developed itching red papules around 1 to 3 mm in diameter on the forearms and feet. Some of them were confluent to plaques and had a scaly aspect. Symptomatic treatment with cetirizine and hydrating lotion was started. Over the next weeks the exanthema was confluent and therapy with oral prednisone (0.7 mg/kg body weight) was added at treatment week 6 . After an initial improvement the exanthema worsened again. Serological tests for HIV and syphilis were repeatedly negative and ribavirin was stopped at week 9. At week 10 the whole therapy was ceased because of increasing severe erythrodermia . There were no oral lesions. One week after treatment cessation skin lesions aggravated further. A dermatologist was involved and a skin biopsy performed. The biopsy showed papillomatosis with vessel convolutes that reached the stratum corneum as well as neutrophiles in the dermis and parakeratosis consistent with psoriasis vulgaris . Systemic prednisone doses were further increased to 1 mg/kg body weight (70 mg) and complemented with local whole body clobetasol propionate applications. HCV-RNA was not detectable at end of treatment and during follow up consistent with a sustained virological response .
Over the next weeks after HCV treatment cessation prednisone could be tapered and replaced by 50 mg acitretin per day. 6 months after treatment termination the patient still had some psoriatic lesions and acitretin was maintained.