A 50-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with jaundice, fever (39 °C) and choluria in the previous 2 days. The patient had undergone cholecystectomy for cholecystolithiasis and Mirizzi syndrome two years earlier . He reported similar episodes in the previous months, with milder symptoms.
He also had personal medical history of Graves' disease, ulcerative colitis and clear cell carcinoma of the kidney (having undergone laparoscopic right partial nephrectomy 10 years earlier).
The laboratory studies showed elevation of liver enzymes, mainly gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) and total and direct bilirubin, of 789 U/L [N: < 55U/L], 10.1 mg/dL [N:0.3–1.2 mg/dL] and 6.7 mg/dL [N:0.1–0.3 mg/dL], respectively, and a slight elevation of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). C-reactive protein was also elevated (7.12 mg/dL; N:0–0,. mg/dL).
The patient was admitted for medical treatment of cholangitis and underwent imaging tests to characterize the bile ducts, with suspicion of iatrogenic/postinflammatory biliary stenosis.
A MRI was performed with MRCP protocol and with hepatobiliary contrast, confirming dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts with an abrupt stop near the biliary confluence, in close contact with the first portion of the duodenum. In the hepatobiliary phase, contrast was excreted to the duodenal bulb and no contrast was present in the choledochal duct, seemingly confirming hepaticoduodenal fistula. Stenosis of the main biliary tract was confirmed, with approximately 3 cm in length .
The patient was diagnosed with Bismuth type III stenosis after cholecystectomy, associated with hepaticoduodenal fistula. Given the young patient age and after discussion in a multidisciplinary setting, the patient was offered surgical reconstruction. Abdominal triphasic CT was also performed to detect potential associated vascular injury and to obtain a preoperative anatomical mapping. The imaging protocols used in MRI and CT are detailed below.
Pre-contrast and triphasic post-contrast abdominal CT was performed on a 64-slice CT scanner (GE Light Speed VCT) with the following scanning protocol: detector collimation 64-slice × 0.625 mm with gantry rotation of 500 ms, 120 kVp and 134 mAs, a slice thickness of 0.625 mm with resulting voxel size of 0.625 × 0.625 × 0.625 mm3 .
The MRI was performed in a 3 T machine (Magnetom prisma fit-Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) using axial and coronal HASTE; axial in-phase and out-of-phase T1-weighted imaging; axial T2-weighted fat saturated sequence; 3D colangiographic sequence; axial DWI b-50-100-800 and a precontrast and postcontrast T1-weighted 3D VIBE after 10 mL endovenous gadoxetic acid injection on arterial, portal, transitional and hepatobiliary phases. The segmentation was performed in the hepatobiliary phase, a 3D Dixon sequence, 20 min after injection, with a 320 × 320 matrix and field of view (FOV) of 320 × 280 .
Original CT and MRCP images in Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) format were exported to a separate workstation with IntelliSpace Portal, version 9 (Phillips Healthcare, Best, The Netherlands) for post-processing and segmentation.
Two radiologists trained in 3D printing performed segmentation of MR and CT images. The liver, portal and hepatic veins were segmented using in the portal venous phase, the coeliac trunk and hepatic artery using the arterial phase imaging. The intrahepatic bile ducts were segmented in both the CT (portal venous phase) and the hepatobiliary phase of the hepatic MR. Regarding the segmentation techniques, both manual and semi-automatic segmentation techniques were used with different methods in order to faithfully render the anatomical structures including thresholding technique, edge detection, region growing and multiple slice interpolation. The larger volume structures, such as the liver and portal vein, were initially segmented with semi-automatic selection tools of edge detection and thresholding, the contours were defined and adjusted manually. The smaller caliber vessels and biliary ducts were segmented step-by-step, with high precision selection tools requiring manual delineation using region growing technique.
The final dataset was exported into Standard Tessellation Language (STL) to be viewed and processed with the Meshmixer 3.5 (Autodesk, Inc). Using the CT STL as a reference, the MRI STL was initially superimposed using three-dimensional Cartesian coordinates and then manually adjusted to achieve a reliable overlap, using reference points placed along the right and left hepatic ducts, the posterior branch of the right hepatic duct and on the convergences of more distal sectoral ducts on both CT and MR STLs.
The original (CT) model and the fused model (CT + MR) were reviewed jointly by the radiologists and the surgical team, concluding that the bile ducts were more accurately segmented using MRCP than CT, due to its superior contrast resolution. During the editing process, some deformities and free objects were removed and the borders were smoothed .
Measurements of anatomical landmarks were taken in both the CT/MRI and the 3D model to assure its accuracy. The structures were measured three times by both Radiologists for each technique and the mean value was used. The structures measured were: the right and left hepatic duct, main portal vein, proper hepatic artery and right and left branches of the hepatic artery. Differences in measurements of the diameter of the aforementioned structures were calculated between both MR, CT and STL , using the following formula: . The percentage of difference in the measurement using CT only and fused CT/MR were low but the agreement was slightly better when using fused imaging (5.2% and 2.1% respectively) .
The patient had an interesting anatomical variation, an accessory hepatic vein apparently draining S6, which was also segmented and included in our model. This however did not present any clinical consequences.
The ensuing 3D models were discussed and analyzed with the surgical team and used in the planning of the surgery, emphasizing its usefulness for the mapping of vascular relations with the stenosis and biliary tree .
During surgery, after dissection of adhesions, the hepaticoduodenal fistula was identified and the duodenal orifice closed. Thanks to the preoperative 3D reconstructions, the right hepatic artery was found and only minimally dissected away from the biliary convergence, thus avoiding devascularization of the bile ducts. The hilar plate was lowered, and the biliary convergence was dissected in a densely inflamed hepatic hilum, with the usual anatomical landmarks obscured . After cholangioscopic exploration confirmed all main biliary ducts were patent, a Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy was performed. Given the patient’s medical history of ulcerative colitis a hepatic biopsy was performed to exclude primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC).
The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged five days after surgery. On pathology, the liver biopsy was negative for PSC. Three months after surgery the patient is well and symptom free, with normal liver biochemistry.