A 50-year-old female patient applied with ulcerated and painful lesion on the sternum . The patient had the complaints for 3 months, during which the lesion gradually grew. The personal history of the patient revealed that she had undergone total modified radical mastectomy on the left and axillary lymph node dissection for infiltrative ductal breast carcinoma 19 years before and received radiotherapy and adjuvant chemotherapy. She had also received hormonotherapy for 2 years. In the physical examination, an ulcerated lesion of 5 × 6 cm in diameter, which was fixed on the sternum and rising above the skin surface, was palpated. In the laboratory evaluations, the serum gama-glutamyl transpherase (GGT) level was 194 U/L and the other biochemical analyses and hematological parameters including the tumor markers were normal. The lateral x-rays showed destruction of the sternum. Thorax computerized tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging evaluations indicated a lesion of 5 × 6 cm in size that had caused nodularity on the skin and marked destruction in the sternum . The diagnosis based on the incisional biopsy was MFH.
The patient did not have any findings of distant metastasis, but was considered inoperable because of local invasion. A chemotherapy protocol of iphosphamid 2500 mg/m2 (3 days), mesna 2500 mg/m2 (3 days), and adriablastina 50 mg/m2 (1 day) (IMA) was started with 21-day intervals. After two cures of chemotherapy, the size of the lesion was 3 × 3 cm. Repeated thorax CT showed regression of the local invasion, and the tumor was operable. Thus, operation was planned.
Intraoperatively, the lesion on the corpus stern was totally excised with a 4-cm margin along with the health tissue. The manubrium sterni was preserved. To provide stabilization, prolene mesh and methyl methacrylate were used. Then, the areolar fatty tissue and skin composite transposition flap was formed and transpositioned on the prolene mesh. A drain with negative pressure was placed under the transposition flap. The remaining right breast tissue was advanced along the inframammarian sulcus and the flap donor area was closed.
The histopathological evaluation of the incisional biopsy material showed a tumor growth of mesenchymal character with cellular appearance. The tumor consisted of cells with spindle character forming non-marked storiform pattern at certain places and fewer polygonal cells. There were marked nuclear pleomorphism and common mitosis. Atypical mitoses and tumor giant cells with bizarre nuclei were not infrequent. Necrotic areas were present. With these properties the tumor was considered as high grade malignant pleomorphic mesenchymal tumor. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells showed strong cytoplasmic staining with CD68, a histiocyt marker. Therefore, histopathological diagnosis was MFH. In the early postoperative period, recurrence was observed. The patient was applied adjuvant chemotherapy. In the postoperative 11th month, cranial metastasis was detected and the patient died in the postoperative 13th month.