A 60-year-old Caucasian woman with a frequent history of asthma, presented to the hospital with several weeks of progressively worsening shortness of breath. She provided a history of intermittent chest pain which, at one time, was relieved with nitroglycerin and morphine, given in the emergency department. As the patient continued having increasing shortness of breath despite adjustments in her asthma medications, she was admitted for further workup. Pertinent positives in her review of systems included decreased appetite, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea, lower extremity swelling and intermittent chest pain. The patient denied fever, chills, or cough. Her past medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes, asthma, and osteoarthritis. Medications included theophylline, prednisone, furosemide (Lasix), fluticasone & salmeterol (Advair) and albuterol. She quit smoking 20 years ago and denied alcohol or intravenous drug abuse. Family history was negative for coronary artery disease at an early age. The physical examination was significant for tachycardia, raised jugular venous pressure, lower extremity edema and expiratory wheezes upon chest examination.
Laboratory tests revealed elevated brain natriuretic peptide at 1020 pg/ml (normal <100 pg/ml), and negative cardiac enzymes with troponin levels consistently below 0.01 ng/ml (normal 0.00-0.03 ng/ml). Electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia, left atrial enlargement, poor R wave progression and nonspecific ST-T wave changes in all leads specifically T wave inversion in the lateral leads . Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly with pulmonary vascular congestion. Pulmonary embolism was ruled out by spiral computer tomography (CT) scan. A 2D echocardiogram with albumin echo contrast showed left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 25-30% with moderate to severe global hypokinesis of the left ventricle and moderately enlarged left atrium. It also showed a normal sized ventricle with multiple trabeculation in the mid LV cavity and apex suggesting either an apical form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy or LVNC . She underwent cardiac catheterization which revealed normal coronary arteries. In view of the normal coronaries and severe global hypokinesis, further workup was done to rule out other causes of cardiomyopathy. Viral cultures were negative for enteric cytopathic human orphan [ECHO] and coxsackie viruses. To further elucidate the cause of the cardiomyopathy, LV endomyocardial biopsy was performed. Histology showed myocardial fibrosis suggestive of cardiomyopathy, possibly secondary to LVNC .