A 60 years old male patient presented to the clinic with a primary complain of unilateral neck swelling and local pain. He first noticed this swelling about 5 weeks ago in the left lateral neck. Since then this neck lump has been getting larger rapidly and extending to his left clavicular region. Clinical examination reveals a non-tender 4 cm lesion within the left root of neck at the level V. The lesion was firm, immobile and adherent to the adjacent tissues extending downwards to the left clavicle. Past medical history was non contributary. Clinical findings are suggestive for a possible malignant lesion so the patient immediately underwent an extensive diagnostic work-up. Blood tests including biochemical and malignant biomarkers were in normal range. U/S examination reveals a large complex mixed cystic/solid mass at the root of the neck on the left side. The mass filled the supraclavicular fossa. Medially, it extended over the front of the clavicle and even on the infero-anterior aspect of the clavicle. It measured approximately 4.4 × 3.4 cm in the coronal plane and axially around 6.6 cm. These findings were confirmed by full body-CT scan, which also described the presence of the mass effect on left subclavian vein and left lower portion of the left internal jugular vein . MRI depicted no infiltration of the branchial plexus . In addition, there was no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy. The PET-CT scan showed a FDG avid necrotic cervical node at the left neck. Cone U/S-guided biopsy of the lesion reveals an atypical epitheliod population, without evidence of lymph node existence in the specimen. Local immunohistochemistry was positive for p63 and CK5/6, and negative for CEA, Melan-A, PSA, CDX2, CK7, CK20, TTF1 and S100. Additional stains for CD30, OCT ¾, EBER-ISH, EMA and synaptophysin was negative and staining for p16 show strong uniform nuclear positivity. Immunohistochemistry failed to indicate the exact origin of the neoplasm. However, the combination of head and neck position, squamous cell markers (positive basaloid cell staining) and HPV surrogate p16 positivity maybe associated with a metastatic carcinoma of primary tumour which was probably located at the head and neck region (probably oropharyngeal portion). Nevertheless, multiple biopsies from the oropharyngeal region including tongue, tonsils and nasal cavity were normal. Furthermore the patient underwent tonsillectomy and the microscopical examination of the specimen was normal. Surgical excision of the mass was decided. An anterior incision according to the dartevelle approach was performed . This approach gave us the opportunity to carefully dissect the neck and thoracic portion of the tumour. By the end of the operation the gap occurring by the successfully complete resection of the mass, left clavicle and first rib was covered by a vascular muscle flap from the major pectoralis muscle. Microscopic examination of the mass surrounding the clavicle showed nests of epithelial cells with pseudoglandular structures and evidence of focal keratinisation together with central necrosis. There was perineural invasion without evidence of lympovascular tumor infiltration.The clavicle bone fragment showed no abnormality and cervical lymph nodes IV and V were negative for malignant disease. The patient after 7 days discharged without any major postoperative complication and scheduled to radiotherapy. However in the context of the possible muscle flap necrosis the radiation therapy was postoponed until the viability was confirmed. Follow-up of the patient after one year showed no evidence of metastastic disease or disease progression .