A 71-year old previously well Sinhalese male was transferred from a local hospital for further management of weakness of left upper and lower limbs following a hump-nosed pit viper bite. At a local hospital, his 20 min whole blood clotting test (WBCT20) was normal. On the previous day, while the patient was working in the home garden at about 11:00, his right foot was bitten by a snake identified by the patient and the relatives as a hump-nosed pit viper. However, the snake was not caught or killed for religious reasons. When he was shown a formalin-preserved specimen of hump-nosed viper at the ward, he identified and confirmed the offending snake. He was given native treatment (local application and decoction) once and was admitted to a local hospital. The next day, he developed weakness of left lower and upper limbs at about 11:30. His urine output was normal, and there was moderate pain at site of bite. On admission to the tertiary care center, his Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 15/15, his mouth deviated to the right, and he had reduced muscle power in both left upper and lower limbs (3/5) with exaggerated tendon reflexes. Ptosis or external ophthalmoplegia was not observed. Also, there was slurring of speech. However, there was no sensory impairment.
There was moderate swelling over the bitten foot, and no necrosis was observed. Fang punctures were difficult to identify owing to local application of herbal medicine over the bitten limb . His blood pressure was 160/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 52 beats per minute, and O2 saturation was 97% on room air. Twenty-minute whole blood clotting test done three times 6 hours apart was normal, and the other laboratory findings are presented in Table . Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed bradycardia . Blood picture and chest X-ray were normal. The non-contrast computed tomography scan of brain on admission (day 2 of snakebite) was normal, but on day 3 it showed an ischemic infarct in right internal capsule .
The patient was started on aspirin 300 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, and atorvastatin 20 mg nocte after giving loading doses of those medications. Intravenous clindamycin 600 mg 6-hourly and cefotaxime 1 g 8-hourly were administered. He continued limb physiotherapy and speech therapy. He was discharged on day 4 of snakebite by arranging clinic visits with a plan for stroke rehabilitation (physiotherapy) with aspirin and atorvastatin. At first clinic visit 2 weeks after the discharge, his limb weakness and pulse rate were improved. His lipid profile was normal.