A 21-year-old Pakistani man presented to the emergency department in an altered state of consciousness. He had sniffed a drug of abuse 6 hours prior to presentation, developed a high-grade fever responsive to acetaminophen, had two episodes of projectile vomiting and, within an hour of presenting, progressed from irritable to stuporous. Initial examination found the patient febrile and stable, with a GCS of 6/15 (E1M4V1). He had dilated reactive pupils, an upgoing right plantar reflex, and a urine toxicology screen positive for morphine and benzodiazepine. There was no history of preceding falls, headaches, abnormal movements and signs of meningeal irritation were negative.
Emergency CT scan (Shown in ) revealed diffuse sulcal effacement and hypoattenuation of the white matter. Naloxone was administered emergently; mannitol, dexamethasone, vancomycin, ceftriaxone and acyclovir were started empirically for infectious causes of encephalitis.
Emergency labs revealed leukocytosis (TLC = 16.6 109/L, 82.3% neutrophils), urea 48g/dL, creatinine 1.4g/dL, hyponatremia (Na = 128mEq/L), hyperkalemia (K = 5.8mEq/L). Urine output was approximately 2–2.5 L/day throughout his hospital stay. MRI-contrast studies were delayed till the renal markers normalized. He had a history of pulmonary tuberculosis diagnosed 7 months ago, managed with antituberculosis therapy which ended 1 month prior to admission.
The patient was admitted to the Medical ICU, where he was managed as a case of meningoencephalitis, with differentials of tuberculous meningitis, drug induced encephalopathy, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) and cerebral malaria. CSF analysis was unremarkable, with all microscopic and biochemical parameters, including Adenosine Deaminase (ADA), within normal limits. On the first day of admission, he suffered an isolated episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizure but his GCS improved gradually, reaching 15/15 on the 4th day of admission, after which mannitol was discontinued. Opioid substitution treatment was initiated, with intravenous nalbuphine twice daily, later shifted to oral tramadol with alprazolam and finally to NSAIDs. On regaining consciousness, he complained of spastic paraparesis and urinary incontinence suggestive of spastic bladder.
This was later accompanied by colicky abdominal pain. The abdomen was non-tender and the remaining abdominal exam was unremarkable. Ultrasound revealed a contracted gallbladder full of calculi and bilateral grade-I renal parenchymal disease. Clinical examination and subsequent imaging studies ruled out biliary, intestinal and renal colic and the paroxysmal pain was diagnosed as skeletal muscle spasms. These spasms were not responsive to analgesics.
On the 15th day of admission, he was shifted to the Neurology ward for evaluation. In confidence, the patient admitted to experimenting with drugs of abuse by the conjunctival route, which were associated with red eyes and headaches relieved by aspirin. The abuse that precipitated his clinical condition involved ‘burning a white powder in foil and sniffing the fumes’. Laboratory and clinical examination indicated that the abused substance was a mixture of heroin, benzodiazepines and adulterants. He revealed no other instances of drug abuse.
Abnormalities in mentation included poor concentration, decreased awareness of surroundings, delayed response to questions and commands, and poor recall (MMSE = 21). Examination revealed pupils to be dilated and non-reactive, but cranial nerves, sensory and cerebellar systems were found to be normal. Lower limbs showed symmetrical findings of hypotonia, 3/5 power proximally, 2/5 distally, and brisk deep tendon reflexes. Right plantar was upgoing, while the left was mute. MRI findings revealed T2-FLAIR bilateral hyperintensities in deep white matter with diffusion restriction on DWI sequences (Shown in ), hence the diagnosis of bilateral drug-induced cerebral leukoencephalopathy was made. The patient could not afford high dose vitamin C or E so coenzyme Q10 and turmeric powder were advised instead.
During his hospital course, we observed certain signs resembling opioid withdrawal. These included diaphoresis, mydriasis, yawning, insomnia, abdominal pain and muscle spasms. The locus ceruleus, whose norepinephrine production is responsible for most features of withdrawal , was spared on MRI. As these signs failed to respond to opioid substitution therapy, and widespread leukoencephalopathy was observed, these signs cannot be attributed to uncomplicated opioid withdrawal. Further, his history suggested only three instances of abuse, so dependence may not have fully developed.
The patient responded to treatment and partial improvement in his cognition, spastic paraparesis and urge incontinence was noted upon follow up at three months.