A 64-year-old Japanese man presented to a private dental clinic for dental caries treatment; a routine, panoramic radiograph showed a mixed radiolucent and radiopaque mass on the left side of the mandibular angle. The dentist suggested that the patient seek further examination and referred him to our university hospital. The patient had no history of trauma or surgery in the left mandibular area, and he stated that none of his family members had any similar bony outgrowths. He had a medical history of controlled prostate cancer and atrial fibrillation, but hematological and biochemical examinations did not reveal any pathological findings. His facial appearance was symmetrical, with mild swelling at the left inferior border of the mandibular angle. There was no swelling or tenderness in the submandibular lymph nodes, and the patient’s intraoral condition showed no remarkable findings. Nonetheless, three-dimensional cone beam computed tomography revealed a mixed radiolucent and radiopaque mass at the left-side inferior mandibular angle and submandibular region . The mass measured 33.3 × 41.0 × 20.2 mm. On the basis of these clinical signs, the patient was diagnosed as having a peripheral osteoma of the mandible, and a surgical resection of bony mass was performed under general anesthesia.
Specifically, a submandibular incision was made and the periosteum was elevated, exposing the mass, which was then lobulated without any adhesive periosteum. The mass was attached to the inferior border of the mandibular angle, and it extended from the internal mandibular angle to the front of the anterior mandibular ramus. The tumor was cut from the mandibular inferior body using a fissure bur; the excised specimen was a hard, ovular mass with a smooth, opalescent surface and without capsules. Histopathologically, the tumor showed a cartilage-capped bony projection with bone marrow that was covered by a thick perichondrium . The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient showed no signs of recurrence during a 1-year follow-up period.