40 years old female presented with transverse fracture of left acetabulum . Patient was managed elsewhere with anterior extended ilio-inguinal approach, with inadequate single screw fixation. The fixation failed . She presented 6 months later with painful hip. The patient was managed with reconstruction of acetabulum by posterior column plating, impaction bone grafting; from the morselized bone grafts harvested from the femoral head, fixed with mesh and multiple screws spanning both the columns of acetabulum ; and a cemented total hip replacement implant . The mesh acted as internal buttress splint as well as protected the bone grafts. As posterior column is the main weight-bearing pillar during walking, posterior column plating was done to support posterior column union. Autologous bone grafts used for filling up the central defect gave support to the cemented cup. Patient was asked to weight bear with a walker till bone grafts consolidated. Post – operative course of patient was uneventful.
Six months post - operatively patient presented with dislodgement of cup, pelvic discontinuity , and sinus in thigh . Patient was planned for a two - staged revision surgery. In the first stage implant removal, and antibiotic spacer insertion was done . Infection healed at 3 months following the spacer surgery . Usual protocol of antibiotics followed spacer insertion. Initially intravenous antibiotics were given till C-reactive protein (CRP) came to normal followed by oral antibiotics for a total period of 6 weeks. Drug holiday for a period of 6 weeks was given afterwards. CRP & Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) returned to normal & clinically infection healed.
Patient had Paprosky grade IIIb defect at the time of second stage of revision total hip replacement. Spacer was removed through postero-lateral approach. Anterior approach was taken for anterior plating. On exploring anteriorly, external iliac pulsations were not felt. Vascular surgeons were called in intra - operatively & it was unanimously decided to abandon the procedure.
Postoperatively digital subtraction angiography of affected limb demonstrated chronic block in the external iliac artery and vascularity of the limb was being maintained by corona mortis , receiving blood supply from the obturator artery, a branch of internal iliac artery . Retrospectively analyzing, this case at no point of time did have any signs, which could have suggested vascular insufficiency in the lower limb. Patient was ultimately left with pelvic discontinuity, excision arthroplasty and pseudoarthrosis of the left hip .
At further follow up patient was not only affected physically but also mentally and financially. She felt helpless and depressed all the time. After undergoing four surgeries, patient was financially drained and thus was not willing to undergo any further management for her pathology of hip region. She rather accepted shortening of her limb and always used walker for ambulation. Due to the pathology she had to quit her job, as she could ambulate only within her house. Thus the fracture of the hip region left her physically and mentally handicapped and financially dependent.