This patient is a 7-year-old Bahraini boy who sustained blunt trauma to his abdomen from the bar of a football goal post. He presented with abdominal pain and vomiting. On arrival to accident and emergency department, he was conscious, alert, and oriented. His pulse was 121 beats per minute, blood pressure was 96/53 (mean 68) mmHg, and respiratory rate was 30 cycles per minute. His abdomen was distended with an epigastric bruise. On admission his hemoglobin was 9.2 g/dL (12 to 14.5), white blood cell count was 20.3×109/L (3.6 to 9.6), serum amylase was 116 U/L (30 to 118), and glucose was 26.8 mmol/L (3.6 to 8.9; Table ). Pan-CT revealed a grade III liver injury , grade I bilateral renal injury, and a suspicion of splenic injury was raised by the radiology registrar. The CT films were reviewed next day by a consultant radiologist and reported a grade III to IV pancreatic injury . Our patient was admitted to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) and was treated conservatively. Because he was stable, he was discharged to the surgical ward by day 3. His blood test results were monitored closely and showed a gradual rise in serum amylase level during the first week of injury . At day 18 he developed abdominal distension and vomiting. An abdominal examination revealed a palpable epigastric mass. A CT scan showed a pseudocyst which was aspirated percutaneously under ultrasound guidance by an interventional radiologist. The cyst recurred at day 25 so a pigtail catheter was inserted for continuous drainage under ultrasound guidance. Throughout his stay, he was maintained on total parenteral nutrition (TPN) through a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line. The pigtail catheter was removed after ten days and a low fat diet was started by day 44 as he did not tolerate orally administered nutrition earlier. He was discharged home at day 55 in good health. Out-patient follow-up and serial ultrasound showed resolution of the cyst and normalization of his blood investigations .