A 50-year-old woman presented to our hospital with hematochezia and anemia. 1 year earlier, she experienced severe anemia (hemoglobin 4.0 g/dL) that was treated with a blood transfusion at another hospital. The diagnosis at that time was a hemorrhagic gastric ulcer, and she was treated with a proton pump inhibitor. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) done just before the first administration to our hospital showed multiple liver lesions of arterioportal and portal venous shunts, hemangiomas, and a large focal nodular hyperplasia. She had hematochezia and anemia (hemoglobin 7.0 g/dL) again and was referred to our hospital for further examination. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies including double-balloon enteroscopy did not reveal any bleeding lesions in her esophagus, stomach, duodenum, proximal jejunum, colon, or rectum, although she had grade 1 esophageal varices. Angiographic examination revealed an AVM, with signs of extravasation, at the jejunal branch of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA; Fig. a). Three vasa recta branches of the jejunum at the AVM lesion were embolized with metallic coils to stop the bleeding . The patient was then discharged from the hospital without any complications. Three months after the embolization, she experienced hematochezia and anemia again and was admitted to our hospital. Repeat angiography showed rebleeding from the same AVM, and an additional 3 vasa recta branches were treated with metallic coil embolization . The coil embolization was temporarily successful again. However, because of the risk of another rebleeding from the same AVM in addition to the risk of necrosis of the coil-embolized jejunum, we considered resection of the affected jejunum to be the optimal treatment and recommended this to the patient.
Elective laparoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia. Although initial investigation under laparoscopy alone failed to localize the lesion, X-ray fluoroscopy showed a clear image of the metallic coils embolizing the AVM . Subsequently, the small bowel was taken out through the umbilical incision, and the metallic coils were confirmed by palpation under direct vision. Partial resection of the jejunum was performed, followed by functional end-to-end anastomosis using linear staplers . Pathological examination revealed fibrous thickening of the vessels and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the mesentery, suggesting a focal inflammation in response to the coil embolization . There was no necrotic intestine caused by the embolization . She had no complications after surgery and was discharged within 1 week. She did not have any hematochezia after resection of the AVM during 8 months of follow-up.