A 49-year-old woman, born to nonconsanguineous parents in Laos, but who had lived in Canada for the past 30 years, presented in May 2010 with a 1-month history of weight loss, fatigue, cough, and intermittent low-grade fever. Her previous family and personal medical history were unremarkable. She could not recall being in contact with tuberculosis. Given that a 7-day course of levofloxacin treatment for presumed right lung pneumonia did not improve her symptoms, she was subjected to further examinations. An initial bronchoscopy showed friable, bleeding, and irregular mucosa of the right upper lobe entry. Biopsies were not feasible, but Ziehl-Neelsen and auramine stains of the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were negative and cytology was normal. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed atelectasis caused by an 8 × 7 cm irregular mass impacting the right superior lobar bronchus along with multiple mediastinal and hilar adenopathies .
Since the most probable diagnosis was a neoplastic process, the patient was discharged home to await a scheduled transthoracic biopsy (TTB). However, when a previous BAL culture was found to be positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB), she was readmitted to rule out active tuberculosis. Upon presentation, she was afebrile and her vital signs were normal. There was no regional adenopathy, and the physical examination was normal except for reduced vesicular murmur sounds on auscultation over the right lung. The peripheral white blood cell count was 26 × 109/L, with 21 × 109/L neutrophils and 3 × 109/L lymphocytes. The inflammatory syndrome was considered important due to a serum C-reactive protein concentration of 111 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 25 mm/h. The procalcitonin concentration was 19 μg/L. The hemoglobin level was 71 g/L with a mean corpuscular volume of 73 fL, and the platelet count was at 766 × 109/L. Other routine biochemical tests were normal. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) performed 3 days after admission, using morning sputum, was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. On the fourth day, the patient developed fever with purulent expectorations. While other investigations were being pursued, treatment for post-obstructive pneumonia was initiated with piperacillin-tazobactam.
An endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) revealed purulent secretions and a diminished right superior lobar bronchus caliber. Multiple transbronchial needle aspirations of adenopathies were also performed. Two days later, the patient’s condition necessitated her transfer to the intensive care unit (ICU), and vancomycin was added. The peripheral white blood cell count was 47 × 109/L and a chest X-ray film showed a new infiltration process affecting the right lower lobe and median lobe with an important pleural effusion. Analysis of the pleural fluid showed an uncomplicated exudative effusion (pH >7.2) with a predominance of lymphocytes. On the fourth day in the ICU, endotracheal intubation and support with amines were required for septic shock. The results of mediastinoscopy biopsies followed by a TTB of the mass lesion were non-diagnostic, showing only extensive fibrosis and unspecific acute and chronic reactive lymphoid infiltrates. Granuloma formation was not observed.
On the eight day in the ICU, the first preliminary report of the initial BAL sample revealed that it was positive for M. colombiense, as shown by analyzing genomic deletions and rRNA 16S gene sequencing (Quebec Public Health Laboratory). As radiologic control had also deteriorated , the decision to commence treatment on the same day with rifampicin, clarithromycin, and ethambutol was taken. Later sensitivity analysis by broth microdilution revealed that M.colombiense was susceptible to clarithromycin with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 0.25 mg/L. Rifampin's MIC was 4 mg/L and ethambutol's MIC was >16 mg/L. Although ethambutol and rifampin are useful clinically in cases of Mycobacterium avium complex infections , breakpoints for determining susceptibility and resistance have not been established by the Clinical and laboratory standards institute M24-A2 (CLSI M24-A2) . HIV tests were repeatedly negative. Two days later, multiple organ failure (MOF) developed. Since the previous mediastinoscopy culture was positive for a multiresistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain , vancomycin was stopped and piperacillin-tazobactam was changed to doripenem and tobramycin. On the patient’s 27th day in the ICU, administration of anti-Pseudomonas antibiotics was terminated because her clinical condition was stable. However, when 2 tracheal aspirates were found to be positive for susceptible P. aeruginosa and clinical deterioration was again noted, treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam and ciprofloxacin was started. Unfortunately, the patient died from septic shock with MOF on the 34th day in the ICU.
Interestingly, almost every culture performed during the patient’s hospitalization was positive for M. colombiense . Although cytomegalovirus (CMV) serology was not performed for this patient before her death, samples from the final bronchoscopy grew CMV in fibroblast cell culture many days later . The pathologist also identified CMV inclusions in the lungs, mediastinal adenopathies, thyroid gland, pancreas, and adrenal glands . This observation was also confirmed by immunohistochemistry .
Post-mortem examination of the right lung revealed an organizing pneumonia, and the mediastinum contained a lot of adherence, fibrosis, and adenopathies with lymphoid hyperplasia. No granuloma formation was detected in the lungs or in any of the other organs examined. An immunologic investigation performed before the death of our patient revealed normal counts of lymphocyte populations (CD4+, CD8+, CD19+, CD56+) and normal levels of immunoglobulins. We concluded that a genetic immunological deficit was very unlikely because of the late presentation of symptoms—at the age of 49 years—and the absence of significant family or personal medical history. Instead, we suspected an acquired deficit; thus, we tested for the presence of anti-IFN-γ autoantibodies in the patient’s plasma. The IFN-γ titer—defined as the dilution of a patient’s plasma that inhibits 50% fixation of 125 pg/mL IFN-γ in a standard IFN-γ ELISA assay (eBioscience ELISA kit)—was positive at 1:53725. Therefore, the final diagnosis was immunodeficiency secondary to the production of autoantibodies against IFN-γ, which resulted in post-obstructive pneumonia caused by lymphadenitis and disseminated infection of M. colombiense. The clinical course was complicated by the presence of multiresistant P. aeruginosa infection post-EBUS mediastinitis, CMV pneumonitis with dissemination, and finally, susceptible P. aeruginosa ventilator-associated pneumonia with septic shock and MOF leading to death.