A 37-year-old white Arabian woman who had never smoked tobacco products presented a nodular goiter during a routine follow up with her endocrinologist. An ultrasound examination of her neck showed a 2.4×3.2cm solid hypoechoic nodule of her right thyroid lobe. Her left thyroid lobe and the isthmus appeared to be normal. Serum levels of free triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin were within normal ranges. She was screened for multiple endocrine neoplasias with negative results.
She underwent ultrasonogram-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) that showed a cellular aspirate comprising predominantly atypical epithelial cells having hyperchromatic eccentric nucleus and a moderate to abundant amount of vacuolated cytoplasm with occasional scattered thyroid follicular epithelial cell clusters with absence of colloid.
Her chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound were normal.
She underwent a total thyroidectomy with neck exploration. The microscopic aspect of the nodule was consistent with a well-differentiated carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that these tumor cells were positive for both cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and were negative for both CK20 and thyroglobulin, which concords with metastatic disease from lung origin .
A computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest along with an upper abdomen CT was then performed, and revealed a 4cm mass within the right upper lobe of her lung. Radiologic findings were negative for both lymph node and adrenal metastases.
Given these results, our case was presented during a weekly board meeting, and the decision of a surgical excision of the pulmonary mass was made. Three weeks later, our patient underwent a segmentectomy with lymph node dissection. According to the pathologic findings, the tumor was staged as IB (pT2a,N0,M0). She was referred to our medical oncology department for adjuvant therapy, where she received six cycles of an adjuvant platinum and vinorelbine-based regimen.
After 1 year of follow up, she continues to be in remission.