A 64-year-old male with Parkinson's disease was admitted to the surgical ward for a laparoscopic sigmoid resection because of a volvulus caused by a dolichocolon. In 2007, he was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. Until surgery, he used amantadine 100 mg b.i.d. and ropinirol controlled release formulation b.i.d., in the morning 10 mg and in the afternoon 8 mg. At night, he used one 100/25 mg levodopa/benserazide controlled release formulation. After surgery, the patient developed a paralytic ileus for which he was on a ‘nil per os’ regime. This regime led to a deterioration of his Parkinson symptoms.
After consultation of the neurologist and pharmacist, the surgeon decided to start rectal administration of 100/25 mg levodopa/carbidopa once daily, in accordance with his oral levodopa/carbidopa dose. The patient gave informed consent for this treatment.
As he was unable to take his other Parkinson drugs (dopamine agonist, amantadine) too, an increase of the Parkinson symptoms was seen, since he only used 100/25 mg levodopa/carbidopa rectally once daily. For that reason, the dose was increased to rectally administered levodopa/carbidopa 100/25 mg 5 times a day. This led to an improvement of the Parkinson symptoms. Optimal control of his Parkinson symptoms was not pursued, but alleviation of the most severe tremor and rigidity was seen, which was confirmed by the neurologist, nurses and patient.
On day 3, a blood sample was drawn 1 h after administration of the rectal levodopa in order to determine the serum levodopa concentration. We found a levodopa serum concentration of 17 nmol/l (determined with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry/mass spectrometry).
When levodopa is combined with a decarboxylase inhibitor, the half-life of levodopa is 1.5 h. In this patient, the oral levodopa formulation was stopped 24 h before the rectal formulation was started. The blood sample was drawn 3 days after the rectal formulation was started, which is 96 h after the last oral levodopa gift.
Since the half-life of levodopa (combined with a decarboxylase inhibitor) is 1.5 h, it can be assumed that after 96 h (64 half-life); all levodopa due to the oral administration was washed out. Therefore, the detected levodopa in this patient is not due to the oral medication.
However, it is not sure whether the detected levodopa is endogenous or due to the rectal administration of levodopa, since one study described an endogenous concentration of levodopa of 38 ± 32 nmol/l. Increase of the levodopa concentration after rectal administration of the formulation we used in human are not described in the literature. The serum levels of levodopa described after oral administration are much higher, in the range of 1,400-12,000 nmol/l [,,].