A 19 months old girl presented with severe anemia (Hb 3 mmol/l). Her parents had noticed her failure to thrive and chronic diarrhea. There was no visible blood in her stools, and markers for intestinal blood loss as well as assays for intestinal pathogens were negative. Also because of inconclusive celiac serology the child underwent duodenoscopy with normal macroscopic and histologic findings. Since a detailed dietary protocol kept by her parents pointed towards (iron) malnutrition, she was adequately supplemented.
After a symptomless four-month interval the child presented again. It was only now that her parents had noted hematochezia and also suspected occasional abdominal pain. Physical examination showed no abnormalities, in particular no abdominal mass on palpation. Laboratory tests were normal apart from mild neutropenia and slighty elevated d-dimer values. However, guaiac fecal occult blood test (HaemOccult®, Beckman Coulter Inc., Brea, CA/USA) was positive.
Abdominal sonography was performed and revealed a 10 to 15 cm long circular lobulated infiltration of the ileum wall, the aboral end almost extending to Bauhin’s valve (Figure ). The lesion’s transmural extension was 1.5 cm and caused a concentric luminal stenosis. Locoregional small amounts of ascites were present. No enlarged lymph nodules were visible. Colour Doppler sonography revealed venous flow patterns in many of the tubular-unechoic multifocal structures in and around the lesion. On duplex Doppler sonography, the larger vessels presented predominantly low-pressure and venous low-flow characteristics, without major feeding or draining vessels; some vessels appeared to be thrombosed.
In order to obtain information on the lesion’s intraluminal or stenosing aspects as well as its exact location an enema consisting of 500 ml saline was gently administered during the US. Filling of the entire colon was prompt and uneventful and confirmed the ileal location of the mass. We then used high frequency linear probes to precisely document the enema’s remarkably prolonged passage which was due to high grade stenosis of the affected small bowel segments. However, clear definition of its relation to Bauhin’s valve was impossible by distension only and without the additional means of analgo-sedation.
Abdominal Hydro-MRI based on the US results was subsequently performed to further visualize extent, location, and anatomic details. The circular infiltration of the terminal ileum (Figure ) was thus confirmed. The lesion exhibited delayed, almost homogenous enhancement after intravenous administration of the contrast agent. Additionally, no large feeding or draining vessels were depicted on MR-angiography, performed in the early phases of contrast agent administration. Small amounts of ascites, but no enlarged lymph nodules nor large feeding vessels were found.
Due to worsening of clinical symptoms and remaining uncertainty as to the potentially malignant nature of the lesions an interdisciplinary committee decided on diagnostic laparoscopy. A three-port-laparoscopy (3-5 mm) was performed and revealed a purple bacciform vascular malformation of the mid-ileum completely encircling the affected intestinal segment (Figure ). Since Bauhin’s valve was not affected as primarily indicated by the imaging studies, the pediatric surgeons decided to remove the 12 cm long malformation en bloc. After a median subumbilical minilaparotomy the lesion was externalized via an Alexis® Wound Retractor, resected and finally an ileal end-to-end anastomosis was performed. Macroscopically, the resected tissue showed multiple, partially hemorrhagic cystic structures smaller than 6 mm which were bulging the focally livid serosa. Histology defined the lesion as a vascular malformation due to innumerable partially thrombosed small blood vessels throughout the bowel wall with alternating vessel diameter and wall thickness. There were no signs of malignancy; in sano resection had been achieved.
The girl recovered well from the procedure and was able to leave the hospital in good general condition after one week. Early follow-up US revealed no residual or recurrent tumorous tissue.