A 44-year-old Saudi male, was referred to our clinic from Dammam Medical Centre (DMC) for a scalp lesion suspicious for basal cell carcinoma. The patient initially noticed a mass on his scalp that appeared one year ago, gradually increasing in size. Not associated with pain, discharge, headache or itching. Patient denied any systemic features such as, fever, abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting. He presented to DMC for evaluation as the size was starting to bother him. On examination, there was a scalp lesion 1x2cm in size, regular borders, no signs of inflammation or infection. The patient's past medical history is significant for hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Past surgical history involved a hemorrhoidectomy ten years ago. The patient is on antihypertensive and anti-diabetic medications with no known allergies. No significant family history was noted. The patient subsequently underwent excision of the lesion and subcutaneous tissue under local anaesthesia in DMC. He was discharged on ibuprofen 400 BID PO for five days and omeprazole 40 mg OD PO for seven days. Ten days later, when he represented to the clinic for suture removal, there was a small area of wound dehiscence in the upper edge of the wound. The histopathology report at the time was consistent with basal cell carcinoma, nodular type with deep surgical margins involved by tumour cells. The patient was then referred to our surgical oncology clinic in King Fahad Specialist Hospital (KFSH) for re-excision of positive margins and further management. A slide review was done in our hospital which showed skin adnexal tumour with trichilemmal differentiation favouring trichoblastoma with small tiny foci of tumour cells present in the inferior margin (1 mm). The slide was sent to an expert dermatohistopathologist for a final report which confirmed our findings and a final diagnosis of Trichoblastoma with benign features was made. A computed tomography (CT) scan was done of the head and neck which showed subcentimetric lymph nodes with suspicious morphology involving the posterior aspect of the neck, the post auricular and sub-occipital region. The patient underwent wide local excision under general anaesthesia which was performed by a breast and endocrine surgery consultant. The patient was then discharged home on analgesia and followed up in clinic 10 days later for removal of superficial sutures and alternating removal of deep sutures. He was seen again seven days later for the removal of the remaining sutures.