A 21-year-old Malay woman diagnosed as having albinism presented to a Low Vision Clinic for low-vision assessment. Her problems were blurring of distant vision, glare, and her dissatisfaction with her current auto-focus spectacle-mounted telescope, which she reported as being heavy as well as cosmetically unacceptable . She had poor visual acuity and sensitivity to bright light and glare, and her ocular presentation showed light colored irides, right eye esotropia, pendular nystagmus, and refractive error.
The distance spectacle prescription for her right eye was −7.00/-3.25×170 with visual acuity of 6/48 and for the left eye was −8.00/-2.00×175 with visual acuity of 6/48. Near visual acuity for both right eye and left eye was N10 at 20cm. Subjective refraction was found to be similar to her spectacle prescription on presentation, and after conducting a pinhole test did not show any further improvement.
Low-vision assessment was carried out and the BITA® Vision Enhancer 3/8 4× binocularly was introduced and fitted to her distance spectacles . Our patient found that the BITA® telemicroscope was acceptable and her visual acuity (VA) for both eyes was 6/9 when using the BITA® device. The BITA® telemicroscope was light in weight compared to her auto-focus telescopes. It was also smaller in size and therefore not readily noticeable by others when in use. The BITA® telemicroscope was therefore prescribed to our patient.
A slit lamp examination showed that our patient could be fitted with contact lenses (CLs). Her tear prism was sufficient and the tear break-up time (TBUT) was 13 seconds for both eyes. In order to reduce glare, Flexcon prosthetic iris-tinted CM Brown color CLs 38% (12mm iris diameter with 3.5mm clear pupil size) /8.4/14.00/plano/ were prescribed to our patient for both eyes . No prescription was incorporated into the CLs because our patient wanted to use the CLs either with her distance spectacles or with the BITA® telemicroscope. Her vision when using the CLs and her own spectacles improved one line to 6/36 for both eyes. The CLs were prescribed with a multi-purpose solution as the disinfecting system. Our patient returned for aftercare following one week of CL usage. She reported that with the prosthetic CLs, glare was no longer a major issue, her nystagmus was reduced and her vision was clearer with her spectacles. She also reported that her vision was clearer when she used the iris-tinted CLs with the BITA® telemicroscope. Our patient was advised to return for routine CL aftercare every three months, as is advised to other CL wearers.