A 47-year-old woman noticed upper eyelid swelling on the right side 1.5 months before referral to our service. An ophthalmologist diagnosed it as allergic conjunctivitis and prescribed an anti-allergic eyedrop. However, the eyelid swelling was gradually worsened in a month. She consulted with a neurosurgeon who diagnosed it as acute dacryoadenitis, based on findings of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The symptom had once subsided after taking oral antibiotics for 20 days but recurred. She had no prior history of any immunodeficient or autoimmune disease, or viral infection. She also had no history of preceding fever.
On the first examination, the best-corrected visual acuity was 1.0 and intraocular pressure was 15 mm Hg in the right eye and 14 mm Hg in the left eye. The right upper eyelid was mildly swollen (a). The right lacrimal gland was palpable, and tenderness was present. The right upper eyelid was mechanically ptotic, and margin reflex distance-1 was 2.0 mm on the right side and 3.5 mm on the left side. Hertel exophthalmometer values were 13 mm in the right eye and 12 mm in the left eye (base, 99 mm). Hess chart showed mild limitation of supraduction in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed bulbar conjunctival injection in the temporal region of the right eye. Funduscopic examination revealed retinal folds in the right eye. Blood test demonstrated increased C-reactive protein (0.42 mg/dL; normal range, ≤0.14 mg/dL), although white blood cell was within normal range (7,100/µL; normal rage, 3,100-8,400/µL). Soluble interleukin-2 receptor and β2 microglobulin levels were within normal range. Immunoglobulin M of Epstein Barr and mumps was negative. Blood test for autoantibodies revealed increased rheumatoid factor (23.9 mg/dL; normal range, ≤15 mg/dL) and proteinase 3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3-ANCA) (7.0 IU/mL; normal range, ≤2.0 IU/mL). T2-weighted MRI showed an oval-shaped, high signal intensity area in an enlarged right lacrimal gland (b). Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) also showed a high signal intensity lesion in the right lacrimal gland (c), and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map demonstrated the lesion with a low signal intensity (d). These findings corresponded to the diagnosis of a lacrimal gland abscess. Systemic work-up did not reveal any suspicious lesion of adjacent (rhinosinusitis) or distant septic foci. Swab culture test of the upper fornix near the right lacrimal gland was negative.
The patient was admitted to our hospital. We consulted with the infection control team and administered 2 g of intravenous ceftriaxone sodium hydrate and 1.8 g of intravenous clindamycin per day to the patient. During hospitalization, we consulted with a specialist of connective tissue disorders and ENT surgeon, but there was no suspicious lesion of granulomatosis with polyangiitis. Drainage of the abscess and biopsy of the lacrimal gland were performed 4 days after the first examination. The drained fluid was turbid in color. Direct smear examination showed only red blood cells. Culture test of the abscess revealed only 1 colony growth of Cutibacterium acnes. The specimen harvested from the lacrimal gland showed proliferation of fibrous connective tissue and infiltration of inflammatory cells. However, vasculitis was not found.
After the drainage, the swelling gradually subsided. At 12-day follow-up, intravenous clindamycin was discontinued. At 15-day follow-up, the patient was discharged. Antibiotic was changed from intravenous ceftriaxone to oral clavulanate potassium and amoxicillin trihydrate, which was discontinued at 22-day follow-up. At 4-month follow-up, the patient did not have any symptom related to dacryoadenitis.