A child and three adults from an extended family, who lived in neighbouring houses, were involved in a cluster of CL detected in a small village in the district of Paphos, where most cases of leishmaniasis in Cyprus since 2005 have been diagnosed.Case number 1, a 6-year-old Greek Cypriot boy, was referred to our hospital because of a small ulcerative lesion next to the left angle of his lips . The lesion persisted for a period of 11 months prior to referral despite several courses of oral antibiotics or local antibiotic ointments. The child never complained of fever, chills, sweating or weight loss during this time. His previous history was unremarkable.
On examination he had a shallow ulcer right next to the left angle of his lips with a diameter of approximately 1cm. There were no enlarged lymph nodes and no hepatosplenomegaly. A more detailed examination of his ear, nose and throat did not reveal any mucosal involvement of the lesion. His full blood count and inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein) were normal. His liver and renal function was also normal. The lesion was surgically removed and the resected tissue was sent for histopathology, culture and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for Leishmania parasites. Material from the lesion was macerated, under sterile conditions, and placed in Novy-MacNeal-Nicolle biphasic culture medium. The culture was negative for bacteria or parasites but PCR, using molecular screening methods: EF-PCR and k26-PCR, a molecular assay specific for the L. donovani complex that discriminates L. donovani/L. infantum zymodemes , revealed the presence of L. donovani in the tissue of the lesion of the patient. The histopathology report was unremarkable other than signs of chronic inflammation. Following surgical resection, a short course of intravenous liposomal amphotericin B was administered to the child at a dose of 3mg/kg/day for 7 days. The child had no side effects and no significant scar remained. The child was followed up for a period of 18 months with no relapse.
Case number 2, a 60-year-old Greek Cypriot woman (the child’s godmother who lives next door) developed a 2cm diameter erythematous papule on her glabella, simultaneously to this child’s illness. Culture and PCR of lesion material (as described above) were positive for L. donovani and subsequent typing of the isolated parasites, using multilocus enzyme electrophoresis , provided the infraspecific position of the parasite as pertaining to MON-37 zymodeme [,]. She was treated at the Dermatology clinic of the University Hospital of Crete, Greece. She was given liposomal amphotericin B and local thermotherapy and completely recovered with a very faint scar at the site of the lesion. No recurrence was observed until today, 20 months later.
Case number 3, a 60-year-old Greek Cypriot man (the child’s godfather and husband of Case number 2) had developed a typical CL ulcer on his face, on the right, above the moustache area. He refused to visit the doctor and the lesion persisted for more than 1 year; it self-resolved leaving a small scar. No material was available for testing.
Case number 4, a 40-year-old Greek Cypriot woman (the child’s aunt) who resided in a house next to the child’s, had developed a lesion in her neck area approximately 1 year earlier. She had already been treated, with surgical removal of the lesion followed by liposomal amphotericin B and at the time of the study the scar was evident. The doctor who had treated her described the ulcer on her neck as a typical CL lesion.