This patient was a 56-year-old Chinese lady transferred to our hospital for fever and deranged liver enzymes for investigation. She was receiving treatment at a psychiatric hospital for psychotic depression prior. At presentation, she was asymptomatic and did not have any localizing signs of infection. She had no cough, sore throat, rhinorrhea, diarrhea or dysuria. There was no change in the colour of her urine or stools. She had no constitutional symptoms or significant weight loss over the past 6 mo, and no chills, rigors or night sweats throughout. She did not consume any raw foods or herbal supplements and had not travelled outside of Singapore in the recent years. Her past medical history was significant for psychotic depression, for which she was being managed with escitalopram 5 mg once daily and olanzapine 7.5 mg twice daily. She had started escitalopram and olanzapine two weeks prior to presentation. She had no known drug allergies.
On physical examination, she had an average build (body mass index 22.8 kg/m2), was not jaundiced, had no rash present, and did not have any tattoos or needle track marks. On palpation, her abdomen was soft and non-tender, and there were no palpable masses or organomegaly. Physical examination was unremarkable. There was no palpable cervical, axillary, supraclavicular, or inguinal lymph nodes.
Laboratory studies revealed a normochromic, normocytic anemia (as confirmed on a peripheral blood film) with a haemoglobin level of 10.1 g/dL. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and haptoglobin were within normal limits. Total whites were not raised at 5.4 × 109 cells/L and eosinophils count were within normal limits as well (0.33 × 109 cells/L). The C-reactive protein was elevated at 67.5 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 10 mm/h and two sets of peripheral aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures showed no bacterial growth after 72 h. Her thyroid function test (TSH and free T4), serum electrolytes, urea and creatinine were all within normal limits, while her liver panel showed raised alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 183 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 99 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP, 552 U/L) and GGT (510 U/L).
A hepatitis screen was done, which found that antibodies against hepatitis C virus were non-reactive, the surface antigen of the hepatitis B virus was non-reactive as well and anti-HBs was >1000 IU/L. This indicated recovery from (and immunity to) the hepatitis B virus (HBV) or successful immunization with HBV vaccine. She had received Hepatitis A and B vaccinations as a young adult.
Serum autoantibodies were performed and included antinuclear antibody of <1:640, speckled pattern, negative anti-smooth muscle antibody titre, and negative antimitochondrial M2 antibody.
In terms of imaging, a computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis found no pancreatic or other mass. Hepatic parenchymal attenuation was normal, with no focal lesions noted. There were no radio-opaque gallstones or biliary dilatation.