A 40-year-old woman with vomiting and jaundice was previously admitted to another hospital. The patient had experienced recurrent episodes of epigastric pain and vomiting for the past 18 months. Her blood test results showed elevated levels of bilirubin (3.9 mg/dL), while abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a 60-mm hypovascular mass in the third part of the duodenum and a left lateral shift of the dilated common bile duct (CBD), suggesting duodenal intussusception . The patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. She had a history of two cesarean sections but no relevant familial medical history. The patient recovered from the hyperbilirubinemia spontaneously and no endoscopic biliary drainage was performed. After admission to our hospital, the patient’s blood tests revealed a serum total bilirubin of 1.0 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase of 18 IU/L, alanine transaminase of 24 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase of 81 IU/L, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase of 99 IU/L. As for tumor markers, serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 levels were 1.3 ng/mL and 76.0 U/mL, respectively. CT showed a 60-mm hypovascular tumor that had shifted from the third to the second part of the duodenum. Improvement in the dilated CBD was also observed . Hypotonic duodenography revealed a tumor that moved easily from the second to the third portion of the duodenum . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a large papillary tumor occupying the second part of the duodenum, which was diagnosed as a high-grade intestinal adenoma via biopsy, similar to the previous pathological results . Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic ampullary mass that did not invade the surrounding organs such as the pancreas or bile ducts. . The possibility of malignancy could not be ruled out because of the large tumor size, even with multiple biopsies, as well as the elevated CA19-9 level (76.0 U/mL). After discussing the treatment strategy with the patient and her family, PD was performed. Laparotomy revealed that the ampullary tumor moved easily from the second to the third portion and the anatomical abnormality such as increased mobility of the second part of the duodenum along with the pancreatic head from the retroperitoneum was confirmed during the intraoperative Kocher maneuver. The operative time was 445 min, and 92 mL of blood was lost. The resected specimen showed a 60 × 40 × 40-mm pedunculated ampullary mass with submucosal elongation . The pathological examination indicated that the ampullary tumor was a high-grade intestinal adenoma . Immunostaining was negative for MUC2 and MUC5AC, while the median MIB-1 index was 30%. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 26 days postoperatively. The patient was well with no signs of recurrence after 15 months postoperatively.