A 13-year-old boy who was born to second-degree consanguineous parents was not known to have any medical illness. He presented to the emergency department of King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center at Jeddah with a persistent headache for four weeks, followed by progressive visual loss for over two weeks associated with polyurea before the presentation. The parents denied having a similar condition or history of any malignancies in the family. On examination, the pupils were dilated bilaterally with a sluggish reaction in the left eye. The ophthalmologic assessment revealed diminished visual acuity with no light perception in the right eye and light perception OS. A fundoscopic examination showed bilateral optic atrophy. No skin stigmata or caféau-lait spots were inspected. A brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lobulated enhancing lesion arising primarily from the optic chiasm involving the prechiasmatic optic nerves and the hypothalamus, measuring 3.1 × 3.7 × 1.7 cm (anteroposterior × mediolateral × craniocaudal dimensions).
The infundibulum was normal. Radiologic findings were most suggestive of optic pathway glioma . The hormonal assay revealed central hypothyroidism, central hypoadrenalism, central diabetes insipidus (DI), and hyperprolactinemia. The patient was evaluated by a pediatric endocrinologist for hormonal replacement therapy. The patient underwent a right pterional craniotomy and a Transylvanian approach to the optic chiasm and nerves. Intraoperatively, the optic chiasm and bilateral optic nerves diffusely thickened with a fleshy appearance. A tumor biopsy was obtained, followed by lesion debulking for size reduction. Postoperative recovery was uneventful. The patient was discharged home in stable clinical condition. The specimen exhibited histological patterns in keeping with germinoma . The whole spine MRI showed no drop metastatic lesion. Serum level of alpha-fetoprotein and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin was normal. The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary tumor board with the conclusion of starting SIOP CNS GCT 96 protocol, with four cycles of carboplatin and etoposide alternating with etoposide and ifosfamide, followed by radiation therapy after evaluation. During the first cycle, the patient developed a significant reaction to etoposide in terms of chest tightness, rash, and low blood pressure. As the patient was unfit for chemotherapy, the treatment plan consisted of solely adjuvant radiotherapy. He received a total of 4600 centigray (cGy) in 29 fractions. After completion of the radiotherapy sessions, the brain MRI revealed an interval reduction in the size of optic chiasm thickening without residual enhancing lesion . On the follow-up visit after two months from radiotherapy, no vision improvement was noted; otherwise, he was well.