In October 2016, a 47-year-old man presenting with stroke syndrome was diagnosed with right frontoparietal infarct and multi-territory foci on magnetic resonance imaging-brain. Past medical history was notable for mitral valve (MV) repair in 2009 and current medications included Clopidogrel 75 mg and Omeprazole 20 mg once daily. There was no history of constitutional symptoms, and screening investigations for a central embolic source were normal. Outpatient transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was therefore planned.
TOE in December 2016 showed a strand-like structure (<10 mm) associated with a competent MV repair (, Video 1); he was admitted to differentiate IE from thrombus. He was afebrile with no significant findings on examination and normal inflammatory markers [white cell count (WCC) 7.3 ×109 g/L and high sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP) <5 mg/L]. Four sets of peripheral blood cultures were sterile. Serology for Coxiella, Bartonella, Brucella, Syphilis, and an autoimmune screen was negative; whole blood polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is not performed in our Trust due to low sensitivity. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography–computed tomography (CT-PET) showed focal posterior mitral annular uptake, typical for IE . IE was possible by mDC [one major plus two minor; possible vegetation on TOE (major), MV repair as a predisposing risk factor (minor) and multi-territory stroke as embolic phenomena (minor)] and so the Endocarditis Team recommended repeat TOE in 2 weeks, anticoagulation and Flucloxacillin, Benzylpenicillin, and Gentamicin for culture negative prosthetic valve IE (PVE). After 2 weeks however, the clinical team noted the negative blood cultures, persistently normal inflammatory markers and apyrexia; antibiotics were stopped and the patient anticoagulated with Apixaban 5 mg twice daily for valve thrombus.
Four days later, he re-presented with self-resolving objective facial and limb weakness. He remained apyrexial with normal inflammatory markers (WCC 7.7 ×109 g/L and CRP <5 mg/L). His mDC score was unchanged, but given recurrent embolic phenomena, inspection of the MV repair and resection of the underlying cause was mandated.
Intraoperative findings were of an irregular mass attached to the posterior mitral annuloplasty ring. There was regional dehiscence with areas of necrotic tissue suggestive of PVE. A 29 mm Carbomedics valve was implanted. Direct valve culture grew fully sensitive Streptococcus sanguinis on enrichment and was considered significant. Cutibacterium acnes ribosomal DNA (rDNA) was identified on 16S molecular testing and deemed a contaminant. Given the intraoperative findings, the previous antibiotics were recommenced for 2 weeks followed by 4 weeks of intravenous outpatient Ceftriaxone monotherapy.
In August 2018, 18 months later, he presented to his local hospital complaining of post-syncopal right frontal headache, diplopia, and transient left arm paraesthesia; stroke was confirmed on CT-Head. Since discharge, he had been diagnosed with presyncope secondary to 2:1 and 3:1 atrioventricular block and had been listed for pacemaker implantation.
He was apyrexial, had no significant findings on examination and near normal inflammatory markers (WCC 6.9 ×109 g/L and CRP 7 mg/L), and a normal electrocardiogram. His medications included: Warfarin [target INR (international normalized ratio) 2.5–3.5], Omeprazole 40 mg, Candesartan 4 mg, Atorvastatin 40 mg once daily. Given his previous history, he was transferred for urgent imaging at Barts Heart Centre. TOE was concerning for a small indeterminate lesion (10 mm) associated with the posterior MV replacement (MVR), with normal valve function (, Video 2). IE was initially possible by mDC [one major plus two minor; possible vegetation on TOE (major), MVR and previous PVE as predisposing risk factors (minor) and multi-territory stroke as embolic phenomena (minor)], but prolonged incubation of the blood cultures grew fully sensitive C. acnes (2/6 bottles), and was considered significant given the previously disregarded 16S findings. Focal avidity of the posterior MVR was demonstrated on repeat PET-CT . Interval TOE at 1 week showed progression of the suspicious lesion to an 11 × 6 mm mobile vegetation attached to the posterior annulus, with good excursion of the disc and only trivial paravalvular regurgitation (, Video 3). The Endocarditis Team opted to manage the case medically with a 6-week course of Benzylpenicillin and Rifampicin. Fortnightly TOE was planned to monitor progress of the vegetation, given absence of elevated biomarkers. There were no surgical indications, and redo surgery was deemed high-risk given two previous sternotomies.
Sequential TOE showed progressive reduction and ultimately resolution of the vegetation. Throughout his 8-week admission, he remained well, with WCC 4.1–7.3 ×109 g/L and CRP <5 mg/L. Following 6 weeks of intravenous antibiotics, he was discharged on a 6-month course of oral Amoxicillin 3 g daily to complete treatment. Cardiac monitoring showed only Mobitz Type I heart block. Given the concurrent IE, pacemaker implant was deferred and an implantable loop recorder inserted. Endocarditis Clinic follow-up has been per protocol at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months, with TOE given the previously absent inflammatory response. This has been unremarkable for recurrent infection and embolic phenomena as of April 2021.