A 60-year-old hypertensive male with a history of prior anterior wall myocardial infarction, dyspnoea (New York Heart Association Class II), paroxysmal atrial fibrillation with fast ventricular rate, sinus rhythm, and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (EF = 25%), received a dual-chamber dual double-coil ICD [using RiataST (St. Jude) 7F ventricular lead] implant in 2008 as a primary prevention strategy for sudden cardiac death. He received oral antiplatelets, anticoagulants, betablockers, and antihypertensives for next 9 years and never had any ventricular tachycardia (VT) or VF episodes requiring ICD therapy. His lead parameters were documented during annual ICD interrogations and were always found to be within normal range.
In 2017, the patient received a pulse generator replacement (PGR) for elective replacement indicator status. During the procedure, externalization of conductor elements of the ventricular lead was detected distal to the superior vena cava (SVC) coil (, left panel). At this stage, electrical parameters of R-wave amplitude, capture threshold, and lead impedance were all within normal range and there were no noise artefacts on ventricular electrogram (EGM) .
Since isolated CE in Riata leads has been shown to only poorly correlate with subsequent electrical lead dysfunction, thus, it was decided to complete the PGR without lead replacement. The patient remained under close biannual follow-up after PGR for any subsequent lead malfunction. The ICD was programmed in two-zone configuration with VT zone at 171/min and VF zone at 214/min.
During the next 4 years, patient did not require any ICD therapy and his lead parameters monitored on a 6 monthly basis, remained within normal range. Lead parameters during his last scheduled visit in December 2020 are shown in .
A month before his next scheduled visit, i.e. in May 2021, the patient presented with complaint of having received two ICD shocks in the last 48 h. His haemodynamics at presentation were within normal range and 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) did not show any acute ischaemic changes or arrhythmia. His vital signs at presentation were within normal range and 12-lead ECG did not show any acute ischaemic changes or arrhythmia.
An ICD interrogation in the emergency room showed 12 VF episodes over the last 6 days. In the previous last 24 h, there were five such VF episodes; three of these episodes received antitachycardia pacing (ATP) therapy and one episode received 30 J biphasic shock . This fulfilled the criteria of an electrical storm.
A careful study of EGMs suggested a normal atrial lead trace but a non-cyclic, non-physiological, high amplitude, high frequency signal was noted on ventricular EGM. This noise artefact with rate falling in VF zone had triggered the inappropriate ICD therapies . An impedance trend graph showed an abrupt and variable increase in impedance values over last 7 days .
In the supine lying down position, the ventricular pacing capture threshold was raised (3.0 V @ 0.5 ms). But unexpectedly, the lead impedance and sensed R-wave amplitude were found to be within normal range .
To address the discrepancy between the recent high impedance values in trend graph and the normal value recorded in supine posture (, , left panel), we performed lead interrogation in the sitting position. The ventricular pacing threshold, lead impedance and R-wave amplitude worsened dramatically in sitting posture while atrial lead parameters remained unchanged (, , right panel).
After the ascertainment of an electrical lead dysfunction, the ICD ATP/shock function was turned off. Following this, pre-procedure assessment including documentation of left subclavian vein patency by contrast venography was done and subsequently, the patient received a new ventricular lead (Durata™ ICD St. Jude) implantation on Day 3. Due to the anticipated risks and technical challenges involved in extracting an ageing dual-coil ventricular lead, the old Riata lead was capped and abandoned .
The patient has been in follow-up for 9 weeks, the wound site is healing well and patient has not received any new ICD interventions and has been doing well. The new lead parameters with all lead parameters are within normal range.