A 7-year-old boy was admitted to our center with a main complaint of bilateral central opacification, photophobia and severe reduced vision since birth. His medical history included childhood mental retardation and phacoemulsification, IOL implantation and anterior vitrectomy on the right eye in 2014 in another medical institution. At examination, visual acuity was counting fingers (CF) in the right eye and light perception (LP) in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 21 mmHg in the right eye and 23 mmHg in the left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed bilateral nystagmus with no conjunctival congestion, diffuse corneal opacity of the right eye and central corneal opacity of the left eye, few strands of peripheral iris and irregular pupils in both eyes, normal IOL position in the right eye and cloudy lens with central adhesion to the posterior corneal surface in the left eye. B-scan ultrasound failed to show other abnormalities in either of the eyes. The patient was not cooperative in further ophthalmic examinations. General physical examination was noncontributory. The boy was the first child delivered normally by the mother at preterm. He was born a gestational period of 35 weeks with a birth weight of 2.51 kg. The Apgar score was 9, and he did not go through oxygen chamber. The mother denied infection or medication history in pregnancy. Moreover, no familial predisposition to any disease was identified.
The patient was diagnosed with type II Peter’s anomaly in the left eye, pseudophakia in the right eye and bilateral amblyopia. He was then treated by operations including phacoemulsification, IOL implantation and anterior vitrectomy on the left eye under general anesthesia. During surgery, a cloudy, irregular lens, which adhered to the central posterior corneal surface, was seen. After the phacoemulsification of partial peripheral cortex, the white, translucent, vesicle-like structure with the central milky opaque patch which closely stuck to the posterior cornea appeared . Postoperative hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining revealed fibrous tissue with proliferated collagenous fiber and fibroblasts, scattered epithelial-like cells which were spindle or cuboidal, broken and degenerated lens cortex in the central focal region, absent Descemet membrane and lens capsule . Periodic Acid-Schiff staining confirmed the absence of Descemet membrane and lens capsule . In order to identify the cell types and tissue origin of epithelial-like cells, the immunohistochemical staining were then performed, which revealed cytokeratins (CK), S-100, vimentin (VIM) and alpha-crystallin positive cells . Based on the micromorphology of HE and immunohistochemical staining, the epithelial-like cells were more likely to be lens epithelial cells .
On the first day postoperatively, the visual acuity was hand movement (HM) in the left eye, and the intraocular pressure was normal. Slit lamp examination revealed mild conjunctival congestion, central corneal opacity, normal depth of anterior chamber, few strands of peripheral iris and normal IOL position in the left eye. The right eye was in the same condition as on admission.