A 35-year-old white woman with morbid obesity (height, 5 feet 1.5 inches; weight, 305 pounds; body mass index, 56kg/m2) and normal renal function (baseline creatinine, 0.6mg/dL) was admitted to our institution for LSG. She required weight loss in order to qualify for hip replacement surgery. Her past medical history was significant for rheumatoid arthritis, fibromyalgia, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and obstructive sleep apnea. Our patient also had a history of chronic pain, for which she was receiving high doses of opioid analgesics (including transmucosal fentanyl, controlled-release oral morphine, and oral tramadol; see Table ). The source of our patient’s pain was mostly in her joints, as a result of rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, our patient reported previously experiencing severe pain necessitating a prolonged hospital stay (>2 days) following a standard laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Given our patient’s history of both acute postsurgical and chronic pain and high baseline opioid usage, she was a desirable candidate for an opioid-reducing, multimodal pain management strategy.At the initiation of surgery prior to trocar insertion, 50mL of 1% lidocaine and epinephrine (1:100,000) was infiltrated around the port sites. At the conclusion of the procedure (which was more than 20 minutes after administration of the lidocaine), 25mL of 0.9% preservative-free normal sterile saline was added to a 20-mL vial of liposome bupivacaine (266mg) for a total volume of 45mL. It was injected using a spinal needle around the port sites : the flanking 5-mm port sites received 5mL each; the central 12-mm ports, 15mL each; and 5mL was infused at the site of liver retraction. The dose of liposome bupivacaine was based on the surgical site and the volume required to cover the area. Aided by visualization provided by the laparoscope, liposome bupivacaine was infiltrated directly into the deep tissue with the needle. The needle was slowly withdrawn so that infiltration of liposome bupivacaine was targeted primarily to the myofascial level. Our patient was administered a total of 925μg of IV fentanyl during surgery.
LSG was successfully completed. Our patient was discharged to the postanesthesia care unit, where she stayed for approximately four hours before discharge to the surgical floor with a pain score of 5 (11-point scale; 0 = no pain, 10 = worst possible pain). The postoperative course was uneventful; no AEs were recorded during surgery or during the remainder of our patient’s hospital stay. Her pain scores ranged from 5 to 8 during her hospital stay; however, this was consistent with her pain before surgery, which was always ≥4 due to her history of chronic pain. She reported that the majority of her pain was musculoskeletal in location and related to her rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia and not related to the surgical site. Analgesic medications administered to the patient are summarized in Table and included intravenous (IV) hydromorphone, oral transmucosal fentanyl citrate, controlled-release morphine tablets, and oxycodone/acetaminophen oral solution. In order to facilitate comparisons, opioid doses have been converted to their IV morphine equivalents. Total opioid use (IV morphine equivalent) was 51.8mg on day 1 (after surgery), 90.1mg on day 2, and 60mg on day 3 (before discharge).
Our patient was discharged routinely two days after surgery, with the same home medication regimen as before surgery, along with a prescription for oxycodone/acetaminophen 5/325mg four times daily as needed.