A 54 year old male (Caucasian) was commenced on 4th line cabozantinib 40 mg daily in Dec 2019 for Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma following disease progression after 8 cycles of 3rd line pembrolizumab and denosumab which was given as per the KEYPAD trial . He was originally diagnosed with de-novo metastatic RCC in April 2015 with a right sided renal lesion and multiple pulmonary metastases present on baseline imaging. He subsequently underwent a cytoreductive right nephrectomy in June 2015 which demonstrated a grade 2, 95 mm, T3aNxM1, Clear Cell RCC on histology with evidence of invasion into the proximal renal vein. First line Pazopanib was commenced in July 2015 and was continued for 11 months until disease progression. Second line Axitinib was therefore commenced July 2016 with no significant issues and was well tolerated for several years until disease progression in 2019 when he was enrolled on the aforementioned KEYPAD trial prior to commencing cabozantinib.
On this occasion he presented to our Emergency department with fevers, rigors and a concomitant widespread non-pruritic, erythematous, maculopapular rash predominantly across his torso and back, 2 weeks after commencement of cabozantinib. These symptoms were preceded by a 2-day history of worsening fatigue, myalgia and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. There was no coryzal stigmata. No sick contacts were identified despite exhaustive investigation.
Our patient was treated empirically with one dose of 1 g intravenous Cefepime in the Emergency Department before transfer to the ward. Subsequent antibiotics were withheld as no infective foci were identified and observations, excluding temperature, were within normal limits. Septic screen including urinalysis and culture, chest x-ray and repeat blood cultures remained non-contributory throughout admission. Ultrasound of the abdomen demonstrated no evidence of biliary pathology and was otherwise unremarkable. Extended respiratory viral nucleic acid detection was negative. Cabozantinib was withheld during admission.
The patient continued to spike high grade fevers up to 39.5 °C with associated rigors for 3 days, however his rash improved and rapidly subsided over 2 days with the use of topical hydrocortisone and oral antihistamines. White cell count was normal at 5.7 × 109/L (reference range: 4.0–11.0 × 109/L) and neutrophil count also unremarkable. C-reactive protein levels were elevated at 211 mg/L. A procalcitonin level was ordered with a result of 1.3 μg/L (reference range: 0.5–2.0 μg/L) suggesting no obvious concomitant bacterial infection. Differential diagnoses of exclusion were thus considered to be either drug related fever and/or primary tumour related fever.
He was therefore commenced on 8 mg oral dexamethasone for presumed drug related fevers and remained afebrile for 24 h following administration. After quick symptomatic improvement, he was discharged on a weaning course of 4 mg daily of oral dexamethasone for a week, followed by 2 mg daily for week until he was due to be seen by his treating Oncologist .
Two weeks later, he was routinely reviewed in our Outpatients Clinic following successful weaning off dexamethasone with nil further fevers or rigors. The patient was keen to recommence cabozantinib and has been re-challenged on the same dose of 40 mg daily. To date, he remains well with no evidence of fever recurrence now 35 days post discharge .