A 39-year-old previously healthy woman was brought in by ambulance to the emergency department (ED) with a 1-day history of profuse diarrhoea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and no respiratory symptoms. Nasopharyngeal swab polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-COV-2) was positive 3 days earlier, with genomic sequencing identifying the Delta variant. Her only past medical history was laparotomy with ovarian cystectomy, she was of Japanese ethnicity, there was no significant family history of cardiac pathology, and she was not vaccinated against COVID-19. On paramedic arrival, the patient was hypotensive with systolic blood pressure (SBP) 70 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 120, oxygen saturations 100% on room air, and a temperature of 36.9. She received 500 mL bolus of Hartmann’s solution and was transported to ED. At triage, she was alert but looking pale and lethargic, with initial vital signs demonstrating a HR of 98 b.p.m. in sinus rhythm, blood pressure 82/69 mmHg, respiratory rate 18 b.p.m., oxygen saturations of 98% on room air, and a temperature of 36.6°C. Physical examination revealed normal heart sounds with no murmurs, no pericardial rub, warm peripheries, a capillary refill of <3 s, and no peripheral oedema. Jugular venous pressure was not visualized. There were no rales and the abdomen was soft and non-tender.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated normal sinus rhythm (102 b.p.m.) without ST changes . Initial high-sensitivity Troponin T was 118 ng/L (normal <14 ng/L), C-reactive protein (CRP) 1.6 . Venous blood gas revealed pH 7.24, bicarbonate 22, lactate 6.3, and base excess (BE) -6. Resuscitation was commenced with 1 L of 0.9% saline.
There was a gradual deterioration during the 4 h in the ED. Repeat blood gas revealed a worsening lactatemia (lactate 7.2), and a second 1 L 0.9% saline, followed by 1 L Hartmann’s solution, was administered for ongoing hypotension (SBP 80–90 mmHg). At ∼4 h after ED presentation, she became critically unwell with profound shock (SBP 53 mmHg), reduced level of consciousness, delayed capillary refill, and a temperature of 31°C. The patient became acutely bradycardic and then suffered a pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was commenced, and three rounds of adrenaline (1 mg IV) were administered without a sustained return of spontaneous circulation. The ECMO team arrived within 25 min and V-A ECMO [bi-femoral 23 French (Fr) access, 15 Fr return cannulae (Maquet)] was established 16 min later. The time from arrest to V-A ECMO flow was 42 min; 7 Fr distal perfusion cannulae was inserted post establishment of ECMO flows. Inotropic and vasopressor support with dobutamine, noradrenaline, and vasopressin were commenced. Extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation flows were maintained at ∼3.7 litres per minute (LPM), with left ventricular (LV) ejection present and a pulse pressure of 10–15 mmHg. Bivalirudin was commenced targeting a therapeutic range of activated partial thromboplastin time 50–70 s.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest reported bilateral patchy consolidation and ground glass opacification in the lower lobes. There were no significant findings on CT of the abdomen and brain.
On trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE), there was a severely reduced biventricular function, normal cardiac chamber size, and a globally thickened, bright myocardium (measuring 16 mm in the septum and inferolateral wall) with a small-to-moderate-sized pericardial effusion (see , ). Owing to increasing inotropic and vasopressor requirement with significant pulsus paradoxus, urgent pericardiocentesis was performed, which resulted in immediate improvement in native cardiac output. Continuous renal replacement therapy, hydrocortisone 50 mg 6-hourly, and broad-spectrum antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam and vancomycin) were commenced.
On Day 1 admission, troponin levels remained modestly raised , CRP was normal, and ferritin elevated. Left ventricular function declined to near ventricular standstill (see , ) with a reduction in pulse pressure. Surgical LV venting cannula (via mini-thoracotomy and right super pulmonary vein) was performed. Empirical treatment with methylprednisolone 1 g (3 days), intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 1 g/kg (2 days), and Tocilizumab was completed.
Coronary angiogram and endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) were performed, demonstrating severe slow flow with no coronary lesions (see , ). Endomyocardial biopsy returned the following day, showing a subtle mild interstitial infiltrate consisting mostly of CD68+ macrophages along with a lesser number of CD3+ T cells. Microthrombi were identified, with the degradation products present suggestive of a sub-acute microangiopathic process . No fibrosis nor myocardial necrosis was present. No viral particles were seen on electron microscopy. With regard to other causes of myocarditis, the EMB did not show interstitial fibrosis, iron accumulation, evidence of sarcoid or amyloid, or changes consistent with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy. A number of investigations for other causes of myocarditis were also performed, including, extended viral PCR panel, serology for coxsackie and echovirus, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)1/2 and hepatitis C antibodies, and autoimmune and immunological screens. All were negative.
On Day 3, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the left leg demonstrated severe vasospasm of the anterior and posterior tibial arteries but patent flow into the foot requiring four-compartment fasciotomies.
Over the following days, a widening and flattening of the QRS on ECG was noted. Serial TTE demonstrated no recovery of LV function with persistent near-complete cardiac standstill. Troponin rose to a peak of 13 408 g/L on Day 7. Profound anasarca developed with capillary leak. Systemic perfusion was maintained by ECMO flows of ∼4.0 LPM with high but stable inotropic and vasopressor requirements.
On Day 7 of admission, the patient developed critical ischaemia of the right leg from vasospasm in the proximal tibial vessels. Subsequent DSA revealed no distal flow and ultimately an unsalvageable distal right leg. There was extensive multidisciplinary discussion with the family and then consensus reached that this was not a survivable situation. The goals of care were transitioned to that of comfort and dignity and the patient died 9 days after arriving to hospital.