A 62-year-old man, right-handed, Chinese man, an entrepreneur, was admitted to our department for a day with sudden-onset dizziness, diplopia, and gait disturbance. He had a history of hypertension for 10 years and was currently taking the orally administered antihypertensive drug telmisartan. In addition, he had been diagnosed as having diabetes 4 years ago and was currently taking metformin. He suffered from cerebral infarction in 2009 and 2010 but had no residual neurological deficits. Beyond the above mentioned, he denied any history of trauma and infectious diseases. He had been smoking two packs of cigarettes per day and drinking alcohol occasionally for 20 years. He quit tobacco smoking and drinking alcohol 4 years ago.
His physical examination on admission showed the following. His temperature was 37 ºC. His pulse was 95 beats every minute. His respiratory rate was 21 times every minute. His blood pressure was 120 over 80. The physical examination showed that his thorax was symmetrical without deformity. There was no tenderness or varicose veins in his chest wall. In addition, bilateral respiratory sounds were clear, without murmur. The appearance of his abdomen was flat and symmetric. His abdominal breathing was normal. Furthermore, a gastrointestinal and peristaltic wave was not seen. No abnormal liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, and kidney were found on palpation. He had no deformity of limbs, no abnormal joint activity, no tenderness and atrophy of muscles, and no varicose veins of lower limbs. No edema was found in both lower limbs and the pulsation of the dorsal artery of both his feet was normal. His complete blood count tests revealed an increased neutrophil count of 7.28(109/l) and a normal red blood cell count, platelet count, and normal hemoglobin count. Laboratory results showed that his fasting blood glucose was 10.88 mmol/l (reference 3.89–6.11 mmol/l). In addition, his glycosylated hemoglobin ratio was 9% (reference 4–6%). Urine glucose results showed 4+. The results of alanine aminotransferase and glutamic oxaloacetic aminotransferase tests were normal. No abnormality of human immunodeficiency virus antigen-antibody, Treponema pallidum-specific antibody, and hepatitis C virus antibody were found. There was no inherited disease in his family.
On admission, he could hardly open his eyes owing to severe oscillopsia. A neurological examination revealed extorsional downbeat nystagmus in the left eye and intorsional upbeat nystagmus in the right eye, with the horizontal component to the left side in the primary position (Additional file 1: Video S1) which is consistent with SSN. The magnitude of nystagmus was pronounced in the right gaze but decreased with a downward gaze. Our patient showed adduction paresis in the left eye and dissociated abducting paresis in the right eye during rightward gaze . The leftward saccades also disclosed abducting lag in the left eye. The rest of the neurologic findings were, otherwise, unremarkable. Saccadic oscillations and SSN were consistently present during primary and eccentric gaze holding. His gait was extremely impaired due to the perception of oscillations. Horizontal head impulse tests were normal in both directions. Except for hyperglycemia as well as hypertriglyceridemia, the remaining laboratory evaluation was normal. An electronystagmogram (ENG) revealed SSN and a Bárány test was negative . As we all know, an infarction of pontine corresponds to the anatomic location of the MLF. Diffusion-weighted (DW) brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disclosed an acute infarction confined to the bilateral dorsomedial pons and left thalamus. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed the left anterior cerebral artery (ACA) was slender and the ipsilateral posterior cerebral artery (PCA) had stenosis . Subsequently, 2 weeks of antithrombotic therapy led to an improvement in our patient’s dizziness as well as nystagmus. The saccades were better characterized when his gaze holding had improved. On discharge, he reported no dizziness but had certain degrees of adduction weakness. After 6 months of follow-up, there was no recurrence of dizziness symptoms and a nervous system physical examination basically returned to normal.