A 49-year-old female patient suffered from a 3-month history of dull pain in the left lower abdomen. And she had laparoscopic hysterectomy for the microinvasive SCC stage IA1 in 2018. Five years ago, the patient was admitted to our hospital with postcoital vaginal bleeding. The cervical biopsy pathology indicated grade III cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN III) with the involvement of glands and human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 DNA positive. The cervical conical resection was performed. The postoperative examination indicated extensive CIN III with glandular involvement. The microscopic invasive SCC (both width and depth less than 1 mm) was found in the focal area, without lymph vascular space invasion (LVSI) . Because the patient had no fertility requirement, laparoscopic total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingectomy were performed, and no more severe lesions were found on the postoperative pathological examination.
The patient was followed up regularly after surgery, and no abnormalities were found in cervical cytology, HPV infection, and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC-Ag) during an annual review. Five years after surgery, she complained of a 3-month history of dull pain in the left lower abdomen. Physical examination showed a palpable mass on the left side of the pelvic cavity, and examination of the vulva, vagina, and vaginal stump was normal. The cytology and HPV test results of vaginal stump exfoliation were negative. The levels of the tumor marker of SCC-Ag in serum showed marked elevation (10.60 ng/mL), and the carbohydrate antigen 125 was normal. The sonographic examination demonstrated a left ovarian solid mass measuring 4.2 × 3.4 × 3.6 cm. Pelvic MRI demonstrated a left ovarian solid tumor measuring 5.5 × 3.9 × 5.6 cm with heterogeneous enhancement , and increased left pelvic lymph nodes were also demonstrated. The positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) did not reveal the possibility of metastatic tumors or tumors derived from other origins. Therefore, an exploratory laparotomy was performed. During laparotomy, a left ovarian tumor measuring about 5.0 × 4.5 × 3.0 cm seemed densely adherent to the posterior peritoneal wall, including the left ureter, which was resected completely. Pelvic lymph nodes were suboptimal resection due to the tumor adhering closely to the pelvic sidewall. Postoperative anatomy revealed a solid mass with a greyish-white section . The right ovarian was resected, and no abnormal appearance was observed. Postoperative pathology showed moderately differentiated SCC with negative pelvic lymph nodes . Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for P16, P63, P40, and CK5/6 markers, and the positive rate of Ki67 was about 80% . No endometriosis or teratoma components were found. The possibility of primary ovarian SCC could not be completely ruled out; however, the ovarian tumor was considered to be derived from the microinvasive SCC of the cervix stage IA1 in combination with the patient's medical history and immunohistochemical examination. Following surgery, the serum SCC-Ag decreased to 3.8 ng/mL on postoperative day 7. The patient was supplemented with radiotherapy and chemotherapy after surgery, there was no sign of tumor recurrence, and long-term follow up will be conducted to observe the prognosis.