In September 2022, a 38-year-old female with no significant medical background was referred to a radiologist by a midwife, owing to a 2-month history of pain in the right upper quadrant of her right breast. The presence of the palpable mass had been noted 1 week before her initial visit. The medical assessment of the patient was subsequently conducted at Firooz Abadi Hospital. The sonography unveiled a calcified round mass with a soft tissue rim adjacent to the second rib, located beneath the major pectoralis muscle, with no apparent involvement of the right breast. The observed punctuated and matured calcification led to considering rib chondroma as a more plausible differentiated diagnosis. The chest X-ray revealed the presence of a calcified round mass, potentially associated with the nearby rib . The Computed tomography scan (CT-scan) demonstrated a 72 × 50 × 30 mm mass located in the soft tissue of the right pectoral muscle, showing no invasion of the proximal rib bone and no presence of calcified lymph nodes in the vicinity. Moreover, the mass exhibited a fade rim enhancement, particularly in its peripheral part . Histopathologic examination of the core-needle biopsy (CNB) unveiled a malignant neoplasm characterized by a bimorphic pattern. This included sheets of undifferentiated round-to-oval cells with an abrupt transition to nodules of well-differentiated cartilage. The tumor cells displayed large hyperchromatic and overlapped nuclei with scant cytoplasm. The hematological and biochemical analyses of the patient's blood specimen yielded no abnormal findings, After the surgical excision of the tumor, the gross view of the mass revealed lobulated contours with a solid, fleshy appearance, accompanied by focal cystic changes . The histopathologic findings of the completely excised lesion were consistent with the initial CNB pathology report, revealing the presence of dilated vascular spaces (HPC-like pattern) and foci of bone formation . Based on the pathology interpretation, these characteristics were indicative of small round blue cell tumors and EMCS . An immunohistochemical (IHC) study corroborated the diagnosis and effectively excluded other less probable histopathologic differential diagnoses, including Extraskeletal Ewing sarcoma. In the IHC study, the tumor cells exhibited positive expression for Bcl2, Ki67 (30%–40% tumor cells), CD99, NSE, and Vimentin, while FLi1 demonstrated negative staining . As a result, the final diagnosis was determined to be consistent with EMCS.
Following the successful excision of the mass, the patient was referred to a reference cancer center for a radiation oncologist consultation. Because the tumor's margins were negative and no malignant cells were seen, radiotherapy was not indicated. Soon after the patient received a 6-month course of the VDC/IE-regimen, which involved alternating drug combinations every 3 weeks. The treatment protocol consisted of two alternating combinations: (1) Ifosfamide at a dose of 17.5 g and Etoposide at a dose of 950 mg, and (2) Vincristine at a dose of 2 mg, Doxorubicin at a dose of 120 mg, and Cyclophosphamide at a dose of 2200 mg. This treatment regimen was administered for a period of 6 months, with careful monitoring and documentation of the patient's response to the therapy. Throughout the 6-month chemotherapy period and after its completion, the medical team closely observed and revisited the patient to monitor her response to treatment and manage any potential side effects. At the 10-month mark, the patient remains asymptomatic with no tumor recurrence or complications from the surgery or chemotherapy. Her overall health is excellent, and she can perform routine tasks without any limitations.