A 36-year-old G4 P2103 (4th pregnancy, two full-term deliveries, one premature delivery, 0 abortions, and three living children) Black female at 26 weeks and 5 days gestation with a history of combined anthracycline-induced and PPCM presented with acute dyspnoea in hypoxaemic respiratory failure. Her past medical history was notable for hypertension, obesity (body mass index 46 kg/m2), and a diagnosis of Stage 3b breast adenocarcinoma 11 years prior, which required bilateral mastectomy, daunorubicin chemotherapy (cumulative dose unknown), and radiation therapy. Her pregnancy history was notable for two full-term pregnancies with spontaneous vaginal deliveries, and a third pregnancy 7 years after her breast cancer diagnosis complicated by pre-eclampsia requiring pre-term caesarean delivery. One month after her delivery, she was diagnosed with new cardiomyopathy most suggestive of PPCM [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 10–15%]. She had no prior history of cardiomyopathy following her breast cancer therapies. After her third pregnancy, she had recovery of LVEF to 40–45% on maximally tolerated guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT). She reported discontinuing her heart failure medications (including losartan 50 mg daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, and carvedilol 6.25 mg twice daily) upon discovery of her pregnancy status in early first trimester. Her outpatient cardiologist had discussed starting her on labetalol for management of hypertension in pregnancy, but this was deferred given normal blood pressures at the time. Soon after, she noted worsening dyspnoea and orthopnoea. On arrival to the emergency room, her exam was notable for heart rate 115, blood pressure 148/113 mmHg, respiratory rate 36 with an oxygen 2 saturation of 95% on 6 L high flow nasal cannula with jugular venous distension and bilateral pulmonary crackles. Brain natriuretic peptide was 350 pg/mL, and electrocardiogram was remarkable for sinus tachycardia with non-specific T wave inversions.
She was hospitalized for optimization of GDMT and serial foetal assessments under the interdisciplinary care of our cardio-obstetrics team. On admission, transthoracic echocardiogram revealed severe left ventricular (LV) dilation (left ventricular end diastolic dimension 64 mm) with LVEF of 15–20% with severe global hypokinesis, right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 46 mmHg, and mild tricuspid (TR) and mitral regurgitation (MR) (see , ). Her clinical status remained tenuous but stable through 32 weeks when she developed increasing signs of volume overload and oxygen requirement despite escalating diuretic therapy. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a significant increase in TR and MR severity with progressive elevation in estimated pulmonary pressures (RVSP 71 mmHg) suggestive of early decompensation of LV function and (see , ). She was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit, and a right heart catheterization was performed using minimal fluoroscopy and appropriate abdominal shielding, which demonstrated the following filling pressures: right atrium 16 mmHg, right ventricle (RV) 60/10, pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) 58/28 mean 46 mmHg, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) 18 mmHg. After multidisciplinary discussion with the cardio-obstetrics team, the decision was made to place an IABP prior to delivery in the context of elevated filling pressures, primarily post-capillary pulmonary hypertension, and worsening TR and MR suggestive of progressive LV decompensation at the peak haemodynamic stress of pregnancy. This was chosen over inotropic support due to relative hypotension (systemic blood pressure 96/64, mean arterial pressure 74) and inability to tolerate GDMT. Intra-aortic balloon pump counter-pulsation support significantly aided in an immediate reduction and normalization of intracardiac pressures to a PCWP of 5 mmHg and mean PAP of 14 mmHg as well as augmentation of cardiac indices (Fick cardiac output 5.9 L/min, cardiac index 2.7 L/min). With IABP insertion, the patient had a profound decrease in systemic (SVR) and pulmonary vasculature resistance (PVR) with an SVR of 1135 dynes s/cm5 and PVR 1.7 WU (Wood unit), allowing for a successful repeat caesarean delivery of a healthy male infant.
The IABP was effectively weaned on post-partum Day 3 without complications, and her haemodynamics remained stable after removal. Repeat echocardiogram demonstrated stable LVEF 20–25% with trivial MR and an RVSP of 26 mmHg. After having a risk and benefit discussion, the patient did not plan to breastfeed or express milk following delivery, which did not prompt the use of bromocriptine for her PPCM. She was discharged one week following her delivery on the following GDMT: carvedilol 15.625 mg twice daily, sacubitril-valsartan 49–51 mg twice daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, dapagliflozin 10 mg daily, hydralazine 25 mg twice daily, isosorbide mononitrate 60 mg daily, and apixaban 5 mg twice daily for LV thrombus prophylaxis. Post-partum cardiac magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a mild improvement in LVEF to 34% with no late gadolinium enhancement or LV apical thrombus but persistently dilated LV cavity (indexed LV end diastolic volume 128.51 m2; LV end systolic volume 85.07 m2). The patient continues to do well with New York Heart Association class I–II symptoms and has only been hospitalized once for heart failure (in the context of cholelithiasis). She is undergoing bariatric surgery assessment before being considered for future advanced therapies including heart transplantation.