An 18-year-old female was admitted to Peking Union Medical College Hospital in November 2016 with the chief complaints of abnormal limb movements and slurred speech for two years, which worsened 20 days ago. Initially, her movements were slower, her hands were clumsy, and she could not speak clearly. In the past 20 days, she gradually developed dysdipsia, unsteady gait, dyskinesia, significantly increased involuntary movements of limbs and fell > 4 times. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed abnormal signals in bilateral basal ganglia and thalamus. Electroencephalography (EEG) demonstrated diffused 4–6 Hz theta waves. Slit-lamp examination showed Kayser–Fleischer (KF) ring in both eyes. Her serum ceruloplasmin concentration was 0.033 g/L (Normal range: 0.2–0.6). The symptoms progressively worsened, and she had a fever, with temperature between 37.5 and 38.0 °C, without chills, cough or diarrhea. The patient had difficulty in opening her mouth, could only speak one word at a time, and had occasional torsion spasm at the time of admission.
The patient had xerostomia, keratoconjunctivitis sicca, frequent oral ulcers, with no significant weight loss. There was no history of other diseases, but her mother recalled that she talked less, had behavioral changes, abnormal gait, involuntary smile and involuntary movements of all limbs since five years. The parents and older sister did not have similar symptoms. Physical examination revealed that the patient had normal comprehension, with low-grade fever, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, dystonia, lack of coordination, slight tremor, dysarthria, dysphagia and right side Babinski sign positive.
After admission, routine tests revealed decreased white blood cell count of 2.87*109/L (Normal range: 4–10). Liver function test showed slightly elevated transaminase level and normal bilirubin level. Albumin level was decreased to 32 g/L (Normal range: > 35). Renal parameters were marginally elevated with proteinuria (1.12 g/24 h) and hematuria (++). Lumbar puncture showed elevated intracranial pressure, normal white blood cell count of 2/ul, elevated protein of 0.69 g/L and elevated immunoglobulin G (IgG) of 58.8 mg/L (Normal range: 0–40). Anti-AQP-4 (Anti-aquaporin 4) IgG and myelin basic protein were negative. MRI revealed symmetric abnormal signals with low signal in T1-weighted image, and high signals in T2-weighted and FLAIR images of bilateral basal ganglia thalamus, midbrain, and pons . Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed diffused lesions in the liver, uneven density, and hepatosplenomegaly. The patient, her parents and her sister underwent genotype test for WD, which showed that the patient had a compound heterozygous mutation, while her family members did not.
Other laboratory findings included elevated ESR, C-reactive protein, IgG, IgM and hypocomplementemia. The titers of antinuclear antibody (ANA) (S1:640), anti-SSA antibody (+++) and anti-rRNP antibody (+++) were remarkably increased, while anticardiolipin antibodies (ACL), Lupus anticoagulants (LA), and anti-β2-glycoprotein-1 (anti-β2GP1) antibodies were all positive. Stomatological and ophthalmological evaluations provided objective evidence of salivary gland (salivary flow rate and parotid sialography) and ocular (Schirmer’s test and ocular dye score) involvement. Salivary gland biopsy showed typical histopathology of Sjögren syndrome. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed normal arteries, and ultrasound examinations of arteries and veins of bilateral legs, bilateral subclavian, supra-mesenteric, inferior-mesenteric, bilateral renal found no thrombotic evidence.
Based on all the findings, the final diagnosis for this patient was WD, SLE, secondary Sjögren syndrome with anti-phospholipid (aPL) antibodies. Therefore, we started therapy with iv sodium dimercaptopropane sulfonate (DMPS), full dose zinc sulfate for WD, and methylprednisolone (80 mg iv for 7 days, then 40 mg po for 3 weeks), and hydroxychloroquine po for SLE, respectively. Since has three kinds of aPL antibodies were positive, the patient was also treated with anticoagulant therapy (low molecular weight heparin, and then aspirin po). One month later, her neurological symptoms and laboratory tests showed improvement. WBC count, liver function test including transaminase level, bilirubin level and serum albumin level, urine test, ESR, CRP, IgG and complement levels were all normal. Repeat lumbar puncture showed normal parameters. The titer of ANA had declined (S1:160), and aPL (ACL, LA, anti-β2GP1) antibodies were negative. The steroid dosage was gradually tapered and the patient was given oral dimercaptosuccinate (DMSA), zinc sulfate, hydroxychloroquine and aspirin for maintenance.
The patient was followed-up every three months at the outpatient clinic. Six months after discharge, her symptoms recurred, and she developed hyponatremia, hematuria and proteinuria, when the steroid was reduced to 2 mg/day. Hence, methylprednisolone dosage was increased to 16 mg/day, while the other treatment remained unchanged. Symptoms and abnormal laboratory findings were relieved in the next follow-up.