A 55-year-old male of Han nationality from China (height 1.70 m, weight 50 kg, body mass index 22.21 kg/m2) had no personal or family history of diabetes. He was initially admitted to the respiratory department of our hospital on 28 April 2022 due to respiratory symptoms of cough and chest pain. Relevant imaging studies were suggestive of lung cancer with multiple metastases to the cervical lymph nodes, brain, and bone. Further lung lesion biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of SCLC. On 04 May 2022, the patient received combination therapy of serplulimab, etoposide, and carboplatin for the first time for a total of six cycles. Tumor lesions were well controlled, and blood glucose monitoring was not indicative of an abnormal increase in blood glucose levels. After stopping therapy for more than 3 months, the patient continued to receive serplulimab alone on 16 January 2023, for a total of five cycles. The treatment process of the patient is presented in Table . On 19 August 2023, the patient presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a sudden onset of severe thirst, nausea, vomiting, deep respirations, and stupor. The test results were as follows: venous glucose was 38.59 mmol/L and glycosylated hemoglobin was 7.4%; pH was 6.95; base excess could not be calculated; bicarbonate was < 3.0 mmol/L; partial pressure of carbon dioxide was 12 mmHg; partial pressure of oxygen was 143 mmHg; lactic acid levels were 4.9 mmol/L; urine ketone was 2+ ; and urine sugar was 4+ . The patient was diagnosed with DKA and admitted to the endocrinology department of our hospital. The glucose levels of the patient during the treatment process are shown in Fig. , and computed tomography imaging findings of the chest and abdomen are shown in Fig. . After active blood sugar control, fluid supplementation, and correction of ketoacidosis, the patient’s condition began to stabilize. Further examination indicated that insulin and C-peptide release were extremely low . Insulin autoantibodies and islet cell autoantibodies were not detected as diabetes-related autoantibodies, and the glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody (GADA) level was < 1.00 IU/mL. After excluding other drug factors, the diagnosis of ICI-T1DM was considered, and long-term insulin replacement therapy was required in the later stage.