A 65-year-old man was found unconscious with bleeding from a left side scalp wound at the bottom of the stairs in his house where he seemed to have fallen down. On arrival at the hospital, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 5 (E1V1M3) without anisocoria. He had a laceration in his left frontotemporal scalp but presented with no other injuries on his trunk or extremities. There were no apparent findings of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage. However, within 20 min of arrival at the hospital, the diameter of his right pupil changed from 3 mm to 6 mm, although that of the left pupil remained 3 mm. He was immediately intubated. A plain brain computed tomography (CT) showed a right acute subdural hematoma (SDH), contusion of the right temporal lobe, traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, and midline shift to the left side . The CT also showed a linear fracture of the left temporoparietal bone and a small fracture at the frontal skull base. There was no evidence of other bone fractures, such as in the spinal bone, and any other organ injury on CT. He underwent an emergency evacuation of the right SDH. The surgeon had the impression that the brain could swell as a result of the severe injury. Therefore, it was decided to do a right frontotemporal decompressive craniectomy, and the dura was closed using a Gore- Tex membrane graft. The size of his skull defect was approximately 10 cm × 11 cm2.
After the operation, his anisocoria improved: the right pupil was 3 mm and the left pupil was 1.5 mm, and plain brain CT showed a regression of the mass effect and midline shift [Figure 1b]. However, within 1 h after the surgery, the anisocoria worsened: the right pupil was 6 mm and the left pupil was 2 mm. An additional CT scan showed a marked midline shift from the right to the left side with brain herniation, i.e., direction opposite to the craniectomy side, compared to the previous CT . The scan also showed that the skin flap overlying the decompressive craniectomy site was markedly sunken . Although the optimal course of action was unclear, we suspected in that situation the atmospheric pressure did exceed the intracranial pressure around the decompressive craniectomy site, resulting in “sinking skin flap syndrome,” which usually occurs in the chronic phase after the decompressive craniectomy. We immediately performed lobectomy of contusion of the right temporal lobe as a precaution for any further brain swelling might occur. Next, cranioplasty was performed using the autologous bone. After the second operation, the patient’s pupils were constricted (2 mm in the right pupil and 1.5 mm in the left pupil). A follow-up CT showed significant improvement of the midline shift . An intracranial pressure monitoring sensor was placed into the right frontal lobe during the second operation. The primary reading was 4 cm H2O immediately after the second operation and 10–15 cm H2O on the following days. We suspected that a CSF leak had caused his intracranial hypotension. To confirm our hypothesis, we aimed at detecting the CSF leakage site using CT myelography 3 days later. Unfortunately, we were unable to conduct the investigation because the lumbar puncture resulted in a dry tap.
A follow-up CT scan 2 weeks later showed complete resolution of the midline shift . We did not perform further investigation to confirm the CSF pressure state because there was no evidence suggesting low CSF pressure, such as that in bilateral chronic SDH or tonsillar herniation. Furthermore, his general condition was unstable at the time. One month after the trauma and the two operations, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital. His GCS score was 9 (E4VTM4) and breathing through a tracheostomy tube. He is now bedridden and requires a feeding tube.