A 45- year old unmarried heterosexual, otherwise healthy and non-smoking female with no previous history of cancer, diabetes or lichen sclerosus was referred to the Department of Breast and Plastic Surgery for reexcision of a histopathologically verified 20 mm x 10 mm perianal verrucous carcinoma. The resection base margin was not free, so the patient was referred to Dep. of Plastic Surgery for further surgical intervention and follow-up. Histopathologically, there was some discussion whether the tumor excised prior to admission should be described as a verrucous carcinoma or a Buschke Loewenstein tumour. However, since no Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) could be found in the tissue by immunohistochemical staining, the final conclusion was verrucous carcinoma of the anogenital area .
The tumour had been present and growing for 3 months. As local treatment by Podophyllotoxin failed to treat the lesion, the patient was referred to a general surgeon in a private clinic, who had excised the tumor. Resection borders were not reported.
No bleeding, itching, painful sensations or previous history of lichen sclerosus were reported. The patient had no risk factors for HIV or symptoms from the gastrointestinal tract. The only medicine prescribed was peroral Imigrane for intermittent migraine. No lymphadenopathy was found.
The clinical presentation was a scar (a) of 20 × 18 mm located in close proximity to the anus remained from the primary excision . A stalked, soft mobile tumor of 5 × 4 mm (b) was also observed in the perianal region at 4 o’clock . Histopathologic evaluation of a 4 mm punch biopsy from lesion b determined that is was a benign fibroepithelial tumor. The patient was referred to the department of surgical gastroenterology, Herlev, Denmark, for endoscopy and further surgical intervention on the suspicion of involvement of the anal canal. PET-CT scan determined no signs of dissemination. A transrectal ultrasound examination revealed a tumour observed at 4 o’clock. This tumour involved the internal muscular sphincter of the anus and it was excised in toto. Histologic diagnosis was lichenoid inflammation.
Follow-up was set for 6 months in which the patient did not display any signs of relapse .