An 11-year-old, right-hand dominant boy injured his left elbow due to fall from a tree with a height of eight feet on an outstretched hand. He went to a primary orthopedic surgeon who diagnosed it as Monteggia fracture-dislocation. The patient was referred to us for further treatment. Clinically, there was severe pain, tenderness, and swelling along left elbow. Neurovascular examination revealed paresthesia in ulnar territory and clawing of ulnar two fingers. Distal radial and ulnar pulsations were normal.
Initial radiographs ( and ) showed a posterior elbow dislocation with displaced radial neck fracture with proximal ulna fracture. The anteroposterior (AP) radiographs showed translocation of the radius and ulna, with medially displaced radius and laterally angulated ulna. We diagnosed it as a case of convergent elbow dislocation with a radial neck and proximal ulna fracture with ulnar nerve paresthesia. We planned for emergency close/open reduction under anesthesia and internal fixation in case of persistent instability. After informed written consent, close reduction was attempted under general anesthesia, but elbow was found unstable. Ulnar closed antegrade nailing was done, but elbow joint was found still dislocating on the extension, then open reduction of radial neck fracture was done through lateral approach. The shaft of radius was gently brought laterally, and radial head was reduced over it. The fracture was stabilized with a K-wire. After radial neck fracture fixation, elbow joint became stable through a full range of movement. An above elbow slab was given for 3 weeks post-surgery to secure the fixation and for soft tissue healing. Slab was removed, and gentle passive- and active-assisted range of motion exercises was started. Ulnar nerve paresthesia resolved progressively, and complete recovery was noted in 2½ months post-surgery. At 2½ months after surgery, the patient had 10—° of elbow range of motion with terminal restriction of pronosupination. Radiographic examination of the patient’s left elbow at 2½ months ( and ) showed the anatomical alignment of radiocapitellar and ulnohumeral joints as well as stable, although incomplete, bony healing of radial neck fracture. No evidence of radioulnar synostosis was noted. At 1½ years follow-up ( and ), the patient reported an almost full painless range of motion with terminal restriction of pronosupination as compared with the uninjured side. He participated in sports and activities of daily living without any restrictions. The radiographs ( and ) showed maintenance of the alignment of radiocapitellar and ulnohumeral joints in all planes.