A 37-year-old Thai woman was referred to our institution for fixation of multiple recurring pathological fractures of both upper and lower extremities. Five years ago, she had sustained fractures of the right shoulder, left elbow, and right femoral shaft after falling on the ground. She received internal fixation of those fractures, as illustrated in Supplementary 1. One month previously, she had been admitted to a local hospital because of fractures of the right distal humerus and left tibial shaft without history of trauma. While staying at that hospital, a new fracture occurred at the left femoral shaft. Since complicated orthopedic procedures for fixation of her fractures were anticipated, she was subsequently transferred to our hospital.
She reported urinary frequency, with more than 10 nocturia episodes per night, accompanied by increased thirst. She was a non-smoker and did not have a history of diabetes, hypertension, or other chronic diseases. She denied a family history of any metabolic bone diseases or genetic disorders.
A musculoskeletal examination showed slightly varus malalignment of the right elbow and shortening with external rotation deformity of the left leg, and painful swelling of the left tibia. A neck examination did not reveal thyroid gland enlargement, thyroid nodules, or palpable neck masses.
A review of plain radiographs revealed multiple fractures with diffuse osteopenia. Brown tumors were also observed at multiple sites (the shaft of the right humerus, the proximal shaft of the right radius and ulnar, the proximal shaft of the left femur, and the shaft of the left tibia; Fig. ). Moreover, a bone survey showed a salt-and-pepper appearance of the skull, while a rugger-jersey appearance was observed in a lateral spine radiograph . These findings were consistent with osteitis fibrosa cystica, prompting further laboratory investigations for PHPT.
The patient’s initial laboratory investigations are listed in Table . She had elevated serum calcium (13.6 mg/dL); low phosphorus (2.2 mg/dL) with high bone turnover, giving markedly elevated alkaline phosphatase (1482 U/L); and very high serum PTH (3850 pg/mL).
The patient was diagnosed with PHPT. Because her serum calcium was high, it was decided that a parathyroidectomy procedure would be performed prior to operative fixation of the fractures. The fractures were temporarily stabilized with a long leg back-slab on the left leg and a U-slab on the left arm. Further investigation with a parathyroid scan (using 99mTc-Sestamibi and single photon emission computed tomography) showed a parathyroid lesion at the inferior pole of the left thyroid lobe. The patient underwent a left lower parathyroidectomy; a 2.5-cm mass that was removed was subsequently histologically confirmed as a parathyroid adenoma.
After removal of the tumor, the patient’s PTH level decreased to 21 pg/mL on postoperative Day 3. Immediately after the surgery, calcium carbonate, alfacalcidol, and vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) supplementation were prescribed as part of a prophylactic protocol to prevent postsurgical hypocalcemia. Despite receiving those supplementations, hungry bone syndrome developed approximately 1 week after the parathyroidectomy, and her serum calcium and phosphate levels decreased to 8.1 and 1.1 mg/dL, respectively. As a result of the syndrome, intravenous calcium gluconate was given; the oral calcium carbonate dosage was raised to 4800 mg per day, while the alfacalcidol was increased to 3 μg per day to maintain a normal serum calcium level. The calcium and vitamin D supplements were gradually decreased over time, and the hungry bone syndrome had resolved by 10 months later.
After the serum calcium level had normalized (for our case, 10 days after the parathyroidectomy), closed reduction and internal fixation of the left proximal femoral shaft was performed. The orthopedic surgeon used a cephalomedullary nail (Zimmer Natural Nail; Zimmer Inc., Warsaw, Ind., USA). Other fractures were treated conservatively. The patient recovered well and was discharged 10 days after surgical fixation, with no postoperative complications.
Six months following the parathyroidectomy, the patient demonstrated a significant improvement in pain relief and level of ambulation. She switched from ambulation in a wheelchair to full weight bearing on her left leg. At the 1.5-year follow-up, plain radiographs of her extremities showed union of all fracture sites and complete healing of the brown tumors . Although she was free of bone pain and able to walk without an assistive device, there was still some limping due to the shortened right femur.