A 64-year-old male came to our clinic complaining of blood presence in the stool. The patient underwent a lower gastrointestinal tract endoscopy, and rectal cancer 7 cm from the anal verge was detected and confirmed with biopsy (moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma). The patient then underwent chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) – the clinical diagnosis of middle rectal cancer (cT3N1) was confirmed. The patient was treated with neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (consisted of 50·4 Gray (Gy) in 28 fractions of 1·8 Gy per day for 5½ weeks with continuous infusion of fluorouracil (1,000 mg/m2 per day for 5 days) during the 1st and 5th weeks of radiotherapy). Eight weeks following the neoadjuvant treatment, follow-up MRI was performed. No tumor was visible, and only single suspicious lymph node in the mesorectum was seen. Patient underwent total mesorectal excision (totally 12 weeks following the neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy). Resected specimen was examined by pathologists, and the diagnosis of moderately differentiated (G2) rectal adenocarcinoma with metastases to regional lymph nodes (ypT2N1b 2 of 15 lymph nodes), R0, and complete TME was confirmed. The postoperative course was uneventful, and adjuvant chemotherapy was not prescribed.
Three years later, the patient started complaining of penile pain and solid formations along the entire length of the penis. During physical examination, a rough and raised tumor with unclear boundaries was observed in the head of the penis, and solid infiltrations were observed in the corpora cavernosa, extending all the way to the root of the penis. The patient underwent a CT scan, which showed irregular accumulation of contrast in the penis without distant metastases . The patient was discussed by a multidisciplinary team, and it was decided to treat the patient by performing an amputation of the penis. Pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed the penile metastasis of low-grade (G2) adenocarcinoma of the colon with lymphovascular invasion and visible tumor structures in the resection margins (R1). Histologically, tumor was composed of irregular glandular and cribriform structures lined with columnar cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and polymorphic-stratified nuclei. The tumor contained abundant necrotic debris (“dirty necrosis”) in the lumen of the structures. The tumor was located in penile glans and corpus, spreading to both corpus spongiosum and cavernosum, infiltrating surrounding adipose and striated muscle tissues. Perineural and lymphovascular invasions were observed as well. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for CDX2, which is a marker of the intestinal epithelium and helps to determine the primary location of metastatic colorectal adenocarcinomas (–). The patient was scheduled for adjuvant chemotherapy with XELOX regimen with a reduced dose of Capecitabine because of the DPYD gene polymorphism heterozygous variant. Almost 3 months after the operation, hematuria occurred, and then suprapubic cystostomy was performed. Later, the patient complained of severe pain in his right leg, and x-ray with bone scintigraphy imaging tests showed osteolytic-type metastases, and massive bone damage with tumor masses in both legs . Due to the progression of the disease while on chemotherapy and deteriorating general condition of the patient, it was decided to apply symptomatic (palliative) treatment. The patient died 3 months later (see the timeline in ).