A previously healthy 64-year-old man was referred the Department of Neurology at our hospital after presenting with numbness and weakness five months previously.
The patient initially noticed numbness in the lower legs and on the ventral side of the fingertips that gradually progressed upwards to the wrists and ankles on both sides. In addition to numbness, he also experienced soreness and swelling of the muscles. He attended the local hospital for treatment and underwent cervical and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging, which revealed normal cervical and lumbar spine parameters. He was given methyl cobalamin tablets, but this treatment was ineffective. One month ago, he felt weak and was no longer able to walk independently. In the previous week, the patient began to experience nocturnal lower limb twitching, which occurred several times each night.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient had no related family history.
During the neurological examination, it was observed that the proximal muscle strength was 4/5 and distal muscle strength was 4/5 in the limbs. Additionally, his muscle tone was low and the bilateral brachial biceps, triceps, knee, and Achilles tendon reflexes were all decreased. The distal limbs showed the greatest decrease in temperature and pain perception, and both lower limbs exhibited a negative Babinski sign. No evidence of altered consciousness, linguistic impairment, or cranial nerve paralysis was present.
Laboratory findings revealed normal routine blood counts, liver function, kidney function, and blood sugar. The level of Vitamin B12 was within the normal range. An increase of 4 mm/h in erythrocyte sedimentation rate was noted. There was no evidence of anti-nuclear, anti-DNA, anti-Ro antibody, anti-La antibody, or anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs), which include proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCAs and myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCAs, and there were no detectable serum cryoglobulins. Immunoelectrophoretic results were negative. Urine levels were as follows: κ light chain < 7.28 mg/L, λ light chain < 4.00 mg/L, and κ/λ light chain ratio 1.82. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B core antibody, and hepatitis B e antibody were positive. Test results for hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) and envelope antigen (HBeAg) were negative. Blood HBV DNA level was 6.14E+02 IU/mL. According to cerebrospinal fluid analysis, white blood cell concentration was 2 × 106/L, red blood cell concentration was 0 × 109/L, glucose concentration was 3.61 mmol/L, and protein concentration was 465.78 mg/L. The patient did not have antibodies against human immunodeficiency virus, rubella virus, Campylobacter jejuni, Treponema pallidum, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, and ganglioside (GD1a, GQ1b, GM1, and GM2).
The patient underwent brain and whole spine magnetic resonance imaging, and no abnormalities were found.