We have changed relevant personal information of the patient to protect her anonymity.
Our patient was a 67-year-old Caucasian woman who was a pensioner with no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. She had a college degree and had previously worked in social services. Before admission, she underwent abdominal surgery while under general anesthesia for extirpation of a pancreatic fistula with an uncomplicated epidural anesthetic consisting ropivacaine 0.2% and sufentanil 0.5μg/ml injected into the T7-T8 interspace. Before the surgery, the patient was informed about possible complications, including epidural bleeding, infection, and neurological disorders such as paraplegia. The pre-operative assessment was unremarkable. The patient tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis. The pre-operative neurological examination of the patient was not conducted in detail but as part of the general pre-operative examination, with motor and sensory functions documented as normal. During the entire procedure, no complications or major hemodynamic changes were recorded. Eight hours after the surgery, she complained of complete paralysis of both lower extremities and complete loss of sensation from dermatome T5 downward. A physical examination showed that her vital signs were stable. Post-operative neurological examination by a consultant neurologist on days 2 and 3 after surgery revealed loss of sensation affecting both lower limbs, abdomen, and chest, with a sensory level at the T5 dermatome and decreased strength of both lower extremities quantified as follows: hip flexion and extension bilaterally, 2/5 (Medical Research Council grading); knee extension, 2/5 (right) and 3/5 (left); knee flexion, 3–4/5 (right) and 3–4/5 (left); dorsiflexion, 4/5 (right) and 2/5 (left); plantar flexion, 4/5 (right) and 3/5 (left); and bilateral big toe extension, 4/5. Both lower limbs showed altering levels of increased muscle tone, ranging from mild to severely increased. Her knee jerks were brisk, and her Achilles tendon reflexes were difficult to elicit. Urinary retention occurred on days 2 and 3 after surgery. Rectal tone and sphincter function were weakened. The plantar response was equivocal on the right. With lifting of the legs into the air and subsequent release, the patient was able to tonically hold both legs suspended over the bed. Three magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examinations on days 1, 2, and 5 after surgery failed to show any evidence of spinal cord, conus, cauda equina injury, edema, or bleeding . Motor-evoked as well as somatosensory-evoked potentials were normal. Extensive blood workup was normal. Because of the absence of edema or bleeding on all MRI scans and no local or systemic infection signs, the benefit of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was deemed low and hence was not performed.
The mental state examination revealed a friendly person with appropriate general appearance and behavior. The patient demonstrated no cognitive or perceptual disorders. There was retained attention, concentration, and memory, along with a euthymic mood. Range of affect was appropriate without any abnormalities in the logic and coherence of thinking nor was there any evidence of disorders of thought content. Although she was initially concerned about her motor abilities and quality of life in the future, her diagnosis did not fulfill the ICD-10 or DSM-IV criteria for a major depressive disorder. She had no personal or family history of psychiatric disorders. Structured clinical interviews such as the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM I and II, the Beck Depression Inventory , the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale , the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale , the Borderline Symptom List , the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale , and the Dissociative Experiences Scale were used to assess her current symptomatology. The patient showed no prominent signs or symptoms of axis I and II disorders. A diagnosis of DP was made according to ICD-10 criteria, based on the disparate neurological findings and the absence of somatic correlates for movement disability.
Intensive physical therapy was commenced 2 days after admission, and the patient’s symptoms began to resolve after the results of her tests and the potential psychological mechanism of the weakness were explained to her. She was discharged to a rehabilitation unit on day 14 after admission, with normal strength in both legs and ability to walk with assistance. During her outpatient presentation 3 months later, her gait was observed to have fully recovered and she was able to walk without any assistance.