A 69-year-old man presented with epigastric pain, and his past medical history included gastric ulcers and alcoholic pancreatitis. Contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed an enhanced mass lesion measuring 33 × 27 mm on the pancreatic body with encasement of the common hepatic artery (CHA) and narrowing of the splenic vein; there was no distant metastasis . A malignant pancreatic tumor was suspected, and an endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) of the lesion was performed that demonstrated cytology consistent with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) . Therefore, we diagnosed UR-LA pancreatic cancer.
Based on these examinations, we planned to perform doublet chemotherapy of GEM and S-1 because the supply of nab-paclitaxel has dwindled since August 2021 and this patient was found to be double heterozygous for uridine-diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) *28 and UGT1A1*6. FOLFIRINOX has not dose adjustment criteria for patients with double heterozygous for UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*6. Besides, in the Phase II study of FOLFIRINOX for chemotherapy-naïve Japanese patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer, patients were excluded if they had UGT genetic polymorphisms heterozygous UGT1A1*6 and UGT1A1*28 . For these reasons, the choice of FOLFIRINOX was not easy for patients with double heterozygous for UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*6. The patient received GEM (1000 mg/m2) on days 1 and 8, and oral S-1 [(100 mg/day (BSA < 1.5m2)] on days 1–14. This treatment was repeated at 21-day intervals. After the first cycles of GEM and S-1, this regimen was discontinued due to exanthematous drug eruption as a side effect of GEM. Because this patient was found to be double heterozygous for UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*6, and S-1 was used in the first-line treatment, the second-line treatment entailed the administration of nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV (80 mg nal-IRI, 4000 mg fluorouracil, and 340 mg leucovorin) in 11 cycles. The starting dose for nal-IRI was reduced to 70% according to dose adjustment criteria for patients with double heterozygous for UGT1A1*28 and UGT1A1*6. The treatment was repeated at 14-day intervals.
After four cycles of nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV were administered, CT revealed that the tumor had shrunk to 25 × 10 mm in diameter, with encasement of the CHA and narrowing of the splenic vein . This was considered a partial response to the nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV chemotherapy regimen according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) guidelines, Ver. 1.1 . After 11 cycles of nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV chemotherapy regimen were administered, CT revealed that the tumor had shrunk to 18 × 7 mm in diameter with encasement of the CHA. The narrowing of the splenic vein had disappeared, and there was no distant metastasis . This was considered a stable disease to nal-IRI + 5-FU/LV chemotherapy regimen according to the RECIST guidelines . There were not any severe adverse events except for grade 1 anorexia. The tumor markers including the carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, s-pancreas antigen-1 and duke pancreatic monoclonal antigen type 2, were normal from the start of treatment . We performed angiography for the purpose of preoperative embolization of the CHA for arterial redistribution. When the celiac artery was imaged, however, only the proximal part of the CHA was imaged . The hepatic blood flowed predominantly from the superior mesenteric artery through the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) ; thus, embolization of the CHA was not performed. Intraoperative histopathological findings of frozen section confirmed tumor-free margins of the celiac artery, GDA and pancreas stump. Based on these findings, a distal pancreatectomy with celiac axis resection, including the left gastric artery, was performed 17 days after the final chemotherapy. There was no involvement of the superior mesenteric vein and portal vein. Thus, we did not perform any vascular reconstruction. The operating time and blood loss were 488 min and 275 mL, respectively. A histological examination of the surgical specimen revealed no evidence of residual adenocarcinoma including co-resected lymph nodes. Macroscopically, no mass lesions were found in the pancreas, and atrophy of the pancreatic parenchyma and an increase in fibrillar connective tissue were observed . The fibrosis of the main pancreatic duct, pancreatic parenchyma, and the interstitial was confirmed and there was an increase in small blood vessels; thus, it is possible that cancer was once present . This finding is consistent with a pathological CR to treatment (Evans Regression Score grade III) . The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 12. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 and remains disease-free 5 months following surgery.