A 47-year-old man with a history of painful testicular masses visited a local clinic. The serum tumor markers AFP, hCG, and serum lactate dehydrogenase were elevated at 8680 ng/mL, 2.9 mIU/mL, and 338 U/L, respectively. Computed tomography revealed masses in left scrotum and metastatic lesions in the left lung . A high inguinal orchiectomy was performed. The histopathological diagnosis was germ cell tumors of several histological types consisting of yolk sac tumor, embryonal carcinoma, and teratoma mixed type. The clinical diagnosis was NSGCTs with lung metastases pT2N0M1aS2 Stage IIIB, and the patient was given an intermediate prognosis according to International Germ Cell Consensus Classification. After surgery, the patient declined the adjuvant chemotherapy. Ten months later, he returned with complaints of dyspnea and significant left pleural effusion. His serum AFP level had increased to 52852.6 ng/mL. Four cycles of a bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin regimen were completed. After first-line chemotherapy, serum AFP and hCG levels increased again. Therefore, we selected nedaplatin 100 mg/m2 and irinotecan hydrochloride 200 mg/m2 regimen as second-line chemotherapy because of his renal dysfunction and anticancer activity. The serum tumor markers returned to normal after second-line chemotherapy. However, the huge pleural and pulmonary tumors remained . Preoperative ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy indicated that the pulmonary metastasis of the NSGCTs caused left middle and lower lobe atelectasis. The preoperative magnetic resonance imaging showed the metastatic NSGCTs in fat tissue near the pericardium. To achieve complete removal of the tumor, EP was conducted as a salvage surgery after predicting a postoperative DLCO2 of 42% by the single-breath method. The resected tumor was 23 × 17 × 6 cm in size and 1476 g in weight . The pulmonary metastatic tumor had been compressing the normal lung tissue . Histopathologically, the resected tissue was immature teratoma . The resected margin was negative. Postoperative imaging 6 months after surgery showed that the pleural effusion in the left thorax . The patient has shown no evidence of recurrence for 5 years since the EP and has led a daily life without the need for an oxygen inhaler.