A 63-year-old male patient came for a follow-up visit at the Ocular Oncology Service of the Paulista School of Medicine (Federal University of São Paulo). He had been diagnosed 3 years before with choroidal melanoma in his right eye. At his initial evaluation, best-corrected visual acuity was hand motion in his right eye and 20/20 in his left eye. In the fundoscopy, he presented an inferior pigmented choroidal lesion in his right eye. His left eye was unremarkable and family history was negative. The ocular echography showed a dome-shaped lesion of 12.8 mm of thickness and a basal diameter of 15.9 mm, suggesting the diagnosis of choroidal melanoma. Enucleation of his right eye was performed. Pathology of the surgical specimen confirmed a choroidal melanoma, with the predominance of epithelioid cells, total retinal detachment, and superficial scleral invasion. Systemic evaluation showed no signs of metastasis. After that, the patient was followed-up with periodic abdominal image examinations (ultrasonography, tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging), serum liver function tests, and chest radiography, at a 6-month interval.
At his routine check-up 3 years after the enucleation, he complained of progressive visual loss. His visual acuity was 20/30 in his left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed mild nuclear sclerosis, intraocular pressure was normal and there were no cells in the anterior chamber or vitreous. On dilated fundus examination, multiple small areas of serous retinal detachment were noted scattered throughout the posterior pole, with yellowish vitelliform lesions . Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed hyperautofluorescent material at the inferior part of the lesions, with a pseudohypopyon configuration . On fluorescein angiography (FA), there was a slight blockage of fluorescence and there was an absence of late staining of lesions . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) showed areas of subretinal fluid, excluded choroidal involvement in all of the lesions, and showed normal choroidal thickness .
Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging showed two pancreatic nodules, one in the head, with 1.1 cm, and another in the uncinate process, measuring 1.5 cm . Both nodules presented with low signal in T1 and restriction to diffusion, suggesting secondary neoplastic involvement. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of these pancreatic nodules was performed, showing epithelioid cells with melanin, nuclear hyperchromatism, evident nucleoli, and karyomegaly, confirming the hypothesis of metastatic melanoma. Image examinations also showed a 0.9 cm lesion near the hepatic capsular region with rim enhancement after contrast administration, believed to be another metastatic lesion . The patient was referred to the Clinical Oncology Department for evaluation; however, he had a cerebrovascular accident, due to brain metastasis. His management is currently palliative.