This is a 50-year-old right-handed male, with 33-year history of T6 AIS A SCI from a gunshot wound complicated by chronic pain, left hip and knee heterotophic ossification, and a chronic dislocation of his right hip, who initially presented to the emergency room with a right shoulder mass in September 2014. While he initially noticed the mass about 2 months earlier, he presented for evaluation now because of acute onset of pain, weakness and paresthesias in the right arm. He was admitted to the general medicine service for pain management and underwent an initial work up for his right shoulder mass, including advanced imaging and a core biopsy. Physiatry was consulted due to his functional deterioration that precluded him from returning to his previous independent living arrangement. He demonstrated diffuse, mild weakness throughout the right arm that was variable and seemed to be correlated with his reported pain level, but his most consistent and weakest movement patterns were his grade 4/5 weakness in finger abduction and distal interphalangeal joint flexion. He had reduced pin prick sensation over the volar surface of digits 3–5, palm and forearm of the right arm and hand. He was not able to perform transfers to or from his manual wheelchair due to his level of pain. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a heterogeneously enhancing mass with a maximum diameter of 6.9 cm that involved the right deltoid and pectoralis major muscles. His core biopsy demonstrated a STS that was classified as a high grade (III) spindle cell sarcoma.
Oncology recommended treatment for his STS with a course of outpatient neo-adjuvant radiation therapy followed by gross total resection with wide margins. Physiatry pre-operative consult focused heavily on functional prognostication. The patient expressed multiple times that he placed the highest priority on return to his previous modified independent living arrangement and not only survival after his STS treatment course. The patient’s personal values combined with the physiatric assessment informed the pre-surgical planning. In particular a decision was made to take a narrower surgical margin around key muscle group (pectoralis major and deltoids) in order to help maintain the man’s manual wheelchair mobility and his ability to independently transfer himself.
He completed neo-adjuvant radiation therapy in November of 2014 and underwent radical excision of his right shoulder mass with flap closure that December. He began intensive inpatient rehabilitation after he was given clearance to weight bear through his arm about 8 weeks later. Initially he required total assistance for most ADL’s, including transfers, manual wheelchair propulsion, dressing and toileting. Despite the extensive surgery and radiation treatments, the gentleman was able to return to a functional level, approaching his pre-morbid status (modified independence). He was successfully discharged home to live alone in his accessible apartment complex.