A 27-year-old Chinese male presented with intermittent palpitations, chest pain, and reduced effort tolerance for 2 weeks. He had one episode of near syncope during exertion. He also complained of fever with maximum temperature 38.9°C for 2 days with dry cough and loose stools. He was diagnosed with advanced HIV infection 9 months ago when he presented with pneumocystis pneumonia complicated by pneumomediastinum . He was compliant with highly active antiretroviral therapy since his diagnosis. His initial regimen included Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, Emtricitabine, and Atazanavir boosted with Ritonavir, and he was then switched to Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, Emtricitabine, and Rilpivirine when the HIV viral load became suppressed at 5 months.
On admission, he was tachycardic with heart rate of 114 b.p.m. Blood pressure was 103/63 mmHg, and oxygen saturation on room air was 98%. Respiration rate was 20. Heart sounds were regular with no murmurs, and his lungs were clear with no evidence of fluid overload. There was no lower limb oedema noted. There were also no peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis. Abdominal examination was normal with no palpable masses detected. There were no cervical or inguinal lymph nodes felt.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, first-degree atrioventricular (AV) block, and frequent atrial ectopics. Chest radiography revealed an enlarged cardiac silhouette (cardiothoracic ratio of 60%). Blood cultures were negative for both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. Other blood investigations are listed in Table . He was placed on continuous inpatient cardiac monitoring and intermittent episodes of asymptomatic complete AV block with a broad complex escape rhythm of 54 b.p.m. was noted . There were also episodes of narrow complex tachycardia, including junctional tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia correlating with palpitations. The patient was otherwise haemodynamically stable.
A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a large mass in the right AV groove and abnormal thickening of the basal septum . The left ventricular ejection fraction was 60%. There was a large pericardial effusion with no evidence of tamponade. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis was performed for evaluation of persistent fever and for other potential targets for percutaneous biopsy. The CT showed intracardiac masses along the right atrial wall and interventricular septum encasing the right coronary artery (RCA), and involvement of the pericardium with pericardial effusion . The involvement of the interventricular septum is likely the cause of his AV block. There were no other lesions suggestive of metastasis or other sites of disease. A further ECG gated CT coronary angiography demonstrated encasement of the RCA by the mass with no luminal narrowing of the RCA. There were also no stenoses in the other coronary arteries.
A cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) scan was subsequently performed for characterization of the mass . The mass was isointense relative to myocardium on both T1- and T2-weighted sequences. There was minimal contrast uptake during first-pass perfusion imaging. Delayed enhancement images showed patchy heterogenous enhancement within the mass.
Given the clinical presentation, background history of retroviral disease and imaging findings, differential diagnoses of either cardiac lymphoma or angiosarcoma were considered. After a multidisciplinary discussion involving cardiologists, cardiothoracic surgeons, and infectious disease physicians, an endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) was performed under combined fluoroscopy and transthoracic echocardiography guidance using an EMB forcep (Jawz, Argon Medical). Histologic examination with immunochemical stains of the samples taken from the interventricular septum showed atypical B cells, consistent with Epstein–Barr virus positive B-cell lymphoma. Cultures taken from the endocardial biopsy were negative for bacteria (including mycobacteria) and fungi.
The patient was subsequently transferred to a tertiary hospital with cardiothoracic surgical support to initiate chemotherapy with sequential R-COP (Rituximab, Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine, and Prednisolone). Since initiation of treatment, serial ECGs showed normal sinus rhythm with first-degree AV block . No further tachyarrhythmias or AV dissociation were observed.