A 45 years old female presented to neurology outpatient department with complains of headache and dizziness for 1 month. Her neurologic examination was normal. The electro encephalogram (EEG) showed deceleration in the right hemisphere, but no other abnormalities. The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 10 × 7 × 4 cm ovoid mass in the right parieto-occipital region with peritumoral edema. The mass was attached to tentorium and was seen extending into the right transverse sinus. The tumor showed intermediate-low signal intensity in the T1-weighted image (T1WI) and slightly increased signal intensity in T2-weighted image (T2WI). The upper and medial portions of the mass showed heterogeneous and relatively low signal intensity in T2WI and suggested a fibrotic mass. The mass showed strong enhancement in the gadolinium-enhanced T1 image. However, we felt that there was also the possibility that the lesion was dura based and simply compressing the ventricle. Given the imaging characteristics, a provisional diagnosis of a meningioma was made (A and B). Gross total resection was done. The tumor was a well-encapsulated, greyish white solid, round and firm mass. The pathologic examination revealed a spindle cell tumor with a “patternless-pattern”. The tumor showed variable cellular morphology comprising of mixed hypercellular and hypocellular areas, with multifocal intervening collagen lay down and scattered vessels. Hypercellular areas showed interlacing fascicles of spindle-shaped cells with moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and oval to elongated nuclei exhibiting variable pleomorphism. Hypocellular areas showed spindle cells with bland nuclear chromatin and abundance of collagen. The tumor cells showed diffuse, strong immunoreactivity for STAT 6, CD 99, CD34, BCL-2 and Vimentin. The mitosis was less than 1/10 high power field (HPF), with an about 1% Ki-67 labelling index, and there was no evidence of necrosis. Sparse reticulin fibers were observed amongst the tumor cells on special stain. With these results, hemangiopericytoma was ruled out, and a diagnosis of SFT was made (A–D). The post-operative neurological status was substantially improved and regular follow-up examinations for 6 months post-surgery have shown that the patient is currently disease-free. The patient was scheduled for follow-up MRI after three months.