A 70-year-old woman with a 6-year history of autoimmune pancreatitis was referred to our department because a gastric submucosal tumor (SMT) had been detected during screening upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. The SMT was located at the greater curvature of the lower part of the stomach and had not been noted 2 years earlier . The maximum diameter of the SMT was 15 mm. Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a 10-mm low-echoic lesion derived from the submucosal layer of the stomach .
A fine-needle aspiration biopsy was attempted, but the tumor was too hard for sampling. Enhanced computed tomography showed a 15-mm hypovascular tumor in the greater curvature of the lower part of the stomach . F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography showed an FDG uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of early 3.8 to late 5.1 . A laboratory examination showed elevation of the serum IgG4 level (262 mg/dl), and all other data were within the normal range.
Because FDG-PET showed an FDG uptake by the tumor, we consider malignant tumor like GIST as a differential diagnosis. As the diagnosis could not be confirmed and the tumor had the possibility of malignancy, LECS was performed for both the diagnosis and curative treatment. First, endoscopic submucosal resection was performed around the tumor. The seromuscular layer was then intentionally perforated endoscopically. Finally, whole-layer resection was performed endoscopically with laparoscopic assistance, and thereafter, the remaining part of the gastric wall was ultrasonically laparoscopically resected by an activated device. After the tumor had been resected, the incision line was closed using a laparoscopic stapling device . The operative time and blood loss were 141 min and 5 g, respectively. The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7.
A histopathological examination showed lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and fibrosis (dense collagen fiber and fibroblast hyperplasia), and immunohistochemistry showed the infiltration of IgG4-positive lymphoplasmacytic cells. The ratio of IgG4+/IgG+ lymphoplasmacytic cells was > 80% . The final diagnosis was definite IgG4-RD of the stomach. No recurrence was observed within 1 year after surgery.