A 35-year old woman was referred to our center with recurrent focal to bilateral convulsive seizures after an episode of fever, headache, and skin rash 6 days prior. Two days before the onset of fever, she received the second dose of an mRNA-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccine (BNT162b2, Pfizer/Biontech). The first dose was well-tolerated. The patient's medical history revealed only sporadic but not recent cocaine consumption and mild SARS-CoV-2 infection a year before the vaccination.
The clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings are summarized in and are illustrated in . On admission, the patient presented with fever of up to 40°C, visual impairment, behavioral changes, recurrent focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures, reduced level of consciousness, and choreatic movements. On admission, moderately elevated TSH, normal free T3 and T4 hormone levels, and slightly elevated liver function tests possibly due to recent overuse of paracetamol were found in the blood test. Drug screening of urine was negative.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) initially showed a generalized rhythmic delta activity with superimposed multifocal interictal epileptic discharges mainly over the frontal and right-sided leads. Frequent brief electrographic seizures were also detected . Initial CT and MRI scans were unremarkable. The MRI on day 5 after admission revealed edema in the left mesial temporal lobe, particularly the hippocampus, which became progressive in size 10 days later. Additionally, FLAIR hyperintensive lesions in the bilateral subinsular regions were detected . The FDG PET showed hypermetabolism of the left amygdala and hippocampus and basal pulmonary hypoventilation. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis (7 cells/μl), normal protein, glucose, lactate, and total immunoglobulin parameters, and matched oligoclonal bands in the serum and CSF without signs of intrathecal IgG production . The blood and CSF screening for common viral and bacterial infections and autoimmune disorders including vasculitis was negative. The diagnostic criteria for a definite autoantibody-negative autoimmune limbic encephalitis according to established criteria were fullfilled . However, testing for common anti-neuronal autoantibodies in serum and CSF was negative, including indirect immunofluorescence staining of mouse brain.
Due to recurrent convulsive seizures without regaining consciousness, a diagnosis of new-onset refractory status epilepticus (NORSE) was made. Levetiracetam up to 4 g/d and lacosamide up to 200 mg/d were started. Under continuous EEG monitoring, phenytoin up to 750 mg/d, midazolam up to 0.57 mg/kg/h, and ketamine up to 4 mg/kg/h were added. Phenytoin was later replaced by phenobarbital. Initially, acyclovir 3 × 10 mg/kg body weight/day and ceftriaxone were given until the CSF and serum testing for herpes viral and bacterial CNS infections turned negative. Immunomodulatory treatment with high-dose methylprednisolone (5 days of 1,000 mg/d IV) was started 2 days after hospital admission with subsequent slow tapering over 8 weeks. Because of continued seizures, plasma exchange for over 10 days starting on day 7 after the admission was performed.
Subsequently, the patient's condition rapidly improved beginning on day 12 after the admission; she regained full consciousness and had only infrequent seizures. The follow-up MRI 1 month after the hospital admission showed edema reduction in the hippocampal, amygdala, and external capsule. On discharge, she had persisting moderate mnestic deficits and infrequent seizures (2–3/month). However, after 2 months, the patient was readmitted to our hospital because of deterioration in seizure frequency (2–3 serial seizures) and neuropsychological deficits. She again received high-dose methylprednisolone for 5 days, which led to significant reduction in seizure frequency.