This was a case of a 26-year-old Sudanese woman, married, who has a 3-year-old boy. This woman presented to our ear, nose, and throat (ENT) department complaining of anosmia for the past 2 years. She had a history of two functional endoscopic sinus surgeries (FESSs) for nasal polyps: the first one was 6 years ago and the second one was 3 years prior to presentation. She complained of being highly sensitive to different irritants including dust, weather change, perfumes, and pets.She also stated that she attended more than three different physicians due to generalized fatigue and getting tired easily after simple daily activity in addition to sleeping for more than 10 hours a day.She attended an orthopedic clinic for unspecified lower back pain that was not related to any type of trauma or physical activity; a lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done and revealed no abnormal findings.She mentioned that she is known to be anxious most of the time and aggressive toward simple reactions from her family members. She had no psychiatric history and was not using any medications.
She was not known to be diabetic or hypertensive or to have any chronic illnesses; she was not on any regular medication. She is a housewife of high socioeconomic status; she is well educated, graduated from dental school with a bachelor’s degree, but currently not employed. She has never consumed tobacco or alcohol; she practiced regular cardio exercises.On examination, she looked healthy, well, not pale or jaundiced. Her pulse rate was 74/minute and her blood pressure was 118/70. Her body mass index (BMI) was 26.8. All systems examinations were normal except for bilateral nasal polyps. Complete blood count (CBC), renal function test (REF), electrolyte, liver function test (LFT), thyroid function test (TFT), urine analysis (general urine test), antinuclear antibody (ANA), and rheumatoid factor (RF) were all normal. An imaging profile included lumbo-sacral MRI, a computed tomography (CT) scan of her sinuses, and electrocardiogram (ECG), which were normal except for bilateral nasal polyps and severe sinusitis that looked allergic to fungi in nature.She underwent FESS surgery to remove the polyps and clean out her sinuses; up to 6 weeks after surgery she used nasal steroids (mometasone furoate 0.005%) two times a day, but her symptoms regarding anosmia were not improved. MRI of her brain and a CT scan of her sinuses were done and both revealed normal features. A vitamin D deficiency was suggested and the laboratory results revealed a low vitamin D level of 7 ng/ml. Treatment with vitamin D supplement was prescribed at 50,000 international units (IU) weekly for 8 weeks and then 1000 IU maintenance dose daily, she was advised to take food rich in vitamin D and get exposed to sunlight for 20 minutes three times a week after the loading dose of supplement. She was at regular follow-up for 6 months; at rates of weekly for the first month, every 2 weeks for the second month, and monthly for the rest of the follow-up period. At each visit, she was assessed with clinical history and examination. It was noticed that the symptoms of tiredness, sleeping, anosmia, and back pain were dramatically improving during that period. At the 6 months follow-up, her blood level of vitamin D was normal, she described her condition as free from all symptoms, and she returned back to normal physical activity.