A 64-year-old woman with 3 months of dysphagia was diagnosed with esophageal cancer using endoscopy at a local clinic and was referred to our hospital. The patient had no significant medical history. Endoscopy revealed a 5-cm circumferential lesion in the lower third of the esophagus with stenosis, which was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma by tumor biopsy . Computed tomography (CT) revealed that the primary tumor was suspected to be invading the main trunk of the left lower pulmonary vein and left lower lung . Lymph node metastasis was suspected in the left cervical field and mediastinum. The diagnosis of clinical T4b N1 M0 Stage IIIC, as classified by the Union for International Cancer Control tumor-node-metastasis staging system, was established .
Induction CRT, comprising two cycles of cisplatin plus 5-fluorouracil for two courses every 3 weeks, was initiated. Cisplatin was administered at a dose of 70 mg/m2 via intravenous drip infusion on day 1, and 5-fluorouracil was administered at a dose of 700 mg/m2/day via continuous infusion on days 1–5. We also performed concurrent radiotherapy at 50.4 Gy/28Fr. CRT had a significant effect on the tumor. Endoscopy revealed no residual tumor . CT revealed a shrunken but remnant tumor with esophageal wall thickness abutting the left lower lobe that was evaluated as partial response according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) . The main trunk of the left inferior pulmonary vein was released from tumor invasion . We expected that the tumor would be resectable and considered R0 esophagectomy possible. We planned to perform McKeown esophagectomy with three-field lymphadenectomy and left lung resection that could be a partial or left lower lobectomy. We selected bilateral VATS as the minimally invasive approach. The patient’s preoperative forced expiratory volume (FEV) was 1.4 L.
We started with the left-sided VATS in the right decubitus position to determine tumor resectability to check whether the tumor invaded the main trunk of the left inferior pulmonary vein. We dissected the esophagus and the main trunk of the left inferior pulmonary vein. The distal part of the veins (V10) had tumor invasion, requiring only partial en bloc resection of the left lower lobe with the esophagus . After completing the left thoracic procedure, we extubated the double-lumen tube, reinserted a Nerve Integrity Monitoring (NIM) tube (Medtronic), and placed the bronchial blocker cuff in the supine position. We then performed a right-sided VATS esophagectomy and lymphadenectomy in the prone position. The esophagus was resected and pulled down through the esophageal hiatus, with partial en bloc resection of the left lower lobe via the left thoracic cavity. Following this, proximal gastrectomy was performed via hand-assisted laparoscopic surgery in the supine position, with lymph node dissection around the celiac artery. We also extensively resected the left crus of the diaphragm to secure the tumor margin. The gastric remnant was pulled up through the retrosternal route, and a cervical esophagogastric hand-sewn end-to-end anastomosis was performed . The operative time was 697 min, and the blood loss was 57 mL.
Although the patient had unilateral recurrent nerve paralysis, the postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 14. Histopathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed a pathological complete response without any remnant tumor or lymph node metastasis according to the RECIST . She had radiation-induced pericarditis approximately 1 month after surgery. The patient’s condition improved after 1 week of conservative treatment. There were no signs of recurrence or metastasis at the 1-year follow-up.