A 24-year-old male presented to our clinic with a history of painless and slowly progressive radial abduction of his right thumb affecting grip and pretension. He complained increasingly discomfort while working at the computer. No history of specific trauma or any other symptoms have been reported. Seven years earlier two sclerotic skin lesions over the radial aspect of the distal third of the first metacarpal bone have been excised.
On physical examination, the patient looked healthy with no dysmorphic features. No skin lesions were detected. Only his right thumb was radially deviated 60° in the metacarpophalangeal (MP) joint and 25° in the interphalangeal (IP) joint . There was a scar of previous operation over the radial aspect of the base of the thumb. The patient showed full active range of motion and the thumb joints were stable.
Radiological examination of the hand showed a spotted pattern with multiple circular or ovoid sclerotic lesions, consistent with osteopoikilosis. Growth disturbance during childhood led to radial deviation in the IP and MP joints . Before presentation to our unit the association of bony and soft tissue lesions was not correlated to a well-defined syndrome.
Due to the patients discomfort treatment with corrective osteotomy was carried out and a fixation plate with bicortical screws for early functional rehabilitation was mounted. Intraoperatively the cortical bone appeared highly sclerotic and thickened .
To further investigate the possibility of BOS in the patient biopsies were taken from the affected bone lesions and surrounding skin and soft tissue over the former surgical scar . The skin biopsy showed macroscopically a white nodule in the dermis. Microscopically, the nodule was hypocellular and consisted of interlacing thick collagen fibres and rare elastic fibres . A segmental biopsy of the metacarpal bone of the right thumb showed a nodular thickening of the cortical bone. Histology revealed in the nodular thickening of the cortical bone a remodelling with formation of network of thick bone trabecules and formation of numerous enlarged Havers’s channels with fibrotic tissue . The histological findings of the bone were consistent with osteopoikilosis and the skin showed the variant of a collagenous fibrotic nodule instead of a nodule with high concentration of elastic fibres.
To confirm the diagnosis of BOS we obtained informed consent from the patient, isolated DNA from peripheral blood leucocytes and analysed the entire coding sequence of LEMD3 with next generation sequencing (NGS) using the Agilent SureSelect XT Clinical Research Exome Kit (V5) on a HiSeq 2500 System (Illumina Inc.). This revealed the heterozygous mutation c.1832T>A, which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and is predicted to result in a premature stop codon (p.Leu611*), probably leading to an incomplete gene function . To our knowledge, this mutation is not yet described in the literature or in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD®) .