A 45-year-old woman presented a one-year history of persistent abdominal pain of the right lower quadrant and a mass with dermal ulceration. One year before admission, the pain occurred without obvious triggers, and the laparoscopy showed a cystic mass in the right lower quadrant of the abdominal cavity. Then, the patient was prescribed oral Chinese herbal medicine without others being performed at the local hospital. During the treatment, the pain recurred and became even worse with the formation of dermal ulceration, and the mass developed even larger after two times attempts of drainage of the purulent group with nothing draining out. After four courses of regular “FOLFOX” chemotherapy, the abdominal pain persisted in the right lower quadrant, and swelling pain occurred on the right back with a mass protruding from the epidermis. She had a history of appendectomy, colonic polypectomy, and left ovarian cyst resection.
A rigid mass with a 6 × 5 cm size protruded from the skin without apparent tenderness and fluctuation, which lacked mobilization and could not be distinguished by the tissues around. The primary mass originated from the right part of the pelvis and invaded the uterus, bowels, right adnexa, and whole abdominal wall layers . Then it was diagnosed as abdominal low-grade mucinous adenocarcinoma(cT4N0M0 stage IIB, ypT4N0M0), proved by pathological puncture biopsy.
Subsequently, we resected the tumor and adjacent tissues and repaired the large abdominal wall defect. During surgery, the terminal ileum, ileocecal junction, and proximal ascending colon were found tightly adhered to the abdominal wall and the tumor. We resected the tumor and 15 cm of the ileum and conducted hand-sewn end-to-end anastomosis of the bowel, and the abdominal wall defect was approximately 87 cm2. Moreover, we also conducted enterolysis and right ureteral exploration intraoperatively.
After flushing the abdominal cavity thoroughly and placing a silicone drainage tube in the right iliac fossa, we performed a tension-free repair of abdominal wall defects by COOK biological patch(170 cm2, Cook Group Inc., U.S.) with continuous suture and 2 cm of the mesh overlapping on the edge of abdominal wall defect. Afterward, we consulted the plastic surgeons for the reconstruction and performed the anterolateral femoral free flap transfer nourished by the perforator branch vessels. Another silicone drainage tube was placed under the flap without suction, and gauze was placed above the flap for local compression hemostasis.
The patient got antibacterial and nutrition support treatment postoperatively. On the 16th day postoperatively, 450 ml of drainage in dark green was found in the abdominal cavity and 50 ml of drainage in brown subcutaneously. After symptomatic and antibacterial treatment, the patient went well and was discharged 37 days postoperatively. She was readmitted 40 days postoperatively due to an intestinal anastomotic fistula, and it was controlled after symptomatic therapy in the second admission. The patient was discharged without discomfort and followed up actively after discharge, and she had been followed up for five months since the operation.