A 68-year-old man who had been healthy all his life was transferred to our hospital’s emergency room with ventricular fibrillation following acute chest pain. Despite implementing advanced cardiovascular life support for 20 min, spontaneous circulation could not be restored. Consequently, the shock team, consisting of two interventional cardiologists, performed the insertion of peripheral VA-ECMO through the right femoral artery and vein in the catheter laboratory. After confirming that the mean atrial pressure remained above 65 mmHg with VA-ECMO, cardiopulmonary resuscitation ceased. Subsequently, an Impella CP (Abiomed Inc., Danvers, MA, USA) was inserted via the left femoral artery. The pump flow of VA-ECMO was set at 4.0 L/min, and the Impella support level was P2 without suction. During this time, ∼2500 mL of normal saline was administered to maintain venous tone. Despite the insertion of ECMELLA, the patient remained in a comatose state. Therefore, target temperature management was initiated.
Following the insertion of ECMELLA, coronary angiography was performed, which revealed an occlusive lesion in the middle segment of the RCA and intact left coronary arteries ( and , ). Subsequently, defibrillation successfully restored the normal sinus rhythm (heart rate = 78/min) with ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, and aVF. During this time, the arterial pressure remained non-pulsatile at 85 mmHg without the administration of any vasopressors or inotropes, which suggested that successful total circulation support was achieved by ECMELLA.
A guide wire (GW) was successfully advanced to the distal part of the RCA. However, backflow through the guide catheter (GC) was not confirmed. Subsequently, a contrast injection was administered in the ascending aorta after confirmation of backflow through the GC. Prudent coronary angiography revealed three findings. Firstly, thrombolysis in myocardial infarction grade 3 flow was achieved. Secondly, the proximal segment of the RCA exhibited a couple of accordion phenomena, defined as pseudo-stenotic lesions caused by straightening of the tortuous coronary artery by the GW. Thirdly, the distance between the right border of the cardiac silhouette and the RCA and venous line of VA-ECMO was shorter than that before PCI ( and , ).
Intravascular ultrasound imaging (Alta View, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) showed the culprit lesion in the middle part of the RCA and a couple of accordion phenomena in the proximal part of the RCA ( and ; , ). Finally, a 3.5 × 20 mm Synergy everolimus-eluting stent (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) was successfully implanted. A final coronary angiography confirmed the presence of severe bending in the proximal segment of the RCA, which was not evident in the reference coronary angiography ( and , and ). Throughout the PCI, the patient’s vital signs remained stable with ECMELLA support, and no vasopressors or inotropes were required. An electrocardiogram upon admission showed resolution of ST-segment elevation and T-wave inversion in leads II, III, and aVF.
The patient had an uneventful course after PCI, except for mild cognitive impairment, and was discharged on Day 13. Computed tomography coronary angiography after ECMELLA removal showed the RCA without deformation .
Ten months after discharge, he was doing well without recurrent cardiac events.