We report a case of a 43-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese woman who presented to our Teaching Hospital, Peradeniya, in the morning with a history of fever, arthralgia, myalgia, and headache of 4 days’ duration. She had been previously diagnosed as having type 2 diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia for which she received treatment with satisfactory control of the medical conditions and she had normal renal functions.
She had experienced postural dizziness since the afternoon of the previous day and she had had nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain since the morning of the previous day. Soon after admission she collapsed in our emergency care unit. She was severely dehydrated with cold clammy peripheries. Her pulse rate was 130 beats per minute with an unrecordable blood pressure. She had reduced breath sounds in the base of her right lung and marked tenderness over the right hypochondrium with flank dullness with shifting. She was drowsy, but arousable.
Her complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 15.3 g/dL, platelet count of 74 × 103/microL, and white cell count of 3.22 × 106/microL. Her serum creatinine was 277 micromole/L with potassium of 5.8 mmol/L. Alanine transaminase (ALT) was 6542 U/L with aspartate transaminase (AST) of 30,617 U/L. Her serum albumin value was 24 g/L. A bedside ultrasound scan demonstrated bilateral pleural effusions (more in the right) with free fluid in her abdomen. A diagnosis of DHF with decompensated shock complicated with acute liver failure and acute kidney injury was made. DF was confirmed by positive non-structural protein 1 (NS1) antigen and serotype was identified as dengue virus type 2 (DEN-2). Both dengue immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) were positive suggesting a secondary infection with dengue virus (DENV). She was screened for alternative causes for liver necrosis including hepatitis A immunoglobulin A, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C IgM, leptospirosis serology, and rickettsial serology, which were negative. Her baseline transaminase levels and serum creatinine done 1 month earlier at a medical clinic were within the normal range. She denied taking supra-therapeutic dose of paracetamol or other native medical preparations for her fever. She had been treated with metformin and atorvastatin until the previous night.
She was assumed to be at the peak of the critical phase of DF (that is, 24 hours in the plasma leakage) on admission. On admission her packed cell volume (PCV) was 44%. (Her baseline PCV was 33% for hemoglobin of 10.5 g/dL in her clinic book.) She was given a 10 ml/kg crystalloid bolus (500 ml) over 15 minutes followed by 10 ml/kg bolus over 1 hour. She was given a 10 ml/kg dextran 40% bolus in the next hour. She had heavy per vaginal bleeding and one episode of melena. Her PCV dropped from 44 to 33% without clinical improvement and she had low urine output (< 0.5 ml/kg). She was administered packed cells to maintain the PCV around 40% to a total volume of 1200 ml.
During the latter 24 hours of the critical phase of DF, she had severe metabolic acidosis with lactic acidosis: PH of 7.2, bicarbonate 8 mmol/L, and partial pressure of carbon dioxide 16 mmHg with a lactate level of 12 mmol/L, which was corrected medically with 8.4% sodium bicarbonate 200 ml in divided boluses. Her ionized calcium was persistently low and corrected with multiple boluses of intravenously administered calcium gluconate. Her blood sugar was checked every 2 hours and corrected accordingly.
At the end of presumed critical phase, we gave her 5500 ml of fluid including normal saline, dextran, and packed cells. She was conscious, rational, but drowsy. She had a spiking high temperature. She was icteric but not pale. She was breathless at rest with oxygen saturation of 85% on room air, which increased to 95% with 60% oxygen via mask. Her pulse rate was 120 beats per minute with blood pressure of 140/100 mmHg. She had bilateral pleural effusions up to mid zone. Her liver was 5 cm below the costal margin with normal upper border and markedly tender. She had gross ascites in a horseshoe-shaped distribution. Her serum creatinine was raised to 345 micromol/L with serum potassium of 5.8 mmol/L and during the last 6 hours of the critical phase she was anuric. Her ALT was 8010 U/L and AST 41546 U/L. Her prothrombin time was 22.1 seconds (control 12 seconds) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 42 seconds (control 26 seconds). C-reactive protein (CRP) was 240 U/L. Her blood sugars were elevated toward the end of presumed leaking phase of DHF.
At the end of the presumed leaking phase of DHF our patient had: massive liver necrosis; acute kidney injury with acidosis, hyperkalemia, and anuria; deranged clotting with bleeding; and symptomatic volume overload with large plural effusions and gross ascites. Many concerns rose at this point regarding management:The fluid in the third space mainly in the pleural and peritoneal cavities would get reabsorbed and as she probably had an established acute kidney injury with anuria, the reabsorbed fluid would accumulate in her intravascular compartment leading to expansion of intravascular volume and massive volume overload with pulmonary edema and heart failure. Massive liver necrosis with deranged synthetic function would worsen the lactic acidosis which in turn would have a negative effect on the inotropic effect of her heart, clotting derangements might aggravate the bleeding risk, and ongoing hypoxia of the liver might further damage her liver. Sepsis with high fever and elevated inflammatory markers. What is the focus? Management of uncontrolled blood sugar. Is it due to her existing type of diabetes or pancreatitis?
She was started on continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) with CVVHD. We decided to keep CVVHD running and titrate the ultrafiltrate according to the volume state. Observations on central venous pressure (CVP) and blood pressure were made hourly. Intermittent measurements of her inferior vena cava (IVC) diameter and internal jugular vein (IJV) diameter were noted. We assumed that reabsorption of the fluid in the third space would increase the CVP, distend the IJV and IVC, and would increase mainly the diastolic pressure. Depending on the above assumptions, observations were made and ultrafiltrate was gradually increased. Surprisingly, fluid reabsorption occurred in an exponential pattern over a period of 5–6 days and came to a halt abruptly . Maximum ultrafiltrate was 280 ml/hour. Heparin was not used in CVVHD due to high risk of bleeding.
She was started on intravenous NAC 100 mg/hour infusion which was continued for 5 days. She was given orally administered metronidazole 400 mg 8 hourly and syrup lactulose to maintain bowel motion 2–3 times per day. She was started on an intravenous infusion of proton pump inhibitors, intravenously administered tranexamic acid, and orally administered norethisterone. She was given intravenously administered vitamin K 10 mg daily for 3 days. She was given 4 units of fresh frozen plasma and 10 units of cryoprecipitate, and 6 units of platelets to correct the coagulopathy. She was transfused with packed cells to maintain PCV around 40% in order to maintain adequate oxygenation of hepatocytes. CVVHD was continued and her lactate level was noted to decline gradually.
She had spiking high fevers on day 3 of hospital stay with high CRP. Septic screening was done with blood culture and urine culture and intravenously administered ceftriaxone was changed over to renal-adjusted dose of intravenously administered meropenem and teicoplanin. Later cultures were negative after 72 hours of incubation. However, gradually her fever settled by lysis of fever over the days.
Although during the presumed critical phase her blood sugar was rather low, her blood sugar started to rise over the days. She was a type 2 diabetic with good control with metformin. Her blood sugar was checked hourly and insulin infusion was continued and titrated according to her blood sugar. Her amylase was 450 U/L (normal range 1–37 U/L).
Over a period of 6 days she was closely monitored. Gradually her transaminases declined, her lactate level normalized, and serum creatinine reduced and normalized . Her urine output gradually increased. CVVHD was terminated after 138 hours of dialysis. She was discharged on ninth day of admission after restoring her full physiology. She was discharged on Mixtard insulin (biphasic isophane insulin injection) for diabetic control. She was reviewed in the ward after 3 days, 7 days, and at 1 month after discharge. Her renal functions and liver functions were within the normal range. She was started again on metformin and atorvastatin 1 week after discharge and insulin was discontinued.