A 37 years-old unmarried premenopausal female presented in the emergency of our hospital with complaints of bleeding from ulcerative lesion in the left breast for a couple of hours. The patient had history of ulcer in the left breast for past 2–3 weeks which developed over the underlying huge breast lump. The lump was present for past 5 months but rapidly grew over the last 3 months to current size. There was no history of coagulopathy, trauma, chronic liver disease or history of similar illness in first degree relatives. The patient attained menarche at the age of 15 years. She is a non-smoker and denies history of contraceptive use or alcohol intake.
On examination in our emergency there was severe pallor with tachycardia. However the blood pressure was maintained. There was an oozing ulceration in upper outer quadrant of the left breast with underlying huge lump measuring 15 × 15 cm occupying the upper outer, lower outer and upper inner quadrants with deformed shape of the breast (a). The skin surrounding the ulcer was erythematous and edematous. Axilla did not show lymphadenopathy.
Before the development of breast lump, the patient had itchy lesion at the same site. The patient unfortunately attributed all these events to that itchy lesion and sought help late. There was no history of headache, shortness of breath, abdominal distension or bone pain.
On investigating the patient, she was severely anemic with hemoglobin of 5 gm% with normal total and differential counts. Coagulation parameters and liver function tests were normal. Chest X-ray showed no evidence of metastasis other than dense breast shadow on left side due to huge breast lump(a).
Mammogram revealed homogeneous radiodense lobulated mass occupying whole of left breast with subcutaneous thickening on the background of dense breast (b). Ultrasound (USG) of abdomen and pelvis did not reveal any abnormal findings. Trucut biopsy from the breast mass showed necrotic areas with fibrocollagenous tissue with proliferation of oval to elongated spindle cells showing mild degree of atypia.
After discussion about the possibility of metaplastic versus malignant phyllodes tumor, the patient underwent modified radical mastectomy (MRM). Histopathological examination showed maximum tumor size of 14 cm with increased stromal cellularity, loss of stromal-epithelial balance and frequent mitoses more than 45 per 10 high power fields typical of malignant phyllodes. All the resected margins, nipple and areola were free of tumor. Lymphovascular and perineural invasions were not identified. Seventeen axillary nodes retrieved were free of tumor.
Postoperatively patient gained weight and was doing well. Three months after surgery, the patient started developing progressively increasing headache, nausea and vomiting for which she got admitted in our center. There was no local recurrence. However on further investigations, she had a huge cystic lesion with mural nodule in her brain (b,c,d). Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of chest, abdomen and pelvis showed lesions in lower lobe of left lung (a) of size 3.9 × 3.6 cm of +40 Hounsfield unit (HU) in posterobasal segment and right adrenal gland of 5.8 × 5.1 cm of +30HU with significant enhancement in post-contrast images. Functional evaluation for the adrenal mass with urinary metanephrines and serum cortisol was negative. Patient refused biopsy from right adrenal gland and lung, but while preparing for burrhole biopsy from brain, patient succumbed to the disease. The patient underwent serial ultrasound of abdomen and pelvis during hospital stay which showed increase in size of 4 cm of adrenal mass in 15 days (tumor velocity).