Our patient is a 48-year-old white woman with a previous history of multiple ovarian cystadenomas requiring a total hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy. Her initial neurological symptoms started in April 2016, when she developed daily headaches. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) done at an outside institution showed small scattered fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensities and areas of susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) signal intensity in her bilateral occipital lobes, right frontal lobe, and left parietal lobe (see Fig. a–n). They were believed at the time to be a consequence of prior trauma. In September 2016, she reported continued headaches and significant fatigue, which prompted workup with a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE). This revealed a 3.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm mass within the left atrium which was felt to most likely represent a myxoma. She underwent successful resection of the lesion shortly thereafter (at another institution), with the outside pathology report confirming an atrial myxoma. Postoperative TTE showed no concern for residual disease. She was well until April 2017, when she experienced recurrent headaches that were now associated with new symptoms of fingertip numbness. A repeat MRI was performed and revealed multiple small, enhancing hemorrhagic lesions throughout her bilateral parietal, frontal, and occipital lobes. She then underwent conventional angiography which revealed multiple “mycotic-like” aneurysms in the right anterior and middle cerebral arterial distributions and left middle and posterior cerebral arterial distributions. An infection workup and repeat TTE were both negative. The lesions were followed with serial imaging; 6 months later in October 2017, she experienced an acute event with severe headache, left-sided visual field changes, and severe dizziness while driving, necessitating calling for emergency assistance. She was then transferred to our institution via helicopter for continued management.
An examination at the time of transfer was remarkable for short-term memory impairment as well as an incomplete homonymous hemianopia to the left. There were no appreciable skin lesions. Repeat imaging showed significant increase in size of the previously multiple enhancing hemorrhagic lesions with surrounding edema . A systemic workup revealed no evidence of additional lesions or recurrent cardiac tumor: computed tomography (CT) of her chest, abdomen, and pelvis; transesophageal echocardiography (TEE); and CT cardiac angiography.
A repeat cerebral angiogram was performed and again showed multiple “mycotic-like” aneurysms, a few of which had decreased in size since the prior examination. Given the unusual nature of her case, it was decided to obtain a brain biopsy to guide treatment. Examination of the histologic sections of the resected myxoma and recuts of the paraffin blocks requested from the outside institution confirmed the diagnosis and revealed clusters of rounded hyperchromatic cells displaying a lack of cohesion, forming small collections of cells separating from the surface of the myxoma . A biopsy of a right frontal lobe lesion confirmed suspicion of cerebral metastasis from the myxoma and myxomatous infiltration of cerebral blood vessels resulting in pseudoaneurysm formation and tumor cell migration into the parenchyma . Based on available reports in the literature and the rapid enlargement of her CNS lesions, she underwent whole brain radiation with hippocampal sparing (3750 cGy in 15 fractions). In light of recent studies, 6 months of memantine was administered to facilitate the prevention of cognitive dysfunction following whole brain radiotherapy [, ]. An MRI performed 3 months post radiation (March 2017) showed decrease size of dominant occipital lesions and stability of the remaining lesions.
The lesions have remained stable on the most recent MRIs: December 2018 (1 year post treatment) and June 2019 (18 months post treatment). At the present time, our patient is engaged in cognitive, ocular, and physical therapy to ameliorate the disabilities caused by the cerebral metastases and her subsequent treatments. Whole exome analysis was then performed on tissue from cardiac myxoma, brain metastasis, and ovarian cystadenoma revealing somatic mutations in PRKAR1A within the cardiac tumor and brain metastasis, but not in the tissue from the ovarian cystadenomas.
Cardiac surgery at an outside hospital revealed a 3.5 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm myxoma consisting of a complex papillary structure comprising grape-like clusters organized into an arborizing network . Microscopy of histologic sections prepared at Yale from two paraffin tissue blocks confirmed the myxoma’s arborizing structure lined by lepidic cells overlying the majority of the surfaces. The tumor’s myxoid matrix was interspersed with clusters and linear strings of cells comprising abortive endothelial-like structures . In addition, at the surface there were several foci of clusters of rounded, hyperchromatic cells displaying a lack of cohesion, forming small collections of cells separating from the surface of the myxoma .
Tumor tissue obtained from the brain biopsy in an imaging-confirmed area at Yale New Haven-Smilow Hospital was studied by microscopy and immunohistochemistry. Staining with an anti-calretinin antibody revealed an arterial vessel with its endothelial lining replaced by calretinin-positive myxoma cells that had infiltrated focally into adjacent brain parenchyma . The subendothelium of the vessel was replaced with myxoid matrix and myxoma cells that were seen invading through the media, breaching the internal and external elastic lamina (dashed lines; Fig. b, c). The myxoma tumor cells also stained positively for SMA and CD31 (data not shown).
In 1997 our patient underwent bilateral ovarian biopsies at an outside hospital, from which the diagnosis of papillary serous cystadenomas was made. The slides were reviewed at the time of her current admission and the diagnosis confirmed. Sections cut from the requested paraffin blocks of the cardiac myxoma and the ovarian tissues from the outside hospitals were utilized for whole exome sequencing.