A 15-month-old Caucasian boy presented with a history of progressive abdominal distension for a 6-week duration. He was experiencing no renal or gastrointestinal symptoms and his routine antenatal scans at 20 weeks gestation were reported as normal. Physical examination showed him to be unwell, with a pulse rate of 150 beats/minute and blood pressure of 108 per 82 mmHg. He had a largely distended and tense abdomen, with general discomfort on palpation but no signs of peritonitis. There was, however, an ill-defined cystic mass palpable in the right side of his abdomen.
No abnormalities were evident from routine blood tests (haematology and coagulation, biochemistry, C-reactive protein and liver function tests). Further laboratory measurements of urinary electrolytes, alpha-feto protein and beta human chorionic gonadotropin levels were also all within normal limits. An abdominal ultrasound scan showed a large, cystic, multiseptated mass containing a small solid nodule, which was suspected of malignancy. The lesion was located in his right flank which extended across the midline and inferiorly into the pelvis. The origin of this mass could not be identified. A chest, abdominal and pelvic computed tomographic scan was performed, that showed a 14.7 × 13.6 × 15.2 cm complex septated cystic mass arising from the peritoneum, containing enhancing septae and solid nodules . The right kidney was seen to be mildly hydronephrotic and displaced supero-laterally but appeared separate from the mass. The left kidney was reported normal in size and texture. No intrathoracic and abdominal lymphadenopathy was reported. The overall impression was of a teratoma with a differential of mesenchymal hamartoma or a complicated mesenteric cyst.
On day 6 of his admission, an exploratory laparotomy was performed due to increasing pain and distress suffered by the patient. The operative finding was a large cyst arising from the lower pole of the right kidney which was adherent to the duodenum, caecal mesentery, and colonic mesentery. The cyst was completely excised and a right nephro-ureterectomy was also carried out. The histology of the mass was reported as originating from the kidney with segmental dysplasia and haemorrhagic cyst formation, suggesting a benign multilocular renal cyst. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient is well at 5 years of age.