A 74-year-old Chinese woman (gravida 3 para 3) was admitted to the emergency department with sudden onset of headache and right arm weakness for 2.5 h. She had a history of well-controlled hypertension and hyperlipemia, for which she took 5 mg of amlodipine daily and 10 mg of atorvastatin daily as instructed by her primary care provider. She had no family history of thrombotic disease and no history of venous thrombosis. She also denied any history of risk factors for thrombosis (e.g., oral contraceptives, malignancy, and autoimmune diseases).
On admission, the patient’s vital signs were within normal limits except for a slightly elevated blood pressure of 141/89 mmHg. Her weight was 63 kg. Neurological examination showed Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 3 for the right arm. The National Institute of Health stroke scale (NIHSS) score at admission was 2. Non-contrast computed tomography (NCCT) was performed, and the radiologist reported no acute abnormalities . The emergent blood assay revealed no abnormalities except for an elevated D-dimer level at 2.4 µg/ml (normal range, 0–0.5 µg/ml). Contraindications for intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) were excluded. After obtaining informed consent from the patient, IVT with 54 mg alteplase was administered 3 h post-onset. The neurological deficits and headache progressively improved, and the NIHSS score 1 h after IVT was 0.
On day 2, the patient complained of headache and weakness of the right extremity (MRC grade 4/5). Her D-dimer level was 4.87 µg/ml. Other laboratory workups were negative and included blood routine tests, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), liver and renal function, lipids panel, glycated hemoglobin, homocysteine, infection panel, and tumor markers (e.g., carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, neuron-specific enolase, and cancer antigen-125). A repeat CT at 24 h showed no hemorrhage . Aspirin (300 mg/day) and rosuvastatin (20 mg/day) were administered as secondary prevention.
The brain MRI on day 3 revealed punctate abnormalities [hyperintensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging (FLAIR)] that neighbored the cerebral falx and left frontal sulcus . However, diffusion restrictions, which are the key parameters for identifying cerebral infarctions, were absent in the parenchyma on diffusion-weighted imaging. After consultation with radiologists, a convexity subarachnoid hemorrhage (cSAH) was considered. Given that the patient was clinically stable, aspirin was continued. CT angiography was performed on day 4 and did not find any aneurysm or arteriopathy. Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was excluded. However, filling defects of CoVs and compensatory expansion of the adjacent veins were present . We then re-evaluated the existing radiographic data and found that punctate hyperdensities within the left frontal sulci, which were ignored on the initial NCCT scans, were consistent with the punctate abnormalities on MRI. The punctate hyperdensities were reduced in the repeated CT acquired 24 h after IVT, which suggested thrombi in the cortical veins. Moreover, lower-extremity intermuscular venous thrombosis was identified by ultrasonography. Thus, ICoVT was highly suspected.
The patient complained of severe headache and progression of right limb weakness (MRC grade 3/5). The MRI on the night of day 4 showed a venous infarction in the frontal lobe . Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) showed curvilinear, serpentine-exaggerated susceptibility within the sulcus, which indicated thrombosed veins in the acute phase . The original MRI abnormality was SWI hyperintensive, which corresponded to subacute vein thrombosis. Therefore, ICoVT was confirmed.
The workup for acquired and inherited hypercoagulability [e.g., antinuclear antibody, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid factor, procalcitonin, protein C, protein S, antithrombin III, coagulation factor activities panel, thrombophilia gene panel, lupus anticoagulant (LA), anticardiolipin (aCL)], and anti-β2-glycoprotein-I (aβ2GPI) antibodies] was performed on the morning of day 5 before the patient underwent anticoagulation. Additionally, screening for an underlying malignancy was initiated, including chest CT, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), abdominal ultrasound, and transvaginal ultrasound. However, no evidence of malignancy was found. In the absence of infective symptoms, systemic infection (e.g., infective endocarditis, pulmonary infection, and urinary infection) was excluded according to normal white blood cell count, urine analysis, CRP, ESR, procalcitonin TTE, and chest CT. Laboratory workup reported the next day were positive for LA (dilute Russel viper venom time normalized ratio, 1.78; normal range, 0.7–1.2), aCL IgG (77 IU/ml; normal range, <20 U/ml), aCL IgA (63 IU/ml; normal range, < 20 U/ml), aβ2GPI IgG (89 IU/ml; normal range, <20 U/ml), aβ2GPI IgA (65 IU/ml; normal range, <20 U/ml). Factor VIII, Factor VII, and von Willebrand factors significantly increased by 225% (normal range, 50%–150%), 212% (normal range, 50%–150%), and 160% (normal range, 50%–150%), respectively.
Aspirin was stopped on the morning of day 5, and low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) was started at a dose of 0.4 ml every 12 h according to the 2019 Chinese guidelines for clinical management of CVST . On the dawn of day 6, the patient experienced an episode of generalized tonic–clonic seizures, which was controlled with diazepam and levetiracetam (0.5 g twice per day). Electroencephalogram showed epileptiform discharges in the left frontal lobe. An enlargement in the venous infarction was observed on the re-examination CT . According to the institutional periprocedural protocol, lumbar puncture was scheduled 24 h after the final administration of LMWH. The cerebrospinal fluid pressure was 160 mmH2O, and cerebrospinal fluid analyses were all within the normal range. Thus, intracranial infection, SAH, and intracranial hypertension were subsequently excluded. LMWH was restarted 4 h after the lumbar puncture.
MR black-blood-thrombus imaging (MRBTI) on day 7 showed vein thrombosis that extended proximally to the superior sagittal sinus . MR venography showed filling defects of the left frontal and partial cortical veins . The patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly, and she developed drowsiness and lethargy; moreover, the muscle strength of her right limbs dropped to grade 1. We employed a multidisciplinary approach combining neurointervention, rheumatology, and hematology consultations. The diagnosis of ICoVT and possible APS was made, and hydroxychloroquine was additionally prescribed. LMWH was recommended to be adjusted with an anti-Xa chromogenic assay. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was scheduled to evaluate whether direct intrasinus thrombolysis should be performed.
On day 8, peak anti-Xa was 0.4 IU/ml, and LMWH was increased to 0.6 ml twice per day. DSA demonstrated multiple thromboses of superior and internal cerebral veins without sinus thrombosis . However, thrombolysis was negated by the neurointerventionalist. The conditions continued to worsen progressively, with enlargement of the venous infarction in the CT on day 10 . Peak anti-Xa was 0.71 IU/ml, and a high-intensity LMWH dose of 0.8 ml twice per day was taken with a goal of achieving 0.8–1.0 IU/ml.
On day 12, the patient progressed to a coma, and the MRI showed a large intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) in the left frontoparietal lobe and transtentorial herniation . Decompressive craniectomy was performed immediately . LMWH was restarted 3 days after the operation at a dose of 0.4 ml twice per day based on the risk of hemorrhage. Warfarin was given 3 weeks after craniectomy. The patient’s symptoms did not improve significantly after surgery and was thus transferred to a rehabilitation hospital. At the 3-month follow-up, serum aCL IgG (51 IU/ml) and aβ2GPI IgG (71 IU/ml) were positive, and a diagnosis of primary APS was established. LA was not retested because of long-term warfarin therapy. The patient remained aphasic and hemiplegic. Her modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score was 5. The timeline of the case is showed in the .