A 66-year-old female presented with a several weeks history of back pain following mechanical injury. Radiographs ( and ) and follow-up computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy (-) showed a new anterior mediastinal mass and metastatic bony lesions to the T6-T8 vertebrae.
At her 1-month visit, she endorsed left-sided chest pain with numbness in her left arm and was sent to the emergency department. Imaging revealed an extra-axial mass within the left posterior fossa and a left anterior mediastinal mass measuring 5.7 × 3.5 cm with internal calcifications. Also seen was a T7 compression deformity and associated soft-tissue mass eroding through the T7 body, intervertebral disk, and superior endplate of the T8 vertebral body with significant retropulsion and canal and left neural foraminal stenosis ( and ). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and hospitalization were recommended; however, she left against medical advice.
The original anterior mediastinal tumor core-needle biopsy showed a sold spindle cell epithelial neoplasm consistent with the WHO type A thymoma. The degree of anaplasia was mild with proliferative index as measured by Ki-67 of only 2%. Lymphocytic infiltration was scant. The lesion stained positive with cytokeratin AE1/3, p63, and PAX8. The lymphocytic component stained positive with LCA and CD3 and negative with TdT. The metastatic lesion to the vertebral body T8 had similar morphology and was composed of similar spindle cells . Occasional mitosis was noted and the proliferative index was overall low but higher than the limited material on the mediastinal biopsy, near 10% . The special stains showed positive results with AE1/3 , EMA, p16, PAX8 , BCL-2, and vimentin and negative results with actin, desmin, CD117, s100, cdx2, chromogranin, synaptophysin, HMB-45, melan-A, Sox10, MITF, and reticulin.
She endorsed persistent symptoms and was again sent to the emergency department. Repeat CT imaging showed a lytic lesion within the T7 and T8 vertebral bodies, with a pathologic burst fracture and near collapse of T7. There was approximately 40° of focal kyphosis, bony retropulsion, and soft-tissue tumor within the canal. Repeat MRI found no other areas of cord compression ( and ). Brain MRI showed two intramedullary osseous metastatic lesions ( and ). T7 and T8 corpectomy with posterior instrumentation and fusion from T4-T11 was performed ( and ). She was discharged on post-operative day 7.
Plans were made for surveillance of her brain lesions over the next 4 months. Intraoperative pathology was consistent with metastatic thymic carcinoma and small spindle cell type. At 3.5 months post-operative, she was ambulating without any assistive devices, completed radiation therapy, and had plans for chemotherapy ( and ). At 2 year, she was ambulating without issue and had completed chemotherapy without signs of recurrent metastases.