We report a case of a 29-year-old male, who underwent heart transplantation for dilated cardiomyopathy, bridged to transplant with left ventricular assist device (LVAD) and transplanted semi-urgently due to LVAD-related sepsis. At the time of transplantation, T-cell crossmatch was negative, but B-cell crossmatch was weakly positive. Low titre human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies were detected including DQ7 (MFI 628). Induction immunosuppression included basiliximab at Day 0 and Day 4 and three doses of 125 mg intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone. This was followed by 1 mg/kg per day oral prednisolone in divided doses weaning by 5 mg/day. Additionally, the patient received cyclosporin and mycophenolate from Day 1 post-transplant.
His post-transplant course was complicated by presentation with recurrent exertional dyspnoea, with clinical findings consistent with heart failure. This was diagnosed as multiple episodes of acute cellular and humoral rejection with graft dysfunction. Graft dysfunction with severely impaired left ventricular systolic function (estimated ejection fraction 30–35%) was first noted in at 2.5 years post-transplant, with concomitant moderate right ventricular dysfunction. Three episodes of acute cellular rejection (Grade 3A/2R) requiring treatment occurred, starting at 12 months post-transplant, and four episodes of AMR (pAMR Grade 2) started at 2.5 years post-transplant. Multiple Classes I and II DSAs were detected, including to complement-binding DQ7 with mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) when first measured 2.5 years after transplantation. Maintenance therapy was quadruple oral immunosuppressive therapy (mycophenolate, prednisolone, everolimus, and tacrolimus) from 12 months onwards. Treatment for AMR included multiple cycles of methylprednisolone, plasmapheresis, and IV immunoglobulin (IVIG), with adjuvant rituximab (375 mg/m2 via IV infusion), bortezomib (3 mg subcutaneously), splenic irradiation (350 Gy in twice weekly 50 Gy fractions) in combination with further rituximab and tocilizumab (800 mg via IV infusion monthly) in order of escalation, none of which produced a sustained response. details the timeline and treatment course. There was persistent moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction 35–40%), elevated filling pressures, and cardiac index of 2.0 L/min/m2 coinciding with functional class (FC) III–IV heart failure symptoms. Coronary angiography was performed at 5 and 6 years after transplantation, showed allograft vasculopathy with a chronically occluded right coronary artery and minor irregularities of the left coronary system, not amenable to revascularization.
Donor-specific anti-HLA antibodies to DQ7 were persistently elevated with strongly positive C1q testing. It was decided to treat with a loading regimen of eculizumab (1200 mg on Day 1, 900 mg on Day 2, and 900 mg on Weeks 2, 3, and 4), after five further plasma exchanges, and fortnightly 1200 mg eculizumab thereafter. Given the extensive immunosuppression regimen, prophylaxis with itraconazole, valganciclovir, and amoxicillin was used for fungal, cytomegalovirus, and encapsulated bacteria prophylaxis, respectively. Prophylactic treatment was effective in protecting against infection, and this patient suffered no infective complications of the aggressive immunosuppressive strategy undertaken.
After initiation of eculizumab, ejection fraction improved to 45% and heart failure symptoms reduced to FC II. The MFI for DQ7 initially dropped to <10 000 but slowly trended upward. Despite this, he experienced the first sustained improvement in heart failure symptoms and graft function in over 3 years. However, persistent diastolic dysfunction and restrictive physiology were noted at echocardiography.
The decision for relisting was taken after clinical stabilization. Given that ongoing diastolic dysfunction and restrictive physiology led to ongoing New York Heart Association functional Class II symptoms and advanced coronary allograft vasculopathy, felt unlikely to respond to immunosuppressive therapy, as well as his young age and potential infective implications of long-term eculizumab, the patient was relisted for transplantation, and successfully transplanted 8 years following initial transplantation and 5 months after commencing eculizumab. Concomitant thymectomy was performed at retransplantation. Both T and B cell crossmatch were negative, but he had persistent strong DSAs. Notably, the recipient and organ were matched at DQ7.
He underwent pre-emptive plasmapheresis at the time of transplantation and maintained on fortnightly 1200 mg eculizumab empirically for 3 months post-retransplantation, as well as usual post-transplant quadruple immunosuppressive regimen including prednisolone, tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and everolimus. Now, almost 3 years after transplant, there have not been any episodes of rejection and graft function is normal. As part of routine protocol, we continued to monitor DSAs following the second allograft transplant coinciding with endomyocardial biopsy. We surveilled DSAs up to 1 year after transplantation, at weekly for the first month and then fortnightly from months 2–3, monthly at months 4–6, and then at 9 and 12 months. Because DQ7 testing is part of routine Luminex monitoring after transplant, continued monitoring has been performed but given matched transplant, weight has not been placed on these results.
Explanted heart showed accelerated coronary and intramyocardial vasculopathy, leading to diffuse multifocal ischaemic cardiomyopathy with subsequent myopathic features.