A 46-year-old West Indian man presented to our emergency department with a two-day history of intermittent passage of blood from the rectum. This was associated with coffee-ground vomitus and symptoms of anemia. He gave a past history of peptic ulcer disease. He had no history of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use. Three weeks previously, the patient had noted jaundice associated with pruritus, dark urine, constitutional symptoms and back pain. Examination revealed the patient to be anemic, jaundiced and hemodynamically normal. Minimal epigastric tenderness was elicited and a Courvoisier's gall bladder palpated. Digital rectal examination revealed altered blood, and nasogastric drainage revealed coffee-ground material.
A diagnosis of an upper gastrointestinal bleed secondary to peptic ulcer disease was made. However, diagnoses of periampullary pancreatic carcinoma or locally advanced gastric carcinoma were also considered. Initial blood investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 8.9 g/dL. Coagulation studies and electrolytes were normal. Liver function tests suggested obstructive jaundice. Abdominal sonography showed a normal liver with a distended (109 mL) gall bladder and dilated biliary system. The pancreas appeared bulky and heterogeneous.
Further evaluation of the pancreatic lesion was planned. However, our patient's condition became complicated by persistent bleeding from the rectum and a resultant fall in his hemoglobin level to 4.4 g/dL over a 2-day period. Though he remained hemodynamically normal, limited blood availability, continued bleeding and the unavailability of endoscopy prompted a decision to proceed to laparotomy. At laparotomy, an actively bleeding ulcer was identified in the first part of the duodenum and it was oversewn with good effect. A bosselated mass, not related to the ulcer, was noted occupying the head and neck of the pancreas. There was no evidence of local invasion. A biopsy of the pancreatic mass was taken.
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged five days postoperatively. Histological analysis of the pancreatic biopsy revealed plasmacytoma . Following this diagnosis, appropriate investigations for multiple myeloma were initiated in the outpatient clinic. Rouleaux formation was noted on blood film, and lytic lesions were noted in the skull, pelvis and proximal femora , both humeri, scapulae, clavicles and in multiple ribs. A complete collapse of the 7th thoracic vertebra was also evident. Based on these findings, the patient was re-evaluated as having multiple myeloma with extramedullary plasmacytoma of the pancreas. Unfortunately, the patient defaulted from follow-up before further investigation and treatment, including bone marrow biopsy, and died from his illness seven months after initial presentation.