A 26-year-old gravida 2, para 2 Caucasian woman presented with a 2-day history of bright red rectal and vaginal bleeding with abdominal cramping. Her reported last menstrual period was approximately 8 weeks prior. The patient’s history was notable for intermittent rectal bleeding for the past 2 years that had been attributed to postpartum hemorrhoids. Her serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) was elevated at 1138 mIU/ml, and an in-office ultrasound revealed an 8-cm right-sided mass, strongly suggestive of an ectopic pregnancy. Diagnostic laparoscopy did not reveal an ectopic pregnancy; however, follow-up laboratory tests 1 week later showed a rise in β-hCG to 5511 mIU/ml. Repeat ultrasound showed an 8.9-mm mass but did not identify any intrauterine or extrauterine gestation. The patient was given a dose of methotrexate; however, she continued to experience intermittent lower abdominal cramping and vaginal bleeding. Follow-up laboratory tests 1 week later showed that her β-hCG had tripled to 16,326 mIU/ml. Repeat ultrasound was consistent with previous examinations showing a nonspecific heterogeneous right-sided mass but no gestational sac. The patient was given a second dose of methotrexate. She failed to follow up with repeat laboratory work as scheduled, and she continued to experience right lower quadrant pressure and intermittent vaginal bleeding. When she presented 15 days later, her repeat β-hCG had risen to 101,290 mIU/ml, at which time she was emergently admitted to the hospital. Computed tomography (CT) showed numerous hepatic masses measuring up to 2.3 cm scattered throughout the liver, strongly suggestive of widespread metastatic disease . An exploratory laparotomy revealed a sigmoid mass that almost completely obstructed the colon. A segmental resection of the sigmoid colon was performed with colostomy, as well as excisional biopsy of one of the hepatic nodules. Preliminary pathology showed high-grade adenocarcinoma of the colon.
The patient tolerated surgery well and was discharged to home to recover while arrangements for treatment were made, pending final pathological results. Contrary to expectations, the patient’s β-hCG continued to rise postoperatively. Two weeks after surgery, the patient returned to the hospital with new right upper quadrant and right chest wall pain with shortness of breath. Her β-hCG had markedly increased to 792,770 mIU/ml, and repeat CT showed new scattered pulmonary nodules and an interval increase in the size and number of hepatic lesions. Additional laboratory tests showed anemia, hyperbilirubinemia, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase. She was febrile and hypotensive and experienced episodes of tachycardia and dysrhythmia. The following day, updated pathological analysis noted invasive, high-grade colonic adenocarcinoma merging with a very poorly differentiated high-grade malignancy showing positivity for hCG, concerning for choriocarcinoma. Multiple medical colleagues, specialists, and pathologists were consulted, and specimens were sent to the Mayo Clinic for further analysis.
The patient continued to deteriorate clinically, with continued fevers, leukocytosis, and anemia, which were managed with antibiotics and transfusions. The results of blood cultures and a chest x-ray were negative, and the patient’s symptoms were ruled to be secondary to her malignancy. Given her rapidly worsening clinical picture and her tumor burden burgeoning in only 2 weeks, the decision was made to initiate FOLFOX therapy (folinic acid, fluorouracil, oxaliplatin). The patient received one dose and was discharged to home 1 week later. The following week, final pathology from the Mayo Clinic confirmed colon adenocarcinoma mixed with choriocarcinoma. Repeat laboratory tests showed continued increase in β-hCG to 916,335 mIU/ml. In light of the confirmed pathology and continued rise in β-hCG, the decision was made to modify therapy to a choriocarcinoma-targeted EMA/CO regimen (etoposide, methotrexate, actinomycin D, cyclophosphamide, vincristine) [, ].
Two weeks after initiation of EMA/CO, the patient’s β-hCG levels had dramatically dropped to 14,981 mIU/ml. After only five cycles, her β-hCG was 17 mIU/ml, and imaging showed a significant decrease in the size and number of her innumerable hepatic lesions , with almost complete resolution of her pulmonary disease. She continued to have marked radiographic response to EMA/CO therapy and a continued decline in β-hCG, with the last quantitative measurement showing 2.7 mIU/ml after nine cycles.
The patient had completed a total of 14 cycles of EMA/CO when CT showed mild interval progression of some hepatic lesions . A core needle biopsy of one of the lesions showed metastatic adenocarcinoma consistent with colon cancer. The patient also began to experience abdominal pain, diarrhea, and fevers and was found to have gram-negative bacteremia. Following treatment with antibiotics, the patient was initiated on a FOLFOX + bevacizumab regimen. After five cycles of FOLFOX + bevacizumab, scans showed further progression of her lung lesions and mixed response of the liver lesions . Subsequently, her treatment regimen was changed to FOLFIRI (folinic acid, fluorouracil, irinotecan) + bevacizumab. The patient received one cycle of FOLFIRI + bevacizumab and was alive 18 months after her initial diagnosis.