A 65-year-old male with a history of recurrent stage 3A bladder cancer following trimodal therapy and subsequent disease recurrence, a radical cystoprostatectomy and ileal-conduit formation was performed. The patient developed early strictures at the distal left ureteral anastomoses with hydronephrosis. The stricture was treated with balloon ureteroplasty and insertion of a reverse nephroureterostomy (Hobbs) catheter. The patient later developed right sided hydronephrosis, with nephrostomy placed after failed attempt at reverse Hobbs insertion. Around the same time, the patient was complaining of significant abdominal and flank pain for which no obvious cause was identified. This was in the context of persistently low hemoglobin (< 100) for approximately 12 months. He was started on low dose apixaban after two recent episodes of pulmonary embolism, and later developed duodenal ulcers. His creatinine had been increasing steadily to > 200. He also developed septicemia with elevated neutrophils. A month later, the patient presented to the Emergency Department with new presyncope and 300 ml of dark red blood in the ileal-conduit ostomy appliance. The left reverse Hobbs was exchanged as it had migrated into the distal left ureter. Four days later, it had migrated again, thought to be due to multiple clots dilating the left collecting system, with ongoing blood product through the ileal-conduit raising suspicion of a UAF. Of note, the right nephrostomy bag was clear. Upon consultation with interventional radiology, preparation was made to provide endovascular treatment if active hemorrhage was elucidated. A prior staging CT had demonstrated the reverse Hobbs catheter traversing closely anterior to the common iliac arteries bilaterally, as well as intimately posterior to the distal IMA branches , with left hydronephrosis (likely secondary to blood products in the collecting system).
The patient arrived in our department vitally stable and informed consent was obtained. A right nephrostomy and left reverse Hobbs were in-situ. The urostomy appliance contained sanguineous fluid. The existing left reverse Hobbs had retracted compared to previous. Injected contrast opacified the ileal-conduit, but not the left ureter and renal pelvis suggesting possible distal blockage (likely by blood products). The tube was rewired and removed over a super stiff Amplatz wire and mixed blood products were seen from the ostomy, suggesting active hemorrhage. At this point, the patient remained vitally stable. A 10Fr, 40 cm Flexor Check-Flo II Introducer sheath was quickly advanced over the wire to tamponade and perform a nephroureterogram while retracting the sheath to interrogate the ureter. Multiple filling defects were seen within the renal pelvis and dilated proximal ureter, consistent with blood clots . Within the distal ureter, there was faint filling of a tubular structure intersecting with the ureter, likely a vessel branch. Digitally subtracted ureterogram was performed demonstrating a fistula between the distal ureter and an IMA branch .
The patient began to bleed more briskly and became unstable (tachycardia to the 160 s bpm), prompting a Code Omega (massive transfusion protocol) to be called. Colloid resuscitation was initiated at maximal rate. A 10 Fr reverse Hobbs was inserted to tamponade. Ultrasound guidance and Seldinger technique was used for retrograde right CFA access. A 5-Fr SOS with Bentson wire were used to engage the IMA. Angiogram demonstrated active extravasation of the superior rectal artery into the ileal-conduit .
A 2.4 Fr Progreat microcatheter and 0.018″ Gold-tip glide wire were advanced beyond the extravasation into the mesenteric portion of the superior rectal artery, and coil embolization was performed across the intersection between the IMA and ureter with eight 5-2 mm Tornado Microcoils (0.018in). Subsequent angiography demonstrated exclusion of the segment of extravasation, preserving distal perfusion of the rectosigmoid region . The patient was resuscitated with three units of blood and stabilized relatively quickly. The Hobbs catheter was retracted over the wire, and angiogram was repeated to confirm resolution of active extravasation. The 10-Fr reverse Hobbs catheter was reinserted. The patient was stable enough to be transferred to the floor.
The patient recovered in the hospital for another 10 days and was discharged.
CT imaging two days post embolization demonstrated persistent left hydronephrosis, and blood clots within left renal pelvis and proximal ureter, similar to 11 days prior to embolization, which was not unexpected, . Follow up imaging a month later demonstrated resolution of blood clots within the left urinary system, with persistent left hydronephrosis, . The left reverse Hobbs was removed, and left nephrostomy inserted without recurrent bleeding, .