A 29-year-old Greek female right-handed hairdresser presented in our outpatient unit with a draining cyst in the palm of her left hand. Nineteen years ago, after accidental drop of strong glue between her middle and ring fingers, a papule had developed in the third web space. She reported that customers' short cut hair often penetrated the third web space skin. She was otherwise healthy and had never suffered from another skin disease. In September of 2003, however, while in pregnancy, she had first reported symptoms consistent with acute inflammation on the palm of her left hand. The papule had developed into sinus, gained connection within the skin and evolved into fistula with hairs protruding in the palm of the left hand. Although the patient had already noticed these alterations, she did not pay much attention to the lesions, as they did not excruciate her.
Two years later she visited our outpatient unit with a chronic sinus on the palm of her left hand. The drainage had persisted for two weeks and had not resolved with oral antibiotic therapy. The sinus was 4 cm long, it had two external openings, in the palm of the hand and in the third web space, and the track contained multiple hairs of different colours . Palpation of the interdigital fold provoked discharge of purulent fluid. Examination of the remaining interdigital spaces of both hands and feet did not reveal any pathological lesions. Furthermore, no signs of lymphadenitis occurred.
A probe was passed along the sinus . Surgical excision of an area of chronic inflammatory tissue with a sinus tract and multiple visible hairs was carried out under local anesthetic. The drainage and discomfort resolved immediately after the excision. After careful curettage, since all the granular tissue had been removed, the skin was closed by primary intention (two layers). In this way, the functional result could be better and achieved quicker. The patient was discharged the same day and a course of oral antibiotic therapy (amoxycillin-clavulanic acid: 1 g × 2) was administered for 4 days.
Within 1 week the wound healed well . Histology revealed epithelial-lined tract with multiple embedded hairs and surrounding foreign body reaction granuloma. There has been no recurrence over the next 12 months and she continues working as a hairdresser.