A 78-year-old Hispanic female with a significant past medical history of type 2
diabetes mellitus, hypertension and hypothyroidism presented with altered mental
status. She was brought to the emergency department by her family members who
assisted with history gathering. According to her family, the patient had a cough
and worsening shortness of breath over 3 days prior to admission unrelieved by
over-the-counter antihistamine and antitussive medications. The family did not know
how long she had been diabetic or hypertensive. Nor could they list her medications.
Upon presentation she was lethargic, had labored breathing and was lying in bed
shaking. Her blood pressure was 142/67 mmHg in the supine position, heart rate
114 bpm, axillary temperature 36.7°C and she weighed 51.7 kg. On physical
examination, she was ill-appearing, obtunded, not following verbal commands and with
Glasgow coma scale of 9. She had decreased breath sounds over the left lung lower
field. The examination of the heart, abdomen and extremities was normal. On
neurological examination, she had hyperreflexia at the patellar and ankle joints, as
well as stimulated bilateral clonus and positive Babinski sign. The screening blood
tests performed upon her admission to the hospital were consistent with severe HHS.
Her initial laboratory findings revealed glucose 635 mg/dL (normal: 70–105), sodium
175 mEq/L (corrected Na: 188 mEq/L) (normal: 135–145 mEq/L), blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) 76 mg/dL (normal: 6–20 mg/dL), creatinine 1.61 mg/dL (normal: 0.5–1.2 mg/dL)
with a serum osmolality 410 mOsm/kg (normal: 280–300 mOsm/kg). Her urine ketones
were negative. On arterial blood gas her pH was 7.43, and HCO3 29 mEq/L
(normal: 22–29). Her initial hemoglobin (Hgb) was 16.8 g/dL, white blood cell count
(WBC) 18.3 × 103/µL and platelet count 194 × 103/µL. The
initial chest X-ray and noncontrast head computed tomogram (CT) were negative with
the head CT showing only mild diffuse cortical atrophy, proportional to the size of
the ventricular system. The calculated water deficit on admission was about 5.5 L.
In the emergency department, aggressive fluid resuscitation for volume replacement
was started using normal saline (NS), which initially caused worsening in sodium
values to 180 mEq/L (corrected Na: 193 mEq/L). After 2 L of NS, WBC was
23.2 × 103/µL, Hgb was 15.1 g/dL, platelet was
160 × 103/µL and her HCO3 was within normal limits in our
laboratory at 28 HCO3 mEq/L. She was admitted to the intensive care unit
(ICU), and nephrology was consulted. She was started on 0.45% NS and subsequently
switched to 5% dextrose in water. The sodium began to trend down, while maintaining
a mean steady decrease of 6 mEq/L of sodium daily, resulting in desired sodium range
within 5 days .
An insulin drip was placed to control the severe hyperglycemia, which resolved
steadily over the first 48 h. The insulin drip was discontinued, and insulin
glargine with correctional insulin lispro was started. An abdominal pelvic CT was
negative. Due to her neurological findings, a continuous EEG (cEEG) was ordered,
which showed left frontocentral and temporal PLEDs on day 1. By day 2, the cEEG
showed only abnormal slowing without epileptiform discharges. During the
hospitalization, a nasogastric tube was placed and tube feeds were started due to
her poor mentation. Her kidney function improved and returned to baseline. She was
also found to have a left lower lobe infiltrate and was treated for community
acquired pneumonia. She was initially treated with ceftriaxone and azithromycin;
however, over the hospital course she clinically improved and was switched over to
oral cephalexin to finish the course. Her mental status improved and returned back
to baseline. In order to prevent potential aspiration, she underwent a successful
swallow study with modified barium and was started on regular diabetic diet. She
stayed in the hospital for 7 days and was diagnosed with severe hypernatremia
secondary to osmotic diuresis and dehydration from HHS. Her hemoglobin A1c was found
to be 9.9%, and upon discharge, she was placed on metformin, insulin glargine and
insulin lispro sliding scale. Due to her decline in functional status and
deconditioning, she was discharged to a skilled nursing facility. She received
diabetes teaching, which included lifestyle modifications, proper nutrition, insulin
administration and glucose checks. Unfortunately, there was no good follow-up with
the patient, because she returned to her home abroad.