A 52-year-old multiparous Japanese woman was referred to our hospital with a complaint of a feeling of abdominal fullness. She had uterine leiomyoma that had been observed for 9 years, and a history of chronic thyroiditis. Aside from the earlier observed leiomyoma, a previously unnoticed soft mass at the uterine cervix was palpable on pelvic examination. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging with fat suppression revealed a swollen uterine corpus with leiomyoma, and suggested a uterine cervical lesion with a low signal intensity . Circulating levels of CA 125 and CA 19–9 were within the reference range at 16.3 and 11 U/mL, respectively. Hysterectomy was performed with a clinical diagnosis of multiple leiomyomas and an unknown cervical tumor. Postoperatively, the patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy (gemcitabine plus docetaxel) and did well for the next 3 months, with neither local recurrence nor distant metastasis on chest and abdominal computed tomography imaging.
The enlarged uterus was 8 × 14 × 8.5 cm in size. Several elastic, hard, whitish masses were found in the uterine corpus, consistent with leiomyoma. In addition, an elastic, soft gray-white hemorrhagic mass measuring 8 × 6 × 5 cm was observed at the anterior wall of the uterine cervix .
Histologically, the cervical mass was below the squamous epithelium and consisted of a nest-like proliferation of less cohesive, epithelioid tumor cells that had rounded nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. The tumor cells had no marked nuclear pleomorphism and prominent nucleoli, and a coarse chromatin pattern was found in the nucleus. Mitotic figures were moderately frequent (4 per high-power field) but atypical mitoses were not present . The tumor showed a confluent growth pattern and individual nests of tumor cells were compartmentalized by intricate vasculature . There was no apparent involvement of myometrial smooth muscle cells. Foci of extensive necrosis and hemorrhage were found in some areas. A low-grade ESS component, showing uniform cells with round to spindle-shaped nuclei, which were whorled around arteriole-type vessels, was not coexistent in the lesion.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for vimentin (clone V9, DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), α-smooth muscle actin (αSMA; clone 1A4, DAKO; Fig. ), muscle-specific actin (clone HHF-35, DAKO), and heavy caldesmon (clone h-CD, DAKO), with moderate positivity for c-kit (DAKO; Fig. ), estrogen receptor (ER; clone SP1, Ventana, Tucson, AZ; Fig. ), and progesterone receptor (PgR; clone 1E2, Ventana). In contrast, the cells were negative for pan-cytokeratin (clone AE1/AE3, DAKO), desmin (clone D33, DAKO), CD10 (clone 56C6, Novocastra, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom), CD34 (clone QBEnd10, DAKO), p16 (clone E6H4, Roche, Basel, Switzerland), DOG1 (clone K9, Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany) and cyclin D1 (Biocare, Concord, CA). The Ki-67 (clone 30–9, Roche) labeling index of the neoplastic cells was 19.5%. These histological and immunohistochemical findings suggested a differential diagnosis of non-epithelial tumor of the uterus, particularly high-grade ESS, epithelioid leiomyosarcoma, or uterine GIST.
FISH was performed for further molecular biological observations. To detect YWHAE rearrangement derived from chromosomal translocation of t(10;17)(q22;p13)—we used a custom dual-color, split-signal YWHAE probe set for the YWHAE locus on chromosome 17p13 (Chromosome Science Lab, Inc., Sapporo, Japan). The probe set consisted of a 333-kilobase (kb) sequence labeled with SpectrumGreen (telomeric [RP11-143 L7 and RP11-22G12]) and a 303-kb sequence labeled with SpectrumOrange (centromeric [RP11-100 F18 and RP11-60C18]). Rearrangements in the NUTM2A and NUTM2B genes at 10q23 and 10q22, respectively, were characterized using a custom break-apart probe design. The probes were synthesized using oligo-based SureFISH technology (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) and labeled with FITC (5’ probe) and Cy3 (3′ probe) fluorophores. The analysis was performed with formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens sectioned into 3-μm-thick slices, as described previously . The split-signal rate of YWHAE, NUTM2A and NUTM2B was 18%, , 0 and 4%, respectively, when 50 nuclei were counted. In contrast, a JAZF1 split, which is a major gene translocation in low-grade ESS, was not detected.
To investigate KIT and PDGFRA gene mutations, direct sequence analysis was performed. Exons 9, 11, and 13 of the KIT gene and exon 18 of the PDGFRA gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction using the primers KITexon9F: GGC TTT TGT TTT CTT CCC TTT A, KITexon9R: ATG GTA GAC AGA GCC TAA ACA, KITexon11F: GAT CTA TTT TTC CCT TTC TCC C, KITexon11R: AGC CCC TGT TTC ATA CTG AC, KITexon13F: GCT TGA CAT CAG TTT GCC AG, KITexon13R: GCA GCT TGG ACA CGG CTT T, PDGFRAexon18F: CAG ATG GCT TGA TCC TGA GT, and PDGFRAexon18R: GAG GAT GAG CCT GTC CAG T. The amplified products were purified and sequenced. The sequences of KIT exons 9, 11, and 13 were wild type. In PDGFRA exon 18, substitution of nucleotide C to T, known as a single-nucleotide variant (rs2228230) was detected in one allele. The variant does not cause amino acid substitution. Thus, it was considered that there was no oncogenic mutation in KIT and PDGFRA genes in this tumor.