A 48-year-old-woman presented to our hospital with unbearable itching and stinging with black secretion on her right eye for 2 weeks. She had no specific ocular, chronic or immune disease. Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/20. Slit lamp examination revealed over three hundred of translucent ovoid nits and over twenty live adult P. pubis firmly attached to the base and shaft of eyelashes. Dry blood and faeces appeared as granular and dark dots on nearby eyelids, which the patient considered as “black secretion” . Lid margin vascular engorgement and mild hyperemia were observed in the conjunctiva. There was mild punctate defect on corneal epithelium. No nit, lice or any abnormal of ocular surface were observed in the left eye. The left cornea was clear and no vision decline. The patient was referred to dermatologist to detect potential phthiriasis lesions in other body parts. On dermatologic examination, lice were also detected in the pubic area. She had past history of sexual contacts with her husband. The search of sexually transmitted diseases was negative. Initial diagnosis of unilateral phthiriasis palpebrarum was made.
Mechanical removal of the lice and nits was attempted but failed as they were numerous. All eyelashes of the affected eye were trimmed with a scissors. Conjunctival sac was irrigated and lids margin was disinfected by compound iodine disinfectant cotton swab immediately and followed at weekly intervals. The patient was prescribed daily moxifloxacin eye ointment and fluorometholone eye drops four times a day for 2 weeks. The pubic hair was shaved and hexachlorocyclohexane cream was applied daily. The patient was advised to avoid close body contact and not to share clothing and towels.
After two-week’s treatment, the patient returned to our hospital complaining with persistent itching of the right eye. The corneal epithelial punctate defect remained unchanged. There were no lice or nits observed on right eye. A co-infestation by Demodex was suspected. Three eyelashes from each eyelid of both eyes were epilated and examined with light microscopy. Demodex detection and counting in epilated lashes were performed as proposed by Gao et al. . A total of 14 D. folliculorum was found in 6 lashes from the right eye and a total of 5 D. folliculorum was found in 6 lashes from the left eye. The diagnosis of demodicosis was confirmed. The lid margin around the root of the eyelashes were scrubbed by a sterile cotton-tipped applicator saturated with 25% tea tree oil daily and eyelids were heated with wet towel at about 40–45 °C twice per day for 2 months. Clothing, pillow cases, and towels were recommended to be washed with hot water and then heat dried for up to 10 mins. The patient’s symptoms relived, and the affected corneal was clear after two-week’s treatment. The number of mites during an examination 1 month later reduced to 2 in the right eye and 0 in the left eye, and was reduced to 0 in both eye 2 months later. No recurrence was observed during 3 months of follow-up.