A 77-year-old Caucasian man presented with a livid discoloration of the left ear, which had first appeared about five days prior to the patient’s flight home from Colombia, where he had spent a two-week vacation, including a stay of several days on a banana plantation in the department of Cundinamarca. The patient remembered a mosquito bite to his left ear during his stay in Colombia. Since his return, he had been experiencing increasing weakness and shortness of breath. The patient had been diagnosed with CLL four years earlier and was currently on ibrutinib therapy. Upon presentation, the patient was in a stable cardiorespiratory state (blood pressure 139/75 mmHg [18.5/10.0 kPa]), heart rate was 92 beats per minute, body temperature was 36.6 °C (309.8 K), and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 100% with 2 L of oxygen. Physical examination showed a lividly discolored area on the left ear and several erythematous, elevated, nodule-like skin lesions disseminated on the torso and extremities , acute renal insufficiency (serum creatinine 2.6 mg/dL [229.8 μmol/L], blood urea nitrogen 37 mg/dL [6.2 mmol/L]), mild anemia (hemoglobin, 13.2 g/dL [8.20 mmol/L]), metabolic acidosis (pH 7.353, HCO3 17.6 mmol/L, lactate 3.9 mmol/L), and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP, 29.5 mg/dL [2809.5 mmol/L]). The leukocyte count was within the normal range with a relative increase in monocytes (leukocytes 5.04 G/L with 35% neutrophils, 31% lymphocytes, and 25% monocytes). A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral pulmonary lesions . Given the patient’s recent travel history and the eschar-like presentation of some of the lesions, a tropical disease was suspected. Skin biopsies were obtained from the right ear and right forearm after starting antimicrobial treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam (4.5 g tid) in combination with liposomal amphotericin B (400 mg/day) and doxycycline (100 mg bid) to provide empiric coverage against leishmania, endemic mycosis such as histoplasmosis, and atypical bacterial infections such as rickettsiosis. Within 24 h of the biopsy, the patient’s condition rapidly deteriorated. He developed further skin lesions as well as a rapidly progressive phlegmon starting from the biopsy site on the right forearm. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to septic shock and required high-dose catecholamine therapy (maximum dosis during shock: 600 μg/h norepinephrine and 1400 μg/h epinephrine) along with mechanical ventilation. Antibiotic therapy was escalated to imipenem, doxycycline, and amphotericin B. Surgical excision was performed on the progressively inflamed area on the right arm . Histological evaluation showed an acute phlegmonous infection with necrosis . Blood cultures remained sterile. The skin specimens were tested for chagas, babesia, leishmania, endemic mycosis, tuberculosis, cryptococcosis, and rickettsia, but yielded negative results. Finally, microbiological cultures of the necrotic area on the patient’s ear, right forearm, and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) revealed the growth of P. aeruginosa, with comparable antibiotic susceptibility testing results showing susceptibility to piperacillin, ceftazidime, cefepime, carbapenems, aztreonam, and aminoglycosides. Thus, a diagnosis of Ecthyma gangrenosum was established. After 8 days of antibiotic treatment and almost daily surgical debridement of the right arm, the patient’s clinical condition significantly improved while the microbiological cultures remained sterile. Liposomal amphotericin B and doxycycline were stopped, and treatment with piperacillin (4 g tid) was continued. Surgical debridement was not performed for skin lesions apart from those on the right arm because these nodules either disappeared or significantly decreased in size, and the systemic inflammatory markers (CRP) also normalized with antimicrobial treatment. Finally, antimicrobial treatment was discontinued 50 days after the patient’s initial presentation, and he was transferred to a rehabilitation facility .
Three and a half weeks after discontinuation of the antibiotic therapy, the patient presented again to the emergency department (ED) with an elevated CRP and recurrence of the skin lesions on the extremities and torso. Physical examination showed red bullous skin lesions with a liquid interior, some of which again displayed a central black eschar . Wound swabs demonstrated growth of P. aeruginosa, and susceptibility testing revealed unchanged susceptibility patterns. Antibiotic treatment with high-dose piperacillin (4 g qid) was initiated and one week later, aztreonam (2 g bid) was added due to the persistent growth of P. aeruginosa in follow-up wound swab cultures, and because the patient had contraindications to aminoglycoside therapy (pre-existing hearing impairment). Recurrent surgical incisions of all the remaining skin lesions were performed. Although the serum IgG and IgM levels were within the normal range, impaired functionality of immunoglobulins (Ig) was assumed due to the underlying CLL [, ], and a total of 30 g Ig were administered intravenously once on day 90. Eventually, no bacterial growth was detected in repeat wound swabs and no new skin lesions were observed after 23 days of treatment with piperacillin and 15 days of simultaneous treatment with aztreonam. Antibiotic treatment was well tolerated by the patient. The patient was released from the hospital and given ciprofloxacin 750 mg bid for another seven days. Clinical follow-up examination four months after the discontinuation of antibiotic treatment revealed normal inflammation markers and no further skin lesions.