While riding a bicycle, an 18-year-old man (height, 165 cm; weight, 60.3 kg) collided with another bicycle coming from the left side. The right handlebar of his bicycle hit his groin. Although the numbness of the right lower limb that began immediately after the impact gradually improved, the patient was admitted to our hospital with right inguinal pain and swelling. Consistent with subcutaneous hematoma, the colors of the right and left leg were similar in the resting state; however, the right leg became pale after walking and he noticed mild claudication. There was no palpable pulse in the right pedal artery, but flow was recognized by pulse Doppler ultrasound. Contrast computed tomography (CT) for the evaluation of bone fracture or active bleeding revealed vascular occlusion extending from the right EIA to the CFA . There was a contrast effect in the distal CFA just before the branching of the superficial and deep femoral arteries and the collateral circulation. A duplex scan showed no flow in the right EIA and small flow in the distal CFA. The right ankle–brachial index (ABI) was 0.50. Laboratory examination showed an elevated creatine kinase (CK) level of 1302 IU/L and slightly elevated glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase level of 43 IU/L. Glutamic pyruvic transaminase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and potassium were normal with levels of 28 IU/L, 197 IU/L, and 4.5 mEq/L, respectively. With respect to inflammatory reaction, the white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level were slightly increased at 9630/μL and 0.87 mg/mL, respectively. The pathological state was similar to acute limb ischemia, and Rutherford classification was category I. However, the severity was not considered urgent as the Doppler detected pedal artery flow and the duplex scan detected CFA flow, both indicating that the blood flow to the right lower limb was maintained by collateral circulation. Although CK level was highly elevated, we did not consider emergent surgical treatment as other parameters were normal or only slightly elevated. Moreover, the patient hesitated the surgical treatment at that time. For these reasons, we decided to see the course for a while with conservative treatment, and heparin administration was started. The next day, contrast CT revealed the extension of the contrast effect in the EIA and no change in the obstruction of the CFA, whereas the duplex scan showed findings similar to that shown on the previous day. The lack of response to conservative treatment prompted surgical revascularization with thrombectomy and femoral artery repair, as well as patient’s surgical consent.
Although the thrombus occlusion was seen in the EIA and CFA segments, judging the bruise site, we considered the CFA segment to be the main injury site. However, the possibility that the injury was also extended to the EIA segment could not be ruled out. Thus, we planned to perform an open surgery and decided to include the pararectal incision and follow the extraperitoneal approach to detect the exact extent of the injury in case the injury site was more proximal than the CFA. Intraoperatively, the CFA had a dark red color extending from the site of injury immediately below the inguinal ligament distally to just before the branching of the superficial and deep femoral arteries. No pulse was felt. A longitudinal incision of the CFA revealed a thrombus in the vascular lumen. The intima was nearly absent at the CFA injury site and was dissected on both the proximal and distal sides . The thrombus on the proximal side was removed with a Fogarty catheter® (Edwards Lifesciences, Irv, CA, USA), and the dissected intima on the proximal side and distal sides was reattached to the adventitia with 6-0 monofilament sutures. It was challenging to perform end-to-end anastomosis due to the long intimal disappearance. Although the adventitia was also damaged, its strength was relatively maintained. Therefore, a patch repair of the CFA was performed with tissue from the great saphenous vein harvested from the same surgical wound . Pulsation of the right pedal artery began postoperatively, and the right ABI improved to 1.05. Contrast CT on postoperative day 7 revealed good patency from the right EIA to the CFA, and the patch repair appeared normal . The patient was discharged on day 8 and has not reported occlusion symptoms, such as numbness of the lower leg.