The 24-year-old caucasian female patient had a past medical history of acute pancreatitis, and experienced her first episode at the age of 20, which was complicated by superior mesenteric vein thrombosis. The second episode occurred at the age of 21. Combined dylipidemia was diagnosed in this context and was initially treated with a statin and fibrate, but without adequate control. Niacinic acid was added, with improved control. Diabetes, classified as secondary to pancreatitis, was later diagnosed at the age of 22, and was treated with insulin since the beginning of its discovery. The patient was subsequently referred to endocrinology appointments, where hypercortisolism was suspected, but excluded. She abandoned these appointments shortly after.
Her gynaecological and obstetric history was irrelevant, and she had no previous history of menstrual abnormalities, hyperandrogenism, or infertility.
At 7 weeks of pregnancy, she was referred to the outpatient endocrinology and obstetrics clinic, in the context of her diabetes. A physical examination revealed that she presented loss of fat from the extremities and trunk , excess of subcutaneous fat in the chin, and apparent muscle hypertrophy . According to the patient, these features had been present since early adolescence. No other typical clinical features were observed during the physical examination, namely hirsutism or acanthosis nigricans. As previously noted, the therapy for diabetes was insulin, with an initial total dose of 106 U/day (1.8 U/Kg/day). The patient was also treated with heparin and salmon oil. Statin, niacinic acid and fenofibrate treatment had already been suspended at the time pregnancy was confirmed. She presented good glycaemic control (HbA1c 4.7%, without hypoglycaemia) and triglyceride levels of 1566 mg/dL (reference value <150 mg/dL), and so was prescribed treatment with gemfibrozil 600 mg, twice a day. Considering her past medical history, and the clinical and biochemical characteristics, Dunnigan lipodystrophy was suspected, and a genetic study for mutations of lamin A/C was requested. The presence of exon 8 c.1444C > T (p.Arg482Trp) heterozygote mutation in the LMNA gene was revealed. No other genes were sequenced.
At 12 weeks of pregnancy, the patient was admitted to the emergency department with the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, with triglyceride levels of 9975 mg/dL. After improvement of triglyceride levels provoked by fasting, treatment began with fenofibrate 267 mg, once a day, and the patient was discharged with triglyceride levels of 655 mg/dL. One week later, on re-evaluation, she presented triglyceride levels of 2965 mg/dL. Considering the risk of a new episode of pancreatitis, the patient was then admitted for metabolic control, centred on fasting. After discharge, with triglyceride levels of 1086 mg/dL, a rigorous dietary plan was prescribed, and treatment was also started with Omacor® [highly purified omega-3 fatty acid ethyl esters (3 g tid)] and Protifar® [high protein powdered supplement (32 sp)]. Triglyceride levels remained constantly between 1000 and 2000 mg/dL until the birth. The birth was by dystocic delivery – caesarean section - because of the failure of natural labour. The operation proceeded without complications and the new-born, although macrosomic (4675 g), presented no clinical signs of having the disease, as was expected.
After delivery, the patient begun regular evaluation during endocrinology appointments and returned to statin (rosuvastatin 20 mg), cholestyramine (4000 mg once a day) and fibrate (fenofibrate 267 mg once a day) treatment, with suboptimal triglyceride levels control (triglyceride levels of 882 mg/dL). For diabetes treatment, metformin was added to insulin, with good glycaemic control (HbA1c < 7%).
With regards to her family medical history, the patient has 3 healthy brothers and a healthy father. However her mother has type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertriglyceridaemia and, according to the patient, she also has the same fat distribution pattern. No history of pancreatitis is known.
Medical evaluation and a genetic study, if appropriate, was offered to all close relatives, but not one agreed to be studied .
The new-born was referred for genetic appointments, in order to be studied for the presence of the mutation, but this has not been performed yet.