A 70-year-old male patient presented to our outpatient department with the left knee pain, left thigh pain, and deformity. Clinical examination revealed an excessive biplanar bowing of the femur with a non-correctable varus deformity of the knee. The patient had medial joint line tenderness of the knee and 5° fixed flexion deformity. Further examination revealed the range of movement to be 5–120° with crepitus appreciated throughout the full range. Distal pulses and neurology were found to be normal. Routine standing knee and limb alignment X-rays revealed a severe left femoral bow with a sclerosed thickened femoral cortex and advanced tricompartmental left knee osteoarthritis. The patient was suspected to have Paget’s disease and the diagnosis was confirmed using a bone scan and blood tests-Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP), C-Telopeptide (CTX), and Procollagen Type I N-terminal propeptide (P1NP). Under an endocrinologist’s care, the patient was treated with single dose intravenous bisphosphonate and was followed-up for 4 months to look for disease activity. When the reduction in pathological bone turnover was noted, which was assessed by evaluating serum ALP , CTX, and P1NP levels along with significant relief in thigh pain relief, he was planned for a left TKA.
Due to the extreme bow of the femur in the coronal and sagittal plane and an overall 20° varus deformity of the knee joint, balancing the extension and flexion gaps during TKA would be challenging. As a standard intramedullary jig could not be used in view of an inaccurate measurement or a cortical breach, we designed a 3D-printed patient-specific distal femur jig (Supercraft3D, Bengaluru, India) that avoided intramedullary referencing. The entire lower limb morphology was studied using computed tomography scans and 3D bone modeling . We considered the deformity as well as the mechanical axis of the femur and designed a jig referred from the distal-most femoral condyle at 90° angles to the sagittal and coronal plane . This custom jig allowed us to take accurately measure the entire femoral mechanical axis for an accurate parallel first distal femoral cut (extension gap) . Following the distal femoral cut, a standard proximal tibial cut was performed using the tibial extramedullary guide. The extension gap was then measured and found to be well balanced. The femur was sized to two and the remaining femoral cuts performed. The gap balancing method was used to equalize the flexion gap and rotation of the femur , achieving a stable well-balanced knee. We elected to use a semi-constrained implant to reduce the strain on the collateral ligaments due to the femoral deformity. The time taken for completion of the surgery was comparable to the conventional primary TKAs we perform. Post-operative X-rays were satisfactory . The patient was mobilized, and rehab was conducted as a standard TKA. At 6-month follow-up he was mobilizing without any walking aids with excellent function and pain relief. He is followed-up for Paget’s disease activity with a serial evaluation of biochemical markers as per current guidelines .