A 64-year-old non-smoking Japanese man was referred to our hospital with suspected interstitial pneumonia in a health examination in 2013. He had a slightly dry cough with no desaturation. He had been a plasterer for more than 40 years without appropriate protective equipment. Chest auscultation revealed slight bilateral inspiratory fine crackles in the bilateral lower lung zones. A chest X-ray film showed enlarged hilar lymph nodes and mild reticular opacities, mainly in the upper to middle lung fields of both lungs . The results of a chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan suggested a predominantly subpleural distribution of irregular linear opacities and reticulonodular shadows with interlobular septal thickening in both lung fields . Pulmonary function tests were close to normal and a six-minute walking test performed on admission was also normal.
One year later (in 2014), forced vital capacity (FVC) and diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) had decreased , while reticulonodular shadows on HRCT worsened. However, his thoracic symptoms had not deteriorated and his vital signs were stable. In order to establish a diagnosis, VATS was performed from the right S2 segment of the upper lung lobe and the right S9 segment of the lower lung lobe . Dense fibrosis with mononuclear cell infiltration and inorganic dust particles around the respiratory bronchioles was observed in the upper lung lobe S2 segment, which was consistent with MDP . Furthermore, fibrously thickened interlobular septa and visceral pleura accompanied by dust, including some birefringent particles suggestive of silicates, and fibroblastic foci were detected within these lesions . Extensive honeycomb changes with dilated bronchioles and parenchymal collapse as well as fibroblastic foci within the cystic wall were observed in the lower lung lobe S9 segment . Asbestos fibers and asbestos bodies were not found in either upper lung lobe S2 or lower lung lobe S9 specimens. An electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) primarily detected silicon (Si), aluminum (Al), and iron (Fe) in the S2 and S9 areas (Additional file : Figure S1).
Based on these results, we diagnosed the patient with pneumoconiosis with the UIP pattern and monitored him without any medication because he quit his job. Although his symptoms and pulmonary function tests transiently improved, he had a dry cough with exertional dyspnea, and his pulmonary function test results markedly deteriorated (in 2016, Fig. ). We administered nintedanib with the expectation of an anti-fibrotic effect; however, the treatment was not effective, and he currently requires home oxygen therapy . A recent chest X-ray image showed a markedly smaller lung volume than that in the initial image as well as the progression of lung fibrosis. A chest CT scan also showed the progression of fibrotic changes in subpleural regions .