We report the case of a 32-year-old non-smoker female, who presented with mild dyspnea for two weeks. She denied cough, hemoptysis, fever and weight loss. Serologic tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and α-fetoprotein (AFP), did not reveal any abnormalities. Tuberculin purified protein derivative (PPD) test of the patient was negative. A computed tomography scan (CT) of the chest revealed left pleural effusion, and there was no evidence of mediastinal lymphadenopathy and the lung fields were clear . Although undergoing repeatedly thoracentesis, the hemorrhagic pleural effusion was recurrent refilling. The routine biochemical test of pleural effusion showed that it was exudative, while no malignancy was detected on cytology examination. Thus, single port video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS) was then performed. Thoracoscope showed a large number of nodules arising from the parietal pleura, with a tenacious texture and a clear margin. Biopsy was performed on multiple nodules, with a little bleeding . Microscopic examination revealed the nodules comprised a conglomerate of capillary vessels, and some of the vascular spaces lined by proliferating endothelial cells. No significant atypia was found in the lining endothelial cells . Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis showed CD31 and erythroblast transformation specific regulated gene-1(ERG) positive, and Ki-67 proliferation index was 2% . The biopsy was suggestive of capillary hemangioma. Dexamethasone (10 mg/day)was injected into the thoracic cavity for three consecutive days, and then the patient began to receive prednisone acetate (30 mg/day). Unfortunately, both topical and systemic dexamethasone were failure to control pleural effusion. The chest CT scan showed that medium-volume still exist after 4 weeks of oral corticosteroids . Hence, the patient stopped corticosteroids and switched to oral azathioprine 100 mg ever day. No side effect associated with azathioprine occurred. The patient was followed up regularly and the pleural effusion was gradually reduced. At the 12 months of follow up, reexamination with CT scan revealed no pleural effusion .