A 79-year-old man, with a history of smoking (Brinkman Index = 75) and atrial fibrillation while taking rivaroxaban, visited the urologist because of gross hematuria. He had undergone a left transperitoneal open nephrectomy for angiomyolipoma 20 years ago, and there were no problems with the intraoperative and postoperative course. CT showed a soft tissue density tumor (41 × 23 mm) in the left lower ureter . MRI revealed a tumor in the same area with a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images with diffusion restriction on the diffusion-weighted image. Washing cytology of the left ureter indicated high-grade urothelial carcinoma (class IV). Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a ureteral tumor in the residual ureter and referred to our hospital for surgical treatment.
Owing to the expected difficulty in identifying the residual ureter during the operation, we decided to perform a retroperitoneoscopic left ureteral resection and partial cystectomy after placing a fluorescent ureteral catheter in the residual ureter.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the lithotripsy position, and a 6Fr NIRC™ (Near-Infrared Ray Catheter) fluorescent ureteral catheter (Nippon Covidien, Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was inserted into the left residual ureter using cystoscopy. As expected preoperatively, the catheter of about 18 cm, which was the length from the left ureteral orifice to the blind end of the ureter, was inserted into the residual ureter. The catheter was easily inserted and there were no complications regarding stent placement.
In the right lateral position, a camera port was placed one finger's breadth away from the tip of the 12th rib. After dilating the retroperitoneal space with a Preperitoneal dissecting balloon, 12 mm ports were placed at the anterior and posterior axillary lines, respectively.
Using near-infrared light, we observed the ureteral catheter glowing green, enabling easy identification of the ureter . The lateroconal fascia was incised at the level of the iliopsoas muscle. With the aid of near-infrared light and visualization of the located ureter, we secured the ureter using vessel tape and dissected it to its intersection with the external iliac artery. The proximal stump of the ureter had severe adhesions as a result of a previous nephrectomy, making it difficult to identify the ureter without a fluorescent catheter. However, by performing the operation while visualizing the ureter using an ICG system (Olympus Co, Tokyo, Japan), it was possible to reliably and safely remove the ureter.
With the patient in the decubitus position, we proceeded with the lower ureteral resection. An 8-cm pararectal incision was made to access the retroperitoneal space. The freed ureter was dissected from the bladder and removed along with the fluorescent ureteral catheter.
After separating the ureter from the bladder, we sutured the bladder mucosa and muscles into two layers. The operative time was 307 min, with the laparoscopic portion lasting 86 min and resulting in minimal bleeding.
The operative specimen revealed two protruding lesions in the lower ureter, measuring 5 and 3 cm in diameter, respectively . The pathological diagnosis confirmed high-grade invasive urothelial carcinoma (pT2).
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. On postoperative day 8, cystography was performed, confirming no leaks. The ureteral catheter was subsequently removed, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 9.