A 51-year-old Japanese man underwent PD with Child reconstruction and Braun anastomosis for T4 N2 carcinoma of the papilla of Vater. Four of 34 resected lymph nodes were involved, but an R0 resection margin was achieved. Adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 (tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil potassium) was performed after surgery. Seven months postoperatively, he developed a high-grade fever, jaundice, and right upper abdominal pain. The laboratory data on admission were as follows: white blood cell count, 9900/mm3; total bilirubin, 22.7mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 199IU/L; and alanine aminotransferase, 178IU/L. The clinical diagnosis was suppurative cholangitis and obstructive jaundice. Abdominal enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed afferent loop obstruction and intrahepatic bile duct dilatation caused by nodal recurrence . To relieve jaundice and prevent cholangitis, ultrasound-guided percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage was performed under local anesthesia. A 7 French pigtail catheter was inserted into the afferent loop from the tributary of segment three . The guide wire was then advanced into the proximal aspect of the obstruction, and an 8 French straight endoprosthesis catheter was inserted . The catheter was dilated from 8 to 12 French to deliver the self-expanding metallic stent. Jejunography confirmed an approximately 4 cm-long stricture of the afferent loop , and a 22mm × 12cm self-expanding metallic stent (WallFlex™ duodenal stent, Boston Scientific) was placed across the stenosis via the transhepatic route . On stent placement, we used the straight guide wire which was 0.035 inches in diameter and 450cm length. The next day, the expansion of the stent was good and balloon expansion was not needed. There were no procedural complications. His jaundice rapidly disappeared, and clinical conditions quickly improved. His hospital stay was 17 days. Stent patency was good, and cholangitis did not recur during five months of follow-up. He is currently receiving chemotherapy with gemcitabine as an outpatient.