A 60-yr-old African American female with a remote medical history of breast cancer, status post double mastectomy, presented with 1 wk of bilateral lower abdominal pain that was associated with diarrhea, early satiety, and a 30 lb. weight loss (over 3 mo).
A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large circumferential mass involving the transverse colon which extended approximately 14 cm in length . On physical exam, her vitals were stable. Her abdominal exam was soft and non-distended, with mild pain to palpation to her lower abdomen. Her laboratory work-up was notable for a mild leukocytosis (white blood count 13.4 bil/L, hemoglobin 15.7 g/dL, platelets 404 bil/L), hyponatremia and acute kidney injury ( sodium 123 mmol/L and creatinine 2.52 mg/dL (baseline creatinine was normal)). Her liver function tests (including albumin and protein level), lactic acid, lipase, infectious stool studies (i.e., Clostridium difficile infection, ova and parasites, Shiga toxin producing Escherichia coli, Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, or Escherichia coli O157) were all normal.
She underwent an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy. EGD was notable for non-erosive gastropathy and normal appearing duodenum for which biopsies were obtained. Colonoscopy was notable for nodular ileal and colonic mucosa with multiple colonic polyps . In addition, she had a 15 cm malignant appearing stricture in the transverse colon . The largest colonic polyp was approximately 2.5 cm in her rectum . Pathology results of her stomach, duodenum, terminal ileum, colon, transverse stricture and all of her colonic polyps were notable for MEITL . There was no evidence of celiac disease on duodenal biopsy. There was no evidence of adenocarcinoma throughout her colon.
For the patient’s newly diagnosed high grade EATL, she underwent staging bone marrow biopsy and positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan. Bone marrow biopsy was without overt morphologic or flow cytometry evidence of T-cell lymphoma or metastatic malignancy. PET/CT scan with abnormal F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) activity associated with the transverse colonic mass, mesenteric lymphadenopathy, focal uptake within the rectum, intense uptake throughout the bone marrow, and portions of the spleen.
The patient was started on chemotherapy with EOCH (Etoposide, Oncovin, Cyclophosphamide, and Hydroxydaunorubicin). She was not a candidate for HCT given her functional status. Unfortunately, despite her aggressive chemotherapy regimen, her disease persisted. At her 6-month follow-up, her repeat PET/CT scan with abnormal FDG activity associated with the transverse colon and rectum. Repeat colonoscopy noted a large lymphoma polyploidy lesion.