An 83-year-old Japanese man presented at our institution with a fever of 38.5°C in the first episode. Five years previously, the patient had undergone mitral annuloplasty for mitral valve prolapse. The patient had been taking pravastatin 10 mg/day, rabeprazole 10 mg/day, carvedilol 2.5 mg/day, cibenzoline 150 mg/day, and verapamil 120 mg/day continuously following the mitral valve surgery. The patient did not smoke or consume alcohol and did not have diabetes mellitus. In addition to the fever, the patient presented with right lower back pain and was examined at our institution. ESBL-EC was detected in two sets of blood cultures and a urine culture. The patient was admitted to the hospital for the first time. We administered antibacterial therapy with meropenem (1 g every 8 hours) to the patient for 14 days for pyelonephritis and bacteremia caused by ESBL-EC. Negative blood cultures were obtained 3 days after treatment initiation. The patient was discharged one day after the completion of antibiotic therapy.
Two days after discharge, he presented with a fever of 38.0°C and was admitted for a second time at our institution. As before, ESBL-EC was observed in two sets of blood cultures; however, the urine culture were negative. We initiated antibiotic therapy with cefmetazole (1 g every 8 hours) for 14 days. Three days after treatment initiation, the patient’s blood cultures were negative, and he was discharged in good general condition.
However, malaise was observed the day after discharge, and the patient had a fever (37.4°C) and was admitted for a third time at our institution. His consciousness was lucid and his vitals were as follows: body temperature, 37.4°C; blood pressure, 100/53 mmHg; pulse rate, 77 beats/minute; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/minute, regular; SpO2, 96% (room air). No conjunctival hemorrhage, nail splinter hemorrhage, Janeway lesions, or Osler’s nodules were observed. Heart sounds were regular, and no murmurs were audible.
Blood test results showed white blood cells at 16,000/μL, neutrophils at 90.0%, and C-reactive protein at 8.9 mg/dL. Procalcitonin was 20.3 ng/mL. Two sets of blood cultures yielded ESBL-EC. Antimicrobial susceptibility results are shown in . The susceptibility results for ESBL-EC detected by blood cultures in the two previous admissions and urine cultures in the first admission were similar. ESBL-EC (designated MS6396) was susceptible to meropenem and cefmetazole.
For repeated bacteremia due to ESBL-EC, the presence of abscess or infective endocarditis was suspected, and the following tests were performed. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvic regions revealed no remarkable findings. Transthoracic echocardiography did not show vegetation, whereas transesophageal echocardiography showed mobile vegetation, 25 mm in size, in the anterior mitral valve annulus . No valve destruction was noted. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head and diffusion-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery images showed 2–3 mm sporadic high-intensity areas, mainly in the parietal lobe, which were considered to be septic cerebral embolisms.
The diagnosis was infective endocarditis of the mitral valve and septic cerebral embolism due to ESBL-EC. We started antibiotic treatment with meropenem at a dose of 1 g every 8 hours on admission. The blood cultures were negative 3 days after treatment initiation. We also administered tobramycin (1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours) from day 5 onwards, in addition to meropenem for treating infective endocarditis of the mitral valve due to ESBL-EC. A cardiovascular surgery was planned, and the patient was transferred to another institution to undergo mitral valve replacement on day 13. The pathological findings during the surgery were abscess-like changes, including inflammatory cell infiltration in the mitral valve mixed with bacterial mass.
The patient was treated with meropenem and tobramycin for 6 weeks postoperatively, and he recovered completely. Four years after the surgery, no recurrence has been observed to date.
After the patient’s treatment was completed, additional bacteriological and genetic examinations were performed on the causative E. coli (MS6396) isolated from the blood culture samples which was obtained at the first hospitalization. DNA obtained via the cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide DNA extraction method was used for DNA sequencing using a MiniSeq next-generation sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). For MiniSeq sequencing, the DNA library was prepared using the Nextera XT Library Prep Kit and Nextera XT Index Kit (Illumina), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A total of 1,130,645 paired-end reads were obtained from the MiniSeq run after adaptor trimming. Trimming of low-quality reads and assembly (average coverage of 56.411 x) were performed using Shovill v1.0.9 . The MS6396 genome consists of 224 contigs with a length of 5,077,791 base pairs. The strain was identified as E. coli using KmerFinder 3.1 and as the E. coli clone ST131 by multilocus sequence typing (MLST) using MLST 2.0. A search for drug resistant genes using ResFinder-3.2 confirmed the presence of blaCTX-M-27 ESBL gene . Additionally, the predominant plasmid replicon type was observed to be IncFIA, IncFIB (AP001918), and IncFII (pRSB107) . Pathogenesis-related genes were searched using a VFanalyzer, and we identified the adherence- (pilus or fimbriae), autotransporter-, invasion-, iron uptake-(siderophore), secretion system-, and toxin-related genes (enterotoxin, hemolysin). Details of the pathogenesis-related genes of MS6396 are shown in the .