This is the case of an 82-year-old male with a known history of gastric cancer. He had undergone right hemicolectomy for colon cancer nine months ago (A), and his final pathologic examination showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma that had invaded into pericolic tissues (T3). There was no metastasis to regional lymph nodes (N0), and the tumour was classified as pT3pN0 (0/18) M0, stage II. Further treatment including chemotherapy was recommended, but the patient declined adjuvant chemotherapy. During the follow-up period, there were no specific findings. At the nine-month postoperative follow-up study, a gastroscopy revealed a large infiltrating ulcerative mass (7*7 cm) on the high body of the stomach (B), but a colonoscopy revealed no specific findings at the previous operation site. A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed a tumour in the lesser curvature of the gastric high body and enlarged perigastric lymph nodes. The CEA and CA19-9 levels were within the normal limit, and other laboratory examinations indicated no specific findings. A positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan only showed gastric uptake (maximum standardized uptake value (SUV), gastric cardia-11.8) without evidence of any other metastasis (B). The patient underwent total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y anastomosis and D2 lymph node dissection. Pathologic examination showed moderately differentiated (intestinal-type based on Lauren’s classification) adenocarcinoma invading the subserosa (T3). There was evidence of metastasis to regional lymph nodes (N2), and the tumour was classified as pT3pN2(3/19) M0, stage IIIA. Further treatment was recommended, but the patient declined adjuvant chemotherapy. Regular follow-up based on imaging, gastroscopy, colonoscopy, and laboratory examinations indicated no specific findings. At the 14-month postoperative follow-up visit, gastrofibroscopy showed a tumour (size: 2.3*2.5 cm) in the blind jejunal loop of Roux-en-Y anastomosis (C), which was confirmed as adenocarcinoma through an endoscopic biopsy. The PET-CT scan only showed blind jejunal loop uptake (max. SUV, blind loop-9.4) without evidence of any other metastasis (C). The patient underwent segmental resection of the blind loop jejunal cancer, with no gross metastatic lesions within the peritoneum. Pathologic examination showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with angiolymphatic invasion. We sought to determine why, in this case, the cancer was in the jejunal loop. First, we suspected recurrence after gastric cancer surgery. We decided to review all the test results. They all indicated relatively moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of intestinal type ( Gastric cancer, H&E, ×100). Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed homogenous high levels (3+) of CDX2 expression (A–C) in the primary colon cancer and gastric and jejunal adenocarcinomas. Further IHC staining for cytokeratin (CK) profiles demonstrated the same immunoreactivity in both the primary colon cancer as well as the gastric and jejunal adenocarcinomas: CK20(+) and CK7(−) (A–C). The above-mentioned findings strongly suggest sequentially developed metastatic gastric and jejunal cancer with basically the same morphological features and IHC characteristics as those of the primary colonic tumour.