One year ago, a 28-year-old Chinese woman came to our department to consult for recurrent ulceration, bleeding and crusted nodules on her nose. She is the first child of healthy consanguineous parents. The parents of this patient were first cousins. Pregnancy and delivery were normal. She has normal mental development. On examination, numerous freckle-like hyperpigmented macules were seen on her face and neck with an ulcerated bleeding nodule on her nose . Reticulate hyper- and hypopigmented macules could be seen on her arm . The skin throughout her body was dry and could not be relieved by using cream. She denied history of acute sunburn. Her brother, who suffered burns 5 years ago, also had similar clinical characteristics to the proband. An extensive burn scar and a 0.5 cm × 1 cm hyperpigmented nodule were seen on the face of her brother . Biopsy results confirmed the diagnosis of basal cell carcinomas of the hyperpigmented nodules on the nose of the proband and her brother.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Jinling Hospital and written informed consent was obtained from all participants. Blood samples of the patient and her family members were collected. DNAs were isolated from blood samples. Total mRNA was extracted from the proband’s surgical tissue. cDNA was obtained by reverse transcription. Eight genes responsible for XP were sequenced using next-generation sequencing (NGS), and the result was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. A novel homozygous c.111_112del deletion in exon 1 of the DDB2 gene, which resulted in a frameshift mutation of amino acid p.A39Efs*6, was detected in the proband and her brother . Her parents are heterozygous for this mutation . Sequencing at the cDNA level also confirmed the mutation . This mutation was not found in 120 unrelated, population-matched control individuals. Western blotting analysis revealed that the patient lacked the expression of the wild-type mature DDB2 protein . The proband and her brother were diagnosed with XPE on the basis of clinical findings and genetic tests. Sun protection was recommended, and the patient did not develop any skin cancers within 1 year of follow-up.