A 57-year-old woman with a history of back pain underwent a thoracic CT-scan in 2016 with the incidental discovery of an anterior mediastinal mass. The mass had a size of 4x3cm, was round and was well delimited, compatible with a teratoma or a thymoma. The patient had no symptom or clinical manifestations of myasthenia gravis, with a Quantitative Myasthenic Gravis Score grade 0. A thymomectomy was performed using a right single-port video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). A chest drain was left after the procedure. Histopathology confirmed a thymoma, type B1, Masaoka-Koga stage 1. Two days after surgery, the patient developed a high output chylothorax (>1000 mL/day), without any signs of infection or inflammation in the blood tests. We introduced a low-fat diet for 6 days and then she was fasting for two more days. However, the chyle continued to flow with an output of 750 mL/day without other complications. No somatostatin or analog was introduced. A lymphangio-magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) didn’t show aberrant thoracic duct anatomy nor chyle-leak . At day 10, the patient was taken to the operating room for a right VATS. The thoracic duct was visualized and the thoracic duct was clipped just above the diaphragm . Two days later, the chylothorax reappeared and the patient developed increasing pain in the left hemi-abdomen, with sign of peritonitis and abdominal distention. Her blood test showed absence of leucocytosis, a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 230 mg/L, and normal lipid, electrolytes, hepatic and pancreatic levels (see Additional file ). A CT-scan demonstrated pancreatic edema and a peri-pancreatic infiltration that extended to the bilateral kidney fasciae, compatible with an acute pancreatitis . Etiologies of acute pancreatitis such as gallstone migration, alcohol, medications, hypotension during the perioperative period, lipidic and IgG4 disease were excluded (see Additional file ). There was no hypotension during the perioperative periode. After medical supportive management the abdominal pain resolved within 2 days and CRP decreased. The chylothorax was treated with restricted low-fat diet, resolved 4 days after the thoracic duct ligation, and the chest tube was removed 16 days after the initial thymomectomy. Six months later, the patient is healthy and has had no recurrence of chylothorax.
This case presentation was conducted in accordance with the CARE guidelines and methodology.