A 45-year-old female presented in an emergency department (ED) with severe diffuse abdominal pain for 10 days. The pain was radiating towards the back and was associated with multiple episodes of yellow-coloured vomiting that used to worsen with fluid and food intake. She also had constipation for 8 days. She had no fever, hematemesis, or hematochezia. For the last 6 months, she has been taking the oral contraceptive norethisterone 30 mg per day to treat heavy menstrual bleeding likely from uterine fibroids diagnosed 2 years ago. She denied smoking and alcohol use. She had no personal or family history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, ischaemic heart disease, thrombosis, or thrombophilia.
On examination, her vitals were as follows: pulse 60 beats per minute, blood pressure 100/70 mmHg, and respirations 18 per minute. On abdominal examination, the abdomen was distended and diffusely tender with no rigidity or guarding. Bowel sounds were decreased, and viscera were not palpable. Abdominal ultrasound done in the ED showed dilated bowel loops with minimal interloop fluid and sluggish peristalsis. Computed Tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was done as part of further investigations. Meanwhile, the patient was admitted to a surgical ward and managed conservatively with intravenous analgesic, intravenous fluid, total parenteral nutrition, and gastric decompression via nasogastric tube. The next day, the CT report revealed PVT extending into the superior mesenteric and splenic veins with mild abdominopelvic ascites, mesenteric thickening, and congestion. Fluid-filled small bowel loops were seen in the mid-abdomen and left lumbar region, suggesting intestinal obstruction. Doppler Ultrasound was then done, which showed thrombosed and greater than 98% occlusion of the portal vein with much-reduced velocity, up to 5 cm/sec, and hepatofugal flow . After 2 days of conservative treatment in the surgical ward, the patient was shifted in a medical ward. Considering liver cirrhosis as the most common cause of PVT, further investigations were done in the medical ward. An upper GI endoscopy was done to screen for variceal bleeding. The result was unremarkable. A triphasic CT abdomen was done to screen for hepatocellular carcinoma, which sometimes gets missed with a normal CT abdomen. But, no focal lesion was seen in the liver. However, by this time, triphasic CT showed a resolution of intestinal obstruction to somewhat with minimal free fluid .
In the medical ward, she was kept on complete bowel rest with nutrition given parenterally. rivaroxaban 15 mg orally twice a day was started. Meanwhile, samples were collected to test for antiphospholipid syndrome. The test result was negative. JAK2 mutation testing was not done due to no evidence of myeloproliferative disorder on complete blood count (CBC). Finally, it was concluded that prolonged oral contraception was the cause of PVT that led to intestinal obstruction in this patient. Her symptoms gradually improved over 7 days, and she started to pass flatus on the 9th day. Oral feeding was started then, which she was tolerating well. On the 12th day of hospitalization, a repeated Doppler ultrasound showed improved circulation in the portal vein with the thrombus in the resolving phase. Her heavy menstrual bleeding was planned to be addressed with a combination of mefenamic acid and tranexamic acid once the illness recovers, as the complaint was uneventful in the current scenario. The patient was discharged home on oral rivaroxaban 10 mg per day and called for follow-up after 3 weeks. Subsequent follow-ups were uneventful, and the patient was kept on oral rivaroxaban for three months with timely monitoring and evaluations.