Our patient was a previously well 13-year-old Caucasian girl, referred to our metabolic service from intensive care because of unexplained encephalopathy and lactic acidosis. She presented to the emergency department with a two-day history of vomiting and deteriorating mentation, progressing to confusion. Initial physical examination was unremarkable except for decreased conscious level. There was no hepatomegaly or signs of chronic liver disease. Initial venous blood gas analysis demonstrated a respiratory alkalosis (pH 7.488, pCO2 29.9 mmHg, bicarbonate 22.5 mmol/L, standard base excess -0.5 mmol/L), mild lactic acidemia (lactate 2.6 mmol/L) and normoglycemia (glucose 5.7 mmol/L). Her alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was mildly elevated at 53 U/L (reference range <45 U/L) but other liver function tests, international normalized ration (INR) and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), electrolytes, urea, creatinine, amylase, lipase, full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein, were all within the normal ranges. There was no history of drug or toxin ingestion and a urinary drug screen did not detect any amphetamines, cocaine, cannabis or opiates. A lumbar puncture and cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan were normal. She was admitted to the intensive care unit for observation because of her decreased level of consciousness, commenced on intravenous fluids (0.45% saline and 5% dextrose) and broad-spectrum antimicrobials to cover sepsis and central nervous system infection after appropriate cultures had been taken. She became increasingly agitated and confused, developed opisthotonos and a significant lactic acidosis without hypoglycemia (pH 7.387, pCO2 32.1 mmHg, bicarbonate 18.9 mmol/L, standard base excess -5.2 mmol/L, glucose 8.2, lactate 9.5 mmol/L). Serum ammonia was 477 μmol/L, suggesting a urea cycle defect. She was treated with intravenous sodium benzoate (loading dose of 250 mg/kg followed by an infusion at 250 mg/kg/day), arginine (200 mg/kg/day), 10% dextrose and lipid infusions. Biochemical markers improved rapidly, with the ammonia falling to 208 μmol/L within three hours. The urine metabolic screen showed a gross elevation in orotate (orotate/creatinine ratio 1.866 μmol/mmol creatinine, reference range <500 μmol/mmol creatinine), and plasma quantitative amino acid analysis showed a typical picture associated with OTCD. Clinically she became more alert and recovered with normal mentation over four to five days. A large protein load consumption associated with festivities was subsequently identified as the trigger for her decompensation. She was put on a protein-restricted diet at maximum protein intake of 2 g/kg/day. A detailed dietary history revealed that she had been subtly self-restricting her protein intake to approximately this level beforehand.
Further history elucidated frequent episodes of nausea and vomiting from about seven years of age, two to three times per week, particularly after restaurant meals or after exercise. There were also shorter episodes of nausea relieved after vomiting. A gastroenterologist had made a diagnosis of abdominal migraines. Psychomotor development was normal: she was in the appropriate academic year at school, was well coordinated and a good athlete. She is the youngest of four children born to non-consanguineous Caucasian parents. Her mother experienced migraines. A great uncle through the maternal line died as a baby of unknown cause. No relatives were known to have had similar episodes of nausea, vomiting or confusion. Cascade testing of other family members after appropriate genetic counseling is proceeding.
Dietary protein restriction has resulted in no recurrence of her episodes of nausea and vomiting. Her serum amino acids and ammonia levels have been within normal ranges on dietary restriction alone and she has not required oral treatment with phenylbutyrate or arginine.
The family was given a written emergency plan. She has had one episode of mild hyperammonemia (maximum ammonia 105 μmol/L) associated with vomiting due to a gastrointestinal illness, from which she made a full recovery. She has also had an episode of viral myositis since her initial admission, without developing neurological symptoms or signs. She shows no demonstrable adverse effects on her growth or development.