A 14 year-old Caucasian female complained of headaches and neck pain for 8 months. These symptoms became more severe and additionally difficulty with swallowing and discoordination occurred. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed and demonstrated an irregularly shaped, inhomogeneous intra-extracranial pathologic formation in the craniovertebral region, which seemed to arise from the C2 vertebrae, mainly at the left, with anteroposterior size up to 4.4 cm, a transverse size up to 5.5 cm and a cranio-caudal size up to 5.2 cm. The tumor comprised the craniovertebral transition, decayed the bone structure of the atlanto-occipital and atlanto-axial joints (causing luxation of atlanto-occipital articulation), as well as the upper third of the processus odontoideus of C2. It penetrated into the spinal canal, narrowed the foramen magnum, compressed the medulla oblongata and the upper sections of the cervical spinal cord, and constricted the foramen of Magendie without impairment of liquorodynamics. The C2 vertebral body was fully comprised in the process and rotated around its axis. The tumor invaded into the body of the sphenoid bone and reached almost to the level of the pons. Anteriorly, it reached the nasopharyngeal region without entering the nasopharyngeal space. Immediately posterior to the tumor the arteria basilaris was passing, with no evidence of its invasion. The left vertebral artery was lost in the thickness of the tumor. Left internal carotid artery and left jugular vein abutted to the left margin of the pathologic mass. The tumor also compressed the left cerebellar hemisphere displacing it backwards and to the top. (Additional file : Figure S1).
Posterior craniocervical decompression was performed with occipitospondylodesis and endonasal biopsy of the C2 vertebral body. Histological and immunohistochemical examinations showed giant cell tumor of bone with local aggressive growth (CD68+, CD99+, BCL2+, Actin+, D2-40+, Ki67 5%).
Subsequently, she was referred to Moscow, where around 2.5 months later incomplete surgical resection was performed. It was reported, that after initial tracheostomy endoscopic transnasal and microsurgical transoral subtotal removal of tumor was performed. Preoperative neurological pathology included severe craniocervical pain, grade 3–4 dysphagia, hoarseness, hypesthesia of the 2nd branch of the 5th cranial nerve, and deviation of the tongue to the left. These symptoms improved partially after surgery (relieve of craniocervical pain; partial regression of symptoms of bulbar violation together with failure of 2nd branch of the 5th cranial nerve). It was reported that postsurgical CT revealed residual tumor mass at the skull base mostly at the left.
After recovering from surgery she returned back to Armenia. Since then her preoperative symptoms gradually recurred. She received 3D conformal external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) using four coplanar fields to deliver total dose of 50.4Gy in 28 fractions. During and after completion of EBRT the above-mentioned symptoms didn’t get milder, and her health condition deteriorated.
MRI performed after the EBRT (3 months after surgery) showed progressive growth of tumor reaching 5,7 × 7,1 × 6,0 cm (Additional file : Figure S2).
Four weeks after completion of radiotherapy, the patient presented to our clinic with severe cachexia, craniocervical pain, discoordination, swallowing problems (grade 3–4 dysphagia), taste loss, diplopia, left eye strabismus, left auricular pain with partial deafness and dysphonia. She couldn’t stick out the tongue, which was deviated to the left, had difficulties with raising shoulders and was almost unable to turn the head to the right. Neurological examination showed that cranial V, VI, VIII, IX, X, XI and XII nerves were affected.
Due to the tumor size, location and its closeness to vital structures a re-resection was considered impossible. The patient’s health condition was extremely poor and continued to worsen; therefore the treatment had to be started immediately.
The fact that several reports stated the significant efficiency of denosumab, as well as good tolerability of this therapy prompted us to implement therapy with denosumab s/c 120 mg q4w with loading doses on days 8 and 15 of cycle 1 [, , , ].
Simultaneously she started taking 4000 IU oral vitamin D per day (initially her vitamin D level was 10 μg/l) and 1000 mg oral calcium.
After the first infusion of denosumab, the clinical condition improved significantly, and further neurological improvements were observed with every injection of denosumab. After two injections of the drug the patient started eating and walking, taste sense partially recovered, the hearing resumed, the diplopia disappeared, and she was free of pain without pain medication. Subsequently she gained weight and after three injections of denosumab she was discharged. After four cycles of denosumab treatment a MRI was performed and confirmed tumor regression 3,2 × 6,8 × 5,2 cm (Additional file : Figure S3), which was suspected from the delectable clinical course. Unfortunately, CT imaging before and after denosumab therapy is not available; and bone formation around the tumor cannot be assessed.
The patient is tolerating the denosumab treatment very well without any severe adverse effects (lowest Ca2+ level was 0.91 mmol/l; normal range: 1.12 to 1.32 mmol/l). She performs daily activities without any difficulties and returned to school. At last presentation the swallowing problems are almost eliminated (dysphagia grade 1), strabismus disappeared, her voice has partially recovered, and she has no difficulties with shrugging. However, some problems with turning the head to right remain. The tongue can be sticked out only slightly, and it is still deviated to the left.