A 65-year-old elderly male patient was admitted to the hospital 6 years after the first surgery to remove a pleomorphic sarcoma from the right side of his back, and he experienced recurrence 4 mo after the last surgery.
The patient underwent primary mass resection from the right back in October 2015. The pathologic evaluation of the surgical specimen revealed fibrosarcoma; the specific stage and immunohistochemical results were not available. In November 2017, December 2018, September 2019, and August 2020, the patient underwent extended resection of soft tissue masses from the right back due to recurrence. The pathologic diagnoses indicated UPS recurrence. After surgery, 2 cycles of doxorubicin + cisplatin chemotherapy, 1 cycle of ifosfamide chemotherapy (specific dose unknown), 2 cycles of gemcitabine + docetaxel chemotherapy (specific dose unknown), anlotinib hydrochloride anti-vascular generative therapy, and bevacizumab + pembrolizumab immunotherapy were administered, but the efficacy was poor. The patient was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes several years after radical resection of renal cancer.
No data were available.
The right back had several well-healed, old surgical scars with no erythema, swelling, or ulcerations. At the level of the 12th rib along the right posterior subaxillary line, a palpable, tender, round-like mass approximately 3 cm in diameter was noted. An ellipsoidal, tender mass, approximately 4 cm in diameter, was palpable at the lateral margin of the lower right scapula and the medial side of the scapula. There was no apparent limitation in thoracic mobility, and breath sounds were minimal in both lungs.
No abnormalities in tumor markers were found.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the right subscapular muscle, infraspinatus muscle, teres major, and latissimus dorsi muscle had local structural disorder. The images revealed the following: Patchy and elliptical abnormal signals; equal or slightly low signals on T1-weighted images; high signals on T2-weighted images; slightly higher signals on DWI; and similar signals or a low signal on ADC. Part of the boundary was clear; and the largest lesion was approximately 5.9 cm in diameter.