A 70-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital for generalized pruritus and rash . She had suffered from left calf claudication for several years. Endovascular treatment using a balloon-expandable metallic stent (ExpressTM LD; Boston Scientific, San Diego, CA, USA) had been performed to treat left common iliac artery stenosis 4 years prior to her hospitalization . Shortly after stenting, a band-like erythema was observed around the navel, which gradually worsened into a generalized rash, burning, and abdominal pain that persisted for 10 months. Finally, she suffered from depression. She had undergone patch tests at several medical institutions, including university hospitals, and was diagnosed with contact dermatitis due to the nickel contained in the stent. Since the administration of steroids did not improve the symptoms, it was determined that the removal of the allergen was appropriate.
We performed an operation to remove the iliac artery stent. On entering the abdominal cavity from an upper to lower midline skin incision, calcification was observed in the bilateral common iliac arteries; therefore, the terminal aorta, bilateral common iliac arteries, left internal, and external iliac artery were all controlled by clamping. The left common iliac artery was incised longitudinally and the stent (measuring 25 mm in length), which was covered with the intima, was removed. Reconstruction was performed with simple closure of the adventitia. The findings of two-year follow-up computed tomography showed no aneurysm or stenosis after revascularization.
The pathological examination of the removed metallic stent demonstrated fibrointimal proliferation with calcification, without infiltration of inflammatory cells or eosinophils. Concentrations of histocytes that phagocytosed black fine granules with heavy refraction were observed in some places. Energy dispersed X-ray spectroscopy revealed that the deposits consisted of nickel (Ni), chromium (Cr), and iron/ferrum (Fe) .
Postoperatively, her dermatitis significantly improved, and her depression disappeared immediately. Follow-up computed tomography showed no recurrence of stenosis of the left iliac artery or any other inflammation. The patient remained free of symptoms of claudication and severe pruritic rash in the 2-year follow-up period after iliac stent removal.