A 51-year-old male with a history of orthotopic heart transplantation for GCM presented to the emergency department with 2-week rapidly progressive symptoms of heart failure (i.e. worsening shortness of breath, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, and weight gain). There was no history of cough, fever, or chest pain, and his review of the systems was grossly unremarkable. Physical examination revealed lethargic man and mild encephalopathy. He was cold and congested and in hypoperfusion state. He was initially haemodynamically stable with the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI) classification of cardiogenic shock C. Shortly after the presentation, he continued to deteriorate, despite support for inotropes, progressing to SCAI D cardiogenic shock, requiring rapid investigations and interventional planning .
Four years before this presentation, he was a healthy 46-year-old with no significant chronic medical illness and no autoimmune disease. He presented with the SCAI classification of cardiogenic shock D, which required temporary MCS in the form of venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. His endomyocardial biopsy (EMBx) showed evidence of GCM . Following the diagnosis of GCM, he underwent aggressive immunotherapy with high-dose steroids, tacrolimus, and mycophenolic acid. He failed to be weaned down temporarily from MCS, and he eventually underwent a HeartWare left ventricular assist device (LVAD). Following LVAD, he could be discharged and was listed for OHTx.
Two years following LVAD, he underwent his first OHTx, where he was induced with basiliximab and was on a higher target immunosuppression with a combination of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisone . On his third surveillance EMBx (i.e. 46 days post-OHTx), his histopathology showed a recurrence of GCM in the allograft heart. He was asymptomatic, and his left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was normal during and following this GCM recurrence. He was treated with alemtuzumab, rituximab, and high-dose steroids, which eradicated histopathologic evidence of residual GCM without affecting his LVEF. Within the first year of his first OHTx, he contracted coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and had a prolonged recovery. Sadly, during his recovery period from COVID-19, his LVEF continued to decline without EMBx evidence of GCM recurrence after intensifying his immune suppression.
During his recurrent COVID-19 infections, he was treated with sotrovimab, and he was introduced to guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF). Subsequent imaging investigations showed worsening scar burden and a widening of the QRS complex where he eventually underwent cardiac resynchronization therapy with no benefit in the improvement of his LVEF. His clinical course continued to decline with the withdrawal of GDMT due to symptomatic hypotension, worsening kidney functions, and failure to thrive. The differential diagnosis for the current presentation was a recurrence of GCM in an allograft heart, COVID myocarditis, and progressive HFrEF.
The initial laboratory investigations showed a high-sensitivity troponin I of 435 ng/L (normal range < 14 ng/L), NT pro-brain natriuretic peptide 16 218 pg/mL (normal range < 125 pg/mL), and lactic acid 2.4 mmol/L (normal range < 1.0 mmol/L). The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a severely dilated and dysfunctional allograft with LVEF estimated at 15–20%. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with a bifascicular block . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) highlighted interval progression of an extensive predominantly subepicardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) involving the basal to mid anterior, anteroseptal, and septal walls . Given his history of GCM, he underwent another EMBx to exclude another recurrence of GCM in his transplanted allograft. His repeated EMBx showed no evidence of GCM recurrence; however, it showed an extensive myocardial scar ( and ). To exclude coronary artery disease, he underwent coronary angiography, which showed no evidence of significant coronary artery disease as the culprit of his worsening HFrEF and cardiogenic shock .
This progressive decline in his functional status, escalating the requirement of diuretic doses and weaning off GDMT, alarms the need for re-consideration of advanced therapy for end-stage heart failure. In the first days following his admission, he showed multiple signs of worsening cardiogenic shock with SCAI classification of cardiogenic shock D. He required more inotrope support (i.e. milrinone 0.50 µg/kg/min). His laboratory investigation showed worsening NT pro-brain natriuretic peptide to 21 460 pg/mL and worsening lactic acidosis, and his repeated TTE showed worsening LVEF 10% and worsening of biventricular functions. He underwent right heart catheterization to determine his cardiac function and showed a cardiac index of 1.6 L/min/m2 and cardiac output of 3.1 L/min. He was urgently discussed in the multidisciplinary team, and the consensus was to proceed with re-listing for the second OHTx. A suitable donor was identified, and repeat heart transplantation was successfully performed within 72 h after enlistment. He was able to have uneventful post-operative course and was discharged home 6 days following his second OHTx. Multiple outpatient follow-up in heart transplantation clinic revealed stable clinical conditions and end-organ functions. His first and second EMBx following second OHTx revealed no evidence of rejection or recurrence of GCM.