A 71-year-old male was admitted to the hospital due to productive cough along with low grade fever, chest pain and shortness of breath. His past medical history included hypertension and glaucoma, and he took irbesartan regularly (150 mg per day). The patient did not smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol or use recreational drugs. No relevant travel history or contact history were detected. The patient had no food or drug allergies.
Three weeks before admission, the patient began to have productive cough, with chest tightness and a temperature of 38 °C. After 2 weeks of progressive symptoms, the patient visited the local hospital. He reported pleuritic chest pain of visual analogue scale score 2. His vital signs and other physical examination results were reported as normal. Initial blood test showed elevated white blood cell (WBC) count (14.8 × 109/L) and C-reactive protein (CRP) level (86 mg/L) as well as liver enzyme elevation. Other laboratory test results were normal. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed patchy opacities in both lower lobes and a small amount of right-sided pleural effusion. He was then admitted to the local hospital and received intravenous sulperazon (cefperazone–sulbactam) 2.0 g once every 8 h, but symptomatic improvement was not noted. Repeated chest CT scan revealed increased pleural effusion in the right. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to our hospital for treatment.
On the admission, his temperature was 37.8 °C, pulse rate 109 beats/min, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, blood pressure 145/87 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 98% on room air. The patient reported no night sweats, weight loss, joint pains, or myalgias. Pulmonary auscultation found decreased breath sounds on both lower fields. No icterus or lymphadenopathy was detected. Thoracocentesis was performed immediately and a chest tube was introduced. Purulent and hemorrhagic fluid was aspirated , and laboratory tests of the pleural effusion revealed an exudate (fluid protein 25.70 g/L, serum protein 28.70 g/L [normal: 35.0–55.0 g/L], fluid lactate dehydrogenase 621 U/L, serum lactate dehydrogenase 355 U/L [normal < 243 U/L]). Other pleural fluid analysis showed: WBC 5000/µL with 88% neutrophils, red blood cells 21,000/µL, fluid glucose 7.31 mmol/L, and fluid adenosine deaminase 18 U/L. Pleural fluid smear, gram stain, bacterial culture, acid-fast bacilli culture and smear, and cytology were all negative. Blood culture was also negative. He was diagnosed as empyema and intravenous tazocin (piperacillin-tazobactam) 4.5 g once every 8 h was initiated.
During the treatment, repeated blood and fluid cultures were all negative, so the pleural effusion was sent for NGS. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted directly from the pleural fluid. The extracted DNA was amplified, purified, and sonicated to a size of 200–300 bp. Fragmented DNA was end repaired to construct DNA libraries, and supplemented with adapter overnight followed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. Qualified DNA libraries were sequenced using the BGISEQ-100 platform. We generated high-quality sequencing data by removing low-quality reads, low-complexity reads, and reads shorter than 35 bp. Human data were mapped to a human reference (hg19) and excluded. The remaining sequencing data were aligned to the bacterial, virus, and fungal databases. All pathogen sequence reference databases were from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) .
NGS identified 14 out of 19317 reads uniquely corresponding to S. constellatus. Although the number of the reads was small, S. constellatus was the only pathogen detected. Tazocin was used continuously for 12 days, then followed by moxifoxacin 400 mg per day for a total of 14 days. Meanwhile, the pleural effusion was drained continuously through the chest tube. The patient claimed gradually resolved symptoms under antibiotic treatment and effusion drainage, and subsequent CT scanning confirmed the improvement .