A 65-year-old female with a past medical history of HMO presented to the outpatient pain clinic with a 4-year history of back and bilateral leg pain. Patient consent was obtained and de-identified data was utilized for this case report. The pain was characterized as constant, heavy, and aching in nature with an intermittent stabbing component that radiated from the back into her lower extremities. Isolated aching pain was also identified in the left hip, bilateral knees, and bilateral ankles. Pain was assessed using a numeric pain scale of 0–10 with 0 reflecting no pain, 1–3 reflecting mild pain and mild interference on activities of daily living (ADL), 4–6 reflecting moderate pain and moderate interference on ADL, and 7–10 reflecting severe pain and inability to perform ADL. The patient initially reported an average pain of 5/10 and reaching a maximum pain of 9/10. Exacerbating factors included walking, exercise, spinal flexion, and rotation. On physical examination, the patient presented with multiple tender points in the lumbar paraspinals, hips, and ankles. There were palpable osteochondromas in the region of the distal tibias along with pretibial allodynia extending inferiorly to the medial malleoli bilaterally. Motor strength was 5/5 in all extremities, and there was no noted sensory deficit.
Lumbar MRI demonstrated an L5–S1 posterior fusion (previously performed 3 years ago to treat suspected Bertolotti’s syndrome), moderate L2–L3 facet arthritis, and no significant central canal or neural foraminal stenosis. The patient’s prior fusion provided minimal axial back pain relief and no effect in the lower extremities making Bertolotti’s syndrome an unlikely cause for the pain. Electrodiagnostic studies showed mild demyelination of the left common peroneal nerve across fibular head and no evidence of lumbar radiculopathy. Further lower extremity radiographs demonstrated left pelvic, right distal femur, right proximal tibia, and left proximal tibia osteochondromas. Surgical excision was then performed for all the osteochondromas with minimal resolution of symptoms. Follow-up X-rays were repeated approximately a year later and showed new bilateral distal tibia osteochondromas of the metadiaphsysis region. Further surgery was declined, and the patient received numerous interventional pain procedures for various presentations including lumbar epidural steroid injections, ischial bursa injections, and bilateral piriformis injections. The pain was pharmacologically managed with methadone 5 mg three times daily, methocarbamol 750 mg four times daily, and oxycodone immediate release with an average daily consumption of 30–35 mg for breakthrough pain. Multiple neuropathic medications and higher doses of methadone were trialed in the past but discontinued secondary to excess sedation.
The patient subsequently was referred for a trial of SCS. Two 16-contact leads were percutaneously placed under fluoroscopy spanning the right and left of T7–T9 vertebral bodies . Settings for both leads were optimized at an amplitude of 5.2 mA, pulse width of 210 μS, and frequency of 40 Hz. The patient was discharged home for 5 days with the trial leads and reported 70%–80% improvement in pain and 85% reduction in oxycodone IR intake.
The patient was then scheduled for permanent implantation with two 2×8 contact paddle leads and an implantable pulse generator that can accommodate 32 contacts. The patient was taken to the operating room under general anesthesia where a T8–T9 hemilaminectomy was performed and two longitudinal paddle leads were placed overlying areas of the T7–T8 and T9–T10 interspaces . The two paddle leads were utilized in order to cover pain from the back, hip, and ankles. The T7–T8 paddle lead was programmed to an amplitude of 2.6 mA, pulse width of 290 μS, and frequency of 40 Hz. The T9–T10 paddle lead was set to an amplitude of 4.1 mA, pulse width of 470 μS, and frequency of 40 Hz. On 8-week follow-up, settings were adjusted, and the patient reported another 30% reduction in pain compared to last visit’s baseline, complete discontinuation of methadone, and increased ADL such as being able to climb steps more easily. At 6-month follow-up, the patient reported continued relief.
Written informed consent was obtained from our patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Institutional Review Board was not needed for this study since it was a retrospective analysis of a single case.