A 51-year-old Hispanic woman with no previous medical history presented with a self-detected lump in her right breast. Physical examination revealed a 2.0 cm firm mass in the outer quadrants of the right breast, which was adhered to the chest wall. The left breast and both axillae were normal. Mammography revealed a distinctive mass with microscopic calcifications and spiculation signs in the upper-outer quadrant of the right breast (BI-RADS 3). A core needle biopsy of the mass reported high-grade IDC. Staging workup, which included a chest CT and a liver ultrasound, was negative for metastatic disease.
The patient was staged with a locally advanced IIIB (T4aN0M0) breast cancer and underwent neoadjuvant therapy consisting of four cycles of doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by 33 sessions of radiation therapy (total dose, 66 Gy to the site of the tumor and 50 Gy to the rest of the breast and axilla). During the course of treatment the tumor did not show any significant change in size; accordingly the patient underwent right modified radical mastectomy.
On gross examination, a 3.2×1.2 cm firm, grey mass with infiltrating margins was noted. Histopathologically the tumor was characterized by small, uniform cancer cells growing in nests and alveolar-like structures surrounded by delicate fibrovascular stroma and collagen that invaded ducts and ductules . Cancer cells were polygonal, round, and oval shape and had finely granular nuclear chromatin with uniform and vesicular nuclei and relatively eosinophilic cytoplasm. Due to these features immunohistochemistry (IHC) with neuroendocrine markers was performed. Cancer cells stained positive for both synaptophysin and chromogranin A (individual reactivity rate 100%) . A high-grade IDC component was also observed within the same tumor. Cancer cells were positive for estrogen receptors (ER) (reactivity rate 90%) and negative for progesterone receptors (PR) and HER-2 (HercepTest™ score 0). The Ki-67 proliferation index was >20%. Axillary lymph nodes did not harbor metastases. Based on these histological findings the tumor was classified as an alveolar-type invasive NECB with IDC.
Postoperatively, the patient was treated with three cycles each of cisplatin/etoposide followed by paclitaxel/carboplatinum. She was also started on hormone therapy (tamoxifen then switched to letrozole). Thirteen months after surgery the patient was alive, but she unfortunately developed pulmonary, bone, and hepatic metastases.