A 59-year-old man (height 171 cm, weight 74 kg) was admitted to our hospital for laparoscopic right hemihepatectomy for a diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma. The operation was performed under combined general and epidural anesthesia. Preoperative laboratory findings were within normal limits, and no premedication was administered to the patient. A standard anesthetic protocol was implemented, including routine non-invasive arterial blood pressure monitoring, electrocardiography, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) measurement on arrival at the operating room, and his vital signs were stable. Before induction of general anesthesia, a thoracic epidural catheter was inserted into the thoracic 7–8 interspace. Anesthesia was induced using propofol (2 mg/kg), remifentanil (0.3 μg/kg/min), and rocuronium (0.8 mg/kg) and was maintained using desflurane (4–6%), remifentanil (0.15–0.3 μg/kg/min), and rocuronium (5 μg/kg/min). The following ventilator settings were used: tidal volume 7 mL/kg ideal body weight, inspiratory:expiratory ratio 1:2, inspired O2 fraction 0.6 with air, and inspiratory fresh gas flow 2 L/min. The respiratory rate was adjusted to 8–16 breaths/min to maintain an ETCO2 pressure of 30–45 mmHg. After induction of anesthesia and tracheal intubation, a 22-G catheter was inserted into the left radial artery for blood sampling and continuous blood pressure monitoring. A central venous catheter was inserted from the right jugular vein for continuous central venous pressure monitoring. The patient was placed in the reverse Trendelenburg position with a left tilt, and CO2 was insufflated to create pneumoperitoneum (intra-abdominal pressure 12 mmHg). A low central venous pressure (< 5 mmHg) was maintained throughout the operation.
Approximately 5 h after commencing the operation and establishment of pneumoperitoneum, during the Pringle maneuver (hepatic resection performed with clamping the branches of the vascular pedicle), we observed a gradual decline in the patient’s SpO2 from 100 to 94%, reduction in the ETCO2 from 44 to 19 mmHg, reduction in the systolic blood pressure from 100 to 82 mmHg, and rapid elevation of the heart rate from 82 to 120 beats/min . Intraoperatively, the image displayed on the laparoscopic monitor revealed a small tear in the wall of a vein without bleeding but ballooning with gas within the vessel . CO2 embolism was suspected, and arterial blood gas testing was performed for confirmation (pH 7.153, partial pressure of O2 122.8 mmHg, partial pressure of CO2 78.2 mmHg). The pneumoperitoneum pressure was reduced to 10 mmHg, and the Pringle maneuver was abandoned. The inspired O2 fraction was immediately raised to 1.0, and intravenous phenylephrine (0.1 mg bolus) was administered to treat hypotension. The respiratory rate was increased to wash out CO2. After the patient was hemodynamically stabilized, the injured vein was immediately cut and sealed. Approximately 4 h after this embolic event, the entire operation was completed without complications. Intraoperative blood loss was 550 ml, and the patient was safely extubated. His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged without further complications.