Sudden-onset chest pain for 1 d.
A 29-year-old man complained of sudden precordial pain with no remission for 1 d prior to hospital admission but denied hemoptysis, dyspnea, or syncope. He sought evaluation and was admitted for the purpose of intensive examination and treatment.
The patient had been addicted to N2O for 1 year; as a result, peripheral neuropathy had occurred and was treated with vitamin B12 (Vit B12). His medical history included poor blood glucose control and anxiety. However, he had no history of thrombosis, malignant tumor, recent trauma, or prolonged air travel.
The patient has smoked over 13 pack-years and did not have alcoholism or a positive family history.
The initial assessment revealed that the patient was overweight and fragile, with a body mass index of 31.12 kg/m2, temperature of 36.3 °C, blood pressure of 110-120/70-80 mmHg, heart rate over 110 beats/min, respiratory rate over 30 breaths/min, and pulse oximetry of 93% when the fraction of inspired oxygen was 49%. Moreover, the physical examination indicated diminished breath sounds on both sides and the accentuation of pulmonic second sounds.
Laboratory data showed a high leukocyte count and an increased hemoglobin level, suggested abnormal liver biochemistry and hyperlipidemia, and revealed HHcy (24.12 µmol/L), high Vit B12 (734 µmol/L), and normal folate (14.39 nmol/L). The results of the protein S, protein C, anti-thrombin III antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, lupus anticoagulant, anti-β2gp1 autoantibody, and other autoantibodies were within normal limits. The clotting profile was normal, other than the D-dimer value (1.13 mg/L), and thrombophilia screening was negative. As markers in the risk stratification of PE, the levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) and cardiac troponin I (CTnI) were 533 pg/mL and 0.334 ng/mL, respectively. Arterial blood gas levels measured with an oxygen concentration of 49% showed the following: pH, 7.44; PaCO2, 30 mmHg; and PaO2, 74 mmHg.
An electrocardiogram (ECG, Figure ) showed sinus tachycardia with typical changes on SIQIIITIII (S wave in the aVL lead, Q wave and T wave in the III lead). Ultrasonic cardiogram demonstrated right ventricular enlargement with left ventricular compression. Color Doppler scans were used to explore femoral, popliteal, and calf muscular venous thrombosis in the right extremity. Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography (CTPA) revealed occlusion of the pulmonary artery trunk, lobar artery, and arterial branches on both sides and signs of increased right heart load .