A one-day-old Japanese boy was admitted to a nearby medical institution for jaundice, and his blood tests showed an elevated indirect bilirubin level and microcytic hypochromic anemia. Serum haptoglobin levels were low and target erythrocytes were found in peripheral blood smears, suggesting the possibility of hemolytic anemia due to thalassemia. His parents are Japanese and not consanguineous. He had no family history of liver or blood disease. There was no abnormality in the perinatal period, and he was born at term. No abnormalities were found in screening tests for congenital metabolic disorders. He needed a red blood cell transfusion every 2 weeks after birth for progressive anemia. Grayish-white stools appeared with persistent jaundice, and his blood tests at 67 days of age showed an increase in serum bilirubin levels (total bilirubin 12.7 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 7.6 mg/dL), transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase [AST], 198 IU/l; alanine aminotransferase [ALT], 190 IU/L), total bile acid (34.8 μmol/L), and alpha-fetoprotein (174,649 ng/mL). No increases in γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (PT-INR), or ammonia were observed. Increased serum levels of iron (139 mg/dL), ferritin (2948 ng/mL), and transferrin saturation (91%) were observed. Levels of antinuclear antibody, blood glucose, thyroid hormone, and α1 antitrypsin were all within the normal range. There was no serological evidence of hepatitis virus (A, B, C, and E), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, mumps, measles, rubella, varicella-zoster virus, parvovirus B19, treponema pallidum, or toxoplasma. All culture tests were negative. Amino acid analysis in blood did not reveal any findings suggestive of congenital amino acid metabolism disorders. Although abdominal ultrasonography showed no abnormalities in the bile ducts, bile duct scintigraphy and duodenal fluid examination showed poor bile outflow. Ascites, a slightly hard liver, and dilated gallbladder filled with yellow bile were observed during laparotomy. All biliary tracts of the common bile duct, common hepatic duct, and intrahepatic bile duct were visualized on cholangiography; therefore, biliary atresia was excluded. Liver biopsy showed changes in hepatocellular giant cells, bile canalicular plugs, and mononuclear cell infiltration. Berlin blue staining revealed that iron was deposited in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells . Low-intensity signals on T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) images were observed in the liver, pancreas, spleen, and bone marrow . Analysis of 61 genes responsible for hereditary disorders associated with neonatal and infantile cholestasis did not reveal any mutations (Additional file ). A genetic test for thalassemia confirmed the diagnosis of εγδβ-thalassemia.
He was diagnosed with NH based on neonatal-onset cholestatic hepatitis, high transferrin saturation, high serum levels of ferritin and α-fetoprotein, iron deposits in liver tissue, and MR images suggesting iron deposition in organs other than the liver. The total amount of red blood cell transfusion was approximately 40 mL/kg at the time of initiating the iron-chelating agent. An intravenous infusion of deferoxamine (60 mg/kg/day) was started at 86 days of age in addition to oral administration of fat-soluble vitamins, medium-chain triglycerides, glycyrrhizin, ursodeoxycholic acid, phenobarbital, and lactulose. Intravenous deferoxamine was changed to oral administration of deferasirox (12 mg/kg/day) at 105 days of age. Some partial blood exchange transfusions were performed, but intravenous immunoglobulin was not administered. Subsequently, no decrease in serum levels of ferritin, bilirubin, or transaminase was observed; therefore, he was transferred to our hospital at 5 months (160 days) of age.
On admission to our hospital, his length was 66.0 cm (− 0.1 SD) and weight 7.3 kg (− 0.5 SD) with no delay in physical growth or mental development. His urine was dark brown, and his stool was grayish-white. His skin color was brownish bronze, and his bulbar conjunctiva was markedly yellowed. He was a little drowsy but had no neurological abnormalities. He had abdominal distension and hepatosplenomegaly. His blood tests showed increased serum transaminase levels (AST 716 IU/L and ALT 338 IU/L), increased serum bilirubin levels (total bilirubin 45.9 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 33.6 mg/dL), increased serum ferritin level (4864 ng/mL), and increased iron saturation level (73%). Elevated levels of serum hyaluronic acid (459.3 ng/mL), a liver fibrosis marker, was observed. No abnormalities were found in blood ammonia concentration or electroencephalogram. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed hepatosplenomegaly, periportal collar signs around the portal vein, and ascites. No improvement was observed in the low-intensity signals of the liver, pancreas, spleen, or bone marrow on T2-enhanced MR images . No mutations in genes associated with hereditary hemochromatosis (HFE, HJV, HAMP, TFR2, and SLC40A1) were found. After admission, serum ferritin levels gradually decreased, but serum levels of bilirubin and transaminase gradually increased. In addition, thrombocytopenia (41,000 /μL), decreased serum albumin levels (2.1 g/dL), and increased PT-INR (1.19) manifested. The Child-Pugh score was 8 points, and the Pediatric End-stage Liver Disease (PELD) score was 19 points. He was diagnosed with irreversible liver failure, and his parents agreed with the necessity of living-donor liver transplantation after receiving sufficient explanation. He underwent living-donor liver transplantation with an enlarged left lateral segment graft from his mother at 6 months of age (202 days of the age). The graft weighed 310 g, and the graft-to-recipient weight ratio was 3.88. Immunosuppressive therapy consisted of steroids and tacrolimus. His resected liver was macroscopically dark green, suggesting strong iron deposition and cholestasis . Pathological examination of his excised liver revealed multinucleated giant hepatocytes, ballooning hepatocytes, intrahepatic cholestasis, bile canaliculus plugs, mononuclear cell infiltration, and interlobular fibrosis . Immunohistochemical analysis of the liver was positive for C5b-9 using rabbit polyclonal antibody (bs2673R; Bioss Antibodies, Woburn, MA, USA) . After liver transplantation, serum bilirubin, transaminases, and ferritin levels gradually decreased, and splenomegaly improved. Deferasirox was discontinued on the 56th day after surgery, and no re-elevation of the ferritin level was observed thereafter. At the same time, the progression of anemia associated with thalassemia slowed down, the frequency of red blood cell transfusions decreased, and he did not need blood transfusions after being discharged 2 months after transplantation. Currently, we are continuing immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus and steroids and following up on liver function and his growth and development. No recurrence of NH was observed from the time of living-donor liver transplantation to 1 year 9 months of age. His blood tests showed mildly elevated serum transaminase levels (AST 41 IU/L and ALT 84 IU/L), normal serum bilirubin levels (total bilirubin 1.38 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 0.38 mg/dL), normal serum ferritin level (56.3 ng/mL), and normal hemoglobin level (11.1 g/dL) at 1 year 9 months of age. In addition, we have continued assessing organ function such as the thyroid gland, pancreas, and heart in consideration of systemic iron deposits caused by NH, but no abnormal findings have been found. The definitive treatment for thalassemia is bone marrow transplantation, but εγδβ-thalassemia is known to be mild in infancy. Currently, his blood test still shows low haptoglobin levels, but he has shown no progression of anemia and is not dependent on blood transfusions. Considering the risk of bone marrow transplantation, we will continue to follow up on his anemia without bone marrow transplantation, with the consent of his parents.
Serum hepcidin-25 and growth differentiation factor (GDF)-15 levels were measured to investigate the changes in iron metabolism regulators in this case . The level of serum hepcidin-25, a negative regulator of iron utilization in the intestinal or reticular endothelial system, was not increased at the time of transfer and gradually declined to below the normal range. Conversely, the serum level of GDF-15, which can inhibit hepcidin-25, was higher than the normal range at transfer and increased thereafter.