The proband was a 9 years and 5 months old Chinese girl who was admitted to our Department of Rehabilitation due to abnormal walking posture. She was born at term by spontaneous vaginal delivery and was the first child of healthy and non-consanguineous Chinese parents. She weighed 3 kg at birth and had an Apgar score of 10. She was able to sit unsupported around the age of 8 months and crawl at the age of 1. She can walk independently at the age of 2. But at the age of 4, she gradually showed signs of increased muscle tone and gait impairment. Her most obvious clinical symptom was “toe-walking,” often falling when walking fast. She can't walk long distances and go upstairs as before. And she also had intellectual disability with poor language expression, slow response, attention deficit and poor grades in school. When the girl was admitted to our department for careful examination at the age of 9 years and 5 months, the physical examination revealed a weight of 35 kg (50th to 75th percentile), a height of 128 cm (10th to 25th percentile) and a head circumference of 51 cm (25th to 50th percentile). The girl was non-dysmorphic, and clinically assessed as increased muscle tension of lower limbs, hyperreflexia of the tendons, limited dorsiflexion of both ankles. The results of her blood counts and thyroid profile were normal, as were liver function tests, renal function tests and blood metabolic screen by mass spectrometry. Electroencephalogram (EEG) result was normal. On ophthalmological assessment, there was no sign of optic atrophy. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed dysgenesis of the corpus callosum and periventricular leukomalacia . The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) had an IQ of 42, indicating severe intellectual disability. A detailed study of the family history showed that no family members exhibited HSP phenotypes. And no neurological symptom was observed in the parents. They exhibited normal intelligence and walked without abnormal posture. The proband has a 3-year-old sister with normal intelligence and motor development.
After approval by the Ethics Committee of Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, 2 mL of peripheral venous blood was extracted from the proband and her family members, including her parents and sister. Genomic DNA was extracted by a DNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Shanghai, China). The DNA library was constructed, and the exomes were captured by xGen® Exome Research Panel v1.0 probe (Integrated Device Technology, USA). The enriched libraries were analyzed on the NovaSeq 6000 Sequencing platform (Illumina, USA). Sequencing reads were mapped to the GRCh37/hg19 reference genome via BWA software. Then candidate genetic variants in exons and canonical splice sites (±2 bp) were picked up with a minor allele frequency <0.005 using the ExAC database , dbSNP (http:// ), and 1000 Genomes Project . Functional prediction and pathogenicity analysis were performed using bioinformatics software. Potential mutations identified by whole-exome sequencing were validated by Sanger sequencing. Suspicious mutations were assessed according to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines. Furthermore, we used the online server, ChimeraX for analysis to construct the three-dimensional structure of DDHD2.
Genetic analysis revealed that the proband had two heterozygous missense mutations in the DDHD2 gene (Genbank association number: NM_015214), exon 2 c.168G>C (p.Trp56Cys) and exon 13 c.1505T>C (p.Phe502Ser). Sanger sequencing confirmed that her mother and sister carried the c.168G>C (p.Trp56Cys) mutation and her father carried the c.1505T>C (p.Phe502Ser) mutation . Comparative amino acid sequence alignment of DDHD2 across different species revealed that the affected amino acids 56 (tryptophan) and 502 (phenylalanine) are highly conserved . Furthermore, these two DDHD2 mutations were not found in ExAC, dbSNP and 1000 Genomes Project databases. The altered amino residues 56 (tryptophan) and 502 (phenylalanine) in the proband are located in the WWE and DDHD domains, respectively . The two missense changes yielded predominantly deleterious prediction scores by multiple in silico prediction tools (SIFT, PolyPhen-2, MutationTaster, Provean and REVEL), and the analysis suggested that these two mutations were predicted to be pathogenic .
Three-dimensional structural modeling of the DDHD2 protein showed that the mutations did not change the hydrogen bonding in protein, but both mutations resulted in changes in side chain size and space ratio compared with the wild type , which might lead to changes in the conformation of the DDHD2 protein. Videos of the three-dimensional structure of wild type and mutant DDHD2 can be found in the . Based on the above, these two compound heterozygous mutations could be the molecular basis for SPG54 in this case.