A 37-year-old female presented to the ED for evaluation of right lower extremity pain and swelling immediately following an exercise session about 24 hours earlier that involved squat motion and hip abduction with maximum load of 40 pounds. She additionally complained of decreased sensation to the dorsum of her right foot. These symptoms progressed through the next 24 hours, and the patient noticed a worsening expanding mass to the lateral aspect of her proximal right lower leg. Eight months prior to presentation, the patient had been in a motor vehicle collision that resulted in an open right tibial shaft fracture and fibular fracture requiring intramedullary nail fixation of the tibia. Three months later, she sustained a mechanical fall causing further displacement of the right fibula, which was not repaired and resulted in chronic nonunion. She successfully completed a physical rehabilitation program and had been doing well until the time of presentation to the ED. The patient had been participating in a rehabilitation program for narcotic dependence that arose after her previous orthopedic surgery. She was otherwise healthy.
Examination was remarkable for marked swelling of the anterolateral portion of the right lower extremity just distal to the knee . The right lower leg compartments were firm, mildly compressible, tender, and nonpulsatile. Her right dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis artery pulses were intact, and she had some mild numbness and paresthesias in the distribution of the superficial peroneal nerve distally. She did not have pain with passive ankle dorsiflexion or plantarflexion, and there were no overlying skin changes.
Radiographs demonstrated prior traumatic injury with hardware in place and marked soft tissue swelling in the lateral proximal calf . Point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) revealed pulsatile flow at the right anterolateral lower leg, suggestive of a pseudoaneurysm . Formal ultrasound confirmed the presence of a three-centimeter pseudoaneurysm arising from the anterior tibial artery along the margin of an 11-centimeter hematoma in the upper, lateral right calf. This finding was also confirmed on computed tomography angiogram .
Vascular surgery was consulted, and the patient underwent an open repair of the right anterior tibial artery pseudoaneurysm with evacuation of the hematoma and a four-compartment fasciotomy. Intraoperatively, the patient was noted to have jagged bone fragments from her fibular fracture in the pseudoaneurysm cavity, which were removed. Fasciotomy was also performed at that time because the patient had clinical signs of compartment syndrome, which included sensory deficit in addition to tense and swollen compartment. Her numbness resolved, and she was discharged home on postoperative day two.