The patient is a 42-month-old boy from a family without ancestral history of neuromuscular disorders. The parents are healthy and non consanguineous. The fetus was found with hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and reduced cerebellum size in the second trimester. There were no antenatal signs for muscle disorders such as polyhydramnios, reduced fetal movements, and no history of hypoxic/ischemic events during pregnancy.
He was born at 39 weeks by uncomplicated Caesarean, with birth weight 2.8 kg and length of 49 cm. The baby started to hold his head up at the age of 3 months and roll over at the age of 4 months. At 5 months he was found with low growth, with body weight 6.5 kg and length of 61 cm , and abnormal genitals with small penis about 0.5 cm during a routine check-up. Then the patient was referred to endocrinology and urology surgery department of our hospital, respectively. At the initial visit, he was also noted with dysmorphic features including ocular hypertelorism, esotropia and nose-bridge collapse. He was admitted to endocrinology department for further evaluation at the age of 7 months. But the boy had more manifestation beyond those dysmorphic features. When he was admitted to endocrinology department, his parents told the doctors that the boy seemed to start to have motor regression at 5 months of age, manifesting unsteady head control and less movement of the bilateral lower limbs in that admission. Then he was referred to the rehabilitation department and the neurology department after discharged. Examination showed head circumference of 40 cm and proximal leg weakness of 3 and arm weakness of 3 + on medical research council scale (MRC). Deep tendon reflexes were absent and hypotonia was significant.
Lab test showed normal thyroid function and tandem mass spectrometry. Stimulation tests of adrenocorticotrophic hormone, luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone and human chorionic gonadotrophin showed good response. Ultrasound showed small testes, which were 7.9*3.6*4.1 mm of the left one and 8.7*3.3*3.9 mm of the right one. The cranial MRI confirmed hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and normal size of the pituitary and cerebellum . The subsequent nerve conduction study (NCS) showed reduced compound muscle action potential (CMAP) of the right median and tibial nerves, and needle electromyography showed giant motor unit potentials in all the tested muscles.
The androgen receptor gene (AR) is normal, and there is no pathogenic variation in the steroid 5-alpha-reductase-2 gene (SRD5A2).Considering the boy had hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, facial dysmorphism, unexplained small penis and testes and motor development regression, he was recommended to perform trio whole-exome sequencing (WES) and array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) in the rehabilitation department. The SMN multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification in light of the findings in NCS identified a homozygous deletion in exon 7 of the SMN1 gene and 3 copies of the SMN2 gene. No further pathogenic variations could explain the hypoplasia of the corpus callosum and dysmorphic features through trio WES and aCGH. The boy was diagnosed as SMA type I, according to the age at onset and the best motor milestone.
Nusinersen for the boy was discussed after it had been available in China. He might get some benefits from nusinersen, but the symptoms potentially caused by brain malformation are still a big problem for him. After an in-depth discussion, the plan of a therapy of nusinersen was made and we would weigh the pros and cons to reconsider nusinersen after one year.
The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia Infant Test of Neuromuscular Disorders (CHOP-INTEND) was 46 points, and the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination (HINE) Sect. 2 was 6 at the age of 18 months when he started to receive nusinersen and routine habilitation training. As we expected he had made an improvement in motor function after one year, and he continued to complete 9 intrathecal doses as protocol . Physical examination showed proximal leg weakness of MRC grade 3 + and arm weakness of MRC grade 4 at the age of 40 months, and the results of CHOP-INTEND and HINE-2 improved a lot , as the scores at last evaluation were 55 and 14 points, respectively.
After starting the nusinersen treatment, both the CMAP of tibial nerve and median nerve still declined until the sixth or seventh dose of nusinersen. Notably, the CMAPs started to improve at around 1 year after starting the nusinersen treatment, The changes in the median nerves were more pronounced than the tibial nerves .
His parents also reported that he regained the ability of rolling over without assistance after the fifth injection. Moreover, he was able to sit independently for several minutes after the seventh injection. He could sit more steadily, lasting for 20 to 30 min at last follow-up.
During therapy, he had an infection of the upper-respiratory tract. No other adverse effects were reported. There were no clinically significant adverse events in laboratory values or physical examinations considered related to the nusinersen treatment.
Although he could speak at the age of 12 months, the progress of speech had been very slow prior to 18-month-old. The speech improved a lot after the age of 30 months, and he could communicate easily. At present, he could speak short sentences with 7 to 8 words. However, his growth was still slow with body weight of 10 kg, body length 90.0 cm and head circumference of 48 cm.
At present, his parents are pleased with the improvements in their son and would like to continue the treatment to see if there will be greater motor improvement in the future.