A 66-year-old Caucasian male patient, with a medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM), paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, previous parathyroid adenoma, and renal failure of unknown origin underwent successful kidney transplantation in 2013. He did not smoke or consume alcohol and had no family history of CRC. In April 2018, he presented with abdominal discomfort at the Emergency Department. Gastroscopy showed ventricular erosions, while colonoscopy and abdominal computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed an adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon with minimal locoregional infiltration. Because of symptoms of bowel obstruction, urgent surgical resection was performed according to Hartmann. The histological diagnosis was low-grade adenocarcinoma, pT3 N1b (3/9+1TD), V1, Pn-, R0, N-K-Ras wild type. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/CT scan showed a 2.5-cm metastasis in the VIIth segment of the liver. A metastatic paraaortical lymph node on the left and raised the possibility of further smaller metastases in the liver, as well . Therefore, the clinical diagnosis of the patient was metastatic (stage IV) sigmoid colon cancer (AJCC TNM system). According to the multidisciplinary team (MDT), first-line palliative cetuximab plus folinic acid–fluorouracil–irinotecan (FOLFIRI) chemotherapeutic treatment was recommended.
Figure shows the main events of the patient’s illness and treatment.
The ongoing medications of the patient included immunosuppressive drugs: tacrolimus, methylprednisolone, and mycophenolate mofetil, as well as other drugs, losartan, pantoprazole, amlodipine, furosemide, potassium, calcitriol, atorvastatin, empagliflozin, dulaglutide, and rapid- and long-acting insulin. The patient’s body mass index was 30.9 kg/m2. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance was 1. Prior to initiation of the treatment, the patient’s routine laboratory tests were within normal limits and his blood pressure and blood sugar values were well controlled.
Beginning July 2018, the patient received one cycle of first-line cetuximab-FOLFIRI therapy. Adverse events (AE) included fluctuations of blood sugar levels, diarrhea, and hypomagnesemia, which were treated adequately. To reduce the risk of further AE, cetuximab was substituted with panitumumab and the patient received panitumumab-FOLFIRI therapy through the second to fourth cycles of chemotherapy. The patient developed diarrhea, hypomagnesemia, and significant weight loss (5 kg) during treatment. In August 2018 the follow-up PET/CT scan revealed stable disease: regression of the left paraaortic lymph node, no progression in the size of the liver metastasis, and no local recurrence .
Because of the severe AE the patient was unwilling to continue with the panitumumab-FOLFIRI treatment regimen. Ablation with radiofrequency was not a possible option for treatment. Based on the MDT’s decision, multimodal therapy, including stereotactic radiotherapy of the liver metastasis was recommended. Accordingly, in September 2018 the patient received 10× 5 Gy stereotactic body irradiation (SBRT) for his liver metastasis, using the inspiration breath hold technique . Since the patient did not consent to the continuation of the combination FOLFIRI treatment because of its side effects, monotherapy was initiated. Thus, the patient was given six cycles of mono-panitumumab therapy. AE, including skin rash and hypomagnesemia developed and were treated.
By January 2019, PET/CT scan showed regression of the liver metastasis but a progression in the paraaortic lymph node . Therefore, 5× 8 Gy stereotactic irradiation (SBRT) was given to the paraaortic lesion. The follow-up PET/CT scan revealed regression in both the size and metabolic activity of the paraaortic lymph node . Meanwhile, the patient continued to receive mono-panitumumab therapy and altogether received 16 cycles of panitumumab until June 2019. Complete remission was attained, since no macroscopic FDG-avid malignancy could be detected on the PET/CT scan at the end of June 2019 .
On 18 July 2019, the patient suffered a hemorrhagic stroke and became comatose. Despite neurosurgical intervention and intensive care, the patient died 10 days later.