A 57-year-old Brazilian woman was referred to our hospital because of an increase in abdominal girth in February 2003. She said she was overweight, and had noted a rapid increase in abdominal girth during the last year. Her menarche occurred at the age of 15, she always had regular periods, and had used oral contraceptives for two years. She had eight pregnancies, producing eight children, and underwent tubal ligation at the age of 29. Her menopause occurred at the age of 46, and she never used hormonal therapy. She underwent an appendectomy and cholecystectomy, respectively, at the ages of 16 and 29, and had arterial hypertension and dyslipidemia. She denied the use of tobacco, alcohol or illicit drugs. Physical examination revealed pale skin, a temperature of 36.1°C (97°F), a respiratory rate of 25 breaths/minute, a pulse rate of 100 beats per minute, blood pressure at 180/140mmHg; normal cardiac and respiratory sounds; her abdomen was distended and tense, and her abdominal circumference measured 134cm , with dullness to percussion and superficial dilated veins. Examination of her breasts, vulva and vagina did not reveal abnormalities. Her lower limbs showed moderate swelling. She was admitted to the gynecological ward for accurate diagnosis and treatment. Laboratory tests revealed hematocrit 29%, hemoglobin 9.2g/dL, leukocytes 7000 cells/μL, platelets 478,000/μL, CA-125 374.8IU/dL, and normal levels of carcinoembrionic antigen (CEA) as well as of alpha fetal protein. The chest radiograph showed an upward compression of her diaphragm, and abdominal ultrasonography study showed a voluminous cystic abdominal-pelvic mass with thick walls, strongly suggestive of an ovarian tumor . Abdominal ultrasound (US) images showed a normal aspect of the liver, bile ducts, portal and supra-hepatic veins, as well as normal spleen and kidneys. The cystic mass had rough septa and voluminous solid components, occupying the entire abdominal cavity with extrinsic compression of the liver and spleen; discrete blood flux within the tumor and high resistance peripheral blood flow. Computed tomography (CT) images of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a conspicuous and well delineated tumor with heterogeneous attenuation coefficient, predominantly liquid and with coarse septa and some solid internal irregularities. The huge tumor displaced her uterus to the left, compressed her abdominal contents, and extended up to her diaphragm . As the main hypothesis was a giant adnexal complex mass, in addition to the high possibility of malignant origin, the surgical option was open laparotomy. Procedures included the intact removal of the right ovarian tumor along with her normal right fallopian tube, left adnexal resection, total hysterectomy, omentectomy, para aortic and pelvic lymph node dissection to stage the disease, and sampling of lymph nodes and of the ascitic fluid for routine tests and cytopathological evaluations. Accentuated excess of skin and subcutaneous tissue was observed after removal of the mass . The extra-large (42×40×28cm) tumor, weighing 40kg, had a smooth external surface, and the inner aspect was multilocular, with mucinous and serous fluid areas . The histopathological diagnosis was a well-differentiated mucinous cystadenocarcinoma . The staging was 1A (tumor limited to one ovary, no ascites present containing malignant cells, no tumor on the external surface, and capsule intact). The immediate postoperative period was in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), for close hemodynamic, ventilatory and renal function monitoring and fluid and electrolytes control. She underwent six cycles of chemotherapy (three weeks apart) with paclitaxel plus cisplatin, with no side effects, and was under close surveillance on the outpatient section of Clinical Oncology. The option for intravenous chemotherapy in this setting was based on two major concerns. The very large abdominal cavity made it difficult to treat with intraperitoneal chemotherapy with platin, and the persistence of elevated CA-129 after the cytoreduction. The levels of CA-125 were 374.8 and 222IU/mL (before and after the cytoreductive surgery), and post chemotherapy control was 7.1IU/mL. Actually, carboplatin is the best option because of its less toxic effects; however, cisplatin was the standardized drug in our hospital at the time of her admission. She has been under specialized follow-up for more than 10 years, asymptomatic and with normal imaging and laboratory parameters, including the CA-125 marker.