A 46 year-old white male with stage IV small cell lung carcinoma presented to the ophthalmological emergency department. In addition to his oncological situation, past medical history disclosed smoking for 10 years and asthma since childhood. He was diagnosed 1 year earlier after complaining of dorsal and thoracic pain associated with dyspnea, anorexia, and loss of weight. A thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography (CT) at that time revealed multiple vertebral and iliac hyperdense areas suggestive of bone metastasis. Laboratory analyses at that time revealed normal protein levels with no monoclonal spikes on electrophoresis, a normal total prostate specific antigen (0.7 ng/mL; N < 4 ng/mL), moderate C-reactive protein (1.2 mg/dL, N < 1.0 mg/dL), and no microalbuminuria. Beta-Human chorionic gonadotropin (B-HCG), Alpha Fetoprotein (AFP) and Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were normal. CT angiography revealed pleural and lung nodules as well as enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. A transthoracic aspirative biopsy of the mediastinal adenopathies was performed and histological analysis revealed small round and blue cells with trabecular and nest-like architecture with many mitotic figures. Immunohistochemistry showed reactivity to CAM5.2, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and CD56 with negative CD45, CK7, CK20, and TTF-1. The proliferative index was high (Ki-67 more than 20%). All these aspects pointed to a metastasis of a neuroendocrine tumor with an assumed primary origin in the lung, and the patient initiated palliative treatment with systemic chemotherapy (cisplatin and etoposide). Positron emission tomography-fluorodeoxyglucose (PET-FDG) scan revealed a mediastinal hypermetabolic mass (compatible with ganglionar metastization), two bone lesions at the sacrum and humerus, and an avid superior right lobe lung nodule suggestive of being the primary lesion. No activity was noted at that time at the extraocular muscles. Due to the patient’s frailty, he interrupted previous chemotherapy after six cycles and received second-line palliative treatment with topotecan.
During this period, he complained of loss of vision and ocular pain. He was observed by our ophthalmology department. Our evaluation revealed proptosis in both eyes (OU), limitation of ocular movements OU, lagophthalmos OU [with absent Bell phenomenon in the left eye (LE)], and a new-onset LE relative afferent pupillary defect (APD) . His visual acuity was 4/10 in the right eye (RE) and hand-motion in the LE (6/10 and 3/10, respectively, 1 month earlier). Biomicroscopy revealed an exposure keratopathy OU. On fundus examination, RE had choroidal folds and normal optic disc and LE had both choroidal folds and optic disc edema.
Orbital computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral infiltration of all extraocular muscles , with orbital compression on the left orbit leading to compression of the optic nerve by the enlarged muscles at the level of the apex (previous CT scans of this patient showed no space conflict at the apex of both orbits).
After multidisciplinary discussion with oncology and maxillofacial surgery, a decision to decompress the left orbit with a lateral canthotomy due to a compressive optic neuropathy was made, in accordance with the patient.
Although visual acuity of the left eye improved slightly (to 1/10), there was progression of the proptosis and worsening of the exposure keratopathy, and an intensive lubrication and amniotic membrane cover was performed on the LE. Incisional biopsy of extraocular muscle metastases was not performed to reduce the patient burden as it would not alter the treatment course.
The patient remained under palliative chemotherapy and eventually died 5 months after presentation.