We report a 7 year old boy who was referred to the Cardiac Center in Addis Ababa with dyspnea on moderate exertion and palpitations of about 2 years duration. The child was found to have a cardiac murmur at the age of about 2 years but was not subjected to echocardiography due to lack of skill and equipment in his locality. He was not on any medication at the time of presentation.
On physical examination, he appeared to be well-grown and healthy-appearing boy with a weight of 39 kg, height of 132 cm and body mass index of 22.4. His blood pressure was 127/55 mmHg and his pulse rate was 84 bpm. His oxygen saturation was 88% on room air. There was no remarkable cyanosis or clubbing of the fingers. Peripheral pulses were palpable. He had a parasternal lift, systolic thrill and a 4/6 ejection systolic murmur, best heard over the left 2nd intercostal space and a pansystolic murmur of grade 3/6 intensity, best heard over the left lower sternal border. There was no hepatomegaly or peripheral edema.
His chest X – ray showed marked cardiac enlargement with clearly decreased pulmonary vascular markings. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with a rate of 88 beats per minute, incomplete right bundle branch block, right ventricular hypertrophy, right atrial enlargement and right axis deviation. Echocardiographic examination showed normal abdominal and atrial situs, with normal position of the heart in the left chest and normal venoatrial, atrioventricular and ventriculoarterial relationships. The right ventricle looked markedly dilated and hypertrophied. The right atrium looked dilated. Right ventricular systolic function appeared grossly reduced on visual inspection and Tricuspid Annular Plane Systolic Excursion (TAPSE). There was a patent foramen ovale with right to left flow by color Doppler. The interventricular septum appeared intact. The mitral and aortic valves were structurally normal. The tricuspid valve looked thickened. The pulmonary valve was thickened with fused leaflets. No calcification was seen. There was a trickle of flow seen across the valve. There was a discrete circumferential membrane about 1.3 cm below the pulmonic valve (Figure ). Continuous wave Doppler across the pulmonic valve showed a peak systolic pressure gradient of 185 mmHg. However, pulsed wave Doppler just distal to the membrane did not show significant turbulence or pressure gradient before dilation of the valve. He had also moderate tricuspid regurgitation with pressure gradient of 185 mmHg. No pericardial effusion was seen.
The boy was scheduled for percutaneous balloon dilation of the valve under general anesthesia and was taken to the catheterization laboratory. Right ventriculography in the frontal projection showed a discrete membranous obstruction about 1.3 cm below the pulmonic valve (Figure
). Right ventricular systolic pressure was 160 mmHg and the pulmonary arterial systolic pressure was 15 mmHg. With a 17 mm × 30 mm Osypka balloon, dilation of the valve was performed (Figure ). Post-dilation right ventricular pressure was 72 mmHg and that of the pulmonary artery was 22 mmHg. There was mild post-dilation pulmonary regurgitation. After dilation of the valve, both catheter measurement and echocardiography showed significant subvalvar pressure gradient. The patient tolerated the procedure and there was no complication. He was extubated in the catheterization laboratory. He was discharged after one day in hospital. He was given propranolol 10 mg orally 3 times a day for 3 months. His discharge echo showed reduction in the degree of tricuspid regurgitation, mild pulmonic regurgitation and a subvalvar right ventricular outflow tract gradient of 45-50 mmHg. On a 1-month follow up visit, he reported significant improvement in his clinical symptoms and improved exercise capacity. His oxygen saturation on this visit was 95% at room air. His right ventricular outflow gradient on this visit was approximately 60 mmHg and his tricuspid regurgitation has decreased in severity. His right ventricular function has improved.