The patient was a 72-year-old man who had never smoked and was receiving annual follow-up after curative resection of colon cancer (pT3N0M0, Stage II) with no recurrence. Chest computed tomography (CT) performed 4 years previously had revealed a 4-mm-diameter nodule with pure ground-glass opacity. Recent CT showed that the nodule had increased to 8 mm in diameter. Therefore, the lesion was suspected to be a primary lung cancer, and he was referred to our hospital for surgery. CT showed that the nodule was located in the right apical segment, which had a bronchus that directly originated from the trachea 1.2 cm above the carina (, A). The right upper lobe bronchus bifurcated to the anterior (S3) and posterior (S2) segments. Reconstructed three-dimensional (3D)-CT and an axial CT image taken at the level of the tracheal bronchus revealed that the apical segmental artery (A1) independently branched from the main pulmonary artery (PA), and V1a and V2a + b shared a common trunk that drained to the anterior vein (, ).
The patient was intubated with a left-sided double-lumen tube (DLT; 37Fr, Mallinckrodt™, Covidien, Ireland) under fiberoptic bronchoscopy. The tracheal bronchus was observed directly under the tracheal cuff. Video-assisted thoracic apical segmentectomy under one-lung ventilation was performed via four incisions: a 3.0-cm incision at the middle axillary line at the 5th intercostal space (ICS), a 15-mm incision at the anterior axillary line at the 4th ICS for the second assistant, a 12-mm incision at the anterior axillary line at the 3rd ICS for the camera, and a 7-mm incision at the posterior axillary line at the 4th ICS. The apical segmental artery (A1) was cut, and the bifurcation of the tracheal bronchus (B1) and the remaining bronchi (B2 + B3) was identified. The tracheal bronchus (B1) was isolated and cut using an endostapler. V1a was ligated and cut while preserving V2a + b. A small branch of V1a (V1a*) draining to V1b was cut using an ultrasonic energy device . The indocyanine green fluorescence method was used to visualize the intersegmental border . Right apical segmentectomy was completed using the endostapler . Histopathological examination revealed adenocarcinoma in situ. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 5 days postoperatively. At one-year follow-up, the patient had no evidence of radiographic recurrence.