A 37-year-old Iranian man with morbid obesity, mechanical low back pain, initial weight of 124 kg, and a body mass index (BMI) of 37.5 kg/m2 underwent sleeve gastrectomy surgery. The patient was discharged from the hospital the next day in a good general condition with stable vital signs and was ordered to get subcutaneous enoxaparin 40 mg daily. A few hours after discharge, the patient had sudden shortness of breath after taking a bath. Despite having taken one dosage of enoxaparin ampoule at noon on the same day, he received another dose and his shortness of breath improved following the injection. He went to the hospital the next morning with symptoms of weakness, lethargy, and shortness of breath. The patient was admitted with a possible diagnosis of pulmonary embolism and underwent empiric treatment with injectable heparin. The patient’s blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, his heart rate was 140 beats per minute, and his respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute. In the tests before bariatric surgery, the patient had hemoglobin (Hb) of 15 mg/dl and creatinine (Cr) of 1.2 mg/dl.
During hospitalization, complementary laboratory tests were requested; Hb 11 mg/dl, Cr 2.3 mg/dl, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 20 mg/dl were detected. Other tests [prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), international normalized ratio (INR), platelet count (PLT), and electrolytes] were reported normal. Laboratory tests were requested once again; Hb 10.3 mg/dl, Cr 2.7 mg/dl, and BUN 22 mg/dl were detected. The patient received 1.5 L of normal saline. The patient had anuria, despite getting intravenous fluid of Ringer’s lactate. Hence, the patient’s laboratory tests were rechecked. In the new laboratory tests, Hb 9.7 mg/dl, Cr 3.4 mg/dl, and BUN 26 mg/dl were detected. The patient was a candidate for CT, which was not performed due to the patient’s high creatinine. After initial management, the patient’s pulse rate was 140 beats per minute, his respiratory rate was 25 breaths per minute, and his blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg. In the echocardiography, pathological findings were not reported. On ultrasound at the bedside, a mild to moderate amount of fluid around the spleen and some blood clots were reported. Due to the progressive rise of Cr and anuria, and the lack of justification with intraabdominal bleeding, the patient was a candidate for laparoscopic revision. The gastrocolic ligament was sutured to the stomach again after the sleeve was opened , and there was a large clot in that space . The source of bleeding was not found after complete washing and emptying the abdominal space of clots and blood. The surgery was then completed after the placement of two drains, and the patient had diuresis of 1000 ml during the first 3 hours following the procedure. The total amount of blood received after the operation was one pack cell unit. Observations and examinations during surgery revealed an increase in retroperitoneal abdominal pressure due to the compressive effect of the clot in the artificial lacrimal space, which collapsed the inferior vena cava above the renal space and justified renal failure of renal origin. The patient was not hypotensive, nor was the renal flow diminished; the renal failure was due to compression load that was not corrected with fluid therapy. The patient was discharged on the second day after the operation in good general condition with stable vital signs with Hb of 10.3 and complementary supplements, such as elemental iron and vitamin C. In the 3-month follow-up, the patient had normal laboratory data and weight loss of about 20 kg.