Two years and six months old Sri Lankan girl presented with persistently low haemoglobin, white cell count and platelet count for two weeks following a viral illness. She was born to non-consanguineous healthy parents at term with a birth weight of 2.58 kg following an antenatal period complicated with pregnancy-induced hypertension of the mother. The child had a large ventricular septal defect at birth which was surgically closed at two months. She had two previous hospital admissions for respiratory tract infections, which had responded to standard antibiotics. Her development and immunisation have been up to date. Her parents were from a higher middle-class family, and she had been taking a well-balanced normal diet adequate in calories and proteins. She was asymptomatic without vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain or irritability.
On examination, she had mild pallor but did not have jaundice, cyanosis, bleeding manifestations, generalised lymphadenopathy or oedema. Her weight was 11 kg (between − 1SD to -2SD), height was 85 cm (between − 1SD to -2SD), and the weight for height was between median and − 1SD. She did not show features of micronutrient deficiency. Abdominal examination revealed firm splenomegaly of 2 cm without hepatomegaly or other abnormalities. The examination of her cardiovascular, respiratory, and neurological systems was clinically normal.
Full blood count revealed haemoglobin of 9.3 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume of 72fL, white cell count of 1.7 × 109/L (neutrophils-33% and lymphocytes-62%) and platelet count of 56 × 109/L. The blood picture revealed a mixture of hypochromic microcytic and normochromic normocytic red cells with occasional pencil cells and macrocytes. The reticulocyte count was 1% and the direct agglutinin test was negative. Bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy revealed normocellular marrow, normoblastic erythropoiesis with occasional megaloblasts, granulopoiesis with normal maturation and < 1% blasts and normal megakaryopoiesis. There were no abnormal cells. Her serum ferritin was 5.7ng/mL (normal 15–200), serum B12 was 550pg/mL (normal 187–883) and red blood cell folate was 355ng/mL (normal 126–651). Abdominal ultrasonography revealed mild splenomegaly with a spleen length of 8.6 cm.
As the cause for splenomegaly was unexplained, further investigations to exclude a metabolic disease were carried out. Venous blood gas revealed a partially compensated metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.40 and bicarbonate of 14mmol/L. Serum sodium was 142mmol/L, potassium was 4mmol/L, chloride was 105mmol/L, and the calculated anion gap was 27mmol/L (normal 8–16). Serum lactate was 3.1mmol/L (normal < 2), and urine was positive for ketones. Plasma ammonia, creatinine, glucose, cholesterol, and transaminases were normal. Viral studies for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus and human immunodeficiency virus were negative and antinuclear antibody and lactate dehydrogenase levels were normal. Plasma amino acid profile was normal; however, urine organic acid profile revealed marked elevations of ketotic markers (acetoacetate and 3-hydroxybutyric acid) and moderate elevation of tricarboxylic acid cycle compounds (2-ketoglutarate, aconitic acid, and citric acid) during fasting as well as the fed state. Due to abnormalities in metabolic markers, genetic mutation analysis using whole exome sequencing was performed. This revealed compound heterozygous variants of the SLC7A7 gene (NM_001126105.2:c.931 A > G and NM_001126105.2:c.1095 + 6T > C), confirming the diagnosis of LPI. Genetic mutation analysis of parents was not done due to the high cost.
She was started on citrulline 100 mg/kg/day with dietary protein restriction. She was also given oral iron (6 mg/kg/day of elemental iron). Oral folic acid (1 mg od) and intramuscular vitamin B12 treatment, which was commenced due to megaloblastic erythropoiesis in bone marrow, was discontinued following receipt of the genetic report. At the 3-month follow-up, she was clinically well with persistent splenomegaly of 3 cm. Her haemoglobin and white cell count had normalised; however, the thrombocytopenia was persistent, with a platelet count of 83 × 109/L. At the 12-month follow-up, she continued to have splenomegaly of 3 cm and thrombocytopenia (platelet count 90 × 109/L). Her haemoglobin and white cell count were 12.3 g/dL and 6.4 × 109/L, respectively.