A 28-year-old male patient presented with headache and personality changes, with no other neurological disturbance. The patient became increasingly pensive and apathetic. He had a history of retinoblastoma operation of his left eye, but a complete data could not be obtained. For his complaints, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which discovered a mass of the left frontoparietal and left cerebellopontine angle. The mass was excised at the Hasan Sadikin hospital in Bandung, with a histopathological result of meningioma . After 7 days inpatient stay, the patient was discharged with improvement of physical symptoms, and was lost to follow-up.
A year later, the patient presents with headache and a lump on his operative scar. CT scan shows a mass of the left frontoparietal and left cerebellopontine angle. The patient's symptoms also include behavioral changes, such as talking to himself and being angry. The patient also appears withdrawn and seeks to be alone. The patient underwent another operation for his left frontal region tumor, with similar histopathologic result of meningioma. After several days treatment, the patient's psychiatric symptoms decreased but did not disappear. The patient was scheduled for an operation for his cerebellopontine angle mass 3 weeks later, but 10 days prior to the scheduled operation, the patient became increasingly aggressive, exhibited erratic behavior, and expressed suicidal tendencies. The patient was then consulted to the psychiatric department of Hasan Sadikin hospital, and was diagnosed with mild depression and given psychotherapy . The patient's left cerebellopontine angle mass was excised, with histopathological diagnosis of meningioma. After several days of inpatient care, the patient was discharged with improvements of his physical and psychiatric condition. The patient no longer has suicidal tendencies.
The patient returned twice for follow-up to the neurosurgery clinic, at 1 and 8 months after his operation. His psychiatric condition still shows aggression and withdrawal, although improved in comparison to his condition before the operation. The patient did not return for follow-up to the psychiatry clinic.