The 67-year-old man who last January 2020 presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital for relapse of heart failure (HF) was already known to our Cardiology Unit. His medical history had begun in 2015 with an acute anterior myocardial infarction, treated with percutaneous angioplasty and stenting on left anterior descending coronary artery. That time, a CMR had been performed before discharge, showing a mildly dilated left ventricle (LV), slight decrease of LV systolic function (LV ejection fraction [EF] 47%) and a subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) involving the apical and septal segments. Five years later, because of a new-onset atrial flutter and a severe pleural effusion , he had been admitted again to our hospital. Echocardiogram had revealed the signs of the previous apical myocardial infarction, and besides, a biventricular hypertrophy (LV mass 116 g/m2, interventricular septal and posterior wall thickness 1.1 cm and 1.4 cm, respectively), LV high filling pressures (E/E′ 27) and a severe biatrial enlargement (left and right atrial volume 56 cm3 and 51 cm3, respectively) . Pleural effusion had been treated with thoracentesis. Because of the telemetry detection of high-degree atrio-ventricular block with long pauses (> 6 s), a single-chamber pacemaker had been implanted. Six months after the discharge, he came again for fatigue and dyspnea. Laboratory tests showed high cardiac troponin and high B-type natriuretic peptide, and the recurrence of severe pleural effusion required a thoracic drainage. Given the rise of troponin, and the echocardiographic worsening of LV EF, coronary angiography was repeated, showing a critical three-vessel disease. For testing myocardial viability and proceeding to coronary revascularization, CMR was performed and, despite image artifacts due to pacemaker, showed a hypertrophic LV with reduced systolic function (LV mass 97 g/m2, LV EF 35%) due to diffuse akinesia . Pleura and pericardium effusion were well appreciable. Inversion time scout sequence was not able to identify the appropriate inversion time to null normal myocardium (Additional file : Video 2), suggesting an abnormal gadolinium kinetics. Post contrast images detected a diffuse transmural LGE , a pattern which raised the suspicion of CA. However, a subsequent BS with technetium-99 m-3,3-diphosphono-1,2 propanodicarboxylic acid (99mTc-DPD) did not detect any cardiac uptake of tracer . AL amyloidosis was ruled out by urine and serum immunofixation. A careful revision of the CMR findings, combined with the recent medical history, forced us to perform EMB, which at first sight showed replacement-type fibrosis and no evidence of amyloid deposits at Congo Red staining under polarized light microscope as well as at thioflavin T fluorescence . Despite this, given the high clinical suspicion of CA, immunoelectron microscopy against kappa and lambda light chains and TTR was performed, showing some TTR amyloid fibrils deposits with diameters of about 9 nm in the extracellular matrix of the myocardium . A genetic testing was then performed, but no pathogenic variants were detected, so that a wild type TTR-CA diagnosis was made. The patient was then discharged with anticoagulant, aspirin, statin, diuretic and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist therapy, and referred to a tertiary care center for evaluation of TTR-targeted treatment. At 6-months follow up, he did not experience readmissions to hospital for HF.