A 47-year-old male was admitted with dyspnoea at rest, reduced exercise tolerance, low-grade fever, night sweats, and unintentional weight loss of 7 kg over the two weeks leading up to admission. He was previously fit and well, had no past medical history, and was not taking regular medications. He was a labourer by trade, an ex-smoker, denied intravenous drug use, drank 2–3 units of alcohol per week, and owned a pet dog. Observations on admission were a temperature of 38.9 degrees Celsius, blood pressure 131/61 mmHg, and pulse rate 114 beats per minute. A Grade 4 early diastolic murmur and mid-systolic flow murmur were audible over the left sternal edge and loudest at the apex. A collapsing pulse was palpable in the upper limbs and Corrigan pulse sign at the carotids was positive. Conjunctival haemorrhages and fingernail splinter haemorrhages were seen. There were signs of heart failure with a raised jugular venous pressure and bilateral basal crackles in the chest. An electrocardiogram revealed a sinus tachycardia with a normal PR interval.
Urinalysis revealed a microscopic haematuria. Initial blood tests revealed a raised C-reactive protein of 72 mg/L and an elevated white cell count of 14.9 x 10 9 /L with a neutrophilia and monocytosis. There was a normocytic normochromic anaemia (haemoglobin of 91 g/L) and thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 80 x10 9 /L). HIV and hepatitis B and C screens were negative. Serum N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was markedly elevated at 27,931ng/L (assay cut-off suggestive of heart failure > 2,000 ng/L) and high sensitivity cardiac troponin I level was measured at 1,506 ng/L trending down to 1,209 ng/L (range 0-34.2ng/L).
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed mobile vegetations attached to a tricuspid aortic valve that oscillated into the aorta during systole (; Video 1). This was associated with severe eccentric aortic regurgitation (AR) with a pressure half time of 72 ms and significant diastolic flow reversal in the descending aorta . The aortic root dimensions were normal. The left ventricle was markedly dilated with a left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) of 316 mL. Left ventricular systolic function was preserved (left ventricular ejection fraction of 0.61 by Simpson’s biplane method of discs). The estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure by echocardiography was 75 mmHg and this was associated with mild dilatation of the right ventricle and severe tricuspid regurgitation (Video 2). There was a posteriorly directed jet of mitral regurgitation secondary to chordal tethering of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve (Video 3).
A diagnosis of definite infective endocarditis of the native aortic valve by the modified Duke’s criteria was made. A magnetic resonance imaging scan of the brain showed a small area of hyperintensity adjacent to the posterior body of the left lateral ventricle . Time-of-flight angiography of the carotid arteries showed small mycotic aneurysms in the left internal carotid artery. A computed tomography scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed cardiomegaly, moderate bilateral pleural effusions, pulmonary oedema, and splenomegaly. Three sets of blood cultures were taken which were negative after extended culture. Intravenous amoxicillin was given followed by intravenous vancomycin and gentamicin.
The patient was transferred to a cardiothoracic centre for definitive surgical management following a Heart team discussion. Intraoperative transoesophageal echocardiography confirmed severe and torrential aortic regurgitation . Multiple vegetations were attached to the left ventricular outflow tract muscular septum and between the junction of the right and left coronary cusps with destruction of the aortic annulus. Purulent material was seeping out of an abscess cavity adjacent to the right coronary cusp. No vegetations were present on the mitral or tricuspid valves. A tissue aortic valve replacement plus aortic root replacement with re-implantation of the coronary arteries was performed. The anterior mitral valve leaflet was found to be mildly tethered and so freed with a tricuspid valve annuloplasty ring sited due to the presence of severe functional regurgitation.
No organisms were seen by Gram’s stain of aortic valve tissue collected intraoperatively and no growth occurred after 48 h of standard culture or 12 days of enrichment culture. As a causal organism had not been identified a sample was submitted for 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene sequencing which identified C.
canimorsus. An additional primer pair (785F/1175R) targeting the V5–7 region of 16S rRNA gene had been recently added to routine diagnostic 16S rRNA, and this helped identify C. canimorsus, which has been shown to be amplified much less efficiently by the other primer sets targeting the V1–2 regions of 16s rRNA gene.
None of the three sets of blood cultures taken at admission grew any organisms after 14 days of routine culture. As the patient had demonstrated a good initial response to intravenous meropenem this antibiotic was continued with daily monitoring of his inflammatory markers to good effect. Capnocytophaga
canimorsus is shown to be sensitive to imipenem, clindamycin, linezolid, and tetracylines.
Four weeks post-surgery an echocardiogram showed a well-seated aortic valve replacement with no transvalvular or paravalvular regurgitation . Left ventricular size had returned to normal (LVEDV 137 mL) and left ventricular ejection fraction was maintained at 0.55–0.60. There was no residual tricuspid regurgitation after siting of the tricuspid annuloplasty ring and minimal residual mitral regurgitation with improvement of mitral valve leaflet coaptation (, Video
S4). The estimated pulmonary artery pressure had normalized to 16 mmHg. The patient’s post-discharge has been uneventful with regular outpatient follow-up.