A 16-year-old girl (body weight, 55 kg; Chinese; student) developed a persistent fever for 18 months, with a peak temperature of approximately 39 °C. Laboratory tests showed a low white blood cell level, normal hepatic and renal functions, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), and negative antinuclear antibodies, anti-double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (dsDNA) and anti–extractable nuclear antigen. Tests for infectious diseases were all negative, except for a positive EBV-DNA of 28,000 copies/mL in peripheral blood. Positron emission tomography showed hepatosplenomegaly and extensive lymphadenopathy. The bone marrow aspirate and lymph node biopsy showed no presence of malignant cells. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed aneurysms involving the aorta and its major branches, as well as multiple aneurysms and stenoses of the coronary arteries .
CMRI was performed using a 3.0-T whole-body scanner (Magnetom Skyra, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). The MRI sequences and parameters were as follows: first, cine imaging was performed using a two-dimensional breath-hold balanced steady-state free precession sequence. Two-, three-, and four-chamber long-axis planes and 10 to 12 short-axis slices covering the entire left ventricle were scanned to evaluate cardiac movement and function. The parameters for scanning were as follows: repetition time (TR)/echo time (TE) = 3.3/1.4 ms, temporal resolution = 45 ms, in-plane spatial resolution = 1.6 × 1.6 mm2, and slice thickness = 8 mm. Second, coronary vessel wall images were acquired using a two-dimensional black blood gradient echo sequence with the following parameters: TR/TE = 5.2/2.6 ms, flip angle = 12°, and voxel size = 0.8 × 0.8 × 4 mm3. Third, contrast-enhanced whole-heart coronary magnetic resonance angiography (CE WH-CMRA) was acquired using a navigator-gated, electrocardiogram (ECG) triggered, fat saturated, and segmented three-dimensional gradient echo sequence. Gadopentetate dimeglumine (Gd-DTPA, Magnevist, Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals, Wayne, NJ) was injected at a dose of 0.2 mmol/kg and a rate of 0.3 mL/s. Forty seconds after the injection began, the CE WH-CMRA data collection was started. The parameters used included the following: TR/TE = 2.8/1.2 ms, flip angle = 20°, readout bandwidth = 610 Hz/pixel, acquired voxel size = 1.25 × 1.25 × 1.8 mm3, and interpolated voxel size = 0.63 × 0.63 × 0.9 mm3. A generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisition with an acceleration factor of 3 was applied. The total acquisition time was 6 minutes and 45 seconds. Fourth, late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) imaging was performed 15 minutes after the injection using a two-dimensional phase-sensitive inversion-recovery gradient echo pulse sequence and the following parameters: TR/TE = 5.2/2.0 ms, flip angle = 25°, field of view = 219 × 350 mm2, and matrix = 120 × 256. The inversion time (TI) was set as the null normal myocardium and was obtained using a TI scout sequence.
On cine images, the enlargement of the left ventricle and right atrium was observed, in addition to aortic valve regurgitation and mild pericardial effusion . A visual assessment of the segmented cine images showed a moderate increase of left ventricle volume at the end-diastolic stage and a slightly restricted movement of the right ventricular wall. The right ventricular ejection fraction was slightly decreased to 41%. On the coronary vessel wall images, the dilutions and stenoses of the lumen were depicted , and thickening of arterial walls involving the left anterior descending artery and diagonal branch artery was also clearly identified . Three-dimensional volume-rendered reconstruction presented multiple aneurysms and stenoses of the coronary arteries as well as an aneurysm at the root of the aorta. On the LGE images, subendocardial delayed enhancement of the mid anterior and mid inferolateral left ventricular wall was shown, as well as transmural delayed enhancement of the basal inferior and mid inferior left ventricular wall , suggesting myocardial infarction.
Given the prolonged clinical manifestation, persistent EBV-DNA level, and CTA and CMRI results, CAEBV was diagnosed. The differential diagnosis for the large artery lesions included Kawasaki disease, Takayasu arteritis, Behcet's disease, and Marfan syndrome, but none was completely compatible with the patient's condition. After a 10-day treatment with Leflunomide, the clinical manifestation and serological parameters, such as temperature, ESR and hsCRP, reversed to normal, and the EBV-DNA level decreased to 5900 copies/mL.
After discharge, the patient received regular Medrol (40 mg, 5 weeks; then 36 mg, 1 week; then 32 mg, 1 week; then 28 mg, 1 week; then 24 mg till follow-up) and Leflunomide (30 mg, 3 months; 20 mg till follow-up) treatment as well as laboratory follow-up. Six months later, the EBV-DNA level decreased to 500 copies/mL. Twelve months later, the EBV-DNA level increased again to 13,900 copies/mL, without a predisposing cause or clinical manifestation. Follow-up with aorta CTA and CMRI at the same day were performed. The aorta CTA showed aneurysmal dilation of the bilateral common iliac artery at the same site, whereas the arterial walls were thicker with new-onset mural thrombi . The aorta CTA also showed new-onset occlusion involving middle segment of the right coronary artery , but CMRI did not find new-onset delayed enhancement lesion .