A 56-year-old White female was referred to her local otolaryngologist for further evaluation of a chronic sore throat lasting several months that failed conservative management. The otherwise healthy woman reported a personal history of 10 pack years of cigarette smoking until about 35 years prior and continued moderate alcohol intake (3–4 drinks per week). Laryngoscopy showed a mass likely originating from the base of tongue (BOT) that was biopsied and determined to be malignant. Histopathologic work up including immunohistochemical analysis revealing diffuse positivity for cytokeratin 7, weak, non-specific staining for GATA3 and estrogen receptor, and negative staining for PAX-8, CDX-2, TTF1, p40 and cytokeratin 5/6. Together with the morphological appearance, the diagnosis of an adenocarcinoma with papillary features was made. Staging by positron emission tomography (PET)- computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-avid mass involving the left and mid BOT and an FDG-avid enlarged lymph node in the right neck (2.0 × 1.5 cm) and two additional subcentimeter lymph nodes in the left neck with faint FDG-avidity, suggestive of regional metastatic disease, but with no indication of distant metastases. The patient was diagnosed with stage cT2N2cM0 disease (AJCC UICC 8th edition). Subsequently, the patient underwent debulking surgery of the BOT mass followed by definitive chemoradiation with carboplatin/paclitaxel weekly and radiotherapy with a cumulative dose of 70 Gy in 35 fractions. A follow-up PET-CT scan 3.5 months after completion of chemoradiation indicated a reduction in size of both the supraglottic mass and cervical lymph nodes. However, the FDG-avidity continued to be in the range of possible persistent disease. Consequently, re-biopsy of the residual mass of the BOT was performed with a subsequent pathological diagnosis of a p16-positive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). Due to the discrepant pathological findings, the patient's biopsies were sent from the originating hospital for pathologic consultation. Comparable morphology between the primary tumor and the persistent lesion suggested a poorly differentiated carcinoma favoring adenocarcinoma as the most likely diagnosis. The p16 staining was assessed by the pathology consultant as focal, non-specific staining.
Given the complexity of this case, the patient subsequently referred to our tertiary care center for further evaluation and discussion of therapeutic options.
Consistent with the previous examinations, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a heterogenous, lobulated lesion in the left BOT as well as bilateral abnormal lymph nodes in levels 2A (right) and levels 3B and 4 (left). Three weeks after the biopsy that diagnosed p16+ SCC, an additional biopsy in the area of the midline vallecula was performed at our hospital. Histopathological analysis of the biopsy specimen showed an – at least in the assessed area – entirely high-grade epithelioid malignant neoplasm with papillary and microcystic architecture, extensive focal necrosis, large round nuclei with prominent nucleoli, focally a vacuolated cytoplasm and eosinophilic secretions, morphologically comparable to the primary tumor and first biopsy of the persistent lesion performed at the outside hospital . Immunohistochemistry revealed diffusely positive staining for GATA3, mammaglobin, S-100, keratin 5/6 , and keratin 7. Tumor cells were negative for p40, ERG, desmin and smooth muscle actin. The case was diagnosed as a high-grade secretory carcinoma with molecular testing requested. This subsequently showed a confirmatory ETV6-NTRK3 fusion transcript involving ETV6 exon 5 and NTRK3 exon 15. Potential treatment options were discussed with the patient, including the standard treatment involving salvage surgery. Given that salvage surgery would be quite morbid including laryngectomy and glossectomy with for the patient significant functional impact, alternative therapy with an TRK-inhibitor was discussed as a potential function-preserving treatment strategy. The patient proceeded with the small molecule TRK-inhibitor larotrectinib. Larotrectinib was initiated and was administered at a dose of 100 mg BID. Although an initial radiographic assessment following 1.5 months on larotrectinib therapy showed no significant decline in tumor burden, following 4.5 months of treatment, a complete clinical response was seen by CT scan. In addition, larotrectinib was very well tolerated by the patient with no adverse serological features. The patient's speech was well-maintained with no difficulty swallowing. At the time of this report, the patient has been on continuous Larotrectinib for 13 months, currently with a maintained complete response . She continues on this therapy with regular clinical and radiographic follow up visits until the potential occurrence of evasive resistance.