A 47-year-old man was admitted to our department with a soft nodular mass at the plantar surface of the forefoot . He complained of disabling and painful gait until he was unable to walk and had difficulty putting his shoes on. The patient noticed for the first time the nodule 25 years ago but during the preceding 12 months the size of the nodule had increased markedly.
Physical examination revealed a tender soft-solid nodule. A corn was developed at the overlying skin. No tingling or numbness was present. Neurological consultation was negative. Past medical and familiar history, as well as general examination was negative.
Radiographs of the foot and computer tomography (CT) demonstrated a soft-tissue lesion with no osseous involvement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-defined mass located at the plantar forefoot with no apparent bone infiltration, . The sagittal T1-weighted image revealed a lobulated, encapsulated, fatty mass (signal intensity identical to subcutaneous fat) with multiple hypointense nodules and septa in the subcutaneous layer of the forefoot, underneath the plantar aponeurosis, . The corresponding sagittal T1-weighted contrast enhanced image, revealed that the non-fatty component does not show any apparent enhancement, . Finally the coronal STIR image through the phalanges showed signal suppression of the fatty component and high intensity of the non-fatty component, . The above assessment was not diagnostic for the pathology, although the duration and the rough imaging of the nodule were not implicating a malignancy.
Marginal surgical excision was performed. The nodule was excised via a plantar approach using a longitudinal incision dictated by the morphology of the corn . The location of the presented lesion warranted the use of a plantar approach. Macroscopically the nodule measuring 7 × 4 × 4 cm was encapsulated and multilobular having a vascular pedicle which was cauterized, . The mass was totally resected without the need to sacrifice the surrounding structures. The cut surface was solid and yellow with a reddish tinge. In the report describing the pathological examination, it was written the following: "Gross pathology: The specimen 7 × 5 × 2 cm. with ill defined margins was yellowish and elastic in consistency. Histologically: the mass was comprised of mature adipose and proliferated vascular tissue in various proportion from field to field with no signs of atypia in either of the two components, . Many vessels were thick-walled with collagen deposition which caused obstruction of their lumens , while very few capillaries demonstrated fibrin thrombi . Adipose tissue showed degenerative lesions with focal deposition of acidic mucopolysaccharides . Focal fibrosis and plenty of mast cells were also detected in the interstitial stroma.
The final histologic diagnosis was benign noninfiltrating angiolipoma. The patient's postoperative course was uncomplicated. At the 12-month follow-up no evidence of local recurrence was noticeable.