A 29-year-old Caucasian man was seen in our department for a second opinion because of asymmetrical walking pattern and progressive sourness in his amputated leg. He was referred from a rehabilitation center where a standard roentgenogram showed evidence of a gauze in situ near the distal femur stump with progressive ossifications .
His medical history noted a severe high energy trauma seven years ago. He had sustained multiple injuries among which a severe crush injury of the left leg with heavy bleeding for which an acute amputation was performed.
After six weeks he could be discharged from the hospital and was measured an advanced prosthetic leg for optimal rehabilitation. It took him 3 months to walk without aids. Two years later he fell on his stump in the bathroom. An X-ray was made of the left upper leg stump to rule out any fracture. The radiologist reported no fracture, but a swelling of soft tissue with calcifications at the femoral cutting edge. The report also mentioned that at the time of roentgenography, the stump was covered with a gauze, because a radio-opaque marker was visible on the X-ray. In the conclusion of the X-ray report, no mention was made on the gauze fibroma.
His painful stump recovered in a few weeks but five years later, he consulted his rehabilitation physician for asymmetrical walking pattern with soreness of the stump. A standard roentgenogram revealed progressive calcifications compared to the previous study. The radio-opaque marker was recognized as a retained surgical gauze which was left behind during initial surgery. The progressive ossifications were thought to cause his complaints. He was directed to our department for re-evaluation. Clinical examination showed an otherwise healthy man with a prosthetic leg with vacuum fitting. His walking pattern was slightly asymmetrical due to partial weight-bearing of his artificial leg. His left leg stump showed obvious thickening at the distal end. No painful or sharp masses could be palpated and no skin defects were noted, let alone multiple scars from previous trauma and surgery.
To exclude malignant tumor growth, magnetic resonance imaging showed a benign granuloma of 12.6 × 10.0 centimeters with remodelling of the ossal part of the femur around the tumor. This was interpreted as a physiological reaction of the leg to encapsulate the foreign body. The suspected surgical sponge was not clearly identified from the surrounding granuloma.
Most effective treatment options would be to completely remove the calcifications including granuloma with surgical sponge. The patient however had experienced much advantage from the firm swelling of his stump and did consent. His prosthetic leg fitted well in time because of these progressive ossifications around the gauze. Therefore it was decided to only remove the gauze, but not the ossifications nor the granuloma, to remove the trigger for further progression of the ossifications, but to maintain the form of the stump.
At surgery, the distal end of the stump was opened through an old scar. A well organized, firm, brownish tumor was opened which appeared to have a wall of around two centimetres. Brownish, serous fluid was drained and sent for culture of micro-organisms. Remnants of a partly disintegrated surgical sponge of 40 × 40 centimeters were removed with curettage of the granuloma . The wound was closed in layers with vacuum drainage. At the fifth postoperative day the patient developed fever and a swollen painful stump for which incision and drainage of an infected seroma with staphylococcus aureus was necessary. The postoperative course was further complicated by infectious complications and shortening of the femoral end with removal of all calcifications could not be avoided . Disturbance of wound healing and treatment with vacuum assisted closure devices characterized the clinical course. Five months after initial removal of the gauze, a definitive stump correction was carried out without complications and a rehabilitation program with a new prosthesis could be initiated.