A 66-year-old woman without structural heart disease, but with a significant PVC burden of 47% (49,939/105,871 beats), was referred to the Electrophysiology Laboratory for possible catheter ablation of the PVC focus following lack of symptomatic improvement with medical treatment. The electrocardiogram (ECG) morphology of the PVCs suggested a right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) origin . A single conventional catheter guided by fluoroscopy was selected for mapping and ablation. Namely, a roving standard ablation catheter (7 French, 4-mm tip) introduced from the right femoral vein was used for location of the earliest activation site. The earliest activation timing of PVCs was identified on the posterior-lateral wall of the RVOT with a local activation time of 25 ms . Radiofrequency (RF) current was applied at this location. After termination of PVCs within 1 s, RF delivery continued for up to 90 s at a power setting of 30–40 W with a target temperature of 55 °C . PVCs were no longer observed for a period of 30 min during infusion of isoproterenol (4 μg/min). A total of 3000 U heparin was given during the procedure. Pericardial effusion (PE) was not evident in the post-procedure transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). She was discharged symptom-free from the hospital 1 day after the procedure (blood pressure, 124/64 mmHg; heart rate, 83 bpm), without anticoagulant or antiplatelet treatment.
Nineteen days later, the patient was sent to our hospital after experiencing sudden syncope. She appeared pale with blood pressure 50/40 mmHg, heart rate 110 bpm, and oxygen saturation of 100% on oxygen (on 3 L oxygen per nasal cannula). Upon physical examination, her neck veins were distended, lungs were clear, and heart sounds were distant. Brain CT scans excluded cerebral hemorrhage. All blood test parameters were normal, except for an extremely elevated D-dimer (2450 μmol/L). The patient’s recent history of cardiac ablation alerted us of the possibility of cardiac problems. TTE revealed a moderate PE (12 mm) with evidence of tamponade, prompting a diagnosis of delayed cardiac tamponade (DCT) . Following an emergent pericardiocentesis to drain a hemorrhagic effusion (200 mL), the patient’s hemodynamics improved significantly. She was monitored in the Cardiac Care Unit overnight without signs of fluid re-accumulation. The next day, her condition improved, becoming conscious. On the third day of hospital admission, TTE showed no evidence of PE. She was discharged after a 2-week hospitalization for investigating other probable causes, such as cancer, infection, and autoimmune disease, with negative results. No signs of PE recurred during a 12-month follow-up .