A 24-year-old female patient was admitted to the Department of Neurology at Liaocheng People's Hospital due to persistent amenorrhea for 2 years and weakness of both lower limbs for the past 10 months. She had no remarkable medical history, except for raising the head and walking later than other children of the same age. There was no problem with the pregnancy or delivery and also no history of drug abuse or hallucinations. No consanguineous marriage in her family was reported. She had irregular menstruation with prolonged menstrual cycles. The first symptom of amenorrhea or absence of menstruation was recorded when the patient was 22 years old. The patient felt like stepping on cotton when walking, and it was a little bit difficult for her to stand up after sitting. At the initial phase, these clinical symptoms were slightly improved after a short period of symptomatic manifestations. However, she started to seclude herself from social activities, while her bilateral lower extremity weakness progressively deteriorated without a remitting period. She also exhibited signs of cognitive decline and abnormal mental behaviors. For example, she had a slow reaction time and always presented delayed responses to doctor’s questions. Reduced communicative participation was noted in this patient during the initial screening. Her calculating and reading abilities were also decreased progressively. She had been suffering from motor function deficits (lower limb tremor, bradykinesia and rigid muscles), requiring active physical assistance for daily activities. Upon neurological evaluation, her muscle strengths of all four limbs were graded as 4-/5. A decreased sense of vibration and numbness of lower limbs were recorded in lower extremities. Moderate station ataxia (Romberg test) and tandem walking tests were not feasible in this patient. The tendon reflexes of lower limbs were sightly active and other remarkable signs, including bilateral Babinski sign and Kernig sign, were not evident. Routine laboratory investigations indicated normal renal and hepatic functions. The endocrinological hormone profiling in the serum showed that the levels of estradiol were 33.473 pg/ml (Reference ranges, follicular phase: 26.6–161 pg/ml; luteal phase: 187–382 pg/ml; ovulation: 187–382 pg/ml; menopause: 5.37–38.4 pg/ml), luteinizing hormone was 55.7mIU/ml (Reference ranges, follicular phase: 2.58–12.1 mIU/ml; luteal phase: 0.83–15.5 mIU/ml; menopause: 13.1–86.5 mIU/ml), and follicle-stimulating hormone was 87.9 mIU/ml (Reference ranges, follicular phase: 1.98–11.6 mIU/ml; luteal phase: 1.38–9.58 mIU/ml; menopause: 21.5–131 mIU/ml). Blood tests for the levels of very-long-chain fatty acids and lysosomal enzyme activities were unremarkable. T2-weighted sagittal and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images revealed white matter hyperintensities and abnormal signals on bilateral periventricular regions, corona radiata, and corpus callosum . White matter rarefaction was visible on FLAIR. Restricted diffusion in selective white matter was noted . Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed an increased ratio of Cho and Cr in frontal lesions . Whole-exome sequencing results indicated that the exon4 of the AARS2 gene contained a missense mutation at c.718C > T (p.Leu240Phe) in this proband , when matched with the HG19 reference genome sequence and the transcript variant NM_020745.3. In silico analyses using multiple bioinformatics methods suggested this mutation as ‘probably damaging’. Furthermore, an alternative splicing mutation (c.1040 + 1G > A) was also noted , as confirmed by in silico analysis (a pathological variant). Both transcript variants were not previously reported in the general population database and might have deleterious effects. The father of this patient carried a heterozygous AARS2 gene mutation (c.1040 + 1G > A), and the mother also had a heterozygous mutation c.718C > T in the same gene. The patient’s brother did not show either of these variants. Coenzyme complex treatment and glucocorticoid therapy had no therapeutic impact on this patient. During the recent follow-up visit, her health condition was found to be worsened further, and the patient’s movement was mostly restricted to bed.