A 62-year-old male nonsmoker presented at our hospital in January 2018. He complained of a one-month history of right chest and back discomfort with no noted triggers. Imaging examinations showed a 2.3 cm mass in his right middle lobe, with metastasis in the right hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes as well as left ilium. A solitary brain metastasis in the left frontal lobe was also noted in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Pulmonary biopsy revealed lung adenocarcinoma stage IV (T1cN2M1c). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) results of the tumor tissue were positive for ROS1 and PD-L1 (> 90%) but negative for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) . ROS1 rearrangement was then confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) .
The patient was given first-line treatment with crizotinib 250mg twice daily from February 2018. This achieved a partial response with good tolerance. Six months later, he felt dizzy, right lower extremity weakness, and unsteadiness. Imaging showed a controlled primary lung lesion but a progressing brain lesion. Therefore, the patient continued to receive crizotinib and underwent concurrent gamma knife radiosurgery for the intracranial lesion. Six cycles of combination therapy with crizotinib and bevacizumab were initiated in March 2019. Approximately 19 months after crizotinib treatment was initiated, he reported dizziness and progressive weakness of his right lower limb. MRI confirmed disease progression and significant edema in the brain in October. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed the primary lesion still under control. The patient then received lorlatinib 75mg once daily, but his symptoms were not relieved. Instead, his dizziness and the muscular weakness in both lower extremities worsened. New symptoms, such as headache, convulsions, sluggishness, and unresponsiveness developed. A repeated brain-MRI showed rapid brain tumor progression, severe brain edema, and cerebral midline deviation . Then, an emergency brain metastasis surgery was performed, and the pathological tests demonstrated the presence of adenocarcinoma from lung cancer. The specimen was further analyzed via next-generation sequencing (NGS; FoundationOne CDx). Unfortunately, the patient succumbed to the intracranial hypertension and cerebral hernia before the NGS report, which showed a high level of MET amplification (32 copies). FISH demonstrated a cluster of MET signals congruent with the NGS result . To investigate whether MET amplification was acquired after TKI treatment, the primary lung lesion was reanalyzed by FISH, and the result was negative for MET amplification .