A 37-year-old woman complained of an 18-year history of progressive onset of multiple, firm, smooth, soft, pink-to-brown papules and nodules on her left sub scapular region and both forearms, ranging from 1 to 2 cm in diameters. Some lesions were arranged in dermatomal-like clustered nodules and plaques on her left upper back . The lesions could become symptomatic after mechanical injury, pressure, cold thermal stimuli or emotional stress. Moreover, we observed brownish nodular lesions on her leg similar to a dermatofibroma, displaying the most common pattern . Past medical history included early menarche, dismenorreas, menometrorrhagia, anaemia and uterine fibromatosis with myomectomy in 2000. Her family history did not reveal similar skin lesions in kindred nor any history of uterine diseases, hysterectomies or renal cancers. A total of 50 cutaneous lesions were counted in our patient; the patient had already removed a large cutaneous leiomyoma in 2003. Five larger nodules were surgically removed to solve the pain and distress caused by their size. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of cutaneous piloleiomyomas. Our main finding was a dermal proliferation of irregular interlacing bundles of benign smooth muscle cells with minimal atypia and scarce proliferative activity . Antibodies against α-smooth muscle actin , desmin and myosin positively stained the neoplastic growth. Moreover, the histological examination of the leg lesion confirmed the presence of dermatofibroma.
Genetic analysis was performed using RNA extracted from a leiomyoma biopsy. Complete coding region sequencing of all 10 exons of Fumarate Hydratase gene (Gb #NM_000143) was evaluated using direct sequencing of RT-PCR amplified FH transcript. The sequence did not reveal nucleotide changes in coding region, due to the presence of amino acid substitutions. This does not exclude the possible presence of complex genomic mutations located inside introns, which could lead to abnormal transcripts. The level of enzymatic FH analysis should be investigated to further characterise the patients for FH activity depletion. Complete routine blood testing and urinalysis did not show anomalies. Abdominal computerized-tomography (CT) scan displayed uterine fibroids and normal appearing kidneys. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed one asymptomatic cerebral cavernoma (data not shown).
Dermoscopy was performed using Dermlite ® with non–contact polarized light on each cutaneous leiomyoma. A delicate dermatofibroma-like pigment network - due to thin lines of pinkish-light brown colour and regular meshes - was present in all lesions . The network was regularly distributed and gradually faded into the surrounding skin. No vascular structures were observed. In some lesions, a white cloud-like area without scar features was observed . As expected, reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) did not show any remarkable findings due to the deep dermal location of the proliferation. Leiomyoma-related discomfort significantly improved with gabapentin - started from 75 mg/die and then increased up to 225 mg/die for 1 month - with marked reduction of the pain.