A 66-year-old woman underwent a PCNL for a staghorn stone in the left kidney. Access to the excretory system was achieved by fascial dilators, and a safety guide wire was used during the procedure. An ultrasonic energy source was used to shatter the stone. Severe venous bleeding was noted during the fragmentation process. The procedure was interrupted; a percutaneous nephrostomy drainage tube (PNDT) was inserted and closed in order to control bleeding within the excretory system.
PNDT was reopened on the second postoperative day, and intense bleeding was observed through the drainage tube, which was immediately closed. The patient presented with normal blood pressure (128/79 mmHg) and a decreased hemoglobin (7.3 g/dL). The patient was transfused with four units of blood, and she remained hemodinamically stable.
On the second post-operative day, a computed tomography angiography showed the PNDT in the left renal vein . Vascular flow was monitored through regular Doppler ultrasonography. Doppler ultrasound showed that there was no renal vein or vena cava thrombosis. The patient was taken to the operating room, and the PNDT was withdrawn 3 cm back to the renal sinus/parenchyma under fluoroscopy control (the contrast material through the catheter when we withdrew the catheter) with the surgical team on standby ready to intervene. 24 hours later the PNDT was repositioned in the collecting system under fluoroscopy through the same way. Bleeding of the PNDT immediately slowed down and the urine became clear during the next day. The patient was discharged on the sixth post-operative day with a hemoglobin level of 9.3 g/dL.
On the eighth post-operative day, the patient developed gross hematuria and severe pain of the left loin. A significant drop of the hemoglobin level was noted (from 9.3 g/dL to 6.8 g/dL) but she remained hemodynamically stable and the coagulation parameters were within normal limits. An abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a large left perinephric hematoma. She was initially treated conservatively with bed rest and transfusions but gross hematuria persisted. After failed resuscitation, a computed tomography angiography was arranged, which revealed a pseudoaneurysm in the left renal artery . A selective left renal angiogram was arranged in order to achieve endovascular control of the bleeding vessel. Active bleeding from the pseudoaneurysm at a branch of the left renal artery with contrast extravasation was shown . The bleeding was embolized selectively with two 2 mm*2 cm metal coils. Twenty-four hours later, hematuria ceased and the patient remained hemodynamically stable.
Following above procedure, there was no further gross hematuria. On the thirtieth post-operative day, a nephrostogram revealed the tract had sealed completely, and the PNDT was removed uneventfully. After an 18-month follow up, her post-operative hemoglobin and serum creatinine remained normal.