A 65-year-old male patient experienced a choking sensation during eating for 2 months.
A 65-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital because of a choking sensation during eating for 2 months, which was accompanied by retrosternal pain and had no obvious cause.
The patient had a 3-year history of hypertension and took telmisartan for blood pressure control. The patient had manifested yellow discoloration of the skin and sclera since childhood, for which he had visited many hospitals, but his condition did not improve with medication.
The patient’s parents were of a consanguineous marriage and had raised three sons and three daughters. Two sons and one daughter also had yellow discoloration while the others showed no relevant symptoms. The patient’s daughter and grandson have no relevant symptoms. Its pedigree is shown in .
The patient was generally in a good condition with no supraclavicular lymph node enlargement. The breath sounds of the lungs were rough without rales or Rhonchi. Heart rate was 102 beats/min, and heart rhythm was regular, showing no pathologic murmur. The abdomen was flat and soft, without tenderness or rebound tenderness. Yellow discoloration of the skin and sclera was observed.
White blood cell count was 7.0 × 109/L, neutrophil percentage was 63.1%, hemoglobin concentration was 125 g/L, alanine transaminase was 9 IU/L, aspartate aminotransferase was 18 IU/L, total bilirubin was 187 µmol/L, direct bilirubin was 19.9 µmol/L, and indirect bilirubin was 167.8 µmol/L. Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm. we also take a DNA analysis,Genetic testing showed :
UGT1A8_ex5 c.1447T > G(p.Tyr483Asp) UGT1A1_ex1 c.211G > A(p.Gly71Arg) UGT1A4_ex1 c.395T > C(p.Leu132Pro)
It was suggested that the patient has CNS-II. Other laboratory indicators were all within normal limits.
Esophagography showed mucosal damage in the mid-to-lower segment of the esophagus, with a filling defect shadow and irregular small niche with a lesion measuring approximately 8.1 cm in length. Gastric endoscopy showed a cauliflower-like ulcero-proliferative growth in the lower part of the esophagus, which was considered to be esophageal squamous cell carcinoma according to the symptoms of the ulcerating surface covered with white moss, and the depressed central part .