A 4-day-old male referred from a neighbouring state with protrusion from the umbilical area which was noted at birth with visible intestinal peristalsis. There was associated postprandial vomiting which was bilious, there was no fever and child had passed meconium on the first day of life. He is a product of term gestation, delivered via spontaneous vaginal delivery with good APGAR score and a birth weight of 3.8 kg at 38 weeks of gestation. Antenatal obstetrics ultrasound scans done noted umbilical anomaly suspected to be omphalocele and did not classify it further.
The child was afebrile, not pale, anicteric, but dehydrated at presentation. His vital signs were as follows: heart rate - 138 beats/minute, respiratory rate - 48 /minute, oxygen saturation (SpO2) – 98% in room air and temperature was 37.40C. The heart sounds were S1 and S2 only with no murmur, and the chest was clinically clear. The abdomen was distended, move with respiration; the umbilical stump was swollen with circumferential normal abdominal wall skin wrapping round the proximal aspect of the umbilical protrusion. The umbilical defect measured about 4 cm in diameter.
Bowel sounds were hyperactive. Perineal and digital examination were essentially normal. .
Blood count and chemistry revealed essentially normal levels of analytes.
He was commenced on intravenous fluid resuscitation with 4.3% dextrose saline, while on nothing by mouth. Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics (ceftriaxone and metronidazole) were commenced. Sterile gauze soaked in warm normal saline, layered with Sofra-tulle® was used to wrap the umbilical stump. The patient subsequently had an emergency surgical repair under general anaesthesia after obtaining an informed consent from parents. Intra-operative findings were a 4cm umbilical defect which was extended by about 2 cm transverse incision to permit the reduction of the herniating bowel. The herniating viscera were loops of ileum, caecum, and ascending colon. The bowel loops were matted together by adhesions and amnion. . Adhesiolysis was done, the herniating viscera was found to be grossly normal with no atretic segment and was reduced into the abdomen. Anatomical closure of the ring was done with vicryl 0 sutures in a continuous fashion. .
He had good recovery from surgery, had satisfactory return of bowel function by post-operative day 3, was commenced on graded oral intake which was well tolerated and was discharged home on 5th post operative day.
The patient was followed up in the outpatient clinic and showed satisfactory wound healing with no complaints.