A 10-year-old boy was diagnosed with BMD having presented to the neuromuscular clinic with a history of muscular pain during exercise and elevated serum creatine kinase levels (2495 U/L). Targeted neuromuscular examination revealed bilateral calf hypertrophy, decreased ankle joint range, and very mild weakness in hip abduction and adduction (Medical Research Council (MRC) scale power Grade 4), with preserved muscle strength in all other muscle group. He was asymptomatic from a cardiovascular point of view and his cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. Genetic testing confirmed an in-frame deletion of exon 45–48 of the dystrophin gene (DMD c.6439-72951_7098 + 1309del; p.Glu2147_Lys2366del hemizygosis). Following the diagnosis, cardiac screening was arranged as per the standards of care. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with normal PR interval for his age, normal QRS axis, voltage criteria for biventricular hypertrophy with pathological Q waves inferolaterally . The echocardiogram showed asymmetric septal hypertrophy affecting primarily the anteroseptal wall and extending more distally towards the apex. Maximal left ventricular wall thickness was 18 mm at the mid-septum. The left ventricular cavity was relatively small and globally hyperdynamic. Left ventricular diastolic performance was normal and left atrial dimensions were also normal. There was no systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve or left ventricular outflow tract obstruction at rest . A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed, confirming an asymmetric septal hypertrophy affecting primarily the basal and mid septum with a maximal left ventricular wall thickness of 18 mm and no left ventricular outflow tract obstruction . There was patchy late gadolinium enhancement of the hypertrophied myocardium .
Given the unusual finding of HCM in this patient with BMD, we explored the possibility of an additional aetiology for the left ventricular hypertrophy. Genetic testing for HCM-causing mutations was performed on a 104-gene panel, including the sarcomere protein gene, and identified likely pathogenic variants in heterozygosis in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7 c.2701G>C; p.Ala901Pro). Family screening for this mutation has been recommended but has not been undertaken to date. The only family member with a history of cardiac disease was the maternal grandfather, who was reported to have undergone a heart transplant due to cardiac sarcoidosis and had died in his forties as a result of subsequent rejection. There was no history of premature cardiac disease or sudden cardiac death in any other family members.
The patient remains asymptomatic from a cardiac point of view without treatment, with no progression of his wall thickness on his follow-up echocardiograms at 1 year. As the concomitant diagnosis of BMD and sarcomeric HCM has not been previously reported in childhood, it is unclear how and whether this combination will affect his prognosis, but he will require regular cardiac follow-up.