A 70-year-old female presented with a 2-wk-history of tongue swelling and altered mental status.
Six months prior to admission, the patient underwent left upper lung lobectomy for pulmonary pleomorphic carcinoma, which is considered a subtype of PSC. The neoplasm was positive for mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) exon 14 skipping and PIK3CA mutations, with a programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) positivity of 75%. The disease was staged as T4N1M0. She was started with capmatinib for stage IV PSC with MET exon 14 skipping mutation.
One month prior, she underwent left vocal cord injection for left vocal cord paralysis. Two weeks prior, she developed tongue swelling, dysphagia and odynophagia. A computed tomography (CT) of the neck with contrast was grossly unremarkable , although visualization was limited due to dental streak artifact and motion artifact. The patient was started with methylprednisolone (Medrol) dose pack by her oncologist with capmatinib on hold as it was concerned that her tongue swelling could be an allergic reaction to capmatinib. However, her tongue swelling continued to worsen to the point that she was unable to take anything by mouth. She became more lethargic that prompted her presentation to the emergency department.
She had a prior medical history of atrial fibrillation, deep venous thrombosis, and bilateral hip osteoarthritis.
She was a former 25 pack/year smoker, but had stopped smoking 25 years prior to this presentation.
On arrival, patient's peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 84% on room air. Physical examination revealed that the tongue and floor of the mouth were severely edematous; the deep oral tongue felt firm to palpation; the overlying mucosa was intact and of normal color; the submental space was mildly full; and cervical lymphadenopathy was not palpable.
Laboratory studies revealed polymorphonuclear leukocytosis with white blood cell count of 20.85 × 103/μL.
Repeated CT of the neck with contrast identified a 2.7 cm × 3.2 cm × 1.9 cm lesion, which were not clearly visible in the CT one week earlier.