A previously healthy nine-month-old female, 10 kg, was brought to the pediatric emergency room due to generalized tonic-clonic movements. At admission, her temperature was 38.6°C, her pulses were weak, and the electrocardiogram (EKG) showed a monomorphic ventricular tachycardia of 204 beats/min. She received synchronized electrical cardioversion (1 J/kg), and an endotracheal tube was placed, recovering sinus rhythm. Afterwards, she was quickly transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU). Upon admission, the patient was tachycardic, 187 beats/min, her blood pressure was low (73/34 mmHg), and her core body temperature was 39.4°C. Nutrition status: overweight.
It was remarkable on physical exam, reactive mydriatic pupils, poor hygiene, and neglect signs. A sympathomimetic toxidrome was suspected due to the hyperadrenergic state and presumptive cocaine exposure. Immunochromatographic rapid test for drug screening in urine confirmed cocaine (cutoff point >300 ng/ml). On direct questioning of the mother, she established the availability of cocaine at her residence. Body packing was not suspected; a plain abdominal X-ray ruled out the presence of a foreign body in the stomach, rectum, or colon.
Once admitted to PICU, the patient received mechanical ventilation, inotropic and vasoactive support (epinephrine and norepinephrine), neuroprotection measures (including anticonvulsants), and empirical antibiotic therapy.
Within the first 24 hours of admission, the patient developed multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS). She had hemodynamic dysfunction (lactate 18.3 mmol/L, troponin I 2338 pg/mL), anuric acute renal failure (creatinine increased from 0.42 mg/dL on admission to 1.14 mg/dL), liver failure, coagulopathy (D-dimer 20853 ng/mL, prothrombin time [PT] 34%) and encephalopathy. Initial laboratory tests are summarized in . An EKG demonstrated sinus rhythm without signs of myocardial ischemia, and the echocardiogram was normal at the time. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal. Renal ultrasound showed patent intraparenchymal renal arteries and resistance index not exceeding 0.7. Due to progression to anuric acute renal failure, it was decided to start renal replacement therapy with venous hemofiltration.
The next day laboratory findings evidenced exacerbation of anemia with signs of ongoing microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (hemoglobin decreased from 11.5 to 7.3 g/dL), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) increased from 344 to 1633 U/L, and haptoglobin was 28.9 mg/dL (normal value [NV]: 41–165 mg/dL) with the persistence of high levels of D-dimer. Direct antiglobulin test (DAT) was negative, and no schistocytes in peripheral blood smear were seen. There was a decrease in platelet count (130 k/mm3) and an increase in encephalopathic compromise, not attributable to metabolic causes or residual pharmacological effect. Additionally, the PT decreased to 26.5%, with prolongation of the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) to 57.1 seconds (NV: 26.4–37.5 sec). TMA with TAMOF phenotype, DITMA, or TTP were presumptive diagnoses. ADAMST13 was not available at our center but was urgently requested. PLASMIC score was 6. Due to progressive deterioration, plasma exchange therapy was decided as empirical therapy, even considering the patient's low-risk PLASMIC score. A 7-Fr, double-lumen catheter (Soft-Line® Catheter, Medcomp®, Harleysville, PA, USA), was placed in the femoral vein for therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE). The apheresis procedure was performed with Prismaflex eXeed™ II equipment (Gambro Lundia, Lund, Sweden), using a TPE-1000™. One volemia was exchanged daily for four days, using fresh frozen plasma as replacement fluid. She had a complete response to the therapy according to Paglialonga criteria.
She improved her mental status, normalizing LDH, increasing platelet count (>150 k/mm3 at 48 hours), and recovering diuresis, renal and hemodynamic function. The ADAMTS13 (disintegrin-like and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type 1 motif n° 13) enzyme study was not characteristic for idiopathic TTP, with an activity of 45% (NV: 41–180%), and the absence of an inhibitor. The patient's clinical condition progressively improved, receiving two days of renal replacement therapy and eight days of mechanical ventilation. The length of stay in the intensive care unit was 17 days.
The examination of three biological matrices found extremely high levels of cocaine, 0.57 mg/L in blood and 15.021 ng/mL in urine, 112.2 ng/mg of cocaine and 10.37 ng/mg of benzoylecgonine in hair analysis, compatible with chronic cocaine exposure. Legal actions were taken by child services and hospital administration for child abuse. However, it was never possible to determine the specific exposure route and the amount of cocaine received by the infant in the hours before her hospital admission. Genetic testing of thrombotic microangiopathies was not performed.
The patient fully recovered, being discharged after a month of hospitalization without morbidities acquired during the PICU stay and without functional sequelae or clinical symptoms at one year of follow-up