This study presented a case of a 78-year-old female with an 18-month history of painless progressive swelling and erythema on the left forehead and right upper eyelid. The lesions were slightly developed and involved all of the scalp surface, eyelids, and face; however, there was no other abnormality. The chief complaint of the patient was the mass on the right eyelid. She had a proptosis of the right eye and an orbital mass; however, there were no signs of headache, nausea, vomiting, or double vision. The medical history of the patient demonstrated that she had hypertension and coronary artery disease, and had undergone angioplasty. However, she had no history of undergoing radiotherapy or chemotherapy. The result of the brain MRI in May 2015 demonstrated a mucosal thickening in the right maxillary sinus. A soft tissue with a slightly lobulated surface was observed using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The ventricles, subarachnoid space, and brain stem demonstrated normal appearance, and there was no evidence of mass lesion or midline shift. The MRI with and without contrast, performed 2 months later, revealed a tissue measuring 5 × 3 × 1 cm and weighing 12 g in the right orbital mass. The microscopic findings demonstrated a benign lesion composed of a mixture of angiomatous tissue and lobulated fatty tissue connected with skeletal muscle tissue, which was suggestive of hemangioma. The brain computed tomography (CT) findings showed that there were no abnormalities in the brain structure. There was diffused skin and subcutaneous soft tissue edema in the cranial area, which was more pronounced in the radiation therapy site. The ultrasound reviewed an inflammatory soft tissue in the right frontotemporal region progressing to the ear. The patient used atenolol 50 mg (twice daily), triamterene-h (half a pill every 12 h), acetylsalicylic acid (daily), and atorvastatin 20 mg (daily). In July 2016, she was hospitalized in the infectious diseases ward with a diagnosis of cellulitis and received oral antibiotic therapy (cephalexin) for 2 weeks. Owing to the lack of response to the treatment, she was then referred to the dermatology department. Swelling and slightly warm soft tissue along with erythema was observed throughout the facial surface and scalp. The swelling of the eyelids resulted in complete closure of the eyelids on both sides, which impaired the patient’s vision; however, the patient’s eye exam was normal . The complete blood count test was done for the patient (hemoglobin level: 14.7 g/dl, white blood cells: 5950 cells/mm3, neutrophils: 50%, lymphocytes: 35%, monocytes: 10%, eosinophils: 1%, basophils: 3%, sodium: 141 mEq/L, potassium: 3.8 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen: 53 mg/dL, creatinine: 1.2 mg/dL, blood sugar: 163 mg/dL). Furthermore, the urinalysis and liver enzyme test demonstrated normal results. Based on the CT scan with and without contrast, no anomalies or bone lesions were reported. The brain MRI showed that there was an area of increased signal intensity on the axial T2-weighted images in the skin and subcutaneous tissue of the right cheek. Five months later, an elliptical biopsy at the margin of the lesion was done and the microscopic examination revealed a malignant vascular neoplasm composed of a poorly circumscribed dermal and subcutaneous tumor with an infiltrative growth pattern. In some areas, there were proliferations of solid epithelioid cells with vesicular nuclei, eosinophilic cytoplasm, and intracytoplasmic lumina, which intermixed through vascular channels with retiform architecture lined by plump hyperchromatic endothelial cells with a hobnail appearance. The lining of endothelial cells in some areas showed multi-layering plump and occasionally pleomorphic nuclei with scattered mitotic figures . The diagnosis was a low-grade malignant vascular neoplasm compatible with CHE. The patient was referred to undergo the immunohistochemistry (IHC) test. The IHC test demonstrated negative results regarding the tumor cell in MNF 116 and SMA; however, it showed positive results for CD31 and CD34 . Furthermore, Ki67 was observed to be positive in only 8% of the tumor cells. Based on the combination of histopathological findings and IHC results, the patient was diagnosed with CHE; therefore, she was recommended to undergo a complete lesion excision due to the involved cervical lymph node. The patient underwent partial excision of lesions and skin grafting. Post-surgery, she received chemotherapy by 100 mg thalidomide (daily). Following the thalidomide treatment, the erythema and swelling regressed, and she was able to open the eyelids.