A 35 year-old male, non-smoker, with a history of poultry contact 10 days before, was admitted to emergency room with fever and cough for 4 days (considered as day 1 for the case timeline). Physical examination showed bilateral moist crackles. Laboratory tests showed white blood cell count (WBC) was 5.75 × 109/L (and it became to 1.35 × 109/L two days later), C reactive protein (CRP) was 13.3 mg/L, and procalcitonin (PCT) was<0.1 ng/ml. Chest x-ray and chest computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral ground-glass opacities (GGO) and consolidation . Moxifloxacin 400 mg daily was administered for two days. And his condition deteriorated with dyspnea and severe respiratory failure, and the blood gas analysis showed PaO2 was 58 mmHg under oxygen mask with a FiO2 of 0.8. He was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) supported with noninvasive ventilation (NIV) and intubated 3 h later. Mechanical ventilation with peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) of 32 cm H2O, positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 20 cm H2O and FiO2 of 1.0 could not maintain the oxygenation. As his PaO2/FiO2 ratio less than 50 mmHg lasted for 3 h, the venovenous-extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VV-ECMO) was established. The microscopic examination, culture and galactomannan detection from serum and bronchial-alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) for virus PCR, fungal, and the culture for bacteria and the microscopic examination for bacteria and tuberculosis were done at ICU admission. The nucleic acid polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for influenza H7N9 virus of sputum specimen turned out to be positive and oseltamivir phosphate was initiated (150 mg twice daily for 2 weeks after the PCR of the virus were negative for two consecutive tests.). As the PCT rose to 4.84 ng/ml, and the galactomannan detection was positive (2.52 from serum sample and 1.21 from BALF sample), vancomycin, imipenem cilastatin and caspofungin were applied. Hydrocortisone 300 mg daily for 3 days was also used for septic shock.
ECMO was weaning off on day 15 (the time of ECMO supporting was 13 days) when his blood flow of ECMO was decreased to less than 2 L/min with a significant improvement on his chest X-ray. The patient turned to high fever in the following days. Repeated PCR for H7N9 virus were tested and show continuous negative in the lower respiratory samples after a week of ICU admission. Advanced antibiotics and antifungal agents were administered, no positive pathogenic result was emerged, and PCT level remained downtrend. The chest CT on day 17 shows bilateral GGO with aggravating consolidation on new areas , compatible with organizing pneumonia (OP). Considering no underlying cause of OP existed other than virus infection, therefore, OP associated with H7N9 influenza virus infection was suspected. Methylprednisolone 80 mg (1 mg/kg) daily was applied on day 17 for 5 days with tapering. With clinical improvement, the patient was extubated on day 21, and supported with NIV with a FiO2 of 0.6. The chest CT on day 26 showed obvious remission of consolidation with patchy GGO and fibrotic changes.
However, the clinical condition of the patient deteriorated again on day 31 with high fever to 40 °C, refractory hypoxemia (PaO2:FiO2 = 65) and a mild leukopenia (WBC was 11.92 × 109/L). the patient was reintubated and supported with invasive mechanical ventilation. Methylprednisolone 80 mg daily was applied at the beginning as a suspicion of the relapse of OP. And chest CT on day 33 revealed progression of consolidation especially in the lower lobe. As the patient’s respiratory failure and condition did not improve after 5 days of daily use of methylprednisolone 80 mg, histological examination was done via open lung biopsy (OLB) on day 35, and OP was confirmed with the presence of intraluminal plugs of granulation tissue within alveolar ducts and surrounding alveoli associated with chronic inflammation of the surrounding lung parenchyma. The therapy of steroid was changed to methylprednisolone 120 mg (1.5 mg/kg) for 5 days, 80 mg for 7 days, 40 mg for 7 days. The oxygenation improved, and the patient was extubated on day 57 and discharged on day 71. A time line of the steroids use, white cell count and ratio of PaO2/FiO2 is illustrated in Fig. .
The following-up for 10 months from onset of primary virus infection showed gradually improvement, with mild interlobular septal thickening, traction bronchiectasis and consolidation in chest CT on the ninth month .
As shown in Tables , 13 previously published cases and the current case of OP associated with influenza virus infection were reviewed [–]. With available information, the age range was 24-year-old to 97-year-old with 64% (9/14) female. Influenza A constituted the majority (93%,13/14), with 8 cases were identified to H1N1, and the current case, H7N9. The other one case was OP complicated with co-infection of influenza B and Streptococcus. Respiratory failure associated with OP was reported in 64% (7/11) patient. Fever (27%, 3/11), dyspnea (36%, 4/11), cough (27%, 3/11) were the most common symptoms reported. Especially, clinical condition deteriorated after controlling of primary disease can be found in 64% (7/11) patients. GGO and consolidation were the main findings on high resolution computed tomography (HRCT), shown in 50%(6/12) and 67%(8/12) of cases, with release of primary opacity associated with influenza infection in some cases. Autopsy were applied at about two weeks and most transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) or open lung biopsy (OLB) were applied over three weeks. Steroid was the main treatment, varying from prednisolone 30 mg/day to methylprednisolone 500 mg/day pulse therapy, with or without tapering. Most patients react well to the treatment with clinical and radiological improvement, excepting the relapsing of OP in our case.