The patient is originally from a Colombian population north of Valle del Cauca, a region with a high prevalence of premutation and full mutation of the FMR1 gene.
The patient is a 53-year-old woman, a farmer, with a 4-year history of distal tremor at rest that worsens with movement, with a greater involvement of the upper limbs, that has become increasingly severe. In the last year, the tremor involved the mandibular region and the tongue. Therefore, the patient repeatedly consulted a physician; electrolyte and thyroid function studies were performed, and cerebral structural alterations were measured by computerized axial tomography. All results were within normal limits. However, due to the tremor's worsening, a contrast-enhanced brain MRI was performed and showed significant cortical and subcortical atrophy, with greater frontotemporal involvement, and an increase in the size of the ventricular system, markedly in the third ventricle . Other findings were not significant.
Subsequently, a molecular study was performed for the quantification of FMR1 gene triplets with PCR using a triple primer, including a CGG-specific primer and Southern Blot. Thirty and 82 repeats were found in each allele.
Personal pathological antecedents included convulsive syndrome in childhood that was spontaneously resolved at 14 years old; medically managed bilateral carpal tunnel; a gestational formula G5P3C2V2Mo3; and irregular menstrual cycles characterized by persistent polymenorrhea and metrorrhagia, without improvement despite medical management that forced a hysterectomy at the age of 33 years. The living children were studied, and none had PM or MC of the FMR1 gene. In the year prior to hysterectomy and up to 2 years later, she reported perimenopausal symptoms such as hot flashes, profuse night sweats, persistent headache, and vaginal dryness.
At the time of the physical examination, there was a tremor at rest that involved the upper limbs, the jaw and the tongue, which worsened during activity. In spite of the limitation for performing cerebellar tests imposed by the tremor, no alterations in gait pattern or other signs of cerebellar ataxia were documented. The Fahn-Tolosa-Marín tremor rating scale was applied to obtain an objective approximation to the findings of the physical examination, and a 15% severity of the involvement was measured .
Another relevant element found in the physical examination was the presence of neuropathy in the four extremities caused by the alteration of superficial sensitivity with the presence of hypoesthesia and paresthesia.
During the interview, manifestations of anxiety with affective modulation were observed. The GAD-7 Scale was then applied with a result that suggested a moderate generalized anxiety disorder.
In addition, an evaluation of the patient's cognitive status was Fahn-Tolosa-Marín performed through the Mini-Mental test in which 25 points out of 30 were obtained, which is suggestive of a pathology.
The testing was assessed by a neurologist who initiated treatment with propanolol for tremor management and also by a psychiatrist who considered psychotherapeutic management without the need for medication at that time.