A 61-years old male suffered left hip infection that leads severe destruction on his joint. He felt badly pain on his left hip for three months and already sought to many doctors but treated as back problem. There were significant disabilities associated it such as limping, restriction of movements, and shortening of the limb. The hip movements were painful and caused walking in antalgic gait. There were no history of previous fever nor sinuses discharging from the hip region. Radiologic examination at that time revealed gross destruction of femoral head as well as acetabulum, irregular and hazy joint margins with diminished joint space .
Two stages surgery were performed on this patient. Resection arthroplasty firstly performed in order to eradicate the infection completely and alleviate very bothersome pain for improvement of patient's quality of life. Girdlestone resection of proximal femur was performed with posterior approach, intraoperatively there were swollen, necrotic, and granulation tissue around the joint. Debridement of the necrotic tissue as well as biopsy was performed to eradicate infection locally and further diagnosis respectively. Pathologic anatomy examination revealed a connective tissue fibrosis, fat and some fragments of hyperemic swollen bone contended with PMN leukocyte and lymphocyte. This condition refers to chronic non-specific inflammation of the hip joint.
Although this first stage surgery result in approximately 5 cm leg length discrepancy , patient was quite satisfied with the results as pain was reduced, and was able to walk with a cane. Two years after first operation, once the patient was mentally ready for the next operation, cemented total hip replacement was performed. This procedure corrected the discrepancy and patient was able to walk immediately. Postoperative rehabilitation was performed to achieve normal gait and hip joint range of motion.
5-years follow-up in the clinic after second operation the patient's condition was very satisfactory. He could carry out normal daily activity with some limitation on hip flexion. Harris hip scoring was measured and showed 95 out of 100 which means excellent . There was no leg length discrepancy, and patient could squat with slight limitation of 80 degrees hip flexion, normal abduction, adduction, external rotation and internal rotation (, ). Radiologic examination showed no sign of loosening of the implant .