A 29-year-old woman presented to the gastroenterology department of our hospital complaining of abdominal pain and diarrhea without obvious predisposing causes.
The patient had a 6-year history of CD and gradual worsening abdominal pain and diarrhea over 5 months before admission.
Six years ago, she had the above symptoms, and was diagnosed with CD based on the combination of all clinical presentations and endoscopic, radiologic and pathologic findings at a local hospital. She was treated with azathioprine, with a lack of response to infliximab previously.
Physical examination on admission revealed tachycardia (116/min), an arterial blood pressure of 12.8/8.7 kPa, a temperature of 36.2 °C and a respiratory rate of 16/min.
Blood analysis revealed moderate anemia (hemoglobin of 8.2 g/dL). Serum C-reactive protein content was increased at 110 mg/L (normal range < 5 mg/L) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 74 mm/h. The blood biochemistry results showed hypoalbuminemia at 32 g/L. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times, electrocardiogram and urine analyses were normal. Tests for toxoplasma, rubivirus, herpesvirus and cytomegalovirus (TORCH) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were normal.
Initial gastroscopy failed to show any evidence of lesions. A colonoscopy revealed multiple erosions, mucosal nodularity, linear ulcers and cobblestone appearance . A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen showed a complex multilocular structure adherent to the greater curvature of the stomach in her left lower abdomen , with fluid, gas and significant surrounding inflammation. The CT also demonstrated an abdominal abscess, which was later treated with an US-guided drainage. However, the CT showed only inflammatory changes and failed to show definite evidence of a fistula. The conventional US demonstrated an unevenly-thickened left colonic wall with its thickest part being 9 mm in the spleen flexure using Esaote Mylab Twice ultrasound system. The lumen was characterized by stenosis to varying degrees (the narrowest luminal diameter was approximately 2 mm). Dotted blood signals were revealed in the thickened wall of the fistula canal by color Doppler flow imaging . Then, the patient took an oral intraluminal contrast agent (Tianxia, Huzhou, China) and OA-CEUS was performed. Contrast agent dilated the lumen of the upper gastrointestinal tract. A good acoustic window was provided for gastrointestinal tract scanning and the impediment of gas inside the gastrointestinal tract was removed. With the aid of the ”window”, a canal with hypoechoic wall was identified connecting the greater curvature of stomach to the splenic colon flexure in free sections . We also observed the hyperechoic gas flowing dynamically inside the canal . Thus, a GF was suspected. In order to alleviate the patient's physical pain and avoid radiation accumulation, Barium enema or meal was not performed. Another gastroscopy was performed again, revealing an ulcer approximately 5 mm in diameter with purulent secretion, suggesting an orifice of the GF .