The clinical story of this 62 year old woman started in 2007 with lower back pain, lumbar muscular contractures and back rigidity. After being examined by an orthopaedic surgeon, she was diagnosed with congenital scoliosis. A lumbar interbody fusion was subsequently performed with no significant impact on the symptoms.
Between 2007 and 2014, she presented multiple episodes of lower limb myoclonus. Episodes were often associated with hyperthermia. A diagnosis of spinal myoclonus was suggested and a treatment with clonazepam began.
In 2014, she presented with lower limb myoclonus, confusion, hyperthermia and acute respiratory failure. She was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Differential diagnoses at the time included NMS versus meningoencephalitis. Nevertheless, no past history of neuroleptic use was identified and multiple attempts of lumbar puncture were unsuccessful. Large spectrum antibiotics were administered with favourable clinical evolution.
She finally presented in our hospital in our emergency department (ED) in January 2017 for recurrent myoclonus and a sudden onset of bilateral leg weakness in the context of an influenza infection. Upon arrival at the ED, moderate hypotension and fever (39.4 °C) were observed. Neurological examination showed bradyphrenia, however she followed one-step commands. There was a motor deficit of the lower extremities scored 4 on the Medical Research Council scale (MRC) , diminished and symmetrical knee and ankle jerks, myoclonus and rigidity in the lower limbs. Initial laboratory tests showed normal white cell count with moderately increased C reactive protein (CRP; 39 mg/l, normal: < 5 mg/l). Creatine kinase (CPK) was elevated at 52144 U/L (normal: 10–170 UI/l) with an acute renal insufficiency (clearance of 14 ml/min). Clonazepam doses were increased from 1 mg to 2 mg three times daily and antibioc therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid was empirically started.
The day after admission in the neurology ward alteration of the level of consciousness, persistent hypotension and respiratory distress were observed and the patient was subsequently admitted to ICU. In the following days, there was a progressive deterioration of the motor function in the lower limbs until paraplegia was reached while lower limb rigidity and myoclonus persisted. Patient contact was lost with respiratory failure, necessitating invasive mechanical ventilation during one week.
Brain and spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a pituitary adenoma, cervical osteoarthritis and thoraco-lumbar discopathy without stenosis. EMG showed continuous rhythmic motor unit activity within the axial muscles. CPK continued to rise in the following days to peak of 74,410 U/L. CSF analysis was normal, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV1), HSV 2 and enterovirus were negative .
In doubt, anti-epileptic treatment with levetiracetam (2 g twice daily) was started. Nonetheless, a consecutive twenty-four-hour electroencephalogram (EEG) demonstrated numerous muscular artefacts but no epileptic activity .
An extensive blood investigation was performed including: human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), Anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, antibody to extractable nuclear antigens, anti-mitochondrial antibody (AMA), anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), Anti-actin antibody (AAA), Anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody (anti-GBM Ab), paraneoplastic syndromes, complement C3 and C4, mycoplasma, influenza, enterovirus, adenovirus, borrelia burgdorferi, cytomegalovirus, cardiolipine antibody, lupus anticoagulant, thyroid function and paraneoplastic neurological antibodies (anti-Amphiphysin, anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-CV2, anti-Ri, anti-Ma2/Ta, anti-Sox1 and anti-Titin). All test results were either normal or negative. However, our patient was tested strongly positive for the antibodies to GAD (95; normal values 0–5). Together with the clinical presentation this ultimately led to the diagnosis of PERM syndrome.
Initial treatment was therefore started with gamma-globulins (0.4 g/kg/day) during 5 days with poor results. Concomitant corticotherapy was started with IV hydrocortisone (50 mg, three times daily) for 10 days, which was then continued orally. The treatment was continued with five sessions of plasma exchange (2 L). Recovery of her consciousness followed within days and myoclonus ceased. She was extubated one week after the end of plasma exchange sessions. Total duration of the ICU stay accounted 33 days. The patient was then transferred to the neurology ward where she recovered progressively with respect to motor function; she was able to walk with a walker when discharged to a rehabilitation centre.
While still in rehabilitation, our patient had a short relapse of the myoclonus in March 2017, only after she was already shortened on her corticosteroids and anti-epileptics. Decision was made to keep her on a regimen of levetiracetam 2 g twice a day and hydrocortisone 20 mg twice daily. She left the rehabilitation centre in May 2017 with a favourable evolution despite persistent mild lower proximal limb weakness (scored 4 on the MRC scale) and gait ataxia.
In August 2017, seven months after admission, she had no relapse of the myoclonus nor the rigidity and was able to walk without assistance. Hydrocortisone was reduced to 10 mg twice daily.
In October, she was again admitted for intermittent episodes of myoclonus (less than 60 min). Myoclonus rapidly disappeared after treatment with IV methylprednisolone (1 g) for three consecutive days. Steroids dose were increased again to 20 mg twice daily. She is now followed monthly at the outpatient clinic and levetiracetam treatment has been progressively stopped while hydrocortisone is maintained at the same dose.