A 30-year-old man complained of a gradually enlarged mass in the right lower abdomen. The results of an abdominal ultrasound taken at the local hospital 3 months prior showed a heterogeneously mixed echo mass located in the right lower abdomen, and the size of the mass was approximately 8.6 cm × 7.3 cm. He had no family history of malignancy but had a history of bilateral undescended testis since birth. The local medical officer suspected a testicular tumor according to the history of cryptorchidism. At the same time, his rapid HIV-1 antibody test showed positive results, and the baseline CD4 count was 70 cells/ml (normal: 404–1612 cells/ml) upon further testing, which suggested severe immunosuppression. The patient initially received combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) but refused treatment for the abdominal mass. As the mass rapidly grew for 3 months, he came to our hospital for treatment of abdominal neoplasm. Upon examination, an immobile and nontender mass was visibly noticeable and palpable in the right lower abdomen. The bilateral testis was not visualized and could not be palpated. The patient had significantly elevated levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), slightly elevated levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG), moderately decreased levels of hemoglobin and a low CD4 count . Further evaluation revealed a low viral load, which was less than 40 copy/ml. Computed tomography (CT) images showed a large, lobulated, ill-defined heterogeneous retroperitoneal mass measuring 17 cm × 16 cm × 24 cm without fat or calcifications and with marked inhomogeneous enhancement due to the presence of necrotic-colliquative areas . The lesion displaced the bilateral lower ureters, resulting in bilateral hydronephrosis. The lesion also compressed the surrounding small intestine, with possible infiltrating signs. Around the mass, ascites was detected, but no enlarged lymph nodes were found. Cystic-solid masses (5 cm × 5 cm) were detected in the bilateral inguinal regions, and their density and enhanced characteristics were similar to those of the retroperitoneal neoplasm . A diagnosis of testicular tumors with bilateral inguinal region metastases was suspected. The patient underwent routine clinical staging and prognosis evaluations according to the results of radiological and laboratory examinations. Clinical staging and risk group categorization were classified as stage IIIC and poor prognosis using the American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system (AJCC) and the International Germ Cell Cancer Collaboration Group (IGCCCG) prognostic scoring scheme (IGCCCG, 1997), respectively .
An ultrasound-guided biopsy was performed on the 5th day after admission, and histology revealed a malignant yolk sac tumor of the testis. Then, the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, retroperitoneal neoplasm resection, partial ileum resection, ileal anastomosis, and double J ureteral stent implantation under general anesthesia on the 11th day after admission. Histopathological examination revealed the lesion as a malignant mixed GCT of the undescended testis composed predominantly of yolk sac tumors with foci of embryonal cell carcinoma and seminoma . The repeated hematological and tumor markers 2 days after the operation are listed in Table . Hemoglobin level was still low; then, 4 Units of suspended red blood cells were transfused to correct anemia with no obvious transfusion reaction. The level of AFP was still high, and the follow-up CT scan showed a gradually enlarged right inguinal mass 1 week and 2 weeks after the surgery, respectively. On the 17th day after the operation, the patient underwent right inguinal mass resection under local anesthesia. Pathological examination revealed mixed GCT metastasis , accompanied by hemorrhage and necrosis. Subsequently, the patient received salvage chemotherapy with a regimen of cisplatin, etoposide, and ifosfamide. Hematology was closely monitored during the treatment. After the first cycle of chemotherapy, the full blood counts remained within the normal range. CD4 count did not decrease during the course of treatment and remained at 118 cells/ml. Then, the patient was discharged and waited for the next cycle chemotherapy. Unfortunately, on the 4th day after discharge, he showed several symptoms of cancer cachexia including fever, progressive weight loss, pain, and severe weakness. Moreover, a low platelet count, which is a side effect of chemotherapy, was found (20 × 109/L, normal 125–350 × 109/L). Therefore, IL-11 was administered subcutaneously at a dosage of 50 μg/kg/day for thrombocytopenia. Two days later, the platelet count was still low (23 × 109/L); on the next day, the patient died because of severe immunosuppression, a low platelet count and cancer cachexia.