A 62-year-old man with recurrent bladder cancer was scheduled for intra-iliac artery chemotherapy. He was a smoker for more than 30 years and had a 10-year history of hypertension. No allergies were reported. There was no coronary artery disease in his family history. The preoperative echocardiogram showed no abnormalities and normal left ventricular ejection fraction. A percutaneous catheter system was set in the bilateral internal iliac arteries distal to the superior gluteal arteries by applying a modified Seldinger technique. During the operation, epirubicin (50 mg/m2) was dissolved in 50 ml of saline solution and then administered over 10 min. After injection, the patient suddenly developed severe dyspnea, chest pain, a red itchy rash on his face, subcutaneous edema, palpitation, diaphoresis and nausea. He progressively became hypotensive and eventually developed shock, and his blood pressure nadired at 52/48 mmHg. Corticosteroids and norepinephrine were administered for his allergic reaction. In addition, fluid resuscitation with 3L of crystalloids and boluses of dopamine was performed to keep the blood pressure at normal values. The first electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST segment elevation of 3 mm in leads II, III and aVF and ST depression in leads I, aVL, and V1–V5 . The patient was taken to the cardiac catheter laboratory for emergent angiography, which revealed 90% stenosis in the proximal segment of the right coronary artery (RCA); the remaining coronary vessels were normal. The RCA stenosis was relieved after administration of 200ug intracoronary nitroglycerin . The ECG after angiography showed recovery of the ST elevation in the inferior leads . The patient’s symptoms immediately resolved after coronary angiography, and his vitals stabilized.
The patient was monitored in the cardiac intensive care unit (CCU). His vital signs stabilized (temperature 37.1 °C, blood pressure 107/71 mmHg, heart rate 93 bpm, respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute). His initial ECG in the CCU showed normal sinus rhythm. Serial troponin-I monitoring showed a normal level (normal range 0.01–0.023 ng/mL) at the time of symptom onset, 0.056 ng/mL 5 h after onset, and a peak of 0.113 ng/mL at the 10th hour. The patient was treated with anti-ischemic treatment, including antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 75 mg), and nitrates were initiated after the coronary angiogram. During hospitalization, the patient remained free of chest pain, and he did not show any chest pain or systemic reactions again during the follow-up.