A 70 years-old man with a dilated ischemic cardiomyopathy, triple coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) in 1990 and chronic renal failure (baseline GFR: 45 ml/min/1.73 m2) underwent a coronary angiography for a Non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). Baseline values of Hs-Troponin T and CK-MB were 497 ng/l and 211 U/l respectively. Native coronary circulation was completely occluded at the proximal segments. Grafts angiography showed a tandem calcified lesions of SVG on distal right coronary artery (RCA) and an ostial stenosis of the SVG on first obtuse marginal branch (OM1). Left internal mammary artery on the mid left anterior descending artery was patent. Ad Hoc PCI of SVG on RCA was attempted. The proximal calcified stenosis has been crossed with a 1.5 x 12 mm balloon only with the support of Guidezilla™ guide extension catheter (5-in-6 Fr), however the non compliant (NC) balloon 2.5 x 15mm was unable to break the hard and calcified plaque . After several attempts, the procedure was interrupted with a suboptimal result . An elective PCI of SVG on RCA with rotational atherectomy was performed (left radial approach, 6 French). Two runs with 1.25 mm burr and 2 runs with 1.5 mm burr were carried out. Then, the use of distal anchoring balloon warranted support and tracking, made as centring rail for the advance of the tip of the “mother-and-child” catheter into the SVG. During slow deflation of the balloon, the Guidezilla™ catheter (5-in-6 Fr) was advanced distal to the proximal stenosis to be stented, thus allowing a first drug eluting stent (DES) 3.5 × 48 mm to be placed on the mid-distal segment of the graft according to a LSD technique. The same technique was applied to deploy a second DES proximally to the first one (3.5 × 28 mm on proximal segment). During both rotational atherectomy and PCI, as well as at the final angiographic control, we did not observe any sign of embolization and the procedure was successfully completed with a final TIMI III flow without complications. A slight elevations of the cardiac biomarkers the day after the procedure (Hs-Troponin T 564 ng/l and CK-MB 308 U/l) was followed by a gradual reduction of the latters in the next 4 days and the patient was discharged in stable conditions.