An 80-year-old Japanese female presented with a 1-month history of progressive dyspnea and dry cough. On admission, she had tachycardia (102 beats per minute), tachypnea (32 respirations per minute), and normotensive blood pressure (123/75 mm Hg). Initial oxygen saturation was 83% with the patient breathing room air. Blood tests revealed a high C-reactive protein level (201.4 mg/l) and a white blood cell count of 18,700/µl. A chest radiograph showed bilateral opacities , and a chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan revealed ground glass opacity (GGO) of bilateral peripheral lung field predominance . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review from the editor of this journal.
The patient was first treated with intravenous antibiotics based on an initial diagnosis of bacterial pneumonia. Despite this treatment, her condition worsened dramatically over the following days. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed a normal ejection fraction with an extremely elevated estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure of 114 mm Hg. Plasma coagulation tests indicated activation of coagulation systems with D-dimers elevated to 9,700 mg/l (compared to a normal level of <1,000 mg/l). Although pulmonary thromboembolic disease was suspected, CT pulmonary angiography showed no evidence of pulmonary emboli but revealed a left ureteral nodule involving the left common iliac vein suggestive of ureteral carcinoma . We then considered the diagnosis of PTTM induced by ureteral carcinoma. The patient refused chemotherapy and selected palliative care for the suspected ureteral carcinoma. She died of respiratory failure on the eighth day of hospitalization.
Postmortem examination revealed tumor cells in the ureter of the left kidney positive for cytokeratin 7 and cytokeratin 20 upon immunohistochemical analysis, which led to the pathological diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma . Tumor cells morphologically similar to the carcinoma of the ureter were identified in the pulmonary arterioles. Marked intimal fibrocellular proliferation and fibrin thrombi were also observed in the pulmonary arterioles . In some arterioles, recanalization of organized thrombi was identified. Extravasation of tumor cells and carcinomatous lymphangitis were not seen. These findings are consistent with the histopathologic features of PTTM. The final diagnosis was PTTM induced by ureteral carcinoma.