A 62-year-old woman presented to her local hospital in December 2017 with a 7-year history of right palatal swelling. The patient first noticed a small, indolent swelling at the right anterior palate 7 years previously, which gradually increased in size over the past 2 years, associated with intermittent toothache and occasional facial swelling.
Initial clinical examination revealed a firm mass over the anterior palate, without apparent buccal and lingual expansion. The initial dental panoramic tomogram (DPT) revealed radiolucency with a welldefined sclerotic border of the right maxilla extending into the right maxillary sinus and significant root resorption of the upper central, lateral incisors, and upper right first molar. Excisional biopsy of the anterior palate was performed under local anesthesia via an intraoral approach, with extraction of the upper right central and lateral incisors at the local hospital. The histopathology examination showed SOC. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) sections showed small epithelial tumor cell cords in a densely collagenized stroma. No obvious dysplastic features were observed in the given specimen. The swelling resolved; however, the patient noticed the swelling of the palate again in April 2018, for which she was eventually referred to our institution for management of the right maxillary tumor .
Except for long-standing diabetes mellitus and hypertension, her past medical history was unremarkable.
Unremarkable.
Clinically, the patient presented with diffuse right facial swelling without overlying skin changes. The swelling was diffuse and firm, causing obliteration of the right nasolabial fold. Mouth opening was not restricted and there was no palpable cervical lymphadenopathy. There were no neurosensory changes to the right infraorbital region . Intra-oral examination showed an irregular mass at the anterior maxilla, extending from the tooth 11 to 15 region, but without obliteration of the buccal sulcus. The swelling was firm and non-tender upon palpation, with non-ulcerated overlying mucosa. The adjacent teeth showed no marked increase in mobility and there was no fluid discharge noted upon palpation .
The histopathology examination of the excisional biopsy that was performed at the local hospital showed SOC. H&E sections showed small epithelial tumor cell cords in a densely collagenized stroma. No obvious dysplastic features were observed in the given specimen.
A gross pathological examination revealed a firm, expansile mass involving the right palate and right maxillary sinus. However, the overlying mucosa appeared intact and not ulcerated . The resected specimens were fixed in 10% formalin, processed, and embedded in paraffin blocks for histopathological examination. H&E sections showed small nests or cords of small neoplastic epithelial cells, immersed within a sclerotic stroma, with perivascular infiltration. Under low power magnification, the tumor cells demonstrated an infiltrating nature towards mature lamellar bone fragments and generally, the tumor appeared to be non-encapsulated. The epithelial cells appeared to be faintly hyperchromatic, while focal areas of tumor islands exhibited round hyperchromatic nuclei with clear cytoplasm. Pleomorphism was uncommon and mitotic figures were scarce, with no significant cellular atypia present . Immunohistochemically, strong positive staining was observed for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and CK19 . Tumor cell showed positive expression of p40 and p63 . The tumor cells stained negative for vimentin and the proliferative activity was approximately 5%-10% according to the Ki-67 staining results, suggesting a low-grade malignancy . The sections also stained negative for S-100.
The initial DPT revealed radiolucency with a welldefined sclerotic border of the right maxilla extending into the right maxillary sinus and significant root resorption of the upper central, lateral incisors, and upper right first molar. DPT was repeated and revealed an ill-defined radiolucency at the right maxilla, with a slight increase in size, as compared with the initial DPT . The computed tomography (CT) scan showed an expansile enhancing osteolytic mass at the right maxilla, with marked buccal and palatal bone perforation . The lesion extended into the right inferior turbinate and breached the nasal septum. No prominent radiological evidence of lymphatic spread to the cervical region was seen.