The presented case was a 31-year-old Chinese woman who was diagnosed with CED at the age of seven. Her antenatal and neonatal histories were uneventful. She had five siblings and she was the fourth child of her parents. Her eldest brother, who was 38 years old, developed CED symptoms at three years of age and the diagnosis was established six months following the initial presentation. Her parents and other siblings were asymptomatic; however, no investigation had been performed on them.
Although her symptoms started at one year of age, due to financial constrained and poor social support, her parents brought her to seek medical treatment at the age of seven. At first, she presented with generalized muscle wasting of all four limbs, more prominently in lower extremities. Subsequently, she experienced progressive worsening of the bone pain. She had poor appetite and failure to thrive. At the age of seven, she was brought to the hospital due to unbearable lower limb pain. Physical examination revealed severe muscle and subcutaneous fat wasting. Her body weight was below fifth percentile. She walked with waddling gait. Femur radiograph was obtained and showed irregular sclerosis of the bone. Unfortunately, the image could not be obtained for review. Before the family history was disclosed and based on the clinical features and her femur radiograph, the initial diagnosis was muscular dystrophy with chronic osteomyelitis. Later, she was reviewed in pediatric clinic and her family history was obtained. Finally, the diagnosis of CED was made based on the clinical features, radiographic findings, and family history.
At the age of 20, she was also diagnosed with concomitant hypogonadism and primary hypothyroidism. Her thyroid gland had not been enlarged but her free T4 level was low and thyroid stimulating hormone level was high. The symptoms of hypothyroidism resolved with initiation of L-thyroxine. Her hearing was not compromised. During follow-up, serial chest radiographs were obtained and showed typical progressive diaphyseal hyperostosis of the humerus (, and ). The rib, clavicle, and vertebrae were spared. Her left radioulnar radiograph that was taken at the age of 24 years also showed similar changes (, and ). A computed tomography of orbit was performed recently due to progressive right exophthalmos. A lateral periorbital dermoid cyst was found but she was not eager for surgical removal. Moreover, the computed tomography showed classic skull changes of CED, which included extensive sclerosis and thickening of the frontal, temporal, and petrous bones, resulting in obliteration of diploe spaces and encroachment into the frontal and sphenoid sinuses. The maxillary sinus was relatively spared . Her orthopantomogram (OPG) showed no hyperostosis of the mandible.
Similarly, her eldest brother had concomitant hypogonadism and primary hypothyroidism. His clinical presentation was similar to the patient but had manifested in more severe form. He was wheelchair-bound since the symptoms started due to severe muscle wasting and bone pain. He had bilateral mixed conductive and neurosensory hearing impairment. His physical examination showed mild hepatosplenomegaly.
The results of their full blood counts, serum urea, electrolytes, calcium, and liver function test were in normal range, except for persistently raised alkaline phosphates (180-265 U/L). They required long-term analgesia to relieve pain. Due to the disease progression and chronic bone pain, they were not able to adapt to normal social parameters. Both of them were unemployed and required social welfare support.