A 15-year-old female with diabetes type 1 is followed in an outpatient clinic, as part of the Ophthalmology Department at Zealand University Hospital Roskilde, Denmark.
She has a family history of HHT and by the age of 12, she is diagnosed with HHT (mutation ACVRL c1232G > A). Her primary complaint related to HHT is recurrent nose bleeding. A thorough clinical examination concerning HHT has only shown a few telangiectasias on her fingers and in the nose.
She started the diabetic screening program from the age of 12 and has since then been followed continuously over the years. The first eye-screening visit took place in 2013. No visual complaints nor any retinal abnormalities were observed . In 2016, fundus images of the left eye showed signs of pigmentary changes located in the area around the fovea . There were no changes in the right eye. Two years later, the lesions were more pigmented, indicating that the changes probably are located in the retinal pigment epithelium layer and thus not related to diabetic retinopathy. Simultaneously, the right eye had developed three small retinal abnormalities imitating macular telangiectasia-like lesions .
Approximately 6 months later, new telangiectatic changes in the left eye occurred . Since OCT was not available in the outpatient clinic the patient was referred to the Eye Department in Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde for further examination. Fundoscopy, OCT and OCTA scans were collected on the Spectralis HRA + OCT machine (spectral domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) (SPECTRALIS® HRA + OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg Germany)).
The OCT demonstrated that the lesions are located close to the RPE (retinal pigment epithelial layer) . The changes are more obvious using the infrared image modality . OCTA showed that the changes seen in the right eye, are located in the choriocapillaris layer corresponding to the same place the teleangiectasia-like lesions are seen on earlier fundus images. The changes in the left eye , are also located in the choriocapillaris expanding towards the retinal pigment epithelial layer, corresponding to the pigmentary changes in the parafoveal area .
At all screening visits, the patient had no visual complaints and had never undergone ocular surgery, laser treatment, or ocular trauma. Best-corrected visual acuity was 90 ETDRS (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study) letters on both eyes and there has not been any sign of DR.