A 52-year-old male patient reported to the department of joint replacement Sarvodaya Hospital, a tertiary care hospital. He presented with chief complaints of stiffness in the back and bilateral painful hip joints, causing a limp. The pain was dull aching in nature, non-radiating, and localized to the hip region. The patient gave a positive medical history of similar pain for the past 2 years, which had flared up in the past 4 months, to the extent that he failed to perform daily activities. The patient also complained that his urine would turn brown on standing for some time after voiding. Later, the urine analysis showed the presence of HGA with an elevation factor of 2637.00, which is suggestive of Alkaptonuria. The family history of similar complaints was negative. However, the stiffness of the back was medically intervened through regular physiotherapy and was alleviated.
On physical examination, stiffness of the spine was tested with SCHOBERS, which was negative (test to determine if there is a decrease in lumbar spine ROM due to any chronic condition). Fixed flexion deformities were found 5° and 10° noted in right and left knee respectively with a further flexion possible up to 120° bilaterally. Further evaluation showed that both the anterior superior iliac spine of the hip was at the same level without any increase in lumbar lordosis. Bilateral Hip joint flexion of up to 90° degrees was possible with painful restriction of internal and external rotation of the hips when the hips and knees were extended and in 90° of flexion. Radiological examination revealed severe degenerative changes of both knee and hip joint with tendinous calcification of the pelvis; spinal X-ray reveals ankylosis straightening of the lumbar lordosis with striking calcification of the intervertebral disc. Magnetic resonance imaging of the spine showed widespread involvement of the cervical and lumbar vertebrae with disc herniation at multiple levels (C4-5,C5-6,C6-7, T12-L1,L5-S1) without canal compromise at both cervical and lumbar spine with relative sparing of the dorsal vertebrae.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for the complaint of painful hip joints, causing a limp, and so underwent THA bilaterally in 2 sittings with an interval of 17 days, by posterolateral approach (Moores aka Southern approach) where the skin was incised 10 cm distal to the posterior superior iliac approach and was extended distally and laterally to the greater trochanter. The approach is considered safe and provides easy access to the hip joint without any disruption to the abductor mechanism. Intraoperatively, the soft tissues, the articular cartilage, and the acetabulum with capsule were found to be brown to dark in color, while the femoral head was observed to be brownish to black in color The pigmented cartilaginous surface, bone, and hypertrophied synovium were sent for histopathological evaluation . Hydroxyapatite-coated spiked titanium acetabular cup with a dual mobility liner and porous-coated uncemented femoral stem was used for fixation, as it provides durable osseointegration ( and ). On the 1st post-operative day, complete weight bearing was allowed. The patient was discharged on the 3rd post-operative day, and walking was allowed with support due to the pathological involvement of the bilateral knee joint. Significant improvements were seen in R.O.M and joint stability at 6 months’ follow-up . Marked improvements when dealing with day-to-day activities were also observed, and the pre-operative and post-operative differences were evaluated through the Harris Hip Score .