A 41-year old woman was diagnosed with relapsing-remitting MS in December 2013. Initial treatment with interferon beta-1b (Extavia®, Betaferon®) was switched to fingolimod in February 2014 due to persistent disease activity. Anti-JCV-serum-antibodies were positive (Unilabs Copenhagen, Denmark). In November 2016 subclinical MRI activity occurred. At this time, the JCV antibody index value was 2.23. Fingolimod was continued, and the absolute lymphocyte count varied between 170/μl and 310/μl.
One year later, a routine 3 T MRI (14-11-2017) revealed a spotty C-band-shaped hyperintense left-parietal FLAIR lesion with patchy Gadolinium-enhancement, and a microcystic appearance on T2 weighted (T2w) images . Few punctate “milky way”-like Gadolinium-enhancing lesions were present . Clinically, a slight worsening of the pre-existing gait imbalance and ataxia as well as increased irritability and aggressiveness was noted. The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score increased from 4.5 to 5.5.
PML was suspected on the background of atypical lesions on MRI, and subsequently confirmed by detection JCV-DNA in CSF (39 copies/ml, Institute of Virology, Heinrich-Heine-University Duesseldorf; serum JCV antibody index value: 5.23).
Laboratory findings revealed sustained grade 3 lymphopenia (310/μl, CD4+ count 27/μl, CD8+ count 71/μl). Flow cytometry of peripheral blood confirmed a reduction of lymphocytes with reduced proportions of NK cells (CD56+ count 56/μl), as compared to fingolimod-treated control MS patients . However, the CD4/CD8 ratio and the naïve/memory distribution of T cells was comparable to fingolimod-treated control MS patients . The PML biomarker CD62L (L-selectin) was strongly reduced compared to healthy controls and in the lower range of fingolimod-treated MS patients . LFA-1 expression on CD4 T cells was strongly elevated indicating recent cellular activation .
Fingolimod was immediately suspended and mirtazapine 30 mg per day was started. Repeated 3 T control MRIs revealed an increasing number of “milky way”-like punctate Gadolinium-enhancing lesions in both hemispheres. Concurrently the immune system reconstituted within one month as blood lymphocyte counts normalized (13-12-2018: 1260/μl). Two weeks later, 3 T MRI (27-12-2017) showed substantially more Gadolinium-enhancing punctate lesions . At this time, JCV-PCR was negative in CSF suggesting IRIS rather than progression of PML, therefore an intravenous corticosteroid pulse therapy was administered .
The next MRI (10-01-2018) showed slightly less lesions and Gadolinium-enhancement. Clinically, the EDSS score improved to 4.5 (improved gait balance and ataxia).
Ultrahigh field MRI at 7 T was done and visualized the initial C-shaped PML lesion in great anatomical detail . In addition, T2*w and SWI hypointense (“dark”) areas corresponding to positive (“bright”) MR phase changes and thus indicating paramagnetic susceptibility changes were visible within the surrounding cortex and neighboring white matter fiber tracts .
Moreover, numerous punctate contrast enhancing milky way-like lesions were detectable on 7 T T1w and T2*w images. Several of these did not present with a central vessel, while a very small vessel was faintly visible in a small proportion of punctate lesions. In contrast, a relatively large central vein was observed within MS-like lesions .
Follow-up MRIs in March and May 2018 showed new nodular- and ring-like contrast enhancing white matter lesions typical of MS plaques . Presuming MS activity, immunomodulation with glatiramer acetate was started. The initial left parietal PML lesion did not enlarge at all .