A 52-year-old woman underwent six courses of post-operative chemotherapy (paclitaxel 262 mg/carboplatin 583 mg) for ovarian cancer. Myelosuppression was detected after the 5th and 6th chemotherapy courses, which prompted G-CSF treatment (filgrastim, 75 μg/day). The patient developed a high fever after the last G-CSF administration and was admitted 4 days later in the gynaecology department. Negative bacterial, fungal, and viral test results were observed, and a broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment did not completely improve her condition. Aortitis was suspected based on enhanced computed tomography (CT) findings, and she was referred to our cardiology department.
Her peripheral arterial oxygen saturation was 96% (room air), body temperature was 38.0˚C with remittent fever, blood pressure was 92/50 mmHg, and bilateral pulse was 70 beats/min. The head and neck had no bruit or tenderness, and the patient reported no visual deterioration or diplopia. Chest auscultation was clear, and cardiac auscultation revealed normal S1 and S2 with no S3 or murmurs. There were no abdominal abnormalities or notable skin lesions and swelling on the extremities. Her medical history included pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis that had been controlled using anticoagulant medication.
shows the patient’s laboratory findings on admission, which included an elevated C-reactive protein concentration (CRP). Although the white blood cell count (WBC) slightly elevated on admission, it gradually decreased to 1400/μL (normal range 3300–8600). Decreasing of the platelet counts and normocytic anaemia were also observed. Bone marrow tests showed that the three lineages of haematopoietic cells were retained, and there was no increase in blasts or morphological abnormalities.
Electrocardiography, echocardiography, and chest radiography revealed no abnormalities that could explain the fever. Echography of the abdominal aorta revealed aortic wall thickening and a hypoechoic region around the aorta . Furthermore, CT revealed an increase in the soft tissue surrounding the aortic arch and abdominal aorta . Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging revealed thickening of the aortic wall and enhancement of the wall and perivascular tissue , and uptake was observed during 18F-fludeoxyglucose positron emission tomography . These imaging findings suggested active inflammation at the lesions.
The patient was transferred to the cardiology department, and G-CSF-associated aortitis was suggested based on her history and clinical course (Naranjo adverse drug reaction probability scale score 7; probable). On Day 23, she was exhausted because of the persistent fever and received prednisolone treatment (PSL, 50 mg/day), which promptly resolved her symptoms. Follow-up testing revealed improvement in her CRP concentration and erythrocyte sedimentation rate . After 2 weeks, CT revealed an improvement in the thickening around the aorta . The PSL dose was gradually reduced. This treatment was marked by the absence of recurrence of the aortitis, cancer, and infection at her 1-year follow-up.