The patient was an 18-year-old male. He was diagnosed with single ventricle asplenia and left inferior vena cava before birth, and underwent the Fontan procedure for single ventricle physiology at 6 years of age. He was regularly checked up after the Fontan procedure. At 18 years old, a hepatic tumor was detected by ultrasound sonography. He was referred to our hospital for treatment of the hepatic tumor.
On laboratory evaluations, the blood test results were as follows: platelet count of 22.6 × 104/μL, prothrombin time of 73%, serum albumin level of 4.8 g/dL, aspartate transaminase level of 32 IU/L, alanine transaminase level of 33 IU/L, and total bilirubin level of 0.6 mg/dL. The tumor markers were alpha-fetoprotein of 3 ng/mL and des-γ-carboxy prothrombin level of 41 mAU/mL. Both hepatitis B virus antigen and hepatitis C virus antibody were negative. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 14%. The liver function was preserved, and Child-Pugh classification was categorized as A.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a hypovascular mass in segment 2 and a hypervascular mass in segment 4 of the arterial phase, followed by a delayed washout . Gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed similar findings. CT arteriography revealed that both masses were hypervascular tumors , and CT during arterial portography showed that they were both low-density masses . Both tumors were suspected to be HCC, and thus we planned to perform hepatectomy.
Oxygen saturation in room air was 92%, and non-invasive blood pressure was 98/60 mmHg. Preoperative angiography revealed CVP of 20 mmHg and a hepatic wedge pressure of 23 mmHg. Left ventricular ejection function was estimated as 57%. Cardiac output was 3.5 L/min. After multidisciplinary medical staff meetings by adult congenital cardiologists, hepatobiliary surgeons, and anesthesiologists, the patient could be tolerated for general anesthesia, and we planned laparoscopic hepatectomy.
We performed pure laparoscopic hepatectomy. Pneumoperitoneum was performed with insufflation management system (AirSeal iFs; Conmed Corp., Utica, NY, USA) for low and stable pressure was started from 6 mmHg and controlled up to 8 mmHg. The intraoperative CVPs shifted 11–21 mmHg and exceeded the pneumoperitoneum pressure. The end-tidal carbon dioxide tension shifted 36–40 mmHg. The liver revealed hepatic congestion due to Fontan circulation . The two 12 and two 5 mm ports were placed in the right and left paramedian and right and left subcostal positions. The Pringle maneuver was applied during hepatic resection . The resection line was marked, and hepatic transection was performed by laparosonic coagulating shears (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH, USA), an ultrasonic surgical aspirator (CUSA; Cavitron Lasersonic Corp., Stamford, CT, USA), and a bipolar clamp coagulation system (VIO 300D; ERBE Elektromedizin, Tübingen, Germany) . The laparoscopic non-anatomical resections were completed. Then the tumors were extracted using a plastic bag through the umbilical trocar incision. A drainage tube was placed for the liver-resected surface. The operative and pneumoperitoneum times were 327 and 263 min, respectively. The intraoperative blood loss was 20 mL.
The patient was discharged on the 9th postoperative day without postoperative complications. The resected specimens showed round-shaped brown tumors and the pathological findings were revealed that the segment 2 lesion was high-grade dysplastic nodule and the segment 4 lesion was well-differentiated HCC. The patient remains free of disease at the 1-year follow-up.