The boy was born at 34 + 1 weeks of gestation, birth weight 1860 g (− 2 SD), to a 36-year-old gravida 4, para 1. In late pregnancy, the mother was diagnosed with group B streptococcus and treated with oral antibiotics. Premature rupture of membrane led to hospitalization for close monitoring using cardiotocography and fetal scalp electrode. Penicillin G was given twice intravenously and oxytocin was administrated continuously for stimulation of contraction. Vaginal examination showed a straight occipito-posterior presentation. Because of lack of progression in labor, vacuum-assisted labor was tried twice followed by acute cesarean. Apgar score was 1/9 and 5/10, umbilical cord pH 7.24, and Base Excess − 4.5 mmol/L.
After birth the infant was transferred to the in-house neonatal department. On day 2, staring, hypertonia, respiratory distress, apnea, and increased gastric residuals were observed, along with a gradually increasing, firm swelling in the occipital region of the scalp. No convulsions were observed. Treatment with bi-nasal flow CPAP (appropriate size Argyle® short nasal cannula fixed with a cotton head cap, Benviniste ventile, heated and humidified air, 5–6 cm H2O pressure), caffeine, intravenous ampicillin, and gentamycin was commenced. Cefotaxime was added to the treatment because of E-coli in both blood and cerebrospinal fluid. The respiratory distress along with blood gas values gradually improved. The results of repeated ultrasound scans of cerebrum and abdomen along with echocardiography were normal.
No signs of skin infection were initially registered. On day 3, skin darkening in the occipital region of the scalp was observed. From day 4 to day 6, the skin in the line of the CPAP cap on the right side of occipital area became increasingly dark and hard, and a small ulceration in this area was observed. During day 8 a spontaneous rupture of a part of the dark skin area followed by secretion of pus was observed. The CPAP was discontinued, the cap removed, and a plastic surgical assessment was made. During day 9 and day 10, a defect and increasing maceration of the skin in the occipital area gradually developed . In this period leucocytes increased to 37.1 E109/L, while C-reactive protein had a biphasic course. On day 11, a reassessment of the skin was made, and debridement of the skin lesion in the occipital area equaling 6% of the total body surface was carried out during general anesthesia. The necrotic skin along with surrounding healthy tissue was removed, saving the periosteum for possibility of later skin grafting. Antibiotic treatment was reduced to cefotaxime, and the infant’s clinical condition as well as infection parameters improved. On day 51, skin grafting was successfully performed using skin from the back. Good healing of the skin graft was observed at surgical follow-up, apart from a small degree of tightening of the graft and occasional wounds .