A 42-year-old male came to us with a history of a grade 1 distal third tibia fracture sustained 15 months back which was fixed with plate and screws the next day of injury. At presentation, he complained of persistent pain at the fracture site and antalgic gait. X-rays showed frank non-union with an interfragmentary screw and a 10-hole medial distal tibia locking plate in situ with 1 locking screw backed out . There was adequate callus at the fracture site of tibia as well as fibula. There was no clinical, biochemical, or radiological signs of infection. A diagnosis of hypertrophic non-union was made as evidenced by improper reduction, inadequate fixation, and presence of callus. The surgical plan consisted of implant removal, fibulectomy, and replating with good reduction. However, after removing the plate and screws, we encountered pus coming out of one of the screw holes . The surrounding soft tissue was healthy hinting towards an intramedullary infection (Cierny–Mader type 1 osteomyelitis). With all the callus around, there was still a visible gap and movement at the fracture site . Plan was changed on the table to an antibiotic nail with fibulectomy. Intraoperative samples were taken for culture. Stainless steel tibia interlocking nail of 9*34 was chosen and around 1–1.5 mm layer of Palacos R+G cement was applied over it making sure the interlocking holes are left uncovered . Pus was seen coming out of the screw holes while reaming. A thorough intramedullary wash was given with the help of a cannula and nailing was done. The excess callus around the fracture site was not disturbed. A fibulectomy was also performed. Intra-operative samples showed methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Broad-spectrum antibiotics were switched to culture specific, i.e., injection vancomycin. The patient was started on weight-bearing physiotherapy on day 2. X-rays were done on day 2 . Sutures were removed on day 15. Discharged on oral antibiotics after 3 weeks of IV antibiotics.
The patient was followed up at monthly intervals. No complications were encountered during the follow-up visits. At 3 months, the patient was walking full weight bearing without support with full knee and ankle range of movements . No signs of infection. X-rays at 3 months showed complete radiological union .