A 62-year-old woman with COVID-19 who presented with chest pain, dyspnea, nausea, and vomiting.
The patient initially presented with flu-like symptoms and was diagnosed with COVID-19 following a positive reading on a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test. Ten days later, the patient presented with chest pain, dyspnea, nausea and vomiting.
The patient’s medical history included dyslipidemia and incipient atherosclerosis in the carotid and aortic territories, continuous use of nortriptyline for migraines and 9 years of tiboline [Libiam 1.25 mg once a day (Libbs-São Paulo–SP/BR)] use as menopausal hormone therapy. The patient had received three doses of a vaccine for SARS-CoV-2; two chimpanzee adenovirus vector vaccines (ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 AZD1222; Oxford/AstraZeneca/Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) on April 12, 2021 and July 13, 2021, respectively, and one BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (BioNTech/Pfizer, New York City, NY, United States) on December 13, 2021. Timeline is showed in Figure .
Upon physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature 36.5 °C; blood pressure 122/78 mmHg; heart rate 82 beats per min; and respiratory rate 22 breaths per min. The patient’s clinical presentation was compatible with Killip-Kimball grade I classification.
Laboratory examination results were as follows: Blood cardiac biomarkers included a creatine kinase level of 6105 IU/L, a creatine kinase myocardial band fraction of 300 IU/L, a cardiac troponin I level of 25000 pg/mL, a C-reactive protein level of 75.8 mg/dL, a lactic dehydrogenase level of 1.510 U/L and a D-dimer level of 2.540 mcg/L FEU. In addition, transthoracic Doppler echocardiography revealed akinesis in the inferior mid-basal and apical infero-basal portions of the left ventricle.
Emergency coronary angiography revealed that the anterior descending coronary artery and its diagonal branches and circumflex artery and its marginal branches were free of obstructive atherosclerotic lesions . However, images of the right coronary artery (RCA) and its right posterior descending (RPD) and right posterior ventricular (RPV) branches indicated defects in intraluminal filling, suggesting a thrombus .
Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm, inferior ST-segment elevations and reciprocal changes in the anterolateral leads . The patient was referred for emergency angiography.
We evaluated the RCA by intracoronary ultrasound. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) pullbacks were performed using a 40 MHz IVUS OPTICROSS catheter (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, United States) at 0.5 mm/s. The images suggested a subacute, homogeneous, echolucent thrombus in a large extension of the RCA, RPD branch, and RPV branch. Additionally, they showed an acute thrombus with a bright aspect, clear outline and no signal attenuation in the RPV branch . We believe that the presence of thrombi on IVUS in the acute and subacute stages was due to the fact that at the time the patient was studied, the process had already been evolving for over 24 h and the thrombotic process (when it does not culminate with vessel occlusion) is a continuum of thrombus stages. We also identified mild to moderate atherosclerosis in the middle third of the RCA .