A 54-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room (ER) of the Third Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University on 20 July 2018. He had a 4-day history of chills, fever (39.0 °C), malaise, fatigue, myalgia and mild diarrhea, and had been treated with herbal medications for 2 days. His fever had been brought down; however, his fatigue and myalgia were exacerbated. He developed a yellowish complexion on the day prior to presenting at our ER.
Upon admission, the patient had a normal temperature of 36.5 °C, heart rate of 95 beats/min, blood pressure of 96/77 mmHg, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min and oxygen saturation of 100% in room air. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 13. He also had cutaneous and scleral icterus. The patient’s urine volume of 24 h was 210 ml. The most prominent appearance of his skin was numerous scattered rashes. Many dusky-purple pustular and petechial lesions appeared on his head, right elbow, right palm, hip and feet . No bite wound was seen. He was conscious with normal cardiac, pulmonary, abdominal and other physical findings.
In discussing recent events leading to his current conditions, he recalled being bitten on his right foot by a wild rat in his house 1 week prior to the onset of symptoms. He was alerted by the rat bite but did not experience any distress. The bite wound healed normally.
Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the head, chest and abdomen was unremarkable except for bronchiectasis in the right lung. Laboratory analyses found an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 225 mg/L, a white blood cell (WBC) count of 5.6 × 109/L with 89.8% neutrophils and a reduced platelet (PLT) count of 4 × 109/L. Additional findings included: procalcitonin level > 100 ng/mL, serum total bilirubin (TB) of 501 μmol/L, serum creatine (CR) concentration of 764 μmol/L, hemoglobin level of 171 g/L, serum albumin (Alb) concentration of 31 g/L, and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 93 U/L.
The initial diagnosis included hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), sepsis, kidney dysfunction and liver dysfunction. Because of the disease severity, the patient was transferred to our intensive care unit, and a blood sample was sent for bacterial culture. In the meantime, empirical treatment with an intravenous drip of tazobactam/piperacillin (4.5 g every 8 h) was initiated. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was applied to treat renal failure. On day 4, blood culture yielded a negative result. However, the WBC count was further elevated to 13.1 × 109/L with 11.3 × 109/L neutrophils accompanied by re-emergent fever (peak 38.9 °C), and the CRP and Cr concentrations remained at high levels. Hepatic function continued to deteriorate (ALT from 93 U/L to 258 U/L in 6 days). Oral doxycycline (0.1 g every 12 h) was then added to the antibiotic regimen to broaden the antibacterial spectrum. No therapeutic response was observed. Considering blood culture had failed to reveal a pathogen, a pustular sample from his right ankle was collected and sent for unbiased meta-next generation sequencing (mNGS) (BGI, Shenzhen, China), in which the pool of detected sequences can match a sequence database of 8000 pathogens including bacteria, fungi, virus and parasite. Within 72 h, mNGS detected 86 of 20 million reads that matched S. moniliformis . To confirm infection by this rare pathogen, a specific PCR was performed using the same pustular sample. The resultant PCR product was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The PCR primers were S5 (CATACTCGGAATAAGATGG) and AS2 (GCTTAGCTCCTCTTTGTAC), which target a S. moniliformis specific region of 16S rRNA . The empirical tazobactam/piperacillin treatment was immediately replaced with penicillin (800,000 IU intravenously every 8 h) for 14 days. The patient’s clinical symptoms were improved after penicillin treatment. The skin pustular lesions erupted, then shrank and scabbed. His WBC count, CRP level, PLT count and serum Cr level returned to normal. The patient made a complete recovery during a follow-up of 3 months after discharge.