The 54-year-old male patient was diagnosed with bipolar disorder for 39 years, with a past history of duodenal ulcer, but no other digestive system disease, metabolic syndrome or food poisoning. He was admitted to the first hospital in October 2017 for recurrent abnormally elevated arousal energy level for a week, where he received 1500 mg sodium valproate, 800 mg quetiapine and 0.75 g lithium carbonate each day. At the beginning of treatment, routine examinations indicated that the level of amylase was 82 U/L, while other laboratory indices and abdominal ultrasound scan were normal. All of a sudden, the patient felt nausea and vomited. The physical examination revealed no skin or scleral icterus. However, the clinician found that the level of amylase increased to 770 U/L, with the blood sodium valproate concentration of 113.0 mg/ml (normal: 50–125 μg/ml). The patient therefore was discharged and referred to the second hospital for possible acute pancreatitis. In the second hospital, further tests were carried out. The results of computed tomography demonstrated an increased pancreatic volume and swollen peripancreatic fat tissue and the contrast-enhanced computed tomography scans on the next day showed similar results. By now the patient was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis. He was to start a fasting diet, trypsin inhibition and gastric mucosa protection in addition to the bipolar disorder medication prescribed at the first hospital. Two days later, however, the patient refused to go to the second hospital to continue with his medications. To keep on with his treatment for acute pancreatitis as well as to stabilize his mood swing, his sister brought him to our hospital on December 2017. He was admitted and routine examinations were carried out. The results of blood tests indicated that serum and urine amylase were 428 U/L (normal range: 0–220 U/L) and 1316 U/L (normal range: 0–620 U/L), respectively, whereas blood cholesterol (normal range: 3.10–5.70 mmol/L), blood triglycerides (normal range: 0.45–1.95 mmol/L), blood calcium, glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase, glutamic-pyruvic transaminase, urea nitrogen, creatinine and lithium carbonate (0.7 mmol/L) were normal, upon which we continued his treatment plan for bipolar disorder that set out in the first hospital and acute pancreatitis in the second hospital, while the serum levels of amylase were routinely examined.
For the first few days of treatment, the level of serum amylase was reduced to 220 U/L, thus we considered the withdrawal of acute pancreatitis treatment. The patient was allowed on a clear liquid diet. However, had been symptom-free for several consecutive days, abdominal pain and diarrhea re-emerged unexpectedly and the blood level of amylase increased to 320 U/L. Considering that the patient exhibited no history of gallstone or other reasons that would induce pancreatitis, we believed that sodium valproate was the medication that held responsible so we decided to change his treatment plan, where dosage of lithium carbonate was increased to 1.0 g/day. As a result, his abdominal pain disappeared, the blood amylase level dropped to 208 U/L, and the concentration of lithium carbonate was found to be 0.89 mmol/L. A few days later, without any symptoms, his blood amylase level elevated to 362 U/L. However, since he had no more symptoms of acute pancreatitis and his mood was stable, his sister asked for him to be discharged. Although we have explained the patient was not clear from acute pancreatitis and we would not recommended him to go home without full recovery, the patient’s sister insisted. We then followed up the patient by phone. At the time of this case presentation, his sister reported that he slept well at home, went back to work, and the blood amylase level was 194 U/L.