A 16-year-old Chinese boy presented with dizziness and projectile vomiting for 3 months. He was admitted at the Neurosurgery Department of Beijing Tiantan Hospital in November 2009 after a progressive exacerbation of symptoms, with unsteady walking and increased blood pressure. Physical examination revealed lucidity, equal reaction of pupils to light, full eye movement, facial symmetry, lolling and muscle dystrophy of the left part of the tongue, bilateral gag hyporeflexia, soft neck, grade V limbs muscle strength, normal muscle tone, Rombergism positive, and bilaterally positive Babinski’s sign. Blood pressure was 142/110 mmHg.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed an intracranial space-occupying lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the lesion (size: 2.5×2.0×2.0 cm) in the left part of the ventral medulla oblongata . The lesion was significantly enhanced after contrast injection. The medulla oblongata was extruded, with peritumoral edema. The patient was a full-term delivery and had no family history of hypertension and coronary heart disease.
Tumor resection was performed in the right lateral position. Surgical time was 6 hours including 2.5 hours for tumor removal. The left vertebral artery and posterior cranial nerve were located on the surface of the tumor. The tumor was completely removed by resection under a microscope. After resection, the left vertebral artery and posterior cranial nerve remained intact. Total intraoperative bleeding was 300 mL. Blood loss due to the tumor resection per se was about 50 mL. The surrounding tissues were shielded using gauze and all blood leaking was suctioned, leaving almost no blood in the arachnoid space. Pathological examination was consistent with diagnosis of schwannoma. Indeed, hematoxylin and eosin staining identified the classic Antoni A and Antoni B regions. In the Antoni A region, cells were closely arranged with a palisade-like structure. In the Antoni B region, the cells were arranged loosely. Immunohistochemical analysis was then performed, which revealed that the tumor was S100 positive, EMA negative, and GFAP negative, which was consistent with the schwannoma.
At day 1 after surgery, the pupils were equally sensitive to light. Wound dressing was clean and dry. The patient presented airway obstruction, and tracheal intubation was performed to secure airway patency. The airway obstruction did not improve even two days after surgery. Hence, dehydration therapy and tracheotomy were performed in the supine position. Three days after surgery, the patient was in a hazy consciousness state. CT showed an ischemic infarction at the bilateral internal carotid arteries and posterior cerebral artery , which was not present on day 1 . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed stenosis at the carotid siphon and distal basilar artery, which was segmental . Hyperdynamic hemodilutional therapy and nimodipine were started. Four days after surgery, the patient was in coma state. His body temperature was 39°C, and hence physical cooling was performed. Penicillin was replaced with vancomycin and ceftazidime. The patient received 50 mL of nimodipine q 12 h, hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4, and 4.5 g of sodium chloride (500 mL/day), and the amount of fluid was increased to 3,000–3,500 mL/day. Five days after surgery, the level of consciousness of the patient was not improved. There was no clear liquid exudate at the incision. The dressing was clean and dry. Six days after surgery, the patient was unconscious. CT revealed that the infarction was located in the frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes . Seven days after surgery, the level of consciousness was not improved. The infarction size increased. Dehydration therapy was carried out, without success. Decompressive craniectomy was successfully performed in the frontal and temporal parts . Head dressing was clean and dry. The bone window was correctly replaced, the trachea incision was unobstructed, and the patient had small amounts of sputum. However, the patient was in a persistent vegetative state, with normal vital signs.
The Karnofsky performance status score before surgery was 90. It was 30 on day 1 after surgery; 20 on day 2 after surgery; 10 on day 7 after surgery; and 40 on the last follow-up (ie, five years after surgery).