Our patient was a 25-year-old Caucasian Iranian man who was referred to our center in 2010 for further evaluation of paraparesis and urinary incontinence. There was no significant point in his past medical or familial medical history. He was well until 2008, when he developed blurred vision in his right eye and was admitted to a local center with the clinical impression of optic neuritis. He received intravenous methylprednisolone 1000mg for 5 days without a good response. Two months later he experienced optic neuritis in his left eye, but he had a good recovery after receiving intravenous methylprednisolone. According to his medical records, his physical examination was normal at that time, with the exception of mild optic atrophy of the right eye. Brain MRI was performed, which revealed some hyperintense T2-weighted lesions around the ventricles, with linear callosal involvement. The lesion was nicely enhanced in a linear pattern in a T1-weighted image with contrast agent . Linear enhancement of ventricular surfaces (pencil-thin appearance) in both the frontal and occipital horns was another important finding in this patient.
The patient was diagnosed with MS and received interferon (IFN) beta 1a three times per week. Six months later he developed another episode of optic neuritis in his left eye, and he had a less than 50 % recovery with intravenous steroids and plasmapheresis. After 1 year, he developed paraparesis and urinary incontinence while receiving IFN beta 1a three times per week. He was admitted to a local hospital and received intravenous methylprednisolone 1000mg/day for 5 days. He responded to this therapy and was able to walk in 4 weeks. At that stage, the patient was referred to our center to escalate the disease-modifying therapy.
A neurologic examination of the patient revealed bilateral optic atrophy, weakness of both lower limbs (grade 4/5) and bilateral Babinski sign. Although we did not perform detailed neuropsychological tests, the patient did not show any apparent decrease in cognition or any other signs or symptoms of callosal involvement. New MRI showed a longitudinal cord lesion extending more than four vertebral segments without any enhancement. Regarding episodes of optic neuritis, longitudinal extensive spinal cord lesion and atypical callosal involvement, anti-AQP4 was checked, and the result was positive. Other laboratory tests, such as anti-nuclear antibody and anti-phospholipid antibody, for collagen vascular diseases were negative. The patient was diagnosed with NMO, and azathioprine was started for him at a dose of 50mg/day with a gradual increase to 150mg/day.