A 14-year-old Iranian girl came to the outpatient clinic with a chief complaint of vague progressive pain in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen for 7 months. She also had suffered from left shoulder pain, fullness, early satiety, and shortness of breath for a month. The patient was in a completely healthy state until 7 months previously when she woke up with acute severe pain in her left shoulder. Exactly 3 days later, the hypochondrial pain was noticed. She hardly could breathe or lay down due to extreme aches. Primary workups revealed nothing except microcytic anemia [hemoglobin 10.3 g/dl, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 63.6 fL]. Analgesics and folic acid were prescribed accordingly. The patient was asked for a follow-up visit a month later. Unfortunately, after three monthly outpatient visits, the pain progressed, and her physician requested no further diagnostic modalities. Due to ongoing pain and inadequate treatment, she came to our outpatient clinic for reevaluation. There was no nausea and vomiting, jaundice, fever, or bowel and urinary symptoms. She was living in the countryside and gave us a history of unwashed fruit ingestion. Examination revealed an asymmetric distended abdomen and a large palpable mass in the left hypochondrium, which was not tender. Vital signs were within normal limits. No past medical history was reported. Basic metabolic panel data was all in normal ranges.
Subsequently, US was requested, which showed a huge irregular wall cystic lesion below the left hemidiaphragm that pushed the hemidiaphragm upward, measuring about 220 mm × 150 mm × 160 mm with a few septa in it. Computed thermography (CT) revealed an enlarged spleen in size measuring 241 mm and intraparenchymal cystic lesion measuring 205 mm × 180 mm × 150 mm in the spleen containing thin septation and fine calcifications in-wall, suggestive of hydatid cyst versus epidermoid cyst . Due to the compressive effect of the cyst, the left kidney was forced to the lower quadrant. Also, stomach, C loop of the duodenum, and pancreas had deviated to the right side. Liver, biliary tract, right kidney, and right and left adrenal glands were normal.
Due to the size of the cyst and its compressive effect, the patient was prepared to undergo total splenectomy with an impression of a hydatid cyst based on the endemicity of Echinococcus granulosus in the region. Albendazole was prescribed, 400 mg twice a day, and the patient was prepared for surgery.
In the operation room, a left subcostal incision in the fascia made an entrance to the peritoneal cavity. A huge splenic cyst was detected on first inspection. To facilitate the surgical procedure, enhance visualization, and minimize operative complications such as the accidental risk of rupture and anaphylaxis, the surgeon intentionally drained the cyst. Approximately 2 L of dark brown fluid were aspirated from the cyst. The cyst’s adhesions to adjacent organs such as the stomach, liver, and left side of the diaphragm were released. Splenocolic, splenophrenic, and splenorenal ligaments were dissected. Afterward, the short gastric artery was ligated, and the spleen was completely excised and was prepared for pathological examinations .
Surprisingly, the pathologist has turned the suspected impression into a simple splenic cyst.