A Caucasian female in her 60s visited the emergency department (ED) with chief complaints of reflux with nausea and spasmodic epigastric pain, no vomiting, dry mouth, and weakness in both legs. These symptoms started around midnight. The lower limb weakness progressed overnight. In the morning, she alerted emergency medical services as she was unable to stand. She presented herself as a hemodynamically stable patient with bilateral ptosis, dysarthria, dysphagia, and decreased strength in both legs (grade 2/5), yet showed preserved strength in her upper limbs. She complained of light dyspnea with bilateral clear chest auscultation. Further clinical examination showed no particularities. During her stay in the ED, the patient complained of newly onset diplopia, gradually increasing difficulty of breathing, and weakness progressing to the upper limbs. An arterial blood gas was drawn and showed a type 1 respiratory insufficiency with hypoxia of pO2 58 mmHg. Methemoglobin was within normal range. On further history, we learned that the patient consumed Atlantic wolffish with spinach, quinoa, and spring onions for dinner the night before. These were reheated leftovers from a meal prepared 2 days earlier. No particularities were found on biochemical and hematological investigations and computed tomography of the brain was normal. The patient deteriorated and needed to be intubated for respiratory support. Subsequently, she was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Due to the suspicion of botulism, trivalent botulinum antitoxin (ABE antitoxin) was administered. Stool samples, stomach fluid, and blood samples were sent to the laboratory for testing on botulism toxins. Extract of the leftovers were injected in mice for observation and mouse bioassay. As primary differential diagnosis of Guillain–Barré syndrome was suspected, intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) were sequentially administered. Electromyography (EMG) on day 2 displayed an axonal motoric neuropathy. A spinal tap showed high immunoglobulin G (IgG) and high protein, but rather low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)/serum albumin ratio. On day 4, the botulism toxins test, performed on stomach fluid and stool, confirmed the diagnosis of botulism. All the mice that were given the Atlantic wolffish died on day 3, whereas the mice that were given the fish and antitoxin were still alive. IVIG administration was discontinued. The patient was successfully extubated on the ninth day and left the ICU 4 days later. She made a full neurologic recovery and could leave the neurologic ward some days later. Afterwards, BoNT/E and C. botulinum type E were found during laboratory investigations. Five months later she is walking 14 km without problems and is starting back at her sports classes.