A 29-year-old woman was presented for routine antenatal care, and was found to have a small pigmented lesion in the vagina that increased gradually in size during pregnancy. Gynecologic examination showed a bluish soft lesion on the anterior vaginal wall. A pelvic ultrasound was carried out on the 17th week of pregnancy, and showed a 1.9 × 0.9 cm oval hypoechoic bilobed area overlaying introitus . This mass had increased three-fold in size by 37th week of pregnancy, forming a protrusion, which occupied most of the vaginal canal. The clinical impression at this stage was vaginal hemangioma; therefore the patient was selected clinically for cesarean section due to the risk of bleeding. Preoperative laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 12.6 g/dL, a white cell count of 12.1 × 103/μL, and platelet levels of 193 × 109/L in the patient. The renal and liver functions were normal. However, the mass was resected during cesarean section, and the patient had a postoperative course without complication. Gross examination showed a cystic mass measuring 6.0 × 4.3 × 3.5 cm. The outer surface had focal areas of dark pigmentation . Serial cuts revealed central cystic changes filled with dark friable material. The entire specimen was submitted for histologic evaluation. Microscopic examination revealed a subepithelial cellular proliferation of heavily pigmented dendritic melanocytes that were arranged predominantly in fascicles, and epithelioid nests dissected through the vaginal wall. These were surrounded by collagen fibers, and a prominent vascular stroma associated with frequent melanophages . However, no cytologic pleomorphism, atypical mitosis, or necrosis was found.
There was no melanocytic junctional activity. The histology of the central cyst of the mass lesion revealed blood filled nonendothelial lined pseudovascular spaces that were lined by the lesional cells (in a manner analogous to an angiomatoid melanoma or aneurysmal benign fibrous histiocytoma) Immunohistochemical analysis of the proliferation using the streptavidin-biotin immunohistochemical technique revealed that the tumor cells were positive for HMB-45, S-100 and melan-A, but negative for estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, CD34, smooth muscle actin, and AE1/AE3. The MIB-1 proliferative index was less than 1%. CD31 and factor VIII immunohistochemical stains showed the presence of a prominent small-sized vascular network within the melanocytic proliferation . Clinical follow-up showed no evidence of recurrence at one year after the resection of the mass.