A 35-year-old Chinese female with no known medical illness presented with double vision and body imbalances for the past 2 days. She described that the diplopia was of sudden onset, painless, and did not occur on looking in any specific direction. Regarding the body imbalance, she showed a tendency to sway to the right side. On further questioning, she also had history of preceding fever with mild flu symptoms for the past 5 days.
She also complained of numbness and cramping sensation over the hands and feet bilaterally, 1 day before presentation. Otherwise, there was no neck stiffness, no upper and lower limb weakness, no slurring of speech, no dysphagia, no dyspnea, and no history of recent accident or trauma. Upon arrival to the emergency department, she required assistance for ambulation as she has difficulty in maintaining balance. Her vital signs were stable with blood pressure of 124/78 mmHg, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute, regular rhythm and no collapsing character, afebrile, and not tachypneic. On physical examination, she had diplopia over the lateral gaze bilaterally, but otherwise there was no nystagmus, no dysdiadochokinesia, no dysmetria, and no facial weakness, and examination of the rest of the cranial nerves, upper limbs, and lower limbs revealed no abnormal findings. Romberg’s test was negative, but sharpened Romberg’s test was positive. Her abdomen was soft, not tender, and there was no palpable mass or organomegaly. Examination of the cardiorespiratory system revealed no abnormal findings. Initial blood investigation was normal .
Blood investigations taken upon arrival to the hospital showed normal cell counts. There was no electrolyte abnormality, and the renal profile and liver function were also normal.
Computed tomographic scan of the brain revealed no intracranial bleeding and no space-occupying lesion . Nerve conduction study revealed mild sensory axonal polyneuropathy with segmental demyelination. H reflex was absent bilaterally. Lumbar puncture for cerebrospinal fluid analysis was done and showed normal cell counts and biochemistry profile and no abnormal cells, and was negative for bacterial culture, multiple viral antibody panels, and cryptococcal antigen test. In view of the presence of ataxia and diplopia, the Miller Fischer syndrome variant of Guillain–Barré syndrome was suspected and later confirmed with the presence of serum anti-GQ1b autoantibody. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 0.4 gm/kg once daily was started and planned to complete for 5 days. On the second day of admission, she developed worsening cough and shortness of breath. Radiographic imaging of the chest revealed homogeneous opacity over the lower right zone . She was initially started on intravenous (IV) co-amoxiclav 1.2 g three times daily, and was escalated to IV piperacillin–tazobactam 4.5 gm three times daily after 2 days after she failed to show any improvement. As atypical pneumonia was suspected by the treating physician in view of the associated neurological symptoms, Mycoplasma pneumoniae antigen was taken and came back positive with 1 over 2560 titer of total mycoplasma antibody and presence of IgM antibody, suggestive of an acute infection. She was started with macrolide antibiotic (oral azithromycin 500 mg once daily for 5 days) on top of the previous IV antibiotic and IVIg treatment. She was also subjected to inpatient physiotherapy for a few days, then discharged well.