The 62-year-old male patient was transferred to our hospital due to a more than 3-week history of dyspnea and the recent onset of generalized fatigue. He was diagnosed with MCD 10 months prior (September 30, 2022) but had no history of other major medical issues. His vital signs were stable. Oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. Venous duplex ultrasound of the lower extremity showed acute deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in other hospitals. Echocardiography: slight enlargement in both chambers (Left atrial 38 mm, Right atrial 41 mm × 49 mm), severely increased pulmonary artery systolic pressure (85 mmHg). Based on the patient's clinical symptoms, signs, and auxiliary examination, the simplified Wells PE score was 2 points, and the patient was moderately likely to have a pulmonary embolism. D-dimer was extracted, and the patient was positive for D-dimer, and then computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) examination was performed, indicating pulmonary embolism in the main pulmonary artery, double pulmonary trunk, and multiple branches of each lobe of both lungs . Acute pulmonary embolism was eventually diagnosed.
In November 2021, he was diagnosed with MCD at the Second Hospital of Jilin University. At that time, albumin protein 37.0 g/L, Urine protein 2+, 24 h urine protein 2.24 g/24 h, the renal biopsy report showed that 36 intact glomeruli were observed in the whole film, 3 glomeruli had global sclerosis, 1 glomerular balloon dilated, and no adhesion or crescent formation was observed. Focal segmental hyperplasia of mesangial cells. Renal tubule epithelial cells showed multifocal granular and vacuolar degeneration, focal atrophy, and protein tubule type. Renal interstitial edema, small focal fibrosis, and inflammatory cell infiltration. Periodic acid-silver metheramine (PASM)+Masson staining showed no nail spike, double track, and erythrophilic material deposition. Pathological diagnosis: minor glomerular lesions. Electron microscope observation showed that mesangial cells and stroma of the glomerulus had slight segmental hyperplasia, basement membrane was segmental thickening, segmental shrinkage, no definite electron compact deposition, and epithelial foot process fusion of about 50%. Lysosomes of renal tubule epithelial cells increased, and part of the tubule microvilli shed, shedding cell fragments can be seen. Electron microscopic diagnosis: podocyte injury. Immunofluorescence was negative. Corticosteroid therapy was recommended and was considered by the patient and his family. Regular corticosteroid therapy was not initiated until July 2022, when the lack of remission persisted.
He was admitted to our department for acute pulmonary embolism on this occasion, and relevant laboratory tests were completed : Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular systolic function, LVEF of 57%, right atrial and right ventricular enlargement, elevated pulmonary artery systolic pressure, and decreased right ventricular systolic function. Venous duplex ultrasound of the lower extremities showed thrombus in the left popliteal vein and posterior tibial vein (acute—subacute stage), and bilateral intermuscular vein thrombosis (acute—subacute stage). Upon admission, the patient had a blood pressure of 110/76 mmHg, a heart rate of 77 times/min, and his vital signs were stable; however, he had elevated BNP and RV dysfunction. His sPESI score was 0, therefore he was determined to be in the low to moderate risk in terms of his PE. He was subsequently started on enoxaparin sodium 4000IU parenteral anticoagulation every 12 h for 7 days followed by oral rivaroxaban 20 mg once a day. The patient developed atrial tachyarrhythmias during the initial part of his hospitalization. Electrocardiography (ECG) during tachycardia first indicated ectopic atrial rhythm and atrial flutter with 2:1 AV conduction. He then went into atrial fibrillation approximately 30 min later. He was given amiodarone which helped restored sinus rhythm. He remained in sinus rhythm during the rest of his hospital stay. Combined with the expert advice of the nephrology department, corticosteroid 32 mg once a day was used to treat the primary disease. After treatment, the patient was discharged from hospital with improved symptoms.
One month later, he returned on November 2, 2022, due to an “increased heart rate for one day”. Admission ECG showed atrial flutter, 2:1 AV conduction ; The patient's heart rate increased and remained unrelieved. The sinus rhythm was restored after “intravenous amiodarone bolus.” Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular systolic function, LVEF of 60%, enlargement of both atria, possible moderately increased pulmonary artery systolic pressure, and slightly reduced right heart function. The decision was made to perform radiofrequency ablation, considering that the rapid heart rate caused by atrial flutter could aggravate heart failure. After completing left atrial computed tomography angiography (CTA) and transesophageal echocardiography, no obvious abnormalities were found. Then bilateral annular pulmonary vein ablation and isthmic ablation of the tricuspid valve were performed, and sinus rhythm was restored after surgery . After discharge, Rivaroxaban tablets were given 20 mg once a day anticoagulant therapy, and oral corticosteroid 24 mg daily was continued to treat MCD. Patients were asked to follow up regularly.