A 48-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to hospital because of a two-month history of NS. Seven years before admission, she had been diagnosed with pSS from keratoconjunctivitis sicca, elevated serum anti-Ro/SSA antibody titer and lymphoplasmacytic cell infiltration around salivary ducts of the small salivary glands. At no time had she developed any extra-glandular manifestations. Although anti-nuclear antibodies were positive with a speckled pattern, no signs/symptoms satisfied the classification criteria of systemic lupus erythematous. Although a persistently elevated serum IgA level (400–500 mg/dL) was noted, she had no history of macrohematuria accompanied by upper-airway infection. In addition, there was no evidence of hypocomplementemia, cryoglobulinemia or M-protein. She had no pertinent family history, medication use, smoking or alcohol consumption habit, or occupational history.
Two months before admission, she noticed gradually appearing symmetric pedal edema. Urinalysis revealed 6.7 g/day urinary protein but no glomerular hematuria or cellular casts. On admission, her general appearance and vital signs were stable. She had no fever or malaise, and a good appetite. Her height was 152.6 cm, and weight was 45.9 kg, representing a gain of 5 kg from baseline. Physical examination showed no significant findings except for pitting edema in the bilateral lower limbs. Blood tests showed hypoalbuminemia (2.2 mg/dL) with normal kidney function (serum creatinine 0.64 mg/dL). No electrolyte imbalance was noted.
Renal biopsy showed 11 glomeruli, one of which showed global sclerosis. In the other glomeruli, diffuse bubbling appearance in the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and slight mesangial proliferation were confirmed . There were no crescents, endocapillary proliferation, double contour of GBM, interstitial nephritis or vasculitis. Immunofluorescence (IF) revealed granular IgA and C3 deposition in GBM but was negative for IgG. Light chain staining indicated no monoclonality. Anti-human Gd-IgA1 antibody (KM55) (Immuno-Biological Laboratories, Cat. No.:10777) staining was significantly positive in GBM with a granular pattern . In electron microscopy, a few electron dense deposits located in the subepithelial area, and more so in intra-membranous and paramesangial lesions accompanied diffuse GBM thickening . Diffuse podocyte foot process effacement was also observed. Screening for secondary MN showed no evidence of neoplasms or infection of hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus or human immunodeficiency virus. Additional serum analysis confirmed an elevated Gd-IgA1 level (13.5 μg/mL), comparable to that seen in IgAN, and qualitative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ProGen Biologics, Cat. No.:IC-003) of IgA-containing circulating immune complex (IgA-CIC) was positive. Thus, we diagnosed GN induced by IC composed of Gd-IgA1. Furthermore, retrospectively performed immunofluorescence of the small salivary gland evaluated at the diagnosis of pSS showed positive Gd-IgA1 staining of infiltrating lymphoplasmacytic cells . Therefore, we concluded that Gd-IgA1 produced by over-activated B cells in pSS formed circulating IC and GN.
NS deteriorated rapidly, with the urinary protein elevated to 12 g/day by the 10th day after admission which resulted in nephrotic crisis requiring hemodialysis for 1 week . Induction therapy with high dose prednisolone (PSL) (1 mg/kg/day) and 1 g/day of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) were administered on the 17th day, after which the amount of urinary protein reduced dramatically. NS remitted on the 24th day and she recovered baseline renal function by discharge. Five months after discharge, the remission was maintained with 1 g/day of MMF and PSL tapered to 9 mg/day. Moreover, in the 6th month after induction therapy, the serum Gd-IgA1 level decreased to the normal range (3.8 μg/mL), and serum IgA-CIC disappeared.