A 62-year-old woman in natural menopause for 12 years presented to the Department of Gynaecological Oncology of the University Hospital “Dr. Georgi Stranski”, Pleven, Bulgaria with complaints of vaginal bleeding. She reported having diabetes mellitus type II with obesity first degree (BMI – 32.65), arterial hypertension, and glaucoma; no previous surgeries. She reported having 2 normal deliveries and 1 spontaneous abortion. A standard work-up was initiated with clinical and gynaecological examination. The gynaecological examination established enlarged uterus as in 2-month pregnancy with no pathology findings in vagina, adnexa, or parameter ligaments. Gynaecological ultrasound measured a 10-mm endometrial mucosa. She was subjected to dilatation and curettage and a diagnosis of clear-cell EC was histologically confirmed. Staging of the disease with chest radiograph, abdominal and pelvic ultrasound, followed by computed tomography (CT) showed no abnormal findings or enlarged lymph nodes (LNs). Thus, the disease was classified as cT1N0M0. The oncological committee referred the patient to surgery. A total hysterectomy with bilateral adnexectomy, pelvic LN dissection, and infracolic omentectomy with peritoneal lavage was done as a standard surgical approach. The final histology described low-proliferative endometrium with intramucosal and polypoid clear-cell EC without infiltration in the myometrium, the cervical channel or the isthmus; there was no lymphovascular invasion; 14 dissected LNs as well as the annexes and the omentum were free of metastases. FIGO staging was thus confirmed as 1A and surgical staging was pT1A pN0 M0. The oncological committee referred the patient to intravaginal brachytherapy postoperatively, and a total dose of 30 Gy in 6 weeks with daily dose of 5 Gy was delivered using iridium 192. The patient was thereafter referred to follow-up (FU) in the outpatient setting. FU visits were organized initially every 3 months and consisted of clinical examination, laboratory tests, and abdominal and pelvis ultrasound. A chest radiograph was done annually.
During the first 12 months there were no signs of disease recurrence. Because the patient reported having a ventral hernia at month 15 after surgery, a surgical correction was planned after check-up. A CT of abdomen and pelvis was done with a solitary enlarged LN in the region of the left common iliac artery, measuring 19/13 mm. A confirmatory PET/CT showed no other secondary sites . The metastatic burden was considered as low and radically resectable. As an oligo-metastatic first progression with only one LN involved, a surgical approach was considered: elective dissection in the region of the common iliac artery to the left followed by correction of the hernia via hernioplasty with a mesh. A conglomerate of 6 common iliac LNs was dissected , and the final histology report confirmed a metastasis of clear-cell EC in only one of them. Six cycles of pseudo-adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel were done. No serious adverse events were reported, and the patient was again referred to FU. Regular CT of abdomen and pelvis with i.v. contrast enhancement was done every 3 months. Currently, at the end of February 2020 – 36 months after first disease progression – the patient is free of disease with ongoing clinical and imaging complete remission.