A 55-year-old gentleman was admitted to the emergency department with worsening shortness of breath and retrosternal chest pain radiating to the left arm and jaw. His medical history consists of hypercholesterolaemia, traumatic neck injury that necessitated spinal surgery, and a previous COVID-19 infection a few months ago. He was an ex-smoker.
During examination, he was found to be tachycardiac, hypoxic, and tachypneic with an oxygen saturation of 80% on room air. His heart rate was 120 b.p.m., and his blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg. Chest auscultation revealed normal heart sounds, no audible murmurs, and bilateral crepitation.
The preliminary diagnosis was a late presenting ST-elevation MI complicated by congestive heart failure. We also considered mechanical complications of MI, such as acute mitral regurgitation due to papillary muscle rupture and ventricular septal defect.
His presenting electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with anterior upsloping ST segment elevation, Q waves, and poor R wave progression (see , ). His high sensitivity Troponin I level exceeded 50 000 ng/L (>50 SI unit) and his creatinine kinase level was 795 U/L. A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed an unruptured aneurysm of the sinus of Valsalva with mild aortic regurgitation. There was moderate functional mitral regurgitation. The left ventricle was normal size with severely impaired systolic function with regional wall motion abnormalities and an ejection fraction of 20% (; see , ). His chest X-ray (see , ) showed cephalization and indistinctness of the pulmonary vasculature compatible with pulmonary oedema.
The patient received a 60 mg intravenous bolus of furosemide and was commenced on a continuous infusion at a rate of 10 mg/hour. Following improvement from pulmonary oedema 2 days later, a coronary angiogram was performed. The procedure utilized a 6F sheath with a right radial artery approach. The right coronary artery was unobstructed and dominant, while the left main stem (LMS) was challenging to locate, requiring several diagnostic and guide catheters. Eventually, a Voda Left 4 guide (Boston Scientific) successfully engaged the LMS, but immediate pressure damping was noted upon engagement. The angiogram revealed a tapering LMS with no flowback and a moderate to severe hazy lesion with TIMI 3 flow in the circumflex indicating a possible thrombus. The left anterior descending artery (LAD) was found to be unobstructed, and a prominent left sinus of Valsalva was noted on the angiogram (; see , ). It was evident that the patient had significant stenosis in both his LMS and LAD. This is likely a result of external compression, potentially from the enlarged left sinus of Valsalva.
A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) (; see , ) was performed, revealing a large SVA involving the left coronary cusp measured 9.9 cm from cusp to commissure, with spontaneous contrast and laminar thrombus noted within the anterior portion. The study confirmed the TTE finding of severe impairment of left ventricular systolic function secondary to regional wall motion abnormalities in LAD territory. There was evidence of mild aortic regurgitation and mild functional mitral regurgitation.
Further examination with a computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the aorta confirmed aneurysmal dilatation of the three coronary sinuses , with the left coronary sinus being the hugely dilated, measuring 63 × 59 mm and extending to the left and cranially, with a small amount of laminar thrombus at the left superior aspect of the aneurysm. On the 3D reconstruction of the CT images, the LAD was observed to be small calibre and stretching over the aneurysm . The right coronary sinus was dilated to approximately 31 × 22 mm, while the non-coronary sinus was dilated to 33 × 32 mm. The remainder of the aorta, including the main arch vessels, appeared normal and satisfactory, with no dilatation.
After a full auto-immune and infectious screen was negative, a cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging was performed to evaluate function and myocardial viability. It showed that only one segment (the apical anterior) was non-viable, while the remaining LAD territories (5/17) were found to be viable with <50% sub-endocardial infarct (see , and ). Following the discussion at multi-disciplinary team meeting, it was decided that the patient would undergo SVA repair. His heart failure medications (2.5 mg of bisoprolol, 25 mg of eplerenone, 2.5 mg of ramipril, and 40 mg of furosemide once daily) remained on therapeutic dose while awaiting SVA repair surgery. The surgical intervention occurred 30 days subsequent to the initial presentation, as the patient initially declined the procedure. The patient underwent aortic valve and root replacement. Unfortunately, the patient passed away 28 days after surgery, following a protracted postoperative course marked by haemodynamic instability from his severely impaired left ventricular function. During this period, the patient required post-bypass extra-corporeal membrane oxygenation and later transitioned to a biventricular assist device (BiVAD). The case underwent comprehensive discussion within the transplant multi-disciplinary team, resulting in the determination that the patient was not a suitable candidate for transplantation. Towards the end of his stay in the intensive care unit, the patient developed disseminated intravascular coagulation, sepsis, and renal failure. Despite inotropic support and assistance from the BiVAD, the patient remained hypotensive, eventually progressing to multi-organ failure. Regrettably, he passed away on the 28th day post-operatively.