A 38-year-old pregnant woman presented with recurrent Cushing's disease. She had initially presented 8 years prior with weight gain, truncal obesity, and hypertension. Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)-dependent hypercortisolism was confirmed. Urinary free cortisol (UFC) was 105.1 ug/24 h (reference range <45 ug/24 h), midnight serum cortisol was 249 ng/dl (reference range <100 ng/dl), and ACTH was 60 pg/ml (reference range 5–27 pg/ml). The patient had a negative high-resolution brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast. Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) results were consistent with a pituitary source of her ACTH-dependent Cushing's syndrome . After discussion with the patient, she was taken to the operating room for sellar exploration. Extensive sellar exploration as well as serial vertical sections through the gland in approximately 2 mm intervals was performed through the entire anterior gland in addition to exploration of the posterior lobe. Several suggestive lesions were identified and removed. On postoperative day (POD) number 1, the patient's cortisol level dropped to 1.4 ug/dl from preoperative levels of 22.3 ug/dl. The patient was started on hydrocortisone 20 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening. The patient was discharged on POD number 3. Six months later in follow-up ACTH was 7 pg/ml (5–27 pg/ml). One-year after the first surgery the patient got pregnant, which resulted in a normal full-term neonate.
The patient remained in remission and re-presented after 8 years with symptoms of fatigue, diaphoresis, 50 pound (22.7 kg) weight gain over 3–4 months, easy bruising, hair loss, hypertension, and headaches. Biochemical workup was as follows: 24-h UFC 172.1 μg (reference range <45 ug/24 h), ACTH 56.3 pg/ml (reference range 6–48 pg/ml); 8 a.m. serum cortisol 26.9 μg/dl. Two consecutive midnight salivary cortisol samples were 245 and 262 ng/dl (reference range <100 ng/dl). Dedicated MRI of the pituitary with gadolinium contrast revealed a 4 mm hypointense sellar lesion that was suspicious for recurrent pituitary microadenoma .
The patient was scheduled for elective surgery, but it was canceled as she was found to be pregnant on the day of the surgery, which corresponded to her 12th week of pregnancy (G4P3). After being re-evaluated by endocrinology and high-risk obstetrics, surgical resection was recommended during pregnancy in order to minimize potential life-threating maternal and fetal complications as a result of hypercortisolism. In addition, it was recommended that surgery be performed during the second trimester of pregnancy. After a thorough discussion of the risks and benefits to both her and the baby, she elected to proceed.
The patient underwent an image-guided endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal approach during the 18th week of pregnancy. The patient was positioned in semilateral supine position to avoid undue pressure of her gravid uterus on her iliac veins. After adequate exposure of the sphenoid sinus had been obtained, a wide sellar exposure was performed extending to both cavernous sinuses. Given the 9 mm intracarotid distance, extra time was spent confirming the carotid location with neuro-navigation and the Doppler probe. Dura was opened with a sickle knife. Scar tissue was found on the dura and intradurally. Notably, the pituitary gland had been sectioned during the previous operation, which made identification of abnormal tissue challenging. Biopsies were taken from far left lateral, left lateral, central, right lateral, and posterior parts of pituitary gland and sent to pathology. Frozen section from the left lateral aspect was suspicious for pituitary adenoma. No cerebrospinal fluid was encountered and the dural defect was covered by inlay dural substitute and onlay mucosal graft harvested from the middle turbinate. Postoperatively, the patient demonstrated normalization of her blood pressure and no longer required antihypertensives. Nadir cortisol and ACTH levels postoperatively on day 2 came back 1.1 ug/dl (reference range 3.4–26.9 ug/dl) and 6 pg/ml (reference range 6–48 pg/ml), respectively, and the patient was started on replacement hydrocortisone. She developed diabetes insipidus postoperatively, which has been controlled to date by oral desmopressin acetate 0.1 mg in the morning and 0.2 mg at bedtime. The patient delivered a full-term healthy neonate at her 39th week of gestation. The baby's weight was 8 lbs (3.6 kg). At 3 months follow-up, the patient is still on hydrocortisione replacement therapy and desmopressin 0.1 mg/day. ACTH stimulation test was 3.0 and 4.0 ug/dl at 30 and 60 min after CORTROSYN administration (a peak of at least 18 ug/dl is considered normal).