A 45-year-old female with surgical prosthetic MVR 4 months ago was hospitalized with septic shock and intubated immediately due to acute respiratory distress syndrome. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) revealed massive vegetation with abscess formation on the posterior commissure of the prosthetic valve and dehiscence. The patient underwent very high-risk urgent operation on the same day. The mitral valve was replaced with 21 mm bileaflet mechanical prosthetic valve (St Jude Medical, Inc.; St Paul, MN, USA) and mitral annulus was reconstructed using pericardium with no residual PVL.
After discharge with no complication, the patient was rehospitalized on the postoperative third month with acute pulmonary oedema. At admission, the patient was orthopnoeic and anxious. Her blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, her rhythm was atrial flutter with 2:1 AV block and her SpO2 was 85% in room air. She had no markers of inflammation or infection. She had a haemolytic anaemia due to PVL. The patient was evaluated with 2D and 3D TOE, and a dehiscence was demonstrated by 3D TOE between 10 and 3 o'clock position, which makes approximately 50% of the mitral annulus, and this was also confirmed by 3D colour Doppler imaging . Resurgery was considered as very high risk by the heart team and percutaneous PVL closure was planned. First device was a 14 mm Amplatzer™ Vascular Plug (AVP) III (St Jude Medical) and it was implanted at 10 o’clock position. After the first device implantation, the remaining degree of PVL was moderate. To close the remaining leak, second same device was placed at 1 o’clock position. A third device was implanted between the two devices to close the residual mild-moderate PVL. The residual mild PVL between the second and third devices was completely closed with the 6 mm Amplatzer™ Duct Occluder II (St Jude Medical) and there was no residual PVL at the end of the procedure . Her functional capacity improved from NYHA Class IV to Class II at the end of the first week.
At 10 months of follow-up, the patient has NYHA Class II functional capacity and she is on a metoprolol 50 mg 2 × 1, ramipril 5 mg 1 × 1, furosemid 40 mg 2 × 1 treatments. She has no peripheral oedema and her laboratory findings are totally normal.