A 48-year-old Caucasian male with a past medical history of methamphetamine use and chronic alcohol substance use disorder initially presented in May 2021 after being found altered in his home. An initial physical exam showed bradypnoea and normal cardiac auscultation. Work-up demonstrated blood cultures positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA) and several septic pulmonary emboli. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed no valvular vegetations, while a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) showed a 3.5 × 1.5 cm vegetation on the end of the peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line that was subsequently removed. Other findings on TEE were mild pulmonic regurgitation with no other valvular anomalies. The patient received two weeks of intravenous nafcillin before leaving AMA without completing the recommended six-week antibiotic course. The patient was readmitted in mid-June 2021 for a methamphetamine overdose with decreased responsiveness and a normal cardiopulmonary exam. On this admission, TEE suggested an uncharacterized coronary artery/atrial fistula but could not be adequately evaluated as the patient left AMA again.
Two years later (without any interval history), in February 2023, he complained of fever, chills, weakness, and pleuritic pain. He was pyrexial, tachycardic, and tachypnoeic. The patient admitted to using methamphetamines intravenously. The general exam showed alertness and cachexia, with no evidence of cyanosis, oedema, or trauma. Initial laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 16.31 K/mm3 (normal value 3.7–10.5 K/mm3). C-reactive protein was elevated at 4.1 mg/dL (normal value < 0.5 mg/dL), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate returned elevated at 71 mm/h. (normal value 0–15 mm/h). Later in his course, his peripheral blood cultures returned positive for MSSA in 2/2 culture bottles. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed multiple septic emboli, right middle lobe pulmonary embolus, and an enlarged right pulmonary artery secondary to pulmonary artery hypertension . There was also evidence of an unclear abnormal connection emerging from the right atrium .
This patient was admitted to internal medicine due to sepsis. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular systolic and diastolic functions with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction. The estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 44 mmHg, indicating possible pulmonary hypertension. Right atrial and right ventricular size was estimated to be grossly normal. A subsequent TEE showed a mobile echoic density in the right atrium (1.2 × 1 cm) attached via a stalk at the junction of the SVC and right atrium that was consistent with vegetation .
The patient proceeded with a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) for further evaluation. This showed a filling defect in the cavo-atrial junction measuring 1.7 cm without significant perfusion, suggesting a thrombus. A tubular vascular enhancing structure was noted between the left atrium anteriorly and medial wall of the inferior SVC/cavo-atrial junction measuring 0.9 cm, concerning for a fistula (, , ). An electrocardiogram (EKG)-gated computed tomography angiography (CTA) chest with venous phase acquisition showed communication of the RCA with the SVC (, , ). The suspicion of a fistula first arose on a TEE two years prior, and the imaging series confirmed and helped to characterize the origin and insertion of the fistula.
It is difficult to rule out a congenital fistula entirely, especially as this patient is presented with no haemodynamic percussions. However, this patient’s clinical course suggests against a pre-existing congenital anomaly. Over 85% of congenital fistula patients present with signs of congestive heart failure with a continuous heart murmur. Moreover, the most common fistula is between the left anterior descending (LAD) to the pulmonary artery. As his prior CT scan did not suggest any evidence of an abnormal connection, with repeated imaging later showing an fistula, this suggests that his fistulization developed in the interim. Thus, this patient was subsequently diagnosed with a RCA to SVC fistula.
The patient was treated with intravenous cefazolin at 2 g every 8 h. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted for percutaneous extraction of the right atrial density with AngioVac (a percutaneous thrombus aspiration system). Per the European Society of Cardiology endocarditis guidelines, surgery is a class IB recommendation for complications of locally advanced infections such as fistulas. Discussions were directed towards surgical intervention. However, the patient declined any surgical intervention and left AMA.
The patient was contacted several months after discharge. He declined to follow up with any specialists. Notably, there is limited literature on the prognosis of similar shunts, but the prognosis appears related to the haemodynamic stability of the patient. This patient reports that he continues to remain normotensive, suggesting that he is likely to remain stable in the short-term.