A 12-year-old male patient was referred from a private clinic to the Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry for the management of mild diffuse swelling in the lower left back tooth region for 3 weeks . The swelling was insidious in onset and gradually increased to the present size. There is a history of pulp therapy done on the same tooth by a general practitioner when the child was 10 years old. There was no history of toothache or decrease in the size of the swelling, or any discharge from the swelling.
Extraoral examination revealed a diffuse swelling in the lower left side of the mandible, without loss of facial symmetry, and the mucosa overlying the swelling was normal. Local examination revealed restored teeth 75, a swelling of approximately 2 × 3 cm in size extending from mesial of 34 to distal of 36, obliterating the vestibule. On palpation, the swelling was non-tender and hard in consistency. The teeth were nontender on percussion. Thus, a provisional diagnosis was made as a radicular cyst/dentigerous cyst. Intraoral periapical radiograph (IOPA)/orthopantomogram (OPG) was taken to confirm the diagnosis ( and ).
Fine needle aspiration cytology was performed under conscious sedation in the next appointment, where the aspirate contained blood and inflammatory cells. It was reported that it contained inflammatory cells ( and ). So, after obtaining written consent from the parents, the procedure was performed under general anesthesia ( and ). The buccal flap was raised, the cyst enucleation was done, and 75 and 35 teeth were extracted along with it . Copious irrigation of the bony cavity was done with betadine solution and normal saline. Carnoy's solution was applied in the bone cavity for 3 minutes with cotton applicators. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination. The bony cavity was rinsed with saline, and sutures were placed.
Postsurgical healing was satisfactory and uneventful. The patient was discharged the next day with medications, and oral hygiene instructions were given. The patient was advised to report to the department for suture removal and follow-up. IOPA was taken on 75 regions during the 3-month follow-ups, where it was noticed that the radiolucency was reduced . For space management, a removable partial denture was delivered with respect to the 35th region .
Histopathological examination revealed a nonkeratinized cyst lining the epithelium in association with fibrovascular connective tissue. In some areas, the lining epithelium shows ameloblastomatous changes like basal columnar cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and reversal of polarity. Suprabasilar cells are stellate reticulum-like cells. The underlying connective tissue shows dense connective tissue fibers, moderately dense chronic inflammatory cells, capillary vessels, and extravasated RBCs. In some foci, the epithelium shows hyperplastic changes adjacent to the inflamed connective tissue. The diagnosis was confirmed as “infected luminal unicystic ameloblastoma.”