In February 2021, a 75-year-old female patient presented with the complaint of progressive visual loss, low color sensitivity on both eyes (OU) and central metamorphopsia on the left eye (LE) over the last 4 years. She had a medical history of asthma with weekly use of inhalant corticosteroids. Despite the long-term complaints, she did not have any previous ophthalmologic examinations due to socio-economic issues.
Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/40 on her RE and 20/200 on her LE. On slit-lamp examination, cataract was present on OU, both classified as grade 2 nuclear associated with posterior subcapsular grade 1 outside the visual axis. Her intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg OU, and both ocular motility and pupillary reflexes were unremarkable. Ophthalmoscopy of the RE was also unremarkable, while on the left eye, a macular hole was observed, with positive Watzke-Allen sign. To complement the clinical examination, a swept-source optical coherence tomographic (SS-OCT) was performed. The right eye examination showed normal foveal depression and partial vitreous detachment , and on LE there was a full-thickness macular hole, classified as stage 2 according to the Gass classification .
Initially, it was decided to follow the patient without vitreoretinal surgery, since the duration of the IMH was not clear. After four months, the patient returned to ophthalmologic examination and the IMH’s size on the LE remained unchanged . The patient refused to be submitted to a posterior vitrectomy via pars plana, however she agreed on proceeding with cataract extraction via phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation on the LE as an attempt to improve her visual acuity. The surgery was performed on June 2021, 4 months after the IMH was diagnosed, and occurred with no complications. On the first post-operative evaluation (1st PO), her visual acuity on LE was 20/100 and the remain of the ophthalmological examination was unremarkable. On the 7th PO the examination remained the same, however, on the 30rd PO she complained of decreased visual acuity on her LE. Her visual acuity dropped to 20/400, cornea was transparent, the intraocular lens was well placed, and on ophthalmoscopy, macular cysts could be noted. The SS-OCT demonstrated retinal thickening, hyporeflective cystic areas within the macula and enlargement of the retinal nerve fiber layer . Therefore, the diagnosis of Irvine-Gass syndrome was made, and clinical treatment was promptly initiated with topical nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 3 times a day.
Since the patient presented socio-economic issues, she refused to return once every week and her next appointment was set to 30 days after the diagnosis of the Irvine-Gass syndrome. She returned referring that all her LE’s complaints were completely resolved, including the central visual field metamorphopsias. Her best corrected visual acuity on LE was 20/25; slit lamp examination was unremarkable and on ophthalmoscopy the foveal depression could be noted. Her SS-OCT showed resolution of the Irvine-Gass syndrome and complete closure of the full-thickness macular hole with full recovery of the external retinal layers . The patient was then submitted to an uneventful cataract extraction on her RE and is being followed since with no further complaints.