A 2 years 7 months-old female with a body mass of 12.8 kg was admitted in the Regional hospital of Buea on the 31st of March 2019 after a 4-day persistent fever, polyarthralgia and abdominal pain but no vomiting nor diarrhea. The patient who lives in an urban area with access to drinking water had no history of diarrhea for the past 1 month and neither did the relatives living with her. The parents admitted that for the past 8 months she always talks whenever she feels like urinating or passing out stool. An auto medication with amoxicillin (aminopenicillin) 250 mg sirop was reported (5 ml twice a day for 3 days).
Upon examination, the patient had moderate jaundice of the sclerae, soft abdomen with no hepatomegaly nor splenomegaly. The temperature upon admission was 38.7 °C. The blood test results of the patient are summarized on Table . Urinalysis was done on the first day and the sediment of the yellow, cloudy urine revealed many bacteria and few pus cells although nitrate reduction and leucocyte esterase were not detected. Ceftriaxone (third generation cephalosporin) was prescribed as empirical treatment and a request for urine and blood culture was made. After being given the relevant instructions, the mother collected mid-stream urine from the child directly into the designated sterile container. Three days after admission, the temperature and CRP were 39.0 °C and 96 mg/l, respectively. Ceftriaxone was discontinued and a combined therapy of ampicillin (aminopenicillin) and gentamicin (aminoglycoside) was introduced.
Gram staining of the urine sediment revealed gram negative rods which grew on Cystine–Lactose–Electrolyte-Deficient (CLED) agar and Eosine Methylene Blue (EMB) as small colourless non-mucoid colonies later on identified biochemically using Enterosystem 18R (Liofilchem, Italy) to be Shigella flexneri (susceptible to Ofloxacin [second generation fluoroquinolone] and meropenem [carbapenem]). The urine culture results were presented to the doctor on the 4th day of admission with patient recording a temperature of 40 °C and CRP of 24 mg/l. Following the antimicrobial sensitivity test, ampicillin and gentamicin were discontinued and patient was put on ofloxacin and paracetamol injection (60 mg/kg to bring down the temperature). Three days after, the temperature (38.5 °C) and CRP (24 mg/l) were still elevated. The blood culture result came out negative. A second urine culture and a urinary tract ultrasound was then requested. The latter did not reveal any abnormality in the urinary tract of the patient. The gram stain of the second urine sample revealed gram negative rods which produced pure yellow colonies on CLED agar and presented a metallic sheen on EMB agar following subculture. This was later on identified biochemically (Enterosystem 18R [Liofilchem, Italy]) to be Escherichia coli (resistant to Ofloxacin and susceptible to Meropenem and Amikacin [aminoglycoside]). Following this result, Ofloxacin was discontinued and the patient was put on Meropenem and Amikacin IV injections for 7 days. There was a progressive decrease in temperature and CRP over these 7 days with the third day recording a temperature of 37.2 °C and CRP of 12 mg/l. A third urine culture was requested and no significant growth was observed after 48 h of incubation. The patient was discharged upon completion of treatment on the 18th of April 2019 looking healthy once more with a normal body temperature.