A 69-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our outpatient clinics because of worsening of dyspnoea during physical exercise (New York Heart Association functional class I–II). She reported that she had suffered from myocarditis 17 years before, but there were no medical reports available to confirm this. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed 8 years before and revealed dilated cardiomyopathy without active myocarditis (i.e. a slightly dilated left ventricle with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 39%). At the time of the examination, she had arterial hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, and diabetes (HbA1c 6%, on diet). Her cardiovascular medication consisted of ramipril 10 mg and simvastatin 40 mg once daily. A very soft systolic murmur was heard at the pulmonic valve auscultation point, otherwise, the cardiovascular examination was unremarkable. The ECG showed sinus rhythm with incomplete left bundle branch block with non-specific ST segment and T-wave changes. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a dilated left ventricle (left ventricular end-diastolic diameter 63 mm) with moderately reduced global systolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction 35%), normal right ventricular function (see Video 1), and a diagnosis of PDA was made based on a continuous, pulsatile and dynamic retrograde jet flow at main pulmonary artery (see ). The PDA was confirmed by computed tomography angiography (CTA) with three-dimensional reconstruction using volume rendering technique (see ). The CTA showed a PDA of conical form (type A) with a length of 29 mm (see ), a very small pulmonary ostial diameter of only about 1 mm, and an aortic ostial diameter of about 8 mm (see ). Cardiac catheterization revealed no significant coronary artery disease, a significant extracardiac left-to-right shunt of 45% [1.87 L/min; pulmonary blood flow (Qp)/systemic blood flow (Qs) = 1.8], and borderline pulmonary hypertension [35/21/25 mmHg; pulmonary vascular resistance 270 dyne.s.cm−5 (3.4 Wood units); pulmonary vascular resistance index 426 dyne.s.cm−5.m2]. Therefore, in line with the 2020 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for the management of adult congenital heart disease, the PDA was closed with an Amplatzer duct occluder II 06-06 mm (Abbott, Vienna, Austria) (see , Videos 2 and 3) with a transarterial approach. Acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg once daily was added to the medication after PDA occlusion for 6 months. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was not repeated before closure. After 5 months, the patient had fully recovered without signs of heart failure. She reported that she had regained physical exercise capacity, including unrestricted mountain hiking. Echocardiography showed no signs of residual flow in the duct, but left ventricular function did not improve significantly. The left ventricular end-diastolic diameter did not decrease either. There was a slight but not significant decrease in N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP: 1084 to 834 ng/L, delta within the biological variation5). After 15 months, the patient reported normal exercise capacity. Echocardiography showed no signs of residual flow in the duct, and the left ventricular ejection fraction improved slightly (40%). The NT-proBNP decreased to 154 ng/L (within the age-adjusted normal range).