A 40-year-old male was admitted to our hospital on July 10, 2020, with a chief complaint of “Multiple tumors occurring throughout the body for 21 years, with pain and numbness of the left forearm for 1 mo.”
Twenty-one years prior to this report, the patient began to develop multiple tumors throughout his body without any obvious causative factors. The tumors progressively increased in size and were accompanied by neurological dysfunction in the areas in which the tumors were growing. The patient developed a progressive decrease in the muscle strength of both lower limbs with urinary and fecal dysfunction, and gradual paralysis began 4 years before this report. The patient developed pain and numbness in the left forearm 1 mo before this report, and his symptoms progressively worsened without any known aggravating or relieving factors. There were no café au lait spots on his skin, and he had no recent hearing or visual impairments, dizziness, headache, cough, hemoptysis, nausea, vomiting, or any significant changes in his weight.
The patient had undergone 5 surgical treatments in our department for schwannomatosis , and he had no other significant medical history.
The patient had a familial schwannomatosis that was also present in 48 of his family members, 9 of whom were currently ill and 5 of whom died of the disease . The patient began to show symptoms at the age of 19 and has suffered from this disease for 21 years. We contacted the patient for the first time 15 years ago, and he had already undergone several operations in our department during the follow-up period.
There were no deformities in his spine or limbs, and many old surgical scars could be seen in the cervicothoracic, lumbar and dorsal areas. A mass, approximately 5 by 4 cm in size, was seen on the ulnar side of the left forearm; the mass was raised, without any necrosis or ulceration. The pedicle of the lump was firm, and the position of the mass was fixed to the underlying tissues. The surrounding skin temperature was normal, and the skin sensation in the left ulnar forearm and palm (the hand muscles, ring finger and little finger area) was decreased. Skin pigmentation was seen in both of his lower limbs, and his skin sensation was decreased bilaterally from his umbilical area to his inguinal area. There was no skin sensation below his inguinal area, and his sensation was absent in the sellar area. His lower limb muscle strength was 0 in both lower limbs, and the muscle strength of both of his upper limbs was grade IV, with a (+) Babinski sign.
All the patient’s tumor markers, biochemical examinations, liver and kidney functional markers and electrolytes were within normal ranges.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the cervical spine showed that the spinous processes and laminae of C2-T1 were absent and showed postoperative changes. There were multiple abnormal signals in the spinal canal at the C2, C3 and T1 Levels; the largest signal was at the C3 Level, and the size was approximately 8 mm × 12 mm × 19 mm.
MRI examination of the thoracic spine showed that some spinous processes and laminae were diseased, and that they also had postoperative changes. The structure of the thoracic spinal canal was disordered. Multiple irregular and nodular abnormal signals were found, so multiple lesions were considered. MRI examination of the lumbar spine showed that the spinous processes and laminas of the 12th thoracic vertebrae and the 2nd lumbar vertebral body were absent, that they also showed postoperative changes and that abnormal signals occurred frequently in the thoracic and lumbar spinal canals (level with the thoracic 11- sacral 2nd vertebral body). The largest lesion was at the level of the intervertebral space of the 12th vertebral body to the first lumbar body with a size of approximately 16 mm × 21 mm × 55 mm, and the adjacent thoracic and lumbar spinal cord was obviously compressed and displaced.
MRI examination of the pelvic cavity showed multiple abnormal cystic signals of different sizes in the pelvic cavity, and multiple compartments were found in the pelvic cavity. Multiple schwannomas were considered, and the largest lesions were approximately 75 mm × 60 mm × 83 mm .