We report a case of an 80-year-old man with a history of arterial hypertension and type 2 diabetes who uses an insulin therapy since 2012. The patient used to suffer from terminal renal insufficiency (stage 5) for 10 years treated with hemodialysis (3 sessions per week). Also, the patient had a long history with smoking (at a rate of 2 packs/day for 30 years) suspended 1 year ago. Eight months ago, the patient was admitted for pain and changes in color in the left lower limb. Evaluated by the vascular department, it was detected that there are many necrosis in his bilateral lower limbs. The patient was treated by surgical amputation of his left lower limb in March 2019, and nine months later, the patient’s right lower limb was amputated. Two months later, the patient was referred to our department because of a severe penile pain and necrosis. On clinical examination, there were necrotic ulcer and blackish discoloration of the glans . The patient had a urinary tract infection, the urine culture found E coli, so he started antibiotic treatment for 10 days by quinolones (ciprofloxacin) 500 mg twice a day).
Due to a severe penile pain, the patient was programmed for partial penectomy (a) after taking his permission as well as that of his family. In the trans-surgery, the absence of vascular flow was observed in the penile arteries and in the deep dorsal vein (b).The following management was based on a daily wound care, debridement for the next 2 weeks and an antibiotic-based treatment for a second episode of urinary tract infection. So, he received imipenem 500 mg two times per 10 day. In the first postoperative days, the patient’s state shows recovery, but from the 14th day of this intervention, the surgical wound remained open with little serohematic secretion, as well as infected tissues shows poor progression that led to Fournier’s gangrene (a). Then, a total penectomy was performed through removing a part of his left scrotum (b). An arteriography was performed during his hospital stay in the vascular department which showed multiple vascular calcifications notably at the level of the internal iliac artery and its branches. During laboratory assessment, the creatinine and urea levels in the blood were higher than the laboratory values: Creatinine 78 mg/L, urea 82.2 g/L. The other results were like the following: Serum Ca was slightly decreased to 83 mg/Land serum phosphate was high reaching 55 mg/L. In addition to that, parathyroid hormone level was not recorded, and vitamin D was deficient lowering to10.8 ng/mL. Elevated inflammatory markers were noticed including C-reactive protein and leukocytes because of his urinary tract infection. Haemoglobin (Hb) was only 7.2 g/dL due to renal anemia by end-stage renal failure. The histopathological analysis found an advanced diabetic microangiopathy accompanied by significant calcium deposits in vessels lumen with intimal fibroblastic proliferation (a and b).