A 55-year-old Turkish woman presented to our clinic with complaints of muscle pain and bone pain in the left side of her chest. She had a diagnosis of malignant melanoma leading to amputation of her left great toe six years ago. This lesion was a primary focus of malignant melanoma. She did not have any metastases. One month prior to this event, our patient felt pain under her left breast; coronary angiography results were normal. The patient attended our Physical Therapy clinic, where no significant abnormalities were found during the examination. She was then referred to our Gastroenterology clinic with a diagnosis of liver abnormality. Initial tests in our clinic revealed she had a white blood cell count of 11.1 k/ul, a hematocrit of 31.4, a platelet count of 437.0 k/uL, positive result for hepatitis B surface antigen, a hepatitis B virus DNA level of 2.17 × 103IU/L, aspartate transaminase levels of 8IU/L, alanine transaminase levels of 70IU/L, alkaline phosphatase levels of 275IU/L, lactate dehydrogenase levels of 1206IU/L and gamma-glutamyltransferase levels of 221IU/L. Blood urea, creatinine, amylase, sodium, potassium, chlorine and calcium ion levels, total bilirubin, thyroid-stimulating hormone, triiodothyronine, thyroxin, free triiodothyronine and free thyroxin levels were all normal. Further tests showed subsequent levels of cancer antigen (CA) 125 to be 68.17U/ml (normal range, 1-35U/mL), CA 15-3 to be 23.08U/mL (normal level < 25U/mL), CA 19-9 to be 23.62U/mL (normal level < 40U/mL), ferritin to be 534.8 ng/mL and folate to be 8.67 ng/mL.
Total abdominal-pelvic ultrasonography indicated a growth in the total size of her liver (craniocaudal diameter 182 mm), with many hypoechoic lesions (metastases), the largest with a diameter of 23 mm at the porta hepatis, paraaortic, and in the peripancreatic region with the largest having a diameter 20 mm. These hypoechoic lesions are perhaps suggestive of metastatic lymphadenopathy. Other intraabdominal organs were normal. Computed tomography (CT) of her thorax showed enlarged right supraclavicular, upper mediastinal, paratracheal, subcarinal, right hilar, left axillary and peridiaphragmatic (largest with a diameter of 35 mm) lymph glands. Several nodes were observed on both lungs with the largest ones having diameters of 12 mm on her right lung and 11 mm on her left lung. Bone structures in the observed region showed lithic lesions (metastasis). Given that our patient had a history of malignant melanoma leading to amputation of her left great toe, upper and lower GIS endoscopy were administered. During upper GIS endoscopy, dark cherry-colored, light elevated, round-shaped lesions were taken from her gastric fundus and from the first part of her duodenum . Biopsies from these samples were determined to be malignant melanoma by the pathologist . A colonoscopy revealed a polyp; a biopsy was taken and evaluated to be a tubular adenoma.
Current findings for our patient were assessed to indicate a malignant melanoma with metastasis to her stomach, liver, lungs and bones. Stomach metastasis due to a malignant melanoma is very rare, and such metastases are hardly ever reported among gastric metastases. This case is the first gastric and duodenal metastases observed in our clinic due to malignant melanoma. Our patient was referred to our oncology clinic after the diagnosis, for chemotherapy.