A 38-year-old male patient presented in 2008 with a centrally located tumour of up to 3 cm in diameter of his right parotid gland, which was treated by resection. Macroscopically an ill-defined grey tumour mass was seen, and histologic examination showed microcystic to reticular and focally tubular growth of moderately pleomorphic epitheloid cells with focal intra- and extracellular PAS-positive mucin production . Muscle infiltration and perineural growth as well as central sclerosis of tumour tissue were recognized. Epidermoid differentiation or presence of goblet cells were not seen. Immunohistochemical examination showed strong expression of cytokeratin 7 and focal weak to moderate expression of S100 protein . No expression of alpha-amylase, carcinoembryonic antigen, or smooth muscle actin was detected. Thus after exclusion of main differential diagnoses of acinic cell carcinoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma, diagnosis of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma not otherwise specified of parotid gland was made, and neck dissection with removal of 14 right cervical lymph nodes was added without evidence of metastases. In follow-up the patient presented with multiple lung metastases: in 2012 three lung metastases of up to 2.5 cm in diameter in right lung segment 2 and two lung metastases of up to 1.0 cm in diameter in right lung segments 1 und 4 were removed, followed in 2014 by resection of three lung metastases of up to 1.5 cm in diameter in right upper and lower lung lobe. Histologic analysis showed comparable morphology to initial diagnostic sample, and lack of TTF1 expression further confirmed diagnosis of lung metatastases of known parotid gland adenocarcinoma. Finally, in 2017, after palliative chemotherapy four lung metastases of up to 0.6 cm in diameter in left lung segments 1, 2, 7 and 8 were treated by local excision. Because of still progressive pulmonary tumour dissemination and the occurrence of skeletal metastases palliative radiochemotherapy was started and extensive immunohistochemical and molecular examination of archived tumour tissue initiated. Additional IHC stainings showed moderate expression of mammaglobin , no expression of DOG1, and moderate to strong nuclear and weak cytoplasmic staining using an anti-pan Trk antibody (Clone EPR17341, dilution 1:250, Abcam, Cambridge, United Kingdom).
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on 3 μm FFPE sections of tumour tissue using break apart probes for NTRK1, NTRK2, and NTRK3 (Z-2167, Z-2205, Z-2206; ZytoVision GmbH, Bremerhaven, Germany), each composed of a green-labelled probe for the 5′ part of NTRK, and an orange-labelled probe marking the 3′ tyrosine kinase domain. Analysis revealed wild-type fusion signals for NTRK1 and NTRK2 but an aberrant pattern for NTRK3. In addition to fusion signals, up to four single orange signals were observed in the vast majority of nuclei . Remarkably, these single orange signals were a lot fainter than orange signals being part of fusion signals.
Next, RNA was isolated (FFPE RNA Kit, Amoy Diagnostics, Xiamen, China) and quantitative reverse transcription PCR performed with a panel comprising 109 different fusion variants for NTRK1/2/3 (NTRK Gene Fusions Detection Kit, Amoy Diagnostics). This assay uses a pooling strategy, and data analysis showed positive signals for two pools, each representing several different ETV6-NTRK3 fusion transcripts. Finally, RNA-based next generation sequencing (RNA-Seq) was executed in order to determine exact variants.
RNA-Seq was performed with two different panels independently. The first analysis was conducted using the Archer FusionPlex Comprehensive Thyroid and Lung (CTL) panel (ArcherDX, Boulder, Colorado, USA). Sequencing was done on a MiSeq sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA), and sequencing data was processed using Archer Analysis 6.2 Site. Archer FusionPlex analysis revealed the presence of three different ETV6-NTRK3 variants , with ETV6:exon5-NTRK3:exon15 as the dominant variant.
Second, a hybridization probe-based library preparation kit targeting 36 genes including NTRK1/2/3 was used (AmoyDx HANDLE Classic NGS Panel, Amoy Diagnostics). Sequencing was performed on a MiniSeq sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, California, USA), and data analysis resulted in detection of the same three ETV6-NTRK3 fusion variants as detected by the Archer panel . In addition, the relative abundance of these variants was comparable, again with ETV6:exon5-NTRK3:exon15 presenting as the dominant variant.
With ETV6-NTRK3 fusion confirmed, the patient’s diagnosis was revised to metastatic secretory carcinoma of the salivary gland, and treatment with pan-Trk inhibitor Larotrectinib (100 mg twice daily) initiated. After 8 months of treatment, CT and MRI scans showed partial remission with pulmonary and skeletal metastases of reduced size.