A 17-year-old man, soldier, was admitted at the Department of Neurology, Union Hospital, TMC&HUST with a history of severe headache and high fever for 4 days. The symptoms started abruptly while he was undergoing military training. His body temperature was 39.8°C, without any other symptoms. The symptoms were controlled by administration of routine symptomatic treatments. However, the headache symptom recurred 3 days later, along with nausea and vomitting. His cerebral computed tomographic (CT) scan was normal. During his admission to our department on August 4th, 2010, his symptoms developed progressively, with altered consciousness, dysphoria and urinary incontinence.
The patient appeared to be delirious and confused during the interview. His body temperature, pulse, respiration and blood pressure were 39.2°C, 105 beats per minute, 36 breaths per minute, and 128/70 mmHg (1 mm Hg = 0.133 kPa), respectively. The physical examination did not indicate any abnormalities in chest or abdomen. The neurological examination revealed that his pupils were equal in size (diameter = 2 mm), round in shape, and the pupillary light reflex was diminished on both sides. Conjunctival edema and limb-associated spontaneous activity was observed. Tendon reflexes of the limbs were symmetrically weakened, while the right Babinski sign was positive. Neck stiffness was found (the chin, 3 horizontal finger apart from the chest). The remainder of the examination could not be completed as the patient was uncooperative.
The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with normal PR and QTc intervals. The lung CT scan revealed small irregular patchy shadows at inferior pulmonary lobe both sides. B-mode ultrasound scan of the abdomen was normal. Urinalysis showed 1+ albumin. Widal test, Plasmodium test, blood and urine cultures were negative. Blood cell count indicated that white-cell count was 12.27 x 109/L (reference range, 4–10 x 109/L), neutrophil count was 10.31 x 109/L (reference range, 2–7 x 109/L), platelets and hemoglobin were normal. Other laboratory tests, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time, yielded normal results. We failed to perform a Lumbar Puncture to analyze his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) on admission, as the patient was uncooperative. Nevertheless, brain MRI displayed the gyral swelling of bilateral occipital and temporal lobes as well as thalamus, while the contrast Enhanced MRI scan revealed remarkable enhancement of leptomeninges. In addition, sigmoid sinus and transverse sinus filling defect were observed, indicating venous thrombosis. Likewise, MRV scan further demonstrated thrombosis in the bilateral sigmoid sinuses and left transverse sinuses, confirming the diagnosis of CVST . The blood JE-specific IgM antibody (InBios’ JE Detect™ IgM ELISA kit, InBios International, Inc., Seattle, Washington, USA) was weakly positive, and the repeated test showed positive results one week later. We performed a Lumbar Puncture on August 18, 2010 as the psychiatric symptoms of our patient then came under control. The CSF tests showed: pressure 80 mmH2O, white blood cell (WBC) count 7 x 106/L, protein 0.57 g/L, glucose 3.73 mmol/L, and chloride 118.8 mmol/L. Consequently, our patient was diagnosed as CVST as well as JE.
Low-molecular-weight heparin and then warfarin was administered to the patient. Other symptomatic therapeutic measures (including dehydration, antipsychotic therapy, antiinflammatory, antivirus, and body temperature control), and supportive therapeutic measures were taken simultaneously. As a result, the patient’s headache was relieved, chemosis disappeared, and the body temperature gradually dropped to normal level without the appearance of any mucocutaneous petechiae or purpura. The psychiatric symptoms were under control as well. The patient was discharged on August 23th, 2010 and transferred to a local hospital for further treatment. The repeat brain MRI scan revealed mild oedema over bilateral thalamus. Compared to the MRI result of August 6th, 2010, the lesion diminished significantly. The MRV demonstrated only a few low signal areas in the left sigmoid sinus, without detecting any filling defect in left transverse sinus .