A 41-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the department of dermatology with generalized maculopapular exanthema . Within three days she developed fatigue, headache, incomplete third cranial nerve palsy, urinary retention, paraparesis (strength 1-2/5 bilaterally) and sensory loss below level T4. Subsequently, tetraparesis (strength arms 3/5, legs 1/5) and dyspnoea with reduced lung capacity emerged. In her past medical history SS had been suspected since the patient had suffered from xerophthalmia, xerostomia and myoarthralgias since the late 1990’s and SS-A-antibodies had been tested positive. The patient had temporarily been treated with oral corticosteroids for sicca symptoms two years before admission.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed extensive transverse myelitis reaching from the caudal medulla oblongata to level C7 as the cause of tetraparesis. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed mild lymphomonocytic pleocytosis and impairment of the brain-blood-barrier. CSF culture was negative as were all polymerase chain reaction studies of the CSF for fungal and viral infection. Furthermore cytology of CSF was negative for malignancy. Identical oligoclonal bands in serum and CSF indicated systemic inflammation. Testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Anti-nuclear antibodies were elevated (1: 960) but all other tests for autoimmune antibodies were negative including aquaporin 4. The previous finding of positive SS-A antibodies was not replicated in our laboratory. This discrepancy is unusual but can be explained by different test sensitivities. The diagnosis of SS was confirmed according to consensus criteria by labial salivary gland biopsy, positive Schirmer’s test and salivatory gland scintigraphy . Erythematous macules and papulosquamous lesions characterized the clinical appearance of the skin lesions. For further examination, a skin biopsy was performed and showed psoriasiform dermatitis with aggregated neurophilic granulocytes in parakeratotic foci and exocytosis of neutrophils presenting as an intraepithelial pustule .
Concerning the neurological differential diagnosis, there was no history of previous radiation to the spine or clinically apparent optic neuritis, aquaporin 4 antibodies were negative and there were no brain abnormalities suggestive of MS on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Furthermore, we could neither find evidence for an arterial occlusion, a compressive aetiology or a viral or fungal infection nor another connective tissue disease -especially leukocytoclastic vasculitis or lupus erythematosus. Subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE) as an important differential diagnosis of psoriasiform dermatitis was excluded since histological characteristics for SCLE (liquefactive degeneration of the basal layer, edema of the upper dermis, scattered interface, perivascular and periadnexal lymphocytic infiltrates) were absent. In synopsis of all clinical and serological findings we considered the extensive transverse myelitis to be SS-associated.
Due to the rapid worsening of the patient’s condition and the evidence of severe demyelination on MRI we initiated seven sessions of plasmapheresis and simultaneous corticosteroid pulse therapy (1 gr/d for 5 days followed by oral tapering). With this treatment regimen tetraparesis and dyspnoea gradually improved but generalized exanthema worsened. For long-term therapy we chose cyclophosphamide (8 cycles). When reaching the maximum cumulated dose of cyclophosphamide after 6 months we switched to rituximab (375 mg/m2 every six months). Since then, the patient is regularly seen for the administration of rituximab and has had no relapse so far. The combination of plasmapheresis, corticosteroid pulse therapy and subsequent immunosuppression significantly improved the severe symptoms, but only an incomplete remission was achieved: while moderate paraparesis with decreased sensation of both legs and urinary retention remained (strength 3/5 bilaterally), generalized maculo-papulosquamous exanthema, dyspnea and oculomotor impairment resolved completely. A follow-up MRI after cyclophosphamide therapy showed significant improvement and no evidence of myelitis .