A 56-year-old male with advanced PD developed severe rigidity, dystonic posturing of both feet, and confusion of 4 days duration in November 2020. He is not known to have any chronic medical illness and has been diagnosed with PD 7 years ago, with initial left-sided tremors, bradykinesia, and rigidity. He had a strong positive family history of PD, but genetic testing was not done. His initial MRI of the brain and FDG-PET scan were normal, and he had a stable course on levodopa. He started to develop wearing-off and dyskinesia after few years which were manageable with drug adjustment.
Dopamine agonists (DA) were added, but the patient developed behavioral changes and psychotic features in the form of hallucination and delusions, which improved with the cessation of DA and small doses of quetiapine. Subsequently, with disease progression, levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel (LCIG) was started with excellent improvement of wearing off symptoms and peak dose dyskinesia. After 2 years, and due to financial issues, the patient stopped LCIG and continued on levodopa with a total equivalent daily dose of 1497 mg and quetiapine 100 mg daily. His last clinical examination was in January 2020 with a stable clinical condition. His Hoehn and Yahr Scale (H&Y) score was 3, MDS-Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part III was 57/132 in off stage, Non-Motor Symptoms Scale (NMSS) was 233/360, and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) score was 24/30. During the lockdown period amid the COVID-19 pandemic, he was compliant to treatment, maintaining his daily activities and communicating with the treating physician through telemedicine, and no drug adjustment was needed during this time.
He started to have severe rigidity and bradykinesia on the 1st of November 2020, with poor response to medications. His condition progressed to akinetic-rigid state with bilateral foot dystonia in the following week. On the 9th of November, he was transferred to the emergency room for confusion. His oxygen saturation was subnormal (90%); however, he had no fever or any respiratory complaint. A nasopharyngeal swab reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 was conducted routinely for hospital admission, as per the Kuwait Ministry of Health (MOH) protocol. He tested positive for COVID-19 and was shifted to a specialized center. He developed fever and respiratory distress with low oxygen saturation, and he was intubated on the 10th day of illness. Computed tomography (CT) of the brain was normal. The patient was maintained on his regular treatment and was successfully extubated on the 19th of November. After discharge, he showed gradual improvement of consciousness and rigidity, and his feet dystonia improved; however, he did not reach his baseline prior to COVID-19 infection after 1 month.