An 81-year-old Caucasian female, with a history significant for atrial fibrillation complicated by recurrent stroke on warfarin with the most recent stroke over 5 years ago, well-controlled rheumatoid arthritis, and hypertension, presented with multiple large ecchymoses over the torso and extremities in the setting of an enoxaparin bridge to warfarin for a subtherapeutic international normalized ratio (INR) . On admission, workup was notable for hemoglobin of 5.7 g/dL, prothrombin time (PT) 28.1 seconds (s), INR 2.7, partial thromboplastin time (PTT) > 180 seconds, D-dimer of 1.02 μg/mL (normal < 0.5 μg/mL), and normal fibrinogen. Anticoagulation was held, but she continued to develop bruises daily with persistently elevated PTT > 180 seconds that failed to correct with mixing studies, raising concern for a factor deficiency. Further workup revealed factor VIII activity < 1% (normal 75–220%). Given her prolonged PTT, LA testing was performed and found to be positive. Initial testing for a factor VIII inhibitor using the standard Bethesda assay was confounded by the presence of LA, requiring a specialized chromogenic Bethesda assay, which confirmed the presence of the inhibitor at 61 Bethesda units (normal ≤ 0.5 units). The patient was diagnosed with acquired hemophilia A on the basis of the presence of a factor VIII inhibitor. She did not meet diagnostic criteria for antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) despite testing positive for LA; additional testing was negative for anticardiolipin and β2-glycoprotein antibodies. Given the association between acquired factor VIII inhibitors and malignancy, additional screening for concomitant malignancy was performed. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was unremarkable. Serum protein electrophoresis suggested an inflammatory picture but was otherwise unremarkable. A bone marrow biopsy performed during a future unrelated hospital admission was also unremarkable.
The patient was started on oral prednisone 80 mg daily with addition of factor VIII inhibitor bypassing activity (FEIBA) 25 units/kg twice daily. FEIBA was transitioned to susoctocog alfa 50 units/kg twice daily after placement of a tunneled line for outpatient administration of rituximab. With initiation of treatment, the patient’s ecchymoses began to resolve, and no new bruising was noted. Following discharge, the patient received four cycles of weekly rituximab and completed a simultaneous steroid taper. At completion of therapy, her factor VIII levels normalized and factor VIII inhibitor was suppressed . The patient continues to follow with hematology with no evidence of relapse and has not yet restarted anticoagulation therapy given this recent diagnosis.