A 69-year-old male patient with kidney transplantation was submitted to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment of a left native kidney mass. The patient had chronic kidney disease for 2 years and had undergone dialysis for 10 months before kidney transplantation. The patient had a 20 years history of hypertension (the highest blood pressure: 170/106 mmHg) without diabetes. The patient underwent kidney transplantation 11 months prior to our study, and maintained a triple immunosuppressive regimen that consisted of tacrolimus, mycophenolatemofetil and prednisolone after transplantation. Two months prior, the patient was submitted to the local hospital for progressive myasthenia both lower limbs and weight loss. Routine laboratory tests showed the following: creatinine and urea were normal, but Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG antibodies were positive. An MRI of the lumbar showed multiple vertebral bone destruction. A positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) scan was then performed for further information, showing an intense FDG accumulation lesion (approximately 1.4 cm, standardized uptake values max: 4.7) in the medial portion of the left untransplanted kidney . PET-CT then proposed possible diagnosis of a renal malignant tumor and bone metastasis, but it could not confirm diagnosis. CE-CT was performed with following scanning parameters: tube voltage, 120 kV; tube current, 250 mA; and slice thicknesses, 1 mm and 10 mm. CE-CT and US detect multiple cysts only and cannot find a solid lesion proposed by PET-CT. PET-CT and CE-CT did not reveal any abnormalities in transplanted kidney. To further evaluate the tumor and definite diagnosis, the patient was sent to our department.
Ultrasonography was performed using the Aplio500 (Toshiba Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a 375BT convex transducer (frequency range 3.0–6.0 MHz). The transplanted kidney was located in the right iliac fossa, and showed no abnormalities in conventional B-mode and Doppler ultrasonography. Only atrophic untransplanted kidneys with multiple cystic lesions were observed in US . Then a bolus of 2.4 ml of SonoVue (Bracco, Milan, Italy) was administered intravenously and flushed by 5.0 ml of 0.9% saline was performed. The examination was performed at a low mechanical index of 0.09. CEUS revealed a completely homogeneously enhancement lesion (approximately 1.3 × 1.1 cm) in the medial portion of the left untransplanted kidney in 33 s post-injected of contrast agent. Enhancement had progressed from the periphery towards the center of the lesion at 20 s post-injection . The lesion exhibited completely enhancement at 33 s and was slightly higher enhanced than the surrounding parenchymal. The lesion gradually turned to hypo-enhancement at 90 s . These features of CEUS suggested a diagnosis of renal malignancy. Subsequently a biopsy was performed under CEUS –guidance because of poor differentiation between the target and adjacent cysts in US. Then a further bolus of agent was injected, and a BARD automatic biopsy gun with an 18G percutaneous core needle biopsy was repeated under CEUS guidance to enhanced lesion . Two tissue core samples with 2 cm in length were obtained from the targeted area . Histological examination of the specimen provided a diagnosis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with immunohistochemistry staining showing positive results for CD20, CD79, Bcl-2 and Bcl-6. Finally, clinical diagnosis was non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (diffuse large cell, stage III B). Clinicians consider the prognosis very poor and communicate effectively with patients and their families. The patient consented to accepted chemotherapy consisting of rituximab and cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunomycin, oncovin and prednisolone at the standard dose. Unfortunately, the patient developed deep vein thrombosis in the right side of his lower limb and pulmonary thromboembolism 2 weeks after one cycle chemotherapy. Despite active treatment, the patient’s condition has not been alleviated. Finally, the patient’s family gave up treatment and the patient was discharged.