A 75-year-old woman was admitted with a five-week history of progressive dyspnoea, ascites, leg edema and lethargy. She had a previous history of pulmonary tuberculosis 50 years earlier and hypertension which was well controlled with atenolol. She had never smoked and had no known previous exposure to asbestos. She had a family history of lung and large bowel cancer but no history of mesothelioma.
Clinical examination revealed bilateral pedal pitting edema but no signs of chronic liver disease. She had moderate ascites but normal cardiovascular and respiratory system examinations. Blood investigations including full blood count (FBC), urea and electrolytes, liver function tests (LFTs), inflammatory markers, hepatitis, viral and autoimmune screens were all normal. Initial ultrasound scan and computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis were unable to demonstrate any significant abdominal pathology other than ascites. A diagnostic ascitic tap yielded transudate with a serum ascites-albumin gradient (SA-AG) of 32. Ascitic fluid culture and culture for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were also negative. The ascites recurred despite multiple drainages. She had a repeat CT scan which showed extensive peritoneal nodularity and omental cake along with massive ascites. A diagnostic laparoscopy with omental biopsy was performed. It showed infiltration of the omentum with a poorly differentiated malignant tumor consisting of sheaths of cells with fairly uniform nuclei containing prominent nucleoli .
A barium enema and flexible sigmoidoscopy showed no bowel pathology apart from mild diverticular disease with pedunculated polyps which were found to be benign on histology. Immunochemical staining of the biopsy showed features consistent with diffuse mesothelioma. She was referred to the oncology department after a multidisciplinary meeting discussion and chemotherapy was planned with cisplatin and pemetrexed. She responded well initially and the ascites resolved with improved general wellbeing, but the treatment was later stopped when she developed side effects in the form of recurrent vomiting and general malaise. Currently she is having palliative treatment and is under regular oncology follow up.