A 41-year-old male haemodialysis patient underwent a live-related donor kidney transplantation in our hospital. His healthy father aged 64 years volunteered to donate a kidney after a careful evaluation of potential living kidney donors. Both of them were evaluated preoperatively with complete clinical examination and imaging workup showing no surgical contraindication and no signs of inflammation or infection during hospitalization. Standard-dose tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone were given to the recipient for immunosuppression following the transplant. Although the third-generation cephalosporin (ceftizoxime) was given to prevent infection, the patient experienced transient fever (38 °C) on the first postoperative night. Therefore, routine blood tests and inflammatory indexes were immediately performed and the antibiotic was upgraded to biapenem (0.3g, q8h). However, on the next night, the fever returned and the temperature was as high as 39.5°C after sudden chills. We immediately performed laboratory tests again including blood culture, blood routine, coagulation function, inflammatory indexes and other related tests before administration of dexamethasone (10mg, i.v.). The body temperature lowered somewhat by giving dexamethasone. However, an hour later he suddenly developed chest tightness, dyspnea and altered consciousness. Meanwhile, his blood pressure decreased to 76/40 mmHg, accompanied by tachycardia (140–160 beats/min) and decreased urine output (20 mL/h). Intravenous biapenem antibiotics, albumin and rehydration fluids were given immediately with oxygen support. The patient’s vital signs gradually returned to normal and urine output also improved after 20 minutes of administration.
Immediately afterwards, color Doppler ultrasound showed good blood flow to the transplanted kidney with no significant perinephric effusion. Bleeding disorders were excluded. The laboratory tests were used to continuously monitor the treatment outcomes. The results of tests previous mentioned were timely reported as showed in . Thus we believed that he was suffering from severe septic shock with suspected pulmonary embolism. In the third postoperative day, the patient underwent a chest computed tomography (CT) to rule out the pulmonary embolism. The maintenance dosages of immunosuppressant were adjusted to the minimum effective dose. And the antibiotics were also empirically adjusted to biapenem (0.3g, q8h), linezolid (0.6g, q12h), and caspofungin (50mg, qd). His blood samples, urine samples and the post-surgical fluids (PSF) samples collected from perirenal surgical drains were sent for mNGS and traditional bacterial culture, respectively. But no clear pathogen was found in results of mNGS on the fifth postoperative day. With the exception of the positive blood culture on sixth postoperative day, all other pathogen tests were negative. The aerobic and anaerobic bottles of all four standard blood culture sets grew R. mannitolilytica . The cultured isolate was confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; Bruker, Germany). So we adjusted the antibiotic to compound sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (960mg, q8h), amikacin (0.2g, q12h) and piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5g, q8h) according to the results of drug sensitivity tests . This regimen was continued for 8 days. Blood cultures were persistently negative for bacterial growth over the period, and the inflammatory indicators (including procalcitonin (PCT), C-reactive protein (CRP), neutrophils, white blood cells, etc.) decreased significantly or returned to normal. The patient was no longer febrile. Then only sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim (480mg, q12h) was carried on for 3 weeks as consolidation therapy. The patient was cured thereafter. No other infectious foci were found anywhere else in the body. Transient impairment of renal function were associated with hypoperfusion during septic shock and application of large quantity of antibiotics. Fortunately, creatinine levels returned to normal values before hospital discharged on the 27th postoperative day . After 6 months of follow-up, all his lab test indicators returned to normal.
Supplementary intensive inquiry of patient’s history after controlling for septic shock revealed that the patient had similar episodes of chills and fever three times during the two-year dialysis period before kidney transplantation. Because of the mild symptoms and fast relief after empirical treatment, the course of the infection did not attracted sufficient attention. The patient did not consider such mild events as important enough to mention to his doctor before transplantation. Considering the potential nosocomial infection, we tested 16 samples from the patient and his surroundings in the hospital, including central venous catheter, skin, drinking water and water cups, etc. Each sample was swabbed by pre-moistened sterile cotton swabs and inoculated into broth medium for incubation. But no R. mannitolilytica was found, indicating that it did not come from these sites. Based on these two points, we believe that R. mannitolilytica may be a chronic colonization state.