A 60-year-old Moroccan woman came to our institute 18 years ago with a history of vaginal bleeding, malodorous discharge and vaginal discomfort. Furthermore, our patient presented with a slowly enlarging skin lesion localized on the dorsum of her nose. Gynecologic examination found a 5 cm exophytic friable lesion arising from her cervix and involving the upper half of her vagina. Biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of a well differentiated squamous cell carcinoma and the absence of parametrial infiltration; neither adenopathies nor distant metastases were found. In addition, a skin inspection found a 2 cm solitary nodule on the dorsum of the nose: the lesion bled spontaneously at the examination and biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of basal cell carcinoma of the skin.
Our patient refused the surgical excision of the nasal lesion, and so treatment consisted of radiation therapy; 30 Gy external beam radiation was delivered in 10 fractions with 3 Gy per fraction over two weeks, followed by 30 Gy delivered by brachytherapy.
The cervical carcinoma was treated with radiation therapy. A whole pelvic external beam radiation dose of 40 Gy was delivered in 20 fractions with 2 Gy per fraction over four weeks, followed by 30 Gy delivered by brachytherapy. In summary, she received 70 Gy total dose radiation on the cervical cancer, and 60 Gy total dose radiation on the skin cancer.
Our patient remained in good control and free from relapsed disease over 17 years. At the age of 78 years, she presented with a rapid worsening of performance status. Gynecologic examination didn't reveal any recurrent disease or recurrent skin lesion. However, systematic liver ultrasounds showed multiple diffuse nodular lesions. We performed a computed tomography of her thorax, abdomen and pelvis. Imaging showed diffuse metastatic nodules of her lungs and liver; there was no evidence of relapsing pelvic tumor . We performed a liver biopsy which revealed a histological diagnosis of liver metastases from a neuroendocrine carcinoma, confirmed by immunohistochemistry study with chromogranin and CD56 positive staining . There was no clinical evidence of the primary site.
Our patient is undergoing a palliative chemotherapy based on a combination of cisplatin and etoposide.