The now seven months old boy was born in Germany after 37 weeks of gestation via cesarean section due to oligohydramnios and intrauterine growth retardation [birth weight 1995 g/-2.47 SDS ]. The parents are refugees from Syria, self-reported to be distantly related. On the first day of life, the boy presented hyperglycemia persistently >200 mg/dl. Insulin and C-peptide concentrations below detection limit (insulin <2 µU/ml; C-peptide <0.1 ng/ml) led to the diagnosis of neonatal diabetes mellitus and initiation of intravenous insulin substitution. Furthermore, newborn screening demonstrated a very high TSH (>250 µU/ml). Congenital hypothyroidism was confirmed by low fT4 levels (fT4 0.3 ng/dl), while ultrasound examination revealed normal thyroid gland architecture and volume. The coincidence of these endocrine entities, together with elevated conjugated bilirubin indicating cholestasis already in the first days of life and several small cysts detected by ultrasound in kidneys and pancreas led the suspicion of an underlying neonatal diabetes with congenital hypothyroidism (NDH) syndrome due to a GLIS3 mutation. Normalization of TSH seemed difficult to achieve at this time, which was in accordance to previous reports on infants with NDH syndrome due to GLIS3 mutations. Although serum levels for free thyroxine reached the lower normal range under substitution with approx. 15 µg/kg/d levothyroxine around day 11, TSH normalization was only reached at day 42 after successive increase of levothyroxine to 35 µg/kg/d, administered intravenously and divided into three doses daily .
In addition to neonatal diabetes, hypothyroidism, cholestasis and kidney cysts, the boy presented congenital hyporegenerative anemia (; Hb at day one: 11.8 g/dl, Hb minimum around day 34: 6.5 g/dl), which has not been reported in individuals with homozygous GLIS3 mutations to date. While under treatment with up to 4 mg/kg of iron oxide, hemoglobin levels further declined while reticulocyte count remained inappropriately low (max. 7.2 %/143.3 G/l during the first months of life). Serum concentrations of folic acid and vitamin B12 were normal. Serological tests for EBV, HHV6 and Parvovirus B19 as well as PCR for CMV in urine were negative. Because of stimulated erythropoietin serum concentrations not exceeding the upper normal range (day 21: 29.4 mU/ml; ref. 4.3-29 mU/ml), we hypothesized a limited erythropoietin synthesis due to impaired liver and/or kidney function and started substitution of recombinant erythropoietin (500 IE s.c. twice weekly). In addition, Vitamin C serum concentration also appeared to be diminished (1.1 to 2.2 mg/L; ref. 4.6-14.9 mg/L). However, combined substitution of iron, erythropoietin and Vitamin C only led to incomplete normalization of hemoglobin levels, while reticulocyte count remained inappropriately low for several weeks.
Under treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), which was started at day 15 of life, conjugated bilirubin levels further increased to a maximum of approx. 3.93 mg/dl at age nine weeks. Serum gamma glutamyl transferase activity presented a continuous rise from week six onwards to a maximum of 760 U/l at age 12 weeks. Alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) serum enzyme activities as well as concentration of albumin and cholinesterase activity were always within normal ranges. Similarly, growth in length and weight gain were appropriate for age, and stool did not look suspicious of fat malabsorption. Repeated analyses of fecal elastase revealed values just above the lower reference limit (104 and 150 µg/g at the age of two and six weeks, respectively), whereas serum lipase activities were normal (repeatedly at approx. 20 U/l). However, low serum concentrations of vitamins A, D and E as well as diminished coagulation indices for quick/INR and vitamin K-dependent factor activities then clearly indicated clinically relevant maldigestion, putatively as a consequence of both cholestasis and partial exocrine pancreatic insufficiency.
Initiation of vitamin K substitution at the age of ten weeks, followed by pancreatic enzyme replacement and substitution of further fat-soluble vitamins between weeks 10 to 14 of age not only stabilized blood coagulation factors, but also appeared to be related to a significant reduction of levothyroxine dose requirement and final resolution of cholestasis and anemia .
Ophthalmological examinations at age two weeks and four weeks revealed borderline enlarged corneae (diameter 11 mm), whereas intraocular pressure was normal. At age 12 weeks, a corneal diameter of 12 mm together with increased intraocular pressure (30 mmHg) directed suspicion to early onset glaucoma, as reported in several earlier patients with NDH syndrome. However, repeated examinations with optimized test conditions at age 13 and 19 weeks confirmed the finding of isolated megalocornea (diameter 12 mm) without elevated intraocular pressure (10-16 mmHg).
The boy is currently seven months old and in good health, showing a slight delay in gross motor development. Body length and weight are within upper normal range: length 72 cm [+0.97 SDS according to WHO growth charts ]; weight 9.8 kg (+1.37 SDS). Blood glucose concentrations mostly range between the age-adjusted target range of 100-200 mg/dl (~5.6–11.1 mmol/l) and modestly elevated levels under continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion via insulin pump device (total daily dose approx. 0.7 IU/kg/d; current HbA1c 8.7%). TSH and fT4 serum concentrations are normal under substitution with 4.9 µg/kg/d levothyroxine (50 µg once daily p.o.), whereas thyroglobulin levels remain elevated (263 ng/ml, ref. 1.7–55.6 ng/ml). Hearing test in the neonatal period was unremarkable. Facial gestalt included several typical aspects known from previously reported patients with GLIS3 mutations : low-set ears, prominent eyes, long philtrum and thin vermillion border of the upper lip.
The patient has one healthy brother, five-years-old. Two further brothers died in Syria during the neonatal period. One of them died from unknown reason a few days after being born with a gestational age of eight months and a birth weight of approx. 2000 g. The other died after one week, with icterus and without having passed meconium (birth at term, approx. 2500 g).