A 71-year-old Nigerian man presented in our hospital with 1-month-old complaints of inability to walk and low back and bilateral thigh pains. This presentation had been preceded by a 5-months history of lower urinary tract symptoms which were both irritative and obstructive. The pain was a dull ache in nature and had no relieving factors but was aggravated by any attempt to ambulate. There was also a poor appetite and a progressive weight loss in addition. He had no other pre-existing diseases. He was first managed at another hospital where he was fitted with urethral catheter for the relief a sudden inability to void urine.
At presentation, he was confined to a wheelchair and was in painful distress. He was pale, not jaundiced, mildly dehydrated but had no leg swelling or enlarged lymph node anywhere on the body. He had a urinary catheter in place and this was draining straw-colored urine. His vital signs were normal. The left lower limb was relatively smaller and showed a foot-drop deformity. There was tenderness over the L4–5 vertebrae, as well as in the hip and knees joints during passive movement. The straight leg-raising sign was positive. The left testis and spermatic cord were hard and nodular. On a digital rectal examination, the prostate gland was found to be enlarged, hard, and nodular, but the rectal mucosa was mobile over it. Blood tests revealed a hematocrit of 21%, a prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood level of 6.8 ng/ml, and normal electrolytes, urea, and creatinine values. The liver function test showed marginally elevated liver enzymes (aspartate and alanine transaminase) and bilirubin. Blood levels of acid phosphatase were also marginally elevated (41 U/L; normal 9–35 U/L). A pelvic ultrasound scan revealed a 57-g enlarged prostate gland having a heterogenous echotexture. An X-ray examination of the femurs showed rounded sclerotic lesions in the distal left femur and left iliac bone . Abdominopelvic computerized tomography (CT) scan could not be done because of financial constraints. He was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, blood transfusion, and an antibiotic regimen (based on urine microbiological studies). He was also given analgesics and was anticoagulated using enoxaparin. A prostate biopsy obtained through a digitally guided transrectal procedure revealed an infiltrating adenocarcinoma of the prostate (Gleason score 5 + 5 = 10), on histopathological examination. He subsequently had a therapeutic bilateral total orchidectomy carried out; the right testis and epididymis was removed via a trans-scrotal incision, while the left testis and spermatic cord was excised via a groin incision. He was discharged on the second postoperative day.