A 16-year-old white girl presented to our academic children’s hospital on postoperative day six with a chief complaint of shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain. She had recently undergone an uncomplicated elective ACL reconstruction with a bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft and lateral meniscus repair with a single FAST-FIX suture (Smith & Nephew, Inc., Andover, MA, USA). The surgery was performed under a general anesthetic as well as a femoral canal block as per our usual protocol. There were no intraoperative complications. Total tourniquet time was 127 minutes at 250 mmHg. Her postoperative course was uncomplicated. She was discharged later that day as her pain was well controlled and she was cleared by physiotherapy. She was encouraged to be weight-bearing as tolerated while limiting her range-of-motion to 0° to 90° of knee flexion for 6 weeks, given her meniscal repair.
On the day of surgery, she weighed 65.3 kg and her height was 165.7 cm. Her past medical history was significant for acne which was controlled with tetracycline. She was on no other regular medication nor did she take a birth control pill. She was a non-tobacco smoker. She had no family history of anesthetic or hematological issues.
She presented to our Emergency Department on postoperative day six with progressively worsening pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath. Her vital signs upon presentation were: temperature, 36.8 °C; pulse, 104 beats per minute (bpm); respiration rate, 20/minute; blood pressure, 135/76 mmHg; and O2 saturation of 96% on room air. Baseline laboratory work was drawn and a computed tomography (CT)-PE study was performed. This revealed bilateral lower lobe emboli with moderate clot burden and an associated opacity in the left lung base in keeping with pulmonary hemorrhage/infarction . She was subsequently admitted and managed medically with a weight-based dose of Lovenox (enoxaparin) twice daily in consultation with Hematology. She was discharged home 3 days later and would successfully complete 3 months of anticoagulation therapy without any further complications. Anticoagulation treatment was stopped after 3 months as per Hematology.
At her 12-month follow-up, she was asymptomatic and found to have no concerning cardiorespiratory issues. Both an echocardiogram and a pulmonary function test were performed, and found to be within normal limits. Hematology decided not to rescan her in order to assess resolution of the PE given her clinical profile. They have investigated for some treatable causes of spontaneous or acquired thromboembolism . Results for lupus anticoagulant and anti-phospholipid syndrome as well as for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria all returned negative. Admittedly, no further testing was performed to identify causes of inherited thrombophilia (that is, factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, protein C, protein S, and/or antithrombin levels), following a thorough conversation with the family, as this would not have changed treatment pathway irrespective of results.
The hematological team did recommend to our patient that she did not use an estrogen-containing oral contraceptive pill, favoring a progesterone-only oral contraction or a progesterone-containing intrauterine device. From an orthopedic standpoint, she is ambulating independently and cleared for return to sport without any restrictions.