A 35-year-old woman, gravida 2 para 1, had undergone bilateral UAE with a gelatin sponge for PPH due to uterine atony after vaginal delivery in her previous pregnancy. The patient developed no UAE-related complications, and menstruation resumed. She subsequently conceived naturally and was found to have placenta previa. We performed a thorough examination with ultrasonography and MRI at 33 weeks’ gestation. The placenta was present on the anterior to lateral wall of the uterus, and the examination findings were consistent with total placenta previa. We found no evidence of PAS in the lower uterine segment . We confirmed that her fetus was well-developed and in a state of well-being.
The patient underwent a cesarean section at 37 weeks’ gestation because of placenta previa. She delivered a healthy female neonate (birth weight of 2906 g, Apgar score of 8 at 1 min) by an oblique incision in the lower uterine body to avoid the placenta as much as possible. The placenta spontaneously detached from the lower uterine segment, but detachment of the placenta from the uterine body did not readily occur. We therefore manually detached the placenta . We clinically diagnosed the patient with uterine body PAS with placenta previa. The uterus did not contract, and bleeding persisted. Therefore, an intrauterine balloon tamponade device with 100 mL of sterile liquid was inserted, and the uterus was sutured. The bleeding finally stopped, and the surgery was completed. The total blood loss was 2940 mL.
After 1 h 30 min, 1040 mL of bleeding was observed from the drainage tube of the intrauterine balloon tamponade device. The patient’s systolic blood pressure was 119 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 76 beats/min. Her hemodynamics were stable. However, her uterus was not contracting, and active bleeding continued. She had no desire to preserve her fertility, and she had developed an allergic reaction to the contrast media at the time of her previous UAE. Therefore, we performed a subtotal hysterectomy instead of UAE. The surgery was uneventful. The total blood loss was 145 mL. The patient received 8 units of red blood cells and 6 units of fresh-frozen plasma throughout the procedure. Pathologically, she was diagnosed with placenta accreta because the chorionic villi were in direct contact with the myometrium . Her postoperative condition was good, and she was discharged 7 days after surgery.