Written informed consent was obtained from the patient to publish this case report.
A 72-year-old man (height, 1.61 m; weight, 71 kg) was admitted for scheduled endoscopic sinus surgery and nasal septoplasty to treat chronic sinusitis. He had previously undergone four surgical procedures under general anesthesia without any adverse events. Two general anesthesia events occurred at another hospital, while the remaining two surgeries were performed under total intravenous anesthesia (remifentanil and propofol). The patient routinely took medication for hypertension. Preanesthetic examination and laboratory evaluation results were within the normal range, except for a mild increase in serum creatine kinase (CK) level of 599 IU/L (reference range: ≤ 240 IU/L for men).
The patient had a family history of MH. His son died at the age of 5 from an MH crisis during general anesthesia with enflurane and succinylcholine 30 years before. His son experienced unexplained tachycardia, tachypnea, muscle rigidity, and elevated body temperatures. The MH crisis led to a cardiac arrest, resulting in death 3 h after induction.
We recommended the patient to undergo a muscle biopsy for calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) testing concurrent with his scheduled surgery and phlebotomy for genetic analysis. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for CICR and genetic testing.
The anesthetic workstation was prepared in accordance with the recommendations of the European Malignant Hyperthermia Group (EMHG) . Initial doses of dantrolene and distilled water were kept on hand so that they could be administered immediately upon the appearance of signs of MH. Our standard monitors, including noninvasive blood pressure, electrocardiogram, capnography, pulse oximetry, and bispectral index (BIS), were initiated along with a body core temperature monitor (3 M Japan Co., Ltd.). The body temperature at the start of anesthesia was 36.1 °C. General anesthesia was induced with intravenous remimazolam 0.1 mg/kg, fentanyl 50 μg, and rocuronium 50 mg. The intraoperative ventilation mode had a tidal volume of 480 mL, a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/minute, and an inspiratory to expiratory (I:E) ratio of 1:2. After induction of anesthesia, the end-expiratory carbon dioxide pressure (EtCO2) was 34.1 mmHg. General anesthesia was maintained with continuous administration of remimazolam and remifentanil. The remimazolam dose rate was adjusted according to the BIS values. Rocuronium was administered at a dose of 10 mg using a muscle-relaxation monitor. At the end of the surgery, the patient’s temperature was 36.0 °C, and EtCO2 was 33.7 mmHg. Surgery, including muscle biopsy, was completed without complications, such as an MH crisis or severe hypotension. The patient spontaneously awakened from anesthesia without antagonists (sugammadex or flumazenil) within 10 min after completion of surgery. The train-of-four ratio was greater than 90%, and the tidal volume was approximately 500 mL. The patient was then extubated. Before returning to the general ward, flumazenil 0.2 mg was administered to achieve complete awakening. He had an uneventful postanesthesia period without high fever, myalgia, or dark urine. CK level was slightly elevated to 786 IU/L on postoperative day 1. The CICR rate was measured using chemically skinned muscle fibers, according to the Endo method . The CICR rates were higher than the controls . This result indicates a predisposition to MH due to the enhanced function of the RYR1 channel in releasing calcium from the SR.
Genetic testing was performed using whole-exome sequencing with panel analysis of 24 genes associated with MH, including RYR1 and CACNA1S. A heterozygous RYR1 variant was identified in exon 39 (c.6502G > A, p. Val2168Met). This missense variant was confirmed using Sanger sequencing . This variant has been described as a pathogenic variant associated with MH by the American Society of Clinical Genetics and Genomics and Molecular Pathology Society (ACMG/AMP) [, ] and EMHG . No other relevant variants were detected in RYR1 or different genes.
Based on the results of both tests, we conclusively diagnosed the patient with MH predisposition.