A 63-year-old male patient presented to our hospital in July 2018. The patient had a symptom of coughing and right-sided rib pain. CT scans showed mass in thoracic spine 6–8, vertebral fracture, and left pleural effusion. This patient was diagnosed as IgA-λ MM at the DS IIIA stage (or ISS III, R-ISS III stage with EMD), exhibiting 67% and 10.48% of myeloma cells from morphology and immunophenotyping analysis, respectively. In addition, cytogenetic analysis of bone marrow by direct fluorescence in situ hybridization (D-FISH) panels was performed. There were 53% 1q21 amplification, 7.5% RB1 13q14 loss, 67.5% D13S19 13q14.3 loss, 7% IgH 14q32 recombination, and 4% p53 17q13 loss. PET-CT scans of the patient showed (1) diffuse increase in bone marrow metabolism, accompanying largely osteolytic change and left anterior second rib pathological fracture; (2) T6–9 vertebral left-sided soft tissue mass with enhanced metabolism; and (3) hypermetabolic and enlarged mediastinal lymph node in zone 7. No other genetic information from his family was revealed.
Before CAR-T cell infusion, three lines of therapy were implemented for this patient. For the front-line therapy, the patient received five cycles of PAD chemotherapy, which consisted of bortezomib, doxorubicin, and dexamethasone. It resulted in partial response (PR) after the first cycle, very good partial response (VGPR) after the second cycle, and VGPR after the fourth cycle. After that, plerixafor was used to mobilize the hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) for autologous HSC transplant (ASCT). High-dose melphalan (200 mg/m2 of body surface area) was used for preconditioning. ASCT was performed successfully, and sCR was achieved 1 month after transplantation. Maintenance therapy was applied using bortezomib and dexamethasone (BD) regimen every 3 months as one cycle and daily treatment of 100 mg thalidomide between cycles. However, the myeloma relapsed 4 months after the transplant. For the second-line therapy, the patient received two cycles of VRD (bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone) chemotherapy. Unfortunately, the patient showed progressive disease (PD) after two cycles. A cycle of DVD (daratumumab, bortezomib, and dexamethasone) chemotherapy regimen was then used as a third-line therapy, but the response was still evaluated as PD. The blood examination showed 4,090 mg/dl of serum IgA, 645 U/L of lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), 34 g/L of monoclonal protein, and 19% of myeloma cells in the bone marrow. Based on IgH/CCND t (11; 14) by the FISH examination of myeloma cells after CD138-positive cell sorting, venetoclax was added into the DVD regimen. However, disease progression was not alleviated. At that time, the patient presented the severe symptoms such as pancytopenia, neutrophil deficiency (0.15×109/L), reduced platelets (4×109/L), bleeding gingival, massive bloody sputum, skin ecchymosis, muscle weakness in both lower limbs (grades 2–3), numbness, difficulty in to standing, abnormal feelings in hips, urinary retention, obvious pain in the whole body (VAS 10), and diplopia. The blood coagulation parameters were normal. Computed tomography (CT) scans showed multiple bone destruction, low-density areas in the liver and spleen, and multiple abdominal nodules, while magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the head detected abnormal signals in cauda equina and the right parietal lobe region that was close to falx cerebri. Orbital MRI was not performed because the patient had severe symptoms of pain and could not be relieved using drugs. Ophthalmic examination of the patient showed that there was no abnormality in intraocular pressure, fundus and visual acuity, and optic papilla edema. However, the patient was sensitive to light reflection and had double vision, slight limitation of right eye abduction, and defective monocular vision, and no nystagmus. The neurological examination exhibited symmetrical bilateral facial pain, symmetrical facial lines, and normal mouth angle of teeth and the tongue position. The muscle strength was grade 4–5 for both upper limbs, grade 2 for the left lower limbs, and grade 2–3 for the right lower limbs. Based on the symptoms and imaging characteristics, the patient was diagnosed with relapsed/refractory MM with CNS invasion seriously at this time. In addition to the CNS, the liver, spleen, and skin were also invaded with tumors.
In October 2019, the patient was enrolled into the BCMA CAR-T (IM21 CAR-T, autologous anti-BCMA CAR-T cells that recognize and induce selective toxicity against BCMA-expressing tumor cells) clinical trial ( identifier: NCT04537442). This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Beijing Hospital in China. The patient was informed of the possible risks and side effects of the therapy and signed informed consent. No bridging chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or intra-thecal treatment was used before CAR-T cell treatment, as the patient showed a very low level of platelet (4×109/L) and symptoms of severe pain. The patient received lymphodepletion treatment with fludarabine (25 mg/m2/day) and cyclophosphamide (250 mg/m2/day) for 3 consecutive days before CAR-T infusion. BCMA CAR-T cells were prepared using the good manufacturing practice (GMP) facilities at Immunochina Pharmaceuticals (Beijing, China). The detailed method of CAR-T preparation was as previously described . The schematic structure of BCMA CAR construct is shown in , using a murine scFv against BCMA, CD8α hinge and transmembrane region, 4-1BB co-stimulatory domain, together with CD3ζ signaling domain. The BCMA CAR gene was transduced to activated T cells using lentiviral vectors. When the CAR-T cells expanded to sufficient dose, cells were cryopreserved and underwent quality-control evaluations. The viability of BCMA CAR-T cells was 88%, and the CAR expression ratio was 34.32%. The CD4/CD8 ratio of CAR-T cells was approximately 0.82. About 30% of CAR-T cells were central memory T cells (CD45RA−CD62L+), 65% were naive and stem cell memory T cells (CD45RA+CD62L+), 2.3% were effector memory T cells (CD45RA−CD62L−), and 2.7% were effector T cells (CD45RA+CD62L−) based on flow cytometry analysis shown in . On day 0, the patient was infused with BCMA CAR-T cells (1×106/kg, 6.6×107 in total). Adverse events were evaluated according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) Version 5.0. The severity of cytokine release syndrome (CRS) and neurotoxicity was assessed according to the reported gradings. The primary endpoint was incidence of adverse events within 1 month after CAR-T cell infusion. The secondary endpoint was objective response rate at 3 months. Patients were followed up at days 0, 4, 7, 10, 14, 21, 28, 90, and 180, and 1 year. A schematic design of the clinical trial is shown in .
The patient was closely followed up within 1 month after CAR-T cell infusion. The peripheral blood was collected at days 0, 4, 7, 10, 14, 21, and 28 and was analyzed using flow cytometry to measure the CAR-T ratio, CAR-T cell number, and cytokine levels. CAR-T cells expanded and reached the maximal level in peripheral blood on day 7 post-infusion . Both serum interleukin (IL)-10 and interferon gamma (IFN-γ) reached the peak level on day 7 (14.9 and 1.8 pg/mL, respectively), and the level of IL-6 was highest on day 14 (87.4 pg/mL, ). In accordance with the cytokine expression, the patient experienced grade 1 CRS and developed symptoms of fever (Tmax, 39.2°C) and headache on day 7. The Visual Analogue Scale score was evaluated as 6. The blood pressure was 129/75 mmHg, and the oxygen saturation was 99%. The level of ferritin was 2,983 ng/ml, and the level of C-reactive protein was 3.5 mg/dl in the peripheral blood on day 7. Blood routine analysis showed the level of leukocyte as 4.97×109/L, and the level of neutrophil was 4.15×109/L. Other symptoms including nausea, vomit, cough, diarrhea, and chill were not observed. Levetiracetam, dexamethasone, and mannitol were used to relieve the CRS symptoms. On day 9, the temperature decreased to normal level, and headache was relieved. The patient showed clear consciousness, accurate sense of orientation, accurate answering of questions, and no symptoms of tremor, dyslexia, aphasia, epilepsy, and neck rigidity after CAR-T therapy. Thus, no neurotoxicity was observed in this patient.
One month post-infusion, the patient suffered no pain and no bloody sputum. The lower limb muscle weakness was improved (4 to 4+ grade), and diplopia was turning better. One month post-CAR-T infusion, the level serum IgA was very low, and monoclonal protein (M-spike) turned to be negative. The level of M-spike remained negative even at 3 months . The concentrations of free κ and λ chains in serum were 6.1 and 5.29 mg/L, respectively, with a κ/λ ratio of 1.15. Bone marrow aspiration sample showed no abnormal plasma cells from morphology observation, and only 0.06% of myeloma cells were detected using immunophenotyping analysis. More importantly, the CNS-involved tumors were eradicated. Cranial and orbital MRI showed no abnormalities, and previous abnormal signals in the right parietal lobe region disappeared . Additionally, other EMD lesions including those in the skin, liver, and spleen also disappeared. Together, the patient response was evaluated as sCR 1 month after CAR-T infusion.
Four months later, the situation was much better improved, and the response remained sCR based on the following evidence. The patient experienced neither pain nor any hemorrhage. The lower limb muscle strength became normal, and diplopia was much more alleviated. Myeloma cells further reduced to 0.02% from immunophenotyping analysis. M-spike still remained negative, and the levels of free κ and λ chains in the serum were 5.5 and 26.9 mg/L, with a κ/λ ratio of 0.20. No lesions with increased metabolic activity were observed through whole-body PET-CT imaging.