A 78-year-old woman with hypertension, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF) on apixaban (CHA2DS2-VASc = 4), and Graves’ disease presented with progressive dyspnoea over 4 days. Heart rate (HR) was 110 beats/min, blood pressure (BP) was 155/122 mmHg, respiratory rate was 23 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 85% on room air while supine. Physical examination revealed no gallops, rubs, or murmurs, scattered rales in the left posterior lung, and trace presacral and pitting oedema. Electrocardiogram showed AF with rapid ventricular response (RVR). Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was undetectable (normal 0.3–4.2), free thyroxine was 1.9 (normal 0.9–1.7), NT-proB-type natriuretic peptide was 6920 (normal ≤239). Chest X-ray showed mild pulmonary oedema. Despite adequate rate control to HR 85 beats/minute with metoprolol and diltiazem, 1 L diuresis with furosemide, BP controlled to 139/78 mmHg, and supplemental O2 at 4 L/min, she saturated in the high 70%’s while both supine and ambulating. Chest computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no pulmonary embolism or pulmonary arteriovenous malformations.
The following day she developed sudden-onset dyspnoea, saturating in the mid-70%’s while supine that persisted despite 15 L/min supplemental O2. She received bilateral positive airway pressure and additional diuresis. SpO2 improved into the high-80%’s but desaturations into the low-80%’s continued while supine. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed moderately enlarged right ventricle (RV) with normal systolic function, severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR), biatrial enlargement, elevated central venous pressure, left ventricular ejection fraction of 60–65% with no regional wall motion abnormalities, and atrial-level right-to-left shunting . After further diuresis, the patient underwent right-heart catheterization . Pulmonary capillary wedge (PCW) pressure was 16 mmHg, mean pulmonary artery pressure was 21 mmHg and cardiac index was 2.1 L/min/m2. SpO2 was obtained at the following locations: superior vena cava 55%, right atrium (RA) 54%, pulmonary artery 54%, aorta 92%, PCW 99%, and inferior vena cava (IVC) to be 46%. Pulmonary/systemic flow ratio was 0.9. Despite evidence of atrial-level right-to-left shunt on TTE, transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was not pursued because her hypoxaemia, which resolved with diuresis, was attributed to her mild pulmonary oedema. She discharged from the hospital.
The patient underwent thyroidectomy 1 week later due to significant goitre mass effect and continued thyrotoxicosis despite medical therapy. Intraoperatively, SpO2 declined into the high-70%’s despite escalating O2 supplementation. Positional arterial blood gases (ABGs) suggested dynamic right-to-left shunting contributing to the hypoxaemia. Transesophageal echocardiogram confirmed a bidirectional shunt at rest through a PFO and severe functional TR. She was diuresed to euvolemia, rate controlled with full resolution of her O2 requirement, and discharged on metoprolol for rate control without supplemental O2.
The patient returned 4 months later in normal sinus rhythm (NSR). Thyroid-stimulating hormone was 4.6 and free thyroxine was 1.4 on levothyroxine. Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated decreased RV size, decreased TR, and absence of right-to-left shunting across the PFO, suggesting resolution of her volume overload. However, 10 months post-thyroidectomy, she developed recurrent AF with RVR, dyspnoea, and pitting oedema. Thyroid-stimulating hormeleven
one was 12.3 and free thyroxine was 1.5 on levothyroxine. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed moderate right-to-left shunt through her PFO at rest, torrential TR, and severe IVC dilation with no inspiratory collapse. Because right-to-left shunting, RA enlargement-mediated severe TR and right-heart failure symptoms were triggered during AF, she underwent pulmonary vein isolation and cavo-tricuspid isthmus ablation with restoration of NSR. She had no recurrent AF or hypoxemic episodes and did not require PFO closure. She remained on apixaban with no complications.