We report the case of a 4-month-old male infant born full-term after a complicated pregnancy with emergency cesarean section for fetal bradycardia during labor. His Apgar score was 5, 7, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 minutes, respectively and he stayed 2 days for observation in the neonatal intensive care unit. He is a child of first-degree related Saudi parents. Growth parameters at birth were normal with a weight of 3,250 g, length of 50 cm, and head circumference of 36 cm. At the age of 6 weeks, he needed few days of inpatient care to manage urinary tract infection associated with influenza infection. During an outpatient visit, he was observed to be pale with failure to thrive for an infant of 3 months old. In spite of good oral intake, his weight was 3,700 g, length was 52 cm, and head circumference was 37.5 cm. Based on the child growth standards of the World Health Organization, both weight and length were markedly below the 3rd centile. On physical examination, the infant was active without any apparent dysmorphic features. However, distended abdomen with dilated veins, hepatomegaly (liver span of 8 cm), splenomegaly of 4 cm below costal margin, loss of subcutaneous fat, and reduced muscle bulk were observed. While investigating his failure to thrive, pallor, and organomegaly, the laboratory and radiological work-up showed the following abnormalities : severe microcytic anemia, hypothyroidism, elevated serum triglyceride level, hepatosplenomegaly, and osteopenia with bilateral punctuated adrenal calcification which appeared on radiological skeletal survey .
Cardiac evaluation by echocardiography showed normal heart function. Additionally, while waiting the confirmatory genetic testing, the diagnosis of WD was supported by LAL deficiency where a dried blood spot which showed a very low LAL level.
A deletion/duplication genetic analysis by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) confirmed the presence of homozygous deletion c.(428 + 1_967-1)_(*1_?)del in the LIPA gene (NM_000235.3; chr.10): (OMIM 613,497). Real-time qPCR amplification (Rotor-Gene Q, QIAGEN, Germany) was done using target gene specific primers. Gene target regions were selected according to the alterations described in the HGMD database, when applicable [HGMD Professional]. The analysis of each fragment was performed in triplicate and by comparison with 4 different normal sample pools. Copy number alterations were calculated according to the Delta Delta Ct method (2^-ΔΔCt), using LIPA (NM_000235.3; chr.10): Exons 2, 4 and 10 (or part of the exon) as the reference gene. The detected variant was a homozygous deletion that included, at least, the exons 9 and 10 of the LIPA gene. This variant is not described in the literature; however, other deletions have been reported in patients with WD [, ]. Based on the available information, this deletion should be classified as a likely pathogenic variant. The enzyme assay was very low which confirms the variant pathogenicity. Genetic testing for the parents was requested to confirm the heterozygous status for genetic counselling.
The condition of the infant was managed with supportive care including packed red blood cell transfusion. Although initiation of ERT had been planned,, the medication was not accessible due to limited availability. After the infant condition had been stabilized, he went home on low-fat special formula.
The infant presented at the age of 4 months with prolonged fever, yellow body discoloration, lethargy, and poor oral intake. Physical examination showed the presence of fever and jaundice in an inactive infant with worsening failure to thrive and hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory findings revealed pancytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, worsening hypertriglyceridemia, hyperferritinemia, and low fibrinogen level . Viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and adenovirus, and serology for hepatitis B, C, and D were reported to be negative. Blood culture was positive for Staphylococcus aureus which was flucloxacillin sensitive. Testing for soluble CD25 level and natural killer cell activity was not available in our institution. In addition to broad-spectrum antibiotics therapy, supportive care including blood transfusion was initiated during the diagnostic work-up. Diagnostic surveillance for immune deficiency and rheumatological disorders revealed absence of hypogammaglobinemia and normal level of anti-nuclear antibodies respectively. Bone marrow aspirate excluded the presence of malignancy and showed the presence of extensive foamy histiocytes with evidence of hemophagocytosis .
After the infant fulfilled the criteria of HLH, specific treatment according to HLH-2004 protocol was initiated which included dexamethasone 10 mg/m2 daily, intravenous immunoglobulin 0.5 g/kg, and cyclosporine 6 mg/kg daily with the exception of etoposide. The infant suffered from venous access difficulty. His condition deteriorated because of refractory thrombocytopenia which required platelets transfusion every few hours to improve platelets count and prevent bleeding during invasive procedure for central line insertion. After the failure of HLH-2004 protocol therapy and because of venous access difficulty, subcutaneous anti-interleukin-1 (anakinra 10 mg/kg twice per day) was initiated. Despite 7 days of the aforementioned treatment, HLH parameters continued to deteriorate in terms of fever, pancytopenia, worsening transaminitis, hyperferritinemia, and hypofibrinogenemia. Additionally, a treatment with 3 doses of etoposide each 150 mg/m2 over 10 days instead of anakinra failed to show any improvement. The infant condition progressed to multiorgan failure including liver failure, refractory cytopenia, coagulopathy, and respiratory failure. Unfortunately, the infant died despite the support and intensive therapy provided to manage his condition.