A 46 years old woman was referred to our facility for surgical therapy of an enlarging metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumour involving the liver. This is on the background of partial gastrectomy for a “benign” tumour in Germany in 1994, which was believed to be the primary. Staging computed tomography scan revealed a grossly enlarged right hepatic lobe secondary to multiple metastases. Two lesions measured 23 cm × 18 cm (oblique axial dimension) and 23 cm × 25 cm × 24 cm (anteroposterior dimension), respectively. The huge tumour led to compression of IVC, right portal and hepatic veins . The patient’s laboratory studies were within normal except for anaemia (Hb 100). She received neoadjuvant therapy of imatinib, to which the tumour responded with significant size shrinkage.
She proceeded to undergo an extended right liver resection using cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and autotransfusion with intraoperative cell salvage (ICS). Induction of anaesthesia was uncomplicated, followed by placement of lines and a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) probe. On rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM), maximal clot firmness on FIBTEM was indicative of low fibrinogen (A5 value at 4 mm; A10 value at 4 mm; A20 value at 5 mm). Intraoperatively, a massive tumour of right liver lobe (17 kg) was discovered . The TOE during early dissection phase was consistent with severe IVC compression and pressure overload on RA/RV suggesting that CPB – instead of veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation – was necessary to complete the surgery. She was heparinised (20,000 U) to reach activated coagulation time (ACT) of 602 before establishment of CPB. During tumour resection, large volume of fluid and blood products [6 U of packed red blood cells (PRBC), 6 U of fresh frozen plasma (FFP)] was infused to replace intra-abdominal losses. Bleeding from liver edges was controlled adequately with local haemostatic agent (Floseal, Baxter, US). High dose vasopressor support was instituted soon after commencing CPB and early resection – initially with noradrenaline (8 mg/100 ml at 10–50 ml/h) and then vasopressin (2.4 units/h). Eventually, the liver tumour was successfully resected and delivered.
The rates of noradrenaline and vasopressin were running at 50–75 ml/h (16 mg/100 ml) and 6 units/h towards the end of CPB, respectively. Steroids were given and, at this time, there was adequate flow on CPB with no evidence of clot. The patient was then weaned from CBP with good cardiac function. CPB time was 2 h 15 min. A total of 300 mg protamine sulphate was administered for heparin reversal prior to decannulation. Even though her coagulation profile including ACT and ROTEM was acceptable, the haemorrhage was refractory to protamine and blood components. She continued to demand a relatively high dose of vasopressors, although the demand was decreasing over time. Total blood products consumed at that stage were 18 U PRBC, 17 U FFP, 17 U of cryoprecipitate apheresis (equivalent to 34 U of cryoprecipitate derived from whole blood), 3 U pooled platelets and 2500 U prothrombinex. A joint decision among the surgeon, anaesthetist and haematologist was made to administer rFVIIa (90 ) of rFVIIa (NovoSeven, Novo Nordisk, Denmark) approximately 1-h post-CPB in an attempt to arrest the bleeding. The pH was 6.808 and temperature was 35.3 °C at time of administration.
Ten minutes following administration of rFVIIa, the patient became haemodynamically unstable secondary to right ventricular failure and went into cardiac arrest. Intraoperative TOE demonstrated extensive thrombi within the right atrium, right ventricle and bilateral pulmonary arteries . Heparin was readministered to achieve an ACT of >999 s, CPB was emergently resumed and internal cardiac massage was performed. Right atriotomy and pulmonary atriotomy were attempted successfully to evacuate the aforementioned thrombi. Despite the clearance of right atrium, repeat TOE showed formation of thrombus in left ventricle and aortic arch. There was also noticeable intra-coronary venous thrombosis. The prothrombotic state resulted in eventual propagation of clot into venous drainage line of CPB machine and no flow could be established due to the blocked venous cannulae (SVC and IVC).The treatment was ultimately withdrawn and the patient died soon on the table. Following this event, Therapeutic Goods Aministration (TGA) was notified of the suspected adverse drug reaction.