We report the case of a 53 year-old woman, originally from Haiti, living in France since 1989. She was hospitalized in the infectious diseases department of Bichat Claude Bernard University Hospital in Paris in March 2016 for alteration of general condition, fever and nasal deformity evolving for at least 6 months.
Her medical history is characterized by an HIV infection diagnosed in 2006, which was classified at AIDS stage in 2008 due to cytomegalovirus infection. At the same time, she suffered from pulmonary histoplasmosis that was treated with itraconazole. CD4 cell count nadir amounted to 7/mm3 in 2008. A first line of Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) was started 3 weeks after those diagnoses consisting in Efavirenz (EFV), Tenofovir Disoproxil Fumarate (TDF) and Emtricitabine (FTC). After 1,5 months the patient decided to interrupt this treatment, a second line of HAART was initiated 6 months later with nevirapine and TDF/FTC. She only took secondary prophylaxis with itraconazole for 6 months and then stopped being compliant with any treatment and was lost to follow-up over 7 years. No history of recent travel to endemic areas or contact with neither birds nor bats was reported. She never smoked, did not have excessive alcohol consumption and did not inhale any nasal drugs.
At hospital admission, physical examination revealed a nasal tip collapse, a disappearance of the nasal septum and a large perforation of the hard palate, resulting in naso-oral communication. Facial skin, alar and triangular cartilages were undamaged. However, maxillary teeth [, ] were loose, and teeth 11, 21 and 22 fell spontaneously. Mucosa of the nasal cavity was ulcerated with crusts and partially necrotic . The sinus CT-scan and the magnetic resonance imaging performed showed: a complete loss of the nasal septum, a maxillar osteolysis, a communication between oral and nasal cavities and bilateral maxillary sinus opacities . The chest X-ray showed an interstitial pneumonia. She did not manifest dyspnea, cough, cutaneous eruption, neurologic deficit, visceromegaly or lymphadenopathy. HIV viral load was 56,943 copies/ml and CD4 cell count was 9/mm3 (2%). In blood: Treponema Pallidum Hemagglutination Assay and Veneral Disease Research Laboratory, Cryptococcus antigen, Toxoplasma polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Leishmania PCR, galactomannan antigen, blood and mycological (×4) cultures were all negative. β-D-Glucane was positive at 338 pg/ml. Blood Hcc PCR was positive. In bronchoalveolar fluid: cultures, Cryptococcus antigen were negative, Pneumocystis jirovecii PCR level was barely positive (18,000 copies/mL), After 3 months, Mycobacterium tuberculosis sputum cultures were negative.
Surgical biopsies of oral, nasal and maxillary mucosa were performed and analyzed. Microscopic examination revealed fungal yeasts , mycological cultures identified the presence of Hcc then confirmed by PCR.
Those tests enabled a final diagnosis of DH with naso-oral involvement in an AIDS-stage patient.
The patient received 200 mg per day of intravenous Amphotericin B (AmphoB) liposomal for 1 month. In the follow-up, we observed: negativation of blood histoplasmosis PCR in 10 days and clinical stabilization of naso-maxillary osteolysis with normalization of mucosa. Treatment was switched to 400 mg of oral itraconazole per day for a minimum of 1 year, in accordance with international guidelines .
HAART by ritonavir-boosted darunavir and TDF/FTC was reintroduced after 3 weeks of positive response to DH treatment. After 6 months, HIV viral load was undetectable and CD4 cell count at 40/mm3. At 9 months, biological results were stable and she had gained 17 k. Strategy of directly observed therapy permitted full compliance and the patient didn’t report any side effect with any treatment. Blood levels of itraconazole and HAART were both in the standards.
Ulceration and inflammation of the mucus decreased, enabling a palatal prosthesis to be implemented. A reconstructive surgery will be proposed to the patient upon completion of antifungal therapy and stabilization of HIV infection.