A 13-year-old girl with severe scoliosis, café-au-lait macules, and soft skin nodules was clinically diagnosed with NF1. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) of DNA isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes of the patient revealed a previously undescribed heterozygous loss-of-function variant c.4771del, p.(Ser1591ValfsTer33) in the NF1 gene (NM_001042492.2; hg 19). The patient’s parents had no clinical manifestations of neurofibromatosis; nevertheless, they also underwent genetic testing which confirmed de novo origin of the identified genetic variant. One year later, a scheduled ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs revealed 10 × 8 × 2 cm masses in the right lobe of the liver and in the subhepatic space retroperitoneally. Considering the established diagnosis of NF1, pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma were suspected. After few weeks of observation, the patient presented with abdominal pains and fever and was urgently hospitalized. Examination at admission revealed cachexia and enlarged liver without jaundice. Laboratory blood tests revealed no critical liver function abnormalities (serum albumin 33 g/L, ALT 35 U/L, AST 57 U/L, total bilirubin 8 µmol/L, direct bilirubin 3.7 µmol/L, GGT 433 U/L elevated, and LDH 541 U/L elevated to 3-fold normal), without significant increase in tumor markers (NSE 30 ng/mL, AFP 8.28 ng/mL, and β-hCG <1.2 mIU/mL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdominal cavity revealed a massive tumor in the right lobe of the liver, about 3580 cm3 and rapidly growing (by 441% in 2 months). A solitary node observed in the projection of the left adrenal gland at the time of the diagnosis was regarded as a metastasis to lymph nodes .
The patient underwent a laparoscopic liver tumor biopsy for histological assessment. The tumor tissue was represented by short bundles and sheets of spindle-shaped or irregularly shaped cells with a moderate nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio; the tumor cells had nuclei of varying size and shaped from ovoid to polygonal, the chromatin сlumpy or hyperchromic, the cytoplasm weakly eosinophilic or optically empty; the stroma presented with low collagen content and myxomatous areas . Immunohistochemical tests revealed uniform expression of INI1 and Vimentin and focal expression of Glypican3, Desmin, trypsin, chymotrypsin, PCK AE1/AE3, and MDM2 by tumor cells and negative reaction with antibodies to CD10, CD68, SMA, Calponin, MSA, Myf4, PLAP, Sall4, Synaptophysin, HSA, S100, and CD34; the Ki67 proliferation index constituted 70%. The results of histological assessment produced the diagnosis of undifferentiated embryonal sarcoma of the liver (UESL).
With consideration to the huge volume of the tumor and the possible infiltration of the portal vein, the decision was made to commence preoperative chemotherapy according to the CWS-2009 protocol. A check-up MRI performed after three cycles of chemotherapy (ifosfamide, actinomycin D, and vincristine) revealed a 37% increase in tumor volume; at that, the solitary node in the abdominal cavity retained its size. Radical tumor resection is known to be a key survival factor in patients with UESL . However, in this case, a radical surgery, optionally with the use of transplantation technologies, was excluded due to the portal vein infiltration.
The choice of transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) and chemoperfusion (a.k.a. transarterial chemotherapy, TACT) was based on successful use of these approaches in adult patients with unresectable liver tumors, such as hepatocellular carcinoma and other hypervascular liver neoplasms including UESL (–).
The method consists of 3 steps: 1-angiography; 2- embolization of the tumor-supplying blood vessels; and 3- chemoperfusion of the tumor. Primary angiography revealed that the liver tumor received its blood supply not only from the proper hepatic artery, but had developed its own vasculature of collateral arteries, extending from the branch of the right diaphragmatic artery, as well as from the superior mesenteric artery and the right renal artery. The patient underwent endovascular occlusion of the right diaphragmatic artery with 500 µm microspheres. The transcatheter oil chemoembolization applied a mixture of lipiodol and doxorubicin (50 mg) to fill the branches of the right diaphragmatic artery and the collateral arteries nourishing the tumor from the superior mesenteric artery. After that, 25 mg of doxorubicin over 2 hours and 100 mg of cisplatin over 5 hours were infused through a catheter placed in the right hepatic artery.
The chemotherapy infusion into the right hepatic artery was performed under sedation to exclude the patient’s movement and catheter displacement. Few days after the procedure the patient presented with abdominal pains, which required narcotic analgesia, and fever, corresponding to the development of post-embolization syndrome; these symptoms resolved in two weeks. The procedure resulted in tumor response [a 20% reduction in the tumor volume according to computed tomography; ], which served an indication for the second session.
The second chemoembolization used microspheres 200–400 µm in diameter loaded with oxaliplatin (50 mg) infused in the collateral arteries stemming from a branch of the right diaphragmatic artery, the superior mesenteric artery, and the right renal artery nourishing the sarcoma, and lipiodol with doxorubicin (50 mg) infused in the hepatic artery proper . Chemoperfusion involved doxorubicin at a dose of 25 mg for 2 hours and oxaliplatin at a dose of 25 mg for 1 hour through catheter inserted in the proper hepatic artery.
The second session of chemoembolization/chemoperfusion was accompanied by a more severe post-embolization syndrome, presenting with intense abdominal pains unresponsive to morphine. To alleviate the symptoms, the patient received epidural anesthesia of morphine and naropin with a positive effect. The pain syndrome persisted for 1.5 months. After the second session, the tumor decreased by another 55% to a volume of 2144 cm3, though the periportal infiltration persisted ; noteworthy, the solitary tumor node on the left, interpreted as a paraaortic lymph node metastasis, lacked significant dynamics. Considering the significant reduction in the liver tumor volume, the decision was made to attempt its resection. The surgical scope of the planned intervention included extended right-sided hemihepatectomy with removal of the retrohepatic portion of the inferior vena cava and its replacement with a synthetic prosthesis under conditions of total vascular isolation and cold perfusion of the liver, and implantation of the left hepatic vein into the prosthesis.
The patient was operated by “J” laparotomy; examination in the retroperitoneal space on the left revealed a tumor node 10 × 10 cm, hardly resembling a lymph node metastasis by gross appearance, removed surgically . Intraoperative examination revealed multiple diffuse lesions in the mesentery of the small intestine, reaching 5.2 cm in diameter ; with regard to the baseline diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1, these lesions were preliminary identified as neurofibromas. Morphological examination of the distant tumor node and the mesentery foci revealed their histological identity: long intertwining bundles of medium-size spindle cells, with large ovoid nuclei with dispersed chromatin, embedded in the fibrous stroma. The tumor also contained cellular elements with shapeless hyperchromic anaplastic nuclei and zones of chondroid differentiation . Immunohistochemical tests revealed partial loss of S100, H3K27me3, and SOX10 expression; subtotal loss of р16; and negative reaction with specific antibodies to SMA, Calponin, TRK, and Myogenin . Thereby, morphological examination confirmed the presence of synchronous tumor process identified as malignant peripheral neural sheath tumor (MPNST) grade 2 with peritoneal metastasis.
Molecular examination of the UESL and MPNST tumor samples by NGS Qiaseq (Qiagen) for a custom panel of genes known to be involved in etiology and pathogenesis of solid tumors in children, supported the presence of the previously identified germline genetic variant NF1 c.4771del, p.(Ser1591ValfsTer33). The multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay (MLPA) revealed a heterozygous deletion of NF1 coding sequence in MPNST tissue.
Thus, the final diagnosis accounted for the synchronous development of two tumors — UESL and MPNST of the retroperitoneal space with metastatic lesions in the mesentery. Given the unfeasibility of the radical resection for MPNST, traumatic resection of the liver tumor was abandoned. The patient was declared incurable and prescribed with palliative course of MEK inhibitor trametinib at 2 mg daily doses orally. Upon the commencement, the patient developed intractable diarrhea with a morphological substratum of intestinal ganglioneuromatosis, leading to reduced absorption of the drug. Trametinib treatment did not lead to the control of the UESL and the local progression was noted. However, primary and metastatic lesions of MPNST presented stable. The patient received trametinib for 1.5 months before dying of UESL progression.