A 62-year-old Caucasian woman living in an urban area of Corsica was admitted to our hospital with an increasing headache, breathing failure and pleuritic chest pain on her right side. She had no relevant past medical history other than pneumonia 6 months ago. Because of the persistence of dyspnea and radiographic findings consistent with a recurrence of infection, she underwent a fibroscopic bronchoalveolar lavage 1 month before admission. The culture grew Nocardia species, and the susceptibility test results were pending at the time of admission. At admission, the patient was receiving a treatment of ceftriaxone (1g) and amikacin (900mg) once a day intravenously for 15 days. Her temperature was 38.2°C with 89% oxygen saturation in ambient air. Her physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Laboratory analyses yielded the following numbers: hemoglobin concentration, 11.8g/dL; a white blood cell count of 4 cells× 109/L (79% neutrophils, 8% lymphocytes); creatinine concentration, 0.68mg/dL and moderately elevated C-reactive protein (62mg/L; normal is less than 10mg/L). Blood cultures and a human immunodeficiency virus test were all negative. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed an interstitial distribution of multiple pulmonary nodules, fluid in the major fissure and a small pleural effusion. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scans conducted upon arrival showed three nodular lesions in the left frontoparietal lobe surrounded by perilesional edema with a faint ring enhancement after contrast injection. The hyper-intense appearance of the lesions in diffusion-weighted images of the MRI scan was highly suggestive of a brain abscess. Stereotactic brain biopsy of the lesions identified a modified acid-fast variable branching filamentous bacterium that had morphology consistent with Nocardia species. The final Nocardia species culture was obtained by inoculating a Columbia agar plate containing 5% sheep blood (bioMérieux) with pus from the abscess. The culture was incubated at 37°C in a 5% carbon dioxide atmosphere. The definite identification was based on the partial sequencing of the 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid gene (over a length of 1439 nucleotides) as previously described . The sequencing results showed a 100% sequence similarity with the N. wallacei reference sequence (GenBank accession number GQ853074.1). No other organisms were isolated from the patient sample. The antibiotic susceptibility of the isolate was assessed on Mueller-Hinton agar (bioMérieux) using the disk method (Mast Diagnostics). The isolate was determined to be susceptible to ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin and linezolid and resistant to amikacin, co-trimoxazole and imipenem. These results were consistent with susceptibility testing performed at the hospital of origin using the disk method. According to the recommendations of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute for the susceptibility testing of Nocardia species, an additional antimicrobial test was performed by the microdilution method, and this test indicated that the isolate was susceptible to co-trimoxazole (minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC)<2/38mg/L) . After admission, the patient received treatment with imipenem (1g/8 hours) and amikacin (900mg/24 hours) and was switched to linezolid (600mg/12 hours) and ciprofloxacin (500mg/8 hours) after receiving the susceptibility test results. Two weeks later, because of the appearance of neurological signs such as Broca’s aphasia and the extension of the cerebral abscess while on treatment, a new surgical drainage was performed by open craniotomy excision. The antibiotic regimen was switched to TMP-SMX (2400mg/day-480mg/day) and linezolid (600mg/12 hours). The linezolid was stopped after a total of 4 weeks to limit the risk of hematological toxicity. The neurological signs were improved, and the biological parameters were normalized after 1 month of treatment. Six months later, the patient presented with an isolated neutropenia and concomitant skin rash consistent with a hematological toxicity of the TMP-SMX. The treatment was then switched to moxifloxacin (400mg/24 hours, administered orally) for the remaining 6 months of the treatment period. A 1-year followup after the antibiotic regimen ceased showed no evidence of a recurrent infection.