A 54-year-old female patient presented with an abnormal shadow discovered on a routine chest X-ray. She had a history of smoking 4–5 cigarettes per month for 5 years but quit over 10 years ago. Her past medical history included a colorectal benign polyp resected by endoscopy. She did not have respiratory symptoms and laboratory findings were unremarkable. The serum levels of the tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, and cytokeratin 19 fragment) were within normal limits. A chest radiograph showed a nodular shadow at the right middle lung field , and a computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed an 18-mm lobulated nodule at the middle lobe . An F18-fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography/CT (FDG-PET/CT) scan did not indicate abnormal FDG uptake. Bronchoscopy showed the round, tan, solid endobronchial nodule reducing the lumen of the right subsegmental bronchus (B5a) . A bronchoscopic biopsy was performed, and the patient was diagnosed with an epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma (EMC). Examination of otolaryngologist and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed no salivary gland pathologies. A right pulmonary middle lobectomy was performed, along with hilar and mediastinal lymph node dissections.
The tumor was measuring 15 mm in diameter and had a white surface; it was well-circumscribed and was present along the bronchial wall . On histological examinations, the tumor was located in the submucosal layer of the bronchus, oppressing the adjacent bronchioles, and partly necrotic . The tumor consisted of two different components: the duct-forming epithelial cells and outer multilayered polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm . Duct-forming epithelial cells were positive for cytokeratin 7, while the outer cells were negative . The outer cells were positive for S100 protein, smooth muscle actin (SMA), p63, and cytokeratin 5/6 , suggesting myoepithelial phenotype. Neither vascular, lymphatic, nor neural invasion was observed, and the mitotic rate is rare. The Ki-67 labeling index was less than 5% . No mutation was found in the KRAS or EGFR gene. We finally diagnosed the patient with P-EMC. The patient is doing well without any sign of recurrence 3 years after surgery.