A 35-year-old male patient previously undergone extensor tendon rupture reconstruction surgery on his right little finger at another hospital. During the procedure, a suture anchor was placed at the base of the distal phalanx. Seven years post-surgery, the patient visited our department, complaining of pain, and stiffness in his finger. Notably, he reported no post-surgical trauma. Physical examination showed an inability to achieve full dorsal extension, but there was no disturbance of circulation or swelling. Mild redness and signs of infection were observed, along with a noticeable protrusion at the surgical site. An X-ray was performed, revealing an anomaly at the base of the distal phalanx of the little finger, raising suspicions of either a distal phalanx fracture or tendon adhesion .
Following further investigation, an MRI was performed, revealing abnormal alterations in both the middle and distal phalanges of the right little finger. These changes were characterized by compromised bone connectivity, irregular areas of patchy high signal shadows (notably with lipid suppression), and indistinct boundaries. Notably, the bone morphology of the other right fingers appeared normal, displaying no discernible abnormal signals. Additionally, the joint surfaces were smooth, with no abnormalities detected in the surrounding soft tissues . Therefore, the patient underwent surgery, where a significant amount of scar tissue around the inserted suture anchor. Following the removal of the scar tissue, it was discovered that the tail of the anchor was located in the center of the extensor tendon, close to the subcutaneous area, and protruding. Attempts to clamp the anchor directly through the tail were unsuccessful. After the base is enlarged with an electric drill, the anchor was completely removed. The bone defect was reinforced by artificial bone grafting and re-repair of the extensor tendon was performed . Our patient was diagnosed with anchor prolapse, which was clearly visible on magnetic resonance MRI.
A finger-cap fixation was applied for one month, accompanied by the administration of oral antibiotics. The stitches were subsequently removed two weeks post-surgery. Functional exercises began after two weeks. At one month follow-up, the flexion and extension function of the distal segment showed improvement compared to its pre-operative state, and the nearly full range of motion was observed at the second-month follow-up .