A 15-year-old girl, on a school trip to London from the Middle East, presented to the emergency room (ER) with 3 h of progressive shortness of breath and chest pain, after a one-day history of cough, difficulty breathing with new sudden haemoptysis.
One week before admission, some of her school friends had developed Influenza-like symptoms. The patient reported coryzal symptoms for one week before her trip but still felt well enough to travel. There was no history of cutaneous injury or pathology.
The patient was previously healthy with no past medical history. There was no history of immunodeficiency in her or her family.
There was no history of immunodeficiency in her or her family. The patient had no known drug or food allergies.
On arrival in the ER, auscultation revealed crackles and reduced air entry in the lower right hemithorax. She coughed dark blood and became suddenly more distressed. She was tachypnoeic at 50 breaths/min and saturating at 92% on room air. Her heart rate was 120 beats/min, blood pressure 105/74 mmHg, and she was afebrile with cold extremities.
Initial arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.42 (normal range: 7.35-7.45), PaCO2 of 4.0 kPa (normal range: 4.7-6.0 kPa) and PaO2 of 7.2 kPa (normal range: 10.5-13.5 kPa) despite supplementary oxygen. Blood lactate was 1.7 mmol/L (normal range: < 1.0 mmol/L), sodium bicarbonate level 19.5 mmol/L (normal range: 22-29 mmol/L) and base excess -5 mmol/L (normal range: -2-2 mmol/L). Of note, the patients’ blood work up demonstrated a leukopaenia with neutrophil count 0.8 × 109/L (reference range 2.0-7.1 × 109/L). and c-reactive protein was 3.7 mg/L (reference range: < 10 mg/L). Blood film analysis was not performed. Full blood count and c-reactive protein results from initial laboratory investigation are presented in Table .
Plain erect radiographs of the chest taken during the initial period of the patient’s admission to hospital before transfer to the severe acute respiratory failure (SARF) centre are shown in Figure . These radiographs, and subsequent cross-section computed tomography of the chest performed at the SARF, showed rapidly progressive consolidation and four-quadrant opacification consistent with the other features of ARDS.
Diagnostic and therapeutic bronchoscopy was performed, demonstrating copious yellow, protein-rich plasma-like secretions with over 300mL fluid suctioned from her bronchial tree. A white speckled appearance of the bronchial mucosa was apparent . Bronchial washings were taken.