A 27-year-old Iranian healthy young man with no history of any significant medical complications but with a history of alcohol consumption was referred to the emergency department of Jalil Hospital, Yasuj, Iran. He presented with vomiting, diarrhea, and vision blurriness 3 days before the referral to the hospital. He did not give any information regarding the consumption of alcohol and had only received some supportive, symptomatic treatment. He referred to the emergency when he became completely blind and had no light perception (NLP).
In the emergency room, vitamin B6 and folic acid was ordered following detection of ethanol 20%, then hemodialysis was performed for detoxification for 4 hours. The patient’s body weight was 74 kg and other initial factors including heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, and breathing rate were measured before and after hemodialysis . The patient was referred for ophthalmological investigation, where he was diagnosed as being completely blind due to mydriasis in both pupils and with no light perception. After 3 days of standard treatment, no changes in his vision were observed.
The following medical intervention was applied to improve his sight: intravenous administration of folinic acid 50 mg/12 hours, methylprednisolone 250 mg/6 hours, and erythropoietin (EPREX) 10,000 IU/12 hours, for 5 days. Following this new therapy, he developed light perception. Two days after administration of the new therapy, he could distinguish light perception and hand motion movement . On the third day, he could count fingers and numbers, and had visual activity, and on the fifth day, his vision had improved (7/10 in the right and 1/10 in the left eyes). According to the optic nerve head (ONH) and retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) analysis, the thickness of the nerve fibers was normal, while the thickness of neuro retina fibers was decreased. The characteristic cupping of the ONH was above 80% and there had been no sign of cupping at the time of the referral .