A 69-year-old Caucasian man, from the Burgundy region of France, presented with symptoms of asthenia and headache of a two-year duration. There was neither fever nor seizure and no history of travel. The full blood cell count was unremarkable. Computerized tomography (CT) scans indicated a diffuse right frontal lobe lesion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium injection demonstrated a right frontal tumor on the cerebrifalx, the lateral right ventricular floor and the corpus callosum, with an extending process to the right but not to the left lobe. The lesion measured c. 40 × 30 mm, surrounded by a ring of gadolinium enhancement and a peripheral edema. The MRI revealed some internal necrotic or cystic septations including fluid. No other cystic lesion and no sign of recent hemorrhage were found in the brain.
The first hypothesis was a primitive glial tumor and the lesion was resected. Macroscopically, the cystic lesion appeared like a bunch of grapes, the tissue fragments having a yellow appearance, surrounded with a discontinuous band of cerebral tissue. However immuno-histochemical analyses with tumor related markers (GFAP (Glial Fibrillary Acid Protein), S100 protein, EMA, vimentine and synaptophysine) were negative. Finally histological observations excluded a cerebral tumor but highlighted a cystic cavity lined with a fibrotic and inflammatory wall scattered with calcifications and macrophages . Interestingly, several hook-bearing scolices were visible in the cyst containing hooks ranging from 100 to 120 μm . These patterns were consistent with the morphology of Cysticercus cellulosae, the most common cysticercus observed in humans. But other cysticercus such as Taenia saginata, Taenia crassiceps, Echinococcus multilocularis, Cenurosis were discussed.
Surprisingly, commercially available Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) designed to detect antiparasite antibody to Echinococcus granulosus in serum (Bordier, France) was weakly positive whereas a similar assay for T. solium (Biotrin, France) was negative. However, based on clinical, radiographical and histological features, the diagnosis of NCC was retained and the patient received both surgical resection of the cyst and albendazole therapy (15 mg/kg/day, 15 days per month for a nine months period), which was well tolerated.
At the final follow-up consultation, the patient was asymptomatic with no recurrence of symptoms. Repeated MRI revealed the persistence of right frontal lesions up to one year after the diagnosis, reflecting sequellar and non-evolutive lesions. E. granulosus ELISA became negative seven months after the lesion was resected.
Molecular identification was retrospectively carried out using previously described PCR protocols . These protocols confirmed the species-specific identification of T. solium and not E. granulosus, as might have been inferred from the serology.