A female patient aged 54 years with HCC and portal vein tumor thrombus, classified as Barcelona clinic liver cancer (BCLC) stage C, was admitted to our department in July 2018. The patient had been diagnosed with HCC and HBV-induced hepatic cirrhosis 2 years prior and received ten courses of transhepatic arterial chemotherapy and embolization. Entecavir had been used as an antiviral agent at another medical center before presentation to our medical group. On admission, the patient presented with good performance status. Physical examination failed to reveal any obvious positive signs. The patient did not report any history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, drug allergy, or tuberculosis except for the more than 10 years history of HBV infection with antiviral therapy with lamivudine and adefovir, which were replaced by entecavir upon development of drug resistance. She received an ectopic pregnancy surgery in 1989. Blood examination showed AFP levels of 46,502 ng/mL, liver function indices including aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), total bilirubin (TB), and albumin were within normal ranges. Liver function was classified as Child-Pugh A. Hepatitis B infection markers of HBsAg, HBeAg, and HBcAb were positive. The HBV-DNA load was less than 100 IU/mL. Liver magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after admission showed multiple lesions in the right lobe, the largest of which was located in Segment 6 with a diameter of around 50 mm , and a tumor thrombus in the right posterior portal branch . Ultrasonography confirmed the above findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasonography identified hepatic cirrhosis and presentation of portal hypertension consisting of enlargement of portal vein, splenomegaly, and esophagogastric varices. Chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated no sign of metastasis . Gastroscopy revealed severe esophagogastric varices and multiple gastric ulcers. Therefore, the main diagnosis of the patient after evaluation was one of the liver multiple HCC with portal vein tumor thrombus (PVTT) and suspected lung metastasis (BCLC C), HBV-induced hepatic cirrhosis, and portal hypertension. Sorafenib, 400 mg, twice per day, was recommended at that time.
To alleviate tumor load, the patient underwent laparoscopic microwave therapy of the tumor in Segment 6. Three months later, levels of AFP decreased to 1453 ng/mL. Unfortunately, the patient developed a complication due to perforation in the hepatic flexure of the colon and was obligated to undergo an ileostomy. The patient recovered well after the surgery. In April 2019, 1 year after receiving sorafenib therapy, AFP values decreased to 29.42 ng/mL; however, the lesion in Segment 6 began to enlarge . The patient exhibited hypertension, proteinuria, diarrhea, and hand-foot syndrome which manifested as red spots, swelling, pain in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet 2 months after using sorafenib, but she was able to endure all of the side effects with appropriate symptomatic treatment. In June 2019, the levels of AFP increased to 95 ng/mL and the lesion in Segment 6 continued to increase in size. At the 3-month follow-up, levels of AFP exceeded 60,500 ng/mL; PVTT was extended into the main portal vein , and lung metastasis and scalp metastasis presented as a frontal lump and bone lesions including skull and left sacroiliac joint leading to a limp were observed . Considering the tumor progression observed following treatment of sorafenib, regorafenib was recommended, and sintilimab (200 mg per 3 weeks) was also introduced as anti-PD-1 therapy. After treatment with sintilimab for three rounds and its combination with regorafenib (160 mg per day), AFP levels decreased to 2005 ng/mL ; meanwhile, the skull and lung metastatic lesions shrank (, and ). Besides, both the lump and limp disappeared. During the combined treatment of regorafenib and sintilimab, a high fever (exceeding 39°C) appeared but could be controlled by dexamethasone. Due to the outbreak of Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the patient was unable to visit hospital; thus, targeted and immune therapies were suspended. The patient revisited our medical centre in August 2020, approximately 7 months later. Amazingly, AFP had returned to normal levels at 0.89 ng/mL . The skull and lung metastasis and PVTT disappeared (, and ). The tumor size also reduced significantly in the right lobe of the liver and was inactive . During hospitalization, the ileostomy was closed, and then, the patient continued with treatment using regorafenib and sintilimab. The patient then returned to the local referral hospital and the use of the combination lasted 8 months and then ceased in April 2021 after visiting our clinics, as a result of severe liver function damage that was graded 3 to 4 in terms of adverse reactions. The liver function recovered with the use of dexamethasone and liver-protecting agents in the local hospital. The follow-up results revealed that AFP values were normal; ultrasonography only indicated cirrhotic nodules in the liver; bone and lung metastases were absent.