A 56 years old diabetic chinese lady with atrial fibrillation and mechanical mitral valve replacement (Bileaflet tilting disc valve, St Jude) was found to be over anti-coagulated [international normalized ratio (INR) of 4.95] during a routine follow up. She had been on warfarin therapy since 2001 for permanent atrial fibrillation and remained on anticoagulation after her valve replacement surgery for severe mitral stenosis secondary to rheumatic heart disease in 2008. Her medications included warfarin 3 mg OD, digoxin 250 mcg OD, bisoprolol 1.25 mg OD, fenofibrate 300 mg OD, furosemide 20 mg OD, potassium chloride 600 mg OD, glipizide 2.5 mg BiD and metformin 850 mg BiD. There were no recent changes in her medication and diet. On physical examination, she was well with no overt signs of bleeding. Her blood pressure was 130/70 mm Hg with a heart rate of 60 beats per minute. Fundoscopy did not reveal the presence of any hemorrhages or diabetic retinopathy.
The serum creatinine was noted to be elevated at 317 μmol/L, a five-fold increase from her last measured serum creatinine of 72 μmol/L 6 months ago. The provisional diagnosis was acute kidney injury (AKI) in the background of over anti-coagulation and diabetes mellitus. Further investigations were performed to elucidate the cause of her acute kidney injury. Urine microscopy revealed microscopic hematuria (Red blood cell 675/UL). Ultrasonography and computed tomography showed normal size kidneys with no evidence of urinary calculi or obstruction respectively. Autoimmune markers including anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antinuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody were negative and there was no hypocomplementemia. Her urine culture was negative and 24-hour urine protein was 0.35 g/day.
Warfarin was initially suspended to restore a therapeutic INR level. Decision was subsequently made for a renal biopsy 12 days after admission due to persistent AKI. Histology showed focal segmental and global glomerulosclerosis with mesangial hypercellularity but no crescents. The interstitium was edematous with presence of acute tubular necrosis. Specifically, a number of tubules demonstrated red cell casts, which were consistent with warfarin related nephropathy . Immunofluorescence was not performed due to inadequate tissue sample. Electron microscopy, carried out on appropriately reprocessed material derived from the paraffin block, showed several electron dense deposits in the mesangial and paramesangial zones, suggestive of underlying IgA nephropathy. All anticoagulation therapy was interrupted for 5 days post renal biopsy due to the development of perinephric hematoma. Oral acetylcysteine 1.2 g BiD, followed by oral prednisolone 30 mg OD was started when the serum creatinine increased to 428 μmol/L. The serum creatinine improved to 274 μmol/L with the above interventions. The patient was bridged with low molecular weight heparin before being restarted back on warfarin, with a target INR of 2–2.5. The serum creatinine and INR 3 months post discharge were 274 μmol/L and 2.1 respectively. The INR and creatinine trends are as summarized in Fig. .