A 31-year-old Caucasian woman presented with 3 months of progressive right arm weakness, speech disturbance and seizures. Neurological examination showed dysarthria, dysphasia (reduced verbal fluency and word finding difficulties), right-sided hemiparesis and hemisensory loss. There were no signs of systemic disease, intercurrent illness, stigmata of neurofibromatosis or Down syndrome. She had no personal or family history of stroke. She was an active smoker of 10 cigarettes a day for 10 years. She was also a chronic cannabis and methamphetamine user, which escalated in the 9 months prior to admission to daily methamphetamine smoking.
Brain MRI revealed both bilateral embolic and watershed infarcts in frontal regions. CT angiography showed development of new lenticulostriate collateral vessels, suggestive of moyamoya pathology . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) demonstrated steno-occlusive disease of bilateral anterior circulations, confirming the diagnosis .
Transthoracic echocardiography did not show a cardioembolic source of stroke. Lumbar puncture, vasculitis screen, autoimmune screen and thyroid function studies were unremarkable. Hepatitis and viral serology were negative. She was not hypertensive.
A repeat MRI demonstrated a new asymptomatic left frontal lobe infarct, which may have been related to the DSA procedure or embolism from her stenotic disease . She was subsequently started on clopidogrel in addition to aspirin to prevent further intracranial artery-to-artery embolism. Nimodipine was prescribed to treat any underlying cerebral vasospasm and carbamazepine was started for seizure prophylaxis.
She underwent an 8-week period of inpatient rehabilitation. At outpatient review 4 months later, she had clinically improved and experienced no further stroke symptoms while on dual antiplatelet therapy and ceasing methamphetamine. Repeat MRI showed no new ischaemic changes but the appearance of the intracranial vessels was unchanged. She continues to be managed conservatively with consideration of neurosurgery in the event of further neurological deterioration.