A 65-year-old woman has presented with epigastric pain radiating to the back since 5 months before her admission. There was a history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension and hyperlipidemia and patient had no history of past surgery, pancreatitis or trauma which made the diagnosis of pseudo cysts less likely. The patient has not also reported any history of weight loss, nausea, vomiting, jaundice, or alcoholism. On physical examination, vital signs were normal without fever, chills or rigor, abdomen was soft without tenderness, or distension and extremities’ pulses were symmetric. Laboratory investigations have revealed a leukocytosis (white blood cell: 22600), mild anemia (Hb: 10.2 mg/dL), and raised blood sugar (blood sugar: 272 mg/dL). Abdominal ultrasound examination has illustrated a heterogeneous mass with diameter of 59 × 76 between spleen and left kidney in LUQ. Abdomenopelvic computed tomography (CT) has shown a septated solid cystic 65 × 62 × 70 mass in the tail of pancreas, adjacent to left kidney. The mass has limited to lesser sac space and it has not invaded any contiguous organs, but it has displaced left kidney to downward. No calcification has revealed and the peri tumoral fat tissue has not obliterated. The differential diagnosis of CT scan report was suggestive of a mass with adrenal origin.
In order to investigate the origin of the mass, an adrenal gland MRI has performed.it has revealed a 60 × 58 heterogeneous and lobulated mass adjacent to left adrenal gland suggestive of a tumor originated from pancreas tail, left kidney or intestinal loop with the most probability of pancreas tail tumor (e.g. pancreatic serous cyst adenoma).
To ensure distinction between cystic lymphangioma and other pancreatic cystic lesions, diagnostic investigations such as guided EUS and CT scan FNA have performed. However, neither EUS nor cytology of FNA has guaranteed a thoroughly definite diagnosis.
24 hours urine VMA and metanephrine analysis were also normal (cr: 624 mg/day, VMA: 6.0 mg/24 hours, V: 1200 mL/24 hours, Metanephrine: 185.6 µg/24 hours, Normetanephrine: 624.4 µg/h.) to rule out pheochromocytoma. Furthermore, the CEA and CA 19-9 tumor marker were within the normal range less likely to make diagnosis of malignancy.
However, laparotomy has performed by a left subcostal approach. It has revealed an 8 × 8 cm solid cystic mass in distal pancreas. The mass had no adhesion to any adjacent organs and it has gradually detached from contiguous tissues. The mass has separated from adrenal gland and the gland was left intact and normal. Distal pancreas has displaced from beneath stomach. Then left gastroepiploic and short gastric arteries have ligated. Finally, the mass has resected with 5 cm margin.so distal pancreatectomy associated with splenectomy has done because splenic vessels were adhered to the lesion severely.
On gross examination, the tumor had a cystic and lobulated appearance .
However, histologic findings have revealed numerous cystic like spaces lined by a single layer of flat shaped endothelial cells with well-defined cytoplasmic borders, small round nuclei with dense chromatin. The cystic spaces, which have resembled vascular spaces, filled with homogenous pink fluid and lymphoid aggregates were evident between cystic spaces .
Finally, the diagnosis of pancreatic lymphangioma has confirmed by Immunohistochemistry (IHC) which shown immunoreactivity to factor VIII-R antigen, CD31 positivity and CD34 negativity for cells lining the dilated lymphatic channels.