A 46-year-old woman received a mammogram, which showed a high-density mass less than 10 mm in her left breast. Subsequent breast ultrasonography (US) showed a well-demarcated and low-echogenic mass that measured 8 mm in the left upper-inner quadrant.
The results of the initial mammography and repeated US at her family clinic revealed that the mass had increase in size at a 10-month follow-up, and the patient was subsequently referred to our hospital. Mammography and US were repeated, and the US findings confirmed an increased mass size with abundant blood flow suggestive of a malignant tumor. Contrast-enhanced MRI demonstrated an ill-demarcated mass that measured 8 mm × 7 mm in the A area of the left breast . There were no apparent daughter lesions, intraductal findings, or lymph node swelling. The core needle biopsy (CNB) pathology showed clusters of atypical cells proliferating in solid and papillary patterns with a high nucleocytoplasmic (N/C) ratio . In addition, immunohistochemistry was performed with various monoclonal antibodies to confirm the diagnosis. The tumor was ER positive and PgR negative. Regarding neuroendocrine markers, the SPC cells were positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), chromogranin, and synaptophysin , and negative for CD56 and S-100p antibodies. There were no myoepithelial cells on the outer edge of the tumor; this was confirmed by negative immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for myoepithelial markers, which included CD10, p63 , and α-smooth muscle actin. No invasive carcinoma was found. Considering the imaging and histology findings together, the preoperative diagnosis of the tumor was neuroendocrine SPC, and its stage was cTiscN0M0.
The patient underwent a partial mastectomy of the left breast with sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB). For further confirmation, the specimens were sent for histopathological analysis , which showed well-circumscribed solitary nodules with neuroendocrine components. Microscopic observation revealed dilated ducts filled with a high proportion of proliferating cells that contained a necrotic vascular stroma. Some tube-like structures were also observed, and these findings corresponded with SPC. The HE-stained sections suggested an obvious infiltration pattern, with a distribution that spread out from the lobular unit. Invasion was observed as irregularly shaped tumor nests that invaded the surrounding stroma . The tumor was 8 mm × 7 mm in size, and the final diagnosis was SPC with invasion and massive SPC in situ.
In the immunohistochemical analysis, tumor cells were positive for NSE, chromogranin, and synaptophysin, which suggested that the tumor had a neuroendocrine feature. The myoepithelial markers CD10, P63, and α-smooth muscle actin were negative. Postoperative pathological findings suggested SPC with invasion. The tumor had an ER-positive, PgR-negative, and HER2-negative biological phenotype, while the Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 30%. The tumor exhibited an intermediate nuclear grade (grade II: 3-2-2) in the invasive components, and the stage was pT1b(8 mm)pN0(0/2, sn)M0, pStage I.
The postoperative treatment plan was determined based on the pathological diagnosis. Whole-breast radiation therapy followed by hormonal therapy (tamoxifen and a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist) was performed as adjuvant therapy. Three years after surgery, the patient developed a persistent cough with the absence of an inflammatory response, and a PET-CT examination showed multiple lung metastases. Systemic treatment was changed to a combination of an aromatase inhibitor and a GnRH agonist. Nevertheless, the metastatic tumors were aggressive, sizes of pulmonary lesions increased, and new liver and bone metastases appeared in the whole-body CT images 5 months after starting the treatment . We talked with the patient carefully about the merits and drawbacks of other treatments including chemotherapy, and the patient decided to undergo oral 5-FU treatment as the first-line chemotherapy. One year after the start of oral 5-FU treatment (S-1: 100 mg/body/day, 2 weeks on 1 week off), the lung metastases disappeared, and the sizes of liver metastases were significantly reduced in size . At present, the patient has taken the same dose of oral 5-FU treatment continuously for 2.5 years. No serious adverse events have been observed, and her quality of life (QOL) during the treatment currently appears to be favorable, more than 5 years after surgery.