A 30-year-old housewife with history of seizure disorder presented in 2010 with history of fall 5 years earlier when she had sustained a fracture of the left distal femur. She was managed elsewhere with upper tibial pin traction for 1 month following which she underwent intramedullary nailing.
Six months later, she developed pain, swelling, and a discharging sinus at the left distal thigh. She was managed elsewhere conservatively for 1 year after which the implant was removed. Later discharge persisted. Debridement was done at the same center and she received antituberculous treatment for 18 months .
In 2010, when she came to us, she was diagnosed with chronic osteomyelitis and underwent debridement and sequestrectomy. Following this, there was no discharge till 4 years later when she complained of pain and recurrent discharge.
On examination, she had a short limbed gait and there was a scar of the previous surgery. There were puckered scars as well as a sinus that was adherent to the underlying bone. The range of movement in the left knee was 0–120°. There was a 2 cm shortening in the left lower limb due to malunion with recurvatum deformity. There were no distal neurovascular deficits. On investigating, her ESR was 26 mm at 1 h and CRP was 42.8 mg/L. All other hematological and biochemical parameters were normal.
Roentgenography showed multiple cystic osteolytic lesions with a sequestrum in the distal femur with surrounding sclerosis and irregular thickening of bone. Sinusogram revealed the extent of the sinus .
MRI revealed well-defined lobulated intraosseous high signal area with peripheral T2 hypointense rim in proximal femur that extends 17 cm from the joint surface .
We diagnosed her with chronic osteomyelitis and performed left femur debridement, sequestrectomy, and saucerisation. Pus was sent for culture and it grew non-fermenting gram negative bacilli susceptible to Amikacin and hence she was started on the same.
Intraoperatively, there was a 3 × 2.3 × 0.8 cm glistening nodular mass close to the popliteal region which was sent for biopsy along with the curetted samples from the lytic lesions in the anterolateral and posterior aspects of the left distal femur Gross pathological examination of the specimen revealed multiple cysts folded like a membrane with a glistening grey-white cut surface. Wall thickness varied from 0.1 to 0.2 cm. Histopathological examination revealed an acellular eosinophilic cyst with surrounding fibrosis and dense chronic inflammation composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, few neutrophils, eosinophils, and several granulomas composed of Langhan’s and foreign body type multinucleate giant cells. Scanty necrosis and reactive new bone formation was seen. All the above findings were consistent with that of a hydatid cyst .
She was advised Tab. Albendazole 400 mg twice daily and Tab. Praziquental 40 mg/kg/week for 3 months. At present, her osteomyelitis is under control.