A 57 year old male with 8-year history of poorly controlled Type 2 DM, hypertension, two previous episodes of transient ischemic attacks and underlying cirrhosis of the liver secondary hepatitis C and alcohol abuse presented to our hospital with a two-day history of “not being able to walk”. He reports that his symptoms started about 2 months ago, when one morning he was awoken with a sudden onset of right calf pain, erythema and swelling. He reported his complaints to a family physician, who unsuccessfully treated him with various courses of antibiotics. His pain gradually progressed, until 1 day prior to admission, when he realized that he was no longer able to weight bear on his affected leg. The patient denied any history of fever, trauma, animal bites or infection. Initial work up revealed moderate leukocytosis (white blood count of 14.7 × 10^9 cells/L), normal electrolytes and unremarkable liver function tests. Interestingly, at the time of presentation this patient had normal creatinine kinase (20 U/L), which suggests that the majority of tissue injury occurred during the preceding days to weeks prior to admission. On presentation, the patient had a blood glucose reading of 28.5 mmol/L, while his glycated hemoglobin was 13.9%. Spot urine albumin/creatinin ratio documented significant microalbuminuria Additional diabetic workup failed to reveal any signs of retinopathy or neuropathy.
Blood cultures were obtained and the patient was started empirically on broad spectrum antibiotics. Deep vein thrombosis was ruled out by doppler ultrasound study of both legs. Unfortunately, antibiotic therapy failed to control his symptoms. Subsequently, his cultures showed no bacterial growth and, hence, all antibiotic medications were discontinued. Initial computer tomography imaging of both legs failed to reveal any signs of infection or abscess, but was suggestive of DMI (Figure
).
While in hospital, glycemic control was established with intravenous and subcutaneous insulin therapy, pain was controlled with analgesic medication and bed rest. Subsequent MRI revealed significant edema, inflammation, necrosis of gastrocnemious and soleus muscles and identified a number of associated communicating fluid collections, that were deemed to be at high risk of becoming infected (Figure
). There was no evidence of arterial thromboembolism. Due to the presence of fluid collections that were deemed to be at high risk of becoming infected, plastic surgery service was consulted and wound debridement was performed. Pathological analysis of debris obtained from soleus and gastrocnemius muscles revealed necrotic tissue with signs of severe acute and chronic inflammation (data not shown). Bacterial and fungal stains and cultures for these tissues did not reveal any infectious agents. The patient gradually recovered over the period of ~4 weeks in the hospital with supportive therapy and was discharged to a rehabilitation facility on insulin, clopidogrel and Aspirin (80 mg per day). He had no further complications on his 15 months follow up visit and is followed regularly in our diabetic clinic.