A 24-year-old female from Southern province of Sri Lanka, presented with arthralgia, malaise and poor appetite for 3 months’ duration. A week prior to the admission, she had an episode of transient loss of consciousness, which was followed by an uneventful recovery. It was assumed to be a vasovagal syncope, since the semiology was not suggestive of a seizure and it was not associated with chest pain or palpitations. She had a similar event a month ago, which also resolved spontaneously upon lying down.
She complained of arthralgia involving all small and large joints indiscriminately without any signs of inflammation. She did not give a history of fever, chills or rigors, drenching night sweats or weight loss. She denied cough, difficulty in breathing, chest pain, headache, visual disturbances, photophobia, or photosensitive rashes. She also did not have cold intolerance, constipation, menorrhagia, polyuria or polydipsia. She denied neck pain, limb claudication or Raynaud’s phenomenon. She was not on any medications. She had regular menstrual periods. She had no premorbid illnesses and her family history was unremarkable.
On examination, her height was 144 cm and she weighed 42 kg with a body mass index of 21 kg/m2. She was not febrile or pale and there was no hair loss, rashes, oral or genital ulcers. She did not have redness in the eyes. She had grade 2 clubbing involving the fingers of the right hand . Interestingly, clubbing was absent in the fingers of the left hand and toes of both feet. Her radial, ulnar and brachial pulses were barely felt in the right arm, whereas in the left arm, all the pulses were felt with normal volume. Blood pressure was not recordable in the right arm and in the left, it was 112/88 mmHg. The carotid and femoral pulses were palpable in normal volume and there was no radio-radial or radio-femoral delay. Mild tenderness was elicited over the right carotid artery but, there was no bruit. Cardiac examination was normal. Lung fields were clear. Rest of the examination was unremarkable.
Full blood count revealed neutrophil leukocytosis, mild normocytic normochromic anemia and thrombocytosis. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was > 110 mm/ 1st hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 24 mmol/l. Liver and renal functions, serum electrolytes including calcium and magnesium, and thyroid functions were normal. The chest and spine X-ray images failed to show any abnormalities. Computed tomography (CT) aortogram revealed thrombosis of brachio-cephalic trunk, right common carotid, subclavian and axillary arteries.
Her clotting studies, including prothrombin time, thrombin time and activated partial thrombin time were normal. Anti-thrombin iii, Protein C and Protein S levels were normal, thereby excluding common diseases of thrombophilia. Anti-cardiolipin IgM antibody, Lupus anticoagulant, anti Beta 2 glycoprotein IgG and IgM antibodies were negative. Anti nuclear antibody (ANA), anti double stranded DNA (anti ds DNA), cytoplasmic anti neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and perinuclear ANCA, were all negative.
Magnetic Resonance angiogram (MRA) was performed to further delineate the cause for thrombosis. In the MRA, brachio-cephalic artery was completely occluded at it’s origin. There were collateral vessels, formed distal to the brachio cephalic stump .
Considering the clinical presentation, elevated inflammatory markers and MR angiographic evidence, TA involving the brachio-cephalic artery and its branches was diagnosed.
She was given intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg daily for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone 40 mg daily. Oral Azathioprin 50 mg daily was added as a steroid sparing agent. She was anticoagulated, initially with subcutaneous enoxaparin followed by warfarin 4 mg, daily.
After starting the treatment, her symptoms subsided and 3 months in to the therapy, clubbing still persisted. ESR reduced to 35 and she is currently being followed up monthly, at our clinic.