A 73 year old Turkish female patient who presented with weakness, epigastric fullness and decreased appetite had a prolonged duration of hematologic remission by the treatment of her CBL with hydroxyurea (HU) . At presentation, complete blood counts (CBC) showed marked decrease in hemoglobin. Differential count made by automated blood cell counter revealed 30% segmented neutrophils, 30% eosinophils, 32% lymphocytes and 8% monocytes. However marked basophilia and eosinophilia at different stages of maturation detected by manual differential in PB smear revealed that automated blood cell counters wrong characterized the neoplastic basophilic cells with coarse and diffuse basophilic granules as neutrophils, as shown in Table .
She was firstly transfused with 4 units of packed red blood cells (rbc) for severe anemia and maintenance therapy with HU was discontinued. Results of rutin laboratory studies with gastroscopy and colonoscopy failed to reveal gastrointestinal bleeding and hemolysis.
Bone marrow (BM) aspiration showed hypercellularity, basophilic hyperplasia, eosinophilia, increase in megakaryocytes and aggregates of mast cells. Suppressions in neutrophilic and in erythroid lineages induced by basophilic hyperplasia and MCs infiltration were seen. BM biopsy showed increase in megakaryocytes and eosinophils at different stages of maturation. Increased numbers of MCs in paratrabecular location were highlighted by immunohistochemical staining for CD117 and tryptase . Increase in serum level of tryptase was shown in Table .
Diagnosis of SM occurring as second neoplasia concurrently with de novo CBL that relapsed after prolonged duration of hematologic remission was established. Her white blood cell (wbc) count except for the basophilia and eosinophilia was normal. The patient has been watched without treatment to see the recurrence of febrile episodes .
Results of CBC and chemistry profiles during the clinical course were shown in Table .
One month later she was seen for symptoms of anemia, without fever. CBC showed increase in wbc and mast cell counts and decrease in Hgb. She was started on HU 1000 mg/day, but after 3 days, developed fever and her platelet count decreased to 63 × 109/l. The patient stopped taking HU.
About 2 months after (3. month of first presentation), she presented with fever, abdominal pain, headache, weakness, diarrhea and was hospitalized. Repeat CBC revealed marked increase in wbc, basophil, eosinophil and mast cell counts, and decrease in Hgb. MCs showed uneven distribution with aggregates of 2 to 6 MCs on PB smear as they were seen in the BM smear. MCs have round nuclei, one or more nucleoli in immature forms and mixed black and orange color round cytoplasmic granules . Her blood chemistry profiles were normal except for elevations in C-reactive protein (CRP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Laboratory studies performed during the febrile attack showed normal histamine, prominently increased IL-6 and elevated tryptase levels.Repeated BM aspiration showed hypercellularity, basophilic hyperplasia having diffuse, coarse basophilic granules and eosinophilia with presence of all stages of maturation of basophilic and eosinophilic lineages, including 2% segmented basophils, 7.5% basophlic bands, 17.5% basophilic metamyelocytes, 23.5% basophilic myelocytes, 1% segmented eosinophil, 4.5% eosinophilic bands, 8.5% eosinophilic myelocytes, 8% promyelocytes, 21.5% MCs. Marked suppression in neutrophilic lineage and moderate suppressions in erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages induced by basophilic hyperplasia and mast cell infiltrations were detected. The M:E ratio was 15.3:1. MCs exhibited uneven distribution with aggregates of 2 to 6 MCs throughout the marrow fields. Rare binuclear forms of MCs were also noted. Striking dysplasia manifested as giant segmented basophils, giant basophilic bands, giant binuclear basophilic metamyelocytes, frequent Pelger-Hüet anomaly and binuclear eosinophilic metamyelocytes were seen. A few giant hypersegmented megakaryocytes, hypogranular forms and rare megakaryoblasts were also observed.
Transformation to MCL from secondary SM occuring concurrently with accelerated phase of CBL relapse was detected 2 months after evolution to SM. The patient underwent 2 consecutive prophylactic leukapheresis to reduce to basophil count below 40 × 109/l for the prevention of cytokine release from dead neoplastic cells induced by chemotherapy. She was transfused with 2 units of packed rbc and the treatment was resumed with increase in daily dose of HU to 1500 mg. Despite prophylactic leukapheresis, she developed febrile episode 3 days after chemotherapy. Her fever returned to normal with corticosteroid therapy, 40 mg/day, for 3 days, but she developed hematochezia due to decrease in Plt count to 28 × 109/l. HU therapy was discontinued and she received supportive transfusion with plt packs and packed rbc.
The patient has received no treatment for about two months since she has required continuous supportive plt and rbc transfusions. Her wbc counts ranged betwen 4.5 × 109/l and 18.3 × 109/l and Plt counts ranged between 4 × 109/l and 25 × 109/l repectively during this period.
About 2 moths later (5. month of first presentation), she was reevaluated for symptoms of anemia. CBC showed increases in basophil, eosinophil and mast cell counts and decrease in Hgb. Treatment with interferon alpha-2b (INFα-2b) was considered, but could not be administered because of persistent thrombocytopenia. She was treated with imatinib 300 mg/day combined with HU 500 mg/day during the ensuing month. She feld better, but decreases in Hgb to 7 g/dl and Plt count to 20 × 109/l were noted. Combination therapy was stopped and she was given supportive plt and rbc transfusions.
Approximately, 7 weeks later (7. month), she developed fever, abdominal pain, fatigue and her spleen was palpable 4 cm below the left costal margin. CBC showed marked increases in wbc, basophil, eosinophil and mast cell counts and decrease in Hgb. The patient underwent 2 consecutive leukapheresis. Treatment with oral etoposide 50 mg/day was started, but on the thirth day of chemotherapy she developed fever and was hospitalized. Repeat CBC showed a wbc of 2.3 × 109/l, Hgb 7.7 g/dl and Plt count 2 × 109/l. Oral etoposide was discontinued because of thrombocytopenia (2 × 109/l) and leukopenia (2.3 × 109/l). She was treated with antibiotics and supportive transfusions. The patient was then followed for 2 weeks (7.5 month) without chemotherapy, but developed fever, abdominal pain and a rapid increase in wbc cunt to 250 × 109/l was detected. She was started on leukapheresis and given i.v cyclophosphamide 1000 mg, but despite these treatments 2 weeks after (8.monts), her wbc count continued to climb. Her biochemical and coagulation parameters were deteriorated rapidly. Repeat CBC revealed prominent increase in wbc, basophil and mast cell counts and decreases in Hgb and Plts. Coagulation profile revealed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) during terminal phase. DIC was due to febrile neutropenia and infection that resulted in septic shock. Despite supportive managements with transfusions of fresh frozen plasmas, plt packs and packed rbc. DIC could not be controlled and she expired 4 days after development of DIC. The patient died 5 months after the diagnosis of MCL.
Toluidine blue stain on PB and BM smears demonstrated diffuse granular metachromatic staining in the great majority of cells including MCs and basophils when transformation to MCL was detected. Peroxidase stain of BM smear showed diffuse granular staining in <60% of non-erythroid nucleated BM cells and peroxidase negative aggregates of cells . Tryptase immunohistochemical staining was performed on PB smear by using Ventana Bench ultra automated staining apparatus and Ventana-Cell Marque-G3 mouse monoclonal antibody. Tryptase immunohistochemical staining of PB smear showed brown color round granular cytoplasmic staining in the aggregates of cells .
Flow cytometric analysis of BM mononuclear cells (MNCs) showed that antigen expressions were positive for CD10 (dim), CD11c (dim), CD13, CD15, CD22 (dim), CD33, CD38, CD45, CD123, IgD receptor and CD117 and negative for HLA-DR,CD7 and CD71.
Chromosome analysis was performed on 20 metaphases and abnormal karyotype was detected in six out of 20 metaphases. Cytogenetic analysis of BM cells revealed: 47,XX,der(6)t(6;?)(q25-27;?),der(17)t(17;?)(p13;?),+mar[6] / 46,XX[14].
Additional chromosomal materials were detected on the long arm of chromosome 6 and on the short arm of chromosome 17 respectively, in addition to a marker chromosme of unknown origin.
Sequence analysis performed on amplified PCR products of exons 9, 11,13 and 17 of c-kit gene revealed heterozygote substitution of C1650A > T (K550N) on exon 11 while wild type sequences were found in exons 9, 13 and 17 respectively. Molecular genetic studies performed by using LSI 4q 12 Tricolor Probe failed to reveal FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene rearrangement.