In October 2020, a 50-year-old man complaining of left flank pain was referred to our center after left hydronephrosis was found by ultrasonography in another institution. The patient had no history of smoking or exposure to carcinogenic chemicals. Computed tomography (CT) urography showed left hydronephrosis, ipsilateral upper-middle ureter thickening, and locally enlarged lymph nodes. Elevations in routinely detected serum creatinine, carbohydrate antigen 72-4 (CA72-4), and cytokeratin-19 (CK19) fragments (CYFRA21-1) were found. Patient received 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan, which confirmed malignancy involving 4.5-cm segment of left proximal ureter. Surrounding hypermetabolic lymph nodes extended to paraaortic region, and no distant metastasis was found . Plasma was collected for ctDNA sequencing and mutations found in tumor suppressor TP53, oncogene ERBB2, and chromatin-remodeling genes lysine(K) demethylase 6A (KDM6A) and lysine(K) methyltransferase 2D (KMT2D) . Retroperitoneoscopic RNU, regional lymphadenectomy, and cystoscopy were planned and performed, whereas a few paraaortic metastatic lesions were not successfully removed because of deep location and surrounding adhesion . The pathology showed ureteral high-grade UC with periureteral lymphatic metastases (pT3N2M0), and surgical margins were all negative. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining was performed for representative markers of subtypes (cytokeratins), tumor growth (i.e., ki-67 and p53), epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) (i.e., cadherins and vimentin) and immune status (PD-L1 and lymphocyte markers) . It was characterized as proliferative, luminal-like, and non-mesenchymal tumor with inflamed microenvironment. Tumor tissue was also subjected to DNA exome and RNA transcriptional sequencing. Main somatic gene alterations involved missense mutations of TP53 and ERBB2 as well as truncating mutations of KDM6A, KMT2D, AT-rich interactive domain-containing protein 1A (ARID1A), and mismatch repair gene MLH1 , and tumor mutation burden (TMB) was 6.3 mutations per megabase (muts/Mb). According to the UTUC mutational classifications, this case belongs to TP53/MDM2-mutated subtype with probably worst prognosis .
Furthermore, the UC subset of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) database was employed to deeply understand the features of this patient. Using TCGA classifier for UC , his lesion was clustered with luminal-infiltrated subtype based on RNA sequencing data . We also performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) for TCGA-UC dataset to process gene expression profiles (GEPs) related with key genomic mutations identified in the current case. Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses suggested that highly expressed genes in TP53-mutant tumors were significantly associated with biological processes and pathways regarding assembly and repair of DNA or chromatin, i.e., DNA replication, DNA damage response, and mismatch repair . Among ERBB2-mutant UC cases, GSEA showed that immune-activating categories [i.e., response to Interferon gamma (INF-γ), natural killer (NK)–cell activation, and T helper type 1 (Th1)- and T helper type 2 (Th2)-cell differentiation] were highly enriched .
Postoperatively, four times of weekly intravesical gemcitabine instillation were administered. However, patient complained about gradually severe left flank pain simultaneously. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a significant enlargement of residual lymphatic metastases at six weeks after surgery . Compared with preoperative values, higher levels of serum tumor biomarkers CA72-4, CA15-3, and regulatory T (Treg)–cell count were observed. The ctDNA test revealed elevated abundances of mutations from TP53, ERBB2, KDM6A, and KMT2D . Further ctDNA analyses showed a decrease in the cancer cell fraction (CCF) but remarkable increases in blood TMB (bTMB) and mean variant allele frequency (mVAF), which was calculated as the mean of VAFs of somatic mutated genes for each specimen . All above findings suggested disease progression postoperatively. Meanwhile, RNA sequencing data of tumor tissue were analyzed to retrieve T-cell–inflamed GEP, a pan-cancer immunotherapy response biomarker . We validated GEP in an ICI-treated IMvigor210 cohort with metastatic UC, among whom the score (range, −0.44~0.16) successfully distinguished tumors with different immune status, as demonstrated by the average increasing in sequence from immune desert, through immune-excluded, to inflamed subgroup (−0.24 vs. −0.18 vs. −0.08, P < 0.001). IMvigor210 cohort was divided into high-GEP (one of the three) and low-GEP (two of the three) subgroups using the score cutoff of −0.13. High-GEP subjects had significantly longer overall survivals than low-GEP counterparts by a median of 5.1 months (P = 0.009), indicating the usefulness of GEP score in prediction of response to ICI agents. GEP score of this patient was high at 0.14, predicting active immunity and favorable response to PD-1 blockage .
On the basis of the aforementioned analyses, ICT treatment was started in December 2020, consisting of off-label PD-1 inhibitor sintilimab [200 mg, day 1 (D1)], gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2, D2/9), and carboplatin (area under the curve of 5–6, D3), every 3 weeks. Sintilimab (Innovent Biologics, Suzhou) is the first approved PD-1 antibody in China with affordable price. The patient tolerated the combined treatment well, and myelosuppression was dealt with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) or thrombopoietin, if indicated. MRI showed shrinks of lymphatic metastases at cycle 3 and most regressed at cycle 6. Flank pain was gradually relieved, although CA72-4, CA15-3, and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) were on the rise. Since cycle 7, sintilimab monotherapy instead of ICT was continued. NK-cell count went steadily up afterward, and CA72-4, CA15-3, and NLR descended significantly to liminal levels. Carcinoma embryonic antigen (CEA), CYFRA21-1, Treg-cell count, and platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) also showed declining trends. MRI demonstrated complete remission of lymphatic metastases at cycle 16. Meanwhile, ctDNA analyses confirmed sustained decreases in CCF, bTMB, and mVAF . Specifically, none of previously detected variants was present at the last detection . Sintilimab was maintained up to 1 year. As of this publishing, the patient remained free of recurrence or metastasis, as shown by radiographic examinations and cystoscopy in March 2023, 16 months after the end of sintilimab treatment.