A 47-year-old woman with BMI of 15 had been diagnosed with Crohn’s disease involving the small and large intestine at 20 years of age. Although she had been treated with anti-tumor necrosis factor-alpha agents and was maintained in clinical remission, she had occasional recurrences of anal fistula. Sigmoidoscopy was performed to investigate anal pain and melena and showed anal stenosis and ulcerative lesions. Biopsy confirmed mucinous carcinoma. Preoperative pelvic magnetic resonance imaging revealed a perianal abscess arising from an anal fistula close to the tumor. The tumor was in contact with the right side of the vagina and the internal obturator muscle and extended to the vicinity of the urethra . Biopsy of the anterior wall of the vagina revealed adenocarcinoma, which was suspected to be an extension of the tumor. The patient was diagnosed with anal fistula cancer with invasion to the vagina and the right side of the urethra. According to the 9th edition of the Japanese Society for Cancer of the Colon and Rectum guidelines , the tumor was clinically staged as cAI, cN1a, cH0, cP0, cM0, cStage IIIc. In the background that positive resection margin was a prognostic factor in anal fistula cancer, informed consent was given to the patient in consideration of these preoperative findings, and total TPE was selected . The patient underwent staging laparoscopy and Seton drainage for infection and pain control. After the inflammation improved with drainage, TPE was performed via a combined laparoscopic and transperineal endoscopic approach .
After the vagina and anus including the fistula were closed with a purse-string suture , the skin was then incised to include the urethral opening and the external openings of the fistula on the excision side . On the right side, since there was an abscess in contact with the obturator internus muscle, the adipose tissue of the ischioanal fossa was extensively resected and the obturator internus muscle was partially resected . TPE was then performed using a combined laparoscopic and transperineal endoscopic approach. A ureterocutaneous fistula was fashioned for urinary tract reconstruction. The perineal wound measured 90 × 60 mm and primary skin closure was difficult . The volume of the omentum was considered sufficient to fill the pelvic dead space, so an omental flap and NPWT with instillation and dwelling (NPWTi-d) were used instead of a myocutaneous flap. The omentum was partially separated from the transverse colon, and the epiploic branch of the right gastroepiploic artery was sacrificed. The omentum was sufficiently mobilized to reach the perineal side . Injection of indocyanine green dye confirmed adequate blood flow to the omentum . The omentum was folded over several times and fixed to the perineal wound . The skin was closed with purse-string sutures and polyurethane foam for NPWTi-d was applied . The NPWTi-d protocol involved applying negative pressure with intermittent aspiration at − 75 mmHg until postoperative day (POD) 4 to prevent bleeding from the omentum, followed by aspiration at -125 mmHg. The foam was changed twice a week for 20 days after surgery. Granulation tissue in the perineal wound gradually formed , and the wound was closed by suturing with a subcutaneous drain on POD20. A subcutaneous drain was removed on POD27. The patient was discharged on POD30 with no postoperative complications such as inflammation of the pelvic dead space, perineal wound infection, or ileus. At 9 months after surgery, she has no complications, such as perineal hernia, and there has been no recurrence of the anal fistula cancer. Computed tomography scans obtained postoperatively indicate that the omentum filled the space in the pelvis .