A 52-year-old man without any history of gout presented with a 1-month history of dizziness and weakness, and a 3-month history of mild brown gross macrohematuria. Physical examination showed significant pallor of the skin. Microscopic urine examination confirmed red blood cells by directly examining the centrifuged urinary sediment. Hemoglobin level was 4.2 g/dl (normal, 13.0-16.6 g/dl), and mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was 88.2 fl with elevated white blood count (14.7 × 109/l) and normal platelet count (38.0 × 109/l). Absolute reticulocyte counts were 1.1 thou/μL. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were both within normal ranges. The serum haptoglobin level was 15 mg/dL. Lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated to 325 IU/L (normal, 119–229 IU/L). Serum level of total bilirubin was markedly elevated to 4.85 mg/dL (normal, 0.0-1.1 mg/dL), whereas direct bilirubin level was only slightly elevated (0.5 mg/dL; normal, 0.0-0.4 mg/dL). Iron studies showed that B12 level was markedly elevated to 6030 pg/ml (normal, 249–938 pg/ml), whereas folate level was normal. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) levels were normal, and electrophoresis revealed no abnormal bands.
A direct Coombs test showed positive results for IgG and negative results for complement C3, while an indirect Coombs test for antiglobulin also yielded positive results. Testing to exclude other autoimmune diseases showed that antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to double-stranded DNA, and antiphospholipid antibodies were all negative. Levels of various tumor markers (prostate-specific antigen, neuron-specific enolase, alpha-fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen were examined and found to be within normal limits. However, serum interleukin (IL)-2 receptor level was elevated to 1503 U/ml (normal, 145–519 U/ml). Urine cytology was negative for cancer. Abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed huge left hydronephrosis due to a renal pelvic mass measuring 4.0 × 4.0 × 3.0 cm, and renal regional lymph-node involvement was also observed as a 2-cm mass, which was suspected to represent metastasis of a renal urothelial cancer or malignant lymphoma extension with renal involvement. A diagnosis of IgG-mediated warm autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) was made on hospital day 3. The patient was transfused with crossmatch-compatible blood. Oral corticosteroid therapy (prednisolone, 60 mg/day) and intravenous Igs 500 mg/day for 3 days were also administered after diagnosis and achieved limited improvement. Surgical treatment was performed on hospital day 7, since tumors that induce AIHA are usually hematological neoplasms such as malignant lymphoma. We planned to eliminate the possibility of malignant lymphoma intraoperatively by intraoperative frozen section diagnosis. If the results of intraoperative biopsy revealed malignant lymphoma of the kidney, initiating chemotherapy as treatment would be considered. Conversely, if some other malignant epithelial tumor was identified, such as renal urothelial cancer or renal cell carcinoma, nephroureterectomy was planned as surgical treatment. The results of intraoperative biopsy indicated reactive hyperplasia of the lymph node, rather than malignant lymphoma. We therefore consecutively performed left nephroureterectomy as a treatment for AIHA. After surgical resection of the left kidney, hemoglobin level and reticulocyte count gradually normalized. Direct and indirect Coombs tests yielded negative results by 7 post-operative weeks. At 10 weeks after surgery, complete blood counts had recovered to within normal ranges and the dose of prednisolone was tapered to 15 mg/day after 10 weeks .
The diagnosis was confirmed to be warm AIHA associated with renal urothelial cancer. The specimen of the left kidney showed papillary urothelial carcinoma (UC) in the renal pelvis with undifferentiated carcinoma, G2, pT4, INF γ, lt-u0, ew1, ly1, v1, n2), and gradual invasion of the tumor into the renal parenchyma with change to undifferentiated carcinoma. Multiple lung and liver metastases were observed 3 months postoperatively on a CT of the chest and abdomen, so the prednisolone dose was increased to 20 mg/day from 14 weeks to prevent recurrence of AIHA. No symptoms of AIHA or abnormal hemolytic state were observed. Prednisolone was tapered to 5 mg/day and the dosage kept unchanged at 5 mg/day. Although chemotherapy using gemcitabine plus cisplatin for metastases was administered, the patient died 7 months after surgery due to rapid development of metastases and multiple-organ failure (MOF).