A 27-year-old male presented to emergency with pain and swelling on posterolateral aspect of the right knee following a varus thrust while playing cricket. Clinical examination confirmed the findings along with foot drop and dense hypoesthesia in CPN distribution. Radiological examination revealed a displaced avulsion fracture of fibular head ( and ). Magnetic resonance imaging of the right knee showed avulsion fracture of the fibular head with attached lateral collateral ligament and midsubstance tear in the posterolateral capsule of the knee along with edematous soft tissue engulfing the CPN suggestive of its compression. There was edema present in the midsubstance region of both cruciate ligaments . There was no sign of meniscal injury. The patient was advised to undergo open reduction and internal fixation of bony avulsion from the fibular head to restore the posterolateral stability of the knee joint along with simultaneous exploration of the CPN. The right knee was examined under anesthesia, and there was Grade II opening on varus stress testing at 30° and 60° flexion. There was no other sign of instability at the right knee.
The right knee was approached through the posterolateral approach. The bony avulsed fragment from the fibular head with attached lateral collateral ligament and popliteofibular ligament was identified. The CPN was found to be lacerated approximately by 50% of the total diameter . The fibular head avulsion was anatomically reduced and fixed with a single 4 mm partially threaded screw . The knee was found to be stable after fixation. Neurolysis of CPN was done microscopically, and repair of nerve fascicles was done without tension. Post-operative bracing of the knee with intermittent range of motion was started on the 3rd day. The patient was followed up for knee stability and CPN recovery. After 1 year, post-operative knee is stable with grade 3/5 power (MRC grading) at the right ankle, and sensations recovered up to 50% over the right foot. The strengthening exercises for quadricep and hamstring group of muscles were also started in the immediate post-operative period. There was gradual improvement in sensory and motor power during the follow-up.