A 59-year-old woman visited the Department of Ophthalmology, Longhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine on Oct 21, 2021, presenting with 1 month history of repeated episodes of itching and irritation symptoms in both eyes. She said her 3-year-old granddaughter had similar symptoms and was diagnosed with Pthirus pubis infection of the eyelashes and scalp in other hospital a week ago. A slit-lamp examination was performed, which revealed mild conjunctival hyperemia and corneal epithelial defects in both eyes. On closer examination, crab-like lice, nits, and red pinpoint excretions (fecal matter) were seen on her eyelashes and eyelids bilaterally . Corneal fluorescein staining in both eyes was observed, and tear film break-up time (BUT) in each eye was 2 s. Numerous lice were also found attached to the scalp hair. At the same time, we found that her granddaughter's hair was shaved off, and no abnormality was found in her eyelids. Therefore, a clinical diagnosis of corneal epithelial injury associated with Pthiriasis palpebrarum was made. In addition, the patient stated that she lived with her granddaughter for 3 years, and had a history of taking care of her bedridden father for more than 2 years and had no history of sexually transmitted diseases. Then, she was referred to the dermatological department for further evaluation, and the pubic hair was found to be free from infestation.
For treatment, eyelashes with nits and/or lice were removed mechanically with a fine tweezers (see Video, , which demonstrates the removal of eyelashes with nits and/or lice). Then, 0.01% Hypochlorous Acid eye wash (2ml:0.2mg, Suzhou Yurou Medical Instrument Co., Ltd, Suzhou, China) was used to clean the eyelid margin twice daily. Also, she was prescribed a combination of Vitamin A Palmitate eye gel (Shenyang Xingqi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, Shenyang, China) three times a day and Tobradex® eye ointment (tobramycin 0.3%/dexamethasone 0.1%, Alcon) once a day. Meanwhile, the patient was provided with suggestions on how to improve personal hygiene and environmental hygiene, including cutting of the scalp hair and the application of 0.01% permethrin rinse (pediculicide).
One week later, no evidence of lice and/or nits on the eyelashes and scalp hair was found and the patient's symptoms had subsided completely. Meanwhile, corneal epithelial defects and BUT (up to 3 s) in each eye had also improved .