A 28-year-old male presented with a dull ache and photophobia in the right eye following blunt ocular trauma. Three days earlier he had been hit in the right eye with a cricket ball. There were no other ocular complaints or significant past ocular history. The patient was in excellent general health and was not taking any medications.
On examination, his corrected visual acuities were 6/12 and 6/6 in the right and left eye respectively. Intraocular pressures were 19 mm Hg in each eye. Biomicroscopy revealed a moderate traumatic iritis in the right eye. After pupillary dilatation, ocular examination revealed a clear lens with an annular pigment band on the posterior capsule in the right eye. No other signs of blunt trauma were detected on a detailed examination of the anterior and posterior segments. The examination of left eye was within normal limits. There was no evidence of any pigmentation on the posterior capsule in the left eye. The patient was treated with mild steroids (prednisolone acetate 0.5% q.i.d) and cycloplegics (cyclopentolate 1%) for a week.
During follow-up evaluation of the patient after two weeks, visual acuities were 6/6 in both eyes. The traumatic iritis in the right eye had resolved. On a detailed evaluation of the right eye, no sequelae of blunt trauma were found. However, the annular pigment band on the posterior capsule of right eye persisted. A directed examination was performed in both eyes for signs of pigment dispersion syndrome. A re-examination of posterior corneal surface did not reveal Krukenberg's spindle or any other pigment deposition patterns in either eye. In both eyes, the anterior chamber was of normal depth with no noticeable concavity of the peripheral iris. There were no transillumation defects in the iris on careful retroillumination. Gonioscopy revealed open angles without any evidence of hyperpigmentation or angle recession in either eye. The cup to disc ratios were 0.3 in both eyes with a healthy neuroretinal rim. On direct questioning, there was no significant family history of glaucoma or other ocular disorders.