One-month history of hematochezia.
A 75-year-old woman was admitted to the Department of General Surgery in September 2022 due to a 1-mo history of hematochezia with no personal or familial history of any specific disease. There was no loss of appetite or general weakness. No fever was noted at home.
No remarkable history of past illness.
No personal or familial history of any specific disease.
Physical examination revealed tenderness in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. A digital rectal examination could touch half of an annular mass in the anterior wall of the rectum 1-2 cm away from the anal sphincter. The boundary of the mass was clear, the range of motion of the mass was normal, and the intestinal canal was narrow, but a finger could pass through. After the examination, scarlet-colored blood was present on the gloves.
Laboratory investigations revealed a hematocrit value of 30%, hemoglobin of 9.6 g/dl, and albumin of 35 U/ml. Tumor markers including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 125 were within the normal reference range.
No anomalies were detected on chest X-ray, electrocardiogram, or fiberoptic gastroscopic examination. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed intestinal stenosis in the splenic flexure of the colon and obvious bowel wall thickness in the lower portions of the rectum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the rectum depicted a sign of concentric tumor rings within the rectal wall and a tumor penetrating the layer of the intrinsic muscle into the perirectal mesenteric fat, and MRI staging was T3N1M0 .
On colonoscopy, an irregularly shaped neoplasm was found in the right rectal wall that occupied over 1/3 of the rectum circumference approximately 2 cm from the anal margin ; a tumor-like lesion that occupied 1/2 of the colon circumference approximately 32 cm from the anal margin and caused intestinal stenosis in the descending colon and as well as a 2 cm-wide polypoidal neoplasm in the ileocecum were also found. Pathologic specimens were obtained during the colonoscopy procedure, and a preliminary histologic report showed adenocarcinoma in the descending colon and rectum and high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the ileocecum.