A 21-year-old male, was referred to our clinic for further investigations after being found incidentally during routine military recruitment medical check-up to have an abnormal chest X-Ray. The patient, who is a non-smoker, was completely asymptomatic at the time of presentation. He denied any previous history of chest infections or hospitalization. His physical examination was unremarkable, with normal chest examination. His routine laboratory investigations, including calcium and phosphorus levels, were all within normal limits. His chest X-Ray was reviewed , and it showed diffuse bilateral reticulonodular opacities. A high-resolution chest CT scan (HRCT) was ordered , and it showed bilateral intra-lobular interstitial and septal thickening and dense calcification. These radiological findings, in an otherwise asymptomatic patient, made the diagnosis of Pulmonary Alveolar Microlithiasis (PAM) highly suspected. A Technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP) whole body bone scintigraphy was done to prove the diagnosis . It showed a mild diffusely increased radiotracer uptake in both lungs. Spirometry was done for the patient, and it was normal, with a Forced Expiratory Volume in the first second (FEV1) OF 91% of predicted, and Forced Vital Capacity of 88% of predicted. His Diffusion Capacity for Carbon Monoxide (DLCO) was normal (84%). His Oxygen saturation on room air, measured by a pulse oximeter, was 98%. After the diagnosis of PAM was established in our patient, we asked to investigate his family members for the presence of PAM as well. His family consisted of his father, mother and two younger sisters (14 and 10 years old). All family members denied any respiratory symptoms. Their physical examination was unremarkable. All family members had a chest X-Ray done. Both the father and the 14-year-old sister had abnormal chest X-Rays.
The father, who is a 45-year-old taxi driver, has a smoking history of 20 years. His chest X-ray showed bilateral reticulonodular infiltration, which was denser than what was seen in our patient’s chest X-Ray. His HRCT showed bilateral microcalcifications with mild interstitial thickening. Again, a Technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP) whole-body bone scintigraphy was done to prove the diagnosis , and it showed a diffuse increase in radiotracer uptake in both lungs. The father’s spirometry and DLCO were normal, with oxygen saturation of 98% on room air.
The 14-year-old sister had an abnormal chest X-Ray as well . Her chest X-Ray showed bilateral fine reticular infiltration, mainly in the lower lobes. Her HRCT showed microcalcifications in both lung fields. She refused to do whole-body bone scintigraphy. Her spirometry and DLCO were within normal limits, and she had an Oxygen saturation of 99% while breathing room air.
Both the mother and the 10-year-old sister had normal chest X-Rays, and they were not further investigated.