A 7-month-old female presented to the Craniofacial Center of Western New York (John R. Oishei Children’s Hospital, Buffalo, NY) following a genetics consultation that raised concern for LDS with possible craniosynostosis. The parent’s chief complaint was the appearance of the patient’s head shape and orbits, which they felt had been abnormal since birth. The parent’s denied any constitutional symptoms. They denied any apparent visual disturbances, abnormal gaze, signs of headache, head banging, unexplained vomiting, or other symptoms classically associated with increased intracranial pressure. The patient was noted to be tracking above average on her growth curve and was noted to be meeting all developmental milestones. Physical exam revealed a well-appearing, tall infant. She had a pectus excavatum deformity, arachnodactyly, and long narrow feet with long toes. Her craniofacial examination was remarkable for ridging along the metopic and left coronal sutures with bitemporal narrowing and mild trigonocephaly, a flat anterior fontanel, and prominent supraorbital ridges . She was also noted to have a narrow pointed Menton. There was no apparent compensatory anterior translation of the ears or forehead. An initial echocardiogram was normal, but a follow-up study disclosed mitral valve prolapse, mild-to-moderate mitral valve regurgitation, and mildly dilated aortic sinuses and ascending aorta.
Although the patient had presented to the Craniofacial Clinic at 7 months of age, there was concern for the child’s abnormal head shape early in life and on presenting to the child’s physician, a posterior-anterior skull radiograph was taken at 7 weeks of age. The skull radiograph skull radiograph identified metopic suture craniosynostosis . After evaluation at the Craniofacial Clinic at 7 months of life, a CT scan of the head revealed very mild hypotelorism, bitemporal narrowing, and prominent ridging with complete synostosis of the metopic suture . Metopic indices were taken from the CT and found to be within normal range.[,,,] The midfronto-zygomatic diameter was 70.4 mm, the eurioneurion diameter was 115, resulting in a metopic index of 0.61. In addition, the endocranial bifrontal angle was 139 degrees. After a detailed discussion with the multidisciplinary craniofacial team regarding the risks and benefits of surgery, the parents elected to proceed with fronto-orbital advancement and anterior cranial vault expansion and remodeling.
The patient was taken to the operating room at age 9 months for fronto-orbital advancement and anterior cranial vault expansion and remodeling. A standard curved coronal incision extending bilaterally to 2 cm superior of the postauricular area was made. An avascular subgaleal was then dissected up to 1.5 cm superior to the supraorbital rims. Next, an anteriorly based pericranial flap exposing the frontonasal suture and frontozygomatic sutures was dissected in the subperiosteal plane . The temporalis muscles were released bilaterally just to below the squamosal suture. After marking the orbital and cranial osteotomies with prefabricated cutting guides, a bifrontal craniectomy was performed followed by osteotomies of the orbital bandeau. The orbital bandeau was then taken to the back table and osteotomized and shaped to match the preoperative plan using positioning guides. A full-thickness cranial bone graft was also harvested and fixated between the two halves of the bandeau to correct the patient’s hypotelorism. The bandeau was then applied and fixated to the patient. Next, the frontal bones were osteotomized, applied, and fixated in position to match the preoperative plan . Significant abnormalities noted during surgery included the thin and fragile nature of the patient’s dura and weak and friable dermis of the scalp. The galea and dermis were closed with 3-0 Coated polyglactin 910 Braided Absorbable Suture (Vicryl, Ethicon, Inc., Johnson and Johnson Co, Raritan, NJ). During closure, the galea and dermis tolerated only minimal tension before stitches would pull-through. The dermis appeared atrophic to almost nonexistent. Skin was closed with 4-0 Vicryl RAPIDE™ suture (Ethicon, Inc., Johnson and Johnson Co, Raritan, NJ) in a running fashion. Primary closure was achieved . The patient underwent an uneventful immediate postoperative course and was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit for close postoperative monitoring, as is the protocol at our institution. The patient was transferred from ICU to floor on postoperative day 2 and discharged to home on postoperative day 4.
The patient followed up 3 days later (postoperative day 7) displaying adequate head shape and good wound healing. Her scalp incision appeared well approximated with no signs of infection or dehiscence . At 4 week follow-up, the patient was noted to have a small area of dehiscence at the right scalp incision. There was no active infection and wound care was stressed to the patient’s parents in hopes of secondary wound healing. The patient presented 1 month later for follow-up and was noted to have a 2 cm × 2 cm area of ulcerated skin at the lateral aspect of the right scalp flap . Again, this did not appear to be actively infected, but was failing to heal. The patient was taken to the operating room for wound debridement and scalp closure, after which the wound healed well without further complication.
The patient underwent genetic testing which disclosed a variant in a highly conserved region of the FBN1 gene denoted as c.3152T>C(p.phe1051ser). This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance, but this mutation in combination with the patient’s phenotype was considered to be pathogenic and diagnostic of MFS. There were no variants detected in the other six genes analyzed. Results of follow-up parental studies were negative for the FBN1 variant detected in our patient, confirming that the variant was de novo.