A young man of 30 years old was presented to our clinic, claiming blurring of vision in his right eye. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was of light perception. Slit lamp examination revealed corneal decompensation with Descemet membrane folds, swallowing of the anterior chamber and hypotony associated with choroidal detachment, detected in the B-mode ultrasound examination. The IOP could not be measured (IOP < 0 mmHg). There was a filtering bleb on the upper and temporal side of his right eye. Under the conjunctiva we noticed the absence of a scleral flap. Instead, choroidal tissue could be seen . The Seidel test was negative, because of the choroidal tissue incarcerated into the slerectomy. His left eye was without relevant clinical problems. The patient referred to a trabeculectomy performed twenty years ago during his childhood. No other information about the surgical procedure or the eventual intraoperative use of antimetabolites was available.
We decided to correct surgically the filtering bleb and the correlated hypotony, following the guidelines of the declaration of Helsinki and obtaining approve by the Ethics Committee of G.N.A. "G. Geminnatas" University Athens hospital. A 7-0 silk corneal traction suture was used to fixate and infraduct the globe, increasing exposure of the surgical site. A fornix-based conjunctival flap on the superotemporal side of the right eye was performed and the conjunctiva and tenon's capsule were separated from the sclera. Once the sclera was uncovered, we confirmed the absence of the scleral flap and the presence of choroidal tissue incarcerated in the sclerectomy. Human pericardium graft (sterile human tissue allograft, New World Medical, Rancho Cucamonga, California, USA) was used to cover the sclerectomy. Four 10-0 nylon sutures were placed to the graft in its four angles, over the sclerectomy and 8-0 Vicryl sutures were used to suture the conjunctiva above the graft. A new filtering bleb was created, with human pericardium graft, instead of a scleral flap, covering the sclerectomy. No antimetabolites were used intraoperatively.
Fifteen days postoperatively the BCVA was of light perception, the intraocular pressure (IOP) was of 7 mmHg, the cornea had Descemet membrane folds and the anterior chamber was narrow. The bleb filtered properly, the pericardium graft could be seen under the conjunctiva and the Seidel test was negative.
Five months later no complications were recorded. The new bleb was working properly and the Seidel test was negative. The patient had BCVA of light perception because of end state glaucomatous optic disk atrophy, the IOP was of 9 mmHg and less Descemet membrane folds and deeper depth of the anterior chamber could be seen .