A 52-year-old African woman with primary infertility who had been postmenopausal for eight years presented with abdominal heaviness of nine months’ duration recently associated with postprandial vomiting. No change of her general state was noted. There were no signs of compression of the pelvic organs. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a huge abdominal mass and an effusion of average abundance. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a tumor mass, tissue and a cystic component measuring 189×133×291mm displacing the bowel loops up and out, and the bladder and uterus down, associated by abundant ascites and a right pleural effusion of medium abundance. The level of carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA-125) was 133U/ml. Surgical exploration was indicated. A preoperative examination noted NYHA (New York Heart Association) class II dyspnea, and obesity with a body mass index (BMI) of 38.6kg/m2. An examination of her upper airway noted a Mallampati grade II. Auscultation found silence at the base of her right lung. Her abdomen was distended. Her pulse oximetry indicated 97%. Her electrocardiogram was normal. A preoperative chest X-ray showed effusion syndrome of medium amount. Echocardiography showed good cardiac function with an ejection fraction of 68%. There were no electrolytic disorders: potassium at 4.2mmol/l, fasting plasma glucose at 1.05g/l. Her renal function was not impaired, and hemostasis laboratory tests were normal. Her preoperative hemoglobin was 12.2g/dl. Our patient was premedicated with 50mg hydroxizine the day before surgery and 50mg on the morning of the operation. In the operating room, standard monitoring (noninvasive blood pressure, scope, arterial oxygen saturation) was performed. Venous access was secured by two 16G catheters and 2g cefazolin was administered. After 10 minutes of preoxygenation in a twenty-degree reverse-Trendelenburg position, and a vascular filling of 1000ml of crystalloid, the crash induction was administered using 100mg suxamethonium, 500mg thiopental and the Sellick’s maneuver. Oral tracheal intubation was successful at the first attempt by a tube 7mm in diameter and our patient was connected to the anesthesia machine and ventilated with a tidal volume of 480ml, respiratory rate of 14 cycles/minute. Just after connecting our patient to the ventilator, her saturation level decreased to 96%. To treat and prevent a secondary drop in saturation, an alveolar recruitment maneuver was decided upon. This maneuver was performed by the application of continuous positive airway pressure (40cm H2O/40s). After this maneuver, her positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) was maintained at 8cmH20. At the end of this recruitment procedure, her blood pressure decreased to 86/51mmHg, requiring filling with 500ml crystalloid and two boluses of ephedrine (60mg) to achieve a blood pressure of 112/65mmHg. After respiratory and hemodynamic stabilization, maintenance of anesthesia was provided by a mixture of oxygen, nitrous oxide (60%:40%) and 2% of sevoflurane. Airway pressures (Paw) remained at 35cm H2O with a saturation level of 99% under a fraction of inspired oxygen at 60% and PEEP of 8cmH20. Maintenance of the slightly proclive position and opening of the abdomen with the progressive removal of 3200ml ascitic fluid allowed a lower thoracic pressure (Paw=24cm H2O). Her hemodynamic status remained stable with a filling of 1000ml of saline serum (0.9%). Intraoperative bleeding was estimated at 600ml, her hemoglobin at the end of surgery was 10.9g/dl and no operative transfusion was administered. The surgical procedure consisted of resection of the tumor, hysterectomy, and omentectomy . Her bladder and bowel loops were compressed without evidence of invasion. The surgical intervention required 3 hours and 30 minutes. Diuresis at the end of the surgery was to 550ml. The intraoperative analgesia was provided by paracetamol (1g), nefopam (20mg) and morphine (5mg) by slow infusion. This analgesia was relayed postoperatively by paracetamol 1g/6h, nefopam 20mg/8h, and morphine patient-controlled analgesia (PCA). In the recovery room, extubation was made after warming, wakening and stabilizing of her respiratory and hemodynamic parameters. The monitor showed a blood pressure of 145/68mmHg and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 98%. Our patient remained on oxygen for 2 hours under 4L/min of flow. Postoperative chest radiography showed no worsening of the effusion. Her hemoglobin and postoperative blood electrolytes were unremarkable. Prevention of thromboembolic disease was started 6 h after the end of the surgery based on enoxaparine 40mg/24h and compression stockings. The nature of the tumor histology was thecoma with a benign prognosis, confirming Demons-Meigs’ syndrome. Clinical evolution after five months was marked by a complete recovery of our patient and no recurrence of effusion.