A 95-year-old male fell from the 2nd floor and presented with severe low back pain. An X-ray showed a pelvic fracture and ankylosis of the lumbar spine due to DISH (, ). Computed tomography (CT) showed an unstable pelvic injury (AO type C2) with unstable sacral and pubic fractures on the right side, a stable sacral fracture on the left side, and bilateral ankylosis of the sacroiliac joints . This patient also sustained a cerebral subarachnoid haemorrhage accompanied by a moderate consciousness disorder. Because of hypovolemic shock due to active bleeding from the common iliac arteries bilaterally, as detected on contrast-enhanced CT, and an unstable fracture, transcatheter arterial embolization, and external fixation of the pelvis were performed on the day of the injury .
Eight days later, we performed minimally invasive spinopelvic posterior fixation and internal anterior fixation (INFIX) for stabilization of the pelvic fracture. Initially, due to the long lever arm created from the lumbar spine to the pelvis, we performed L2-iliac posterior stabilization while the patient was in a prone position. Once percutaneous pedicle screws (PPS) (6 × 50 mm) were inserted from L2 to L4 through 6 small incisions, and 2 iliac screws (7 × 50 mm cranially, 7.5 × 80 mm caudally) were inserted bilaterally through bilateral 5 cm skin incisions, we connected the screws using 5.5 mm titanium rods into the paravertebral muscles. After that, we performed INFIX to stabilize the anterior pelvis while the patient was positioned supine. A longitudinal 5 cm incision was made centred over the anterior inferior iliac spine. Care was taken to protect the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve, which was retracted laterally. Polyaxial screws (7.5 × 80 mm) were introduced along a path between the anterior inferior iliac spine and the ipsilateral posterior superior iliac spine. Once screws were inserted, 5.5 mm titanium rods were cut and shaped, considering the size and abdominal shape of the patient so as not to compress abdominal organs . The estimated surgical time from posterior and anterior surgeries was 147 min and 49 min, respectively. Blood loss from posterior and anterior surgeries was 268 g and 150 g, respectively. The postoperative clinical course of the patient was uneventful and bony fusion was achieved as seen on X-ray obtained 1 year postoperatively even without any medical treatment for osteoporosis . However, because of consciousness disorder and muscle weakness of the lower limb (Manual Muscle Test 2) due to disuse syndrome, the patient was bedridden without a limitation in range of movement of the bilateral hip joint for up to 2 years postoperatively. We considered implant removal after bony fusion was achieved. However, the patient and his family did not want the surgery under general anaesthesia because he was elderly and there were no serious complications such as lateral femoral cutaneous nerve irritation or improper placement of the rod.