A 3 year-old male, neutered, domestic shorthair cat was presented with a 2 week history of severe regurgitation of all ingested food. The cat had a history of a voracious appetite and regurgitation of solid food since being acquired as a kitten, but was able to consume liquid meals without regurgitating until 2 weeks prior to presentation.
The physical examination revealed a poor body condition score (BCS 2/9) and a 4 cm firm tubular structure in the ventral neck, believed to be within or associated with the esophagus. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. As a result of the cat’s fractious nature, it was necessary to induce general anesthesia for further evaluation. Thoracic radiographs showed severe distention of the entire cervical and intrathoracic esophagus to the level of the heart base with heterogeneous soft tissue opaque material surrounded by a thin gas rim . Differentials for the radiographic findings were constriction due to a vascular ring anomaly (VRA), most commonly a persistent right aortic arch, a mural defect or benign esophageal stricture.
Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) was performed in order to confirm and classify the suspected VRA and to determine if surgical correction would be possible. The esophagus cranial to the heart base was almost entirely filled with heterogeneous soft tissue, gas and mineral opaque material. At the level of the heart base, the esophagus was focally and concentrically narrowed by the trachea and aorta on the right and the main pulmonary artery on the left. The site of constriction was apparent at the anatomic level of the ligamentum arteriosum; however, the ligamentum arteriosum could not be specifically identified on CTA. The aortic arch and proximal descending aorta were located just to the right of midline, with the distal descending aorta positioned immediately ventral to the thoracic spine. A bicarotid trunk and right subclavian artery were present, and branched from the aortic arch in close succession. The left subclavian artery branched aberrantly from the proximal descending aorta. Additionally, the origin of the aberrant left subclavian artery from the aorta was markedly dilated and then abruptly narrowed distally to a normal diameter; this finding is known as Kommerell’s diverticulum. Although the aberrant left subclavian artery created a dorsal indentation in the intrathoracic esophagus, it did not appear to be the primary cause of the constriction. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the CTA confirmed a type III VRA.
Esophagoscopy was performed and multiple compact trichobezoars were removed. The esophagus remained dilated cranial to the level of the constriction and pulsation of the major vessels against the wall of the esophagus was observed at the level of the luminal narrowing (see video in the Supplementary material). Evidence of mild-to-moderate esophagitis, presumably due to stagnation of trichobezoars and putrefaction of food, was observed cranial to the constriction. It was possible to advance the endoscope past the constriction and no gross abnormalities were noted in the stomach.
Following recovery from anesthesia, the cat was able to drink water and eat a canned food slurry without complication or regurgitation. Surgical ligation and transection of the vascular ring anomaly with concurrent endoscopic balloon dilatation of the esophageal stricture was recommended as the treatment of choice. The owner elected not to pursue further treatment at that time. The cat was discharged with instructions to continue feeding a canned food slurry in an upright position.
The owner was contacted prior to submission and reported that the cat was doing well with multiple small feedings of canned food and had not regurgitated since discharge.