Our work is a single case report and has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .
A healthy 8-year-old girl presented with painless slow-growing swelling of the jaw that had persisted for 3 years, associated with dental loss. She was referred to our department's consultation for specialized care. No other personal or family history was raised during the patient interrogation. Clinical examination revealed large tender swelling without sensory disturbances and incompetent lips with a protruding lower lip. In the vertical direction, the lower third part of the face is larger than the other parts.
On intra-oral examination, she had hard swelling of about 50 mm, non-pulsatile, displacement of teeth leading to malocclusion .
The panoramic dental x-ray showed a lesion of the mandible not well defined, tooth displacement, and root resorption The computed tomography (CT) was performed and revealed an iso-dense large destructive cystic mass 34 × 43 mm in an eccentric position of the mandible, pushing the tongue back, absence of peripheral sclerosis, trabeculation, and cortical perforation .
Endocrinology assessment was done to check hyperparathyroidism: calcium, parathyroid hormone, and phosphorus were at a normal level.
A biopsy concluded at a central giant cell tumor (CGCT).
Surgical intervention was performed by the chief professor of our department.
The patient has received under general anesthesia; the intra-oral approach of the cyst was done.
Intra-operatively, a unilocular cystic mass without liquid content was excised.
There was, however, a rupture of the external wall of the mandible cortical without iatrogenic fracture.
The patient received antibiotics and antalgics daily for 8 days.
The pathology of the surgical material concluded at the central giant cell tumor.
Postoperative periods were favorable with the disappearance of swelling and advised to oral rehabilitation .
The patient was followed up in our specialized consultation; any clinical signs that appeared were mentioned on the patient's discharge form.
Routine follow-up 3, 6, and 12 months later showed no signs of recurrence.