A 60-year-old man presented with sudden onset of left neck pain after rotating his head to the right, followed by hoarseness and dysphagia. The patient had no significant history of other diseases. The physical examination determined the poor elevation of the left soft palate and leftward deviation of the tongue on protrusion. Laryngoscopy revealed left-sided vocal cord paralysis. Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography showed dilatation of the left ICA, and diffusion-weighted imaging indicated no cerebral ischemic lesions. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a DA in the left distal cervical ICA extending into the petrous portion . The true lumen was narrow, and high blood flow through the false lumen was observed. The patency of the left ascending pharyngeal artery was confirmed. Three-dimensional DSA revealed entry and re-entry tears in the intimal flap [-]. Computed tomography angiography revealed an elongated left styloid process, which was 35 mm in length and near the DA .
The diagnosis was left cranial nerve IX, X, and XII palsies caused by compression from the DA, which was further caused by the elongated styloid process. Expecting spontaneous recovery of ICA dissection, we initiated conservative treatment. Anticoagulant therapy with heparin was started to prevent artery-to-artery embolism due to a thrombus within the false lumen. One week later, however, we changed the antithrombotic therapy to dual antiplatelet therapy with acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg/d) and clopidogrel (75 mg/d) in preparation for an emergency stent placement for ICA occlusion due to false lumen thrombosis. During the four weeks of conservative treatment, the patient developed aspiration pneumonia due to severe dysphagia and was required to stop oral intake and start tube feeding. Surgical treatment was planned as the patient’s symptoms did not improve, and the DSA exhibited no changes in the aneurysm. We chose flow-diverting stent (FDS) placement, expecting a reduction in the DA size and preservation of ICA blood flow. FDS placement was performed five weeks after onset.
The procedure was performed under general anesthesia and systemic heparinization. After the placement of an 8-Fr sheath introducer in the right common femoral artery, an 8-Fr guiding catheter was delivered proximal to the lesion in the left ICA. Using a coaxial system with a micro-guidewire, an inner-catheter and a 5-Fr catheter (AXS Catalyst 5 115 cm, Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA), was delivered distal to the lesion through the true lumen. In this procedure, the 5-Fr catheter occluded the true lumen, and antegrade blood flow through the false lumen was clearly observed. The lesion length was 37 mm, and the diameters were 4.9 mm in the distal ICA and 5.4 mm in the proximal ICA. We selected Surpass Streamline 5.0 mm × 50 mm (Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) as the FDS and placed it in the true lumen from the petrosal portion to the cervical portion of the ICA to cover the entry and re-entry tears. Two telescoping surpass-streamline FDSs were placed due to stent shortening due to dilatation on the lesion. After FDS deployment, balloon angioplasty was performed over the entire length of the FDS. A post-FDS placement DSA demonstrated blood flow stagnation in the DA and true lumen dilation .
Cranial nerve palsy improved remarkably immediately after FDS placement. The DSA performed 7 d after FDS placement exhibited regression and thrombosis of the DA [ and c]. Six months after FDS placement, DSA revealed almost complete obstruction of the DA and regression of the thrombus in the DA [-], and the symptoms were completely resolved.