A fifteen year old male presented to the Emergency Department (ED) at Cork University Hospital (CUH), a level one trauma centre serving the southeast of Ireland, after being crushed under the front wheel of a tractor on a farm. There was no significant past medical or surgical history.
Initial management followed standard Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocol , and Orthopaedic Association Audit standards for Trauma (BOAST) guidelines for pelvic fracture .
On admission Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 10, the patient was intubated by the Emergency team after deterioration of his concousness level. We applied a chest tube after we had done needle decompression for left side tension pneumothorax. He underwent emergency embolization of the internal iliac artery. He responded well and the haemodynamic stability was achieved. On examination the left leg was noted to be internally rotated. Dorsalis pedis pulses were preserved bilaterally. Plain films demonstrated fractures of the left sacrum and iliac bone, a locked symphysis pubis and fracture of the distal left femur. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the pelvis demonstrated multiple fractures; displaced fracture of the left iliac bone, commuted left sacral ala fracture, minimally displaced right-sided sacral ala fracture with plastic deformation of the posterior crescent fracture configuration which was not fully extended through the iliac wing, and complete rupture of the pubic symphysis with LSP. CT scan of the lumbosacral spine , showed a complete burst fracture of the L3 and L4 vertebral bodies and minimally displaced transverse process fractures of the right L1-L4 vertebrae. The surgical treatment for this young patient was a challenge. The patient was haemodynamically unstable on admission. We arranged a selective coil embolisation of the internal iliac artery by using multiple 6 mm pushable Azur CX coils to stop the bleeding after failure of all measurements of resuscitation.
A multidisciplinary team (MDT) including National Spine Injuries Unit and pelvic trauma specialist were consulted and the patient was transferred to the National Spine Injuries Unit, Mater Misericordae Hospital Dublin for definitive management.
The decision for a closed reduction to unlock the LSP by using the external fixator (Hoffman 2) as a lever arm for reduction was made as the best option for a skeletally immature haemodynamically unstable patient. The Illiosacral Joint (ISJ) was fixated with two illiosacral cannulated screws.
The patient was in the supine position on the orthopaedic table. An external fixator was applied to the pelvis and used as a lever arm for closed reduction of the LSP. This involved applying an anterior and lateral pulling force directly on the pubic bone via the external fixator with a simultaneous external rotation force applied on the left iliac wing . The bilateral SIJ fracture was fixed with two fully threaded cannulated screws using the method described by Routt et al. . The distal femur was fixed with external fixators . The patient's position was then changed to prone for posterior spinal stabilisation L1 to L5 with two rods and ten pedicular screws .
Post-operative management included analgesia, thromboembolic prevention commenced 48 h post operatively with subcutaneous enoxaparin, bed rest for 48 h with 30 degrees inclination. The post-operative period was uneventful. We allowed partial weight bearing for eight weeks. We removed the external fixator after eight weeks from the initial surgery after clinical and radiological confirmation of fractures healing by plain radiograph (, ).
After one year from the initial injury the patient was fully weight bearing with no limping. We assessed his quality of life and mobility by SF-12 an SF-32 outcome scores . His SF-12 was 42 and SF-32 was 97. His updated radiographs are illustrated in .