Our patient is a 71-year-old Asian man with a history of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), type II diabetes, chronic kidney disease (CKD), and Hodgkin’s lymphoma, which was stage IV, diagnosed 6 years prior to presentation, status post six cycles of adriamycin/bleomycin/vinblastine/dacarbazine (ABVD), with sustained complete remission; he presented with progressive fatigue and malaise of 2 months’ duration. He was a former tobacco smoker with a 30 pack year history; however, he had quit smoking 20 years before presentation. He had no history of alcohol or illicit substance use. He was retired from a previous career as a farmer. He had no contributory family history. His vital signs were within normal limits with temperature of 36.3 °C (97.3 °F), blood pressure of 128/78 mmHg, and a heart rate of 70 beats per minute. An examination was most notable for new cervical lymphadenopathy. Other examination findings included finger deformities attributed to his RA and normal neurological examination. A laboratory evaluation was notable for pancytopenia with leukocyte count of 2.6 × 109/L, platelet count of 50 × 109/L, and hemoglobin of 11 mg/dL. His chemistry studies including calcium, creatinine, and liver function test were within normal limits. Positron emission tomography (PET) computed tomography (CT) demonstrated multiple enlarged hypermetabolic lymph nodes throughout his neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis, the largest measuring 2.2 cm × 1.2 cm. This prompted concern for recurrence of Hodgkin’s lymphoma or de novo development of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. A tissue biopsy of an enlarged hypermetabolic left inguinal lymph node was obtained, with pathology notable for sheets of CD138+, MUM1+, MYD88-, and lambda restricted plasma cells, consistent with a plasma cell neoplasm. A bone marrow biopsy performed shortly afterward demonstrated largely unremarkable trilineage hematopoiesis without increased plasma cells, and with no monoclonal plasma cells detected. Our patient demonstrated normal renal function and electrolytes. Serum albumin, serum protein, and serum protein gap were within normal limits. His plasma and urine were negative for monoclonal protein, with normal findings on serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP), urine protein electrophoresis (UPEP), serum immunofixation, serum free light chain assay, and urine free light chain assay. Based on the above data, a diagnosis of multiple diffuse extramedullary plasmacytomas of the lymph nodes was established. On diagnosis our patient was on metformin 1000 mg daily, Januvia (sitagliptin) 100 mg daily, glipizide 5 mg daily, Nexium (esomeprazole) 40 mg daily, Vesicare (solifenacin) 5 mg daily, folic acid 1 mg daily, nebivolol 10 mg daily, and tamsulosin 0.4 mg daily.
Treatment was promptly initiated with subcutaneously administered bortezomib 1.5 mg/m2 and orally administered dexamethasone 40 mg weekly for 3 weeks on and 1 week off. Our patient’s platelet count improved considerably following initiation of treatment, allowing for the addition of thalidomide. He received four cycles of bortezomib/dexamethasone followed by two continuous 28-day cycles of thalidomide 100 mg orally administered with prednisone. Thalidomide was chosen rather than lenalidomide due to our patient’s CKD and some persistent thrombocytopenia. His initial presenting symptoms improved throughout the course of therapy. An interval PET-CT was then done to assess response, and demonstrated near complete resolution of prior hypermetabolic lymphadenopathy with no new areas of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) avidity noted. He now remains in remission over 18 months following completion of therapy.