We have a 30-year-old female patient who came with pain and swelling over the right knee for 1 year. The swelling was non-traumatic, insidious in onset, and gradually progressive. It was associated with dull aching pain, diffuse in nature, gradually progressive in intensity, increased on activity, and relieved on rest and medication. The patient had no constitutional symptoms of fever, weight loss, and evening rise of temperature, cough, breathlessness, chest pain, or any h/o contact with a confirmed case of TB. The patient had presented to us 6 months after her complaints. On examination, there was diffuse swelling over the right knee with fullness in the supra-patellar area, along with local rise of temperature and diffuse tenderness over the knee. Chest radiograph was normal. On preliminary imaging with X-ray of the right knee– a mild periarticular osteopenia along with supra-patellar joint effusion was noted with no other bony abnormality . Subsequently, MRI was advised for further evaluation which showed inflammatory/infectious arthritis and synovitis (-) which needed further evaluation with a histopathological examination of the tissue. After performing a USG-guided synovial biopsy, in which a granulomatous inflammation of probable mycobacterial etiology was found following which she was started on First Line Category-1 Anti-tubercular drugs (AKT).
The patient presented to us 1 month after starting AKT with complaints of severe pain and swelling aggravated over the past month affecting and unable to do her activities of daily living such as walking, squatting, sitting cross legged (those activities requiring flexion of the knee). Clinical examination at this time suggested that synovial hypertrophy was significant. Patient was in severe pain and spasm. Not allowing to flex beyond 30° for further clinical evaluation. Rest pain and night cries were present. An open arthrotomy was planned for the patient to reduce the aggressive disease load and rule out drug resistant TB or any missed diagnosis by histopathological diagnosis from all deeper corners of the knee.