A 33-year-old Nepalese man presented to our department of neurology in a university hospital for evaluation of an acute-onset flaccid paraplegia in the background of a 10-day history of headache and puffiness of the face.
Ten days prior to his presentation to our hospital, he had sudden onset, unilateral right-sided headache that later became generalized. He developed facial puffiness concomitant with headache that gradually progressed to involve his lower limbs. This was associated with shortness of breath on exertion, but without cough, fever, and decreased urinary output. For these complaints, he was initially evaluated at a local medical center. During his stay at the center, on his eighth day of admission, he developed stiffness of the neck for which he underwent lumbar puncture. The lumbar puncture yielded a bloody tap. He was then referred to our center for further evaluation.
During his transfer from the local medical center to our hospital, he developed a sudden onset weakness of both lower limbs with loss of sensation. He presented with all of these symptoms at our center 10 days after the onset of headache. The loss of sensation gradually spread up to the level of his xiphisternum. He also developed severe back pain in his mid-thoracic region. He gave no history of weakness or any sensory disturbances involving his upper limbs. However, there was a history of both bowel and urinary incontinence. There was no history of loss of consciousness, altered sensorium, or seizures. He did not have any ocular symptoms at presentation. There was no evidence of a recent respiratory or gastrointestinal tract infection prior to the development of lower limb weakness. He had no history of alcohol intake or tobacco smoking. There was also no history of chronic medical illness.
His higher mental functions and cranial nerves examination were normal. Visual acuity and fundal examination were also normal. Muscle strength was intact in his upper limbs. Muscle tone was decreased in both lower limbs. Power across all major muscle groups in his lower limbs was 0/5. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in his lower extremities. Bilateral plantar responses were mute. A sensory examination revealed a sensory level at approximately T4/T5.
Blood investigations showed: hemoglobin 12.1 gm/dl, packed cell volume 36%, white blood cells 17190/mm3 (neutrophil 82%, lymphocytes 16%, eosinophils 1%), and platelets 213,000/mm3. His renal function test was deranged: urea 21 mmol/l and creatinine 185 μmol/l. Urine routine evaluation showed: white blood cells 1 to 2 cells per high power field, red blood cells 8 to 10 cells per high power field, and albumin 3+ without any casts. Tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) were negative. Serology was positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and hepatitis B e antibodies (anti-HBe) while hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B core IgM antibodies (anti-HBc IgM) were negative. His hepatitis B viral load was less than 2000 IU/ml. Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test and rapid plasma reagin test were negative. Serology was negative for cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), and herpes simplex virus (HSV). His 24-hour urinary total protein was 3.9 grams per day, suggestive of nephrotic range proteinuria.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed pleocytosis with elevated protein and normal glucose: total count 1300 with 70% polymorphs and 30% monomorphs, protein 380 mg/dl, and sugar 5.3 mmol/l. The red blood cells count in CSF was 12,500/mm3 and the opening pressure was 26 cm of water. Microscopy with gram stain and acid-fast bacilli stain followed by culture did not reveal any organism. CSF VDRL was also negative.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of his head revealed linear hyperdense areas in his ambient and suprasellar cisterns which was suggestive of SAH . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his dorsal spine showed diffuse T2 high signal intensity within his spinal cord extending from second to 12th thoracic vertebral level which was suggestive of transverse myelitis . A CT cerebral and spinal angiogram did not reveal any abnormalities. However, an MRI of his brain was not done.
Serological evaluations for antinuclear antibodies and anti-double stranded-deoxyribonucleic acid antibodies were negative and his serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) level was normal. Immunofluorescent assay showed perinuclear-ANCA (p-ANCA) within range but cytoplasmic-ANCA (c-ANCA) was positive with end-point titer over 1:20. In the light of positive serological tests for HBV and c-ANCA that pointed toward the vasculitic origin of myelitis, a further test for neuromyelitis optica (NMO) was not carried out.
The final impression was that of a SAH with acute transverse myelitis and with nephrotic syndrome in a patient who is a chronic carrier of hepatitis B. He was started on entecavir administered orally for hepatitis B infection. He was treated for myelitis with methylprednisolone administered intravenously (1 gram per day) for 3 days followed by a short course of prednisolone administered orally. During the course of his stay at our hospital, his sensory symptoms improved but his motor symptoms did not improve. Moreover, it was not economically feasible for him to remain in our hospital any longer and, hence, he was discharged after 1 month of hospital stay. He and his family members were counselled about rehabilitative care to prevent secondary complications of prolonged immobility. He came for regular follow-up in our neurology clinic for the next 3 months during which his condition remained the same with no improvement in motor function. After 3 months, he was lost to follow-up.