A 30-year-old male patient referred to the emergency department with acute right upper extremity paresthesia that gradually worsened.
He was cautious and the vital signs were in the normal range (blood pressure: 120/80 mmHg, heart rate: 80 per minute, respiratory rate: 16 per minute and axillary temperature: 37.2 C). There was no history of any comorbidities and traumatic events. Physical examination revealed both radial and ulnar artery pulses were weaker on the right side. He was admitted with primary diagnosis of cerebrovascular events. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan was done and there was not any evidence of cerebrovascular pathologies. Cardiac monitoring showed normal sinus rhythm. After 4 hours, the right hand became numb and significantly colder than the left one. Also, the radial, ulnar and brachial pulses were not detected. CT angiography was requested which showed right brachial artery occlusion without any distal blood flow runoff .
Vascular surgery consultation was requested for acute right upper extremity ischemia and heparin (1000 unit per hour) was started. Interestingly, the vascular surgeon’s physical exam indicated that right upper extremity was not ischemic and radial and ulnar pulses were three plus. The numbness and paralysis of the forearm were resolved gradually. Chest and neck x-rays were taken and the cervical rib did not appear. CT angiography images were reviewed by the vascular surgeon again and another congenital anomaly was found out. He had a non-aneurysmal, not occluded ARSA; Group 1 “Kiefer et al” classification .
Anticoagulant treatment was continued for the patient and transesophageal echocardiography was done to check the cardiac thrombus or existence of PFO as a source of the probable embolic event. A 4 mm in diameter and 10 mm in length PFO (which bubbles were passed from) was reported. Doppler ultrasound of both lower limbs was performed on suspicion of paradoxical embolism but there was no evidence of deep vein thrombosis. After 48h, the patient had ischemia presentations (coldness and paresthesia) in the right upper extremity again while receiving heparin which was continued for 2 hours and was relieved gradually. After the second ischemic attack, the patient was a candidate for ARSA open surgical revascularization through right supraclavicular approach. A right carotid subclavian artery transposition with oversewing the origin of the aberrant subclavian was done .
He was discharged after 3 days and aspirin (80 mg) was continued for him daily as cardiologist prescription. The patient did not experience any ischemic attack in his right upper extremity for one year of follow up.
This case was approved by the Ethics Committee of Babol University of Medical Sciences with code number: IR.MUBABOL.HRI.REC.1399.118.