A 50-year-old male patient visited our outpatient clinic due to increasing cervical pain as well as numbness radiating down his left arm and fingers. His symptoms had lasted for just over a month with medications failing to alleviate the pain. He also described two similar episodes a few years back. He was a heavy smoker (one pack of cigarettes per day).
Physical examination revealed slight (4/5) weakness of his left dorsal interosseous muscle, as well as paresthesia on a C8 distribution. In addition, a palpable right neck lump was noticed.
Our preoperative workup included an MRI of the cervical spine, cervical X-rays, electromyography (EMG) and blood tests. The MRI scan revealed spondylosis of the middle and lower cervical spine. A nodule of the right thyroid lobe was noted . The C7/T1 level was shown to be the most severely affected with a prolapsed intervertebral disk exerting pressure mainly over the left C8 root . Instability was excluded in flexion and extension X-rays.
The EMG results were pathological on the left-hand side for the first dorsal interosseous muscle and extensor digitorum communis muscle as well as - to a lesser degree - for the triceps muscle. Blood tests, including thyroid function tests, were noted as unremarkable.
Taking into account the findings of our preoperative workup, and after consulting the general surgeons, one level ACDF combined with a right hemithyroidectomy was offered to the patient in order to excise the thyroid nodule and also to facilitate the approach to the C7-T1 level. Informed consent was obtained after a thorough discussion on the benefits as well as possible complications of the planned two steps approach.
A transverse C-arm guided skin incision was made over the C7-T1 level. The incision started from the midline and extended laterally for a total of approximately 6 cm. Of note, such an incision is slightly larger than usual in order to accommodate the hemithyroidectomy. Dissection and excision of the right thyroid lobe (4.7x6x2cm), as well as the thyroid isthmus (1x3x0.7 cm) was uneventful . The right RLN was recognized and preserved. Hemithyroidectomy provided a wide surgical corridor for the discectomy to follow without the need for excessive traction over the surrounding structures. After radiological reconfirmation of the correct level, the longus colli muscles were elevated from their medial attachment on the anterior longitudinal ligament, which was then incised and a rectangular 1 cm opening was created. Microdiscectomy was performed in a standard fashion and, at the end of it, the underlying dura matter was identified intact. An appropriately sized standalone polyetheretherketone (PEEK) interbody cage was tapped in place and a final X-ray confirmed its optimal positioning . The whole procedure was uneventful, the patient recovered well and shortly after he was transferred back to the neurosurgical ward.
The postoperative course was uncomplicated and the patient reported immediate and significant improvement of his symptoms, without dysphagia or any other symptom related with the anterior neck exposure. He was discharged on post-op day 2 with instructions for an endocrinology consultation in a month time. Histopathological findings on the excised thyroid tissue included hyperplastic changes, one colloid nodule with a mean diameter of 2.3 cm and two solid nests, without any signs of malignant transformation. The patient’s symptoms continued to improve over a period of a few months and today occasionally he is experiencing paresthesia.