An 11-year-old girl was referred to our hospital in August 2010 with a lesion in the right cheek area which was progressively enlarging. The patient complained that her nose and mouth corner were crooked and that her face was swelling. In clinical examination, the patient had a slight asymmetry in the right midface as a result of buccal and palatal cortical expansion from the right maxillary canine to the molar region, resulting in depression of the nasal alar and mouth corner .
A panoramic radiograph showed an increased bone density on the right maxilla and zygoma and obliteration of the right maxillary sinus. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 4.5 × 4 × 4.5 cm, expansile ground-glass opacity lesion involving the right maxillary sinus, right maxillary alveolar process, zygoma, and hard palate. Bone scan revealed an irregularly shaped hot uptake in the right maxilla, and no abnormally increased uptake was observed at any other sites . The physical examination did not show any other lesions, and the patient had no history of pain, trauma, loosening of teeth, or trismus. Based on the typical radiologic findings, the patient was diagnosed with FD, and no additional biopsy was performed. The patient had regular follow-up every 6 months to monitor the lesion’s progress. At the 1-year follow-up, the development of tooth germ within the lesion was normal, and slight expansion of the lesion to the bucco-lingual side was observed. Because we thought the patient was still growing and increasing in height, we decided to conduct an ongoing progress observation.
About 3 years later in December 2012, there were no significant changes of the FD lesion, but the distance from the mouth corner to the inner canthus was about 2 cm longer on the right side than on the left. Periodic observation was continued, and in August 2017, corrective surgery was planned because the maturation of the lesion was confirmed to be complete and there were no changes in the size of the lesion. At that time, the distance from the mouth corner to the inner canthus was 2.5 cm longer on the right side than on the left, and the distance from the occlusal plane to the outer canthus was 5 cm longer on the right side than on the left. Bone contouring surgery, the primary treatment for facial asymmetry and fibrotic bone lesions, was planned .
The patient wanted to improve asymmetrical facial appearance through the surgery. Therefore, we aimed not only to remove the FD lesion, but also to make the patient’s facial as symmetrical as possible. For this, direct visualization and surgical approach to the infraorbital rim and lateral area of zygoma were required, but the surgical approach through buccogingival incision had limited access to these areas. On the other hand, the midfacial degloving approach was expected to help reestablishing symmetric facial contour by allowing direct comparison of the lesion with the normal side. Moreover, this approach provides esthetically acceptable outcomes, leaving no scars and no functional disability. Therefore, we decided to perform the operation through the midfacial degloving approach.
With the patient under orotracheal anesthesia, the lesion was removed by the midfacial degloving surgical procedure. Local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine with epinephrine (1:100,000) was infiltrated into the maxillary vestibular mucosa and into the nose. The procedure is performed with a maxillary vestibular incision and three intranasal incisions to expose the entire midface skeleton that include (1) bilateral intercartilaginous, (2) complete transfixion, and (3) bilateral piriform aperture incisions .
A buccogingival incision was made in the maxillary vestibule approximately 5 mm superior to the mucogingival junction and extended from the second molar to the contralateral second molar. Periosteal elevators were used to elevate the tissues in the subperiosteal plane fist over the anterior maxilla and then extending widely to encompass posterior tissues behind the zygomaticomaxillary buttress. The infraorbital neurovascular bundle was identified superiorly and dissected. Subperiosteal dissection along the piriform aperture stripped the attachments of the nasal labial muscularture to allow its complete release from the midface skeleton. The mucoperiosteal flap was elevated up to the piriform aperture.
The intercartilaginous incision divided the junction between the upper and lower lateral cartilages . An incision was made along the inferior border of the upper lateral cartilage, beginning at the lateral end and extending medially curved into the membranous septum anterior to meet transfixion incision . Laterally, the incision was sufficient that it extended to the piriform aperture. The lower lateral cartilage was eventually displaced superiorly during the degloving procedure, whereas the upper lateral cartilage remained attached to the midface skeleton. The transfixion incision was used to separate the membrane septum/columella from the cartilaginous septum. An incision was made along the caudal border of the septal cartilage from the medial end of the intercartilaginous incision toward the anterior spine . The intranasal incision was made by a full-thickness incision down through the periosteum of the piriform margin and the nasal floor.
Dissection through the intercarilaginous incision allowed access to the nasal dorsum and bones . Sharp subperichondrial dissection with a scalpel or a blunt dissection with scissors freed the soft tissues above the upper lateral cartilage as in a standard open rhinoplasty. The dissection should be within the subperichondrium plane to prevent injury to the overlying musculature and blood vessels of the nose. Elevation extended laterally to the nasomaxillary sutures and superiorly to the glabella. Retraction of the freed soft tissues allowed sharp incision to be made with a scalpel or with sharp periosteal elevators through the periosteum at the inferior edge of the nasal bones. Elevation of the soft tissue laterally to the piriform aperture was also performed so that the maxillary vestibular dissection was easily connected to this pocket.
After the connection of the nasal and oral incisions, the midface was degloved. The midface skin was separated from the maxilla and the nasal pyramid. The upper lip and the intact nasal columella, nasal tip, and alar cartilages were then retracted by two Penrose drains introduced through the nostrils over the nose to the level of the inferior orbital rim. This approach provided visualization of the medial maxillary wall, pterygoid junction, nasofrontal suture, infraorbital rim, and laterally to the temporal process of the zygoma . Under direct visualization, the overgrowing bone lesion was then excised using osteotomes and saws. The right maxilla was drilled further at the orbital rim and laterally till zygomatic complex. The contour of the midface was reestablished using burr to give a cosmetically normal looking midfacial skeletal contour while protecting the infraorbital nerve . For the removed lesion, a biopsy was performed for the accurate diagnosis and histologically confirmed as FD. The soft tissues were then carefully redraped and the nasal tip brought back into position. The intranasal incisions were closed using 4-0 resorbable sutures (vicryl), and the transfixion sutures were precisely performed to determine the final position of the nasal tip and prevent vestibular stenosis. The cinch suture of alar base was used to prevent postoperative alar base widening. The intraoral incisions were closed using a 3-0 black silk. Nasal packing into the maxillary dead space with Vaseline gauze was done for 3 days in order to minimize the postoperative bleedings.
The patient’s postoperative course was generally uneventful. There was moderate nasal crusting for 3–4 days. Mild swelling with periorbital ecchymosis disappeared after 2 weeks, and transient paresthesia around the infraorbital nerve spontaneously resolved after 3 month. No postoperative complications such as epistaxis, vestibular stenosis, or esthetic problems of the nose were seen. Clinical and radiographic examinations obtained 4 months after surgery showed the anatomical structures were in a stable state without recurrence of FD . The esthetic result was satisfactory for the patient, and occlusal state was also well maintained . Therefore, no additional orthodontic treatment or orthognathic surgery was performed.