A 29-year-old female (Chagga by tribe) 24 weeks pregnant was referred from the regional hospital to our center (a referral hospital) with a 1-week history of abdominal pain and constipation. The pain started gradually and was generalized and cramping in nature. It was associated with vomiting containing food material. She denied history of fever. She reported a decrease in fetal movements and denied any history of abdominal trauma or vaginal discharge. Her past medical history was insignificant. This was her second pregnancy; the first was delivered by cesarean section because of preeclampsia, and the child is growing well. For her index pregnancy, she was on iron and folate supplements.
Upon examination, she was ill looking, conscious, alert, mildly pale, and dehydrated, with a temperature of 38 ℃ and a nasogastric tube (NGT) in situ draining fecal content. Her blood pressure (BP) was 112/81 mmHg, pulse 136 beats per minute, and saturation 96% on room air. Her abdomen was symmetrically distended and moving with respiration, had a Pfannenstiel incision scar, and was tense and tender on palpation with a symphysiofundal height correlating to 23 weeks. Muscle guarding could not be elicited because of the tense abdomen, and hypertympanic note on percussion and no bowel sounds were heard on auscultation. There was nothing abnormal detected on rectal and vaginal examination. Other systems were unremarkable.
Her complete blood count on admission showed a normal leukocyte count of 9.17 × 109/L, anemia of 9.4 g/dl, and platelet count of 441 × 109/L. She had mild hypokalemia of 2.52 mmol/L, which was corrected by intravenous potassium chloride. Initial abdominal ultrasonography revealed gaseous abdomen with a viable intrauterine pregnancy of 24 weeks. Abdominal X-ray was done that was suggestive of intestinal obstruction with a differential of perforated hollow viscus . She was kept nil orally and on intravenous fluids for resuscitation.
She was consented for an emergency laparotomy whereby the abdomen was opened through a midline incision. A gravid uterus, approximately 500 ml of amber-colored ascites, and a 360° anticlockwise sigmoid volvulus around its mesentery, which was gangrenous and distended, were found . The bowels proximal to the volvulus were distended. Thus, derotation of the volvulus and resection of sigmoid colon were done followed by a Hartman’s colostomy. Hemostasis was achieved, abdominal lavage was done, and the abdomen was closed in layers. She received 450 milliliters of whole blood intraoperatively. She was then nursed at the intensive care unit, where on day one she expelled a male fetus weighing 800 g with no signs of life.
During her stay in ICU, she was kept on intravenous antibiotics, and was transfused with one more unit of blood. Her control hemoglobin was 11.5 g/dl. On day 7 postoperatively, she continued to do well clinically with a functioning colostomy and was thus discharged home with instructions on colostomy care and to continue follow-up as an outpatient. Six weeks post discharge, she was reviewed at the outpatient clinic, where she was clinically stable with functioning colostomy and unremarkable histology for the sigmoid colon; she was scheduled for an elective colostomy closure after a normal distal loopogram (barium enema). She was also reviewed by the obstetrics and gynecology team and started her on oral combined contraceptive pills to regulate her menstrual cycle. Six weeks post-colostomy closure, she was clinically stable with no abdominal complaints and, hence, discharged.