A previously well 51 year old white Caucasian woman presented with sudden onset right upper quadrant abdominal pain. She took no regular medication and had no medical, surgical or family history of note. Unenhanced computerised tomography (CT) imaging, used due to a pre-existing iodine allergy, identified a 4 cm mass in the head of the pancreas associated with marked pancreatic and mild bile duct dilatation . Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the liver with gadolinium contrast demonstrated a 4.4 × 3.9 cm mass arising from the inferior head and uncinate process of the pancreas, abutting the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) but with no evidence of liver, peritoneal or mesenteric involvement . Positron emission tomography-CT identified metabolically active disease limited to the head of the pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration demonstrated poorly differentiated malignancy, with evidence of epithelial and neuroendocrine differentiation with weak chromogranin and focal cytokeratin staining.
At this point the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) of the patient was 0. A pancreaticoduodenectomy with SMV resection was performed. Histology confirmed a biphasic carcinoma with adenosquamous and undifferentiated components ; the undifferentiated component was positive for CD56 but negative for other neuroendocrine markers (synpatophysin and chromogranin) and exhibited focal pancytokeratin staining. There was evidence of perineural and lymphovascular space invasion, and 3 out of 25 lymph nodes contained metastatic adenosquamous carcinoma. Resection margins were clear of disease. Staging was confirmed as pT3 pN1 M0 R0 (American Joint Committee on Cancer Stage IIB).
Post-operatively, adjuvant gemcitabine (1000 mg m− 2 on days 1, 8 and 15 of a 28-day cycle) chemotherapy was administered as part of the European Study Group for Pancreatic Cancer (ESPAC) 4 Trial (UKCRN ID 4307; ISRCTN96397434). However, after the second cycle of gemcitabine, the patient reported further right upper quadrant pain. ECOG PS dropped to 1 and unenhanced CT confirmed multiple hypodense liver lesions of new onset in keeping with liver metastases . Gemcitabine was stopped and palliative capecitabine started (1250 mg m− 2 with an 18% dose reduction at patient request to reduce tablet burden). Persistent anaemia, thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy were managed with frequent transfusions of packed red blood cells (PRBC) and oral tranexamic acid.
After 19 weeks of capecitabine therapy ECOG PS returned to 0, and the patient returned to work full time. Haematological indices improved. No further PRBC transfusions were required after 24 weeks and tranexamic acid was stopped. Palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia, 14.6 months into capecitabine therapy, prompted a switch to a 2 week on, 2 week off treatment schedule which was well tolerated. Restaging CTs after 13.8 and 32.3 months of capecitabine therapy confirmed stable, measurable disease, but with marked calcification of liver metastases, indicative of disease response . After 34.6 months (41 cycles) of capecitabine monotherapy, the patient reported recurrent right upper quadrant pain. A CT confirmed progressive disease with an increased soft tissue component surrounding the pre-existing calcification within segment 8, in keeping with progressive disease.
Capecitabine was discontinued and FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy (5-FU 400 mg m− 2 bolus followed by 2400 mg m− 2 infusion over 46 h; irinotecan 180 mg m− 2; oxaliplatin 85 mg m− 2) started, with granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (GCSF) support. Due to peripheral neurotoxicity, the oxaliplatin dose was reduced by 20% for cycle 7 and discontinued from cycle 8. The patient completed 12 cycles of the reduced intensity chemotherapy. An end of treatment CT demonstrated stable partially calcified liver metastases, and this was followed by a treatment break. Surveillance CT 13.3 months after initiating FOLFIRINOX and 4 years 5.3 months after initial presentation, confirmed stable disease .
To better understand the treatment responses observed and to explore future treatment options, tumor targeted DNA sequencing, tumour CDA expression, and whole blood CDA activity were analyzed. Genetic analysis identified a G12D mutation in KRAS, a truncating mutation in TP53, but no BRCA1/ BRCA2 mutations or currently putative “druggable” mutations . Strong expression of CDA was detected within the glandular and, to a lesser extent, the undifferentiated components of the tumor by immunohistochemistry . Whole blood CDA activity via spectrophotometry was found to be 6.72 UA/mg protein, below the median CDA activity level observed in this patient population ( and unpublished data).