A 70-year-old male with a long-standing smoking history but without known cardiac disease presented to the emergency department with the chief complaint of chest pain that had been ongoing for 45 min and radiating to the left arm. On exam he was noted to be in significant distress due to pain. The patient’s blood pressure was 133/103 mmHg and his heart rate was 39 beats per minute. His facial features were not overtly dysmorphic, uvula was normal in appearance, and scoliosis was noted. There were no murmurs, rubs, or gallops, and pulses were of normal amplitude.
His past medical history was significant for a recent diagnosis of LDS, renal cell carcinoma, poorly controlled non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney disease, well-controlled hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, oncocytic salivary tumour, infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm, significant tobacco abuse, and an asymptomatic-acquired posterior diaphragmatic hernia.
Family history was notable for heritable thoracic aortic aneurysm disease (h-TAAD) with Type A dissection in his mother, prophylactic ascending aortic replacement in one sister, sudden death at age 40 in another sister, and late onset abdominal aortic aneurysm disease in his father. The living sister had presented to orthopaedics at age 22 years for scoliosis and a clinical diagnosis of ‘Marfan syndrome’ was made at that time. Subsequently, echocardiograms were performed on first degree family members and based on aortic dilation and some physical features, a diagnosis of ‘Marfan syndrome’ was made in mother, sister, and the patient. Relatives were followed regularly by general cardiology with aortic diametres <5 cm. One year prior to the patient’s presentation, the sister was referred to the Marfan and Related Aortopathies clinic at which time genetic testing was performed that revealed a pathogenic mutation in the TGFBRI gene (TGFBRI c.934G > A p.Gly312Ser) consistent with the diagnosis of LDS. The patient then underwent a targeted sequencing study and was found to have this same mutation.
On the ECG, the patient was found to have ST segment elevation in the inferior leads with complete atrioventricular block . Computed tomography-angiography was done to rule out aortic dissection given the history. This was negative for aortic dissection but did reveal a stable 3.9 cm infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm and 2.7 cm bilateral iliac artery aneurysms, all with non-obstructive thrombus present . The aortic root was dilated at 4.2 cm. After confirmation of absence of aortic dissection, the patient was loaded with aspirin and ticagrelor and taken emergently for invasive coronary angiography. He was found to have aneurysmal dilation of the entire RCA measuring up to 6 mm in the mid-RCA. The distal RCA had 100% occlusion secondary to thrombus. The left anterior descending artery (LAD) had 70% stenosis at the proximal segment, 80% at the mid segment, and 70% stenosis distally. The OM 1 branch of the left circumflex artery had 90% stenosis and OM2 branch had 80% stenosis . Intravascular ultrasound was performed on the RCA, which revealed no evidence of atherosclerotic plaque or plaque rupture in the aneurysmal vessel . Spontaneous echo contrast suggestive of thrombus was present.
The patient underwent balloon angioplasty of the 100% occluded RCA with a 3.0 × 5 mm semicompliant angioplasty balloon, resulting in thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 2 flow . The severe aneurysmal nature of the RCA proved prohibitive for coronary stenting. Due to complete atrioventricular block at presentation with an inferior STEMI a temporary transvenous pacemaker was placed. The patient was stabilized with these measures. Given the presence of multivessel coronary artery disease, he was referred for CABG. To allow for antiplatelet therapy washout, surgery was performed 5 days later. Given his underlying connective tissue disorder with family history of dissection, concomitant aortic root replacement was recommended. Although the left internal mammary artery did not appear affected, saphenous vein grafts were used to bypass to the LAD, the first OM, and the posterior descending artery given the patient’s underlying arteriopathy, the potential for subsequent involvement of the muscular arteries, and the age of the patient. The RCA was ligated proximally and distally to the aneurysm. Intraoperative findings of RCA dissection and thrombosis were noted. The aortic root and valve were replaced with 25 mm Konect biologic aortic valve.
The patient’s post-operative course was complicated by right ventricular failure, post-operative haemorrhage, and refractory ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation. Right ventricular failure was likely a result of ischaemia, although no repeat coronary angiography was performed to assess patency of the grafts. This required right ventricular assist device placement and veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. He subsequently developed multiorgan dysfunction, sepsis, and intraparenchymal frontoparietal haemorrhage. He was transitioned to comfort care measures at the request of the family and died 3 weeks post-operatively.