The patient was a 57-year-old female who underwent physical examination seven days ago at the Department of Radiology, Beilun People's Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang Province. The ultrasonographic findings were as follows: Inhomogeneous hypoechoic mass with calcification in the spleen, hemangioma requiring excision, and further examination was recommended . The patient was hospitalized for further treatment. The patient was healthy in the past, and the spleen was not palpable under the ribs on physical examination. The patient's biochemical indexes and liver and kidney function electrolyte indexes were within the normal range. Routine blood, urine, and fecal tests were also within normal ranges. Blood tumor markers CEA, CA-199, CA-125, and AFP were all normal, and coagulation function, electrocardiogram and chest x-ray were normal.
Plain and contrast-enhanced CT scans of the spleen showed local enlargement of the spleen, with a type of circular isodensity and punctate calcifications . The lesions in the arterial and venous phases showed progressive enhancement, with a CT value of about 40 HU on the plain scan, and a CT value of about 84 HU in the enhanced part of the venous phase. Conventional and contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the spleen showed localized enlargement of the spleen with abnormal intracellular signal and well-defined lesions . T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) scans showed that most of the lesions were slightly low-intensity shadows, with strip-shaped high-low mixed signal shadows, while T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) showed that most of the lesions were iso-intensity shadows, with slightly high signal shadows in local areas. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed hypointense shadows with stripes of lower signal shadows inside. The lesions showed obvious enhancement in arterial and venous phases, with strip-like unenhanced areas inside and internal strip-like enhancement in the delayed scan and the remaining areas showed isointensity shadows.
Splenectomy was performed after the examination. The spleen was completely removed by surgery after the diagnosis of the splenic tumor by rapid pathology. A splenectomy specimen was obtained. A gray tumor with a diameter of about 5 cm was observed in the spleen section. HE-stained tumor cells were fascicular, swirled, oval cells, with no mitoses, with scattered lymphocyte infiltration. Immunohistochemistry showed CD21 (+), CD23 (+), CD35 (+), BCL-2 (−), Bcl-6 (−), CD10 (−), CD138 (−), CD15 (−), CD20 (−), CD3 (−), CD30 (−), CD43 (−), CD45RO (−), CD5 (−), CD79α (−), Cyclin D1 (−), Ki67 (∼20% +), Kappa (−), Lambda (−), MUM-1(−), PAX-5 (−), CKpan (−), CD31 (−), CD34 (−), β-Catenin (−), CD68 (partial +), Desmin (−), S-100 (−) and ALK(1A4) (−). In situ hybridization showed EBER positive . The final pathological diagnosis was inflammatory pseudotumoral splenic follicular dendritic cell sarcoma. The patient recovered well after surgery. No tumor recurrence was found during the 1-year follow-up.