A 67-year-old Greek man was referred to our department because of leucopenia, marked anemia and splenomegaly. Progressively worsening anemia-related symptoms had started 8 weeks prior to admission. The patient also reported night sweats, but neither fever nor weight loss. Physical examination revealed pallor and moderate splenomegaly (5 cm below the left costal margin). The liver and lymph nodes were not palpable. The rest of the physical examination was normal.
Blood tests showed profound anemia and moderate neutropenia (Hct: 19.5%, MCV: 80fl, WBC: 2730/mm3, PMN: 1460/mm3, PLT: 249000/mm3). Serum ferritin was normal and reticulocyte count was 0.23%. Other abnormal tests included an elevated fasting serum glucose level (219 mg/dl), a prolonged partial thromboplastine time of 68.1 sec (norm. 26-35 sec) that was not corrected after 1:1 dilution with normal plasma, and an extremely high erythropoetin level of 409.4 U/ml (norm. 4-24 U/ml). Subsequent clotting factor assays showed the existence of a lupus anticoagulant. Serum electrophoresis and immunofixation did not reveal existence of a monoclonal paraprotein. Serology was negative for autoimmune disorders and viral infections (HBV, HCV, HIV and CMV). CT scan did not reveal any lymphadenopathy in the thorax, abdomen and pelvis, whereas CT and MRI of the upper abdomen showed diffuse splenomegaly without any focal lesions in the splenic parenchyma .
A bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy were further obtained, revealing increased cellularity and a marked reduction and maturation arrest of the erythroid lineage in the proerythroblast stage. A lymphocyte infiltrate was also found, consisting of small, mature lymphocytes without villi and with paratrabecular, pericapillary and intrasinusoidal distribution in the marrow. Erythroid lineage comprised 4% and lymphocytes 60% of total bone marrow cells. Lymphocytes were CD20+, CD19+, CD22+, CD5-, CD10-, CD103-, CD23-, sIgM+ by immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry. No peripheral blood involvement was detected by flow cytometry. Additional serum testing for Parvovirus B19 was negative. Initial diagnosis was pure red cell aplasia secondary to low-grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
The patient was treated with 8 weekly courses of rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/kg. Reticulocyte count rose to 5.3% after the 5th cycle and he achieved transfusion independence after the 6th cycle of treatment, having been transfused with a total number of 13 units of packed red cells since the day of admission. He was subsequently subjected to splenectomy. Biopsy of the spleen confirmed the diagnosis of splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL). He remains alive and well since then, having achieved both complete remission of his PRCA ( and ) and a very good partial remission of his SMZL, with a median hematocrit of 43% and a marrow infiltrate of less than 5% at subsequent marrow testing .