A 47-year-old, American Society of Anesthesiologists Physical Status (ASA) III, 70-kg man was scheduled for plate-screw fixation using the deltopectoral incision for surgical neck fracture of the humerus at the Department of Orthopedics. The patient's medical history revealed that he had been diagnosed with ALS 2 years prior and had been on baclofen 2 × 10 mg and riluzole 2 × 50 mg on a regular basis. Preoperative physical examination showed difficulty in speaking and swallowing. Neurological examination showed anarthria, hypoactive pharyngeal reflexes, grade 4/5 muscle strength in the left lower extremity, and hyperactive deep tendon reflexes. Preoperative ‘ALS severity score’ was recorded as 26 (speech, 3: limited speech to one word response; swallowing, 7: prolonged time or smaller bite size, lower extremity and walking, 8: difficulty with uneven terrain; upper extremity dressing and hygiene, 8: slow self) . Preoperative complete blood count, biochemistry, chest radiogram and ECG were normal. As a result of consultation with the orthopedic surgeon, we decided to perform general anesthesia to prevent the formation of axillary nerve neuropraxia.
After obtaining informed consent, the patient was taken to the operating room without premedication. Noninvasive blood pressure, SpO2, and ECG monitoring were performed and 0.2 µg kg−1 min−1 remifentanil infusion was commenced. Ten minutes after the initiation of remifentanil infusion, propofol 140 mg (2 mg kg−1) was administered for induction of anesthesia. Immediately after the induction, a nasogastric catheter was inserted to prevent aspiration. Neuromuscular transmission was monitored with train-of-four (TOF-Watch SX, Organon, Dublin, Ireland) acceleromyography on the ulnar nerve. After induction of anesthesia, calibration and setup settings of neuromuscular monitor were adjusted before giving rocuronium. The baseline TOF ratio was >0.90. A total dose of 20 mg rocuronium was then administered intravenously by titrating in doses of 10 mg, and the patient was intubated with a number 8 endotracheal tube when the TOF reached 2 responses. Central body temperature was measured by an esophageal temperature probe.
The patient was put in the semi-sitting position and anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (2%) and remifentanil infusion in a mixture of 50% oxygen in air. Fifteen minutes after intubation, the TOF ratio increased to 0.75. Thereafter, an additional 10 mg rocuronium was given for muscle relaxation. After the second dose of rocuronium, the TOF ratio was 0.44 and 0.85 at 30 and 60 min, respectively. During the operation, hemodynamic parameters were within normal limits. Duration of surgery was 75 min. Anesthetic medication was discontinued at the end of the surgery. The TOF ratio was >0.90, with 100% oxygen ventilation before extubation. Although the patient was breathing spontaneously, muscle strength and tidal volume were inadequate and he was unable to open his eyes spontaneously. Sugammadex 2 mg kg−1 i.v. was given. Depth of spontaneous respiration increased and he was able to open his eyes spontaneously after 120 s. Following extubation, the patient was conscious, oriented and cooperative, and was able to move the four extremities with adequate spontaneous breathing. He was transferred to the intensive care unit for postoperative monitoring. The patient's nasogastric catheter was left in place for 24 h. Arterial blood gases, electrolytes, and biochemistry values were normal following extubation and in the intensive care unit. Morphine 4 × 6 mg was given subcutaneously for 24 h for postoperative analgesia. The patient was sent to the inpatient service after 24 h.