A 56-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of recurrent pain and impaired range of motion (ROM) of his right knee for over a year. His medical history included type 2 diabetes and hypertension which were poorly controlled. He told us his knee was mild painful and swollen at the first place about one year ago without any injury. He went to a local hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) and was treated with “small needle-knife acupuncture” and ozone injection into the knee joint for several times. His symptoms became better after these treatments. However, 2–3 months later, his knee pain and swelling came back and he was again treated with acupuncture and TCM plaster, as well as joint aspirations with corticosteroid injection. After these therapies his knee was painless for another 2 months before it became swollen and painful again. Approximately 5–6 times of aspirations and corticosteroid injections were given to him, but the time-period of pain-release became shorter and shorter.
On admission, he was afebrile, T 36.2 °C, BP 133/70 mmHg, P 83/min, R 16/min. His right knee joint was obviously swelling. A 3 cm × 3 cm local bump on anterolateral knee can be inspected, which was soft and painless on palpation. Joint line tenderness was present, and floating patella test was positive. His right knee has impaired ROM (100°-0–0°) and was painful when over-extension or over-flexion. Anterior drawer test, Lachman test and McMurray test were negative.
Blood tests showed elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 29 mm/h, reference range < 20 mm/h) and C-reactive protein (CRP, 18.38 mg/L, reference range < 8 mg/L), while the white blood cell (WBC, 7.3 × 109/L, reference range 3.4–10.0 × 109/L) count and hemoglobin (HB, 140 g/L, reference range 131–172 g/L) were normal. Radiographs of both knees exhibited the formation of osteophytes and narrowing of joint space on the medial compartments which indicated osteoarthritis . MRI T2-weighted and SPAIR sequences demonstrated subchondral bone marrow edema in the lateral femoral condyle, and the presence of soft-tissue abnormalities, including capsulitis, extensive synovial hyperplasia, capsular fluid collection, and periarticular muscle edema .
The patient then underwent thorough arthroscopic debridement and partial meniscectomy of his right knee. Inflammatory synovium was observed under the arthroscopy . Meanwhile, his thick, yellow and turbid synovial fluid was harvested. The biochemical and cytological analyses of joint fluid were as follows: Rivalta test, +++; total cell, 454 × 109/L; WBC, 155 × 109/L (22% mononuclear neutrophils and 78% polymorphonuclear neutrophils); protein, 37.7 g/L; lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 1841 U/L. The Gram stain and acid-fast stain of the fluid demonstrated no bacteria or tuberculosis. Representative isolates of Candida were cultured in the Sabouraud dextrose agar medium . Subsequently, Candida species was identified by Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) sequencing (forward primer ITS1, 5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACTTGCGG-3′; reverse primer ITS4, 5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′) and confirmed as C. parapsilosis by BLAST on NCBI . The sequence of ITS gene amplified from this isolate was listed in Additional file . Notably, the budding cells and pseudohyphae were also observed in the synovial tissue by periodic acid-schiff (PAS) staining , which further confirmed the diagnosis of Candida arthritis. Susceptibility test was performed and yielded susceptibilities to 5-flurocytosine, amphotericin B, fluconazole, itraconazole, and voriconazole.
The patient was then treated with fluconazole 400 mg daily intravenously for three weeks and then switched to orally for one year. The pain and swelling of the knee subsided gradually, and the patient had no complaints of the aforementioned symptoms 4 weeks post-surgery. On one-year follow-up, the patient remained in a clinically stable condition and the last culture of joint fluid was negative for C. parapsilosis.