A 46 year-old woman (gravida 2, para 2) with history of menometrorrhagia for 5–6 years due to a voluminous uterine fibroid was admitted to our institution (Department of Neuroscience, Reproductive Sciences and Dentistry, School of Medicine, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy) with fever (temperature over 39 °C) and strong pelvic pain.
Transvaginal ultrasound (US) showed diffuse fibromatosis and two evident uterine masses: the first was 53 × 57 mm, submucous, in fundus-anterior wall; the other was 97 × 70 mm, subserous, in isthmus-posterior wall. Despite the size of the masses, no alarming features were observed.
In order to preserve pelvic stability, the woman expressed the wish to avoid total hysterectomy; therefore, a laparoscopic myomectomy was considered.
During hospitalization the patient showed an inflammatory state (elevation of fibrinogen and C-reactive protein) with intermittent fever (not exceeding 38 °C). Blood cultures were negative.
Several measurements of serum LDH total activity were performed, showing normal or only slightly increased values, with the highest peak of 304 U/l (reference range: 125–243).
Due to the clinical presentation, an abdominal CT with and without contrast was performed, showing increased uterine volume with two evident masses: the smaller one (4 × 3 cm) was subserous, on the fundus; the larger one (12 × 10 cm), voluminous and inhomogeneous, was para-uterine, on the left, with intraligamentary growth and eccentric areas of colliquative necrosis . These features were suggestive of sarcomatous degeneration, so a MRI was recommended.
The abdomino-pelvic MRI was performed with and without contrast, confirming the presence of both masses (3.2 × 5 cm and 15x10x9 cm). However, the larger one appeared capsulated and non-infiltrative . Characteristic MRI findings associated with sarcomas were not clear: enhanced signal intensity (SI) was absent in T1, and weak and inhomogeneous in T2. These findings were not enough to support the diagnosis of uterine sarcoma.
In order to support our suspicion of malignancy, electrophoresis of LDH isoenzymes was performed, showing the following results: LDH1 = 15.6% (reference range: 16.1–31.5%); LDH2 = 23.3% (29.2–41.6%); LDH3 = 21.0% (17.0–26.2%); LDH4 = 13.6% (5.9–12.3%); LDH5 = 26.5% (3.2–17.3%); LDH5/LDH1 ratio = 1.7 (normal value: < 1).
We found an elevation of muscle isoforms (4 and 5) accompanied by a decrease of the normally predominant heart isoforms (1 and 2), with an increased LDH5 to LDH1 ratio. In literature, this pattern has been presented as strongly associated with malignancy .
Given the characteristic LDH isoenzymes pattern, supported by the CT report, we discussed with the patient about the increased suspicion of malignancy and the necessity of a radical surgical treatment. So, we finally opted for a total abdominal hysterectomy instead of a laparoscopic myomectomy (initially preferred by the patient), in order to avoid risks linked to the morcellation of an occult malignancy .
Histological examination of the surgical sample showed a malignant mesenchymal proliferation constituted by hypercellular areas with epithelioid or pleomorphic cells alternating with hypocellular myxoid areas . Necrosis and high mitotic index were observed. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for caldesmon, muscle specific actin and CD10 and focal positivity for smooth muscle actin . The definitive diagnosis was of high grade leiomyosarcoma with myxoid changes, confirming our suspicion.