A 58-years-old female was referred to the Clinic for Maxillofacial Surgery, University Clinical Center of Vojvodina in Novi Sad, complaining of a nonhealing post-extraction wound in the gingiva of the mandible on the left side. Three months after tooth 36 was extracted, the wound did not heal. Swelling and vegetation of the gingiva were observed in the mandibular region on the left side after the intraoral examination, and the OPT determined that the bone was destroyed . The patient did not report any other complaints or illnesses. Differential diagnosis included pyogenic granuloma, squamous cell carcinoma, or some type of mesenchymal tumor of the jaw, chondrosarcoma, or osteosarcoma. An incisional biopsy of the gingival tumor was performed and the patient underwent computed tomography of the head, neck, and chest as part of the oral carcinoma TNM staging protocol . Based on the computed tomography examination, a radiologist described an expansive-infiltrating tumor in the area of the mandible body with infiltration into the surrounding tissue. The size of the tumor was 60 × 30 × 40 mm. The bone was destroyed with a “sunburst” periosteal reaction and the borders were independent compared to the surrounding soft tissue. The tumor infiltrated the mylohyoid muscle, pterygoid muscles, and the anterior belly of the digastric muscle. In addition, the radiologist described expansive soft tissue changes in the left breast with dimensions of 60 × 40 × 35 mm and infiltrating lymph nodes in the area of the left axilla. Mammography, and core biopsy of the breast tumor was done . Osteoblastic changes were also observed in the 3rd thoracic spinal vertebra. The pathologist described metastatic MAC based on the tissue obtained from the gingival biopsy. Microscopic examination of the specimens revealed nests of cells floating in lakes of mucin partitioned by delicate fibrous septa containing capillary blood vessels. The cell clusters varied in shape and size with occasional tubular arrangements. In order to find the primary tumor, mammography and core biopsy of the breast tumor were done and, after pathophysiological analysis and immunohistochemistry, it was found that the primary tumor was a breast tumor and that the gingival tumor was a metastatic tumor from the breast MAC. The tumor was estrogen-(90% of cells, Allred score 8) and progesterone receptor-positive (40% of cells, Allred score 6), and the Ki67 proliferative index was 30% (30% of the nuclei of the tumor cells had a positive reaction). HER2 receptors were 1+, CK7+, CK20+, mammaglobin −, and GATA-3 + . The patient was sent to the Oncology Committee for Breast Diseases, where chemotherapy was indicated with 3 cycles per anthracycline (AC) protocol, after which the effects of therapy and the inclusion of irradiation therapy for mandible metastasis were evaluated.