Our patient was a 53-year-old Japanese woman. Her sister had bipolar disorder–like episodes (details unknown). When the patient was a high school student, her parents often commented that she was inferior to her sister in appearance. She became further worried about her looks when her teacher told her that she was not suitable to be a tour conductor, which was what she wanted to be. From the age of 18 to 35, she drank approximately 1400 ml of beer every day. However, from the age of 36, she had tried to abstain from alcohol, although she sometimes drank a lot when she felt stressed. Five years before her admission (year − 5), she became unemployed because she was often absent from her job as a result of her mother’s death. Because this caused her to consider herself worthless, she visited a psychiatrist . She was prescribed antidepressants, including noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressants (NaSSAs) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), to treat her depression. She had ongoing mild suicidal ideation in a state of depression, but she only tried to kill herself once. Most of the time she just stated, “I am meaningless, so I should die,” but did not put this thought into action. Before her current admission (year 0), she had been hospitalized three times for depression and once for mania . After being discharged from her third hospitalization, she showed a decreased need for sleep and became wasteful with money. It became difficult for her to control her manic state. Thus, she was again admitted to the hospital and was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. She was started on lithium carbonate, and her manic state improved, and she left the hospital. However, she continued to visit the hospital for lingering depression.
One month before her current admission, she had started to experience severe depression, and she subsequently began to lose her appetite as a result of severe dysgeusia and glossalgia. To improve her mental and physical condition, she was admitted to the hospital (day 1). In addition to the aforementioned symptoms, she developed a swaying gait, finger tremors, and dysarthria approximately 1 week before hospitalization. She also vomited and had diarrhea before and after hospitalization. Despite having depression before admission, she was in a manic state upon admission. She stated, “Somehow I am so happy and full of energy.”
Because her swaying gait, finger tremors, and dysarthria had continued for about 1 week, and because she had been prescribed 800 mg/day lithium carbonate (before the current hospitalization, she had received lithium carbonate for approximately 2 years), we investigated cerebellar infarction and lithium intoxication for her differential diagnosis. Her computed tomographic scan showed no intracranial lesions. Blood examinations revealed a blood lithium concentration of 1.99 mEq/L, which is within the range of intoxication. Results of blood tests were mostly within the normal range, except for mean corpuscular volume 104.4 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin 34.7 pg, and alkaline phosphatase 458 U/L . The patient’s vital signs upon admission included blood pressure of 109/66 mmHg, pulse rate of 84 beats per minute, and body temperature of 36.9 °C. She sometimes complained of pain in her tongue and a taste disorder. Her tongue was diffusely red, but its shape appeared normal on admission. We asked her about dysgeusia and glossalgia, but presumably because of her confused mental state and physically disordered condition as the side effects of lithium treatment, she just said, “I have a pain in my tongue, and I can’t taste anything.” At that time, she needed urgent medical care for her lithium intoxication; therefore, we did not ask her any further questions about her symptoms for the differential diagnosis.
To treat the patient’s dehydration and increase her urinary excretion of lithium , we started infusing physiological saline and stopped prescribing lithium carbonate (day 1). Her blood concentration of lithium declined to 0.91 mEq/L on day 3 and to 0.13 mEq/L on day 8 . In terms of symptoms, her dysgeusia and glossalgia were relieved on day 4, her dysarthria was relieved on day 5, and her swaying gait and finger tremors were relieved on day 7. By day 8, all of her symptoms had disappeared. Because cessation of lithium carbonate treatment could raise the patient’s risk for the recurrence of bipolar disorder, we continued with follow-up observation of her symptoms of this disorder. During the follow-up observation, she underwent rehabilitation, including occupational therapy, so that she could return to her normal life after being discharged from the hospital. From day 14, her depression reappeared, and an initial dose of 200 mg/day of lithium carbonate was prescribed. Once she had recovered from this depression, she left the hospital (day 30). By the time the patient was discharged, the color of her tongue had returned to normal.