A 71-year-old Caucasian woman with known diverticular disease of the colon and MM diagnosed 3 years previously, who was receiving chemotherapy with melphalan, bortezomib (a proteasome inhibitor), and a moderate dose of dexamethasone, presented to the emergency department of our hospital with abdominal pain, abdominal discomfort, and pneumoperitoneum. The clinical examination revealed acute abdomen with free air on an abdominal plain x-ray, and elevated levels of leukocyte cells at 18,000/μl and C-reactive protein at 145 mg/L. The patient had a family history free of cancer, and the last time she underwent colonoscopy was 1 year before admission. She had been diagnosed 3 years previously with stage II MM based on the International Staging System with a β2-microglobulin level of 4.2 mg/L and serum albumin level of 37 g/L. No study was performed for amyloidosis.
An abdominal CT scan showed a 5-cm-wide, 12-cm-long sigmoid mass with medial extension into the fatty tissue at the same localization, pneumoperitoneum, diverticula, free abdominal fluid collections, and distended loops of the small and large intestines . The patient was urgently admitted to the operating room as soon as the diagnosis of colonic perforation was established. An exploratory laparotomy was performed, with supra- and subumbilical midline incisions. Intraoperative findings were purulent peritonitis and an obstructive mass of the sigmoid colon causing massive central colonic distention . The mass was extending toward the mesosigmoid. It was impossible to define if the mass might be originating from the mesocolon . After washing the whole abdomen meticulously, exploration revealed colonic perforation in the midtransverse colon at the mesocolic site. The mesocolon at this part was extremely inflammatory and had signs of venous congestion. An extended left colectomy was decided as the operation of choice for this patient. The operation was undertaken in an ontological fashion, with high ligation of the superior mesenteric artery and retrieval of all regional and apical lymph nodes. Peripheral transection was performed at the level of the upper rectum, and after removal of the specimen, a transverse stoma was established (a modified Hartmann’s procedure). Direct anastomosis was considered extremely risky owing to local inflammatory conditions (after peritonitis) and a highly distended colon (after obstruction).
The histopathologic study of the lesion showed large oval cells consisting of a round nucleus in eccentric position with coarse chromatin, protruding nucleolus, and enough cytoplasm . There were also a few cells with double nuclei as well as giant nuclei. Few cells had the morphology of typical plasmacytes. There were many mitoses. Higher cell apoptosis was observed in the largest part of the tumor. The neoplasm densely infiltrated the muscular wall of the intestine and the pericolic fat without reaching the surface of the serum and without infiltrating the mucosa, which had severe ischemic lesions . The surgical margins were free. In IHC analysis, the tumor cells were CD20−, CD5−, CD79a+, CD138+ (moderate), CD38+ (moderate), CD56+, CD10−, CD30−, CD117+ (a few), keratins AE1/AE3−, and S-100− . IHC analysis for both kappa-light and lambda-light chains gave an unreliable effect owing to a very high substrate material . The Ki-67 cell proliferation index was approximately 40%. In the lymph nodes, morphologically and with CD138 and CD38 immunostaining in selected sections, infiltration by the neoplastic cell population was not documented. The patient did well postoperatively.