An 87-year-old woman was referred to our hospital in May 2010 with severe left ocular pain since 4 days before. On initial examination, the left orbit was severely necrotized with several live larvae attached to the necrotic tissue. The upper and lower eyelids and the eyeball were completely destroyed. Periorbital tissues were swollen and erythematous .
According to her grandchild, the patient had not been able to walk or sit for several years, presumably due to back injury. She also had bladder and bowel incontinence. However, her mental status was intact. She had history of eyelid surgery due to a skin lesion 15 years ago which had been confirmed to be skin cancer. There were no medical records or documents however, and she had experienced no recurrences ever since.
Orbital CT scan revealed disorganized globe and periocular tissues, with hemorrhagic patches in the left orbit filled with larvae. The orbital walls seemed intact and no larvae could be detected in the periorbital sinuses or cranium.
On the day of admission, the patient underwent exenteration of the left orbit . All necrotic tissues and over 150 larvae were removed. A few larvae were collected and preserved in 70% ethanol. The larvae were identified as Chrysomya bezziana (Diptera: Calliphoridae) or old world screwworm fly. The most distinctive characteristics of this species include one pair of anterior spiracles with 4 to 6 digit projections at the ends, located on the first segment of the third instar of the larvae above the cephalopharyngeal skeleton (one pair of hooks at the base) , and one pair of posterior spiracles at the bottom of the third instar of the larvae. Each is surrounded by a complete peritreme, without a distinct button. There are 3 slits inside each peritreme, which continue to its end . is a picture of the complete third instar larva of Chrysomya bezziana, removed from the patient’s orbit.
Pathological findings of the exenterated tissue included unidentified and severely necrotic and hemorrhagic tissue.
During the postoperative period, the patient remained under intensive supervision for wound infections and possibly missed larvae. Vaccination for Clostridium tetani was performed. As the wound began to heal, the patient’s general condition improved and she was discharged after two weeks.