In 2011 an Italian 69 years old woman was referred to our Gastrointestinal Unit due to an 8 years long history of diarrhea, dyspepsia and weight loss. Diarrhea was responsive to PPI. Two years before (2009) she was diagnosed as having NF2 syndrome, according to internationally accepted clinical criteria
, based on the finding of multiple encephalic meningiomas (partially removed by surgery), a tongue schwannoma and bilateral acoustic neurinomas. In addition, a non-functioning adrenal adenoma, has also been diagnosed. To investigate the cause of diarrhea, the patient had already undergone both a colonoscopy, negative, and an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which provided clear cut evidence of a duodenal bulb ulceration; during the endoscopy the measurement of intragastric pH was not performed, since the patient was on PPI. After two weeks of PPI withdrawal laboratory tests revealed a marked increase in plasma gastrin levels (1051 pg/ml; reference value, r.v. <108), chromogranin A (337 U/L; r.v. <36), glucagon (524 pg/ml; r.v. 25–250). The liver, kidney, thyroid and parathyroid function tests were normal. Moreover, secondary causes of hypergastrinemia were excluded.A secretin stimulation test (Secrelux 2U/Kg, Goldham-Bioglan, Zusmarhausen. Germany) was performed and showed a diagnostic increase of plasma gastrin levels (from 1031 to 3789 pg/ml) within ten minutes from the secretin injection (Figure ). The patient underwent Octreoscan® with the evidence of a hypercaptant pancreatic lesion and a second one in the right frontal area, consistent with a meningiomatous lesion. Other imaging studies included abdomen magnetic resonance (MR) and Gallium-68-DOTATOC positron emission tomography (PET) (Figure ), which revealed a 1.2 × 2 cm nodular lesion in the pancreatic head, a liver metastatis and, the already known cerebral meningioma. After several months the patient underwent pancreatic endoscopic ultrasound with fine needle aspiration, demonstrating cytomorphologic features suggestive of pancreatic gastrinoma, with well-differentiated cells expressing Chromogranin A, synaptophysin and gastrin at immunohistochemistry. Ki-67 index was 2% and no mitosis was found in the sample.Due to the coexistence of a gastrinoma and an adrenal adenoma, a brain and encephalic trunk MR (Figure ) was performed to investigate the possible presence of a pituitary neoplasm: this revealed partial empty sella, the residual meningiomatous lesions and a pituitary microadenoma, which resulted non functioning at hormonal blood tests. There was no evidence of hyperparathyroidism, but, given the presence of a pancreatic gastrinoma, a pituitary and an adrenal adenoma, the patient underwent genetic testing for MEN1 mutations, which was negative. Genetic test for the CDKN1B gene was not performed since the patient died because of massive bleeding from a cerebral meningioma.