A 59-year-old man with a 1-month history of headache was examined in an otolaryngological clinic of a general hospital. The patient’s anterior nasal septum was swollen, and he was diagnosed with nasal septal abscess and admitted to the hospital the same day. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a swollen, ring-enhanced lesion in the anterior nasal septum . He was treated with incisional drainage of the abscess and antibiotic drip for 1 month (fosfomycin, ampicillin/sulbactam, ceftriaxone, and meropenem). In addition, insulin-based therapy was started because the patient had uncontrolled diabetes and hemoglobin A1c of 13.3%. His symptoms persisted despite 1 month of antibiotic drip. Pus from the nasal septum was cultured three times. Culture tests detected low concentrations of Capnocytophaga spp. and Serratia marcescens, which were sensitive to the antibiotic drip. No fungi were detected. The septal lesion was biopsied twice and showed granulation-like tissue with infiltrated inflammatory cells (nothing indicating malignancy or fungus). Despite the antibiotic drip for >1 month, diplopia developed due to bilateral abducens nerve palsy, with subsequent impairment of right eye movement and eventual visual loss. The patient was then referred to our department.
The patient’s initial visit revealed a saddle nose. Nasal fiberscope revealed bulging of the nasal septum and granulation-like tissue on the right side of the nasal septum. The patient’s left eye fixed at the central position and the supraduction and adduction of the right eye were limited. His visual acuities were light perception in the right eye and “count fingers” in the left eye. The functions of the 5th, 7th, and 8–12th cranial nerves were intact.
The patient’s hemoglobin A1c was 9.2%. Plain CT showed a poorly marginated lesion with soft tissue density at the superior nasal septum, which was invading the anterior cranial fossa. Another mass with soft tissue density appeared in the left maxillary sinus . A spinal tap and cerebrospinal fluid culture were immediately performed, and the results revealed elevated glucose levels (130 mg/dL) and cell counts (mononucleosis 19/m3, polynucleosis 1/m3). No pathogen was detected by microscopic examination or culture methods. Owing to the possibility of a fungal and/or bacterial infection, we prescribed an antibiotic (ampicillin/sulbactam) and antifungal (amphotericin B) drip. Subsequently, we performed diagnostic endoscopic sinus surgery under general anesthesia. Histopathological examination revealed that the ball-like lesion in the left maxillary sinus harbored fungi, with filaments slightly thinner than those of Aspergillus spp. . A commercially available fungal DNA detection kit (Robust HotStart ReadyMix PCR Kit; KAPA biosystems, Inc., U.S.A.) was used to detect pathogens in tissues from the nasal septal lesion and ball-like fungal lesion in the left maxillary sinus. A broad-range polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed targeting the highly conserved sequence of the ribosomal RNA genes in fungal DNA shared by most fungi. Internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions in ribosomal DNA were then amplified by PCR using primers ITS1F (5′-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3′) and ITS4R (5′-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3′). PCR products of 150–500 bp were obtained and sequenced to match a known DNA sequence from a reference database (BLAST: Basic Local Alignment Search Tool). The organism detected by PCR and tissue cultures was S. apiospermum. Subsequent enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed strongly enhanced lesions of the nasal septum, ethmoid sinuses, bilateral orbital apexes, and cavernous sinus. The dura along the anterior and bilateral middle cranial fossa was thickened and well-enhanced. . The diagnosis was orbital apex syndrome and hypertrophic pachymeningitis secondary to fungal nasal septal abscess caused by S. apiospermum.
Drug susceptibility testing led us to change the antifungal drip to voriconazole (500 mg/day). Since voriconazole had no apparent effect on the patient’s symptoms after four days, we surgically resected the lesion under general anesthesia.
Using endoscopy-assisted open skull base surgery, we removed the fungal ball-like lesion and the mucosa of the left maxillary sinus. We then incised the anterior border of the nasal septum and removed the mucosa of the bilateral ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses. After anterior craniotomy, we resected the anterior skull base between both sides of the ethmoid tegmen, from the frontal table anteriorly to the optic chiasm posteriorly. We avoided the extirpation of the eye ball or removal of the orbital content, because the medial bony wall of the orbit was intact.
The resected nasal septum was thickened and necrotic, strongly suggesting infectious inflammation and necrosis of the tissue. Mild mucosal edema was observed in the bilateral ethmoid and sphenoid sinuses. No fungal invasion or pus was observed. The dura was thinned just above the affected part of the cranial fossa, suggesting that the infection and inflammation had spread to the dura; however, there was no apparent dural deficit, and the dura was preserved. Following resection, we reconstructed the affected anterior cranial fossa with pericranium.
The patient’s headache decreased and almost disappeared 3 weeks postoperatively. His preoperative mild fever and inflammation normalized, and he was discharged on postoperative day 29. The patient continued oral voriconazole (400 mg/day) until 12 months post-surgery, when bilateral ocular movements completely improved; however, loss of visual acuity persisted. At 22 months post-surgery, a follow-up MRI demonstrated that the enhanced lesion in the orbital apex diminished. Thirty months has passed without any evidence of recurrence until now. The timeline of the patient’s illness is illustrated in Fig. .