A 21-year old male patient with no significant medical history was referred to our dental outpatient clinic in June 2020 with the chief complaint of dysphagia due to teeth mobility and sleep disturbance for 4 months. Patient has no significant medical condition and family history. The patient was previously seen for generalized gingival edema and hyperplasia in 2017 at local hospital. He was diagnosed with “pyogenic granuloma” and underwent a gingivectomy in 2018, during when surgical excision of the expanding nodular masses on both buccal and lingual surfaces of #3–#5, #7–#9, #12–13, #19–#21 and #28–#30 was conducted. Pathology results were equivocal.
In April 2020, the patient presented again with gingival hyperplasia, tooth mobility and diminished ability to chew and was referred to our clinic. Clinical presentations include generalized gingival hyperplasia and osteolysis of the maxilla and mandible. Extraoral examination showed symmetrical appearance with no obvious lymphadenopathy. Intraoral examination indicated generalized dark red gingival enlargement predominantly in palatal and lingual regions, with partial extension to incisal edge and occlusal surface of the teeth. Nodular masses were located at both labial and palatal surface from regions of #6–#11 and #18–#21 with localized surface erosion. Physical examination revealed lesions on the patient's back and shoulder; a round, firm, well-demarcated 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm nodular mass was identified on the left shoulder of the patient, yet he declined a tissue biopsy at the location . The patient also presented with bleeding gingiva upon palpation, non-purulent periodontal pocket, tooth mobility and displacement with a “floating in air” phenomenon . Radiology indicated ill-defined multilocular, amorphous-shaped radiolucencies in both maxilla and mandible. There was erosion of lamina dura with generalized tooth displacement, and radiographic bone level was seen to extend beyond the middle third of the root. The inferior border of the mandible showed punched-out lesions, partially surrounded by areas of periosteal reaction .
Karyotype reported normal chromosomes . In the cd45-SSC scattered plot, granulocyte group (R1) accounted for 68.14%, CD16/CD11b expression curve suggested that the proportion of cells in each stage of the granulocyte was roughly normal, and CD34+CD117+ accounted for about 1.22% of nuclear cells; T cells dominated the lymphocyte population (R2), which accounted for 15.49%. CD4/CD8 ratio was normal in CD3+ cells, and Kappa and lambda restricted expression was not observed in CD19+CD20+ cells; monocyte population (R3) accounted for 2.32%; Nucleated red cell population (R4) accounted for 3.65%; Hematogone cell population (P11) accounted for 2.68%. These results suggested mild granulocytic deficiency, erythrocyte proliferation, and no specific immunophenotype in bone marrow biopsy specimens . With informed consent, a tissue biopsy was conducted by excising mandibular hyperplastic gingival tissue. Hematoxylin eosin staining showed that there were colonies of histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells and a few lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils and Touton giant cells in the lamina propria; there were few areas of calcifications . Immunohistochemical staining reported: Langerin (−), LCA (+), CD35 (−), CD21 (−), S-100 (−), Myo-D1 (−), CD138 (−), CD34 (−), Myogenin (−), CD 38 (−), SMA (−), Vimentin (+), CK (−), CD1a (−), CD68 (+) .
The above findings were suggestive of a diagnosis of Juvenile Xanthogranuloma. Topical and systemic corticosteroids were recommended to the patient, with proposed treatment plan of surgical excision and removable prosthesis. However, patient declined treatment at our clinic due to financial reasons and elected to be transferred back to local hospital for future medical intervention.