In August 1982, a 40-year-old man presented with hoarseness of 8 months duration. He was an ex-smoker.
Examination with indirect laryngoscopy revealed a polypoidal lesion on the middle third of a mobile right vocal cord. Clinical examination revealed no lymphadenopathy. Biopsy confirmed the presence of a squamous carcinoma.
Treatment consisted of stripping of the vocal cord and a full course of postoperative external beam radiotherapy for 30 treatments in 43 days - right and left lateral wedged fields totalling 6600cGy to the larynx - dose per fraction was 220cGy. Recovery was uneventful, apart from intermittent hoarseness.
At regular follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence, but in December 1997, 15 years later, the patient was admitted as an emergency with sudden onset of stridor. Laryngoscopy revealed immobile bilateral vocal cords. An MRI scan of his neck showed marked narrowing of the airway. An enhanced signal in C2 to C6 vertebral bodies and a loss of height in C5 was noted and deemed consistent with post-radiotherapy change (see Figure ). Due to the severity of the airway compromise, an urgent tracheostomy was performed.
In February 1998, microlaryngoscopy and laser right arytenoidectomy was performed to facilitate decannulation. In May 1998, a second tracheostomy was needed for airway difficulty, but successful decannulation was achieved. In July 1998, the stridor recurred. The only positive finding was fibrotic supraglottic stenosis. Several biopsies excluded recurrence of tumour as a cause.
The patient was keen to avoid a permanent tracheostomy as he was an enthusiastic windsurfer and wanted to continue his hobby. In January 1999, a formal partial vertical hemi-laryngectomy was performed. There was evidence of long-standing post-radiotherapy fibrosis, scarring and contraction.
During November 1999, the patient required a third elective tracheostomy post-hemi-laryngectomy. Due to ongoing aspiration, inability to decannulate and severe laryngeal scarring, a total laryngectomy was performed in February 2000. Histology showed no malignancy and the specimen showed changes consistent with post-radiotherapy change.
In April 2000, the patient was fitted with a Blomsinger valve, but the procedure was complicated by the development of cellulitis. He was treated with antibiotics but continued to suffer with pain, tenderness and dysphagia. A contrasted swallow study was reported as showing external constriction and the patient was referred to our gastroenterology department for flexible endoscopy and oesophageal dilatation. Two weeks after the oesophageal dilatation, he complained of persistent pain in his right shoulder and discomfort over the lower cervical spine. An MRI scan showed a mass originating from C4/C5 which extended into the pre-cervical space and posteriorly into the spinal canal causing cord compression. The possibility of a metastatic deposit in the C5 vertebral body was noted, but this did not fit in with the clinical picture. There was no neurological deficit at this time, and he was treated with analgesics.
He was admitted as an emergency 2 months later with increasing pain in his neck and, in addition, pain and paraesthesia in his right arm. A further MRI scan (see Figure ) revealed a reduction of the disc height at C4-5 and C5-6, a loss of height of the C5 vertebral body and retrolisthesis of C5 on C6. Inflammatory markers were significantly elevated. The patient was immobilized in a Jerome Halo brace.
At surgery, there was no evidence of infection, and the prevertebral fascia was intact. The vertebral bodies of C4 and C5 were curetted and submitted for culture and histology. No infective organisms were found and no evidence of metastatic tumour was seen.
Two weeks later, the patient collapsed with severe pain, dizziness, paraesthesia in his legs and inability to walk. He was found to have signs of quadriplegia and a sensory deficit below C5 distribution. He was transferred to the neurosurgical unit where his neck was re-explored. Partial destruction of the bodies of C4 and C5 was noted and curettage of the vertebral bodies was performed. The posterior longitudinal ligament was incised and an epidural abscess was drained. No organisms were grown from these samples and only white cells were present. Biopsies again showed no evidence of tumour recurrence.
The patient was stabilized and transferred to a specialist spinal unit where he received intensive rehabilitation. He regained some power in both his upper and lower limbs, and is able to mobilize for short distances. He remains with an indwelling catheter, permanent tracheostome and is mostly wheelchair bound.