A 78-year-old Japanese female was diagnosed with focal epilepsy two years prior to admission based on repeated right hemiconvulsion evolving into generalized tonic–clonic seizure with an electroencephalography finding of frequent sharp waves in the left parietal lobe. Her status was stable on treatment with levetiracetam (LEV) 2000 mg/day orally, however, episodic disturbance of consciousness appeared and gradually worsened one month prior to admission. Phenytoin (PHT) 200 mg/day was given in conjunction with LEV at another hospital 16 days prior to admission. Nevertheless, there was little improvement in the frequency of impaired consciousness, and she was transferred to our hospital to adjust AEDs.
At the time of admission, her level of consciousness was alert and there was no obvious evidence of epileptic seizures. Physical examination on admission revealed blood pressure (BP) 106/52 mm Hg, heart rate (HR) 76 beats per minute (bpm), body temperature (BT) 37.5 °C, and respiratory rate (RR) 22 breaths per minute, and the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed no arrhythmia and PR interval was normal (0.16 s). Her height, body weight, and body mass index (BMI) were 152 cm, 42 kg, and 18.2 kg/m2, respectively. Figure A shows the clinical course and the chronological laboratory findings of the patient. Her complete blood cell counts (CBCs) showed total white blood cell (WBC) counts of 7100 /μL with neutrophil counts of 5893 /μL, hemoglobin level of 7.0 mg/dL, red blood cell counts of 413 × 104 /μL, mean corpuscular volume of 63.7 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration of 26.6%, and platelet counts of 19.6 × 104 /μL, indicating hypochromic microcytic anemia due to iron deficiency. Her blood chemistry tests showed normal liver and renal function: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 13 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 8 U/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 15.1 mg/dL, and creatinine (Cr) of 0.34 mg/dL. Her serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was mildly elevated to 6.6 mg/dL and chest computed tomography showed mild aspiration pneumonia in the left S10 segment of left lung. Since she was in good condition without decreased percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2), antibiotics were not administered. LEV 2000 mg/day was continued orally and PHT was discontinued, thereafter, the patient was initiated on LCM at 100 mg/day orally because the patient did not accept to increase the LEV dose due to drug-induced drowsiness. The stool occult blood on admission was positive, but the patient did not agree to undergo a gastrointestinal endoscopy, thereafter, the patient received a blood transfusion containing 4 units of red blood cell concentrates (RCC) on the 4th hospital day to treat anemia.
The dose of LCM was increased to 200 mg/day on the 9th hospital day, as per the Japanese guidelines for maintenance doses, and subsequently on the 10th hospital day, a sinus bradycardia with HR of 20 bpm suddenly began to appear, with a maximum sinus arrest of 5.6 s . The PR interval was 0.16 s and did not change during her hospitalization. There was no decrease in BP or no symptomatic syncope due to SND, while WBC counts were decreased to 2300/μL on the 10th hospital day. The additional blood chemistry tests showed AST of 16 U/L, ALT of 10 U/L, BUN of 15.8 mg/dL, Cr of 0.33 mg/dL, and potassium of 4.45 mmol/L. Drug-induced SND and leukopenia were suspected and LCM was immediately discontinued. The bradycardia gradually improved until the next day with HR of 59 bpm. There was no evidence of sepsis causing neutropenia at this point, and CRP was decreased to 1.2 mg/dL.
On the 11th hospital day, a decrease in SpO2 requiring high-flow oxygen appeared. An analysis of arterial blood (O2 10 L/min via non-rebreather mask) showed a pH of 7.49, a partial pressure of carbon dioxide of 31.9 mm Hg, and a partial pressure of oxygen of 72.3 mm Hg. Although serum N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide level was elevated to 1320 pg/mL (reference range < 125 pg/mL), a transthoracic echocardiogram showed a normal ejection fraction of the left ventricle (63%) without signs of asynergy and pulmonary hypertension, and normal inferior vena cava diameter (13 mm) with normal inspiratory collapse. A chest X-ray showed an infiltrative shadow in the left lung field, which was suspected to be exacerbation of the pneumonia recognized at admission. The WBC counts decreased to 500/μL and the neutrophil counts to 49/μL, leading to a diagnosis of drug-induced agranulocytosis. Fever of over 39 °C appeared. After blood, sputum, and urine cultures were submitted, meropenem (3 g/day) and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) (100 μg/day) were administered. No bacterial growth was confirmed in the blood and urine cultures, while the sputum cultures showed a growth of Acinetobacter baumannii/calcoaceticus complex and Klebsiella pneumoniae that were sensitive to carbapenem antibiotics. Since LCM was discontinued, LEV was replaced from oral to intravenous administration, and the dose was increased to 3000 mg/day in order to reinforce the treatment of epilepsy.
On the 12th hospital day, the vital signs were worsened to BP 69/49 mm Hg, HR 123 bpm, BT 39.4 °C, RR 34 breaths per minute, and she became unresponsive to calls. Consequently, fluid resuscitation was started, and vancomycin was administered with dose adjustment based on therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM). Since hypotension did not improve even with adequate fluid resuscitation, norepinephrine was started and increased to maintain mean arterial pressure at 65 mm Hg. The WBC counts were 600/μL and the neutrophil counts were 24/μL with still no improvement in agranulocytosis, and serum procalcitonin level was markedly elevated at 25.55 ng/mL (reference range < 0.50 ng/mL), suggesting severe sepsis. Generally, 28–49% of severe sepsis cases are known to show negative cultures Although the blood cultures of the patient were negative, septic shock was strongly suspected due to fever associated with agranulocytosis, hypotension unresponsive to adequate rehydration, tachypnea, disturbance of consciousness, and the absence of other diseases causing hypotension.
On the 14th hospital day, the patient’s WBC and neutrophil counts improved to 4000/μL and 3640/μL, respectively, therefore, G-CSF administration was discontinued. Although the SND and agranulocytosis improved, the patient could not recover from septic shock, and died on the 15th hospital day.