A 23-year-old female patient was admitted to the authors’ emergency department after falling from a height of 5 m. She complained of severe pain in her lumbar spine and right foot. She had no head trauma and the Glasgow coma score (GCS) was 15/15. Based on these findings, no brain computed tomography (CT) scan was performed at the emergency department after neurosurgeon’s consultation. Physical examination revealed paresis of L5 left root with significant weakness (1/5) of the left long toe extensor muscle and impaired light touch and pinprick sensation (both 1/2). Urinary retention was diagnosed by means of urinary bladder ultrasound and the anal sphincter was spoiled with associated perianal hypoesthesia. Radiograms and CT revealed an A3/AO type fracture of the second lumbar vertebra, a B1/AO-type fracture of the fifth lumbar vertebra, and a comminuted (sanders type 4) right calcaneal fracture . Thirty hours after the initial admission at the emergency department a posterior minimal stabilization from L1 to S2 vertebrae accompanied by L5 decompression was performed to address the spinal fractures, while an Ilizarov device was applied to reduce and temporarily stabilize the calcaneal fracture . Both surgical interventions were performed in prone position under the same anesthesia in the same session. The total duration of both surgeries was 4.5 h. Immediately after surgery, the left pupil was found larger than the right associated with slower and incomplete reaction to light exposition . The identification of the anisocoria was settled by the anesthesiologist in the recovery phase. With this clinical finding, the ophthalmologists did not recommend the pilocarpine administration test. By contrast, the right eye pupillary reactions were normal. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, while the Ishihara test was normal. The patient had no diplopia, the intraocular pressure was within normal limits (14 mmHg), and there was no history of pupillary abnormality in the past. Brain CT was normal, while our patient had no sign of brain herniation (GCS: 15/15). Furthermore, our patient was neurologically evaluated daily until the discharge on day 6 after surgery. Bedside fundus examination showed normal posterior vascularization and normal optic disk and macula . It was impossible for the ophthalmologists to perform a slit-lamp examination in a non-ambulatory patient like ours to detect possible iris transillumination defects and sphincter tears at the pupillary margin, which could cause a dilated pupil. Six hours postoperatively, the anisocoria was gradually resolved and 24 h after surgery, it was completely absent , while the pupillary reaction was also normal. At every follow-up, even at the last one at 18 months postoperatively, our patient had no complaints or pathology from the affected eye.