A 46-year-old Southeast Asian female was referred to our institution with persistent hypotension and intractable heart failure after five days of care in a peripheral hospital. In the peripheral hospital, the patient was initially treated for decompensated heart failure. Her condition worsened despite optimum available pharmacological treatment had been administered. The local physicians decided to refer the patient as soon as they suspected a concurrent ventricular septal defect.
The patient’s consciousness was still intact on admission. She complained of shortness of breath—especially when assuming a supinated position—excessive fatigue, and progressive legs swelling within the last month. There was no complaint of angina prior to or during hospitalization in the peripheral hospital. There was a history of poorly treated Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus for more than ten years. The presence of the other risk factors was denied.
The patient’s vital signs on arrival at the emergency department were as follows: blood pressure (BP) of 107/69 mmHg supported with continuous infusion of dobutamine 3 mcg/kg/min and norepinephrine 0.05 mcg/kg/min; heart rate (HR) was ranged between 95 to 115 beats/min; respiratory rate (RR) of 24 breaths/min; afebrile (36.9 °C); and peripheral oxygen saturation level (SpO2) of 96% aided by 4 L/min nasal cannula oxygen supplementation. Head and neck assessment showed anaemic conjunctiva and distended jugular vein. Chest auscultation revealed rales at the base of both lungs and a holosystolic murmur at the apex of the heart. There were ascites and lower limb oedema.
The ECG was sinus rhythm with poor R wave progression at precordial leads as well as biphasic and inverted T waves at leads V1 to V3 that may suggest a late onset anteroseptal myocardial infarction . There was no clear information regarding the exact onset of acute coronary syndrome. Chest radiography displayed pulmonary congestion and pleural effusion of both lungs . Initial laboratory examination showed mild anaemia (haemoglobin of 10.9 g/dL and haematocrit of 31%) and hypoalbuminemia (2.46 mg/dL). High-sensitivity cardiac troponin I was normal. Other laboratory indices included liver function tests, renal function tests, arterial blood gas parameters, and electrolyte levels were unremarkable.
Echocardiography revealed hypokinetic anteroseptal and anterior segments of the left ventricular (LV) wall, while other segments’ motion remained normal. The LV ejection fraction (LVEF) was 50%. A left-to-right shunt was detected from a ventricular septal defect of 10 mm in size at the apical portion of the interventricular septum . The non-invasive hemodynamic assessment showed reduced cardiac output (CO), cardiac index (CI), LV outflow tract velocity time integral (LVOT VTI), respectively 2.87 L/min, 1.81 L/min m2 and 10 cm (the normal values are respectively 4–8 L/min, 2.8–4.2 L/min m2, and 20 ± 3 cm). The systemic vascular resistance (SVR) was relatively high (1997.7 dynes s/cm5). There was an increase in estimated right atrial pressure (RAP) (> 15 mmHg), LV filling pressure and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) (E/e’ ratio of > 14). The pulmonic to systemic blood flow (Qp/Qs) ratio was 2.1 . Lung ultrasonography (LUS) displayed pulmonary congestion and bilateral pleural effusion in the right and left costophrenic sinuses.
The patient was transferred to the intensive cardiac care unit (ICCU). The objectives were to improve the clinical status and preparation for coronary angiography. Dobutamine (5 mcg/kg/min) was administered to maintain adequate perfusion. Norepinephrine was safely tapped off, followed by the introduction of a low-dose ACE inhibitor, Ramipril 2.5 mg. Furosemide was administered through continuous infusion to achieve adequate decongestion. The dose was started by 10 mg/hour and gradually lowered following the improvement in patient’s volume status. Diabetes mellitus was treated with insulin, and comorbidities were treated accordingly.
During the first week in the ICCU, the urine output was adequate with diuretic and inotrope support (the total urine output was 17.7 L and the total water deficit was 11.3 L). However, the heart failure symptoms remained, and the echocardiography hemodynamic monitoring showed only slight improvement in CO, CI, and LVOT VTI. The LV filling pressure and PCWP were still high with an E/e’ ratio of > 14. Since inotrope can enhance left-to-right shunting through the septal defect, lowering the dose may reduce the shunt. However, several attempts to lower the inotrope dose resulted in hypotension, decreasing urine output, and worsening symptoms of congestion. The patient clinical profile may be described as “stable but inotrope dependent”. It took ten days for the patient to tolerate the supinated position without developing severe symptoms and to be considered eligible for a coronary angiography procedure. Within this duration, there were episodes of hypokalaemia and metabolic alkalosis secondary to loop diuretic therapy.
Coronary angiography was performed on the tenth day of hospitalization. It revealed a chronic total occlusion of the left anterior descendent artery, up to 50% stenoses at distal portion of left circumflex artery, and severe stenoses of the right coronary artery . The Heart Team unanimously decided that surgery would be performed after preoperative optimization. IABP was implanted as a bridge to surgical therapy. There were significant improvements in symptoms as well as hemodynamic parameters following the application of IABP (1:1 augmentation ratio). On the second day of IABP utilization, the inotrope was completely tapped off. Hemodynamic monitoring showed left-to-right shunting reduction (Qp/Qs ratio 1.55) and significant augmentation in CO, CI, and LVOT VTI (respectively 4.14 L/min, 2.67 L/min m2, and 14.9 cm). There was also improvement in ventricular filling pressure and PCWP (E/e’ ratio < 14).
The surgery was performed four days after IABP implantation. Pre-procedural trans-esophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed a defect at the apical portion of the ventricular septum with a diameter of 10 mm . The surgery procedures included coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and VSR closure. During CABG, anastomoses were made from the Saphenous vein graft (SVG) to the right posterior descending artery (RPDA) and from Left Internal Mammary Artery (LIMA) to the middle segment of the Left Artery Descending (LAD) artery. A septal defect of 15 mm in diameter was revealed during left ventriculotomy . It was then closed with a polytetrafluoroethylene patch. Post-procedural TEE showed no residual flow through the septal patch.
Postoperative care in the intensive care unit was uneventful. The IABP was still maintained after the surgery and safely removed after proper weaning with minimal vasoactive drugs on the third postoperative day. The patient was transferred to the low care unit on the fifth postoperative day and was discharged after several days without relapsing symptoms of heart failure.