A 56-year-old Turkish Caucasian man had been complaining of dyspnea on exertion, hacking cough, fever and continuous sweating for one and a half months. He had been exposed to passive smoke for 25 years and biomass for 30 years. At the time of his admission, his body temperature was 36.6°C, pulse rate was 70/minute, arterial blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg and oxygen saturation was 93% (in room air). During auscultation of both pulmonary lower zones, end-expiratory rhonchi were audible. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 15 mm/hour and C-reactive protein was 9.67. Acid fast bacillus examination of a sputum specimen was found to be negative in three consecutive tests. Pulmonary function tests were normal. Thoracic computed tomography (CT) revealed enlarged paratracheal and aorticopulmonary lymph nodes with the largest node being 1 cm in diameter, and reticulo-micronodular interstitial infiltration symmetrically extending to the pleural surfaces in both pulmonary perihilar areas. CT supported positron emission tomography (PET) showed increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in lymph nodes in both hilar areas (10R and 10L; maximum standardized uptake values (SUV max) 5.6 and 5.7), and in the right lower paratracheal (4R; SUV max 4.1) and right para-esophageal (8; SUV max 8.9) lymph nodes . Fiber-optic bronchoscopy was normal. Transbronchial fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed on the 4R and 10R lymph nodes. Pathological examination of the specimens revealed chronic inflammation. A decision was made to sample the right lymph node number 8. Pathological examination of the biopsy from the right lymph node number 8 conducted by video-mediastinoscope revealed granulomatous inflammation. No problems were observed during the postoperative period. The chest tube was removed on the same evening as the operation when the drainage was minimal. The patient was discharged the following day.
General anesthesia was applied using a double lumen endotracheal tube, which ensured the collapse of the operated lung and the patient was placed in a 60° lateral position toward the front. The operative approach was performed through one thoraco-port. With the incision made in the 6th intercostal space on the posterior axillary line, the video-mediastinoscope (Richard Wolf, Germany) was advanced into the thoracic cavity . Pleural adhesions were eliminated through blunt and sharp dissections and the lymph node in the paraesophageal region was reached. The video-mediastinoscope was further advanced into this area and the distal end was enlarged. Lymph node biopsy was performed using appropriate instruments . The port was then used for inserting the chest tube.