A 50-year-old woman, with a history of breast cancer and a course of radiotherapy and chemotherapy, had a Permcath emplacement in right subclavian vein in august 2008 for her chemotherapy. Permcath is a flexible double lumen cuffed plastic tube that can be put into a vein just below the neck. The tube can then be used for long term purposes. The patient was otherwise in a good health condition and did not have any other positive medical or drug history. The treatment for cancer seemed to be successful and her oncologist performed routine follow-up measurements. The Permcath had remained in its position without any complication for three years followed up by routine chest X-ray study ( and ). However, the Permcath was found broken totally from its base and embolized to right ventricle and the left main pulmonary artery ( and ) after three years of insertion.
The chest X-ray (dated a year before our evaluation) revealed that the Permcath was intact and in its normal position. Furthermore, there was no history of physical or traumatic injury or accident in the precise history review for the last three years. The patient did not report any use of her Permcath during the last investigation and did not remember any obvious complaint regarding embolization, migration, or lodging the catheter. There was not any positive chief compliant at the time of detection and physical examinations. Furthermore, electrocardiography and echocardiography investigations were normal or unchanged comparing with the previous ones.
We hypothesized that sticking the catheter between her clavicle and first rib was the probable cause of its breaking (pinch-off syndrome). In consultation with colleagues and experts, and following discussion of probable symptoms and potential complications, considering the lack of any sign or symptom and the risk of open surgery to removal of the embolized catheter, we decided to leave it in its position, and the patient was advised to perform regular consecutive follow-up studies. There was no change in the patient condition and the catheter position during a one-year follow up.