A 17 year-old Tanzanian male with known SCD came in May 2018 to the Sickle Cell Clinic at the Muhimbili National Hospital (MNH) in Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania with a complaint of loss of appetite and nausea. The day before the patient had been discharged from a local hospital in Dar-es-Salaam where, having been admitted 5 days previously because of fever, nausea, loss of appetite, generalized body pain and weakness. Plasmodium falciparum malaria infection was diagnosed upon microscopic examination of blood slides. The patient was treated with artesunate injection followed by quinine tablets. A similar episode, with confirmed P. falciparum infection, had occurred some weeks earlier, when the patient had been treated with artemether-lumefantrine tablets.
The medical history showed that the patient had been diagnosed with SCD at the age of 2 years. At the age of 5 years when living in the USA, the patient was started on hydroxyurea. In 2007, he returned to Tanzania where, in 2008, he had an episode of malaria. In 2010, the patient moved to France where further investigations revealed that his SCD was sickle beta thalassaemia, and that he was also homozygous for alpha-thalassaemia. The beta thalassaemia mutation was identified as IVS1nt5G > C. Deficiencies of coagulation factors VII and X were also detected. His steady-state Hb level was 10–11 g/dL; however, he required blood transfusion on 9 occasions because of recurrent exacerbations of anaemia, attributed to hypersplenism and recurrent splenic sequestration. Therefore in 2014 he had a laparoscopic splenectomy. The spleen weighed 428 g and histology showed marked congestion without haemosiderosis or other abnormalities.
In 2016, the patient returned to Tanzania where he now attends secondary school. In 2017 the patient was feeling so well that he stopped taking hydroxyurea, his steady-state haemoglobin being 9–10 g/dL, and his only medication was folic acid (5 mg/day). However, recently he has had several bone pain crises.
On admission to MNH in May 2018 clinical examination did not reveal any specific findings. There was no severe pain and no evidence of infection. The patient’s Hb was 7.3 g/dL and a malaria test was negative. The patient continued on folic acid, hydroxyurea (500 mg/day) was re-introduced, and anti-malarial prophylaxis with proguanil (100 mg/day) was started. On monthly follow-up visits from June 2018 to September 2019 the patient has been generally well, except for occasional pain that responded to paracetamol, diclofenac or ibuprophen. Laboratory findings were stable.
A high performance liquid chromatography haemoglobin analysis confirmed in this patient the diagnosis of sickle beta thalassaemia . The mother is an A/S heterozygote and the father is a beta-thalassaemia heterozygote. Surprisingly, the patient’s sister, who reports having been generally well, was also found to have sickle beta thalassaemia.