A 59-year-old female presented to our outpatient clinic complaining of pain in the left knee, with decreased range of motion (ROM) for 1 year. When she visited our inpatient department on the next day, her ROM of the left knee was restricted from 0° to 15°. She had a history of left knee pain in the past 2 years with the absence of trauma. The pain was non-specific and significantly exacerbated by knee activity. She had no prior consultation for her symptoms but occasionally took diclofenac sodium capsules for pain relief. The pain became so severe that she could no longer walk. Her past history of illness revealed that she had atrial fibrillation and a 1-week history of swelling and pain in both legs 3 years ago. Therefore, she underwent ultrasound examination and was diagnosed with multiple thrombosis in the bilateral lower limb arteries, which was more serious in the right lower limb with complete thrombus occlusion occurring in the right popliteal artery. She underwent interventional right iliac artery thrombectomy with stent implantation and balloon dilatation of the right anterior tibial artery in our hospital 3 years ago. Since then, she has been taking anticoagulants (warfarin) for atrial fibrillation until she presented at our department. The patient had no history of endocrine and metabolic disorders such as diabetes, hyperthyroidism, and gout. During physical examination, obvious and unbearable pain upon movement was noted without any knee swelling and tenderness. Signs related to meniscus pathology or joint laxity were not found.
Blood tests were performed while the patient was hospitalized. The results revealed normal range of calcium and glucose at 2.35 and 4.99 mmol/L, respectively; however, the patient’s blood uric acid was high (480 μmol/L). The patient had normal hemoglobin of approximately 130 g/L. Three days after arthroscopic debridement, the patient developed mild leukocytosis, which was believed to be a response to surgical stress. The results of biochemical and hematologic tests were within the normal range. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left knee demonstrated a high-density shadow within the intercondylar notch with mild osteoarthritic changes . The high-density mass on plain radiographs was so inconspicuous that our radiologist did not notice or report it. Multi-planar computed tomography (CT) positioned the lesion precisely and excluded any other intra-articular pathology that could cause limitation of joint movement. The mass appeared as a non-structural lesion in the intercondylar area by coronal CT . The sagittal CT image revealed the mass inside the PCL . CT showed the mass with heterogeneous density. In both X-ray and CT images, the mass was shown as high density, which made it difficult to determine whether it was an ossified or a calcified lesion. Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is meaningful and necessary for a full evaluation of the ligaments in our patient, it was not recommended because of the presence of a stent of unknown material in the body.
Because we speculated that the patient’s discomfort resulted from mechanical locking and entrapment by the dense mass, we recommended surgery and performed arthroscopy accordingly. Intraoperatively, a hump of the PCL was revealed by arthroscopic examination, while other pathological changes were not found. The fiber fascicles of the PCL appeared after debridement of the synovial membrane covering the pathological site of the PCL. We slit open the fascicles and exposed the mass, which appeared grayish-white and seemed to be hard based on the macroscopic appearance . The mass was so closely adhered to the fibrous bundles of the ligament that debridement of the lesion was carefully performed. The pathological tissue obtained from surgery was sent for histopathology.
Pathologically, the tissues were calcified mature lamellar bone with completely fibrotic bone marrow, which was infiltrated by a few chronic inflammatory cells . The pathological tissue obtained from surgery was stained with hematoxylin–eosin. The finding of osteogenic components or lamellar bone and chondrogenic components or cartilage led to the diagnosis of HO. The hallmark of osteogenic components, which were stained clearly red, is lamellar characteristics. The chondrogenic components were stained light blue with a few chondroblasts.
Following the surgery, the patient verbalized complete relief of her symptoms. Moreover, she was allowed full ROM and weight bearing with no assistance. No complications were observed during the postoperative course. The patient was discharged after wound healing 2 weeks later. At 1-year follow-up, clinical examination demonstrated no signs of recurrence, and the patient gained full ROM with no pain or instability.