A 50-year-old woman developed an open wound in a surgical incision scar and was readmitted to our hospital on July 31, 2019 because the wound in her left chest wall had reopened.
Following radical esophagectomy in June 2016 to treat esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, in May 2019, the patient developed an open wound in the surgical incision scar on her left chest wall .
The patient was diagnosed with moderately differentiated esophageal squamous cell carcinoma in 2016. During the 3 years following surgery, the patient received repeated radiotherapy to metastatic tumor of the left lung (40 Gy/4 F), anastomotic site and lymph nodes (60 Gy/30 F), metastatic tumor of the right lung (50 Gy/5 F), metastatic tumors of both lungs (48 Gy/6 F), and sternal metastases (45 Gy/15 F) with time sequence .
When the patient was readmitted to our hospital on July 31, 2019, she was pale and dehydrated on physical examination, and the wound in her left chest wall had reopened, was approximately 2 cm × 3 cm, and had malodorous purulent secretion emanating from it.
Bacterial culture and drug sensitivity testing of the pleural drainage fluid on August 8, 2019 revealed positivity for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans. Regular bacterial culture of the pleural abscess drainage fluid indicated that Pseudomonas aeruginosa (August 29) and Klebsiella ozaena (September 30) were present.
When the patient presented in May 2019, whole body positron emission tomography (PET-CT) indicated the formation of a gastro-thoracic fistula, with lesions involving the lateral chest wall and active malignancies in the left lung, inferior segment sternotomy, and right lobe of the liver. A gastro-thoracic fistula of approximately 5 cm, located in the greater curvature of the stomach, was confirmed on endoscopy . Poor drainage of the abscess by the drainage tube applied was detected on computed tomography (CT) examination in September 2019.
The patient did not smoke or consume alcohol. Her mother and brother both died of esophageal cancer.