A 23-year-old gravida 2, para 1, with no known medical history presented at 38 weeks of gestation with spontaneous rupture of membranes, contractions, and blood-tinged discharge. She reported uncomplicated prenatal care; however, no records could be obtained.
On admission, the patient's vital signs were within normal limits. She was 8 cm dilated on the cervical exam. Due to her desire for pain control, and in anticipation of expeditious delivery in a multiparous patient, anesthesia was consulted for neuraxial analgesia. A review of her obstetric history revealed a prior uncomplicated vaginal delivery at 38 weeks of gestation. Laboratory studies from that admission revealed hemoglobin of 12.5 g/dL and platelet count of 223 K/μL. She had no known history of thrombocytopenia, so an epidural was placed prior to obtaining complete blood count results, which was in accordance with hospital policy.
Laboratory testing resulted afterwards and was notable for hemoglobin of 7.1 g/dL, hematocrit of 22.1%, mean corpuscular volume of 74.7 fL, and platelets of <10 K/μL. Upon further questioning, the patient reported a history of ecchymosis and an episode of epistaxis 2 weeks prior. She reported no history of heavy menstrual bleeding, hemarthrosis, or bleeding gums. On examination, no pallor, ecchymosis, or organomegaly was detected. There was a concern for hemodilution of the blood sample due to the location of the blood draw or laboratory error, so the blood was redrawn.
While awaiting repeat laboratory results, the patient delivered a male neonate by spontaneous vaginal delivery. Neonatal laboratory studies were normal with a hemoglobin of 18.8 g/dL and platelet count of 245 K/μL. Total quantitative blood loss during delivery was 400 mL. Epidural was removed immediately post delivery. Subsequently, repeat laboratory tests confirmed the initial results, with hemoglobin of 5.6 g/dL, hematocrit of 17.7%, and platelets of <10 K/μL. Further laboratory studies showed no marked abnormalities in coagulation profile or hepatic panel results. Iron and B12 deficiencies were noted.
Peripheral blood smear revealed microcytic anemia with anisocytosis, polychromasia, and thrombocytopenia. Teardrop cells, reticulocytes, and small spherocytes were present. No overt schistocytes or fragmentation of red blood cells was noted. There was no concern for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Antibody screen was positive for warm autoantibodies. DAT was positive for anti-immunoglobulin G and anti-complement antibodies. The diagnosis of ES was made based on the positive DAT in the setting of hemolytic anemia.
Hematology was consulted, and transfusion of 2 units of red blood cells and 1 pack of platelets was recommended. The patient also received 1 gram of intravenous iron dextran. She was treated with oral dexamethasone, 40 mg daily for 4 days, with a subsequent rise in platelets to 55 K/μL . She was discharged on postpartum day 4 with a plan for weekly outpatient laboratory studies and oral prednisone (60 mg daily). She was also started on folate (1 mg daily) and B12 (1000 mcg monthly) supplementation.
On postpartum day 9, follow-up laboratory studies revealed a platelet count of <10 K/μL. The patient received a second 4-day course of oral dexamethasone, 40 mg daily, with a good response. Her platelet count rose to 55 K/μL. On postpartum day 18, laboratory results showed the platelet count decreased to 16 K/μL, and she received a third course of dexamethasone, 20 mg daily for 4 days, and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), 1 mg/kg for 2 days. Repeat DAT remained positive for warm autoantibodies. Given the poor response to steroids, rituximab therapy was initiated. On postpartum days 21 and 28, the patient received 2 doses of rituximab (375 mg/m2 weekly).
On postpartum day 34, the patient presented to the emergency department with chest pain and shortness of breath. The evaluation was notable for elevated D-dimer, and a computed tomography scan was obtained due to suspicion of pulmonary embolism. Imaging revealed ground-glass opacities and an acute pulmonary embolism . Notably, lower extremity dopplers during initial admission showed no venous thromboses. The patient was started on anticoagulation with high-intensity heparin infusion. The patient reported that her mother had tested positive for the recently emerged novel coronavirus (COVID-19). Given her symptoms, sick contact status, and imaging findings, the patient was tested for COVID-19. Nasopharyngeal specimen testing for detection of the 2019 novel coronavirus ribonucleic acid by real-time polymerase chain reaction was positive. The platelet count on readmission was 131 K/μL and remained stable over 200 K/μL. Rituximab infusion was held for several weeks due to active COVID-19 infection and stable platelet count.