A 41-year-old woman has referred to our medical center, complaining of fullness and vague pain on her right upper quadrant. Her symptoms have initiated one year ago. Her pain has worsens after eating. The pain has occasionally radiated to her back between her scapulae. Patient has not complained of fever, nausea, vomiting or jaundice.
Her assessment has continued by liver sonography and abdominal CT scan and octerotid scan.
Sonography has demonstrated multi cystic lesion in lever, suggestive for “Hydatid cyst”. Abdominal CT scan has revealed multi cystic lesion in right liver lobe, measuring about 100 × 68 mm ( and ). This finding was compatible with “hydatid cyst” or “cyst adenoma”. Retroperitoneal area and pancreas appears normal. MRI demonstrated multi lobular cysts in 6th and 7 th segments of her liver and chest imaging was normal, octerotid scan has not shwon metastatic neuroendocrine tour of liver.
Cholecystectomy has performed on her 5 years ago, because of symptomatic cholelithiasis. Patient has occasionally taken oral contraceptive pills.
Immunogenic tests results were negative for hydatid cyst. Mammography has shown benign changes, thyroid scan was normal.
The patient has volunteered for hepatic resection due to these findings. Right hepatic lobectomy has performed; pathologic result has revealed well differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasm (G2).
Every single neuroendocrine tumor had considerable potential for malignancy. These tumors have well differentiated neuroendocrine tumors classified as caracinoid tumors. They might appear as poorly differentiated or mixed.
Patient has undergone conservative surgery. Permanent pathology has shown that surgical margins were tumor free. Classic right hepatectomy has performed on the patient, tumor was nonfunctional, and therefore, there was no need to hormonal treatment such as somatostatin.
Pathologic report after tumor resection (right lobectomy) was well differentiated neurendocine neoplasm findings have shown mildly atypical cells with small and pepper nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in trabecular and glandular pattern with some nest formation. Few mitotic figures hemorrhage and foci of necrosis have seen. Immunohistochemistry has done after tumor resection ki 67 was positive in about 3% of tumoral cells, ck7 was positive, TTf1 and ck20 were negative. Synaptophysin and chromogranin were positive ( - ).
Post op period was uneventful, patient symptoms disappear entirely.