A 78-year-old male presented in March 2002 with a 2 months history of change in bowel habit and rectal bleeding. The examination revealed a tumour of the lower rectum. An abdomino-perineal excision was performed and the pathological examination revealed a Dukes C undifferentiated adenocarcinoma with the lymph nodes involvement (15/22). He had received adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy postoperatively. He remained well until 2 years later, when he presented with urogenital complaints: penile ulcerous lesion, semierectile penis and voiding dysfunction.
A follow-up examination was performed in April 2005 following the development of indurations, hyperaemia, and oedema of the penis and demonstrated 0.5 cm and 0.3 cm ulcerative lesions on glans penis . The examination of the superficial inguinal lymph nodes and the abdominal examination showed no remarkable signs. There was also no history of trauma or infectious disease.
A complete blood cell count showed an increased white blood cell count of 16 x 103 / μL (normal range: 5–10.0 x 103/μL), anaemia (with a haemoglobin of 10.2 g/dL), normal level of PSA but increased levels of CEA (66.6 ng/ml, normal value <3 ng/ml) and CA19.9 (67.5 U/ml, normal value <37 U/ml). Penile US was normal for corpus spongiosum and cavernosus. CT demonstrated metastases of several thoracic vertebras and sacroiliac joint. Furthermore, MRI of the penis showed multiple pathological focuses in T2 signal and a nodular lesion that measured 15 mm in size, occupying the glans penis (,). The patient underwent excisional biopsy of the glans penis and inguinal lymph node, which revealed metastatic adenocarcinoma consistent with his rectal carcinoma. The patient received chemotherapy for metastatic disease until disease progression and unacceptable toxicity. The order of drug administration each week was irinotecan (80 mg/m2 i.v. day 1) followed by leucovorin (500 mg/m2 i.v day 1) and 5-fluorouracil (2300 mg/m2 continuous infusion day 1). Two days after chemotherapy administration of the third cycle the patient was admitted to our department with fatigue, weakness, dysuria and hypotension. Increased level of BUN, creatinin and decreased level of blood count were registered. Despite the whole blood transfusion, the values of blood count decreased (down to 5.4 g/L) during hospitalization. He was admitted for further medical therapy but during this admission his general condition deteriorated and he died with progressive disease.
Overall it appeared that this patient had a disseminated metastatic rectal carcinoma, with an unusual settled for the penis.