A 50-year-old postmenopausal Caucasian woman was diagnosed with high-grade ovarian serous carcinoma with peritoneal carcinomatosis in March 2013. First-line neoadjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel was administered at 3-week intervals for 4 cycles. After the fourth cycle, the patient underwent surgery, achieving optimal cytoreduction. Anatomopathological analysis revealed ovarian serous carcinoma in samples of omental implants and in 2 of 21 excised adenopathies, and high-grade papillary serous cystadenocarcinoma with frequent psammoma bodies in the ovarian samples. Surgery was followed by carboplatin plus neoadjuvant paclitaxel chemotherapy administered every 3 weeks for 4 cycles. In June 2014 – 8 months after the last cycle – PET-CT imaging showed extensive supra- and infradiaphragmatic lymph node involvement. At that point, and after an 8-month PFI, chemotherapy with trabectedin (i.v. infusion of 1.1 mg/m2) plus PLD (i.v. infusion of 30 mg/m2) every 3 weeks was initiated. Partial response was achieved. After the 12th cycle, CA-125 levels decreased from 215 to 59 (U/mL), and CT imaging showed that the size of known portacaval adenopathies had decreased from 15 to 10 mm. In November 2015, after the 18th cycle, CT imaging evidenced disease progression at supradiaphragmatic level, gallbladder and abdominal wall; CA-125 levels were elevated (717 U/mL) and ECOG performance status was 0. Given that disease progression occurred in a BRCA mutation carrier with a 25-month PFI, the management plan was to achieve platinum response and thereafter administering olaparib as maintenance therapy.
Third-line chemotherapy was initiated with carboplatin AUC4 on day 1 and gemcitabine 1,000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 every 3 weeks. After the third cycle, imaging confirmed complete response, which was maintained after the sixth and final cycle. At this point, maintenance treatment with olaparib 400 mg/12 h was initiated. At present (November 2016), 6 months after the start of maintenance treatment with olaparib, complete response is maintained. All treatments were well tolerated, no treatment-related toxicity was observed, and no dose reduction of any of the chemotherapy agents was necessary.