A 32-year-old Hispanic primigravida with a spontaneous pregnancy was referred to our institution after a fetoscopic procedure of laser coagulation of anastomoses at 18 weeks of gestation due to TRAP sequence. She was married and had moved to Panama from Venezuela. She did not have any chronic medical illness and lived in a suburb that was well served. At the time of ultrasound examination, the fetal anatomy was normal, and amniocentesis revealed a normal male karyotype (46,XY). At 22 weeks of gestation, symptoms of premature labor emerged, including uterine contractions and effacement of the cervix. Nifedipine was used as a tocolytic medication. Follow-up scans were obtained in search of progressive polyhydramnios and increasing dimensions in the acardiac twin, and signs of cardiac insufficiency were evaluated, including increased cardiac dimensions, tricuspid valve regurgitation, and pericardial effusion in the ex-pump twin. The result of fetal echocardiography performed at 25 weeks of gestation was normal. See Table .
At 26 weeks of gestation, ultrasound scans showed a striking tubular dilation of the lower digestive tract . On color or power Doppler examination, there was no identifiable flow signal within or between the dilated bowel loops. At that time, the differential diagnoses were jejunal atresia, ileal atresia, meconium ileus, intestinal volvulus, and meconium peritonitis . Umbilical artery Doppler was normal. At 29 + 6 weeks, after preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM), magnesium sulfate for 24 hours and an antenatal corticosteroid (betamethasone) was administered. A male infant weighing 1458 g was born via cesarean section. The result of neonatal examination of the abdomen was normal. The newborn was diagnosed in the early neonatal period with intestinal perforation. Exploratory laparotomy confirmed volvulus and intestinal malrotation, and end-to-end anastomosis was performed. The midportion of the small bowel contained a closed bowel obstruction that was strangled and became gangrenous. The volvulus was untwisted, and the gangrenous segment with a sealed perforation was resected. A primary ileostomy was performed with resection of 10 cm of distended ileum. The newborn’s postoperative course was uneventful, and intestinal continuity was restored. Oral feeds began 10 days after the procedure, with the patient previously receiving total parenteral nutrition. The boy is now 5 years old, and his clinical assessments are normal. Written informed consent was obtained for the publication of the present case report.