A 59-year-old man presented to the emergency department with cloudy vision and difficulty of movement. It was learned that the previous night, before sleeping, the patient had wrapped a cotton pad impregnated with spirit around his knees and covered his knees with stretch film to end his pain. The patient had remained for over ten hours with the cotton pad and stretch film wrapped around his knees. Anamnesis from the patient was that he had had knee pain for over ten years and that he was not treated with any medical or surgical treatments. He had no comorbid chronic diseases. His father had hypertension, and coronary artery disease was in his family history. The patient’s Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was 15. Vital findings revealed arterial tension of 130/85 mmHg, heart rate of 86/bpm, respiration rate of 18/min, temperature of 36.8°C, and oxygen saturation of 98%. The only note on physical examination was redness on the knees. The biochemical parameters of the patient are shown in . Because of a high anion gap, metabolic acidosis was considered, caused by methanol. Regarding a differential diagnosis, diabetic ketoacidosis, ethanol intoxication, salicylic acid intoxication, lactic acidosis, and uremia were considered. All of these diagnoses were ruled out according to the drug and ethanol abuse anamnesis, kidney function tests, and blood glucose levels. Brain tomography and MRI were performed to rule out an intracranial event, and results were normal with no radiological pathological findings such as brain edema or atrophy, infarctions, or hemorrhages of the putamen. On ophthalmic examination there were light perception and light reflex in both eyes. The patient had no signs or symptoms of intoxication in funduscopic examination. Macula was normal, there was not cavity or pale of the optic nerve. The visual field examination was normal. HCO3 replacement treatment was started. The blood methanol level could not be studied, and antidotal treatment could not be given, so the patient was put on hemodialysis. After three hours of hemodialysis, arterial blood gas analysis was improved. Anion gap and acidosis were normalized. Then, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for observation. Two days later, the patient was discharged to home with a healthy status. One week later, the patient returned for neurological and ophthalmic examinations that revealed no pathology. He had healthy vision and movement.