A 75-year-old Polish man with a history of kidney stones and colonic diverticulosis presented with bright red bleeding from his rectum for the previous five days to our emergency department. About two months prior, he had developed lower abdominal pain, left-sided more than right-sided. He was seen in Urgent Care and the diagnosis of urolithiasis was made as he had 6 to 10 red blood cells per high power field (RBCs/HPF) on urine analysis. He was referred to a urologist for further evaluation. Renal ultrasound was performed and showed benign-appearing bilateral renal cysts without renal stones or hydronephrosis. A cystoscopy was suggested, but not pursued. During the same period of time, he also noticed a generalized skin rash, more pronounced on his lower extremities. He was asymptomatic from the rash at that point with no itching or pain. No respiratory infections had occurred before the onset of the rash. He was seen by his family physician for follow up of his abdominal pain and was treated with a 10-day course of ciprofloxacin and metronidazole for possible diverticulitis as the patient had a known finding of diverticulosis on abdominal computed tomography in the past.
He reported rectal bleeding and worsening left lower abdominal pain for five days prior to presenting to the emergency department for evaluation. He had had swollen bilateral proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints of his hands in the past two years; however, there was no currently active joint pain. He denied having Raynaud's disease, sun sensitivity, pleurisy, urethritis, oral aphthae, alopecia, or acute eye problems. He also denied recent history of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors use, food allergies, and vaccinations or insect bites. On physical examination, there was a generalized, palpable, purpuric rash on his trunk and both extremities, more pronounced on his lower extremities and buttocks . Abdominal examination showed mild tenderness of his left lower abdomen without guarding or rebound. There was bilateral pedal edema without significant joint swelling. Laboratory testing showed a mildly elevated serum creatinine of 1.3. Urine analysis was remarkable for microscopic hematuria; dysmorphic RBCs 20 to 25, and new onset proteinuria; urine protein-to-creatinine ratio was 1.53. The C-reactive protein was slightly elevated at 1.3. Additional blood tests included anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), cryoglobulins, hepatitis B and C antibodies, anti-double stranded DNA antibodies, complement levels, serum protein electrophoresis, and myeloperoxidase and PR3 antibodies that were negative. Abdominal computed tomography with contrast showed a diffusely edematous and thickened sigmoid colon and probably the rectum with surrounding inflammation. The possibilities of infectious colitis, ischemic colitis, and vasculitis such as small vessel and drug-induced vasculitis were raised. Emergency flexible sigmoidoscopy was performed and showed severe petechiae starting just above the anal verge, throughout the examined part of the colon, and much more pronounced in the rectal area . Colonic biopsy demonstrated small vessel, acute inflammation in colonic mucosa with superficial hemorrhage and patchy, acute cryptitis. Skin biopsy revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis involving the small vessels. A direct immunofluorescent technique showed rare colloid bodies with antibodies to IgG and IgA, trace granular basement membrane staining with antibodies to C3 and trace basement membrane staining with antibodies to IgM. With these clinical and laboratory results he was diagnosed with a case of adult onset HSP and was initially treated with intravenous methylprednisolone 125 mg every 8 hours for one day and intravenous isotonic fluids. There was marked improvement of abdominal pain. Skin lesions gradually faded away and rectal bleeding resolved. After nephrology evaluation of acute kidney injury, along with proteinuria and hematuria, he underwent a kidney biopsy which demonstrated IgA mesangioproliferative glomerulonephritis with less than 50% crescents. Oral prednisone tapering was continued to complete the six months of steroid therapy. Acute kidney injury and proteinuria were markedly improved after one month of treatment. He was doing well without another episode of rectal bleeding.