A 41-year-old female of Middle Eastern ethnicity was presented to the emergency department in September 2018 by her family via ambulance. The patient was unemployed and had a past medical history of left leg fibro-osteoblastic sarcoma since 2015, which was treated with chemotherapy and radiotherapy. She had no other significant medical history and was not on regular medications other than painkillers. She also had an above-the-knee amputation of the left leg. There is no relevant family history reported. The patient is a nonsmoker and uses a wheelchair. She was complaining of a 3 days duration of shortness of breath associated with chest tightness, dry cough, progressive orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. She has no associated chest pain, palpitations, or lower limb edema. On examination, she was conscious, oriented, and alert but in respiratory distress. She was desaturated with SpO2 =91, her heart rate (HR) =130, her respiratory rate (RR) =30, and her blood pressure (BP) =90/50 with good air entry bilaterally, on auscultation. She has bronchial breathing on the right lower zone and bilateral basal crepitation, her jugular venous pressure was not elevated, and she has no lymphadenopathy or breast masses.
After primary assessment with a thorough history and physical examination, an ECG was done and showed sinus tachycardia, X-ray showed bilateral apical infiltrate with air bronchogram, lower limb Doppler showed no deep venous thrombosis, her D-dimer was negative, and the labs including complete blood count showed WBC of 19 000 with a shift to the left, creatinine (Cr) =1.7 and troponin =30. She was transferred to the intensive care unit to keep under observation as she was desaturated and her blood pressure was low, and she was given levofloxacin, ceftriaxone, and sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim because pneumonia was suspected, and septic work-up was done with pending results.
On the second day of admission, her condition deteriorated; a repeat chest X-ray showed a bilateral apical infiltrate suggestive of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and she was intubated. Her mechanical ventilation settings, tidal volume (TV) =380, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) =10, fractional inspired O2 (FiO2) =100%, and RR =16. Her vitals include BP =90/60, oxygen saturation =88%, and HR =130 despite her being on a maximum dose of norepinephrine of 30 μg. RR was increased to 20, PEEP increased to 14, and given 1000 cm3 running intravenous (i.v.) fluid. Her saturation improved to (99%) and she planned to decrease FiO2 and PEEP according to saturation. But her BP still did not improve; an urgent echocardiogram was done and showed a left atrial mass .
After the echocardiogram findings, the Cardiothoracic team consulted urgently and advised urgent surgery. The decision to proceed with the surgery was made after consulting the anesthesiologist and the cardiologist. The surgery was performed by a highly skilled and experienced cardiothoracic surgeon, who was assisted by a full staff of nurses, anesthesiologists, and other medical professionals. During the surgery, the chest was opened by a mid-sternotomy incision. After heparinization, aortic and bicaval cannulation was performed. Cooled blood antegrade cardioplegia was given after cross-clamping the ascending aorta. The left atrium was opened, and a huge tumor measuring 6×6 cm was resected en bloc . The mitral valve was tested and showed no significant regurgitation, then after closing the left atrium and de-clamping the aorta, the heartbeat was sinus. De-airing was done with transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance, and the patient was disconnected from the bypass after warming with high inotropic support. TEE showed mild mitral regurgitation with good left ventricle function and no residual masses. A biopsy was taken and showed myxoid sarcoma.
On the day of surgery, the patient was in critical condition on noradrenaline, adrenaline, milrinone, and dopamine, and then we started weaning until we reached 10 μg of norepinephrine, and her situation improved and she became hemodynamically stable with a mean arterial pressure of 80. She was on mechanical ventilation: TV =500, RR =22, and FiO2 =50%. A chest X-ray post-operation showed bilateral patchy opacities. She was kept on meropenem and sulfamethoxazole–trimethoprim. She was extubated in the morning of the second day post-operation; her vital signs were good without O2 support, and she had a good urine output. After 11 days of the surgery, the patient was in good general condition with a healthy dry sternal wound, so she was discharged with full instructions and to continue her management with the oncology center for possible chemoradiotherapy.
After we discharged her, she did a chest computed tomography, which showed metastatic lung nodules. So chemotherapy was planned. Ten days after her discharge and before her chemotherapy session, her doctor referred the patient to us because of a turbid, moderate discharge from the sternal wound, which was treated successfully. Three months after her second discharge, she developed a general weakness of 2 days duration associated with loss of appetite, diarrhea without blood or mucus, and cough. She had no history of fever or vomiting; therefore, she was brought to the emergency room. On examination, she was pale, not responsive, and had pale extremities; she also had shallow breathing with oxygen saturation of 70% and tachycardia with HR of 137. She was managed as a case of hypovolemic shock initially, two i.v. lines were applied and given 1000 cm3 of normal saline; afterward, she had a BP of 80/60. Because of her low oxygen saturation, she was given oxygen via a facemask, and then her oxygen saturation went up to the 80s. Unfortunately, despite the resuscitative efforts, the patient died.