A 68-year old female presented with pulsatile swelling over the lower part of right forearm near the wrist joint which was painful and gradually increasing in size for past 8-weeks .
She had undergone coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) along aortic valve replacement 2 months earlier at a private centre for which coronary angiogram was performed preoperatively through right transradial route. She was receiving aspirin-325 mg, warfarin-5 mg, frusemide-40 mg, and rosuvastatin- 20 mg.
After few days following angiography, small swelling was noted at the radial puncture site for which she consulted her physician. According to her, manual compression was attempted which failed to resolve it. She was advised surgery which she refused as she was already traumatized by her past experience. By the time she visited our hospital, swelling had already progressed. On clinical examination, blood pressure was 112/84 mm Hg in left arm in supine position. Pulse rate was 76/min, regular, normal in volume, with no special character and all pulses were equally palpable. On auscultation, S1 was normal and S2 was normal with aortic click. Her electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and chest X-ray postero-anterior view indicated normal cardiac size. Her routine investigation, and biochemistry including international normalized ratio was within the normal range. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed normal systolic function, normal opening and closing of aortic valve prosthesis, and grade II diastolic dysfunction. Duplex ultrasound was performed which confirmed it to be a large pseudoaneurysm arising from right radial artery with a narrow neck (0.18 mm) .
Haematoma was ruled on the basis of pulsatile nature and persistent communication of the swelling with the arterial lumen with to and fro flow through its neck. True aneurysm was ruled out on the basis of narrow neck of the swelling.
As manual compression had already failed to resolve the swelling and it had been more than 2 months old, compression using ultrasound probe was not considered, and thrombin injection being unavailable, percutaneous endovascular exclusion was planned after taking her informed consent as she refused any surgery further. 6-F sheath was introduced into right brachial artery antegradely and cocktail containing 200 μg nitroglycerin, 2.5 mg diltiazem, and 5000 IU unfractionated heparin (UH) was administered. Radial angiogram was performed through 6-F Judkins Right (JR) guide catheter (Medtronic Inc, USA) which revealed pseudoaneurysm, its narrow neck and large size (A, B). 0.014-inch runthrough wire (Terumo Inc, Japan) was parked into distal branch of radial artery. 3.5x18-mm Graftmaster covered stent (Abott Vascular, USA) was positioned over the neck of pseudoaneurysm (C).
The stent was slowly deployed over one minute time at 14-atm pressure (A). Subsequent angiogram demonstrated complete exclusion of pseudoaneurysm without any spillage of contrast into the sac (B).
The sheath was removed after 6 hours of keeping the activated clotting time < 180 seconds and replaced by light pressure bandage using dynaplast, which was removed next day. Ultrasonography on the following day revealed partially thrombosed and completely excluded pseudoaneurysm and patent radial artery .
The patient was discharged in stable condition with appropriate advice. In the 6-week follow up, the swelling had completely normalized . At 1-year follow up, radial artery was patent as Barbeau test was normal.