A 1 month old baby boy from rural Pakistan presented to a university hospital with three swellings- two swellings in the occiput and cervical region and third swelling in the thoracolumbar region. His mother informed us that the swellings were present at the time of birth. Besides, these swellings, the mother also complained that the baby moved both his lower limbs sluggishly. The baby was delivered vaginally at 36 weeks of gestation at a local hospital and the baby cried immediately after birth. She had not received any antenatal care. On examination, there were two cystic swellings on the occipital and cervical region each measuring 9 × 6 cm and 2 × 2 cm respectively. Third cystic swelling measuring 4 × 4 cm was present in the thoracolumbar region. Skin over the individual swellings were complete. Anterior fontanelle was soft and open. There was no evidence of other congenital malformations. There were decreased movements in bilateral lower limbs. Muscle tone was normal in all limbs. Anal tone was normal.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) containing sac measuring 9.3 × 4.5 × 5.7 cm with brain tissue herniating through a defect in occipital bone and posterior elements of the upper cervical vertebra in the midline. Bilateral lateral ventricles were mildly dilated. With this, the diagnosis of occipito-cervical meningo-encephaloceles with mild hydrocephalus was made for the upper cystic swellings. MRI thoracolumbar spine revealed a CSF containing sac measuring approximately 2 × 3.6 × 3.6 cm herniating through a defect in posterior elements of D11 through L1 vertebrae. An intramedullary hyperintense T2 and hypointense T1 signal were noted opposite to C6 to D11 level suggestive of a syrinx. The diagnosis of thoracolumbar meningomyelocele with syrinx was made. .
The baby was admitted to the neurosurgery ward with the diagnosis of occipito-cervical meningo-encephaloceles and thoracolumbar meningomyelocele and was planned for excision and repair. Surgery was performed. Both the encephaloceles were repaired first. Neural tissue was found in upper encephalocele which was pushed back into the cranial cavity and dura was closed with polyglactin 910. Neural tissue was found retracted in the spinal canal while operating on thoracolumbar swelling. The neural tissue was separated from the surrounding tissue. Nerve filaments were isolated gently. There was no associated lipoma in the surrounding tissue. Dura was closed with polyglactin 910. Wound was closed in layers with polyglactin 910. The skin was closed with prolene. Valsalva maneuver was performed after repair of dura and skin to check for CSF leak.
Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the neurosurgical ward and observed for the development of signs of acute hydrocephalus. But the patient remained fine. The patient stayed in the hospital for 1 month. At discharge, the patient was tolerating oral feed. Neurology was the same as in the preoperative period. The patient was followed up again after 1 month and was doing fine.