A 28-year-old woman presented with hearing loss for five years, intermittent dizziness and headache for one month, and facial paralysis for eight days (House-Brackmann II). On admission, neurological and physical examination revealed profound mixed hearing impairment of the right ear (116 dBHL; ). No other apparent abnormalities were detected in her facial sensory, mastication function, and tone of voice. No systematic disease, family history of neurofibromatosis, or other genetic or bone diseases were reported in her past. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a dumbbell mass with a maximal diameter of approximately 5.0 cm at the right cerebellopontine angle (CPA) and the temporal bone . The lesion compressed the brainstem significantly and exhibited low- to iso-intense on T1-weighted images and iso- to high-intense on T2 fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images and heterogeneously enhanced after gadolinium-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid administration . In the computed tomography (CT) scan, we observed an enlargement of the right IAC with significantly bony destruction of the temporal bone . There was suspicious soft tissue in the mastoid cells, which was later proved to be part of the tumor during the surgery . Based on MRI and CT scans, BrainLab iPlan Stereotaxy software (version 3.0.6; BrainLab, Munich, Germany) was applied to reconstruct the three-dimensional model to demonstrate the spatial relationship of the tumor, adjacent nerves, arteries, and veins .
The patient’s primary diagnosis was GVS with the temporal bone invasion, and a sequential approach of microscopic resection and GKRS was applied. Firstly, microscopic resection was performed via a retrosigmoid suboccipital approach under intraoperative cranial nerve monitoring per established protocol (–). Intraoperatively, the tumor was yellow-greyish and moderately tough. Through the aid of preoperative three-dimensional reconstruction and intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring of the facial nerve, the facial nerve was identified in the medial side of the tumor, and we observed the proximal cochleovestibular nerve extending into the tumor, which suggested its cochleovestibular origin. After meticulous arachnoid dissection and intra- and extracapsular decompression, the arachnoid plane at the brainstem was preserved, and a tiny tumor carpet was left on the facial nerve, owing to its extremely high adherence to the nerve. Near-total resection was achieved for the tumor in the posterior cranial fossa. The facial nerve was preserved anatomically and functionally, which was confirmed by the motor unit potential in the proximal stimulating of the nerve root after tumor debulking.
After surgery, no noticeable functional deterioration of the facial nerve or other complications were detected. Postoperative MRI confirmed the extent of microsurgical resection , and histopathological examination demonstrated typical Verocay bodies in the Antoni A region in hematoxylin and eosin staining with S100b+ in immunohistochemistry .
To further investigate its invasive behavior, the expression of inflammatory markers including biomarkers of macrophage and microglia (ionized calcium-binding adaptor molecule-1 [Iba-1]) and proinflammatory cytokine (tumor necrosis factor-α [TNFα]) was evaluated via immunohistochemistry on 4-μm paraffin slides. For the control, a typical large VS patient was randomly selected from the pathological database. Compared with the control subject (data not shown), obvious higher density of Iba-1 positive cells was observed in both the Antoni A and B regions with higher expression of TNFα , which also exhibited typical morphology of hyperplastic macrophages and microglia.
Three months after surgery, the patient’s clinical symptoms (dizziness and headache) were relieved, and no residual lesion was observed in the CPA region. GKRS was applied according to plan using the Leksell Model B Gamma Knife (Elekta Instruments, Stockholm, Sweden) for the tumor in the middle cranial fossa and petrous bone. The maximum marginal dose was 14 Gy with a 50% isodose curve. After the GKRS, there were no new symptoms. One month after GKRS, postoperative MRI demonstrated that the petrous part of the tumor had asymptomatic enlargement and degeneration of its central region . One year later, the tumor showed shrinkage of the residual lesion and further cystic degeneration . No functional deterioration of the facial and auditory nerves on the affected side were noticed, and the patient kept good hearing on the healthy ear. During the treatment and follow-up, we kept the communication with this patient and informed her our findings of the condition. In the last clinical visit, the patient felt relieved and satisfied with the outcome.