A 24-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency department of Beijing Friendship Hospital of Capital Medical University 4 h after receiving a knife stab injury to the neck due to urban violence. The patient weighed 98 kg and had a history of bipolar disorder. Upon arrival at the hospital, her level of consciousness was normal. She presented with a hoarse voice, intermittent hemoptysis, and slight mixed dyspnea during quiet respiration without hypoxemia. Clinical examination showed a 1 cm-long skin wound in the upper left neck with an intermittent hemorrhage , decreased breath sounds on the right side, and palpable subcutaneous emphysema. Chest and cervical computed tomography (CT) showed right pneumothorax , severe subcutaneous pneumatosis, and partial rupture of the trachea at the level of the thyroid isthmus . Active bleeding was controlled with the appropriate amount and direction of direct pressure using gauze. A difficult airway was anticipated and the patient was expeditiously transferred to the operating room to avoid airway compromise and worsening hemorrhage rapidly.
First, aimed at providing sufficient respiratory function reserve for oncoming risks during airway management, closed thoracic drainage under local anesthesia was performed. Rapid sequence induction and intubation as opposed to awake intubation was chosen based on the following considerations: 1. The patient had a high risk of being uncooperative owing to existing mental disease. 2. Awake intubation was also a high-risk approach—rapid airway deterioration might have occurred under sedation and topical anesthesia, and during flexible laryngoscopy, due to an excessive coughing reaction and increased airway bleeding. Excessive blood or secretions in the airway might have limited the effectiveness of the topical anesthetics and adequately deep sedation without topical anesthesia would not have been achieved. The presence of copious amounts of tracheal blood would have likely rendered flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy difficult or impossible. A longer-than-normal approach might have placed the patient in danger since she initially appeared stable but could have decompensated rapidly. 3. A fiberoptic bronchoscope with a large suction port was not available.
Similar to awake intubation, a tracheotomy under local anesthesia was anticipated challenging and difficult for several reasons. First of all, the patient had a high risk of being uncooperative owing to existing mental disease. Secondly, we have to consider other risk factors under whatever anesthesia, such as unknown vascular injury, distorted anatomy, hemostasis, airway protection from bleeding and external pressure during operation, patient position and longer than normal duration of operation. Above all, we don’t think that the risk of the failure of airway during tracheotomy under local anesthesia initially is lower than that after failure of transoral intubation. And if intubation succeed, it avoid placing the patient in danger due to airway compromise. So, we did not prefer tracheotomy under local anesthesia in this patient.
Before beginning the intubation sequence, communication between the anesthesiologist and surgeon focused on the risk that a preexisting anatomic defect in the patient’s trachea made the endotracheal tube more apt to penetrate the tear and be introduced into a false lumen. Consequently, a double setup, where both an alternative airway device and surgical airway were identified and readied, was used. After preoxygenation for five minutes as usual and rapid sequence induction using midazolam, sulfentanyl, etomidate and rocuronium bromide, the patient’s SpO2 level decreased to 70% in 40 s, Transoral intubation with video laryngoscopy but with no cricoid pressure was administered quickly; however, after successfully passing through the glottis, resistance was encountered. The patient’s SpO2 level continued decreasing to 40% after replenishing oxygen. The tracheal tube was thought to have been introduced into a false lumen passage and the patient was rapidly extubated. Simultaneously, a surgical procedure was initiated. During surgery, an Laryngeal Mask Airway (LMA) was placed with facilitated bag-mask ventilation, which maintained the SpO2 level at approximately 80% while the surgeon cut the skin, provided hemostasis, and identified distorted anatomical landmarks. When the pretracheal fascia was nearly exposed, the SpO2 level suddenly decreased to lower than 10%; the broken end of trachea was roughly identified, and the tube was introduced into the distal trachea with no further reduction in SpO2. After an adequate SpO2 level was maintained, a penetrating injury from the upper left neck to the right apex of the chest was found. The thyroid isthmus and right anterior tracheal wall were ruptured and the right recurrent laryngeal nerve transected. Bleeding originated mainly from the thyroid vessels.
After the surgery, the patient recovered from anesthesia without impairment of brain function. Postoperative chest CT showed aspiration pneumonia . After 2 weeks of hospitalization, the tracheal tube was successfully removed and the tracheostomy was repaired by pulling the skin using medical tape, without the need for further reconstruction surgery .