This report describes an asymptomatic 62-year-old Caucasian man with a deceased-donor kidney transplant for end-stage kidney disease for obstructive uropathy due to renal calculi from childhood, 14 years post-transplantation, who was diagnosed as having extra-nodal marginal zone MALT lymphoma with bone marrow and colonic involvement; the diagnosis was made after a positive occult blood testing, which was conducted as part of routine cancer screening post-renal transplantation. He did not have any B symptoms including night sweats or unintended weight loss. He did not have any altered bowel habit and no overt per rectal bleeding. He did not have any proceeding infective symptoms prior to diagnosis.
His past medical history included gout, secondary hyperparathyroidism, osteoporosis, and a left lower limb deep venous thrombosis (previously on warfarin). He did not have any co-existing autoimmune conditions. Maintenance immunosuppression was cyclosporine A, mycophenolate mofetil, and prednisolone. Other medications were allopurinol, diltiazem, metoprolol, irbesartan, calcitriol, and cholecalciferol. He had no family history of colorectal carcinoma, inflammatory bowel disease, or coeliac disease. He lived at home with his wife, was independent and employed as a law lecturer. He never smoked tobacco and drank alcohol minimally.
On physical examination, he had an easily palpable transplant kidney but no other remarkable findings including no clinical lymphadenopathy. He had a baseline serum creatinine of 170 μmol/L and urine albumin-creatinine ratio of 4.7 mg/mmol after renal transplantation. He had a mild normocytic anemia with hemoglobin of 114 g/L. His other baseline laboratory results including liver function tests were unremarkable.
Fecal occult blood testing was conducted as part of routine cancer surveillance, in the context of mild anemia, post kidney transplantation. Colonoscopy following a positive fecal occult blood test identified MALT lymphoma in one of three sessile sigmoid polyps . The colonoscopy (inserted to the distal ileum) was otherwise normal macroscopically. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of the biopsy in the involved polyp showed a lymphoid population to be composed predominantly of small to medium-sized CD20-positive B cells. The cells were positive for BCL2 with negative staining for BCL6, CD10, cyclin D1, and CD5; Ki-67 proliferative index was 30–40%. Staining of light chains was suggestive of kappa restriction. Epstein–Barr encoding region in situ hybridization (EBERish) was negative. The other two polyps showed tubular adenomas with low-grade dysplasia. A gastroscopy (inserted to the duodenum) showed a patchy darker mucosa in the antrum and a 12 mm slightly raised circular patch with indistinct mucosal pattern in the mid-antrum. There was also a 10 mm indistinct slightly raised patch in the medial wall of distal D1 but it was otherwise normal macroscopically to D2. A gastric biopsy showed mild chronic gastritis with focal intestinal metaplasia and no evidence of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) or gastric lymphoma. The histopathology of the D1 and D2 biopsies were normal. Serum H. pylori IgG was positive. He received H. pylori eradication with esomeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin.
A further laboratory test was conducted to investigate for any systemic features of MALT lymphoma. A monoclonal IgA (kappa) protein was detected in the serum. Serum β2-microglobulin was raised, it was 5 mg/L, reference interval (RI) 0.8–3.0 mg/L, with normal lactate dehydrogenase of 176 U/L (RI < 250 U/L). His serum anti-nuclear antibodies and extractable nuclear antigen antibodies were negative. A bone marrow aspirate showed that 12% of nucleated cells were lymphocytes with a population of abnormal cells with a prominent nucleolus. Of the lymphocytes present, 50% were B cells of the phenotype CD5− CD10− CD20+ CD19+ CD22+ CD38− FMC7+ CD23− surface Ig+, kappa light chain. Monoclonality was demonstrated by light chain restriction. Immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) clonal rearrangement analysis demonstrated a monoclonal result. Bone marrow trephine histology showed only scattered CD20+ cells (20% of nucleated cells) with no lymphoid aggregates (not illustrated). Circulating lymphoma cells with the same immunophenotype as the bone marrow aspirate were detected in the peripheral blood. A positron emission tomography scan was negative for other disease sites.
Overall, these results were consistent with low-volume MALT lymphoma with bone marrow and colonic involvement. Our patient was asymptomatic and had no evidence of significant systemic disease. He was managed expectantly with monitoring of blood counts and paraprotein levels and repeat endoscopy. Immunosuppression was unchanged. Since the initial diagnosis, he has remained clinically well with stable renal allograft function after 2 years.