A 13-year-old girl with a 4-month history of periorbital edema was referred to our clinic in December 2019. The periorbital edema of the patient appeared bilaterally every morning with no obvious inducements and disappeared half an hour later without eye redness, heat, or pain and was accompanied by intermittent foamy urine. No other specific discomforts, such as gross hematuria, fever, backache, rash, lower limb edema, or suspicious drug use were reported. The blood pressure of the patient was 104/67 mmHg, heart rate was 92 beats/min, and body mass index was 15.24. She appeared thin and sallow, with bilateral arcus corneas and multiple xanthomas located on the extensor sides of the right thumb, bilateral elbows, and knee joints that first appeared at 3 years of age. Physical findings of other relevant systems were normal.
The patient's paternal aunt reportedly developed “nephritis” in adolescence. Her paternal grandmother died of “sudden cardiac death” in middle age. Her maternal grandmother developed an aortic aneurysm with ulcers, and type II diabetes mellitus. Her maternal grandfather had a history of gastric cancer. There was no familial history of xanthomas, corneal arcus, or hyperlipidemia. The pedigree of the proband's family is shown in .
The results of the girl's laboratory tests were as follows (partly shown in ): total cholesterol 14.65 mmol/L; LDL-C 12.92 mmol/L; high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), 0.93 mmol/L; triglyceride 1.68 mmol/L; apolipoprotein B 3.85 g/L; apolipoprotein A1 1.14 g/L; lipoprotein(a) 602.2 mg/L; creatinine 19 μmol/L; estimated glomerular filtration rate 193.83 ml/min/1.73 m2; urea nitrogen 2.1 mmol/L; and albumin, 29 g/L. A dipstick urinalysis showed hematuria (2+) and proteinuria (2+); urine sediment showed a few red cells, 60% of which were normal; and urinary protein was 7.25 g/24 h. No malignancies or thyroid disease was discovered, and other routine blood examinations, such as anti-PLA2R, antinuclear, anti-double-stranded DNA, anti-Smith, anti-RNP, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, were all negative. Complements C3 and C4, immunoglobulin, rheumatoid factor, and anti-streptolysin levels were within normal range. She was seronegative for human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B and C viruses. Electrocardiography and echocardiography indicated normal cardiac structure and function. Ultrasonography of the arteries showed atherosclerotic plaques in the bilateral carotid arteries , subclavian artery, innominate artery bifurcation, and abdominal aorta. Ultrasound of the urinary system showed no abnormalities, while that of the renal veins showed entrapment of the left renal vein between the aorta and superior mesenteric artery, consistent with nutcracker syndrome . To further elucidate the cause of the high urinary protein level, a renal biopsy was performed. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed diffuse granular deposition of IgG++, C3++, IgG1 +-++, IgG2 ++, IgG3 +, and PLA2R + + ++ in vascular areas. GBM was diffusely thickened, and spike formation was observed on the epithelial side. Granules and balloon-cell degeneration were visible in the renal tubular epithelial cells. No obvious abnormalities were observed in the interstitium or small blood vessels. In addition, no lipid deposition was observed, and no significant staining of Oil Red O was noted . The pathology of renal biopsy demonstrated MN (stage II), but atypical membranous nephropathy might not be excluded, with electron-dense deposition in the subepithelial area, basement membrane, and mesangial zone.
A whole-exome sequencing analysis of the genomic DNA of the patient and her parents was performed. The proband carried a novel homozygous LDLRAP1 gene variant, NM_015627: c.383 T>G, p.V128G, which was not reported in the database of the Leiden Open-Source Variation Database, Human Gene Mutation Database, or previous literature. Her parents, who were verified as LDLRAP1 heterozygotes, denied being consanguineous but were from the same village.
Upon completion of all the examinations mentioned above at Peking Union Medical College Hospital, the diagnoses of ARH, MN-induced NS, and nutcracker syndrome were confirmed. The girl then received detailed nutritional guidance as follows: her overall energy requirement was about 1,600 kcal/day, and protein was 60–80 g/day. Reduced intake of saturated fatty acids and recommended intake of exogenous cholesterol were 20%, as were reduced sugar intake and reduced high-trans fatty acid intake. Treatment with the angiotensin receptor blocker benazepril (10 mg/day), atorvastatin (30 mg/day), and ezetimibe (10 mg/day) was initiated, and the PCSK9 inhibitor evolocumab (420 mg/month) was initiated 1 month after discharge. The girl and her parents rejected the offer of lipoprotein apheresis and the possibility of liver transplantation.
The dynamics of the laboratory tests, key highlights, and response to treatment for the next 2 years are shown in . Within 10 months of aggressive LLT along with continuation of angiotensin receptor blocker, she responded very well with improvement in 24-h urinary protein from 2.08 g to only 0.01 g (99.9% reduction) and stopped benazepril administration. During the follow-up, she sustained aggressive LLT, including atorvastatin (15 mg/day), ezetimibe (10 mg/day), and PCSK9 inhibitor evolocumab (420 mg/month). Her blood total cholesterol (TC), LDL-C, and lipoprotein(a) decreased to 6.29 mmol/L (55.6%), 4.63 mmol/L (62.5% reduction), and 118 mg/L (80.4% reduction), respectively, which even led to regression of the large xanthomas.