A 19-year-old nulliparous woman presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding and dysmenorrhoea. Her medical history was uneventful. Pelvic examination revealed the presence of a large mass measuring 5 cm in diameter and protruding from the cervix. The preoperative ultrasound demonstrated a uterus with heterogeneous material visualized within a thickened endometrial cavity measuring 13.9 × 21.4 mm. Laboratory tests showed low haemoglobin level of 5.2 g/dL. With these findings we interpreted the mass as a prolapsed pedunculated submucous myoma. A hysteroscopic resection of the myoma was planned.
Two weeks after the outpatient visit, an examination under anesthesia revealed a remarkable increase in the degree of the prolapse of the large mass. The mass was noted to extend outside the vagina and beyond a palpable dilated cervix (instead of outside the cervix, which was the case on presentation). The myoma was clamped and twisted around its pedicle and the stump was ligated under direct vision. Excess downward traction on the myoma was avoided in order not to cause an inversion of the uterus. Electrocoagulation was performed when bleeding from the pedicle stump persisted. After the procedure the fundus was impalpable and the cervix could not be visualized on pelvic examination. The bladder was empty so it was not possible to misinterpret it as the uterus. After this, a fimbria appeared in the vagina. These findings made us strongly consider the possibility of a uterine rupture. A laparoscopy followed by laparotomy with Pfannenstiel incision was performed and the fundus of the uterus was perforated from the left cornual area to the right. The uterus could be preserved and was closed in layers. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged from the hospital five days after the surgery. At follow-up her menstrual cycle was regular without dysmenorrhoea. The final histopathological report revealed a benign submucous leiomyoma.
The uterine inversion happened when the uterus retracted to expel the submucous myoma with fundal attachment. By extirpating the stalk the fundus was also resected, thus causing a uterine perforation.