A 72-year-old woman was referred to our hospital owing to numerous polyps in the right side of the colon detected on colonoscopy performed for the examination of fecal occult blood. The patient had several comorbidities, including type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and dyslipidemia, with no history of smoking or alcohol consumption or of treatment for childhood or adult cancers. The patient’s father and brother had lung and gastric cancers, respectively; however, the patient had no family history of colorectal polyposis or cancer.
Colonoscopy revealed > 100 polyps, with a normal mucosal background confined from the cecum to the splenic flexure of the transverse colon . A clinical diagnosis of sparse FAP was made based on guidelines [, ]. No polyp lesions were observed in the descending colon, sigmoid colon, or rectum. Biopsy results confirmed that the polyps were adenomas, with two moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinomas detected in the ascending and transverse colon. The lesion in the transverse colon was suspected of submucosal invasion . Computed tomography revealed no evidence of enlarged lymph nodes, distant metastases, or other organ lesions. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and ocular fundoscopy revealed no evidence of extracolonic lesions.
Laparoscopic right hemicolectomy with regional lymph node dissection was performed , and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 without any postoperative complications. Histopathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma in the transverse colon with invasion of the muscularis propria and two lesions of highly differentiated intraepithelial adenocarcinoma in the cecum and ascending colon. No lymphatic or venous invasion or lymph node metastasis was observed. Approximately 800 adenomas were diffusely distributed from the ascending colon to the splenic flexure of the transverse colon against a background of normal mucosa, some densely fused, with adenocarcinomas detected in such areas. The pathological stage of the most advanced one was T2N0M0 Stage I according to the eighth edition of the Tumor Node Metastasis Classification of the International Union Against Cancer . Most polyps were tubular adenomas; however, some showed serrated changes. The resection margins showed no neoplastic or adenomatous atypia. The tumors were microsatellite stable. At 5 years postoperatively, the patient remains cancer-free, with no recurrence of cancer or polyposis in the remaining colon or rectum, although few sporadic adenomatous polyps developed in the sigmoid colon.
To identify causal genetic factors, DNA sequencing of blood samples was performed using an original multigene panel for APC, EPCAM, MBD4, MLH1, MLH3, MSH2, MSH3, MSH6, MUTYH, NTHL1, PMS2, POLD1, POLE, and TP53. The exons and 5-bp flanking regions of these genes were sequenced and evaluated. For APC and mismatch repair genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2), splicing abnormalities were also analyzed in mRNA. The results revealed a heterozygous variant in MSH3 (c.606G > A, p.Cln202 =), which was interpreted as likely benign in ClinVar , and no difference in MSH3 expression was observed between the normal mucosa, adenomas, and carcinomas using tissue immunostaining of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens with a rabbit monoclonal anti-MSH3 antibody (ab111107; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), performed as described previously . Because serrated lesions were observed in some polyps on hematoxylin and eosin staining, the possibility of serrated polyposis was considered. RNA sequencing of RNF43 using the blood samples was also performed; however, no variant was found. Based on the above findings, the final diagnosis was CPUE.