A 34-year-old White woman with type 1 diabetes mellitus diagnosed since youth and end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis therapy over the last 4 years was referred to our hospital with abdominal pain in the right iliac fossa. She had a history of two previous pancreas transplantation failures. The first was a simultaneous pancreas–kidney transplantation performed 7 months prior that was complicated by pancreas graft thrombosis within 1 month and required graft resection. Five months after the first transplant, she underwent a second pancreas transplantation in the right iliac fossa using the same right common iliac artery anastomosis. On the second day postprocedure, her case was complicated by another pancreatic graft thrombosis requiring graft resection. Her renal function was still preserved, but insulin was reintroduced to control glucose levels.
At our emergency department, she complained of abdominal pain in the right iliac fossa without signs of peritoneal irritation, bleeding, or hemodynamic instability. Abdominal angiotomography was performed and revealed a pseudoaneurysm in the right common iliac artery at the point of the previous graft anastomosis measuring 5.15 × 4.21 × 4.10 cm with a 1.07 × 0.30 cm neck . There were no signs of active bleeding to the pelvis or hematomas.
Endovascular treatment was proposed, and the patient was transferred to our interventional radiology unit. Under local anesthesia and mild sedation, we achieved percutaneous access to the right common femoral artery with a 7-French sheath. On initial arteriography, a right common iliac artery pseudoaneurysm was identified . To cover the site of extravasation, we implanted a 7 × 39 mm covered balloon-expandable stent (VBX Viabahn W. L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, AZ). Control arteriography showed adequate stent location and exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm sac . An 8-French vascular closure device (Angio-Seal, Terumo, Europe NV) was used for femoral artery sealing, and loading doses of acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) 100 mg and clopidogrel 300 mg followed by daily doses of ASA 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg were administered.
The patient was discharged after 2 days with normal renal function and a lack of symptoms. She was followed up for 5 months by interventional radiology and nephrology teams without complaints.