A 48-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our hospital to exclude an unrecognized infection as the cause of three episodes of fever associated with splenomegaly. Her past medical history was unremarkable up to 4 years previously, when by routine mammography and subsequent biopsy an intraductal carcinoma was diagnosed. She underwent a skin-sparing mastectomy of her right breast combined with reconstruction and implantation of a silicone prosthesis (Polytech 445 g). No adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy was provided or indicated. Three years later she underwent a reduction operation of her left breast combined with lipofilling of both breasts. She had experienced fever 8 and 5 months prior to hospitalization that lasted for about 3 weeks. She was treated at home with levofloxacin because of a known allergy to penicillin.
When fever appeared again together with sore throat, fatigue, sweating, cough (she smokes about 10 cigarettes daily), and an involuntary weight loss of 10 kg in the last year, she was hospitalized for 2 weeks in a peripheral hospital. Abnormal results from laboratory investigations included: hemoglobin 10.4 g/dL, leukocytes 3.6 × 109/L, serum total protein 5.3 g/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 638 U/L, and ferritin 398 ng/mL. An abdominal ultrasound examination demonstrated her spleen was enlarged, with a diameter of 15 cm. X-ray examination of her chest showed bilateral apical pleural scarring, which was confirmed by computed tomography (CT). CT also revealed subpleural densities of uncertain significance, an enlarged liver and spleen, ovarian cysts, and a 2.3 cm large layer of fluid in the Douglas space. There was no evidence of enlarged mediastinal, abdominal, or retroperitoneal lymph nodes. A histologic examination of a bone marrow biopsy specimen was of no diagnostic help. 18FDG-PET/CT evidenced hypermetabolism of both adrenal glands. She was given azithromycin and her fever subsided but profound weakness remained. Extensive laboratory examinations did not indicate any infectious, autoimmune, or malignant diseases. She was referred to our Division of Infectious Diseases for a search for an unrecognized infectious disease.
On physical examination our patient was pale and weak. Her body temperature was 37.3 °C, blood pressure 110/90 mmHg, heart frequency 92 beats/minute, arterial blood oxygen saturation 98 %, body weight 59 kg, and high 168 cm. She complained of memory deficits and an unexplainable unstable gait. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. Since her breast operation 4 years previously she had needed sleeping tablets. During her first 6 days in hospital without any treatment her body temperature rose progressively from 37.3 to 39 °C. Because of the pleural scars and subpleural densities seen in the CT images, and the hypermetabolic adrenal glands shown by 18FDG-PET/CT [adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol concentrations were within the normal range], a tuberculosis (TB) infection was considered. Results from a repeated search by microscopy, culture and PCR analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in her sputum and bronchial aspirate were unremarkable. A Mantoux skin test and QuantiFERON-TB assay were negative too. Leishmania infection was excluded by serology and microscopy of her bone marrow aspirate.
Despite repeated negative blood, urine, and stool cultures for pathogenic bacteria, among the many laboratory examinations, titers of 1:160 anti-Salmonella O and 1:2560 anti-Salmonella H antibodies were detected by Widal Wright’s reaction . Thus empiric antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone 2 g daily was started. There was no response to treatment and her high fever persisted. Therefore, indomethacin 50 mg three times daily was administered. This was followed by prompt defervescence; however, it lasted only for 3 days . On the fourth day of indomethacin treatment, her fever of 39 °C recurred and was associated with increased weakness, malaise, and confusion. That night, two episodes of right hemiparesis with aphasia of about 30 min duration were observed. No areas of ischemia or hemorrhage were seen by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-angiography of her brain. An analysis of her cerebrospinal fluid found 282 mg/dL of protein, but there was no increase in cell number . At this point, her symptoms were treated with dexamethasone 16 mg daily for 2 days followed by methylprednisolone 1 g daily for the next 4 days and then again dexamethasone 16 mg daily. Ceftriaxone was substituted by meropenem, and empiric anti-TB treatment and treatment with fluconazole were added. Corticosteroid therapy was followed by an impressive clinical improvement, including defervescence, regaining orientation, and regaining her ability to stand and to eat. However, on the fourth day of corticosteroid treatment, her high fever recurred together with extreme weakness, anorexia, and episodes of confusion.
The criteria for HLH/MAS were fulfilled , but no underlying cause was evident. Because eight cases of AOSD associated with SBIs have been reported (see below), the silicone breast prosthesis of our patient was considered to have possibly contributed to her hyperinflammatory state, and consequently was explanted on the 22nd hospital day. A more detailed medical history revealed that the breast prosthesis had caused our patient many problems. Because of painful inflammation, the first prosthesis had to be explanted after 6 weeks and necrotic inflammatory tissue surrounding the prosthesis removed. Because an infection was suspected, the prosthesis was cleaned with antiseptics and then re-implanted, but no infectious agent could be isolated. Two months later, the prosthesis had to be removed definitively. Again, necrotic inflammatory tissue had to be removed and no infectious agent could be isolated. One year prior to her current hospitalization, a new silicone breast prosthesis was implanted. An inflammatory reaction with swelling of her breast was treated locally with infiltration of corticosteroids. Thereafter, our patient could tolerate the prosthesis and a mild pain was felt only when touching the prosthesis.
Significant worsening occurred after removal of the intact prosthesis. Her fever rose up to 40.4 °C, she became icteric and for the first time she experienced severe low back pain that radiated to her lower legs and required analgesic treatment with opium derivates. She complained of perianal anesthesia and fecal incontinence. The day of implant removal, 25 g of endovenous immunoglobulin was started and given daily for 3 days to treat the MAS. Finally, cyclosporine 100 mg twice daily was administered without any benefit. On the 29th hospital day, the results of the histologic examination of the tissue taken at implant removal were available and showed (a) normal pectoralis muscle with absence of neoplastic infiltration; (b) cutis and subcutis with dilated vessels showing an intraluminal proliferation of atypical large lymphocytes with a vesiculosus nucleus with several nucleoli . A immunohistochemical analysis of the neoplastic cells revealed positivity for cluster of differentiation (CD) 20, B-cell lymphoma (BCL)-6, BCL-2, multiple myeloma oncogene 1 (MUM-1), and weaker staining for CD5. The proliferation index Ki-67 was over 90 %. Results for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), CD10, CD34, CD3, and cytokeratin-CAM were negative. These results are consistent with the diagnosis of IVLBCL. The remaining parenchyma showed an extensive giant cell-lymphohistiocytic foreign body reaction, but no carcinomatous infiltration. Her familial medical history was notable for an uncle who has died from acute lymphatic leukemia at 43 years of age.
Our patient was transferred to our Hematology Ward where she was treated with six cycles of R-CHOP [rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (doxorubicin), vincristine, prednisone] chemotherapy. Intrathecal prophylaxis with methotrexate was also given. After 6 months her white blood cell count, platelet count, hemoglobin level, LDH level, and liver function tests were again within the reference ranges. After 2 years our patient’s clinical status is good, but sequelae of the cauda equina syndrome are still present, including low back pain, saddle anesthesia, difficulties in voiding the bladder and intestine, loss of sexual sensation, right plantar numbness, and gait instability. She continues to undergo 3-monthly follow-up visits (see Additional file for supporting data).