An 88-year-old Caucasian woman, suffering from type 2 diabetes, hypertension (ambulatory blood pressure of 145/90mmHg) and Parkinson's disease was referred to our clinic with a one-week history of a white area on her palate.
An oral examination revealed a white area, not raised, occupying more than half of the hard palate. Our patient did not report any pain but her temperature had risen to 38°C during the initial four-day period. A moderate weight loss (5kg), not caused by dietary restriction, was also reported. The results of laboratory tests were as follows: hemoglobin 9.5g/dL, white blood cell count 6,300 cells/L (neutrophils 55 percent, lymphocytes 37 percent, monocytes 5 percent, eosinophils 2 percent, basophils 1 percent), serum creatinine 1.6mg/dL, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 107mm/hour. The results of serum antigen tests for hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and parvovirus B19 were negative. A test for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) was also negative. On clinical examination, the affected area showed a well demarcated fibrinous border, matching the vascular zone affected by necrosis . An incisional biopsy of the peripheral margin of the zone was taken under local anesthesia.
Microscopic study of histological sections revealed that while fibrinoid necrosis involved both lateral extremities of the vascular segment, and that the middle portion was relatively unaffected. The presence of inflammatory infiltrate with variable number of neutrophils, macrophages and scattered lymphocytes was also observed . All these histopathological findings were consistent with a diagnosis of PAN. Also, as suggested by the American College of Rheumatology guidelines, the diagnosis of PAN was made on the basis of six signs that our patient exhibited . It was not possible to perform other studies due to the inability of our patient to move.
According to recent literature laboratory analysis was used to evaluate compete blood counts with potassium, vitamin D3 and calcium. Treatment was started urgently and our patient was treated with oral prednisone at a dosage of 1mg/kg/day, prescribed for three weeks, before being tapered by 5mg every 10 days to a dosage of 0.5mg/kg/day then by 2.5mg every 10 days until a dosage of 15mg/day was obtained and, finally, by 1mg every 10 days to the minimal effective dose or, when possible, until definitive withdrawal. She was also treated with aspirin and warfarin, added to her anti-hypertensive medications, and rinsing with saline solution three to four times at day to clean the affected area. Adjuvant treatment with vitamin D3, calcium and potassium to prevent corticosteroid-induced osteoporosis and cytidine 5'-diphosphocholine (500mg/day) as supportive treatment for Parkinson's disease was also given.
After this treatment, the lesion showed improvement and had regressed completely at one year from treatment initiation .