A 58-year-old male presented with a 6-month history of the gradual onset of an asymmetrical paraparesis (i.e., left leg 1/5 and right leg 3/5 proximal/2/5 distal with incomplete T4 sensory level). The patient had a familial history of VHLD. The thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a left T3-T4 intraforaminal/intracanalicular solid lesion with cord compression with extension through the foramen (i.e., measuring 40 × 35 × 35 mm – transverse × anterior-posterior × cephalocaudal axes). It was hypointense/isointense on T1 hyperintense on T2/short-tau inversion recovery and uniformly enhanced with gadolinium. The preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan documented chronic T3 vertebral body scalloping and left T3-T4 foramen widening . The brain MRI revealed a small asymptomatic lesion in the medulla oblongata while the ocular MRI showed a left retinal hemangioblastoma. In addition, the patient had two pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors on the head and body of the pancreas and multiple renal cysts without malignant features; there were signs of pheochromocytoma.
Angiography revealed that the tumor was fed from the left T4 intercostal artery which was selectively embolizated 24 h before surgery .
Neurosurgery first performed a T2, T3, and T4 laminectomy and a left unilateral T3-T4 facetectomy; this allowed for en bloc resection of the intraforaminal/intracanalicular extradural tumor. At surgery, the left T3 nerve root that was adherent to the tumor was sacrificed. Second, the thoracic surgeons removed the intrathoracic component of the tumor using video-assisted thoracoscopy.
Postoperatively, the patient was neurologically intact and the postoperative CT documented complete tumor removal .
When discharged 3 days later, he had residual 3/5 left leg and 4/5 right leg weakness.
MRI 3 months later confirmed no tumor recurrence and his neurological status continued to improve with 4/5 paraparesis being able to walk with the aid of walkers.
The histological analysis confirmed a hemangioblastoma; immunohistochemistry showed diffuse positivity for CD34 and vimentin, partial positivity for S100 protein, and focal positivity to EMA.