A 19-year-old Pakistani/Asian man with a low socioeconomic background was brought to the emergency department of our hospital with a 15-h history of altered behavior, acute confusion, and disturbed gait. His family did not report any fever, recent fall, accident, or substance abuse. His parents had died at a young age, and he was living with his paternal uncle. He used to work in a generator shop, and he had a history of occasional alcohol and cannabis intake and benzodiazepine abuse 6 months earlier.
On presentation, his blood pressures was 148/65 mmHg with a regular heart rate 96 beats/min. His oxygen saturation was normal, but his breathing was rapid and deep at a rate of 32/min. His temperature was recorded at 36.8 °C. On examination, he was found to be very agitated and was not comprehending. His neck was supple, and his examination result was negative for Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs. He was moving all four limbs symmetrically and withdrawing from painful stimuli. His tendon reflexes were normal bilaterally, and his plantar responses were downward. His pupils were normal in size and equally reactive to light. The results of his chest, abdominal, and cardiac examinations were within normal limits.
Laboratory investigations showed serum anion gap 28 mmol/L, osmolal gap 22.5 mOsmol/kg, arterial pH 7.23, lactate 15 mmol/L, potassium 5.6 mmol/L, sodium 140 mmol/L, bicarbonate 5.8 mmol/L, random blood sugar 108 mg/dl, serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 7 mg/dl, serum creatinine 1.3 mg/dl, hemoglobin 17 g/dl, white blood cell count 24.4 × 109 (neutrophils 82%), platelets 447 × 109, negative urine toxicology screen (amphetamine, cannabinoids, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, opiates, and cocaine), and negative serum ethanol. Serum methanol levels were not measured, because the assay was not available. urinalysis demonstrated 2+ proteins, 1 white blood cell, 10 red blood cells, 5+ hemoglobin, no cast, and no crystals. The results of amylase, lipase, creatinine phosphokinase, and liver function tests, including alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase, were within normal ranges. Blood and urine culture results were negative.
The patient’s chest radiography result was normal. His electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Ultrasound of his kidneys revealed bilateral swollen kidneys. Computed tomography (CT) of his head showed cerebral edema.
At that point, our differential diagnosis included acute methanol or ethylene glycol poisoning (on the basis of high anion gap metabolic acidosis; elevated osmolal gap; and history of substance abuse in the past, though there was no history of intake) and septic encephalopathy (acute confusional state with raised white blood cell count).
In the presence of severe metabolic acidosis and acute kidney injury, the patient was started on an intravenous diluted sodium bicarbonate infusion along with intravenous crystalloids. Empiric intravenous ceftriaxone was initiated.
During the first 24 hours of admission, the patient showed remarkable improvement in his consciousness level; however, he was still delirious but started following commands. His serum bicarbonate improved to 18 mEq/L, and his white blood cell count decreased. Although his urine output was adequate at approximately 1.2–1.5 L/d, his serum creatinine worsened. The family and the patient were questioned again regarding intake of methanol or ethylene glycol, but denied it completely.
On day 3 of admission, the patient confessed taking transformer oil in order to commit suicide. The transformer oil had been kept in their home for more than 1 year and was collected from a burst transformer. On subsequent days, after an initial improvement, the patient’s consciousness level deteriorated rapidly, and he started complaining of continuous headache with episodes of increased agitation alternating with acute delirium. Despite an adequate urine output and normal electrolytes, his serum creatinine kept on worsening.
At that time, his consciousness level was not explained by uremia, because his BUN was only 50 mEq/L, though his creatinine had risen to 8.5 mg/dl. Hemodialysis was considered at that point, but our suspicion was intake of some lipophilic substance that could not be dialyzed. Because of the patient’s unexplained delirious state, CT of the head was repeated, which revealed abnormal low-density areas in bilateral temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes; genu of corpus callosum; and right cerebellar peduncle along with cerebral edema.
On day 7, the patient’s urine output declined, and his BUN and creatinine increased to 80 mg/dl and 12.5 mg/dl, respectively. He had two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures and was dialyzed immediately for 4 hours. After the first hemodialysis session, although the patient’s BUN fell only slightly from 80 to 60 mg/dl, he showed a remarkable improvement in his consciousness level. He became calm and alert, his agitation was almost alleviated, and his complaints of headache became less frequent. He was again dialyzed consecutively for the next 2 days.
After three consecutive sessions of hemodialysis, no further dialysis was needed. The patient’s headache subsided completely, and his consciousness level improved significantly, which further pointed to removal of certain substances via dialysis as the cause of altered sensorium and kidney injury. He was discharged on day 12 with stable serum creatinine, which was completely normalized 10 days after discharge. The patient is under regular follow-up, and his renal function is normal. The trend of the patient’s renal function is shown in Table .