A five-year-old male patient who had been complaining of abdominal pain for the past 10 days was taken to the emergency referral unit of Sumaré State Hospital with a condition of hematemesis (two episodes in the last two hours). No other symptom or important antecedent was reported by the family. The mother said that she had sought medical services twice during the period, and the child had been evaluated and released since there were no symptoms. At admission he presented pallor, tachycardia (150 beats per minute, bpm) and hypotension (60 mmHg), and volume expansion with saline solution was started. The blood tests upon admission showed: hemoglobin (Hb): 8.9 g%; hematocrit: 27%; platelets: 161,000; International Normalized Ratio (INR): 1.09; and Ratio (R): 0.87. Simple abdominal radiography showed a radiopaque image with a double circular halo outline in the distal colon suggestive of a button battery (the mother was unaware of this ingestion) .
Within two hours, he presented two more episodes of hematemesis, with Hb falling to 6.8 g%. A transfusion of packed red blood cells (10 ml/kg) was administered. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed in the surgical room (four hours after arrival), which showed a deep ulcerated lesion in the distal third of the esophagus, occupying 70% of the circumference and 5 cm in length. The bottom of the ulcer was covered by fibrin and a large clot had adhered to it, without active bleeding. After withdrawal of the endoscope, he presented new profuse hematemesis, as well as severe hypotension, and a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube was introduced. The case evolved with major abdominal distension and cardiopulmonary arrest, which was reversed by means of chest compressions and adrenaline.
Because of the gradually increasing abdominal distension, it was decided that exploratory laparotomy should be performed by the pediatric surgeons. Through this, large amount of blood was found in the stomach, without any perforation of the digestive tract, and no blood was found in the peritoneal cavity. During the procedure, the child presented a new cardiopulmonary arrest, but did not recover from it. The button battery was removed by means of rectal manipulation during the procedure.