A 77-year-old female presented to our department with exacerbation of ptosis and local recurrence of thymoma. Five years earlier, she had been diagnosed with an anterior mediastinal tumor with a symptom of ptosis and underwent thymectomy for type B2 thymoma of Masaoka stage II disease. Following the operation, her ptosis was well controlled with tacrolimus 3 mg/day, prednisolone 5 mg/day, and pyridostigmine 180 mg/day.
When she underwent an operation for colon cancer, chest computed tomography as a preoperative examination revealed local recurrence of a nodule 1 cm in diameter on the innominate vein and a small nodule in the anterior mediastinum . We recommended radiotherapy for the recurrent lesions, but she wished to undergo observation for a while. She hoped to receive treatment for the exacerbation of ptosis.
The dose of tacrolimus was increased according to the trough value of the blood concentration, and her ptosis improved. The value of anti-acetylcholine receptor (AChR) antibody gradually decreased (71 to 10 nmol/L). Following 6 month observation, erythema on the extremities and body trunk suddenly appeared , which was diagnosed as drug eruption. The drugs for MG were thus reduced or interrupted. The patient developed progressive muscle weakness and fatigue and was admitted to the hospital.
The post-administration course and blood examination values are shown in Fig. . Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were significantly increased, and complication of drug-induced or autoimmune hepatitis was suspected. She slept in the sitting position, because her dyspnea worsened in the supine position. Her neck hung down without bulbar palsy symptoms. We once experienced a similar situation in an MG patient who died of myocarditis and polymyositis. She was transferred to the intensive-care unit (ICU) 5 days after admission and received artificial ventilation.
A laboratory examination performed immediately before treatment revealed that the serum levels of creatinine phosphokinase (3098 U/L; normal range 45–163 U/L), creatine kinase isozyme MB (257 U/L; normal range 45–163 U/L), ALT (311 U/L; normal range 6–27 U/L) and AST (351 U/L; normal range 13–33 U/L) were elevated. In addition, cardiac troponin I was elevated to 679.6 pg/mL (normal range 0–26.2 pg/mL). Serum electrolyte and calcium values were normal. The electrocardiogram at admission to the ICU showed only a slightly prolonged QT time (0.392 s). The echocardiogram demonstrated a preserved left ventricular systolic function, with an ejection fraction (EF) of 63%. There were no findings of cardiac infarction. Although a myocardial biopsy could not be performed, we diagnosed as polymyositis and myocarditis which is rarely associated with thymoma. This diagnosis was valid considering the positive findings of anti-striational autoantibodies (anti-titin and anti-Kv1.4), elevation of myosin light chain I and luck of elevation of anti-AChR antibody, which were revealed later.
The clinical course is shown in Fig. . Steroid pulse therapy was induced immediately for polymyositis and myocarditis. As the cardiac function was maintained, catecholamine administration was not needed. The blood test findings were markedly improved, as shown in Table , but the symptoms of MG and weakness of the muscles persisted. Therefore, we performed tracheostomy and immunoadsorption plasmapheresis (IAPP).
Pancytopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia (Good's syndrome) were also found, and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy was performed. She was also diagnosed with cytomegalovirus infection, and ganciclovir was administered. Eculizumab was induced, and the symptoms of MG and weakness of the muscles were improved. On the 136th day of hospitalization, she was discharged. Since then, immune therapy with medicine has been continued, excluding eculizumab. There has been no recurrence of any of her autoimmune diseases, excluding MG, for 1 year.