In 2010, three months prior to presentation, a 54-year-old Japanese man noticed an enlarging mass in the soft tissue of his left buttock. An excisional biopsy was performed and the tumor was diagnosed as a leiomyosarcoma composed of cellular bundles of spindle cells . Immunohistochemical stains demonstrated that tumor cells were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and calponin, and negative for S-100, CD34 and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). Subsequently, a positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. The results showed the existence of multiple metastatic lesions in the skeletal muscle and the absence of metastases in the liver, lung, and lymph nodes . The magnetic resonance (MR) images of the lumbar area and thigh revealed multiple isointense skeletal muscle tumors on T1-weighted with heterogeneous high-signal intensities on T2-weighted images . Our patient was treated with doxorubicin (20g/m2 day 3), and ifosfamide (2,500g/m2 day 3) chemotherapy. Because he developed anemia during chemotherapy, a careful examination of his GI tract was performed, which revealed a bleeding tumor located in the small intestine. Surgical resection of the small intestine tumor was performed. Microscopically, the resected mass was composed of interlacing bundles of spindle and epithelioid mesenchymal cells with morphological features similar to the previously described tumors in his buttock. The mitotic index was 10/high-power field (HPF), and the tumor seemed to be a high-grade spindle cell sarcoma. Immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor cells revealed focal positivity for c-KIT and SMA, and negativity for CD34 and S-100 . Based on these features, additional immunohistochemical analyses of the primary buttock tumor were performed. The buttock tumor cells were negative for c-KIT, but diffusely positive for platelet-derived growth factor receptor-α (PDGFRA) and were definitively diagnosed as a skeletal muscle metastasis of the primary small intestine GIST. Although our patient underwent chemotherapy with imatinib mesylate, death from GI bleeding occurred six months after the initial diagnosis.