The patient was a 36-year-old Caucasian woman with known intermediate beta thalassemia who presented to the hospital with nausea, vomiting, and exacerbated shortness of breath of grade II on the Modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) scale in the last 3 days, along with a dry cough. In hemoglobin electrophoresis from 5 years ago, she had a fetal hemoglobin (HbF) of 36% and a hemoglobin alpha 2 (HbA2) of 5.5% . She also mentioned a history of splenectomy 4 years ago, hospitalization a month ago with the COVID-19 infection, and receiving blood transfusion weekly from 2 months ago. She took a tablet of hydroxyurea 500 mg twice daily as medication. Her vital signs showed a normal blood pressure (125/80), pulse rate (84 beats/min), respiratory rate (14 breaths/min), and oxygen saturation of 92%. During her physical examination, her lungs were clear, and there was jugular venous distention. Her abdomen had no tenderness or hepatomegaly (14 mm), but a scar from a previous splenectomy was visible.
Table displays the results of the laboratory tests. Chest radiography at the time of admission presented signs of rib enlargement and prominence of the pulmonary artery . An echocardiography showed an ejection fraction of 50%, severe pulmonary hypertension (PH) (SPAP = 80 mmHg), D-shape septum during systole due to severe right ventricular pressure overload, severe right ventricular hypertrophy with normal systolic function, and mild mitral regurgitation; the cardiologist suggested a severe increase in pulmonary artery pressure with a noncardiac cause. Due to the echocardiographic findings, a pulmonology consult was requested. The pulmonology consultant ordered a contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) to rule out a pulmonary embolism. Chest CT imaging showed that the pulmonary trunk was prominent, and its aortopulmonary (AP) diameter was 32 mm. The main arteries of the right and left lungs were also prominent, and no signs of mediastinal adenopathy, lateral fluid, or pulmonary embolism were seen. There was no mass lesion or parenchymal opacity in the parenchyma of the lung field. Rib expansion of both hemithoraxes with soft tissue component in the 4th and 5th ribs of the right and the 4th rib of the left hemithorax was evident. In the left paravertebral of T10 and T9 vertebrae, there was evidence of soft tissue mass with homogeneous density and actual dimensions of 45 × 37 mm . Findings favor diffuse expansion of the imaged ribs and a left paravertebral soft tissue mass suggestive of EMH as the primary differential diagnosis. Her treatment began with blood transfusions and conservative treatments.
The next day, her COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction PCR test came back positive. As a result, she was moved to the infectious disease ward for patients with COVID-19. After 2 days, she was discharged with her personal consent and began receiving COVID-19 therapy at home.