A 52-year-old woman presented with several months of progressive anterograde amnesia noticed by her colleagues at work. Neurologic exam was otherwise unremarkable. Noncontrast head computed tomography (CT) revealed a hyperdense, suprasellar, and third ventricular lesion, consistent with either intralesional microcalcifications or hemorrhage . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated a large, partially cystic, minimally enhancing suprasellar lesion extending into the third ventricle, with compression of the bilateral fornices at the foramina of Monro. A small intrasellar component of the lesion was also suspected [Figure –]. Based on its location and radiologic appearance, this lesion was thought to represent most likely a CP. Surgical resection was thus indicated for tissue diagnosis and to decompress the fornices. Given the likely presence of an intrasellar component of this lesion, a decision was made to first attempt endoscopic endonasal resection rather than craniotomy.
Following lumbar drain placement, a standard endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal approach was undertaken using intraoperative neuronavigation (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA). After opening the sellar dura, the small lesion in the posterior portion of the pituitary gland was easily identified and excised. Intraoperative frozen section examination was suggestive of CP. However, this intrasellar portion did not appear to be in direct continuity with the suprasellar lesion. An attempt to access the suprasellar space was then made. Unfortunately, however, a surgical corridor could not be safely developed. Anteriorly, the optic chiasm and anterior communicating artery complex completely obstructed the line of sight. Posteriorly, the neurohypophysis and dorsum sellae impeded access to the suprasellar compartment. Thus, a decision was made to abort the endoscopic procedure and plan a transcranial approach. Pathologic examination of the permanent intrasellar specimen showed a cystic lesion with clusters of simple squamoid epithelium and a rare strip of nonciliated columnar epithelium and proteinaceous contents. This was most consistent with the diagnosis of RCC, although a colloid or pars intermedia cyst or even a CP could not be ruled out . The patient's postoperative course was marked by diabetes insipidus requiring desmopressin therapy.
Five days later, the patient underwent bifrontal craniotomy and gross total resection of the suprasellar and third ventricular lesion via an interhemispheric transcallosal interforniceal approach [Figure and ]. Intraoperatively, the lesion was noted to be mulberry-shaped and filled with blood products of various ages, which was consistent with a diagnosis of CM. The lesion was completely resected and the bilateral fornices were successfully preserved intact. Pathologic examination of the specimen revealed abnormal ectatic vascular channels in a hemorrhagic background, consistent with a vascular malformation [Figure –].
On the second postoperative day, the patient suffered sudden acute deterioration of her level of consciousness with right nonreactive mydriasis. Head CT revealed a new right hemispheric subdural fluid collection with mass effect and midline shift to the left [Figure and ]. The patient was thus taken to the operating room and underwent emergent evacuation of the subdural collection and placement of a left frontal external ventricular drain (EVD) . Postoperatively, the patient exhibited significant improvement with gradual return to her normal level of consciousness. She was ultimately discharged to a rehabilitation facility after the EVD was successfully weaned and removed.
Three weeks later, the patient exhibited worsening mental status and increasing lethargy. Head CT demonstrated external hydrocephalus [Figure and ]. She was taken back to the operating room and underwent EVD placement, which was subsequently converted to a ventriculoperitoneal shunt a few days later . Following cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) diversion, she improved significantly to her baseline neurological status, and was ultimately discharged back to the rehabilitation facility. At her last follow-up 4 months later, she was functionally independent without focal neurologic deficits, despite persistent anterograde amnesia and desmopressin-dependent diabetes insipidus.