A 74-year-old man with no significant medical history presented with his left clavicular pain. A chest X-ray showed a neoplastic fracture in the left clavicle. Abdominal and chest CT examination revealed the renal mass with early enhancement in right kidney with 35 mm diameter . In addition, CT scan showed osteolytic mass in the left clavicle, left iliac crest, and small nodule in middle lobe of the right lung . It is the basic policy of our institution to recommend radical nephrectomy for clinical stage T1 and T2, and subsequently he underwent laparoscopic radical nephrectomy. The pathological examination showed clear cell RCC (Fuhrman grade 2) with tumor invasion of perirenal fat, leading to the diagnosis of stage pT3aN0M1. With a diagnosis of left clavicle and iliac bone metastasis, the patient received the treatment with zoledronic acid 4 mg intravenously every 4 weeks.
According to the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium score, the patient was classified as poor risk (<1 year from time of diagnosis to systemic therapy, Karnofsky Performance Status 70, low hemoglobin value) and began to receive nivolumab plus ipilimumab combination therapy for his multiple metastatic sites.
After one cycle of combination therapy, he felt listlessness of the right forearm and difficulty in speaking clearly. The brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a brain metastasis and cyber knife therapy was performed for brain metastasis . In parallel with radiotherapy, the patient received the second course of the combination therapy. Two weeks later, he complained of grade 3 nausea and anorexia. He also experienced grade 3 diarrhea, grade 2 liver dysfunction, and grade 1 rash, leading to discontinuation of third course of combination therapy . We suspected severe irAEs due to various symptoms, but we were unable to exclude the possibility of bacterial enteritis and started the administration of 40 mg (1 mg/kg per day) PSL for the patient. With the negative test result of fecal culture, the dose of PSL was increased to 80 mg and irAEs gradually improved within next 7 weeks. Finally, the dose of PSL was tapered to 7.5 mg. Metastatic sites maintained partial response for 30 weeks after the discontinuation of ICIs without any additional therapy . However, follow-up CT examination showed the new lung metastatic lesion after 41 weeks after discontinuation and we decided to start readministration of nivolumab monotherapy . As a result, he experienced only grade 1 diarrhea after three cycles of nivolumab, which can be controlled with the temporary increasing dose of PSL. Importantly, any other irAEs such as nausea, anorexia, liver dysfunction, and rash did not appear after the introduction of nivolumab monotherapy.
Follow-up CT scan at 12 weeks after the introduction of nivolumab showed the increase in lung and iliac bone metastasis, leading to withdrawal of nivolumab and subsequent axitinib therapy.