A 14-year-old male child presented to the orthopedic casualty of a tertiary care center with pain in both the shoulders and unable to move both the upper limbs following fall from a moving train. The patient was referred from level one and level two care centers after primary stabilization. He was conscious and oriented with bilateral shoulder swelling and inability to move both the shoulders. There was an associated degloving injury to the face with intact vision. There were no head, chest, or abdominal injuries.
Local examination revealed swelling, bruising, and tenderness on both shoulders with arms held by the side of the body. The range of movement was painful and severely restricted. A 4x6 cm degloving injury near the lateral aspect of the face was noted with intact vision. No neurological or vascular deficits noted in both the upper extremities.
Anteroposterior and axillary radiographs of both shoulders revealed displaced proximal humeral physeal injury in both the upper extremities with a right-sided clavicle fracture. The left side had a Salter-Harris type 1 (physeal separation) Neer-Horwitz Grade 4 injury with >2/3rd shaft diameter displacement, with 85.6 varus angulation . The right side had Salter-Harris type 2 physeal injury of proximal humerus with Neer-Horwitz Grade 2 injury with 16.5° of valgus angulation .
Considering the poor remodeling potential at a borderline adolescent age and the amount of displacement, a decision for closed/open anatomical reduction and fixation was taken. The patient was induced under general anesthesia and a beach chair position was given to ensure adequate fluoroscopic visualization. For the right side, closed reduction by traction, abduction, and rotational maneuver was performed and the fracture reduction was confirmed under orthogonal fluoroscopic imaging. Skin marking was done for the course of the axillary nerve 6 cm distal to the acromion. Two smooth Kirschner wires were inserted percutaneously crossing the physis in a cross pattern. To provide further stability, a 4 mm cannulated cancellous screw was passed with washer across the physis. Stability of the construct was confirmed under fluoroscopy and the pins were bent and placed subcutaneously (, ).
Similar maneuver was performed on the left side and three smooth Kirschner wires were inserted percutaneously and placed subcutaneously (, ). Both the arms were placed in a shoulder immobilizer for 3 weeks. Gradual passive range of motion exercises were started and the pins were removed at 6 weeks (, ). Full range of motion was achieved at 3 months postoperatively. The screw removal was scheduled at 6 months, however, the patient was lost to follow-up.
The patient presented at 18 months with full restoration of the function and full range of motion with no pain and the disabilities of the arm, shoulder, and hand (DASH) score of 1.7/100 . The right side shows partial obliteration of the physis with no signs of avascular necrosis. The left side healed fracture and restoration of the anatomy .