A forty year old previously healthy Sri Lankan male presented with acute onset bilateral leg weakness which was progressive over two days following a brief febrile illness of three days. He did not give any history of trauma nor there was any history of tuberculosis. Initially he did not have urinary retention nor there was any sensory symptoms. He did not complain of shortness of breathing.
On examination he was found to have asymmetric flaccid paralysis of bilateral lower limbs with power grade one to two. Reflexes were diminished bilaterally and Babinski sign was equivocal. Examination of optic fundi and cranial nerves were normal. There was no demonstrable sensory level and joint position sense was initially preserved. Upper limbs were neurologically normal. Respiratory movements and sphincter function were preserved. Depending on initial findings a clinical diagnosis of Guillain-Barré syndrome was suspected and he was closely observed for the development of respiratory paralysis with monitoring of forced vital capacity and oxygen saturation.
On the fifth day of onset of symptoms his weakness worsened with additional flaccid paralysis of upper limbs and neck muscles. He was catheterized for acute retention of urine. Patient was urgently transferred to a high dependency unit but he did not develop respiratory paralysis necessitating ventilator support. Later he developed bilateral spastic paraparesis and positive Babinski sign with mild paraesthesia of lower limbs. But he did not develop a definite sensory level at anytime during the course of his illness.
A nerve conduction study failed to show demyelination or axonal loss. Magnetic resonance imaging study of the spine showed hyperintensity of central portion of mid cervical cord from C 2 to C 5 level in T2 weighted and FLAIR images (Figure ) There was mild swelling of cervical cord without significant change of signal intensity on T1 weighted image (Figure ).
Basic investigations were as follows; Na+ 139 mmol/l, K+-4.2 mmol/l, Serum creatinine-62 μmol/l, blood urea 8.7 mmol/l, White cell count 5000/mm3(N-76,L-18), platelet count 17500/mm3. Haemoglobin 9.3 g/dl, AST-51u/l, ALT-74u/l, Bilirubin 12 μmol/l, ESR-12 mm/hr, CRP-0.4 mg/dl, VDRL-negative, Fasting blood sugar 5.4 mmol/l.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis done on the tenth day after onset of weakness was suggestive of a viral CNS infection with a protein content of 300 mg/l, glcose 4.3 mmol/l(RBS 10.9 mmol/l) and a leukocyte count of 350/mm3(92% lymphocytes). CSF infectious screen was positive for cytomegalovirus PCR(sensitivity more than 100copies/ml). This test was repeated and result was confirmed. Cytomegalovirus IgG and IgM were not detected in CSF. Polymerase chain reaction of CSF for herpes simplex virus(HSV) and Japanese encephalitis virus(JEV) were negative. Oligoclonal bands were not detected in CSF.
Considering the overall clinical picture, a working diagnosis of CMV associated transverse myelitis was made. Immunoglobulin levels and lymphocyte subset analysis failed to identify any immunodeficiency while HIV serology was negative.
Patient received treatment with intravenous ganciclovir for a duration of 21 days starting on the 10th day of illness. He was also given maximal supportive care with physiotherapy and psychological support. A second CSF analysis done 22 days after the onset of symptoms revealed no cells and protein content of 390 mg/l. (CSF glucose 3.6 mmol/l RBS-6.5 mmol/l) Repeated CMV serology in blood, CSF and CSF PCR for CMV were negative on the 22nd day of illness.
One month after the onset of symptoms the upper limb power was improved (grade 5) but the lower limb power remained grade 3. He was transferred to a long term rehabilitation facility.