A 38-year-old Chinese man visited the Department of Periodontics (West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Sichuan, China) with gingival enlargement, loose teeth, and tooth loss. The chief complaint of the patient was generalized gingival enlargement beginning 2 years ago, sometimes with pus. The teeth gradually loosened several months ago, and the left maxillary first molar was lost following severe pain. A local doctor diagnosed him as periodontitis, and then he was referred to the Department of Periodontics for periodontal therapy.
Medical history: The patient was a smoker for 20 years, averaging 20+ cigarettes per day. There was no relevant family history and no special disease history, no history of allergies, and the patient was not on any drugs. The extraoral examination showed facial symmetry and no obvious abnormalities in the lymph nodes of the head and neck. Intraoral examination showed that the patient has extremely poor oral hygiene, with a mass of dental plaque and debris covering almost all the teeth. The teeth had subgingival and supragingival calculus from the incisors to the molars. Gingivae were generally enlarged and red, and the buccal gingivae of the left mandible and maxilla were even enlarged toward the occlusal surface. The involved gingivae were edematous and tender, the gingival margin was inflamed, and there was no ulceration or significant necrosis. General findings were bleeding on probing, deep periodontal pockets, and attachment loss. Tooth mobility varied from Io-IIIo, and was IIIo in the left maxillary first premolar and second premolar . Mucosal texture and color were basically regular. There were no specific findings in the salivary glands, and salivary gland ducts could open normally. Panoramic radiography showed generalized alveolar bone loss (ABL), especially alveolar bone resorption at the left maxillary first and second premolars, as well as the left and right posterior teeth from alveolar crest to the apical area, but the maxillary sinus was intact without damage . No significant abnormalities were found in further clinical examinations, bone marrow examination, and tests for infectious diseases such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), syphilis, hepatitis B and C, and mycobacterium tuberculosis. Serological examination showed that C-reactive protein was high at 14 mg/L (normal range: 0–10 mg/L), the serum IgG was 23.70 g/L (normal range: 8.00–15.50 g/L), and IgG4 concentration was 2.800 g/L (normal range: 0.035–1.500 g/L). Then biopsy of gingivae was carried out under anesthesia from the left maxillary first and second molar.
Histological analysis of hematoxylin and eosin staining (H&E) demonstrated ulceration, a large infiltration of lymphoplasmacytic cells, a storiform pattern of fibrosis, and mitotic figures ; the preliminary diagnosis was plasma cell granuloma. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining results showed that scattered infiltration of 10 IgG4-positive plasma cells in the high-power field (HPF) . Other IHC markers, CD38, Ki-67/mum, kappa, lambda, EBER, and Pan Cytokeratin (PCK) were positive (Additional file : Figure S1, data not shown). Position emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) also excluded the possibility of cancer, and there were no obvious changes in other organs. According to clinical manifestations and serological and histological features, the lesion was regarded as an inflammatory condition. After 2 months, the patient was diagnosed as IgG4-related periodontitis by the Department of Rheumatology and Immunology (West China Hospital of Sichuan University) on the basis of the diagnostic criteria for IgG4-RD, although there were only 10 IgG4-positive plasma cells in the HPF. Using a new classification of periodontitis from a 2017 workshop [–], he was then diagnosed as periodontitis (Stage III, generalized, Grade C) and classified as manifestation of systemic diseases by Department of Periodontics.
The treatment plan for this patient was oral corticosteroids and periodontal therapy guided by the Department of Rheumatology and Immunology (West China Hospital of Sichuan University) and the Department of Periodontics. The rheumatologist recommended oral corticosteroids therapy. The initial dose of prednisolone was 0.6 mg/kg for 2 weeks (40 mg/day), which was then tapered by 5 mg every week for 6 weeks to determine a maintenance dose (5 mg/day). At the same time, the periodontist carried out periodontal therapy, including oral hygiene instruction, supragingival cleaning, subgingival scaling, and root planning . Three months later after non-surgical therapy, the periodontist re-evaluated the periodontal condition of the patient, then suggested he should have supportive periodontal therapy (SPT).
After 6 months of multidisciplinary comprehensive treatment, an approach using corticosteroids with periodontal non-surgical therapy, gingival edema disappeared, the color of the gingivae turned pink, gingivae recessed, periodontal pockets became shallow, and gingival enlargement significantly decreased . In serological testing, IgG4 concentration was 0.584 g/L, which was in the normal range. After this, the rheumatologist recommended a supportive dose of 5 mg/day and revisit every 3 months, while the periodontist suggested that patient should have SPT every 3 months and quit smoking (timeline in Additional file : Figure S2, data not shown).