A 6-year-old boy was admitted to the Affiliated Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical University in July 2020 due to an “epileptic status.” At the age of three, he had developed convulsions during sleep with no obvious cause. The seizures manifested with loss of consciousness, head tilting back, eyes on the turn, cyanotic lips, foaming at the mouth, and stiff and shaking limbs. They were accompanied by urinary incontinence, and lasted approximately 4−5 min before self-relieving, after which the child cried and screamed. No special treatment was effected at this time. The seizures occurred again after an interval of 2 months, with the same symptoms as before. After visiting a local hospital, the child was diagnosed with epilepsy. Oral administration of “lamotrigine 1/8 tablets, qd” was done, and the dosage was adjusted during the treatment. At the age of four, the patient had three seizures with the same presentation as before. He visited Beijing Children's Hospital in September 2019. The diagnosis was unknown, and rehabilitation treatment was recommended. At the age of six, about one convulsion per month was observed. The child visited a local hospital and received “sodium valproate 500 mg qd.” In May of the same year, he had five intermittent attacks. The boy stopped taking sodium valproate at home on May 29. At the end of May, he had another convulsion during sleep, presenting the same symptoms as before; the convulsion lasted for about 2 h, and then resolved. Another oral administration of “sodium valproate 500 mg qd” was given, and the patient had no attacks during treatment. However, he had another seizure during sleep at the age of 6 years and 7 months, with loss of consciousness, eyes on the turn, cyanosis of the lips, gurgling with phlegm, quadriplegia, and urine and feces incontinence. He was urgently admitted to our hospital. After oxygen inhalation and administration of chloral hydrate enema, the seizure was relieved, having lasted approximately 50 min. The child experienced dysphoria following the easing of symptoms.
The boy was the first birth and first child of his mother; he was an easy delivery, but was overdue (45+6). His birth weight was 3000 g. There was no history of asphyxia or hypoxia following birth. No abnormalities were found during the neonatal period. He was able to sit by month 8 and walk by month 17. He could shout “Mom” and “Dad” at 3 years old. At the time of this study, he could speak complete sentences, but was unable to communicate normally with people.
No special examination is conducted.
The blood, urine, and stool routines, myocardial enzyme level, liver and kidney function, cardiac color ultrasound, abdominal color ultrasound, head magnetic resonance imaging, urine organic acid analysis, blood amino acid, and carnitine analysis were all normal. The video electroencephalogram was abnormal for the child. Extensive/multifocal spike waves, slow spike waves, and multiple slow spike waves were emitted during each period. Sleeping discharge was in a nearly continuous state. Partial comprehensive secondary attacks were monitored in the right frontal pole and frontal region during the waking period.
Major sports: intelligence age of subscale, 66; developmental quotient/index of subscale, 80. Fine movements: intelligence age of subscale, 31.5; developmental quotient/index of subscale, 38. Adaptability: intelligence age of subscale, 36; developmental quotient/index of subscale, 43. Language: intelligence age of subscale, 37.5; developmental quotient/index of subscale, 45. Social behaviors: intelligence age of subscale, 33; developmental quotient/index of subscale, 40. Intelligence age: 40.8. Developmental quotient: 49. Autism Behavior Checklist/Autism Scale Assessment Report: 56 points.
The above information was used in the clinical diagnosis of ASD. To date, the child has received oral administration of oxcarbazepine and lamotrigine, and has occasionally had seizures. Seizure frequency has been significantly reduced, and rehabilitation training has been carried out.
After examination by medical ethics and family members using Agilent SurePrint G3 Human Genome CGH Microarray (array CGH) 8 × 60 K chip (Agilent Technologies, America) comparative genomic hybridization, follow the instructions. Luciferin (Cy3/Cy5) was applied to label the DNA of the patient and the reference samples, and then, microarray hybridization and post-hybridization washing were performed. Fluorescence images were obtained using an Agilent chip scanner, and the data were read by Feature Extraction Technologies; standardized processing was performed. Data analysis was carried out using Genomic Workbench (Agilent Technologies), and regions of copy number change were found. Their position in the genome was determined based on the Human Genome Reference Sequence (GRCH37/HG19), available in the UCSC database since February 2009. Data analysis was performed using Gene-related clinical information via Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM: 608636). The test results showed arr 15q11.2-q13.1 (23,769,039−28,527,183) × 3, 23,769,039−28,527,183, with a size of variation of 4.758 Mb . Amplified abnormalities of 1 were detected in 378 disease-specific regions, and 41 subtelomere regions of the chip design: 15q11.2-q13.1, according to published clinical literature, correlates with 15q11-q13 repetitive syndrome. The genomic DNA of the blood samples was extracted using multiple linking probe amplification (MLPA) using a Qiagene Kit, sample quality inspection, DNA denaturation, ligation, gene amplification, computer application, and the genomic variation database. The test results showed MLPA 070. Repeated variation of exon1 of NDN was found at the site of 15q-cen in the subject's chromosomes. The test results showed MLPA P036. Repeated variation of exon1 of the MKRN3 gene was found at the site of 15q-cen in the subject's chromosomes; no large fragment variation was found at P106. The parents did not have the above variants. Considering the new variants, the child was diagnosed with 15q11-q13 repetitive syndrome.