A 39 year old male with a history of dog bite to the left lateral thigh during a police pursuit, was bought into the emergency room from jail complaining of acute onset vision loss in the right eye, shortness of breath, and left leg pain six weeks after the dog bite.
The wound was initially treated with oral antibiotics, and mildly improved. However, it became indurated later with painful tracking to the left hip.
Social history was significant for amphetamine abuse in the past.
Upon presentation to the Emergency room, the patient was found to have tachycardia, and leukocytosis. The vital signs are summarized in table . The laboratory workup is summarized in table .
Further workup revealed left thigh abscess and signs of sepsis. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. Blood cultures showed oxacillin resistant staphylococcus aureus (ORSA) bacteremia, and further evaluation revealed multiple septic emboli to various organs, causing bilateral loculated pleural effusion , left renal cyst abscess, left obturator abscess .
The patient was initiated on intravenous levofloxacin, vancomycin, and gentamycin. He underwent emergent hip incision and drainage, computed tomography guided placement of bilateral pigtail tubes to drain the pleural fluid, and a nephrostomy tube was placed to drain the left renal cystic abscess. Trans-esophageal echocardiogram showed no evidence of endocarditis. The left hip arthrocentesis and the left renal cystic fluid both grew ORSA.
Meanwhile, the ophthalmology service was consulted to evaluate the right eye acute vision loss in the setting of systemic ORSA bacteremia. Initial ophthalmological exam of the right eye showed visual acuity of 20/200 on the right and 20/25 on the left. Intraocular pressure was 10 mmHg bilaterally. Slit lamp exam of the right eye showed conjunctival injection, corneal edema, chemosis, anterior chamber cell and flare. Slit lamp exam on the left was normal. Dilated fundus exam of the right eye showed absent red fundus reflex, vitreous cells and debris, chorioretinitis and vitritis. Dilated fundus exam of the left eye showed two tiny cotton wool spots along the superior and inferior arcades.
The patient was diagnosed with endogenous endophthalmitis of the right eye as a complication of the systemic ORSA bacteremia, for which he underwent an anterior chamber tap and intravitreal injection of vancomycin, ceftazidime, and voriconazole in the right eye. Prednisolone (1 drop every three hours), and ofloxacin (one drop four times daily) were initiated.
Antibiotics were continued including intravenous vancomycin, gentamycin, levofloxacin, and topical ofloxacin drops. The patient continued to be afebrile and white blood cell count decreased from 18.6 to 7.4.
Later, the anterior chamber fluid aerobic, anaerobic, and fungal cultures came back all negative.
Five days post injection exam showed visual acuity of 20/200 on the right, and 20/25 on the left. Intraocular pressure was 8 mmHg on the right, and 10 mmHg on the left. Dilated fundus exam showed decreased chorioretinitis and vitritis in the right eye. However the patient was noted to have macula-off rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, and a retinal hole inferior to the inferotemporal arcade . Dilated fundus exam of the left eye showed decrease in size of the cotton wool spots on the superior and inferior arcades.
The patient was taken to the operating room to repair the retinal detachment. Encircling scleral buckling was performed. Inspection of the posterior pole revealed a macula-off rhegmatogenous detachment and a necrotic retinal hole inferior to the inferotemporal arcade. A posterior vitreous detachment was created by using the vitrector. Following this, the cryoretinopexy was applied to the superotemporal retina where there were some small atrophic holes near the buckle. The peripheral vitreous was trimmed using a scleral depression for 360 degrees without complications. Next, perfluorocarbon was placed on the macula to stabilize the macula, followed by endolaser photocoagulation to surround the retinal hole and also 360 degrees on the scleral buckle. Next, an air-fluid exchange was performed, followed by silicone oil placement. At the end of the operation there was good red reflex and the eye was normotensive by finger palpation.
The patient was continued on intravenous vancomycin and oral levofloxacin for systemic infection control, and was started on one drop of Maxitrol three times daily. Patient was advised to keep his head in a face-down position.
Postoperative exam of the right eye showed flat retina 360 degrees . The patient was discharged to jail with a plan to continue on intravenous vancomycin, oral levofloxacin, Maxitrol drops, Ofloxacin ophthalmic solution, Prednisolone eye drop, Atropine sulfate ophthalmic solution 1% four times daily, and Cosopt one drop twice daily.
Follow-up exam 4 weeks post operation showed a visual acuity of 20/400 on the right and 20/25 on the left. Slit lamp exam of the right showed deep heme, 1+ cell, no signs of iris neovascularization, and pigmented anterior capsule. Slit lamp Exam of the left eye was normal. Dilated fundus exam of the right eye showed flat retina 360 degrees, bare RPE with surrounding laser scars. Dilated fundus exam of the left eye was normal.
Maxitrol and Ofloxacin were discontinued, atropine dose was reduced to once daily, and patient was given a slow taper down of prednisolone eye drops over 3 weeks. Patient was advised again about the importance of face-down positioning.
Later, the patient was released from jail, and he stopped following with our clinic.