The proband was a 51-year-old female seen in our clinic following relocation from a different health board. She had a history of reduced vision and hearing loss since childhood, and now undergoes annual ophthalmological evaluation. This included assessment of best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) with the ETDRS LogMAR chart, wide-field retinal imaging and red-free wide-field imaging (Optomap P200, Optos Plc, Marlborough, MA 01752,USA), spectral-domain OCT (Spectralis HRA + OCT 5.1.2.0 system; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) and electrodiagnostic testing by electroretinogram (ERG) and multifocal ERG at the Tennent’s Insitute of Ophthalmology, Glasgow.
The proband was referred for genetic testing at the Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory within Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine (MCGM, Manchester, UK) in 2019. Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood. Next generation sequencing using an inherited retinal disease gene panel covering 175 genes was performed as previously described , with assessment of identified genetic variants performed by NHS Clinical scientists within the Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory. Segregation analysis was performed using a DNA sample from an unaffected child of the proband. Informed consent was obtained and the study was performed according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Initial interpretation of genetic variants was performed by UK National Healthcare Service (NHS) clinical scientists within the Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory at MCGM as previously described . Briefly, this included assessment of the proband’s clinical referral, evaluation of scientific literature including Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD; ) and Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD; ), and in silico prediction of pathogenicity using the Variant Effect Predictors (VEP) SIFT, PolyPhen2, MutationTaster and AlignGVGD embedded in Alamut Visual Version 2.6 (Interactive Biosoftware, Rouen, France).
Sequence conservation was determined by aligning homologous protein sequences using ClustalOmega to identify conserved amino acid residues. Conservation scores for p.Cys3251 were calculated using PhyloP and PhastCons.
Further assessment of p.Cys3251Tyr was performed using a recently established pipeline to obtain the results from 32 different VEP tools (shown in Supplementary Table ) and comparing the predictions for 102 pathogenic and likely pathogenic USH2A missense variants from ClinVar (shown in Supplementary Table ), and 3239 putatively benign USH2A missense variants observed in the human population from gnomAD v2.1 (shown in Supplementary Table ).