Our patient is a 19-year-old male with no significant past medical or surgical history who presented to the emergency department by ambulance after a sudden onset of bright red bleeding per rectum and hematemesis. The patient stated his symptoms began the morning of his admission and were associated with nausea, abdominal cramping, and dizziness. He denied any prior episodes of similar symptoms. Patient denied any history of drug or alcohol use or family history of hematological and gastrointestinal disorders such as Crohn’s disease.
His admission laboratory work-up revealed a hemoglobin of 10.0 and a white blood cell count of 12.3. Initial imaging including a computed tomography (CT) angiography of the abdomen and pelvis did not show any areas of active extravasation. While in the emergency department, the patient had two additional episodes of hematochezia and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for adequate resuscitation with crystalloids and blood products.
The patient was consented for an emergent endoscopy/colonoscopy. The EGD was unremarkable; however, the colonoscopy showed a significant amount of bright red blood throughout the colon from rectum to terminal ileum without a clear source of bleeding. He was taken for a tagged red blood cell scan to identify the source while continuously being transfused with Packed Red Blood Cells (PRBC) and Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP) to maintain hemodynamic stability. The resulting scan revealed abnormal tracer activity in the left upper quadrant with the proximal jejunum as the most likely source of bleed .
At this time, he had additional episodes of hematochezia with a drop in his systolic blood pressure. His repeat hemoglobin was now 7.3 and he began requiring vasopressors. Because of the location of the GI bleed in the jejunum where vasculature is variable and with the initial angiography unable to detect any source of bleeding, the interventional radiologist was not certain embolization would be a reliable method of treatment for our patient.
With his hemodynamic instability progressing, the decision was made to take the patient emergently to the operating room where he underwent an exploratory laparotomy with the general surgeon and surgical residents. During this time, the small bowel was run from the terminal ileum to the ligament of Treitz, paying close attention to the jejunum. We were able to visualize intraluminal blood coursing from the proximal/mid- jejunum to terminal ileum. Proximal to this site, no intraluminal blood was noted. Additionally, a 1 cm palpable lesion was identified in the jejunum. An enterotomy at the proximal jejunum confirmed the presence of a small, nonbleeding, raised nipple-like lesion . A small bowel resection including the lesion with primary anastomosis was performed. Upon careful inspection, no additional lesions were identified. The patient tolerated the procedure and was taken back to the ICU for close hemodynamic monitoring.
The small bowel specimen was sent for pathology which revealed a small bowel mucosal erosion with underlying dilated tortuous segments of artery filled with blood consistent with a Dieulafoy lesion .
On postoperative day 1, the patient was extubated. During his postoperative course he subsequently remained hemodynamically stable. He received a total of 8-units of PRBCs, 2-units of FFP, and 1-unit of platelets during his admission, primarily prior to the surgical intervention. The patient was stable for transfer out of the ICU on postoperative day 3. His diet was resumed and continually advanced as tolerated to a regular diet. On postoperative day 5, the patient was discharged home in stable condition. He was subsequently seen on follow up visit with complete resolution of his symptoms, fully healed surgical incision, and tolerating a regular diet. Our work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .