A 63-year-old Caucasian man presented to our hospital with 2 weeks of progressive generalized weakness, vague abdominal discomfort, and dyspnea on exertion requiring more frequent use of his inhaler. He did not report similar symptoms in the past, and he denied any associated chest pain, cough, changes in bowel habits, fevers, chills, weight loss, recent travel, tick bites, or sick contacts. His past medical history was relevant for chronic bronchitis diagnosed 10 years ago. He was a former one-pack-per-day smoker for 20 years. His family history was noncontributory.
The patient’s vital signs at presentation showed a blood pressure of 128/84 mmHg, heart rate of 75 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths/minute, oxygen saturation of 99% on room air, and body temperature of 97.7 °F. On physical examination, the patient was in no apparent distress and was awake, alert, and oriented to person, place, and time. His heart and lung examination revealed sinus tachycardia and diffuse expiratory wheezes throughout the lung fields. The patient’s abdominal examination was pertinent for a nonperitonitic tenderness to palpation in the left upper quadrant. His neurological examination was remarkable for weakness in the right upper extremity. His laboratory data are summarized in Table .
See Fig. for the timeline of the patient’s kidney function and absolute eosinophil count while receiving steroid treatment.
Findings of computed tomography (CT) of the patient’s brain were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain revealed subacute infarcts involving the left frontal white matter and left cerebellum; in addition, an evolving subacute infarct was seen in the left corona radiata. CT of the chest demonstrated diffuse ground-glass opacity, and CT of the abdomen was remarkable for a wedge-shaped area of low attenuation in the spleen consistent with splenic infarct. His transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a mural apical thrombus in the left ventricular (LV) apex with reduced ejection fraction (31–35%). Cardiac MRI performed 7 days after anticoagulation therapy was initiated showed a diffuse subendocardial scarring of the middle to apical LV segments and the right ventricular side of the septum. It also revealed evidence of edema of the middle anteroseptum and apical septum, consistent with endomyocardial fibrosis. However, no mural thrombus was visualized.
A presumptive diagnosis of HES was made on the basis of presenting symptoms, laboratory data, and imaging studies. Investigation for secondary causes, including immunological testing , blood and urine cultures, ova and parasites, and infectious serology , were unrevealing, and results of urine drug screening were negative. Bone marrow biopsy demonstrated a normocellular bone marrow population with eosinophilia comprising 60–70%, without evidence of lymphoproliferative disorder or metastatic neoplasm. Cytogenetic analysis was unrevealing: negative for breakpoint cluster region-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homolog 1 (BCR-ABL1) fusion, eosinophilia-associated platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRA), platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB), fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1), Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) mutation, and JAK2 pericentriolar material 1 (PCM1) fusion.
Due to the stigma of hemolysis (normocytic acute anemia, elevated lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin, positive schistocytes with relative thrombocytopenia), further investigation was pursued. The result of the Coombs test (direct and indirect) was negative. A disintegrin-like and metalloprotease with thrombospondin type 1 motif 13 (ADAMTS13) activity level was greater than 50%, and the expression of complement regulatory proteins CD59 and CD55 on erythrocytes was within normal limits as determined by flow cytometry.
Due to a further decline in the estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) early in the patient’s hospital course, a kidney biopsy was pursued. Renal biopsy revealed a glomerular and vascular TMA, interstitial fibrosis, and inflammation with focal eosinophils . IHC staining for eosinophil granule major basic protein 1 (MBP1) was not performed.
Our patient was started on prednisone 1 mg/kg daily and a heparin protocol at 18 U/kg/hour with an activated partial thromboplastin time goal of 60–100 seconds. Simultaneously, warfarin was initiated. Once the patient’s international normalized ratio was within therapeutic range (2.0–3.0), he was anticoagulated with heparin and warfarin for an additional 48 hours. His eosinophil count and estimated GFR were monitored on an outpatient basis, and his prednisone dose was gradually tapered. After the eighth week, the patient was maintained on 5 mg of prednisone daily.
By the time the renal biopsy report was available, the patient’s kidney function had started to recover; hence, no further intervention was required. After initiation of treatment with steroids, the patient achieved resolution of pulmonary, cardiac, neurologic, and abdominal symptoms. Repeat echocardiography after 5 weeks showed improvement of LV ejection fraction to 50–55%. Complete normalization of eosinophil count and renal function was observed after 4 and 8 weeks of therapy, respectively . At his 10-week follow-up, the patient continued to do well under close surveillance for renal and cardiac complications. At 12-month follow-up, he continued to have a normal eosinophil count and renal function. However, cardiac MRI showed persistent endocardial fibrosis.