A 45-year-old man presented with a history of a dull aching pain in the left flank and progressive abdominal distention since 4 years ago. Recently the patients complain from aggravation of abdominal pain and new onset constipation. He had no history of passing stones. He had not history of haematuria, dysuria, frequency or fever during 4 years ago.
General physical examination revealed nothing positive. Abdominal examination revealed asymmetrical buldging of abdomen on inspection and a firm fixed mass in the left hypochondrium that extended to the epigastrium and hypochonderium on palpation. Laboratory investigations showed haematuria, mucosuria and 10-12 pus cells/high power filed in urine examination. Urine culture was negative.
Routine hematological investigations were within normal limit.
Intravenous pyelography revealed the non-functioning left kidney with multiple large opaque stones. In transabdominal sonography a huge cystic mass with internal echo debris and multiple stones without remarkable renal parenchyma was observed that mimicked sever long-standing hydronephrosis accompanied with pyonephrosis.
Abdominal CT scan (64-MDCT, Siemens. Somatom, Sensation) with IV and Oral contrast revealed a huge lobulated multicystic thin wall mass measuring 25*20*30 cms with thick septation accompanied with solid component without marked enhancement and some large nodular calcified density (stone) that completely replaced left kidney. .
Abdominal CT did not reveal any other mass lesions or ascites in the abdomen. There was no singe of hydroureter in abdominal sonography and abdominal CT scan.
Surgical excision of the mass was performed completely. Grossly left kidney was completely replaced by lobulated multicystic mass measuring 30*20*20 cms that were filled with necrotic and mucinous material. .
Histopathology revealed that the tumor was composed of single layer of columnar epithelium with scattered goblet cells and mucous glands resemblance to intestinal mucosa with abundant extracellular mucin compatible with cystic mucinous adenocarcinoma .
The renal capsule, Ureter and renal hilar vessels were intact (T 3).