An 89-year-old Japanese woman with a 1-month history of stoma bleeding was referred to our hospital. She had undergone a transverse loop colostomy 35 years previously for an iatrogenic colon perforation that occurred during left ureteral lithotomy. Upon physical examination, the patient was found to have a hard nodule at the colostomy site, measuring 3 cm . A biopsy of the nodule suggested adenocarcinoma. Laboratory data revealed anemia and renal dysfunction. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were not elevated. Staging computed tomography showed a 3-cm tumor adjacent to the stoma with no invasion into the abdominal muscle. There was no evidence of metastatic disease. Colonoscopy via the stoma revealed no other lesions in the colon or rectum. On the basis of our findings, the preoperative diagnosis of the stoma tumor was transverse colon cancer (T2, N0, M0, stage I). We concluded that colectomy and repositioning of the colostomy site were appropriate for this patient. Although we thought stoma closure was possible, the patient and her family were opposed to this strategy because they were concerned about anal function.
Under general anesthesia, a laparotomy was performed via a peristomal incision with 5-mm skin margins, and the tumor was covered using a surgical glove to avoid tumor seeding. Adhesion around the stoma was not strong, and there was no evidence of peritoneal dissemination. Only pericolic lymph nodes were dissected. The colon was separated from the tumor by 5-cm margins, and the specimen was removed en bloc . An end colostomy was constructed to a new site on the right side of the abdomen. The deficit in the abdominal wall was repaired, and the skin was closed via a purse-string suture. The operative time was 102 min, and blood loss was 52 mL. Macroscopic examination showed complete excision of the tumor with clear margins .
The patient was discharged 8 days after surgery. Her postoperative course was uneventful, and she recovered without any complications. One year and five months after surgery, there is no evidence of recurrence.
Microscopic examination of the tumor showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma mixed with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma . The tumor extended into the proper muscle layer and directly invaded the skin. There was no lymph node metastasis. The final diagnosis of the stoma tumor was transverse colon cancer (T2, N0, M0, stage I).
The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of Showa University Northern Yokohama Hospital. The study was conducted according to the Declaration of Helsinki.