A 10-year-old Tibetan girl presented with headache and nonprojectile vomiting for two months. Her headache was moderate to severe in intensity. No fever, seizure, or weight loss was reported. The girl had no significant medical history previously, and her family members were in good health. Her six schoolmates presented with similar symptoms and had been suspected of cysticercosis. Cooked yak meat and pork were the main source of meat for the patient and her family.
At admission, general and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Blood routine tests showed that white blood cell count was 7.5 × 109/L with a percentage of eosinophil of 7.8% (normal range, no more than 6.9%), an absolute eosinophil count of 0.58 × 109/L (normal range, no more than 0.68 × 109/L), and normal absolute neutrophil and lymphocyte count. Examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed slight elevation of protein concentration (696.4 mg/L; normal range, 80-430 mg/L) and white blood cell count (25 × 106/L; normal range, less than 15 × 106/L), and normal glucose. Gram and Indian ink stains and bacterial culture of CSF were negative. C-reactive protein, serum immunoglobulin E, serology for human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis, T-SPOT.TB (an enzyme-linked immunospot assay for the infection of tuberculosis), tuberculin skin test, stool examination, abdominal ultrasound, chest computed tomography (CT), ocular and spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed no positive results. Brain MRI showed a lot of cystic lesions and somewhat perilesional edema in cerebral hemispheres, brain stem and cerebellum, and some lesions presented with the so-called “hole-with-dot” appearance, indicating viable cysticerci with eccentric scolex . Serum immunoglobulin G antibodies against cysticerci were detected using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). These results were consistent with a diagnosis of massive parenchymal neurocysticercosis.
Corticosteroids and mannitol were administered to decrease brain edema and inflammation. Albendazole (15 mg/kg/d for 10 days) was given to the patient, and her symptoms were relieved. However, headache re-emerged after the treatment was over for one month, accompanied by an episode of seizure and intermittent arm and leg shaking movements. The shaking movements lasted several minutes to half an hour each time without impaired awareness, and happened mainly in the morning with an interval of several days. Repeated brain MRI showed no significant change of these intracranial lesions. Then supportive management including corticosteroids and mannitol and retreatment of albendazole (15 mg/kg/d) for 10 days were given to the patient. Oral prednisone was continued after these treatments. Headache and shaking movements of limbs were relieved. About three weeks after the end of these treatments, headache and an episode of seizure recurred. Considering that the patients did not respond very well to the therapeutic regimen of albendazol alone, albendazol (15 mg/kg/d) in combination with praziquantel (50 mg/kg/d) was administered for 14 days. Oral prednisone was given at the same time and in additional two weeks after the antiparasitic therapy. The patient’s symptoms were all relieved. Repeated imaging two months after antiparasitic treatment showed that most cystic lesions had resolved . The patient recovered well within the 4-year follow-up. The good therapeutic response to the antiparasitic medication also supported our diagnosis in this patient.