A 49-year-old Sri Lankan Tamil male suffered a snake bite to his left foot while working in the garden. The snake had been killed and brought in to hospital for identification purposes. It was subsequently identified as a hump-nosed viper. On the way to hospital, the patient developed severe retrosternal chest pain and became unresponsive to stimuli, however did not receive cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) during transport. On arrival to the Emergency Treatment Unit (ETU), he was unconscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 3/15, and did not have spontaneous respiration. Electrocardiography (ECG) revealed ST elevation in leads II, III and aVF with reciprocal changes in leads I and aVL, suggestive of an inferior wall infarction . The ECG also showed atrial fibrillation with a heart rate of 132 min−1. His blood pressure at time of presentation to ETU was 68/40 mmHg. Immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation was commenced and he was urgently intubated, and synchronized electrical cardioversion was performed with a 100 joule initially, followed by 200 J. This led to the return of spontaneous circulation and converted his rhythm back to sinus rhythm at 110 min−1, with a blood pressure of 122/80 mmHg. Fang marks were seen over the dorsal aspect of the first toe in left foot, with associated swelling and localized bleeding but no signs of necrosis. Twenty-minute whole blood clotting time (20-WBCT) was prolonged indicating ongoing coagulopathy. A subsequent 12-lead ECG repeated 90 min later revealed resolved ECG changes other than T-wave inversion in lead III.
His past medical/surgical history included diabetes mellitus for which he was taking metformin for the last 2 years. He did not have any hypertension or ischemic heart disease in the past.
Intensive care was provided. 20-WBCT persisted to be prolonged for another 48 h. GCS improved to 7/15. His full blood count showed marked neutrophil predominance (87 %), leukocytosis with white blood cell count of 26.5 × 109/L, haemoglobin of 110 g/L, haematocrit of 44 % and the platelet count was 101 × 109/L. Coagulation profile revealed prolonged prothrombin time of 23 s (control 12 s) with international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.9. Renal profile was normal with serum Na 140 mmol/L, K 3.72 mmol/L and serum creatinine 0.9 mg/dL. C-reactive protein was high (160 mg/L). He developed haematuria on the first day with urine red blood cell count at 30–40/hpf. This resolved by the third day of admission. Initial blood film showed presence of a few schistocytes indicating early micro-angiopathic haemolytic anaemia (MAHA), which resolved in consequent films following fresh frozen plasma therapy. Thrombolysis, anticoagulation and anti-platelets were not considered due to the presence of haematuria and coagulopathy. The cardiac enzyme troponin I assay was marginally elevated. The electroencephalogram (EEG) performed on day 10 revealed low amplitude pattern compatible with diffuse brain damage. Imaging, which included a non-contrast computed tomography scan of the brain and a transthoracic echocardiogram to assess the heart, were normal.
He was extubated after a tracheostomy on day 8. Over the next 2 weeks, his GCS showed improvement from 7/15 to 10/15. Almost a month after the incident, he was discharged home with arrangements for rehabilitation. According to the Glasgow–Pittsburgh Cerebral Performance Categories (CPC) Scale, he persisted to be in cerebral performance category 3 on discharge, as well on follow-up at 6 months .