A 48 year old patient presented with worsening dyspnea on exertion with orthopnea associated to lower-extremity edema that appeared 2 weeks before his admission.
He did not report any similar family medical history. The general examination found a conscious patient. His heart rate was 70 b/m, his blood pressure was 136/75 mm Hg. He was polypneic and orthopneic with a respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, an O2 saturation of 96% on ambient air. Also noted, fine bibasilar crackles with 4+ pitting edema bilaterally. Further physical examination was normal. A 12-lead electrocardiogram and Holter ECG , performed 1 week before his admission, revealed the presence of an accelerated junctional rhythm at 98 bpm with a short PR interval (<120 ms) indicating a junctional rather than atrial focus and a pseudo-infarct pattern. Another one was performed in our department revealing this time a coronary sinus rhythm with a first-degree atrioventricular block (PR interval >200 ms), low voltage in limb leads and a pseudo-infarct pattern . Initial laboratory data noticed high levels of NT-pro BNP and cardiac Troponin (respectively 3525 pg/ml and 89 ng/l). The rest of laboratory exams was normal. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed grainy and shiny aspect of the interventricular septum with concentric wall thickening and biatrial enlargement with mild pericardial effusion (-A). Ejection fraction was at 55%. Impaired relaxation and elevated filling pressures with restrictive mitral inflow pattern were noted, indicating severe diastolic dysfunction (-C). Pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PASP) was estimated to be 58 mmHg assuming a right atrial pressure of 20 mmHg (-E). In addition to that, the echocardiographic strain imaging revealed the “bullseye’’ appearance (-F), consistent with preserved longitudinal systolic function at the LV apex in contrast with reduced longitudinal shortening at basal level. Coronary angiography was performed and revealed no coronary artery stenosis. Since clinical, echocardiographic and biological findings were strongly suggestive for amyloidosis, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. It objectivated delayed postgadolinium enhancement of myocardium, suggesting amyloid deposition in the myocardium . The diagnosis of cardiac amyloidosis was highly considered, the patient underwent a salivary gland biopsy, which confirmed the presence of amyloid deposits. Further investigations were realized to determine the type of cardiac amyloidosis, including serum protein immunofixation, serum Kappa/Lamda free light chain ratio analysis and urine protein immunofixation. A gamma-peak was observed and Kappa/Lambda ratio reduced to 0.15. Bone scintigraphy did not show signs in favor of TTR amyloidosis , thus confirming the diagnosis of AL amyloidosis.
The differential diagnosis includes the other etiologies of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), left ventricle hypertrophy which is associated with cardiac hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypertension or Fabry disease.
The initial outcome was favorable with regression of the signs of heart failure under intravenous diuretic treatment. During his first week's hospitalization, the patient presented a syncope related to a complete atrioventricular block , reason why he benefited from an implantation of a double chamber pacemaker. The patient, after improvement of his cardiac decompensation, was transferred to hematology department to initiate urgent chemotherapy directed against plasma-cells.