A 44-year-old man attended a follow-up visit after cataract surgery of the left eye. His surgery had been complicated by a posterior capsular tear requiring anterior vitrectomy and implantation of +19.5 diopter Sensar AR40e lens in the sulcus (3-piece, 6 mm biconvex optic, 13 mm length, 5° posteriorly angulated). Ocular examination and visual acuity (VA) were unremarkable earlier. Four weeks postoperatively, the patient reported blurry vision in the left eye for several days prior to the visit. VA was 20/125 improved to 20/32 using a pinhole. Inferior half pupillary capture was found on the slit-lamp examination. Pharmacologic pupil dilation was performed aimed at relieving the pupillary capture. After pupil dilation, slit-lamp examination revealed a reversed position of sulcus IOL and pupillary capture was relieved . The patient was asked to stay in a supine position and 2% pilocarpine was prescribed to induce miosis which was not successful until office hour was over. The patient was sent home and asked to come back the next day. He was advised to stay in a supine position as much as possible. Six hours later, he came to the emergency room because of sudden pain, blurry vision, and redness in the affected eye. VA was hand motion and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 48 mm Hg. Ciliary injection and cloudy cornea were noted. The pupil was 6 mm in size which circumferentially attached to the IOL optic border resulting in iris bombe and shallow peripheral anterior chamber. He was diagnosed with acute angle-closure from a pupillary block and was treated using 2% pilocarpine. He stayed in a supine position all night then IOP returned to normal, no pupillary capture, and all symptoms were disappeared. Laser peripheral iridotomy (LPI) was scheduled the next morning aiming to prevent recurrence. After laser treatment, an open-angle on gonioscopy was noted. The mesopic pupil was 5.9 mm in the left eye. Two weeks later, routine examination showed 360 degrees pupillary capture without IOP elevation . The patient also complained of blurry vision in the left eye. VA was 20/160 and open-angle on gonioscopy was noted. The refraction was −2.00 × 1.25 × 30. The patient has undergone IOL exchange with implantation of +19.0 diopter Aurolens SC6530 lens in the sulcus (single-piece, 6.5 mm optic, 13 mm length, 10° posteriorly angulated). Postoperatively, VA was 20/40, quiet anterior chamber, and IOP within the normal range were noted throughout the follow-up period without any medication. The patient reported better vision without fluctuation. The postoperative refraction was −1.00 × 1.25 × 180.