A 70-year-old man was diagnosed with a solitary HCC 6 cm × 6 cm in size, located on the right side of the hepatic hilum, across the right anterior and medial segments . The patient suffered obstructive jaundice due to tumor invasion into the hilar bile duct, and first underwent endoscopic biliary stenting in the right hepatic duct. After his total bilirubin was normalized, we planned to perform right trisegmentectomy with hepaticojejunostomy of the liver. Although the tumor was estimated to be anatomically resectable, we introduced preoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with atezolizumab and bevacizumab to reduce tumor viability because the patient’s protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II (PIVKA-II) level was remarkably high at 14,683 mAU/mL while his alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level was normal (2.2 ng/mL). After six courses of the treatment, his PIVKA-II level had significantly decreased to 295 mAU/mL, and the viability of the tumor seemed to be decreased on a contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan that revealed defuse low-density change in the tumor . Although the liver function was good as Child–Pugh grade A with 0.934 of galactosyl human serum albumin (GSA) uptake ratio of the liver to the liver plus heart at 15 min (LHL) in technetium-99 m-GSA scintigraphy , portal vein embolization (PVE) of right lobe and segment 4 branches was performed because of the insufficient estimated remnant liver volume less than 30% (28.9%), and we finally could achieve the sufficient volume of 40.2%, 2 weeks after PVE. A preoperative blood test was normal except for mild anemia and a slightly low level of albumin, and the patient’s activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and prothrombin time (PT) were both normal . During ICI treatment, the patient required prednisolone therapy for enthesitis of the right gastrocnemius muscle, which was suspected to be an IrAE due to atezolizumab. The symptom disappeared after the steroid treatment, and the patient underwent right trisegmentectomy of the liver with hepaticojejunostomy without blood transfusion, 8 weeks after the completion of atezolizumab and bevacizumab administration. Hepaticojejunostomy was performed between the confluence of segment 2/3 bile ducts and jejunum without biliary stent, because the bile duct was sick and enlarged due to the previous biliary obstruction, so that we believed biliary stent was not necessary.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful until he developed anastomotic leakage of both the hepaticojejunostomy and the jejunojejunostomy, which required urgent surgery 7 days after hepatectomy. Both were re-anastomosed, and a 2.5-mm plastic biliary stent was placed during the hepaticojejunostomy. At 9 days after hepatectomy (2 days after reoperation), although the patient appeared to have been doing well, laboratory data showed a sudden onset of significant prolongation of APTT (109.7 s) and the PT international normalized ratio (> 7.02). An initial assay of coagulation factors revealed that factors II, V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI and XII were all significantly decreased , though only factors V and VII were below normal range after the serum sample was diluted fourfold . Lupus anticoagulant could not be calculated, and anti-cardiolipin-beta2-glycoprotein I complex antibody was not detected . The previous anastomotic leakage was well controlled without recurrence, and no other surgery-related complications were observed. At the onset of coagulopathy, the level of total bilirubin was 1.5 mg/dL, creatinine was 1.86 mg/dL, C-reactive protein was 8.66 mg/dL, white blood cell count was 10,500/μL and platelet count was 68,000/μL. Acquired coagulation factor deficiency due to immunologic destruction was suspected because a cross-mixing test (CMT) revealed an inhibitor pattern . After the first surgery of hepatectomy, the antibiotics were administrated as follows; cefmetazole 1 g × 3 per day for 3 days, tazobactam sodium/piperacillin sodium 4.5 g × 3 per day for next 4 days, and meropenem 1 g × 2 per day, daptomycin 350 mg × 1 per day after reoperation, until the patient died. Meropenem and daptomycin were used for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterococcus faecium, both of which were identified in the abdominal fluid in the drain the day after the second operation, and there was no severe peritonitis nor bacteremia throughout the course.
Once we suspected immune-mediated coagulopathy, the patient was given intensive treatment in the form of repeated plasma exchange, 2 courses of rituximab and a steroid bolus. Even after rituximab administration, however, the coagulopathy was not reversed, and the patient died of uncontrollable systemic bleeding 25 days after the onset of coagulopathy (32 days after hepatectomy) . After the patient died, a stored blood sample was sent to the Japanese Collaborative Research Group for an Integrated Consignment Screening Test [, ], and detailed experimental examination of stored patient plasma collected at postoperative day 16, confirmed severe multiple coagulation factor deficiencies, including deficiencies in Factor V/5 (FV/5), Factor X/10 (FX/10), and Factor VIII/8 (FVIII/8) . Unfortunately, not all items (e.g., antithrombin, thrombin–antithrombin complex, etc.) were examined, due to the limited amount of plasma available. Both the FV/5-specific CMT and the FX/10-specific CMT showed a downward convex inhibition pattern , and the titers of FV/5 and FX/10 inhibitors were > 100 BU/mL and 2.5 BU/mL, respectively. However, an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay detected only anti-FV/5 autoantibodies, but not anti-FX/10 autoantibodies . Accordingly, the patient had true FV/5 inhibitor and false FX/10 inhibitor . These findings are consistent with the definitive diagnosis of autoimmune FV/5 deficiency (AiF5D) according to the Japanese government criteria established by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare . Our ultimate diagnosis of this refractory coagulopathy was AiF5D possibly due to an atezolizumab-related IrAE.