A girl aged 2 years and 10 months was admitted to Children’s Hospital of Soochow University in May 2018 due to recurrent productive cough and wheezing lasting for 1 month.
She had experienced recurrent pneumonia (2-3 times every year) beginning 4 mo after birth, with repeated infection by Pseudomonas aeruginosa and parasinusitis, but without a history of chronic diarrhea or pancreatic involvement.
The child was conceived through in vitro fertilization. Her father had been diagnosed with congenital absence of vas deferens, and her mother was healthy.
She weighed 11 kg, her height was 89 cm, her body mass index was 13.9, and she presented with shortness of breath and dyspnea. Crackles and wheezing rales were present in bilateral lungs. The heart and abdomen were normal. No clubbed digits were found.
Blood routine examination showed a white blood cell count of 15.59 × 109/L, a C reactive protein concentration of 55.4 mg/L, and positivity for Pseudomonas aeruginosa on bronchoalveolar lavage fluid culture. Findings on other tests, including serum electrolyte measurement, fungus culture, Glactomannan test, T-SPOT tuberculosis test, allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and aspergillus fumigatus specific IgE detection were all negative.
Chest computed tomography (CT) scanning revealed obvious exudative lesions and bilateral bronchiectasis . Sinus CT scanning revealed bilateral parasinusitis. Liver CT scanning revealed a low-density lesion in the left lobe of the liver. In patients with CF, the liver is also the organ affected by the dense secretion of digestive juice. Bile secreted by the liver can clog bile ducts and damage the liver. Ultrasonography of the pancreas was negative.
Two heterozygous mutations were found in the CF patient by Sanger sequencing analysis. A heterozygous novel missense mutation of c.753_754delAG chr7-117176607-117176608 was identified in exon 7 , which was inherited from her mother based on its identification in the mother’s sample as well . This novel mutation has not yet been recorded in the CFTR mutation database . In addition, a heterozygous c.1240 C>T mutation in exon 10 was observed in CFTR of the CF patient , which was inherited from her father and had already been included in the CFTR mutation database.