This report presents a 60-year-old non-diabetic, non-hypertensive female whom had experienced a fungal infection on her prosthetic knee post total knee replacement (TKR).Twoyears ago, the patient underwent right TKR for her osteoarthritis which was then followed by conventional physiotherapy. The patient post-operative period was uneventful for the subsequent 8 months.
Eight months later, the patient presented with the right knee pain, associated knee swelling, and restricted range of motion. She was admitted for suspected bacterial infection of the prosthetic knee. The culture of the joint aspiration was done, and the result was positive for bacterial infection with “Streptococcus viridans”. Following the confirmation of bacterial PJI, the patient underwent TKR revision with the removal of the infected prosthesis and placement of cement spacer,all covered with a plethora of antibiotics, including imipenem + cilastatin 500mg, amoxycillin 1g+ clavulanic 200mg, vancomycin 500mg, and cefuroxime 750mg. The patient was hospitalized for the next 42 days and discharged on amoxicillin 875mg and clavulanic acid 125mg [1*3]. Three months following the placement of cement spacer, the patient was admitted for the second stage of TKR with removal of the cement spacer and placement of the new prosthesis after confirming the sterility of the aspired knee fluid. During the hospital stay, the patient was covered with imipenem + cilastatin 500mg, vancomycin 500mg, cefuroxime 750mg for prophylaxis, and discharged on amoxicillin 875mg+ clavulanic acid 125mg [1*2]. During the following period, the patient was improving and doing well.
However, 9 months following the two-stage revision TKR, the patient presented with the right knee pain, swelling, and hotness. The physical examination revealed redness, hotness, restricted range of movement, and tibial loosening which called for the admission of the patient. The patient’s complete blood count, kidney function tests, liver function tests, and chemistry were all sent for laboratory analysis refer to and whichshow the prerioperative radiographs.
Right knee soft-tissue excision showed fibrofatty tissue with inflammatory infiltrate and fibrin. Necrotic bone periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) stain was negative for fungal spores and pseudohyphae. Right knee synovial fluid aspirate showed sheets of neutrophils in hemorrhagic background. PAS stain is negative for fungal spores and pseudohyphae, but culture of the joint aspirate showed growth of “C.parapsilosis.” A repeated culture confirmed the presence of the fungal infection. During this admission, the patient underwent the first stage revision of TKR with removal of the infected prosthesis and placement of amphotericin bimpregnatedcement spacer and received capsofungin 50mg, fluconazole 200 mg, imipenam+ cilastin 500mg, ceftriaxone 1g, levofloxacin 500mg, and vancomycin 500mg for 40 days and then was discharged on fluconazole 150 mg 1*1 for 6 weeks. Knee aspirate culture demonstrated no fungal presence 2 weeks post-anti-fungal treatment.
Three months following the placement of amphotericin B impregnated cement spacer, the patient was admitted for the second stage TKR with removal of the cement spacer and placement of the new knee prosthesis after confirming the sterility of the aspired knee culture during the hospital stay, the patient was on imipenem + cilastatin 500mg, amphotericin B 50mg, fluconazole 150 mg capsules, vancomycin 500mg, and cefuroxime 750mg. The patient was discharged on fluconazole 150 mg 1*2 for at least 12 months.
During the subsequent period, the patient was improving and gradually regaining the range of motion and her X-ray at 8thmonths post-operative is presented in Fig. 3.The patient was seen in the clinic for regular checkup and serial laboratory testing every 4 weeks.. However, after completion a period of 9 months out of the planned 12 months of oral Fluconazole, the patient developed skin rash and stopped the medication.