A 53-year-old Caucasian man with a history of chronic myeloid leukemia in clinical remission for three years, on maintenance therapy (100mg/day) with imatinib, was admitted to our hospital to investigate a persistent fever. He reported the sudden onset of an acute chest pain with epigastric radiation 15 days before his hospital admission. At that time, the referring physician excluded a pain of cardiac origin based on normal electrocardiogram (ECG) findings and cardiac enzyme levels. Three days later, our patient was febrile (38.5°C) and dyspnoic. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count (13×103 cells/mL), and a chest X-ray (not shown) was performed revealing an ill-defined hypolucency in the right lower lobe. On the basis of these clinical and radiological findings, a presumed diagnosis of acute bronchopneumonia was made and our patient was given medical therapy with antibiotics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory and proton-inhibitor drugs.
At admission, our patient was febrile (38.5°C) with abdominal tenderness and hypoactive bowel sounds. A plain abdominal X-ray film was then performed . On the upright film , a huge air-fluid level was clearly depicted in the right subphrenic space. In the supine position the extraluminal air appear to extend from the right subphrenic to the subhepatic space and the hepatoduodenal fossa . Based on the X-ray findings, a contrast-enhanced multi-detector row CT study was performed (Aquilion 64; Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan) with a detector configuration of 1×32mm, a table feed of 36mm/s and a gantry rotation time of 0.75 (pitch factor=0.844), 120kVp and automatic dose modulation. A monophasic acquisition was performed 80s after intravenous bolus injection of 150cm3 of non-ionic iodinated contrast media (Ultravist 370; Bayer, Berlin, Germany) at a rate of 2cm3/s.
On contrast-enhanced MDCT, a right subphrenic abscess was clearly depicted . The huge air-fluid collection extended from the subphrenic to the perihepatic space and extraluminal air bubbles could also be detected in the fissure of Teres’ ligament . On the coronal reformatted image extraluminal air could also be detected in the hepatoduodenal ligament where extraluminal leakage of the water-soluble iodinated contrast media could be seen after oral administration of 500cm3of 3 percent diluted diatrizoate meglumine.
Our patient underwent surgery. During laparotomy, a huge abscess was found in both the right subphrenic and the subhepatic spaces. After drainage, several attempts to identify the site of leakage were made but were unsuccessful because of an inflammatory block involving the lesser omentum, the duodenal bulb, the hepatic flexure and the inferior margin of the left hepatic lobe. After extensive adhesiolysis, the duodenal bulb was finally exposed and the site of the ulcer identified by methylene blue administration through a nasogastric tube. The ulcer was sutured.
Our patient had a largely uneventful recovery, with the only incidents being a right pleural fluid collection (600cm3) requiring thoracocentesis and small (<200cm3) residual perihepatic fluid collections, which were monitored and managed conservatively. He was discharged 12 days later.