A 61 year-old Caucasian woman (height 150cm, weight 50Kg), in good general health, suffered a lumbar spine trauma caused by a fall in her home. The clinical picture, X-ray and CT (computed tomography) scan showed a fracture of the L2 vertebral body. We performed a kyphoplasty with high density polymethylmethacrylate cement (PMMA) (X-Pid, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA). The dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) exam confirmed the osteoporotic picture (T-score −4 DS). At that point we started an osteoporosis treatment. Considering the DEXA results and clinical signs of the patient, a bisphosphonate was administered . To treat the post-traumatic low back pain we started with clodronic acid (200mg once every two weeks) through intramuscular injection (Clasteon®, Abiogen Pharma S.p.A., Pisa, Italy) with the intention of substituting the clodronic acid with one of the other bisphosphonates (alendronic acid, risedronic acid, ibandronic acid) by oral intake. In fact, clodronic acid inhibits bone resorption and possesses good anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties, useful in the acute post-traumatic phase [,].
In the weeks following discharge, our patient began to complain of fever, arthritis, low back pain and acute abdominal pain and was hospitalized. A thorax-abdomen-pelvic CT scan showed a left kidney ischemia . At first, we suspected that the renal artery might have been closed by the PMMA cement used in her surgery and that this may have been responsible for an artery thrombosis. Contextually, we suspended the clodronate treatment and we started anti-thrombotic therapy with enoxaparin sodium (Clexane®, Sanofi-Aventis S.p.A., Milan, Italy) (4000IU once for two times a day for 30 days) and ticlopidine (Ticlid®, Sanofi-Aventis S.p.A, Milan, Italy) (200mg tablets two times a day) after the suspension of enoxaparin. We admitted the patient to hospital to complete the diagnostic procedures . In the following days the blood tests showed positivity for anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), anti-double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) antibody (anti-ds DNA), anti-nuclear auto-antibodies (ANA) and anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies (MPO). At the same time, the CT scan showed an increase in left renal ischemic tissue and a new ischemia area in the right kidney . An arteriography or a kidney biopsy would have been useful to make a diagnosis. Considering kidney blood tests it was not possible to carry out the arteriography due to the risk of inducing a kidney failure . The patient did not give the consent to perform a kidney biopsy.
Although we suspected a link between the extension of renal ischemia on the right kidney to the first thrombotic event, the antibodies’ positivity supported a diagnosis of immunological vasculitis, specifically systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We, therefore, started an immunosuppression therapy with cyclophosphamide (Endoxan®, Baxter S.p.A., Rome, Italy) (50mg, once a day, four days a week). The follow-up blood test to check anti-inflammatory and antibody parameters showed a progressive return to normality, which was achieved by the six month check-up.
However, the good clinical response to immunosuppressive therapy, the absence of clinical signs of SLE and physiological range of antibodies allowed us to exclude the previous immunological hypotheses. We suspected, therefore, that the vasculitis may well have been caused by the clodronate.
We suspended the immunosuppressive therapy and we planned periodic check-ups. After one year the CT showed a partial reduction of renal ischemia , even though the chronic renal failure persisted. We did not detect any increase in auto-antibodies or any onset of pathologic events.