A 6-year-old girl was admitted to our center, Amir Oncology hospital, a tertiary teaching hospital in Shiraz, Iran, on October 2, 2021, due to pancytopenia. On admission, she was febrile with stable vital signs (heart rate of 80 beats per minute and respiratory rate of 22 beats per minute). Except for some inexplicable bruising on her limbs and a solitary 5 × 5 mm erosion on her lower lip, no specific symptom was found. Table summarizes the lab results throughout the patient’s hospital stay. A trephine bone marrow biopsy demonstrated hypocellularity with three lineage aplasia without signs of leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)/myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN), or megaloblastic changes. Only 18% of benign immature B cells (hematogenous)-positive for CD10, CD19, CD20, and negative for CD33, CD117, and TdT- were found in bone marrow flow cytometry without any evidence of lymphoma or leukemia. There was no evidence of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) in peripheral blood flow cytometry phenotyping. The chromosome breakage analysis was used to rule out Fanconi anemia. Dyskeratosis congenita and other rare cause of primary AA was investigated by Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS). It is important to note that our patient was previously healthy and does not exhibit any of the classic signs and symptoms of Fanconi anemia (mostly birth defects, such as abnormal thumbs, skin pigmentation, small heads, small eyes, and cardiac and skeletal anomalies) or dyskeratosis congenita (abnormal skin, nail dystrophy, and oral leukoplakia).
In an abdominopelvic ultrasonographic examination, no hepatosplenomegaly was detected. A day following admission, a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay for COVID-19 was reported positive from a nasopharyngeal swab. Following the primary bone marrow (BM) report, we looked for secondary causes of bone marrow aplasia. The secondary causes of BM aplasia were excluded and the patient was transferred to an isolated room in the COVID-19 ward. Serum folate and vitamin B12 levels were normal (8.5 ng/ml and 459 pg/ml, respectively). For virological markers, both serological and molecular assays were used. Anti-parvovirus B19 antibody (IgM) and blood RT-PCR parvovirus B19 both were negative. She was seropositive (IgG positive, IgM negative) for hepatitis A virus (HAV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Her anti-HBs antibody titer was above protective values (318.54 mlU), and she had received full primary immunization against hepatitis B virus (HBV). She was seronegative for hepatitis C virus (HCV). The fourth-generation p24 human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antigen/antibody assay was reactive for HIV I/II.
Parents were asked about any high-risk behavior, and she was evaluated for HIV-related signs and symptoms by daily physical examination. She has never had blood or blood products infusion. Parents were tested using the fourth-generation p24 HIV antigen/antibody assay which both have negative results.
The patient was tested for HIV antibody/Ag P24 in Pars virology specialty laboratory in Shiraz, which was reactive again. Several samples were sent to the Shiraz AIDS Research Center on separate days to ensure the test's reactivity which one of them reported as an intermediate result. According to the Iranian national guidance , the HIV-1 RNA PCR was tested in the Shiraz HIV research center and the Keyvan Virology Specialty Laboratory in Tehran, both of which were negative. So, the reactive HIV antibody/Ag P24 test was considered a false-positive result due to cross-reactivity with a recent SARS-CoV-2 infection. She was febrile continuously during her admission course. Blood and urine cultures were negative on multiple occasions, and she had monophasic or biphasic high-grade fever bouts despite broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam (100 mg/kg/dose per 6 h) and vancomycin (15 mg/kg/dose per 6 h). Repeated blood sampling revealed a negative serum galactomannan test, and fungal blood culture utilizing BACTEC™ Myco/F Lytic culture vials revealed a negative result. On a spiral computed tomography (CT) scan, the paranasal sinuses, chest, and mediastinum were all unremarkable. Her lip skin lesion had become necrotic, with soft tissue edema dominating . A dermatologist performed a skin biopsy to rule out invasive fungal infections and vasculitis. On microscopic examination, detached hyperkeratotic layers, acanthosis, submucosal infarction, vascular proliferation, and mild perivascular inflammation were detected. Vascular thrombosis, bleeding, many nuclear bags of dust, fungal short and septate hyphae surrounding and, in the vessels, were also present .
Because of the patient's thrombocytopenia (platelet count 30,000/mm3), a skin biopsy was obtained and sent for histology. No fungal culture was performed since the tissue sample was very small. Therefore, a broad antifungal agent was preferred to overcome invasive cutaneous Aspergillosis and Mucormycosis, and liposomal amphotericin B (L-AmB) was started (5 mg/kg/day). After two weeks of antifungal treatment, the patient was still feverish, and the lip lesion had only partially healed. Despite antifungal and antibiotic treatment, the patient experienced new-onset abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The pain was primarily apparent in the right lower quadrant on physical examination, which was due to neutropenic enterocolitis. Her treatment regimen was changed to linezolid, colistin, and voriconazole was added to her antifungal regimen. The results of several abdominopelvic ultrasonographic investigations were inconclusive, and abdominal pain worsened progressively. A surgical consultation was requested, but exploratory laparotomy was postponed due to the patient’s very low platelet count (< 10,000/mm3), and the patient underwent an abdominopelvic CT scan with contrast for better evaluation . After intravenous and oral contrast administration, several axial and coronal reconstruction images through the abdomen and pelvis show mild ascites in the abdominopelvic cavity, severe colitis, multiple sub-centimeter mesenteric lymph nodes, and peritonitis. The patient’s clinical status deteriorated due to the advent of acute abdominal distension and respiratory distress, necessitating admission to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). The patient was intubated and put on mechanical ventilation less than 24 h after being admitted to the PICU. On November 1st, 2021, she developed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and passed away from multi-organ failure (30th day of admission).