A 66-year-old lady with history of diabetes mellitus was referred for evaluation of painless progressive jaundice for six months associated with fatigue. Physical findings of café-au-lait spots, multiple neurofibromas over the trunk along with family history of first degree relative (sister) affected by neurofibromatosis type 1 confirmed the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 [, ]. Generalized icterus was noted however no abdominal lump was palpable. Laboratory analysis showed anemia (hemoglobin - 8.7 g/dl) and deranged liver function tests (total bilirubin – 246 umol/L, conjugated bilirubin – 132 umol/L, AST – 97 U/L, ALT – 70 U/L, GGT – 461 U/L, alkaline phosphatase – 659 U/L). Levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were within normal range. Abdominal computed tomography showed a 3 × 2 cm lesion in the periampullary area of the duodenum showing heterogenous enhancement with mild dilation of the common bile duct and another 2 × 1.7 cm lesion in the fourth part of the duodenum . Endoscopy showed a bulging mass at the site of major papilla. Biopsy was performed and histologic analysis revealed infiltration of lamina propria and muscularis mucosa with carcinoid cells that were strongly positive for synaptophysin and chromogranin. Urine 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels were within normal limits. The patient underwent pancreatoduodenectomy. Intraoperatively, multiple small nodules were found on the hepatic hilum with the maximum size of approximately 4 cm. Thought to be metastatic lymph nodes, frozen section was performed which revealed spindle cell tumor. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery.
The operative specimen showed a 3 × 2 × 2 cm non-ulcerated tumor located close to the ampulla of Vater. In addition, firm white-tan submucosal nodule sized 2 cm in greatest diameter was located in the fourth part of duodenum. Microscopically, the later was GIST, consisting of spindle cells arrange in a fascicular pattern without necrosis . The nuclei were elongated without any significant pleomorphism. The cytoplasm was variably abundant with indistinct cell borders. Mitotic figures were infrequent. Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for CD34, CD117 and DOG1 supporting the diagnosis of GIST . S100 stain was negative. Histopathological examination of periampullary tumor revealed well-differentiated endocrine tumor Grade 1 with strong immunohistochemical expression of chromogranin, synaptophysin and Ki67 < 1% . Also, CK7 and S100 were negative which ruled out adenocarcinoma and paraganglionoma respectively. Histologic examination of hepatic hilar nodules showed a spindle cell tumor arranged in fascicular pattern within fibrillar stroma. Nuclei were elongated, thin, without mitotic figures. Tumor cells were positive for S100 and were negative for CD34, CD117 and DOG1 suggestive of plexiform neurofibroma. All the resection margins were free of tumor. At two months of follow-up after surgery patient was doing well.