A 9-year-old male English Setter presented with a 6-month history of ulceration of the left upper eyelid as the only clinical finding . On examination, the lesion was round, elevated, and well circumscribed. A malignant eyelid tumour was suspected, and the lesion was excised for histopathological examination. A fine-needle aspirate was obtained from a popliteal lymph node from the left side. The popliteal lymph node was chosen, as the owner did not want any expensive diagnostic procedures and the popliteal lymph node was the easiest accessible. The dog was doing well and presented without fever, clinical signs of anaemia, or weight loss. A routine blood profile was unremarkable except for a haematocrit (packed cell volume, PCV) of 37%, which is borderline low. The blood test also showed a serum calcium: 2.43 mmol/L (ref 1.98–3.0 mmol/L), serum albumin: 31 g/L (ref 23–40 g/L), serum alkaline phosphatase: 53 U/L (ref 23–213 U/L), and serum creatinine: 91 µmol/L (ref 44–159 µmol/L). Serum sodium, potassium, chloride, and glucose were also within normal limits. C-reactive protein (CRP) was < 10 mg/L, which is also normal. The owner did not want additional examinations or treatments other than excision of the tumour and for this reason, a thoracic radiograph, abdominal ultrasound, and a full haematological profile were not performed. No systemic treatment was initiated, and 2 months after surgery an unremarkable full haematological profile was obtained. 19 months after the diagnosis the dog was still alive and doing well with no signs of relapse.
The specimen was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin immediately after surgical excision, processed and embedded in paraffin. Sections (4 µm) were prepared and stained with haematoxylin and eosin according to standard protocols. Furthermore, sections were routinely stained with periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Gram stain, and Gomori’s methenamine silver stain (GMS) to detect microorganisms. Giemsa staining was performed to visualize the blood derived cells in the specimen.
Immunohistochemical stainings were performed on a Ventana Benchmark Ultra Platform (Ventana Medical Systems, Tucson, AZ, USA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The following antibodies were used: CD3 [clone 2GV6, code 790-4341, rabbit anti-human, ready-to-use (RTU), Roche (Hvidovre, Denmark)], PAX-5 [clone SP34, code 790-4420, rabbit anti-human, RTU, Roche (Hvidovre, Denmark)], vimentin [clone V9, code 790-2917, mouse anti-human, RTU, Roche (Hvidovre, Denmark)], and Ki-67 (clone MIB-1, code M724001, mouse anti-human, 1:100, Dako). Positive and negative controls were performed according to the manufacturers’ instructions.