A 20-year-old feoderm woman from the Northeastern region of Brazil was hospitalized during her first pregnancy in the Fundação de Hematologia e Hemoterapia de Pernambuco (HEMOPE), a hematologic reference hospital. She presented microcytosis (mean corpuscular volume of 74 fL/red cell), hypochromic anemia (hemoglobin of 6.5 g/dL and mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 21.8 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (platelets of 11 × 109/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 183 U/l, reticulocyte count of 1.82%, serum iron of 38 μg/dl, transferrin saturation of 11.8%, and ecchymosis with severe hemorrhagic events in the second month of gestation. Prothrombin and activated thromboplastin time were normal.
Her physical examination on admission to our hospital revealed that she was a conscious woman who was afebrile, anicteric, pale, and with a good general condition. She was oriented and cooperative and no edema was observed. Her mental status was normal. There was no spinal deformity or tenderness, no subcutaneous nodules, and no focal neurological deficits. A motor and sensory examination did not show abnormalities. Her neurological examination was normal. A medical examination was remarkable for mild petechial lesions in her lower and upper limbs. She had a blood pressure (BP) value of 140/80 mmHg. An ultrasound examination on admission showed a fetus in a transverse position without biometrics abnormality detection, and normal amniotic fluid and placenta. The fetal heart rate was normal (140 beats per minute) and there were no contractions. Her laboratory data revealed no other changes and renal failure was not presented. She has no history of excessive alcoholic drinking, tobacco smoking, or illicit drug usage. Her family history shows no neurological diseases and no hematologic diseases. However, her cousin had thrombocytopenia and died without a definitive diagnosis.
During clinical investigation in the HEMOPE (Fundação de Hematologia e Hemoterapia de Pernambuco), our patient obtained an initial diagnosis suggestive of ITP based on the clinical framework, absence of schizocytes (triangular, helmet red blood cells) in peripheral blood, and nonspecific myelogram . Her bone marrow was hypercellular for erythroid (27% cellularity) and had granulocytic (61% cellularity) and megakaryocytic sectors, which showed some signs of atypicality and the presence of decreased platelet genesis . Steroid therapy with prednisone (60 mg per day) was started, but without adequate response, treatment with immunoglobulin was performed. Our patient remained with platelets of 17 × 109/L with severe hemorrhagic events (gingivorrhagia, epistaxis), and splenectomy was indicated. One week after this surgery, she showed high BP, headache, hepatic enzyme alterations, and LDH of 1675 U/l evolving to cesarean delivery with 27 weeks' gestation in another emergency hospital due to the suggestive framework of hemolysis with elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count (HELLP) syndrome raised by the Medical Obstetrics Board. The baby was born healthy and with no clinical complications so far. Due to the persistence of MAHA, thrombocytopenia in the puerperium, and the presence of schizocytes in a new peripheral blood sample , the hypothesis of TTP was proposed, since the persistence of the clinical framework did not support the hypothesis of HELLP syndrome. Plasmapheresis was indicated. After two sessions, there was an increase in platelet counts of 17 × 109/L to 67 × 109/L. Her serum level of LDH (210 U/l) was normalized in 1 week after plasmapheresis. Figure shows the evolution of platelet counts before and after plasmapheresis. The results of ADAMTS 13 enzyme activity < 5% were received with no inhibitor present, with confirmed diagnosis of congenital TTP and not acquired TTP or other differential diagnosis. The clinical course of clinical symptoms, treatment, and clinical findings are shown in Fig. .
During the following 2 months, she developed recurring monthly episodes of TTP with hypochromic anemia, thrombocytopenia, hemorrhagic events, and petechial lesions in her body that indicated initiation of a preventive fresh frozen plasma (FFP) monthly infusion (10 mL/kg per dose). She has remained free of recurrences without schizocytes in her blood count since preventive treatment was started in September 2017. Up until now, her child does not have thrombocytopenia or symptoms of the disease. He has been asymptomatic without any treatment.