A 75-year-old man with asymptomatic anemia (hemoglobin, 8.6 g/dl) had a checkup at our hospital. The patient had no significant past medical history, family history, or predisposing conditions such as familial adenomatous polyposis, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, and Crohn’s disease. The patient was noted to have a non-reducible right inguinoscrotal hernia on examination. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate 19-9 were within normal range. Colonoscopy revealed bleeding through the ileocecal valve, and therefore, we advanced the scope into the ileum and found an annular stricture by a tumor, for which endoscopic biopsy and clip-marking of the tumor were performed . The biopsy revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. Enhanced CT showed a hypervascular solid tumor and a metal clip in the right inguinal hernia . With a diagnosis of small bowel adenocarcinoma incarcerated within a right inguinal hernia, the patient underwent elective laparotomy with midline excision. There was no metastatic lesion including liver metastasis and peritoneal dissemination. The small bowel tumor, located at 30 cm from the terminal ileum, was incarcerated within a right inguinal hernia, and the small bowel was adherent to the hernia sac although there was no evidence of direct invasion into the hernia sac . After adhesiolysis, the tumor and the hernia sac were reduced into the peritoneal cavity . A 24-cm segment of the distal ileum and regional lymph nodes were resected, and triangle anastomosis was performed for reconstruction. The reduced hernia sac was ligated, and the bottom of the hernia sac was resected from the peritoneal cavity side . Finally, the hernia orifice was closed by tissue repair technique via a standard oblique incision in the right inguinal region. To avoid possible infection, we chose a tissue repair technique without a mesh. The excised specimen revealed type V (unclassifiable type) tumor with the diameter of 70 × 40 mm with nodule-aggregating lesions and a localized ulcer . Pathological examination revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the small bowel with no lymph node metastasis [Union International Control Cancer classification of malignant tumors 7th edition; pT2, pN0, pM0, stage I, R0] . Postoperatively, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 without complications. The patient did not receive adjuvant therapy and remains well with no evidence of tumor or hernia recurrence as of 1 year after operation.