A 60-year-old Asian male who complained of hematuria for 20 days was admitted to the hospital. Ultrasonography showed an extremely hypoechoic mass at the lower pole of the left kidney, enlargement of the right kidney, and multiple hypoechoic areas of the right kidney (cysts and space-occupying lesions were considered), and further examinations were recommended. Subsequent contrast enhanced Computer Tomography (CT) showed that the volume of the right kidney was increased, with a patchy low-density shadow with infiltrative growth inside that had a significantly lower signal intensity than the renal cortex; the possibility of collecting duct carcinoma or lymphoma was considered. Enlarged perirenal and retroperitoneal lymph nodes were also seen , along with bilateral renal cysts, calcification of the left renal cyst wall, and bilateral kidney stones. Eight years prior, ultrasonography showed a complex renal cyst in the right kidney, and no treatment was administered at that time. The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years, and his blood pressure was well controlled by oral enalapril 10 mg daily. He had a healthy son and denied a family history of genetic mutations. The other laboratory tests showed no other abnormal findings. Laparoscopic radical nephrectomy of the right kidney was performed at this time, and the postoperative specimens were submitted for pathological examination. Grossly, a mass in the middle and upper poles of the right kidney was seen, with a size of 65 × 35 × 20 mm. The mass broke through the renal capsule and invaded the perirenal adipose tissue. The mass contained cystic and solid regions and was grayish red. The focal area was yellowish, and the texture was moderately hard. Microscopic examination showed that the cystic areas of the tumor were lined by a monolayer of tumor cells . The tumor cells in the solid areas were arranged into papillary shapes, glandular tubes, nests and sheets. The tumor cells were enlarged in size and irregular in shape. The cell boundaries were unclear, and the cytoplasm was eosinophilic or slightly transparent. The nucleus was enlarged and atypical, with a significant eosinophilic nucleolus and peripheral halo . Abnormal mitoses were clearly seen. A small amount of lymphocyte infiltration could be seen in the stroma. There was no definite bleeding or necrosis. Cancer metastasis was observed in 2 renal hilar lymph nodes. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed CK, EMA, PAX8 (+) , CD10 focal (+), CK7, Vim, FH (−) , and Ki-67 80% (+). Due to the negative expression of fumarate hydratase (FH) protein in a renal tumor that was morphologically similar to fumarate hydratase-deficient renal cell carcinoma (FH-deficient RCC), corresponding molecular pathological tests were performed, and the results showed an FHp.R233H (arginine > histidine) germline mutation (inactivation mutation). The postoperative pathological diagnosis was fumarate hydratase-deficient renal cell carcinoma of the right kidney, T3aN1M0.