A 17-year-old male with a history of obesity and well-controlled asthma was transferred to an emergency department from a rural hospital for further management of sepsis secondary to right lower extremity cellulitis. Three days prior, he had noticed an itchy scratch on his right shin which had progressively become swollen, erythematous, and tender. The patient denied any paresthesia or numbness but had developed a limp due to the pain. The pain was localized at the anterior lesion but extended to the lateral and posterior surfaces of the calf. The patient reported feeling feverish alongside a headache without vision changes, neck stiffness, or photophobia/phonophobia. The patient had two cats and two dogs at home but denied any scratches or bites, as well as any tick or insect bites. He also denied vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, rash, malaise, arthralgias, prior MRSA infection, or sick contacts. The patient's only recent travel was to Arizona from his home in Nebraska .
At the outside hospital, the patient had been afebrile, mildly tachycardic (110 bpm), and tachypneic (22 bpm), with an oxygen saturation of 90 % on room air. Laboratory results were notable for elevated white blood cell count (26.7 × 10^9/L) with neutrophilic predominance (89.9 %), elevated CRP of 33 mg/dL, and elevated lactate of 2.2 mmol/L. The patient also had an elevated ALT of 93 U/L. CT with contrast of the lower extremity showed subcutaneous edema of superficial soft tissue, along with normal-appearing muscle and fascia consistent with cellulitis. He received 4 L normal saline, 1× vancomycin sepsis dose, 6000 mg cefazolin IV, 200 mg doxycycline IV.
On arrival to the emergency department, the patient was afebrile, mildly tachycardic (102 bpm), and tachypneic (24 bpm), with an oxygen saturation of 94 % on room air. On examination, there was an 8x6cm coalescing, necrotic, ulcerated lesion with a violaceous base on his right lower leg. Surrounding the central lesion were 1 cm fluctuant lesions, some with hemorrhagic crust and central necrosis. The lower leg was diffusely tender and erythematous .
A second read of his prior CT scan also concluded subcutaneous edema consistent with cellulitis. The patient was continued on doxycycline and cefazolin and admitted to the floor. General surgery was consulted for further evaluation and agreed with the diagnosis of cellulitis.
Within a few hours, the patient began reporting extreme pain. Due to the severity of the pain and the rapid progression of the disease course, plastic surgery was urgently consulted for concern of necrotizing infection. Within 4 h, the patient underwent fasciotomy and debridement. The following day, the debridement was repeated, and a meshed split-thickness skin graft taken from the patient's thigh was secured. Wound cultures grew multiple species of Group A Streptococcus as well as Staphylococcus. The patient was hospitalized for 10 days and received a 3-week course of Cefazolin .
It is relevant to note that the work has been reported in line with SCARE criteria .