A 19-year-old Asian Indian female presented to us in December 2020 with complaints of decreased vision in the right eye since 2 weeks. Since the age of 10 years, she had a history of juvenile idiopathic arthritis with ANA positivity by immunofluorescence assay and was on systemic immunosuppressive treatment with methotrexate 20 mg weekly dose at the time of presentation. She also had a history of recurrent anterior uveitis in the right eye since 2007 and had been on and off topical steroids during those flare ups.
Family history revealed HLA-B27 positive ankylosing spondylitis in her father who was on treatment with adalimumab and methotrexate for the same. However, our patient was negative for HLA-B27. She had no history of or any known contact with COVID-19 affected personnel in the recent past.
On examination, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/60 and 20/20 in the right eye and left eye respectively. Anterior segment examination of the right eye revealed circumciliary congestion, presence of non-granulomatous keratic precipitates, anterior chamber cells 2+ and flare 2+ (SUN grading), 270 degrees posterior synechiae and complicated cataract . Left eye was quiet on anterior segment evaluation . Intraocular pressures were normal in both eyes. Dilated fundus evaluation revealed presence of 1+ vitreous haze with a hyperemic disc and a dull foveal reflex in the right eye with a normal left eye fundus .
Optical coherence tomography of the right eye revealed presence of posterior vitreous cells, epiretinal membrane (ERM), cystoid macular edema (CME) with central retinal thickness of 552 μm . Left eye macula had a central retinal thickness of 236 μm and appeared normal. Investigations for infectious and non-infectious causes revealed normal blood counts with raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR 32 mm/hr) and C-reactive protein (CRP 7.69 mg/L). Urine routine and microscopy, liver function and renal tests, vitamin B12 levels, serum ferritin, procalcitonin, D-dimer and lactose dehydrogenase were within normal limits. She was HLA-B27 negative and also seronegative for tuberculosis, syphilis, hepatitis B and C and HIV 1 and 2.
She was started on topical steroids (prednisolone acetate 1% six times daily), cycloplegic agent (homatropine hydrobromide 2% twice daily), along with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent (NSAIDS, nepafenac 0.1% thrice daily) and lubricants (carboxymethylcellulose 0.5%) and also continued on methotrexate 20 mg weekly systemic immunosuppressive therapy. Following a rheumatologist consultation, she received subcutaneous injections of adalimumab 40 mg every 2 weeks. At 1 month follow up, she showed signs of improvement with right eye vision improving to 20/40, resolved anterior segment inflammation and macular edema . The left eye was normal . Fundus fluorescein angiography however showed patchy hypofluorescenece due to blocked fluorescence of vitritis and late hyperfluorescence with late diffuse perivascular leak noted peripherally suggestive of subclinical or angiographically active peripheral retinal vasculitis in the right eye . Left eye did not reveal any perivascular leakage . There was no macular leakage which corroborated with the resolution of CME with CMT of 305 μm on OCT in the right eye . Her methotrexate dose was increased to 25 mg per week and subcutaneous adalimumab 40 mg once in 2 weeks was continued that subsequently led to the resolution of inflammation in the right eye.
After 6 months, she presented with a fresh complaint of floaters associated with mild blurring of vision in both eyes since 1 month. She reported the first appearance of bilateral floaters within a week of the first dose of SARS-CoV-2 (Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) vaccination, Covaxin (Bharat Biotech International Ltd., BBIL). She noticed an increase in the floaters following the second dose that she received after 30 days of the first dose. She presented to us after the second dose of vaccination. She was apparently symptom-free before the vaccination and did not report any symptoms suggestive of systemic infections. She had skipped one dose of methotrexate in the week of vaccination as per advice of the treating rheumatologist.
On examination, her BCVA was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. Anterior segment examination revealed presence of anterior chamber cells 0.5+ and flare 1+ in both eyes . There was presence of anterior vitreous cells 2 + with mild disc hyperemia in both eyes . Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed disc hyperfluorescence with mild leak and diffuse perivascular leak in the peripheral vessels in both eyes . She was reinvestigated to rule out superadded infectious aetiology and was seronegative for tuberculosis, syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus. Her blood counts, ESR, CRP, liver function tests, renal function tests, urine routine and microscopy were all within normal limits. Patient was treated with topical difluprednate four times a day with gradual taper over 6 weeks with continued bimonthly dose of 40 mg adalimumab and weekly dose of 25 mg methotrexate. Eventually, inflammation resolved on follow up at 6 weeks and visual acuity improved to 20/20 in both eyes .