A 69-year-old woman, gravida five and para four, presented with genital prolapse and no other clinical symptoms. The patient had been menopausal for 20 years, and she had no abnormal bleeding and no hormone replacement therapy after menopause. Her past menstrual history was normal and she did not have any other history of PCOS or oligomenorrhea or dysmenorrhea. The patient had no history of malignancy or family history of malignancies. She was admitted for operative treatment of pelvic organ prolapse (POP). Pelvic examinations using pelvic organ prolapse quantitation (POP-Q) revealed subtotal uterine prolapse (POP-Q III) along with anterior vaginal prolapse (POP-Q III), posterior vaginal prolapse (POP-Q I).
Preoperative transvaginal ultrasonography (TVS) showed that the endometrium was linear and that the size and shape of the uterus were appropriate for the patient’s age. There was no abnormal echo in the uterine cavity. The cervical smear and routine laboratory findings were normal. Tumor markers were not examined. As a benign lesion had been suspected preoperatively, neither CT nor MRI was arranged.
Three days after admission, the patient underwent transvaginal hysterectomy, anterior and posterior vaginal wall repair and ischium fascia fixation. Postoperative specimens showed that the mucosa of the uterine cavity and cervical canal was smooth.
The postoperative gross specimen showed that the endometrium was thin. There was a tumorous lesion measuring 0.7 cm in diameter in the myometrium. Another one, measuring 1.0 cm in diameter, was found in the submucosa. The histopathology of the specimen revealed grade 2 endometrioid adenocarcinoma arising in adenomyosis . The normally situated endometrium had a malignant lesion and the morphology of the carcinoma cells was the same as that of the carcinoma cells in adenomyosis . Immunohistochemical results suggested that the carcinoma cells were positive for oestrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), CK7, P53, P16, CA125 and Pax-8 . The mitotic index by Ki-67 immunostaining was approximately 40% . Some carcinoma cells were positively stained for CEA and Vimentin, while a small number of them were positive for CK5/6. The depth of the tumour involvement was approximately 0.9 cm, and the thickness of the myometrium involvement was approximately 1/2 of the myometrium. No lymphovascular space invasion was found. Cervical and vaginal margins were not involved. The FIGO stage was TIBNxMx.
The patient was stable and was discharged 4 days after the operation. A month later, the patient was readmitted for surgery for endometrial carcinoma. Her preoperative serum CA125 and HE4 level were 10.4 U/mL and 66.4 U/mL, respectively. She underwent laparoscopic bilateral adnexectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy and para-aortic lymphadenectomy. During the operation, the pelvic and abdominal cavity was explored without any obvious abnormal findings. Postoperative pathology showed that the bilateral adnexa, pelvic lymph nodes and para-aortic lymph nodes were not involved. No malignant cells were found in the peritoneal lavage. Postoperative adjuvant therapy was suggested but the patient refused. Now she showed no signs of recurrence 11 months after initial diagnosis, CA125and HE4 were both normal.