An 84-year-old right-handed female with a past medical history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, and colon resection presented with a several-month history of progressive ataxia and dysphagia. She had been at a rehabilitation center for the past month due to multiple syncopal episodes. At initial presentation the patient was able to ambulate only short distances with a walker. She also described some difficulty with fine motor skills with her hands. Her family states that she had been able to ambulate as recently as several months ago. She denied any additional constitutional symptoms including fever, chills, or nausea. She denied neck pain. She had not undergone any spine procedures previously. Her preoperative modified Rankin score (mRS) was 3.
On physical examination motor strength was 3+/5 in the right upper extremity. The remainder of the neurologic and general examination was unremarkable. Rheumatoid factor, cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP), and ANA were normal. The serum and urine immune-electrophoresis detected no abnormal bands.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed and showed a non-enhancing soft-tissue mass extending superior from the retro-clivus to C2 posteriorly, eccentric to the right with severe mass effect on the upper cervical medullary junction [Figures and ]. Differential diagnoses based on CT and MRI findings may include Central Nervous System (CNS) lymphoma, high grade gliomas, and cerebral metastases, and calcifying pseudoneoplasms of the neuraxis (CAPNON).
On CT, amyloidomas generally are hyperattenuating and enhance following contrast administration. Similarly, most primary CNS lymphomas are hyperattenuating and show enhancement on CT. High grade gliomas, on the other hand, characteristically appear to have irregular thick margins that are highly cellular and hyperattenuating with irregular hypodense necrotic centers. Marked mass effect, edema, hemorrhage, and heterogeneous enhancement of the margins may also be observed. Unlike amyloidomas, cerebral metastases range from isodense to hypodense to hyperdense on pre-contrast imaging. Enhancement is also variable with contrast and may appear nodular or ring-enhancing. CAPNONs on CT appear as a well-defined leptomeningeal or parenchymal mass that is heavily calcified.
On MRI, amyloidoma signal characteristics are variable. T1 and T2 images range from hypointense to hyperintense. There is vivid contrast enhancement on T1-contrast images, and peripheral radial enhancement may be observed. Additionally, on T2 susceptibility weighted images (SWI), microhemorrhages may be observed. T1 images for CNS lymphomas are usually hypointense to grey matter. High-grade tumors show homogenous enhancement with contrast, whereas low-grade tumors may have absent enhancement. Like amyloidomas, T2 characteristics of CNS lymphomas are variable. High-grade gliomas on T1 appear hypointense within the white matter with a necrotic heterogenous signal in the center. With contrast, the lesion has peripheral enhancement with nodular components surrounding the necrosis. T2/FLAIR imaging appears hyperintense with vasogenic edema and, occasionally, flow voids. Unlike amyloidomas, SWI characteristics for high-grade gliomas include a low-intensity irregular rim from blood product usually located inside the peripheral enhancing component. Brain metastases typically are isointense or hypointense on T1 imaging. There may be intrinsic intensity if the lesion is hemorrhagic. Enhancement patterns with contrast are usually intense but variable, ranging from uniform to punctate to ring-enhancing. Unlike amyloidomas, T2 imaging of metastases are usually are hyperintense, although hemorrhage may alter the signal. CAPNONs are isointense to hypointense on T1 and have varying enhancement with contrast. There is low signal on T2/FLAIR. The non-vascular pannus and calcium pyrophosphate deposition may appear similar to findings that are characteristic of CAPNON lesions.
The decision was made to proceed with operative intervention for decompression of her cervical spinal cord and to obtain tissue for diagnostic pathologic examination. As the amyloid tumor arose posterior to C2 and extended caudally to the retro-clivus, we decided on an endoscopic trans-nasal approach with combined posterior stabilization. A transoral approach was considered, but ultimately, was not chosen because of the retroclival nature of the lesion. Although a transoral approach can provide a wider surgical field, the trans-nasal approach allowed better visualization of the clivus as well as structures posterior to C1 better. The patient underwent endoscopic trans-nasal resection of the retro-clival mass with the assistance of an ENT colleague. A pre-operative lumbar drain was inserted to decrease the risk of cerebrospinal leak post-operatively. During the course of surgery, the vertical portion of the cruciate ligament was identified and appeared to be markedly thickened and thus, incised and resected in order to gain exposure to the lesion. An autologous fat graft was utilized at the termination of the procedure. Due to the violation of the atlanto-axial ligaments, the team decided it was prudent to follow the anterior surgery with a second stage posterior instrumentation procedure. Arthrodesis was completed from occiput down to C5 due to the patient's age and poor bone quality.
Multiple specimens of the lesion were taken and underwent pathologic examination. Microscopic examination revealed amorphous, eosinophilic deposits. Special stains revealed focally strong congophilia with Congo red stain for amyloid, consistent with cerebral amyloidoma. Examination under polarized light revealed focal apple green birefringence to polarized light . The kappa and lambda light chain immune stain found no evidence of light chain deposition. Therefore, the pathology of the lesion is amyloid associated (AA), rather than amyloid light chain associated (AL). Stains for bacteria, fungi, acid-fast bacilli, and uric acid stains were negative.
The patient underwent monitoring in the neurosurgical intensive care unit and gradual tapering of her lumbar drain. Extensive systemic evaluation did not reveal any inflammatory processes, systemic amyloidosis, or plasma cell dyscrasia. Serum rheumatoid factor, CCPs, and ANA were negative. Urine and serum protein electrophoresis and immune-electrophoresis did not reveal a monoclonal gammopathy. The patient was discharged to subacute rehabilitation 2 weeks postoperatively with improved neuro-motor exam. MRI imaging revealed debulking of the retro-clival mass with improvement of cervical medullary kinking. CT imaging demonstrated a stable spine construct . The patient's postoperative 2-year follow-up MRI showed complete resolution of the retroclival mass. There was no evidence of spinal cord compression . Her mRS remained 3 and she currently continues to be able to ambulate with moderate assistance.