The study was approved by the ethics committee of Sir Run Run Shaw hospital and the written informed consent for the publication of images was obtained from the patient.
A 52-year-old female patient visited our hospital complaining of pain, redness and decreased vision in both eyes for about 4 weeks. There was no history of trauma, contact lens wear, systemic illness, pre-existing ocular disease, or ocular surgery. The patient also complained that she had the appearance of a flaming red, scaly, papule-covered face with itching before the onset of eye discomforts. She was unable to say for certain which eye had been affected firstly and she hadn’t seen any doctors before she came to our hospital. Examination revealed a vision of perception of light and remarkable conjunctival injection in both eyes. The corneal ulcers in both eyes are nearly symmetric which were about 6 × 6 mm in the central part of the cornea with marked deep stromal infiltration and hypopyon . There was no evidence of chronic dacryocystitis, trichiasis, lagophthalmos, lid scarring or notching. Diffuse papules on face including eye lids were presented with pigmentation and dryness . The diagnosis was infectious keratitis in both eyes, and corneal cultures of both eyes were performed. No fungal hyphae or Acanthamoeba cysts could be detected by in vivo confocal microscopy (Confoscan 3, Nidek Technologies America, Inc., Greensboro, NC, USA). The patient was started on topical 0.3% levofloxacin eye drops (Cravit; Santen, Osaka, Japan) every 30 min and 3 mg/mL ofloxacin ointment (Tarivid; Santen, Osaka, Japan) at night.
Upon taking a more detailed history, the patient revealed that she had been using corticosteroids-containing cosmetic creams on the face for about 5 months and before that she had no eruptions on her face. The use of topical corticosteroid was suggested by her beauticians and the exact type was unknown. She had history of exacerbation of the eruptions following sun exposure and rebound phenomenon on stopping the cream. The patient was referred to dermatology outpatient department, where she was diagnosed with topical corticosteroid-induced rosacea-like dermatitis. Topical tacrolimus 0.03% dermatologic ointment (Protopic; Astellas Pharma, Tokyo, Japan) was prescribed for treatment.
In view of the unusual presentation, the patient was also investigated for evidence of immunosuppression and any systemic focus of infection. Human immunodeficiency virus serology was normal. Blood counts, blood sugar levels, liver and renal function tests were all within normal limits. Physical examinations and chest X-ray also failed to reveal any evidence of systemic disease. Serum vitamin A levels were not measured but the patient did not show any evidence of vitamin A deficiency. The patient was a housewife living in urban communities with good hygienic conditions and appeared to be in good health.
Microbiological culture of materials from both corneas both revealed significant growth of Morganella morganii, which was sensitive to amikacin, aztreonam, ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, Ceftazidime, levofloxacin and tobramycin using the disk diffusion method. Topical 0.3% levofloxacin eye drops and 3 mg/mL ofloxacin ointment were administered continuously. The ulcers showed good response to medications with decrease in infiltration. Resolvement of infection with corneal scarring was noted after 6 weeks. The corneas of both eyes showed stromal opacity and neovascularization 2 months after the treatment and the vision of both eyes was hand movement before eyes .