A 57-year-old Japanese man complained of left chest pain 2 months before visiting the previous hospital. He had lost 8 kg of weight in 2 months. He had no previous medical history and was not taking any medications. He had smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 40 years (Brickman index 800). It was revealed that he had a family history of lung cancer in his father. In the previous hospital, computed tomography (CT) showed multiple nodules in bilateral lungs and lesions in the left eighth rib, right iliac bone, and ninth thoracic vertebra . The results of a biopsy of the metastatic rib lesion at the previous hospital indicated a diagnosis of malignancy (suspected adenocarcinoma of the lung). Additional pathological diagnostic tests were considered, but they were not done because the biopsy sample was inadequate. The imaging findings of multiple nodules in the lungs and multiple metastases in the bones and the pathological diagnosis led to the suspicion of lung cancer at the previous hospital. Prostate cancer and renal cancer were suspected due to the frequent bone metastases. It was also determined that he needed further examination for cancer of the gastrointestinal tract, liver, pancreas, and gall bladder.
Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) performed in our hospital showed 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (FDG) uptake in the left eighth rib, ninth vertebra, right iliac bone, and left neck lymph node with maximum standardized uptake values (SUVmax) of 2.8, 6.0, 4.1, and 3.5, respectively. The pulmonary nodules did not show high uptake .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple brain metastases but no significant neurological symptoms . There were also no apparent masses in the liver, pancreas, or gall bladder. Sputum cytology showed no obvious malignancy, and biopsy could not be performed because of the small sizes of the pulmonary lesions. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an elevated lesion in the duodenum, and a biopsy was performed, but there were no obvious malignant findings due to suspected hyperplasia of Brunner’s gland. Ultrasonography of the kidneys and bladder was performed because of gross hematuria; however, no obvious tumor was found. Urine cytology was negative. Results of laboratory investigations of tumor markers are presented in Table . The levels of CA15-3 and KL-6 were elevated. Breast cancer was suspected on the basis of the level of CA15-3, but imaging findings were negative. Despite a thorough examination, the primary tumor was not confirmed. The patient was treated as a patient with cancer of unknown primary.
The lesion in the ninth thoracic vertebra was destructively extending to the ninth vertebral body. Although a diagnosis had not been made, it was determined that treatment was necessary as soon as possible. On the other hand, the brain metastasis was asymptomatic; we did not immediately perform whole-brain radiotherapy (WBRT). Therefore, an explanation was given to the patient and we obtained consent to perform palliative irradiation to the ninth thoracic vertebra. Although the patient had multiple metastases, he had a relatively good Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance score of 1, and considering the fact that the patient was untreated, irradiation was planned within the range not exceeding the tolerance dose of the spinal cord. Palliative radiation therapy (RT) was performed on the ninth thoracic vertebra for a total dose of 39 Gy in 13 fractions. The irradiation field is shown in Fig. . The treatment was completed without any serious side effects requiring suspension or discontinuation of irradiation; however, radiation esophagitis was observed 2 weeks after RT .
Follow-up MRI examination for WBRT showed that almost all of the tumors had spontaneously shrunk 1 month after RT for the ninth vertebra . Although the brain metastases had not disappeared, we decided to observe the patient and did not perform WBRT. CT and PET-CT showed shrinkage of all lesions except the brain metastases, and FDG uptake disappeared . Examination of tumor markers revealed a CA15-3 level of 34 U/ml and KL-6 level of 254 U/ml. Because the lesions had shrunk, the primary lesion could not be determined. It was difficult to decide what type of chemotherapy was appropriate. In addition, the patient did not wish to receive additional treatment because the tumor size was maintained without treatment.
Thereafter, the extracranial lesions continued to shrink without treatment; however, an MRI scan showed multiple brain metastases 3 months after RT for the ninth vertebra . WBRT for a total dose of 36 Gy in 12 fractions was performed 3 months after the initial RT. One month after WBRT, all of the brain metastases had disappeared . The patient did not want to have chemotherapy.
Fifteen months after the initial RT (12 months after WBRT), MRI showed recurrence of brain metastasis . There were no lesions other than multiple brain metastases, and all of the lesions in the brain were less than 2 cm in size. We judged them to be an indication for Gamma Knife radiosurgery. Gamma Knife radiosurgery was therefore performed for 14 brain metastatic lesions, and MRI showed the disappearance of the lesions after Gamma Knife radiosurgery.
During a period of 30 months after RT for the ninth vertebra, the lung metastases maintained their shrinkage and the lesions in the iliac bone, ribs, and ninth vertebra and other lesions of the trunk all maintained their shrinkage. Thereafter, the right cervical lymph node metastasis showed rapid enlargement . The brain metastases also recurred again.
A needle biopsy of the right cervical lymph node metastasis led to the diagnosis of clear cell carcinoma (CCC). Immunostaining showed a positive pattern for AE1/AE3, vimentin, and EMA and a negative pattern for K7 and K20. In addition, CD10, CD15, PSA, TTF-1, S-100, CEA, HMB45, p63, CK14, and 34βE12 were all negative.
There were marked elevations in levels of the tumor markers CA15-3 (156.6 U/ml, normal range: 0–28 U/ml) and KL-6 (1668, normal range: 105–435 U/ml) as was observed at the time of the initial treatment. The changes in tumor images and tumor marker values from the initial treatment are shown in Fig. . After the pathological diagnosis, radiotherapy to the right cervical lymph node metastasis and additional systemic chemotherapy were considered; however, the patient developed left lower body paralysis and disorientation due to the progression of brain metastasis. Three months after the progression of brain metastases, the patient died. An autopsy was not carried out. The timeline of the present case is shown in Fig.