A 23-year-old white man with a history of over 20 episodes of bacterial tonsillitis in the preceding 2 years was admitted to our hospital with enlarged left cervical lymph nodes. The lymphadenopathy had appeared suddenly 2 weeks prior to admission and had not retreated despite the application of several types of antibiotics. One week prior to admission, the patient had started to manifest the following symptoms: fever reaching 39 °C, fatigue, weight loss, and intense night sweating. In the anamnesis on admission, the patient reported that his brother had died at a young age owing to a malignant tumor located in the nasopharyngeal region. He also admitted that he had been working in a muddy area and had been scratched by a pet rat several months earlier. He denied having traveled to regions of endemic diseases. His physical examination on admission revealed a few separate enlarged lymph nodes on the left side of his neck. The lymph nodes were slightly tender, and the skin covering them was unchanged. His palate tonsils were asymmetrically enlarged (in favor of the left side) without any discharge. He had a fever that reached as high as 39.5 °C and was successfully lowered only by metamizole administered parenterally. No other significant abnormalities were found.
A possible differential diagnosis was formed on the basis of the patient’s anamnesis and clinical examination. Additional diagnostic tests for infectious diseases and malignancies, including Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphoma as well as carcinoma of the nasopharynx or the tonsils, as possible causes of cervical lymphadenopathy were performed.
Leukopenia (2.2–3.32 × 103 cells/μl), moderate anemia (hemoglobin 12.0 g/dl), and thrombocytopenia (127 × 103 cells/μl) were observed. A blood smear test revealed granulocytopenia, monocytosis, and 1% of lymphoid cells. A slightly elongated activated partial thromboplastin time (39.8 seconds) and increased D-dimer level (1.9 μg/ml) without other coagulation abnormalities were revealed. Inflammatory markers were increased, with the patient’s C-reactive protein (CRP) level reaching 17.63 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate amounting to 40 mm/hour, accompanied by negative procalcitonin. The patient’s serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was also increased at 463 U/L. During hospitalization, a threefold increase in CRP and nearly a doubling of LDH level were observed .
Serological tests detecting toxoplasmosis (immunoglobulin G [IgG], IgM), Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test, hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs), anti-HB core antigen antibodies, anti-hepatitis C virus antibodies, EBV antibody to viral capsid antigen (IgG, IgM), anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibodies, anti-streptolysin O antibodies, and ANA were negative. Anti-HBs antibodies were present at a concentration of 36.94 mIU/ml (as a result of vaccination), whereas anti-cytomegalovirus antibodies were IgG-positive and IgM-negative. The results of bacteriological cultures of blood and urine, as well as the tuberculin skin test, were negative. A chest x-ray revealed no abnormalities. Craniofacial computed tomography (CT) with contrast administration revealed numerous cervical lymph nodes enlarged up to 2 cm in diameter on the left side, with the majority of them situated in the supraclavicular area and a few of them located under the sternocleidomastoid muscle as well as in the submandibular region and next to the mandibular angle. Several slightly enlarged lymph nodes were also found on the right side under the mandible. CT of the chest revealed several lymph nodes up to 0.8 cm in width in the left axillary region. The lungs and mediastinum were not altered.
The patient underwent fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), with a normal result. Subsequently, an excision of the enlarged lymph nodes was performed. A histopathological examination of the lymph nodes with immunohistochemistry produced an unexpected result. In all three excised lymph nodes, an identical morphological image was observed: irregular paracortical areas of coagulative necrosis with abundant karyorrhectic debris and distortion of the nodal architecture. Different types of histiocytes and lymphocytes were observed at the margins of the necrotic areas. The karyorrhectic foci were formed by different cellular types. Areas of paracortical hyperplasia with small and large lymphoid cells were observed .
Cluster of differentiation 8 (CD8) and CD4 antigens were positive in the lymphocytes located in the clusters. CD138 was positive in plasmocytes, CD15 was positive in a few cells, and CD30 was negative. On the basis of the histopathological findings, a diagnosis of KFD was made. Afterward, the patient remained in the hospital for a several-days-long observation period, during which symptomatic treatment was continued and fever as well as sweats retreated. In the 3-month follow-up after the patient’s discharge from the hospital, he was found to be in a good general state with no sign of lymphadenopathy. In a 6-month-long observation period, the only abnormality was the asymmetry of the palate tonsils. The patient was qualified for elective tonsillectomy.