A 45-year-old Asian woman with history of diabetes mellitus visited her family doctor with a chief complaint of epigastric pain. Contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a 45-mm-diameter tumor with extravasation in liver segment S3/4, indicating HCC rupture . Transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed immediately, and the patient was referred to our hospital for radical surgery. The serum tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) were markedly elevated (AFP: 3367 ng/mL, PIVKA-II: 885 mAU/mL). She was negative for hepatitis B and C, but had a fatty liver. Liver function was normal (Child–Pugh score, 5 points; grade A). We performed a left hemihepatectomy 1 month after TAE. Histologically, the tumor was confirmed to be moderately differentiated HCC . There was no vascular invasion, lymph node metastasis, or intrahepatic metastasis. The surgical margins were negative. The pathological stage was II, according to the staging system of the Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan .
Seventeen months after the initial surgery, CT revealed a 10-mm nodule near the cut surface of the liver , together with mild elevation of AFP and PIVKA-II (AFP: 76 ng/mL, PIVKA-II: 41 mAU/mL). We diagnosed peritoneal recurrence of HCC and performed laparotomy. Given that the tumor was undetectable by ultrasonography, ICG 0.5 mg/kg was administered intravenously 3 days before the surgery and a metallic marker was placed the day before the surgery for reliable identification and complete resection of the tumor. Intraoperative findings showed a metallic marker in the fatty tissue of the lesser omentum; however, the boundary of the tumor was unclear . Near-infrared imaging showed ICG accumulation with a clear boundary around the metallic marker and absence of other lesions, which enabled us to secure the surgical margin . Histopathological examination revealed enriched growth of atypical cells, indicating peritoneal dissemination of the HCC .
Twelve months after resection of the peritoneal dissemination, a CT scan revealed a 12-mm nodule on the dorsal side of the lower part of the right liver lobe with elevation of AFP and PIVKA-II (AFP: 72 ng/mL, PIVKA-II: 47 mAU/mL). Preoperative imaging analysis showed no other lesions; therefore, we decided to repeat surgical resection. Based on tumor location, we chose the laparoscopic approach, and ICG fluorescence imaging was used to identify the tumor . Intraoperatively, two disseminated lesions were detected by careful examination with ICG fluorescence . All lesions were resected, and R0 resection was achieved, resulting in immediate normalization of tumor markers. Histopathologically, all the lesions were diagnosed as peritoneal dissemination of HCC . The patient is alive and monitored in an outpatient setting; no recurrence has been noted 3 months after the second metastasectomy.