A 14-day-old male presented to the ED with a 24-hour history of swelling and redness of the right cheek. He had been doing well since birth. His mother noticed that he was crying between his feeds and appeared fussier. The parents denied fever, any kind of rash, or contact with a sick person. The cheek swelling was associated with the skin redness. The baby was born at 38 weeks twin delivery, cesarean section, no complications at birth, and was gaining weight appropriately.
In the ED, the patient was afebrile with normal vitals for his age. On exam, he had right facial redness and crying with palpation of the right cheek . The left side was normal. The right tympanic membrane could not be visualized due to edema. Oral mucosa was normal, but purulent material was seen coming out of the mouth. When parotid massage was performed more purulent material was expressed inside the mouth from the opening of the right Stensen duct. No other significant exam findings were noted. A presumptive diagnosis of acute suppurative parotitis was made.
His laboratory tests showed a normal complete blood count. His comprehensive metabolic panel was also within normal limits except for total bilirubin and direct bilirubin levels . A respiratory panel was obtained and was negative. A point-of-care ultrasound of the soft tissue, head, and neck was performed, which showed a swollen, hypervascular right parotid gland likely representing changes of parotitis. There was no evidence of ductal dilation, obvious calcification shadowing, or changes to suggest abscess ( and ). This was the main contribution to the diagnosis. Ear nose throat (ENT) and infectious disease specialists were consulted from the ED and agreed with the diagnosis. Even though the baby was afebrile, he received a full septic work-up. Because neonatal suppurative parotitis (NSP) causes complications such as bacteremia and meningitis in many cases, it needs to be identified and recognized early. Blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was done .Meningitis BioFire polymerase chain reaction panel (BioFire Diagnostics, Salt Lake City, UT) was negative. Urinalysis was a catheterized specimen that showed 2+ blood likely due to trauma associated with catheterization but no other findings. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal. Intravenous (IV) antibiotics vancomycin, cefepime, and metronidazole were started to cover staphylococcal, streptococcal, and anaerobic species commonly responsible for causing acute suppurative parotitis. In the hospital, ENT recommended warm compresses and massage of the parotid gland that briefly expressed purulent drainage. However, cultures were not taken due to lack of availability of staff and minor duration of purulent drainage. Blood and CSF cultures did not show any growth, but urine cultures grew 10,000 colony forming units per milliliter S. aureus. After 48 hours of IV antimicrobials rapid clinical improvement was noticed. After five days of IV antibiotics, he was transitioned to oral clindamycin for 10 days with a resolution. He was sent home and the parents were advised to follow up with his pediatrician.