A-45-year old Indian female of Nordic origin presented 5 years back with a lump in the right breast and the axilla. She was detected to have carcinoma of the right breast with clinical stage as T2N1. Investigations ruled out any metastatic site and she underwent modified radical mastectomy. The tumor measured 2.1 cm with 1 out of 25 lymph nodes positive for tumor deposits. Histophotomicrograph of the excised breast lesion showed a duct carcinoma, not otherwise specified. . Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for estrogen receptor(ER) and progesterone receptor (PR). She received 6 cycles of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide (500 mg/m2), epirubicin (50 mg/m2), and 5-fluorouracil (500 mg/m2) on day1 and day15 every 4 weeks. This was followed by tamoxifen 20 mg per day for five years. She was doing well on follow up until the completion of fifth year of her disease, when she presented with complaints of mild fever, weakness and swelling in the neck and elbow. Examination revealed bilateral cervical, epitrochlear, inguinal and right axillary lymph node enlargement along with hepatomegaly. Hemogram showed mild anemia, normal platelet count and a leukocyte count of 1.2 × 1011/L. Lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated (746 IU/L). Peripheral blood examination revealed medium sized lymphoid cells , constituting almost 75% of total nucleated cell population, suggestive of a chronic lymphoproliferative disorder. Findings were confirmed on bone marrow examination. The lymphoid cells showed, dot-like staining with acid phosphatase and immunophenotying, depicted positivity for CD2, CD3, CD4, CD5, CD7, CD45, CD38 and ZAP70 and negative for CD8, CD10, CD19, CD20, CD103, CD11c, CD23, surface immunoglobulin and TdT. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of post thymic T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia was made. Conventional cytogenetics did not reveal any abnormality.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) of the chest and abdomen was done which revealed an anterior mediastinal mass with destruction of sternum and right coastal margin along with multiple small nodular shadows in bilateral lung fields suggestive of lung metastasis . In the background of breast carcinoma, recurrence of the primary breast cancer was kept as a differential and fine needle aspiration (FNA) cytology of the anterior mediastinal mass was done. Low power photomicrograph of the FNA smear showed atypical ductal cells arranged in trabecular pattern . The ductal cells showed moderate nuclear pleomorphism, overlapping and prominent nucleoli . Immunohistochemical stains performed on aspiration smears showed nuclear positivity for ER protein , PR protein and grade 3 positivity for erb-B2 (Her2neu) stain . This confirmed a metastatic carcinoma consistent with a breast primary. She was started on chemotherapy for T-PLL with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide along with hormonal therapy with aromatase inhibitor (letrozole 2.5 mg per day) for metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Unfortunately, both her malignancies progressed after an initial stable disease of two months.