A 56-year-old male presented to our hospital in June 2015 with a 1-month history of an axillary lump. Preoperative pathological examination confirmed it as a metastatic adenocarcinoma through regional lymph node resection . The patient denied any pain, fevers, chills, or any significant weight loss. The patient had no family history of cancer or hereditary intestinal disorders. Physical examination revealed a hard, mobile, 3 × 2 cm lesion with unclear border and a smooth surface, which was palpable at the position beneath the umbilicus. Clinical examination results for the respiratory, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, and nervous systems and routine laboratory examination results were normal. Some tumor markers were slightly higher than the marginal values (CEA: 10.02 ng/mL, normal range: 0–6.5 ng/mL; CA72-4: 17.12 U/mL, normal range: 0–6.7 U/mL). A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen confirmed the mass under the umbilicus, but it was difficult to differentiate it from the intestine. The soft tissue density around the mass was increased. The lesion measured approximately 2.8 × 2.0 cm . Several lymph nodes were palpable in the right axillary area . The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) scan of the umbilicus mass revealed a focally increased metabolic rate, and there was no clear border line with adjacent bowel loops . There was no significant uptake in the right abdomen. Increased metabolic rate was also found on the right side of axillary lymph nodes , which may have been caused by postoperative inflammation. No other areas of increased metabolic uptake were identified.
Based on the preoperative evaluation, we first performed a laparoscopic exploration to exclude other diseases. Then, open surgery was performed to remove the bellybutton neoplasm and urachus. Postoperative pathological examination confirmed that the specimen from the transected umbilicus and urachus tissue was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . Immunohistochemistry analysis results were as follows: CK7(+), CK20(+), Villin(+), CDX-2(±), MUC2(+), MUC5A(+), MUC6(−), TTF-1(−), PSA(−), PAX8(−), and GATA-3(−). The patient experienced no complications after surgery and was discharged on the seventh postoperative day. After 12 courses of postoperative FOLFOX6 scheme chemotherapy, the patient had no evidence of recurrent disease or metastasis across the reexamination of PET–CT.