A 41-year-old male was referred to the orthopedic outpatient with complaints of diffuse lower back pain, perineal pain, and lower limb pain for the past 8 weeks in February 2022. Bilateral laparoscopic hernia repair with mesh was performed in November 2021 for bilateral inguinal hernia. The patient had been complaining of pain after 2 weeks of surgery and there had been no pain-free interval since. The pain was dull, throbbing in nature, and non-specific with no aggravating or relieving factors. The patient did not have fever or any constitutional symptoms. The pain did not resolve with over-the-counter medications. He had not suffered from similar symptoms before the surgery. The patient had congenital deafness and no other significant past history of illness. Initial management with analgesics and fomentation did not relieve the pain. The patient was referred to the pain clinic for management but the pain was not relieved.
On examination, there was no abdominal tenderness. Tenderness was present over the ischial tuberosity on the left side, there was no joint line tenderness around the hip, and movements around the hip and knee were painless. There were no spinal tenderness and no neurological involvement. There were no sinuses, wounds, or areas of discharge present around the hip and thigh region.
A plain radiograph in December 2021 of the pelvis revealed no obvious bony abnormality with mesh tacks seen on the bilateral superior pubic rami . A repeat X-ray in February 2022 revealed marginal erosions with few sclerotic areas (right more than left) in both the pubic symphysis suggestive of OP/osteoarthritic changes . A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed an altered marrow signal in the pubic symphysis, edema in the gluteus maximus on the right side, and collection in the peri-vesical space. Contrast-enhanced MRI of the pelvis showed a collection adjacent to the right ischial tuberosity and marrow edema in the symphysis and bilateral pubic rami .
CT-guided aspiration yielded 5 ml of seropurulent fluid. Cytology after aspiration from the collection showed a mixed inflammatory infiltrate with predominant neutrophils with histiocytes some lymphocytes and plasma cells. The fluid culture did not show any growth and CBNAAT for mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. The patient was started on oral clindamycin and clarithromycin for 6 weeks. At the end of 4 weeks, the patient was painless and signs of healing in previously lytic areas were noted on plain radiographs . The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) also decreased with therapy . The patient reported that he was able to perform his normal activities as well.