A 64-year-old Caucasian woman with major depression (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Text Revision (DSM IV-TR): 296.33), alcohol dependence (DSM IV-TR: 303.90) and benzodiazepine (lorazepam) dependence (DSM IV-TR: 304.10) was referred to a specialist ward for the treatment of substance use and co-occurring mental disorders. Daily use of alcohol started ten years prior to admission and daily use of lorazepam one year prior. In addition, our patient had a history of medical conditions for which she had been receiving medication. Levothyroxine was used to treat hypothyroidism (thyroxine-stimulating hormone < 0.01 mU/L; free thyroxine = 20.9 pmol/L, free tri-iodothyronine = 8.5 pmol/L), standard female hormone replacement therapy consisting of 1 mg 17β-estradiol and 5 mg dydrogesterone was used to alleviate and prevent symptoms associated with menopause, and atorvastatin was prescribed to control hyperlipidemia. Felodipine, metoprolol and lisinopril were used to treat hypertension. Salicylate was used for the prevention of cardiac infarction. Pantoprazole was used to alleviate symptoms related to gastro-esophageal reflux. All prescriptions, including a previous trial with the antidepressant mianserin, were well tolerated without significant side effects and, except for mianserin, were continued after admission without dose changes.
On admission, lorazepam, at 5-10 mg daily, was begun to prevent alcohol- and BZD-associated withdrawal symptoms. Antidepressant treatment with mianserin (60 mg daily) resulted in a partial response. A three-week add-on trial with venlafaxine (maximum dose 450 mg daily) resulted in further improvement of depressive symptoms. However, residual depressive symptoms persisted and mianserin was switched to mirtazapine (maximum dose 75 mg daily). Complete remission was achieved two months later and venlafaxine maintained at 150 mg daily and mirtazapine at 60 mg daily (relapse prevention).
Lorazepam was tapered and discontinued after six weeks of treatment. One day after the last lorazepam dose, our patient exhibited difficulties in maintaining attention and showed signs of psychomotor agitation, anxiety and disturbed thought processes, such as loosened, illogical and tangential associations. Dissociative symptoms were also observed. These signs were consistent with an ensuing BZD withdrawal syndrome (DSM IV-TR: 292.0) and suggested that an even more protracted discontinuation phase may have been necessary. Delirium was not diagnosed at this time because orientation remained intact and the severity of the symptoms was not in excess of those usually associated with a BZD withdrawal syndrome. Lorazepam was resumed at 3 mg per day. Symptoms of withdrawal resolved and lorazepam was maintained at 3 mg daily for one month. Lorazepam was then discontinued without tapering, and diazepam was started at an equivalent dose of 15 mg daily. Less than one day after the BZD switch, our patient became increasingly irritable and agitated and eventually exhibited fluctuating levels of consciousness with reduced clarity of awareness and reduced ability to maintain attention. Disorientation, incomprehensible speech and memory deficits were also noted. The diagnosis of a BZD intoxication delirium was ruled out based on the absence of slurred speech, incoordination, unsteady gait, nystagmus or stupor. Our patient was diagnosed with BZD withdrawal delirium (DSM IV-TR: 292.81) and received 4 mg of lorazepam combined with 4 mg of haloperidol. The acute delirious state resolved within hours and our patient remained well. Haloperidol was stopped after two weeks. Lorazepam was continued at 4 mg daily. Our patient was dismissed one month later with a lorazepam maintenance dose of 4 mg per day.
An initial review of the prescriptions and the diagnostic tests performed in the course of treatment failed to reveal our patient's vulnerabilities to delirious states. Except for a slight increase of plasma diazepam levels in the presence of metoprolol, no relevant drug interactions were identified. A physical examination, laboratory workup and an analysis of cerebrospinal fluid were unremarkable. In particular, there was no evidence of hepatic dysfunction. Serum levels of alanine and aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase, and bilirubin were normal. Prothrombin time was within the normal range. Serum γ-glutamyltransferase was slightly elevated (74 U/L; normal range, < 55 U/L). However, serum concentrations of O-desmethyl-venlafaxine (a liver-derived metabolite of venlafaxine) were seven-fold higher than those of venlafaxine. Taken together, these results suggested normal liver function with intact hepatic drug metabolism and ruled out the differential diagnosis of a diazepam-exacerbated hepatic encephalopathy.
Electroencephalogram recordings showed the rhythm of alpha waves (11-12 Hz) and beta waves (18-22 Hz) to be as expected during treatment with lorazepam. Epileptiform discharges or focal abnormalities were not present. Electrocardiogram recordings showed a normal sinus rhythm with a frequency of around 90 per minute. Neuropsychological tests revealed only mild cognitive deficits. At the time these test were performed our patient was receiving the medication to treat her physical conditions as described above. In addition, she received mirtazapine (60 mg daily), venlafaxine (150 mg daily) and lorazepam (4 mg daily). The Mini-Mental State Examination score was 27. The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease test revealed minimal cognitive impairment, mainly affecting her verbal memory (left hippocampus system), executive functions (frontal lobe) and mental rotation (parietal lobe). On the Hamburg Wechsler Intelligence test for adults, she achieved 90 points, a score slightly below average.
Computed tomography scans showed no signs of brain atrophy. However, using T2 pulses, magnetic resonance imaging showed scattered sub-cortical signal disturbances in her frontal, parietal and occipital regions. Additional signal disturbances were found in her pontine regions and brain stem. Together, these findings were consistent with sub-cortical atherosclerotic encephalopathy, in other words, Binswanger's disease. Positron emission tomography scanning of the brain using the radio-labeled glucose analog 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) showed diminished FDG uptake in temporal and parietal cortical regions. Lower FDG accumulation was also found in parts of the visual cortex and in both her basal ganglia and thalamus. The absence of hallucinations, Parkinsonian or extra-pyramidal symptoms, together with the previously well-tolerated trial with haloperidol, argued against Lewy body dementia . The most likely diagnosis was an early form of mixed dementia, combining both vascular (DSM IV-TR: 290.40) and Alzheimer-type lesions (DSM IV-TR: 294.10). Thus, the neuro-imaging results suggested that our patient might be liable to develop a delirious state in response to chemically induced brain disturbances. Before leaving our hospital, our patient was started on donepezil, shown to improve cognition in Alzheimer's disease .