A 62-year-old woman with a medical history of nondestructive surgical treatment of Meniere’s disease 25 years ago and moderate-to-severe bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, greater for the left ear and using hearing aid on the right ear, who presented to the emergency room due to 3 months history of progressive gait instability, dizziness, and left mouth angle weakness associated with 2-week history of reduced sensitivity in the left facial region. Physical examination revealed left facial paresis (House-Brackmann Grade 2) and left facial hypoesthesia in the territory of the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve.
An urgent brain computed tomography (CT) scan with and without contrast was requested, showing evidence of heterogeneously enhancing 3x2 cm space-occupying lesion at the left cerebellopontine angle (CPA). The patient was admitted, and a brain magnetic resonance imaging study was requested, revealing a large 30 (AP) × 25 (T) × 30 (CC) mm size enhancing (T1W) hyperintense (T2W) well-defined mass within the left CPA with intra- and extracanalicular extension. The lesion exerts mass effect on the 4th ventricle with marked dilatation of the third and bilateral lateral ventricles. The lesion was consistent with the left side vestibular schwannoma . Auditory evoked potential was performed for the assessment of hearing threshold showing nonreproducible responses bilaterally. The patient was scheduled to undergo microsurgical resection of the lesion with IONM.
Anesthesia regimen consisted of total intravenous anesthesia (propofol and remifentanil), and muscle relaxants/ rocuronium were only used during induction. Blood pressure (BP) and heart rate (HR) on arrival to the operating room were 120/75 mmHg and 63 beats/min. After induction, the patient was intubated with an NIM TriVantage electromyography (EMG) endotracheal tube size 7 mm (Medtronic™, Xomed Inc., Jacksonville, Florida) for bilateral monitoring of VN. Intubation and tube positioning were done using video laryngoscope, alongside with the neurophysiologist to ensure optimal electrode depth, alignment, and direct contact with the right and left vocal cords. Midline fixation of the tube using bite blocks followed with the tape-tying method was done to prevent tube rotation and upward or downward displacements of the electrodes during the operation. Posttube intubation and posttube positioning left side cR1 and right side cR1 and cR2 responses were present and stable bilaterally.
After the patient intubation, electrodes were placed bilaterally for upper and lower limb somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) and muscle motor evoked potentials (mMEPs). Electrodes for free-run EMG, brainstem mapping (BSM), and corticobulbar motor evoked potentials (CoMEPs) were placed on the left masseter, orbicularis oculi, orbicularis oris, soft palate, trapezius, and tongue muscles to monitor cranial nerves V, VII, IX, XI, and XII, respectively. Left blink reflex (BR) responses were also recorded by stimulating the left supraorbital nerve and recording from the left orbicularis oculi muscle.
The LAR was evoked by independent stimulation of the right and left side of the laryngeal mucosa (single electrical stimulus, duration 0.5–0.7 ms, intensity 3–5 mA) using embedded EMG tracheal tube electrodes. Contralateral LAR responses (cR1 and cR2) were recorded using endotracheal tube electrodes positioned contralaterally to the stimulating side. The monitoring parameter for IONM interpretation of this modality consisted of considerable attenuation (≥60%) in LAR amplitude responses .
Postpositioning SSEPs, mMEPs, and CoMEPs responses were present in all extremities and left side corticobulbar targeted muscles. The left BR responses were stable and with proper morphology. Post patient positioning baselines for LAR left side cR1 and right side cR1 and cR2 responses were good and reliable. Preoperative and intraoperative brainstem auditory evoked potential waves were absent, and the surgeon was informed of baseline responses.
The dura was opened with adequate surgical corridor and exposure; the tumor was visualized along with brainstem and lower cranial nerves; BSM was then performed. During tumor resection, the patient’s HR and BP dropped significantly. IONM changes related to the event consisted of reduced left-sided BR amplitude responses with no other alterations. The surgeon was informed, and surgical stimulation was discontinued. A dose of 1.0 mg atropine sulfate was administered to the patient to counteract the bradycardia, with returning of HR and BR responses to baseline values within 1 min after its administration .
A second event occurred soon after while continuing with tumor resection alongside lower cranial nerves. HR and BP significantly decreased throughout the event, and a significant amplitude response decrease was seen not only on left LAR cR1 but also on right LAR cR1 and cR2 responses, attesting the bilateral nature of this reflex. An amplitude response decrement over the left-sided vocal CoMEP was evident, alongside with neurotonic discharges in the left side X cranial nerve. No other IONM cranial nerve changes seen throughout this event. The surgical team acted immediately, neural stimulation was stopped, and 1.0 mg of atropine was given to the patient immediately, with improvement of hemodynamic parameters, bilateral LAR, and left side CoMEP responses 1 min after administering atropine .
During dissection of the tumor adjacent to the left facial nerve, frequent and prolonged trains of neurotonic discharges were observed in all branches of the left side VII cranial nerve. Due to several IONM and hemodynamic changes during the procedure and considering that more than 90% of tumor resection was accomplished, tumor resection was discontinued. BSM, mMEPs, and SSEPs remained normal during tumor resection.
The patient was transferred to the ICU for strict neurological monitoring and observation. Forty-eight hours postoperatively, noncontrast brain CT was requested and showed no postoperative complications. The patient was transferred to the neurosurgery ward.
The left sensorineural hearing loss persisted, in addition to horizontal nystagmus. There was worsening of left-sided facial nerve paresis with involvement of the orbicularis oris and complete eyelid closure with maximum effort (House-Brackmann Grade 3), which required covering of the left eye at night and application of eye drops. The patient also presented with mild dysphagia that required adjustment of soft diet; dysphagia resolved gradually within the next 48 h. There were no other neurological deficits of the remaining lower cranial nerves, descending and ascending neural tracts.
Rehabilitation therapy was initiated at 2 weeks after surgery with marked improvement at week 4 postoperatively. At 1-month follow-up, the patient can close her eye with minimal effort, and her mouth showed mild asymmetry (House-Brackmann Grade 2). Conclusive pathological study of the tumor showed Schwannoma-WHO Grade I.