A 40-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our emergency department with moderate pain of his left abdomen for 2 days. He also complained of abdominal distension but presented no other signs and symptoms like fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea or intestinal obstruction. His medical history included an untreated left inguinal hernia in the last year. A physical examination revealed pain in his left abdomen associated with a palpable mass on his left flank, without rebound tenderness or guarding.
Two bilateral reducible inguinal hernias were found. Laboratory results revealed a C-reactive protein of 124mg/L. Given this unspecific clinical presentation, an abdominal and pelvic CT scan were performed, revealing an intra-abdominal abnormality, suggestive of pathologic infiltration of his omentum and the presence of the whirl sign suggesting torsion of his greater omentum . The distal end of his omentum seemed to be alongside the spermatic cord into a bilateral inguinal hernia sac. Since there was no evidence of acute abdomen or incarcerated hernia and he was stable, we decided on conservative treatment because it has been reported that spontaneous derotation of the omentum can occur . After he had spent 2 days as an in-patient of our hospital, his pain persisted and his left inguinal hernia became incarcerated. A preoperative diagnosis of secondary torsion of his greater omentum associated with an inguinal bilateral hernia (particularly left inguinal hernia) was established and he submitted to surgery.
Laparoscopy was performed to evaluate the extent of the damage to his omentum. A wide twist of omentum with large necrotic vascular changes that extended to the inguinal hernia content was found . After reducing the hernia content, omentectomy was performed. His abdominal cavity was reached using a 10mm trocar under his umbilicus. Two accessory trocars were placed in his right flank (5mm). A median minilaparotomy (6cm) through the umbilicus port was created for exteriorization and resection of his large necrotic omentum . Surgical repair of bilateral inguinal hernia was performed by Lichtenstein technique, since the success of laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair techniques (such as transabdominal preperitoneal) in incarcerated hernias is still controversial [,]. A histopathological examination revealed large areas of interstitial hemorrhage, vascular congestion and thrombosis compatible with omental torsion.
His postoperative period occurred without complications and he was discharged on the third day after surgery. One month later he yielded no complaint.