A 16-year-old adolescent girl had an intermittent cough with shortness of breath and wheezing for 1 year that had become worse in the previous week.
The patient visited a local hospital with symptoms of an irritating cough and wheezing. A chest X-ray showed no abnormalities. She was diagnosed with bronchial asthma and treated with budesonide and formoterol. Over the next year, the wheezing and cough symptoms gradually worsened, and the treatment was not effective. One week before admission, the patient's cough and wheezing symptoms worsened after catching a cold, and she experienced wheezing and a feeling of suffocation even when resting. A chest X-ray revealed blurred markings in both lungs . Allergen testing was not performed. She was diagnosed with acute onset of asthma and treated with Ventolin (salbutamol sulfate solution for inhalation) and intravenous methylprednisolone for 1 wk, but the symptoms were not relieved. She was then transferred to the respiratory department of our hospital.
The patient had no other previous medical history.
The patient had no relevant family medical history.
The patient had a body temperature of 36.7 ℃, blood pressure of 128/80 mmHg, heart rate of 103 beats/min, respiratory rate of 28 breaths/min, and an SPO2 of 98%. The patient had clear consciousness and was in a semi-supine position. The three concave sign was positive, her inspiratory phase was prolonged, and bidirectional wheezing could be heard.
Routine blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 12.0 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 122 g/L, and a neutrophil ratio of 85%. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.45, a PaO2 60 mmHg, and a PaCO2 of 33 mmHg. Liver and kidney function was normal and neuron-specific enolase was 16.5 ng/mL (normal range: 0-15.2 ng/mL). The patient did not undergo pulmonary function tests due because of her dyspnea.
Chest computed tomography (CT) at the T2/T3 vertebral level showed a nodular mass in the trachea that obstructed about 90% of the lumen without invading the tracheal wall and its surrounding tissues .
A bronchoscopy was done with the patient's consent to determine the nature of the intratracheal mass. The bronchoscopy showed a pedicled dumbbell-shaped reddish-brown mass with a smooth surface and small blood vessels in the middle part of the trachea, about 4 cm below the vocal cords . The mass obstructed about 90% of the airway. Pathological examination of the tracheal mass showed that the tumor cells were long and shuttle-shaped, with an uneven distribution and fenestrated arrangement in some areas . The sample cells were incubated with mouse antihuman monoclonal antibodies against S100, desmin, CD117, and Ki-67 (MXB Biotechnologies, China). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed with a VENTANA BenchMARK Ultra automated staining instrument following the manufacturer’s instructions. IHC revealed S-100 (++), desmin (-), CD117 (-), and a Ki-67 positivity of < 1%. The pathological diagnosis was tracheal schwannoma.