The patient was a 34-year-old pregnant woman (height, 156 cm; body weight, 49 kg). She had no relevant history of comorbidities or medications, and her pregnancy course was unremarkable. At 24 weeks and 4 days of gestation, she experienced epigastric pain and was admitted to another hospital. Streptococcus mitis/oralis was detected from two sets of blood cultures, and antibiotic therapy was initiated. At 25 weeks and 1 day of gestation, she experienced shortness of breath. Chest X-ray demonstrated features of acute pulmonary edema . An echocardiogram confirmed the diagnosis of severe mitral regurgitation from infective endocarditis. She experienced acute heart failure (New York Heart Association [NYHA] class IV) and was then transferred to our hospital at 25 weeks and 2 days of gestation.
We planned to perform emergency cesarean section on the same day but before cardiac surgery, as cardiac surgery during pregnancy is associated with a high fetal mortality rate . The obstetrician performed the abdominal ultrasonography examination and confirmed that the fetal heart rate and amniotic fluid level were normal. Although we considered spinal anesthesia, the heart failure symptoms of the patient were too severe to maintain supine position. Her last meal and drink were 10 h prior surgery. She did not have any risk of difficult airway except for pregnancy. Finally, we selected general anesthesia with percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS) on standby. Before anesthesia induction, we placed an arterial catheter in the left radial artery. The transducer was connected to the radial arterial line to evaluate the arterial-based cardiac index (FloTrac™, Edwards Lifesciences). Thereafter, we inserted a central venous catheter via the right internal jugular vein. A 4-Fr sheath was placed into the right internal jugular vein and the right femoral vein to establish vascular access for PCPS.
We confirmed the fetal heart rate to be 160 beats per minute, which showed reassuring fetus status, then initiated continuous administration of remifentanil (0.03 μg/kg/min) and remimazolam (6 mg/kg/h). With the patient under a fasting condition, we selected continuous administration of remimazolam (6 mg/kg/h) until confirming that she had fallen asleep, instead of rapid sequence induction. She fell asleep after 90 s of 7.2 mg remimazolam administration, which was eventually reduced to 1.2 mg/kg/h. Her spontaneous breathing was maintained until just before she fell asleep. We subsequently placed a tracheal tube 1 min after administration of 50 mg of rocuronium, and the cesarean section was immediately started.
She delivered a male baby weighing 926 g after 4 min of the operation. Total dosage of remimazolam until the delivery was 12.1 mg. The infant’s Apgar scores were 4 at 1 min and 7 at 5 min, and the pH of the umbilical artery was 7.35. As the baby did not cry, the neonatologist promptly intubated and administered surfactant. The mother’s mean blood pressure was maintained above 65 mmHg during the surgery, without catecholamines or vasopressors. The bispectral index values were around 50 to 65. After the cesarean section, her hemodynamic condition was stable, and she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) under intubation .
She underwent mitral annuloplasty on postoperative day 2, and she was weaned from vasopressors and ventilatory support. She was discharged to the ward from the ICU on day 5 after the cesarean section. The infant was diagnosed with patent ductus arteriosus and underwent ductus arteriosus ligation at 14 days old. He was weaned from ventilatory support at 35 days old and was discharged at 96 days old.
We have obtained the patient’s written consent for the publication of this case report.