A 37-year-old female patient presented to the ophthalmology clinic at Union Hospital on 16 December 2021 with a complaint of blurred vision in her right eye for one week. She had a fever of unknown origin five days before, which resolved spontaneously. Five days earlier, the patient was diagnosed with optic neuritis at a regional hospital and received oral corticosteroids, and her symptoms were well controlled. The patient reported a history of raising a cat at home and that she had not been scratched in the past few months. A general physical examination did not show any skin lesions or lymphadenopathy. The patient’s laboratory examination results showed normal complete blood count and autoimmune antibody values. However, increased serum C-reactive protein (CRP; 108 mg/L; normal = 0–5 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 51 mm/h; normal = 0–20 mm/h) values were detected.
The patient underwent detailed ophthalmic examinations, including best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), tonometry, slit-lamp examination, fundus examination, optical coherence tomography (OCT), fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA), visual field examination and visual evoked potential (VEP). No abnormal results were found in the left eye. In the right eye, the BCVA was count fingers, the intraocular pressure was normal and the anterior segment was quiet. Fundus examination showed optic disc oedema, macular exudates and inferior exudative retinal detachment. Macular OCT showed subretinal fluid with hyperreflective signals at the level of the outer plexiform layer and outer nuclear layer. FFA showed optic disc hyperfluorescence in the late phase . Visual field examination showed that only an inferonasal island of vision remained, while VEP showed a prolonged implicit time and reduced P2 wave amplitude. Based on the clinical symptoms, ocular signs and results of the auxiliary examinations, the diagnosis of neuroretinitis in the right eye was made.
To identify the possible causative pathogen of the disease, serological tests for Toxoplasma and Treponema were conducted, and the results were negative. A T-SPOT.TB test also returned a negative result. Serological tests for Lyme borreliosis and rickettsia were not available. mNGS test was performed to screening for potential infectious pathogen. Considering the accessibility of different intraocular sample types and the lack of indication of pars plana vitrectomy, aqueous humour was used in the test procedure. With the patient’s consent, about 100 μL of aqueous humour was obtained through paracentesis performed at the 7 o’clock position of the cornea. The sample was sent to GiantMed Diagnostics (Beijing) for mNGS on the Nextseq 550 platform (75 base pair [bp] single-end reads; Illumina, San Diego, USA). A total of 42,469,925 reads were generated, and 39,640,698 reads were aligned with human sequences using SNAP software (version 2.0, Swift Biosciences™, Ann Arbor, MI, USA). In the downstream analysis, adapter, plasmid, duplicate, low-quality, low-complexity and short reads (< 35 bp) were filtered out and 5371 reads remained as the total reads of detected microbes. Reads associated with contaminating microbes from laboratory environment and engineered bacteria from the enzymes and buffer solutions used in the wet lab procedure were also removed. The remaining 1029 reads were then blasted against the Microbial Genomes database using Burrows–Wheeler Alignment. The database consists of microbial genomes collected by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) from more than 20,000 microorganisms, including 11,910 bacteria, 7,103 viruses, 1,046 fungi and 305 parasites. A total of 521 reads aligned uniquely with the B. henselae reference genome, with a genome coverage of 2.26% . To verify the mNGS result, an IFA test of the serum sample for anti-B. henselae immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody titers was performed. The test was performed according to the kit manufacturer's instructions (IF1300G, Focus Technologies, Cypress, CA) as described in the previous study . The result of IFA test was positive, with a titre of 1:64 . Test for anti-B.hensenlae immunoglobulin M (IgM) was not available in our hospital. Taking the contact history, clinical manifestations, mNGS and serological results into consideration, the diagnosis of Bartonella neuroretinitis (ocular CSD) was made.
After the diagnosis was made, the patient was treated with doxycycline (200 mg/day), rifampicin (600 mg/day) and azithromycin (250 mg/day), together with oral prednisolone (30 mg/day), which was gradually tapered down over six weeks. When the oral medications were discontinued, the patient’s BCVA was 20/60 (Snellen visual acuity chart). Fundus examination showed lightened optic disc oedema, decreased macular exudates and absorption of subretinal fluid. Massive exudates could still be observed in the inferior part of the retina. The last follow-up was six months after the onset of the disease. At that point, the BCVA of the right eye was 20/25. Fundus examination showed a normal optic disc and macula, and the exudates had reduced .