The patient, a 31-year-old male, was evaluated at the
Mount Sinai–Irving J. Selikoff Center for
Occupational and Environmental Medicine on 22
March 2005. He complained of shortness of breath
at rest and with exertion, dry cough, and cough
with phlegm. Additional symptoms included fatigue,
chest tightness, wheezing, and decreased ability
to perform physical activity. The patient had
begun experiencing breathing difficulty about 2
years before his initial visit, and his symptoms
had progressed over time. In 2004 he became more
symptomatic and was examined by a nurse
practitioner. He was diagnosed with bronchitis and
prescribed an albuterol inhaler,
salmeterol/fluticasone diskus, and oral prednisone
for several days. At the time, it was recommended
that he obtain a chest X ray, but he did not
follow up on this recommendation. As a result of
the above-mentioned treatment, his symptoms
partially improved and he continued to work,
albeit only part time because of continuing
respiratory symptoms. In the beginning of 2005,
the patient was examined by his primary care
physician, who sent him for a chest X ray and
referred him to a pulmonologist. The pulmonologist
then ordered a chest computed tomography (CT)
scan, bronchoscopy, and lung biopsy and referred
the patient to our clinic for evaluation. At the
time of his visit to our clinic, the patient was
not taking any medication.
Review of systems was unremarkable. His past medical
history revealed orchidopexy at 9 years of age. He
denied having allergies to any medications or to
any other exposure. At the time of his visit he
was actively smoking 20 cigarettes/day on average;
he began smoking at age 11. He described himself
as a moderate drinker.
The patient had been a carpet and floor installer for 15
years. He began working at the age of 15 and he
had worked for different carpeting and flooring
companies, mostly small family businesses.
The patient’s major occupation was the
installation of new carpeting and the removal of
old carpets, stripping and patching floors using
cement and water, and scraping and cleaning
floors. In the process of his work, he used
adhesives and glues on floors. The patient
mentioned that there was usually a substantial
amount of talc present when installing new
carpeting. He was not familiar with any material
safety data sheets relevant to his job. The
patient had not received proper job training, and
he did not use any respiratory protection or other
personal protective equipment when doing his
work.
On physical examination, the patient’s blood
pressure was 120/75 mmHg, his pulse was 90
beats/min, and his respiratory rate was 28/min,
with a fast, regular but shallow breathing
pattern. His height was 6 feet and his weight was
158 lb, for a body mass index of 21.1
kg/m2. Examination of his head and neck
was normal. His lungs were clear to percussion and
auscultation, and examination of the heart showed
regular and rhythmic heart sounds and no murmurs.
His abdomen was soft to palpation, with no
tenderness. Liver span was normal, and no megalies
or masses were noted. An examination of the
patient’s lower extremities revealed
normal peripheral pulses and no edema.
Musculoskeletal examination was normal;
neurological examination was nonfocal, and his
skin was clear.
Chest X rays on 16 February 2005 showed a diffuse,
extensive, bilateral regular-nodular infiltrate,
with nodules measuring < 5 mm in diameter.
Roentgenographic interpretation according to the
International Labour Organization (ILO)
classification for pneumoconiosis revealed rounded regular opacities
classified as q/r in shape and size (q,
1.5–3 mm; r, 3–10 mm), located
throughout both lungs, with a degree of profusion
of 3/3 (on scale of 0/– to 3/+) . No large opacities were noted, and no
pleural abnormalities were described; coalescence
of small opacities was described. A chest CT scan
on 24 February 2005 revealed multiple nodular
lesions throughout both lungs, from the apices to
the bases ( and ),
with coalescence of opacities and formation of
conglomerates in both upper lobes. No evidence of
consolidation or mediastinal or axillary
lymphadenopathy was seen, but it was noted in the
record that the hilar nodes could not be evaluated
because of the use of a noncontrast technique. No
pleural effusion was visualized. Occasional
bullous changes were described in the apices of
the lungs. Blood tests revealed a normal
C-reactive protein. The erythrosedimentation rate
was 10 mm/hr.
Pre- and post-bronchodilator spirometry was performed on
22 March 2005. Prebronchodilator forced vital
capacity (FVC) was measured at 3.09 L (55% of
predicted), and prebronchodilator first-second
forced expiratory volume (FEV1) was
1.97 L (43% of predicted); the FEV1/FVC
ratio was 64% (predicted 82%). Postbronchodilator,
the patient’s FVC improved by 460 mL
(15%), and his FEV1 improved by 1.02 L
(26%). This study was interpreted as a mixed
obstructive and restrictive impairment with
significant improvement after inhaled
bronchodilator.
The patient underwent bronchoscopy with transbronchial
biopsy on 7 March 2005. Bronchoalveolar lavage was
negative for malignant cells, but the culture of
lavage was positive for Klebsiella
oxytoca and Mycobacterium
avium-intracellulare. The transbronchial
biopsy was referred for consultation. The
pathologist reported
… a dense interstitial histiocytic
infiltrate with numerous multinucleated,
foreign-body type giant cells. Numerous sheet-like
refractile and strongly polarizable particles are
present within the histiocytes. The appearance
fits with a form of silicate pneumoconiosis, most
likely of the type due to talc, although mica and
kaolin can cause a similar appearance.
No further pathology reports or results of any special
pathology study (such as electron microscopy or
spectroscopy studies) were available.
The nature and the implications of the diagnosis were
explained to the patient. The patient was urged to
stop smoking and advised to change his job and
avoid exposure to respiratory irritants. The
patient was referred for full pulmonary function
tests with plethysmography and diffusing capacity.
He received a prescription for an albuterol
inhaler, and his follow-up appointment was
scheduled at our clinic for 3 weeks after the
initial evaluation. It was further recommended
that the patient continue to follow-up with his
pulmonologist and primary care physician. Despite
multiple phone calls and written letters, the
patient did not attend any appointment, neither at
our clinic nor with the pulmonologist or his
primary care physician. The impression of the
treating physicians was that he had understood the
nature of his disease but was unable to follow
medical recommendations.