A 50-year-old woman was referred to us for bilateral blurred vision as well as dryness and irritation of her eyes for several days. Except for a mild fatigue and a slight headache, she had no further complaints. Her visual acuity was 1.0 in both eyes, and slit-lamp examination was normal. A fundus examination revealed bilateral optic disc swelling and small preretinal peripapillary splinter haemorrhages in the right eye . Her colour vision was normal (13/13 on Ishihara). Humphrey visual field testing showed an enlarged blind spot and an inferonasal deficit in both eyes (right > left) . Fluorescein angiography demonstrated a bilateral late leakage of dye from the optic disc and pooling consistent with cystoid macular oedema (CMO) in the left eye. Non-perfused areas, intraretinal microvascular abnormalities and retinal neovascularizations were not seen. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) performed with Cirrus HD-OCT 6.0 showed an in-creased macular thickness with a small amount of subretinal fluid at the fovea in the left eye. In the right eye, the macular thickness was normal . The segmentation algorithm was not used. The B-scan ultrasonography demonstrated disc swelling, but no drusen .
General physical examination was normal except for absent ankle reflexes and a diminished sensation in the feet. Laboratory tests showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 30 mm/h, elevated levels of M-protein type IgA of 1.4 g/l, and a vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) concentration of 6.1 ng/ml (n = 0.028–0.966 mg/l). Cerebrospinal fluid pressure was normal, and the cerebral spinal fluid had a protein content of 131 mg/dl (normal <45 mg/dl). An abdominal CT revealed hepatosplenomegaly. Her EMG showed a mild axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy. The diagnosis of polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, monoclonal gammopathy, and skin changes (POEMS) syndrome was made based on polyneuropathy, hepatosplenomegaly, IgA lambda monoclonal proteinemia, and the optic disc swelling. Additional investigations to find a further possible malignancy revealed no abnormalities.
After 2 months, local treatment with 40 mg posterior sub-Tenon (PST) injection of triamcinolone in both eyes was started because of continuous complaints of blurred vision. This was followed by 2 intravitreal bevacizumab (IVB) injections of 2.5 mg in the left eye at intervals of 4 weeks after 10 weeks. Local therapy with PST injection had resulted in a small decrease of the optic disc swelling after 4 weeks. In the left eye, the macular oedema regressed, and the central retinal thickness, as measured by OCT, diminished. The IVB treatment resulted in a slight regression of the optic disc oedema (ODO) and a minimal decrease of the CMO . Because of diarrhoea and general malaise and the fact that the blurred vision had diminished but not completely disappeared, melphalan was initiated. This was followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. After systemic treatment, the patient had no further visual complaints and the ODO had disappeared . The VEGF serum concentration normalized. Three years after the initial diagnosis, the patient's ophthalmological condition remained unchanged.