A 37-year-old male patient suffered from a sudden swelling in the submandibular region of the right side of the neck. The swelling started initially small and had gradually increased in size to reach 3–4 cm in 1 week, accompanied by pain and local fever. The patient’s history was unremarkable. On extraoral examination, a single, localized, well-defined, ovoid swelling was present in the right submandibular region. On palpation, the swelling was tender, mobile, soft in consistency, compressible but not reducible. Intraoral examination showed no abnormalities. The patient was treated with an antibiotic regimen for 10 days without any significant improvement. All serological parameters were within normal limits, and testing of HBs-Ag, HCV-Ab and HIV-Ag/Ab was negative. Ultrasonography and MRI imaging of the head and neck revealed a well-defined cystic lesion with sharp regular borders measuring 39.8 mm × 19.7 mm within the right submandibular gland . The cyst was then enucleated under general anesthesia. Diagnosis decision was determined on histopathological observations as an inflammatory cyst in the submandibular gland. The patient was reviewed after 6 months with no evidence of recurrence as confirmed by ultrasound imaging.
To examine the possible involvement of IL-34 in the inflammatory response observed in this case, 5-μm thickness sections were prepared from FFBE tissue samples obtained from five different regions of the surgically resected inflammatory cyst in addition to one sample from the adjacent swollen lymph nodes . The expression of IL-34 was examined in these sections as compared to normal human salivary gland tissues (OriGene, Catalog No: CS811918, Case ID: CU0000012638, Sample ID: PA0000964A). Immunohistochemistry staining was performed using a specific antibody against IL-34 (EMD Millipore, Catalog No: MABT493, 1:200 dilution, 4 °C overnight) followed by secondary antibody reaction (ImmPRESS UNIVERSAL REAGENT, Anti-Mouse/Rabbit IgG PEROXIDASE Vector, Catalog No: MP-7500, 30 min at room temperature). Peroxidase/DAB was added, and the sections were counterstained with hematoxylin.
By microscopic observation, normal salivary gland tissues showed typical histology, composing of serous acini mixed with adipocytes and ducts lined by cuboidal epithelial cells . IL-34 expression was undetectable in serous acini or endothelium, but can be observed at very weak levels in the epithelium of the ductal system . As expected, IL-34 showed enhanced expression levels in tissues of the submandibular gland surrounding the inflammatory cyst . In particular, IL-34 showed remarkable enhancement in the cuboidal epithelial cells of the ductal system and interestingly in endothelial cells lining blood vessels within theaffected gland . IL-34 showed very weak staining in some areas within the adjacent swollen lymph nodes . The specificity of the anti-IL-34 antibody was confirmed by the specific staining of keratinocytes in normal skin (BioChain, Catalog No: T2234218, Lot. C105169) . Isotype control antibodies showed no staining in all samples used for IHC in this report (data not shown). To further confirm the expression of IL-34 in these samples, total RNAs were collected from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples (NucleoSpin total RNA FFPE XS, Macherey-Nagel, Catalog No: 740969.10) and then reverse-transcribed into cDNA (ReverTraAce qPCR RT Master Mix, Toyobo, Catalog No: F0937K). RT-PCR analysis on these samples showed elevated levels of IL-34 mRNA in addition to several inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) in the inflammatory cyst of the submandibular gland compared to normal salivary gland tissues (Additional file : Figure S1).
Consistent with this inflammatory condition, high expression of IL-34 in the affected gland showed a tendency to be accompanied with high infiltration of lymphocytes, as confirmed in both cases of the epithelium of the ductal system as well as endothelium of blood vessels . Collectively, these results indicate a potential involvement of IL-34 in the inflammatory response observed in this case of the inflamed submandibular gland.