A 22-year-old single woman had a history of periodic pain in the left lower abdomen after menses for more than a year, accompanied by a small amount of irregular vaginal bleeding lasting for approximately one week.
During the preceding months, the pain (in the left lower abdomen) had worsened and sometimes necessitated the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Transvaginal ultrasonography (TVU) showed a left adnexal cystic-solid mass, which was considered to be an inflammatory lesion. Following anti-inflammatory therapy and symptomatic treatment, the mass did not decrease. Thus, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further management.
The patient denied the history of gynecologic disease and operation. She had attained menarche at 12 years of age and had not experienced dysmenorrhea. Her menstrual pattern was normal.
The patient and her family had no history of gynecologic and other diseases.
Gynecological examination showed that the uterus was enlarged, and a mass of approximately 4cm in diameter was palpable on the left side of the uterus.
Laboratory examinations, including the serum tumor markers, were all within normal limits.
TVU showed a normal endometrial cavity and normal uterus size. A cystic dark area 3.0 cm × 2.9 cm × 3.9 cm in size was observed on the left muscle wall, which was thought to be a uterine myoma with liquefaction or an endometriosis lesion. There was no obvious mass echo in bilateral adnexa area .
Pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was then performed, which revealed a cystic lesion on the left posterior wall of the uterus, which protruded to the left horn and serosa of the uterus . Cystic adenomyosis or uterine malformation was suspected, considering the age of the patient and no other findings, the former diagnosis is unlikely. A radiologist, who had been researching on genital tract malformations, considered that the patient had an ACUM.
Thus, the patient underwent a preoperative pelvic MRI, which showed a round, cystic lump on the left side of the myometrial wall adjacent to the left uterine horn, that was not contiguous with the endometrial cavity . MRI showed T1 hyperintensity, T2 heterogeneous hyperintensity components in the ACUM cavity, suggesting hemorrhage. . Furthermore, the endometrium and myometrium are normal. And the adnexa were otherwise normal.