In February 2014 a 57-year-old male patient diagnosed with HHT and suffering from recurrent nosebleeds since childhood was referred to our clinic. The definitive diagnosis was established at the age of 43 years by fulfilling each of the 4 proposed Curaçao criteria: (1) spontaneous and recurrent nosebleeds, (2) presence of telangiectasia, (3) presence of AVM and (4) positive family history . In the past years, the nose bleeding episodes had dramatically increased necessitating multiple nasal cauterization and transfusion of more than 100 units of packed RBC between January 2009 and February 2014. At the initial presentation at our clinic, we observed severe anemia with a hemoglobin level of 5.1 g/dl as well as hypoferritinemia (4 µg/l) requiring continuation of RBC transfusions as well as oral iron supplementation. Further endoscopic and imaging measures also revealed disease involvement of the duodenum, lungs and medulla oblongata. Due to the high frequency of nosebleeds associated with symptomatic anemia requiring RBC transfusions every 14 days and multivisceral disease involvement, intravenous systemic therapy with the anti-VEGF antibody bevacizumab was started in March 2014 and administered every 2 weeks at a dose of 1 mg/kg body weight after obtaining the patient’s informed consent including the off-label use of bevacizumab in HHT. Within several days after the first injection of bevacizumab the severity and duration of nosebleeds impressively decreased. The epistaxis severity score (ranging from 0 to 10), a tool to standardize the severity of nosebleeds, was decreased from nine to two and was maintained beyond cessation of anti-VEGF therapy . Bevacizumab therapy had been started at a hemoglobin level of 7.6 g/dl and after the application of 16 cycles (=32 weeks) a hemoglobin level of more than 13 g/dl was achieved. The therapy was stopped in October 2014 whereas oral iron supplementation was continued.
The size of the pulmonary and central nervous system AVM had not changed during anti-VEGF treatment in imaging studies but the nasal mucosa became pale and less vascular. In May 2015, 7 months after stopping bevacizumab, the severity of the nosebleeds gradually increased again and due to symptomatic anemia (hemoglobin 6.8 g/dl) the patient was transfused with RBC again; however, between October 2014 and May 2015 our patient had remained independent of RBC transfusions for 258 days. As a consequence of the recurrence of heavy nosebleeds, we decided to reinitiate therapy with low-dose bevacizumab for another seven cycles in May 2015 which immediately shortened the duration of epistaxis episodes and led to a RBC transfusion independence for a further 181 days. Anti-VEGF treatment was reinitiated in November 2015 due to a progressive relapse of severe nosebleeds. Since January 2016 our patient has been transfusion-independent and anti-VEGF therapy was recently stopped in May 2016 after 13 therapy cycles . The patient’s epistaxis severity score has currently improved to one. To date, the patient has not experienced any therapy-related adverse events.