A 35-year-old G3P2002 with two prior uncomplicated vaginal deliveries and no significant medical history presented at 15 3/7 weeks gestation by last menstrual period. She was brought in by emergency medical services due to a syncopal episode at home. Her history was notable for one-month of progressive abdominal pain and associated nausea, vomiting and diarrhea. She reported having regular follow-up with her obstetrician and multiple recent emergency department visits. She had no prior surgeries. Her vitals showed a heart rate in the 130s and her blood pressure was 76/43. On physical exam her abdomen was diffusely tender with peritoneal signs. Her labs were significant for a leukocytosis to 28,700, hemoglobin of 7.6, creatinine of 1.07 mg/dL and lactate of 5.7 mmol/L. Ultrasonography showed free fluid in the abdomen. Both the obstetrics and trauma surgery teams were immediately consulted as the source of her hemorrhagic shock was unknown. The patient became hemodynamically stable with resuscitation; so, the decision was made to proceed with a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast.
Concurrently, outside hospital records were made available and reviewed by both teams. They revealed that the patient had ultrasounds performed at 8 5/7, 12 4/7, and 13 0/7. Her ultrasound at 12 4/7 noted a possible arcuate uterus with the pregnancy located more on the patient’s right. An additional scan at 13 0/7 reported suboptimal visualization of the pregnancy on both transabdominal scan and transvaginal scan. These records also showed that one week prior to presentation at our facility, the patient had gone to an outside emergency department with right lower quadrant pain. There she had an elevated white blood cell count to 18,000, a transabdominal ultrasound and abdominal MRI. Neither the ultrasound nor the MRI were interpreted as showing any acute abnormalities. Both specifically commented on there being an intrauterine pregnancy. The patient was discharged home from the outside emergency department with a presumed viral illness. A timeline of events is presented in Fig. .
At our facility the patient’s CT scan demonstrated a large volume hemoperitoneum, and the pregnancy appeared to be superior to the uterine corpus. This raised concern for a ruptured interstitial ectopic pregnancy . The patient was consented for emergency laparotomy with possible hysterectomy.
A midline laparotomy incision was made below the umbilicus. Upon entering the abdominal cavity, hemoperitoneum was encountered and more than 2 L of blood were evacuated from the abdomen. Inspection of the uterus showed an enlarged right cornua with the amniotic sac actively rupturing through the uterine serosa. Gentle manipulation of the uterus resulted in spontaneous rupture of the amniotic sac and expulsion of the pregnancy . The patient was hemodynamically stable as resuscitation was ongoing. Further inspection of the operative field showed brisk bleeding from placental tissue densely adherent to the uterus and what remained of the right uterine cornua. On close examination, there was no remaining tissue in the right cornua which could be used for re-approximation and no clear plane for dissection or removal of the remaining placental tissue . Thus, the decision was made to proceed with supracervical hysterectomy which was uncomplicated. Intraoperative blood loss was 5000 mL. The patient received 6000 mL intravenous fluid, 6 units packed red blood cells, 4 units fresh frozen plasma, 1 unit platelets and 500 mL albumin. Preoperative hemoglobin was 7.6 g/dL and was 8.4 g/dL on postoperative day 1. The surgical pathology report was significant for right cornual changes consistent with placenta percreta.
Her postoperative course was complicated by the need for brief use of supplemental oxygen on postoperative night 0. This was thought to be due to atelectasis versus volume overload secondary to large volume resuscitation. The patient and her spouse received emotional support and counseling services while in the hospital and the patient was started on sertraline. She was discharged on postoperative day 3 with plans for a two-week follow-up. At her two-week follow-up the patient had recovered from a surgical perspective. However, emotionally, the patient had developed significant anxiety as a result of the prior events.