A 37-year-old man was diagnosed with MEN1 owing to a recurrent symptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT) and a positive family history. Genetic analysis of the Menin gene showed a frame-shift mutation in codon 229 (c.657 1bpdel/K285X). At the initial evaluation, a non-functioning pituitary gland tumor, non-functioning adrenal lesions and a 17 mm non-functioning PET were detected. Normal levels of pancreatic polypeptide, gastrin, chromogranin A, serotonin, insulin, proinsulin and glucagon were present. Computed tomography (CT) showed a tumor in the pancreatic tail with a diameter of 25 mm without any radiological signs of malignancy. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) visualized two small lesions in the pancreatic tail . Somatostatin-receptor scintigraphy (SRS) did not provide any evidence of a somatostatin-receptor positive tumor. There was no evidence of lymph node metastases (LNMs) or distant metastases (DMs) in the imaging procedures.
This patient was scheduled for a laparoscopic distal pancreatic resection after laparoscopic ultrasound (LUS) to rule out additional tumors in the pancreatic head and body. At laparoscopy, after mobilization of the pancreatic tail, LUS confirmed the finding of the pre-operative EUS. In the absence of additional lesions in the pancreatic head and body, as well as no DMs or LNMs, the patient underwent a spleen-preserving distal pancreatic resection. A rapid histological diagnosis was performed to exclude malignancy. Seven days after an uneventful clinical course, the patient was discharged.
Histopathological examination showed four well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (one of 40 mm, three of 3 mm). Immunohistochemistry displayed a positive staining for synaptophysin and chromogranin A. The Ki-67 index was lower than 1% .
The patient was re-evaluated 15 months after surgery. At presentation, the patient was asymptomatic. Thus, he participated in our regular screening program and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), SRS and EUS were performed. As was the case before the initial operation, hormone levels were within the normal range. Surprisingly, MRI and EUS demonstrated a tumor measuring 25 mm in the pancreatic head and an enlarged lymph node (LN) above the caval vein on the lower pancreatic margin. DMs were not detected. An additional pancreatic lesion, 7 mm in diameter, was visualized by EUS . The pancreatic head tumor had developed within 12 months of surgery, but radiological signs of invasion could not be established. The patient was scheduled for surgical exploration as malignancy was suspected owing to the rapid growth.
At laparotomy, an intra-operative ultrasound (IOUS) was performed . A well-outlined encapsulated tumor measuring 22 mm was found in the pancreatic head. Before the final decision on the surgical procedure was made, one enlarged, but soft, LN of 15 mm from the hepatic ligament was transected to rule out LNMs. As rapid histological diagnosis showed a normal LN, the pancreatic head tumor was enucleated. At the lower margin of the pancreatic head, two enlarged LNs of 10 mm were also transected. The tumor bore macroscopic invasion of the surrounding pancreatic tissue. The defect was covered by a Y-en-Roux loop . A resection of the pancreatic head would have resulted in a pancreatectomy, which results in XXX pancreoprivic diabetes. The patient was discharged after an uneventful clinical course of 10 days.
Gross examination showed a pale tumor 28 mm in diameter and a smooth, lobulated cut surface. The tumor was covered by a white capsule . Microscopically, the tumor-forming epithelial glands infiltrated the pancreatic tissue. The tumor cells showed a hyperchromatic nucleus with a gross chromatin structure. In some parts, the tumor displayed necrosis. Immunohistochemistry resulted in a positive staining for chromogranin A and a negative staining for insulin and gastrin. The Ki-67 index was again lower than 1%. The LN of the hepatic ligament (12 mm) and one of the two LNs of the lower pancreatic margin (10 mm) were without evidence of tumor cells. The second LN of the lower pancreatic margin, measuring 9 mm, revealed an infiltration of atypical epithelial cells.