A 73-year-old Asian man, a former tobacco smoker with hypertension and diabetes, presented to the emergency department in our hospital with a 2-month history of progressive exertional dyspnea. He was diagnosed with congestive heart failure due to arterial fibrillation and tricuspid regurgitation; he had been hospitalized five times over the previous 5 years and had been treated with bisoprolol and furosemide. Pericardial friction rub or knock, or pericardial effusion was not detected in any previous hospitalizations. He had a family history of congestive heart failure, lung cancer, and gallbladder cancer. He was prescribed 2.5 mg bisoprolol, 40 mg furosemide, 60 mg azosemide, and 80 mg valsartan before the current illness. An initial physical examination on the first day of hospitalization revealed the following: blood pressure, 101/56 mmHg; pulse rate, 108 beats/minute; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/minute; body temperature, 37.0 °C; and oxygen saturation 95% while he was breathing room air. Jugular venous distension, Kussmaul’s sign, and leg edema were observed. A neurological examination did not reveal any abnormal objective findings. Chest radiography revealed bilateral pleural effusion with an increased cardiothoracic ratio of 84.4% . Laboratory tests indicated that his serum levels of immunoglobulin G (IgG) (1729 mg/dL) and its subclass IgG4 (122.0 mg/dL) were elevated. His serum levels of triiodothyronine, thyroxine, and thyroid-stimulating hormone were all within normal limits. He was negative for an antinuclear antibody, an anti-deoxyribonucleic acid enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, p-antineutrophil or c-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and a lupus anticoagulant. Sputum acid-fast bacillus cultures and the tuberculin test were also negative.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated pericardial effusion with a pericardial cavity that was 24-mm thick. Pericardiocentesis revealed 900 mL of exudative effusion, Giemsa staining revealed three or four plasma cells per high-power field in the pericardial effusion , and IgG4-positive plasma cells were detected by immunostaining . Even after pericardial drainage, his symptoms persisted and TTE showed an end-diastolic ventricular septal shift . Cardiac catheterization revealed that both ventricular pressure traces showed an early diastolic dip and plateau. Moreover, significant reductions in both ventricular peak systolic pressures during inspiration were observed. Although intravenous furosemide and dobutamine infusion in addition to 15.0 mg of oral tolvaptan were prescribed, his symptoms were not resolved. Positron-emission tomography (PET) imaging detected an abnormal uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) in his pericardium as well as in his gastric wall and in his hilar lymph nodes . Serial horizontal cross-sectional images demonstrated 18F-FDG uptake in both sides of his pericardium .
A thoracoscopic pericardiectomy was performed and a histopathological analysis demonstrated lymphoplasmacytic inflammation with scattered plasma cells among a fibrous stroma in specimens of the pericardium in hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections . Elastica Masson–Goldner-stained sections revealed fibrous thickening of the pericardium . Immunostaining showed an IgG4/IgG-positive plasma cell ratio of 42% . Although our patient’s serum IgG4 level did not reach the diagnostic criterion of >135.0 mg/dL, he was diagnosed as having IgG4-RD because of typical histopathological features and the clinical symptoms of CP . He was administered 30 mg of oral prednisolone (0.6 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks and the dose was gradually decreased over the following 2 months to a maintenance dose of 2.5 to 5.0 mg daily . Soon after starting on prednisolone, his dyspnea and leg edema dramatically improved over a 1-week period. An X-ray showed the resolution of bilateral pleural effusion and a decreased cardiothoracic ratio to 73.4% . Moreover, TTE revealed that the end-diastolic ventricular septal shift had disappeared . He was discharged on foot 1 week after he had been introduced to corticosteroid therapy.