A 35-year-old Caucasian woman developed a COVID-19 infection during the 7th week of pregnancy.
The pregnancy was achieved after a frozen-thawed embryo transfer performed on the 20 February 2020 in a gametes donation programme after autologous repeated implantation failure (RIF). The patient was monitored according to a substituted protocol with daily 6 mg of oral oestradiol (Provames®, SERB, France), 800 mg of intravaginal progesterone (Utrogestan®, Besins, France). Because of the RIF history, an immunological treatment with 7·5 mg of prednisone (Cortancyl®, Sanofi Aventis, France), 400 mg of hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil®, Sanofi Aventis, France), 100 mg of aspirin (Aspegic®, Sanofi Aventis, France), 0·4 mL of enoxaparin (Lovenox®, Sanofi Aventis, France) and 0·2 mL of filgrastim (Growth Hormon (GH)), (Neupogen®, Amgen, Holland) per day was started 10 months before the embryo transfer. The patient did not have any pregestational comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes, or cardiovascular disease.
At 7 weeks of amenorrhea (WA), namely day zero (D0) of the symptoms, the patient started to complain about nausea, asthenia, and symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux. At day seven (D7), liver tests showed that aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) were 3, 5 and 2 times the upper level of normal (ULN) respectively . At day ten (D10), symptoms worsened (asthenia, permanent nausea, mild and diffuse abdominal pain, shortness of breath when exercising), but the patient did not complain about fever (37·5 °C). The clinical exam was normal, and an ultrasound scan at 8WA + 2 days confirmed an evolutive intra uterine pregnancy without any sign of molar pregnancy. The length of the embryo was 20·9 mm corresponding to the gestational age with a perceptible heartbeat. Treatment was changed: oral oestradiol was switched to oestrogenic patches of 100 mg per 2 days (Vivelledot®, Sandoz, France), and prednisone was increased to 10 mg per day. Hydroxychloroquine was stopped. Serology for viral hepatitis A, B, C, E, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein Barr virus (EBV) returned negative. The new blood tests showed white blood cell count of 13·0 G/L with neutrophil count of 10·88 G/L and lymphocyte count of 1·39 G/L. Transaminases AST and ALT increased to 4 and 8 ULN, respectively and, GGT to 4 ULN but alkaline phosphatases (PAL) and lipase were still normal. Electrolytes and creatinine were also normal. D-dimers were slightly increased at 0·506 μg/mL. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 14 mg/L. Biological results are resumed in Table . Liver ultrasound scan found sludge in the gallbladder which had a thin wall whereas the bile ducts and liver were normal.
In the COVID-19 epidemic context, it was decided to screen the patient for COVID-19 infection. The RTq-PCR assay indicated the presence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the nasopharyngeal swab. In the absence of signs of severity, it was decided to monitor the patient at home according to the French government guidelines. No symptomatic treatment was given to the patient for the COVID-19 infection. However, the luteal phase support treatment was maintained. Gradually, the severity of nausea, asthenia and shortness breath diminished, and the blood tests returned to normality. Ultrasound scans performed on the 11th week of amenorrhea confirmed the satisfactory evolution of the pregnancy: the foetus had followed a normal growth with a size of 51·0 mm and the morphological exam did not reveal any malformations and the nuchal translucency was normal at 1·3 mm.