A 41-year-old woman pregnant with twins was admitted to our hematology department at a gestational age of 27 weeks for stage IIA HL. The disease history started with a vena cava syndrome associated with a right supra-clavicular adenopathy up to 3 cm. A thoracic-abdominal-pelvic scan showed a compressive anterior mediastinal mass of 16 cm in diameter, and a lymph node biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of classic HL. The CRAT (French reference center about teratogenic agents) states that if the examination is necessary to ensure the best diagnostic/treatment of the patient, it can be performed with protective measures in a specialized department. Radiation levels were lower than the maximum recommended during pregnancy . A course of corticosteroid (prednisone 80 mg/d and then 40 mg/d) was started at the time of diagnosis. Maternal transthoracic echocardiography and electrocardiogram were normal. Fetuses’ transabdominal echography at gestational ages of 18 weeks and 4 days, and 22 weeks and 3 days revealed normal morphologic examination. The heart was in normal position and there were four equilibrated cardiac cavities for each of twin. The intersection of the big vessels was normal. No abnormal cardiac rhythm was detectable. Cytological, urinary and hemostasis results were within the normal range at patient admission. A multidisciplinary team (hematologists and obstetricians) decided to start a chemotherapy regimen based on the ABVD protocol at a gestational age of 28 weeks and 3 days. The patient received 2 chemotherapy cycles on a 15-day outpatient basis . During each outpatient hematology session, doxorubicin 25 mg/m2, bleomycin 10 mg/m2, vinblastine 6 mg/m2, dacarbazine 375 mg/m2 (ABVD), and dexamethasone 10 mg were given. The patient received medications such as ondansetron (8 mg twice a day), prednisone (40 mg per day from the diagnosis until 1 week after the first ABVD), enoxaparin (4000 UI twice a day), lansoprazole (30 mg once a day), and valaciclovir (500 mg once a day). Preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) occurred on the same day as the completion of the second cycle of ABVD, corresponding to a gestational age of 32 weeks and 4 days. She was admitted in the maternity unit for surveillance and was given antibiotics by amoxicillin and steroids for fetal lung maturity. No sign of chorioamnionitis was found at that time (no contractions, no inflammatory sign in blood sample, no fetal tachycardia). She spontaneously went into labor at 33 weeks, and a cesarean section was performed given the prematurity and twin pregnancy. The latency period, from the PPROM to the delivery, seems to be shorter in twins compared with singleton pregnancies. Most studies report a median latency of less than 24 h .
The first twin born was a boy weighing 2030 g (50th percentile) and measuring 48 cm. Head circumference was 31.5 cm, Apgar score was 9/10/10 and umbilical cord pH was 7.32. The neonate presented normal respiration (45 breaths/min) and heart rate was 150 beats/min. Blood count was normal with hemoglobin at 18 g/dL and platelets at 328,000/mm3. To avoid premature apnea, an intravenous loading and maintenance dose of caffeine (5 mg/kg/day) was given. The neonate breathed spontaneously with no apnea or bradycardia. Four days after delivery, an echocardiographic control examination showed a minor left cardiac dysfunction with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) at 48%, associated with a high concentration of troponin (Tn1: 103 ng/L; reference: < 26 ng/L). Cardiological advice was given and no therapy was initiated, but medical monitoring was started. When he was one-month-old, echocardiography findings were normal with a borderline LVEF at 50% without pulmonary arterial hypertension. No troponin measurement was further performed. Following exclusive parenteral nutrition for 4 days, oral nutrition was progressively introduced with complete autonomy on day 17. Neurological investigation was normal.
The second twin was a girl weighing 1785 g (25th percentile) and measuring 42 cm at birth. Head circumference was 32 cm; Apgar score was 9/10/10 and umbilical cord pH was 7.32.Blood count was normal with hemoglobin at 19.2 g/dL and platelets at 310,000/mm3. At birth, echocardiography results were normal, with a LVEF > 55%. Neurological investigation was normal.
For the mother, 18F-FDG PET and TDM scans were performed 20 days later and revealed complete metabolic remission. She was treated with 6 further ABVD cycles for consolidation.