A 23-year-old woman was referred to our clinic with dyspnea and a massive pleural effusion. She had been diagnosed with Graves’ disease 6 years earlier. However, she did not take her anti-thyroid medications because of a fear of weight gain and because of an improvement in her symptoms. On presentation, she had a 2-week history of worsening shortness of breath and left pleuritic chest pain. At presentation, her blood pressure was 130/60 mmHg, with a regular heart rate of 138 beats/min and body temperature of 36.5°C. She had characteristic bilateral proptosis and a diffuse goiter. Her thyroid was diffusely enlarged and was non-tender. Both jugular veins were distended. Breathing sounds were decreased in the left lung, but there was no wheezing.
On admission, the complete blood count, electrolytes, and liver and renal function tests were normal, but her total cholesterol level was decreased (75 mg/dL). Thyroid function tests showed severe hyperthyroidism: serum triiodothyronine 501.1 (normal 79.8 - 200) ng/dL, free thyroxine 4.62 (normal 0.75 - 2.00) ng/dL, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 0.00 (normal 0.3 - 5.0) μIU/mL. TSH receptor and anti-thyroperoxidase antibodies were markedly increased at > 40 (normal 0 - 1.5) IU/L and > 3000 (normal: 0 - 60) U/mL, respectively.
A chest X-ray showed increased opacity in almost the entire left lung . Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a left pleural effusion with passive atelectasis. Ultrasonography of the thyroid revealed a diffusely enlarged thyroid gland to approximately 61 cm3 (3.4 × 2.4 × 6.8 cm, width × depth × length) without deﬁnite evidence of nodular lesions .
Thyroid volume was calculated by the formula :
V (mL) = π x depth (D) x width (W) x L (length) (cm)
Neck CT showed diffuse enlargement of the thyroid gland with an intrathoracic goiter and retrosternal extension of the Both lower pole. Diagnostic thoracentesis produced milky, turbid pleural fluid. Analysis of the pleural fluid showed an elevated triglyceride (TG) level (883 mg/dL) and lymphocyte-predominant white blood cells (cell count 1,346/mL; lymphocytes, 95%). Biochemical studies of the pleural fluid were consistent with chylothorax. Microbiological cultures and cytological analysis of the pleural fluid were negative for infection or malignancy.
Her symptoms and signs improved after placing a chest tube and treating her with methimazole and propranolol. She fasted via TPN for 5 days. However, we stopped the TPN when she complained of extreme hunger and chest pain at the tube site and was started on a high-protein, low-fat diet (< 10 g fat/day) supplemented with oral MCT. After starting this diet, thoracic pleural fluid drainage increased (up to 500 mL/day). Lymphangiography with post-procedure CT scanning was performed to identify the exact site of leakage. However, no abnormal ﬁndings were observed on 99 mTc-phytate lymphoscintigraphy performed to identify the exact site of the chyle leakage.
Two weeks after admission, we decided to administer radioactive iodine (RAI) to reduce the goiter size and treat the Graves’ disease, because the patient refused surgical therapy. The patient was discharged after 20 mCi (740 MBq) RAI therapy and concomitant steroid prophylaxis for ophthalmopathy with an indwelling catheter for drainage at home and methimazole medication. Two weeks after discharge, although a chest x-ray showed a left pleural effusion, we removed the indwelling catheter because there had been no further re-accumulation of chyle. She had no symptoms of thyrotoxicosis or dyspnea 4 weeks after discharge. A follow-up chest x-ray 4 weeks post RAI therapy showed no residual chylothorax . On physical examination, the goiter was decreased slightly. Ten weeks after RAI therapy, a follow-up ultrasonography of the thyroid showed a decreased size of diffuse goiter compared initial ultrasonography (36 mL volume of both thyroid gland, 2.8 × 2.0 × 6.1 cm, width × depth × length, 0.87 cm, isthmus thickness) .