A 36-year-old nulligravida presented this medical center in August 2020 with an approximately 11 cm left-sided adnexal cystic mass and inhomogeneous endometrium under ultrasound scan.
The patient had previously undergone laparoscopic oophorocystectomy of right-sided ovarian cyst in another medical center in March 2011. Postoperative pathology diagnosed MBOT with IECA, thus supplementary treatment with transabdominal right-sided salpingectomy, omentum resection, appendectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, peritoneal and omental biopsies was preformed three months later. The postoperative pathology did not indicate any evidence of cancer metastasis, thus confirming the tumor stage as IC. However, the patient refused chemotherapy due to her strong desire for fertility. Subsequently, she underwent regular follow-up every 3–6 months as required.
The patient completed the MRI after hospitalization in our medical center, which suggested a complex primarily cystic mass in the left upper side of the uterus, measuring approximately 8.9*10.2*9 cm; the endometrium was heterogeneous, and malignancy was not excluded due to the high DWI signal. Tumor marker results indicated no abnormalities. The patient’s preoperative assessment of ovarian reserve was within normal range (anti-Müllerian hormone, AMH: 1.91 ng/ml). Considering the her history of two pelvic surgeries thus a higher likelihood of pelvic adhesions and the relatively large size of the tumor, we performed a transabdominal procedure. Consequently, she underwent transabdominal left-sided oophorocystectomy and hysteroscopic curettage in August 2020. Postoperative pathological findings suggested mucinous cystadenoma of the left ovary and high-moderate differentiated endometrioid carcinoma . The patient strongly requested to preserve her fertility, but on recheck her AMH was only 0.32 ng/ml and the preserved left ovary had only two antral follicles on ultrasound. With the patient’s full knowledge, she was treated conservatively with oral medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA; Beijing Zhong Xin Pharmaceutical, China) 500 mg/day for 6 months postoperatively. Thereafter, she underwent two times of hysteroscopic endometrial pathological evaluations in December 2020 and April 2021 , while magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to clarify the absence of tumor presence in the thoracic, abdominal and pelvic cavities, and the patient was considered to have achieved complete response (CR).
The patient received her first cycle of ovulation induction via progestin-primed ovarian stimulation (PPOS) protocol on 10 May, 2021, menstruation cycle day (MC) 3, using a combination of human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG; Livzon Pharmaceutical Factory, China) at a dose of 150 IU/day and 10 mg/day oral MPA. Due to the poor ovarian response, the dose of hMG was increased to 225 IU/day on MC 7, the follicles were still observed to be atrophied and the level of estrogen was also decreased on MC 12, hence this treatment cycle was eventually terminated.
After a third hysteroscopic assessment in July 2021 to determine that she was remaining in CR , she received her second treatment cycle with gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist regimen in September 2021. On MC 3, she was administered hMG 150 IU/day and GnRH antagonist (Cetrorelix; Merck-Serono, Spain) 0.25 mg/d was added on MC 8 depending on the ovarian response. She was triggered with 250 μg recombinant human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; Ovidrel, Merck Serono Inc, Geneva, Switzerland) on MC 11 and three oocytes were retrieved 36 h later. Two oocytes were normally fertilized with her husband’s semen. On the third day after fertilization, one non-top-quality embryo was frozen by vitrification. The other top-quality grade 1 8-cell embryo was transferred in the same day, but eventually failed to conceive.
The patient underwent her fourth hysteroscopy in December 2021 and it was determined that she still achieved CR . Therefore, in February 2022, she began the third treatment cycle with the mild stimulation protocol for ovulation induction, using the combination of Letrozole (LE; Fu Rui, Jiangsu Hengrui Pharmaceutical Co., China) and hMG. She received LE 5 mg/day orally from MC 3 to 7. hMG with a dosage of 150 IU/day was applied from MC 3, adjusted to 225 IU/day on MC 10 continue with this dose until the day before the trigger with 250 μg hCG. Transvaginal oocyte retrieval was preformed 36 h later. Two oocytes were collected and both of them were fertilized. Three days after retrieval, two top-quality grade 1 8-cell embryos was transferred. She subsequently received luteal support and resulted in a positive pregnancy test 10 days later. Detailed clinical course of three ovarian stimulation treatment cycles was presented in Fig. .
A clinical pregnancy was confirmed by visualization of a gestational sac on ultrasonographic examination 30 days after the embryo transfer, and thereafter regular pre-natal examinations were performed as scheduled. A placental MRI performed at 30 + weeks of gestation revealed complete placenta previa combined with placenta accreta, which was treated with acceleration of fetal lung maturation after a comprehensive assessment. Meanwhile, multi-disciplinary physicians including gynecologic oncology, critical care medicine, and neonatology were also invited for consultation to formulate further treatment plan for the patient. At 33+ weeks of gestation, the patient presented with antepartum hemorrhage with approximately 500ml, therefore an emergency lower uterine transverse incision cesarean section, ligation of the superior branch of the right uterine artery, endometrial biopsy was performed. Since intraoperative hemorrhage was about 1500 ml, the patient was given appropriate rehydration treatment and uterine cavity tamponade, and the multi-disciplinary treatment (MDT) was proceeded as planned. At the end of the procedure, minor hemorrhage was still noted by pressing on the uterine fundus, thus bilateral uterine artery embolization (UAE) was administered. The patient eventually delivered a healthy female infant, with a birth weight of 3300 g and an Apgar score of 10-10-10. No abnormalities were found in the postoperative pathology .
The patient has not undergone standard surgical treatment as she still retains one frozen embryo and has fertility needs. She remains on regular follow-up and has not recurred to date.