A 78-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our hospital presenting with a painful mass in her right groin, without fever, rectal bleeding or any other bowel symptoms. She had no history of malignant diseases. A physical examination showed an irreducible palpable mass in her right inguinal region protruding through the external inguinal ring. Routine blood examinations showed she had chronic anemic status with an hemoglobin value of 8.9g/dL. Tumor markers values of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19.9 were 4ng/mL and 24U/mL, respectively. A computed tomography scan of her abdomen showed the presence of the cecum in her inguinal canal, with an irregular thickening of its wall suggesting a cecal neoplasm within the inguinal hernia involving the femoral vessels .
A colonoscopy was not completed due to the large involvement of the cecum into the hernia sac. Surgical exploration was made through a midline laparotomy that confirmed the herniation of the cecum into her right inguinal canal , without the possibility of reduction in her abdominal cavity owing to the tumor infiltration into her abdominal wall and inguinal structures. Thus, a right inguinal incision was made, which revealed an aggressive cecal tumor infiltrating her inguinal wall, right round ligament and femoral artery. The mass was resected en bloc, with complete vascular control of her femoral vessels, and reduced into her abdomen.
Finally, a right colectomy was performed with a manual ileocolic anastomosis and her inguinal wall was repaired by a direct suture without mesh. The operative field of the femoral region was also marked with surgical clips for further postoperative radiation therapy . Histopathological examination of the specimen showed a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the large bowel with lymphovascular and perineural invasion, microscopic involvement of the resection margins, and metastases of 8 out of 17 regional lymph nodes (pT4b pN2b M0, R1; Stage IIIC; Dukes C3) . The postoperative course was uneventful and our patient received adjuvant radiochemotherapy. Six months after surgery, our patient is alive and disease free.