The patient was a male neonate delivered by Caesarean section at a gestational age of 39 weeks from a 27-year-old woman. His first-minute Apgar score was nine. His parents took him home despite the presence of a huge sac on the occipital region. After 13 days, he developed poor feeding and lethargy, and the parents brought him to our center.
Upon admission of the 13-day-old boy, the vital signs and growth parameters were as follows: pulse rate: 130/min, respiratory rate: 50/min, blood pressure: 80/50 mmHg, temperature: 37 °C. His weight was 3000 g. His head circumference was 33 cm, height was 48 cm, and anterior fontanelle was 2 × 2 cm. On physical examination, he had poor sucking. The Moro reflex and deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) were normal. On the posterior occipital region, we observed a huge swelling covered by intact skin, larger than his head, it measured approximately 18.8 × 10.5 × 6.1 cm. His skin was warm and dry, and there was no sign of petechiae or purpura. His lung was clear in auscultation and had symmetrical expansion. And normal heart sounds were detected. According to laboratory data, he had high BUN, sodium, and potassium due to dehydration which improved during the course of hospitalization .
After a brain computed tomography (CT) scan, the patient was scheduled for operation and resection of the giant occipital encephalocele . General anesthesia was provided in the prone position. A circumferential incision was made on the mass, the margins of the skin were marked, and the encephalocele containing gliotic brain tissue and vessels was resected with the help of bipolar cautery. Dissection of the dural plane was performed around the bone defect of the occiput. Then, a primary dural repair was performed. Subcutaneous tissue and skin were sutured, and a dressing was applied. Extubation was done a few hours after surgery, and the patient was discharged with a satisfying condition. In 3-month, follow-up, the patient was well and had no complications . And if the patient has acceptable developmental and cognitive milestones in the future, our team will consider cranioplasty surgery in the future.