The patient, a now 28-year-old male, was born with café-au–lait macules on the left side of the back . He was initially symptomatic with a slight facial deformity and blurred vision in 2008. In 2009, he was diagnosed with bone fibrous dysplasia and treated with Calcium Carbonate 1,200 mg once daily (QD), Vitamin D3 Tablets 600 mg QD and calcitriol 0.25 μg QD for 2 months and disodium chlorophosphite 1,600 mg QD for 2 years. In 2014, his facial deformities worsened, most notably in the left mandible, while he presented with more symptoms including widened teeth, wide lips, enlarged nose, occasional palpitations, and sleep snoring . In 2015, he underwent left mandibular abrasion; since a left humeral fracture occurred out of minimal trauma injury during hospitalization, an external stent fixation was performed. Zoledronic acid 5 mg was injected yearly to relieve bone pain.
Also in 2015 during hospitation, due to palpitations, thyroid function was tested. With a Free Triiodothyronine level of 11.46 pg/ml, a free thyroxine level of 3.36 ng/dl, and a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level of <0.008 μIU/ml, a diagnosis of hyperthyroidism was made. Thiamazole 5 mg twice daily was prescribed since then. In 2018, during annual health check-up, the patient was diagnosed with bilateral thyroid nodules for the first time by Doppler ultrasound (data unavailable) and left untreated. In 2019, thyroid ultrasound follow-up indicated the nodules to be 7.2 cm × 6.7 cm × 4.4 cm on the left and 1.9 cm × 1.7 cm × 1.0 cm on the right. In 2020, the size increased to 8.3 cm × 5.6 cm × 4.7 cm on the left and 2.7 cm × 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm on the right.
In 2021, the patient presented to the thyroid clinic complaining of chest tightness and shortness of breath after minimal activity. The patient denied a history of oncological diseases, other genetic diseases, exposure to epidemic areas, special chemicals, or radioactive materials. Upon physical examination, he was calm with a pulse rate of 78 beats/min and blood pressure of 135/78 mmHg. He had firm, nontender swelling on both lobes of the thyroid, 9.0 cm × 6.0 cm on the left and 6.0 cm × 4.0 cm on the right. The trachea deviated to the left. Mixed echo nodules were identified in both lobes of the thyroid gland (Ti-RADS grade, level 3) on Doppler ultrasound. Computed tomograpy (CT) showed heterogeneously decreased bone density in the skull, face, and skull base, showing “diffuse ground glass” changes. Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia was prominent on CT with the presence of a thickened skull plate, asymmetrical facial bone, and the osteolytic changes of the mandible . A normal hemogram and serum biochemistry were obtained, and thyroid function was also within a normal range, with triiodothyronine of 2.13 nmol/L, thyroxine of 117.03 nmol/L, and TSH of 0.945 mIU/L. Further investigations showed thyroglobulin antibody of 0.00 IU/ml (N, 0–4.91), and thyroid peroxidase antibody of 0.50 IU/ml (N, 0–9), while the patient's thyroglobulin level increased to 487.00 μg/L (N, 1.15–130.77). Cardiac ultrasound pointed out whole heart enlargement, with an ejection fraction of 65% (normal range: 50%–70%). Chest radiograph revealed scoliosis and kyphosis, together with a thoracic deformity . Chest CT scan showed a right thyroid goiter (62 mm × 72 mm) around the trachea. Due to the compression from the goiter, the diameter of the trachea was approximately 18 mm at the narrowest point . The preoperative diagnosis was (1) bilateral thyroid nodules; (2) retrosternal goiter; (3) hyperthyroidism and (4) polyostotic fibrous dysplasia.
Under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation, a total thyroidectomy was performed. The blood supply of the significant goiter behind the sternum was extremely abundant, and the intraoperative bleeding was approximately 600 ml in total. This may result from the severe thoracic deformity which created ample room for the growth of the gland. Blood vessels on the thyroid surface were ligated as the first step to reduce bleeding. The parathyroid glands and the recurrent laryngeal nerves were difficult to locate, and intraoperative nerve monitoring was used to identify and preserve the nerves. Complete removal of the thyroid gland was performed and submitted for histopathological examination. Grossly, the surface of the specimen was pinky-grey and sized at 11 cm × 7 cm × 5 cm. Cut surface reveled asymmetrical multinodular changes, the largest being 2.5 cm in diameter . In H&E-stained paraffin sections, variably-sized dilated follicles showed nodular hyperplasia, with some uniform-sized follicles showing adenomatous hyperplasia . Cystically-dilated follicles could be observed locally and contain large amount of colloid. Part of the follicular epithelium shows papillary hyperplasia (grade 1–2 papillae), round cells, oval cells, mild atypia, no clear nuclear grooves and intranuclear pseudo inclusions. Based on the naked eye and microscopic view, we confirmed the diagnosis of multinodular goiter. The patient was sent to the intensive care unit postoperatively and spontaneous respiration restored the next day.
Breathing difficulty was instantly relieved after surgery. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. L-thyroxine was taken daily after surgery and the dosage was adjusted to assure a serum thyroxine level within the normal range and close to the lower limit. No residual thyroid gland or abnormal lymph nodes were detected in the postoperative ultrasound follow-up. One year after surgery, the patient stated that tolerance to activity had substantially improved. Also, bone pain in the lower limbs and back had alleviated, and no new fractures had happened.