A 20-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 2, presented with a pregnancy of 27 weeks to Hospital Santo Tomas with a 3-day history of absent fetal movements without other medical complaints. She had no significant past medical history or comorbidities for negative pregnancy outcomes. The maternal physical examination was unremarkable, and vital signs were within normal limits . Obstetric sonography confirmed intrauterine fetal demise by revealing a 27-week fetus with an estimated body weight of 968 g and no fetal heart rate. There were no signs of placental abruption or preterm rupture of membranes. Maternal laboratory values were normal, and TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other agents, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex) infections were excluded .
The mother was positive for SARS-CoV-2 through viral RNA nasopharyngeal swab analysis via reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR) performed on all pregnant women before admission. She was admitted for labor induction via the use of Misoprostol. The patient delivered a male stillborn fetus of 992 g, corresponding to the 40th weight percentile, with a fronto-occipital circumference of 24 cm, equivalent to the 25th percentile for his gestational age, and a crown-rump length of 24 cm . Macroscopic evaluation of the fetus did not show apparent morphological abnormalities. The patient was asymptomatic, and she was discharged without complications. The patient was not vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2 due to the unavailability of vaccines during the last quarter of 2020, when the major circulating variant in the country was the Panamanian endemic A.2.4. The National Bioethics Research Committee approved this study (EC-CNBI-2020–04-52), and written informed consent was obtained from the patient.
The placenta was collected, and histopathological analysis was performed through hematoxylin and eosin staining by using diagnostic criteria from the Amsterdam Placental Workshop Group Consensus Statement. Severe chorioamnionitis was present throughout the chorion, subchorionic fibrin and decidua of the membranes , as was the identification of mononuclear cells that morphologically resembled plasma cells and lymphocytes within the fetal membranes . Maternal vascular malperfusion, which consisted of scarce intervillous fibrin deposition and accelerated villi maturation with the formation of a vasculo-syncytial membrane in chorionic villi, was observed . The chorionic villi showed inflammation with infiltrating plasma cells . The decidua basalis was necrotic with severe inflammation composed of lymphocytes and neutrophils . Stem villi with vessel obliteration and thrombi were observed, consistent with fetal vascular malperfusion .
The immunohistochemistry results demonstrated inflammation with infiltration of CD68+ macrophages at the chorionic plate , the chorionic villi and the decidua and of CD56+ natural killer (NK) cells and scarce CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the decidua basalis. Placental tissue from the SARS-CoV-2-infected patient expressed the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (1:500, anti–SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein, Santa Cruz Biotechnologies, Santa Cruz, California) in stromal cells of the chorion , stromal cells of the chorionic villi , and decidual cells . SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA was not detected by RT‒PCR in the placental tissue.
None of the compartments of the placenta stained positive for CD19+ B lymphocytes , CD4+ T lymphocytes , or p53+ apoptotic cells .