An 80-year-old woman presented with a history of intermittent, severe epigastric pain. Over the preceding 5 months, she had less severe and self-resolving epigastric pain 15–30 min after every meal. The full blood count, serum biochemistry values, and C-reactive protein level were within normal ranges. Additionally, arterial gas analysis was normal. Abdominal plain radiography showed free air between the liver and diaphragm, and PI . Abdominal computed tomography showed severe calcification of the SMA origin; SMA peripheral flow was reserved . Computed tomography (CT) revealed bubble-like intramural gas of the small bowel with the contrasted wall pneumoperitoneum .
Since the patient did not have peritonitis, a conservative approach was performed. She was managed in the condition of intensive care unit, due to fears of the potential for acute mesenteric ischemia due to mesenteric artery occlusion or non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia. She was managed for bowel obstruction, which included fasting and intravenous fluid administration. She received heparin infusion to prevent SMA occlusion and maintain collateral flow. During admission, she reported abdominal pain relief. Seven days after admission, abdominal plain radiography showed improvement in PI and pneumoperitoneum; therefore, she was permitted to begin drinking fluids. There was no evidence of recurrent abdominal pain after the fluid consumption, so she was allowed to eat solid food.
Angiography was planned to relieve the postprandial abdominal pain. The findings showed severe stenosis of the SMA origin with calcification, and the SMA had replaced the common hepatic artery . ET, namely stenting to the SMA and common hepatic artery, was performed. The SMA trunk was engaged with a 6F Parent Plus 60 guiding catheter (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) from the left brachial artery. Initially, 8000 units of heparin was infused, and additional heparin was added to keep the activated whole blood clotting time over 200 s. The SMA occlusion was traversed using a 0.014” NEO EVT Guide Wire Cruise (ASAHI INTECC J-sales, Tokyo, Japan). The SMA trunk to the hepatic artery was traversed using a 0.014” NEO EVT Guide Wire Cruise, which was engaged with a 6F SheathLess PV (Cardian Health, Ohio, USA) from the right brachial artery. Intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) (Navifocus WR, TERUMO, Tokyo, Japan) revealed severe stenosis of the SMA trunk with calcification. Balloon dilation was performed with the kissing ballon technique using a 4-mm Coyote ES (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) to the SMA and 5-mm SHIDEN RX (KANEKA MEDICAL, Osaka, Japan) to the common hepatic artery. After dilation, two balloon-expandable stents (5-mm PALMAZ Genesis (Cardian Health, Ohio, USA) to the SMA and 6-mm PALMAZ Genesis to the common hepatic artery) were implanted with the kissing stent technique from the common ostium . The sizes of the stents were based on the IVUS measurements. IVUS showed good orifice expansion. Final angiography showed satisfactory circulation to the terminal organ from the orifice .
Endovascular therapy relieved the patient’s symptoms. She required dual anti-platelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel post-intervention. Follow-up computed tomography showed patency of the orifice of the common hepatic artery and SMA, and there was no evidence of PI or pneumoperitoneum. No recurrent postprandial abdominal pain occurred for two years after the ET.