Our case was a 58-year-old Chinese woman who had presented with severe complex pressure ulcers 2 years earlier. She was an obese (body mass index, BMI, 30.05kg/m2) paraplegic who presented with fever and anemia; she was admitted from home to the Chronic Wound Treatment Center in July 2014. Her past medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus (managed with insulin), hypertension, and chronic gastrointestinal dysfunction. She had developed paraplegia following a traumatic injury 40 years earlier. It was reported that a wound on her ischial tuberosities had started to produce purulent secretions, together with labia majora redness 12 days earlier. It was observed that she had pyrexia and labia majora ulceration 2 days before hospitalization.
On admission, a physical examination revealed a high fever (39.2°C) and lower limb edema. Her heart rate was 104 beats per minute (bpm) and blood pressure was 110/80mmHg (after medication). Her neurological examination was unremarkable expect for hypermyotonia in her lower limbs. A continuous indwelling urethral catheter was used because of an absence of lower limb sensations.
Multiple ulcers covered with necrotic tissue were located on her bilateral ischial tuberosities, left hip, perineum, and left sacrococcygeal region. Local skin examination of these sites revealed an absence of pain, and no exudates were observed. No regional lymphadenopathy was noted. However, there were clear signs of infection and purulence with redness extending several centimeters from the coxal wound margins to the genital region, which had weeping hemoserous fluids.
A computed tomography scan of her hip at a previous admission to another hospital 22 days later, showed a lesion with rarefaction areas in her sacral area, and an obvious gas shadow on her left buttock, manifesting itself as a soft tissue infection on her left hip and ischium. Laboratory tests revealed a high leucocyte count level (white blood cell, WBC =21×109/L), high C-reactive protein level (CRP=189.6mg/L), slight anemia (hemoglobin, HGB =96g/L), and low serum potassium level (K=3.26mmol/L). Her urine culture confirmed infection with Citrobacter freundii. Swabs from the pressure ulcers were cultured; Escherichia coli were isolated from the culture and were found to be sensitive to amikacin. The rest of the laboratory tests (other electrolytes, blood culture) were within normal values.
She was initially treated with mezlocillin sodium (6g per day) followed by levofloxacin (0.6g daily) for 2 weeks, both via intravenous administration. She was also treated with oral montmorillonite powder (once every 3 to 5 days) to control her bowel movements.
Without anesthesia, a conservative sharp debridement of the wound bed was carried out. To clean the wound with widely undermined areas, we inserted a sterile silicone tube (an irrigating tube of 6mm diameter) deep into the tunnels and then applied the areas with 3% hydrogen peroxide, iodine, 0.5% metronidazole, 0.9% sodium chloride solution, one after another, using a 50ml syringe.
An accurate assessment of the wound area was made by conducting a thorough evaluation of the size, depth, presence of granulation tissue, wound edges, skin temperature, and exudates and/or necrosis. Large ulcers were present in the ischial tuberosities (size: left, 6.0×7.0cm; right, 4.0×5.0cm, both with undermining), left hip (size: 5.0×6.0cm with undermining), left sacrococcygeal region (size: 10.0×9.0cm with undermining) and genital region (with undermining). The tunnels ranged from 8.0 to 20cm in length. All of the open wounds communicated with each other within the deep soft tissues and were close to the anus (see Fig. ). All pressure ulcers were at stage IV with eschar or slough.
After cleansing the wounds and preparing the peri-wound areas, the wound drain tubes were laid on top of foam; the irrigating tube (with lateral perforations) was then inserted inside and deep into the tunnel. The negative pressure therapy used polyurethane foam and wall suction. Negative pressure wound therapy with instillation (NPWTi; see Fig. -1) was initiated immediately: 5% povidone iodine (10ml) and normal saline (500ml) was instilled twice a day. Instillation was repeated every 24 hours by continuous negative pressure at −80mmHg.
Proliferation of healthy granulation tissue was observed with a decrease in scores of pressure ulcer severity, which was measured every 5 to 7 days; complete re-epithelialization was eventually achieved (see Fig. -2). The wounds healed within 130 days of admission without any severe complications. No additional treatment for this patient is anticipated, except for ​petroleum jelly, which will be applied to protect the restoring wound area.
Three months after discharge, the patient was reviewed using a one-to-one interview. She did not have any new occurrences or recurrence of pressure ulcers.