A 79-year-old female patient visited the authors’ clinic with gingival swelling and pain on the left mandibular region. She was in a mandible edentulous state. The lesion range was from the alveolar crest on the mandible left to the floor of the mouth. Incisional biopsy was done. The biopsy result indicated the presence of squamous cell carcinoma (cT4aN2cMx). After incisional biopsy, the patient was given neoadjuvant chemotherapy (Doxetaxel) for 1 day. Modified radical neck dissection (mRND) was done on the left side. On the right side, supraomohyoid neck dissection (SOHND) was done. Wide excision and segmental mandibulectomy was also done. Reconstruction was done with a reconstruction plate. Instead of free tissue transfer, a pectoralis major myocutaneous flap was used to cover the intraoral defect due to the patient’s poor general condition. The biopsy result indicated the presence of squamous cell carcinoma (pT4N2cMx). The patient was given postoperative radiotherapy 25 times (45 Gy) .
Fourteen months postoperatively, reconstruction using ready-made type T-mesh (Striker-Leibinger, Freibrug, Germany) and iliac PCBM was done to repair the mandible left body defect (7 × 2.5 × 1.0 cm). After the reconstruction plate removal, corticocancelous block bone harvest was performed, including the iliac crest, and the Ti-mesh tray was filled with iliac PCBM. After that, the tray was adapted to the mandible and fixated using eight screws onto the anterior area, and seven screws onto the ramus area .
The patient did not come back for follow-up for 2 years and 3 months. Seven years and 6 months postoperatively, the patient revisited with orocutaneous fistula on the left chin, but neither intraoral fistula nor pus discharge was observed. Fistulectomy on the chin area was done at first to cover the T-mesh.
Eight years and 8 months after the mandible reconstruction, there was T-mesh exposure on the left mandible area. As such, a Ti-mesh removal operation was scheduled. Eight years postoperatively (after the reconstruction surgery using T-mesh), the Ti-mesh tray and Leibinger screws (15 ea) were completely removed. The reconstruction site was found intact, and no inflammation was observed. Since after the Ti-mesh removal, no inflammation and complication have been observed. Also, an aesthetic contour of the mandible, with adequate functions, was achieved .
A 62-year-old female patient visited the authors’ clinic with pain on the right mandibular region. Incisional biopsy was done. The biopsy result indicated the presence of squamous cell carcinoma (cT4aN0M0). After incisional biopsy (20 days later), SOHND was done, along with wide excision and segmental mandibulectomy. Reconstruction was also done with a reconstruction plate and a right fibula free flap . The biopsy result indicated the presence of squamous cell carcinoma (pT4aN0M0). One month postoperatively, the intraoral fibular skin flap was infected due to the emergency care that was given to the patient (due to a cardiologic problem that arose after the operation). The infected fibular segment was removed 1 month postoperatively. One year postoperatively, fibular bone exposure was observed. The two screws on the mandible posterior area, which had been used for fibular bone fixation, were removed. Complete curettage was done on the infected fibular bone. Although no wound dehiscence was observed after the curettage for 1 year and 4 months, reconstruction was done using custom-made type T-mesh and iliac PCBM and platelet-rich plasma (PRP), which has growth factors for bone healing enhancement , to repair the mandibular defect. The CAD-CAM T-mesh was made prior to the operation, at the laboratory. After the reconstruction plate removal, the iliac crest including a 7 × 5 cm block bone and PCBM was harvested and fixated using two mini-plates. The T-mesh tray was then adapted to the mandible, and the T-mesh tray was filled with an additional particulate iliac bone .
One year and 6 months postoperatively (after the reconstruction surgery), no fistula and swelling were observed. The T-mesh tray (except the mini-plate) was completely removed. The reconstruction site was found intact, and no inflammation was observed. Since after the T-mesh removal, no inflammation and complication have been observed .