A 75-year-old male (American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status, class III; height, 176 cm; weight, 94 kg; body mass index, 30) presented for right total hip arthroplasty revision due to severe pain. His medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus type II (on insulin and metformin), hyperlipidemia, obstructive sleep apnea (non-compliant with CPAP therapy), and slowly progressive dementia (managed with donepezil; his caretaker is his wife). With respect to his dementia, the patient was diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment 6 years before surgery after taking the Montreal Cognitive Assessment test; however, his symptoms had gradually progressed to a moderate cognitive decline prior to surgery.
The following details the sequence of events: 1 year prior to surgery, his wife first noticed a change in the patient’s gait described as shuffling steps. Subsequently, 5 months prior to surgery, the patient started complaining of pain in his thighs and difficulty standing up from a seated position, and 2 months prior to surgery, the patient experienced several falls attributed to frequent tripping. A neurologist was consulted a few days prior to surgery for further evaluation. Physical exam revealed diffusely brisk deep tendon reflexes in upper and lower extremities (Mayo Clinic scale for tendon reflex assessment −4 to +4; + 1 (brisk) for biceps, brachioradialis, triceps, quadriceps with crossed adductor response, and Achilles reflexes) with negative Hoffman sign, Babinski sign absent on right and equivocal on left, and visible fasciculations of right external rotators, right deltoid, bilateral gastrocnemius and quadriceps muscles. Motor testing demonstrated mild motor weakness of upper (Medical Research Council scale for muscle power 0 to 5, Right Side/Left Side: external rotators 4/4, deltoid 4/5, biceps 4/5, triceps 4/5, wrist extension 4/5, wrist flexion 5/5, finger extension 4/4, interossei 4/4, abductor pollicis brevis 4/5) and lower extremities (Medical Research Council scale for muscle power 0 to 5, Right Side/Left Side: Iliopsoas 4/4, thigh adductor 5/5, thigh abductors 5/5, quadriceps 5/4, hamstrings 5/5, tibialis anterior 5/5, gastrocsoleus 5/5, foot inversion 5/5, foot eversion 4/4, toe extension 4/4, toe flexion 4/4). Sensory testing was notable for mildly decreased vibration and pinprick sensation in great toes. During gait testing, the patient was slow to stand up, unable to stand on his heels, and was walking with a slight wide-based stance with steppage on the left leg. The patient denied any problems with breathing, chewing, or swallowing. His speech and language were normal, palate elevation was symmetric, and there were no tongue fasciculation. Serology demonstrated an elevated creatine kinase levels up to 1825 U/L (reference level 39–308 U/L). Electromyography study showed neurogenic changes with active denervation in the cervical, thoracic, and lumbosacral segments. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed normal morphology of the spinal cord, conus medullaris, and cauda equina with mild to moderate cervical spondylosis and foraminal stenosis. Head computed tomography taken during evaluation for a recent fall showed mild brain parenchymal volume loss. Electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus bradycardia which was unchanged from a previous electrocardiogram 13 years prior. Given these findings, the patient’s clinical and pathological features were highly suspicious for ALS. Of note, he had a hip replacement 10 years ago at an outside hospital with no reported complications; however, the patient was unable to recall the type of anesthetic he received.
On the day of surgery, the patient appropriately fasted for at least 8 hours, and his vital signs were heart rate 97, blood pressure 152/93, oxygen saturation 96%, and respiratory rate 20. After a multidisciplinary team discussion involving the surgical and anesthesia team, the patient elected to have spinal anesthesia due to potential concerns of postoperative respiratory failure associated with ALS. In the operating room, an 18-gauge IV was established, and standard anesthetic monitoring was applied (5-lead electrocardiogram, blood pressure, pulse-oximeter, temperature, and capnography), and intravenous midazolam (2 mg) and fentanyl (50 mcg) were administered for sedation during the spinal procedure. A 1-liter fluid bolus of lactated ringers was administered during the regional anesthesia procedure. The patient was positioned in the lateral decubitus position, and an intrathecal injection of 1.8 mL of 0.75% isobaric bupivacaine was administered using a 22-gauge, 3.5-inch Whitacre needle at L3-L4 via midline approach under sterile conditions. During the surgical procedure the patient received mild sedation with a propofol infusion (10 to 30 mcg/kg/min) titrated to a Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale of −1, and the patient was spontaneously breathing with a nasal cannula for oxygen support. Intravenous dexamethasone (4 mg), cefazolin (2 g), tranexamic acid (2 g), and ephedrine (25 mg in divided doses) were also administered intraoperatively. The surgeon performed a peri-articular block using a ropivacaine solution for postoperative analgesia., Surgery was uneventful with a total procedure time of approximately 2 hours. The patient remained hemodynamically stable (heart rate 60 to 70, respiratory rate 14 to 16, oxygen saturation 100%, non-invasive blood pressure mean 65 to 80, skin temperature 36°C) during the intraoperative period with minimal fluctuation in vitals for the exception of periodic low blood pressure readings which was responsive to small doses of ephedrine. In the recovery unit, the patient had minimal pain and he did not experience nausea. He was discharged from the recovery unit within 1 hour of arrival, and his vital signs prior to discharge was heart rate 78, blood pressure 158/86, respiratory rate 14, oxygen saturation 98% on room air, temperature 36.4 °C. Postoperatively, the patient was able to slowly ambulate and participate in physical therapy (Activity Measure for Post-Acute Care Inpatient Short Form during hospitalization: Basic Mobility Raw Score increased from 14 to 18, and Daily Activities Raw Score increased from 16 to 17). He was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 7 to a skilled nurse facility for ongoing rehabilitation. No neurological complications were noted during his hospitalization and at a 6-month follow-up.