A 46-year-old male was first referred to a nephrologist at the age of 15 years due to proteinuria and hematuria. Renal biopsy revealed IgA nephritis (IgAN). At 38 years, his history of IgAN was complicated with abdominal pain and painful palpable purpura on his lower legs. A skin biopsy revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis. Thus, he was diagnosed as having Henoch-Schönlein purpura (IgAV). On the other hand, some of his complications were unexplainable by the original disease alone, such as common carotid arteritis and recurrent oral ulcer. Although he was diagnosed with steroid-induced diabetes mellitus at the age of 40, it was under control with HbA1c levels approximately 7% on average; furthermore, multiple examinations by an ophthalmologist revealed no diabetic retinopathy. As a treatment for IgAV, oral prednisolone (PSL) was started at 50 mg/day, and his purpura and urine abnormalities resolved; PSL dose was gradually reduced.
IgAV relapsed at the age of 45 with increasing urine protein. Tonsillectomy plus triple methylprednisolone pulse therapy did not ameliorate the urine protein aggravation. Renal biopsy was performed and light microscopic analysis of the specimen revealed 14 glomeruli; of these, 2 were obsolescent, 4 were adherence lesions with fibrous crescents showing previous active IgAV, and the others exhibited only minor glomerular abnormalities. Immunofluorescence staining was negative for IgA or C3 in the glomeruli, and electron microscopy revealed no evidence of an early sign of diabetic nephropathy such as diffuse thickening of glomerular basement membrane. As a result, no exacerbation of the original disease and no onset of other specific kidney lesions, such as diabetic nephropathy, were observed . After the biopsy, intermittent fever developed and the serum creatinine temporally changed from 0.68 to 2.26 mg/dl. In addition, a prolonged fever necessitated a detailed laboratory analysis . Microbacterial and imaging inspections, including Ga-scintigraphy, could not detect any inflammatory focus; however, a physical examination revealed a folliculitis-like rash on his scrotum . Ophthalmologic examination and gastroscopy and colonoscopy tests yielded negative results. At first, we diagnosed an incomplete type of BD, which was treated with PSL. The increased dose of PSL failed to relieve the fever and finger pain, and then, an ophthalmologic reexamination revealed hemorrhage in the ocular fundus . In addition to the absence of microaneurysms, local filling defects of the vein were seen at the area of retinal hemorrhage, suggesting BD-associated vasculitis. After the diagnosis of complete-type of BD was made, the PSL dose was increased to 30 mg daily. Urinary protein levels subsequently improved along with amelioration of BD, which supported that diabetes had little contribution to the renal lesion, considering the absence of diabetic retinopathy and short history. Despite tapering of the PSL, no exacerbation was observed with the daily oral 8 mg of PSL and 1 mg of colchicine.