The patient was a 72-year old man, who until recently had been working full time in a cognitively demanding job. In 2009, he had an anterior-wall myocardial infarction and emergency PCI. He had surgery for hernia in the spring of 2022 but was otherwise healthy. He had smoked for 35 years, until 2007.
In May 2022 (; week 0), 2 months after hernia surgery, he had pain in the left flank and groin, which disappeared after a few hours, and tenderness in the left axilla/hemi-thorax. CT thorax showed four potentially malignant lesions dorsolaterally in the right lower lobe, with signs of infiltration of the thoracic wall and enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. The largest pulmonary lesions were 3x1.5 cm and 2x2 cm, respectively . CT abdomen showed multiple liver metastases; the largest with a diameter of 5.5 cm . After ultrasound-guided liver biopsy, he was diagnosed with extensive stage small cell lung cancer (ES-SCLC). He was in good general condition, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 0.
He was included in an RCT of combination therapy with carboplatin (AUC 5 mg*min/ml), etoposide 100 mg/m2 body surface area (BSA), durvalumab 1500 mg iv. on day 1, and etoposide 200 mg/m2 BSA po. on days 2–4 with or without thoracic radiotherapy and was randomized to therapy without concurrent radiation. At the start of each cycle, he had dexamethasone 8 mg for 3 days.
Shortly after the 1st cycle, he developed petechia on his chest and thrombocytopenia. For the 2nd cycle, he therefore received a reduced dose of carboplatin/etoposide (60% of AUC 5).
He completed four cycles of systemic therapy. CT thorax/abdomen after the 2nd cycle, showed considerable reduction of lesions in the right lower lobe and lymph nodes in the mediastinum and right hilum, but new lesions in corpus of vertebra T8 and possibly a pathological fracture of the 8th rib. The liver metastases were reduced in size, from 55 to 25 mm largest diameter for the largest lesion. After the 4th cycle, the pulmonary lesions were smaller, with a remaining 4 mm nodule in the right lower lobe and reduced size of the liver metastases , and serum neuron-specific enolase (NSE) was normalized. Brain CT did not detect brain metastases. He then continued with durvalumab 1500 mg iv. monotherapy every 4th week and received the 5th cycle in September 2022 (week 16). In October 2022 he received prophylactic cranial irradiation (PCI) of 25 Gy in 10 fractions and continued with durvalumab monotherapy (1500 mg iv. every 4 weeks). In December 2022, he was in good general condition, ECOG 1, but had challenges with diabetes control. CT evaluation early January 2023 showed stable disease in the thorax/abdomen, and there were no metastases on brain CT.
One week later (week 17), at consultation for evaluation for PCI, he was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus with blood glucose 26.7 mmol/L, HbA1c 64 mmol/mol (reference 20–42), c-peptide 230 pmol/L (fasting reference 300-1480). A diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis was confirmed and insulin treatment was started.
Serum IA2 and GAD65 antibodies were not detected using an ELISA-based test from RSR Limited, (Cardiff, UK). In May 2022, before the start of immunotherapy, he had no confirmed diagnosis of diabetes.
In January 2023, during 4 days of hospitalization for compression fracture of vertebra T7 after a fall, he had spontaneous alterations of cognition. The examination revealed no neurological abnormalities, and a brain CT was normal.
A few days later, he was admitted to the stroke unit of the hospital after a 10 min episode of dysphasia with spontaneous normalization. Brain CT, including angiography and perfusion images, showed no evidence of stroke. However, he had minor electroencephalogram (EEG) abnormalities with a left-sided frontotemporal dominance and reduced cognition, with 26/30 points on the mini mental status examination (MMSE). An epileptic seizure could not be excluded, but this was not treated. He was discharged to his home with an outpatient appointment for a new brain MRI and follow-up for treatment of his SCLC.
In February 2023 (week 41), he was admitted to the Department of Pulmonary medicine because of increasing confusion. His wife described seizure-suspect episodes with strange swallowing noises, no eye contact, and tremor-like convulsions of the upper extremities, followed by incoherent speech. In addition, his general condition had worsened, with increasing gait disturbances and imbalance, and visual hallucinations.
At admission to the Department of Pulmonary medicine, he had no neurological abnormalities. During the next days, he became disoriented and periodically dysphasic. Brain MRI on day 4 after admission showed high T2/FLAIR signal and increased volume in the left temporal lobe and hippocampus with no gadolinium contrast enhancement , which suggested limbic encephalitis, possibly paraneoplastic. EEG demonstrated sequences with polymorphic and semi-rhythmic theta and delta activity over both hemispheres, with a left-sided temporo-frontal maximum with sharp potentials. Lumbar puncture (day 7) with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed no signs of bacterial or viral encephalitis, but evidence of intrathecal IgG bands not present in serum.
He was diagnosed with autoimmune encephalitis and started treatment with intravenous methyl prednisolone on day 7, 1 g qd for 5 days and anti-seizure therapy with levetiracetam 250 mg bid and was transferred to the Department of Neurology.
Four days after starting steroid treatment, he was tired, had bilateral Babinski´s sign, but otherwise normal tendon-reflexes. He was unstable on walking, but had negative Romberg test, no ataxia of the extremities and normal motor examination. He answered questions adequately but had problems with short-term memory.
A neuro-immunological paraneoplastic and encephalitis panel analysis was positive for antibodies in serum against both γ-aminobutyric acid type β receptor 1 (GABABR1) and glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (GAD65) , while CSF analysis was positive only for GABABR1 . No other encephalitis or paraneoplastic antibodies were detected using
the Euroimmun autoimmune encephalitis mosaic 6 cell-based assay (Euroimmun, Lübeck Germany) or the Ravo PNS 14 line assay (Ravo Diagnostika, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany).
After 10 days of treatment, he still had poor balance/gait, was not oriented for time/place and person and had cognitive difficulties. There was no clinical improvement since hospital admission. Plasma exchange (PLEX) was therefore started, with sessions every other day using a Spectra Optia apheresis machine (Terumo BCT, Lakewood, CO, USA), in total five sessions. Each time, 1.2–1.3 plasma volumes were removed with 4% albumin as substitution fluid and acid citrate dextrose solution as anticoagulant. He continued with oral prednisolone 80 mg per day with gradual tapering of the dose.
After the first PLEX session, he improved cognitively, no longer had a Babinski sign, but neurological status was otherwise unchanged. Three days after final PLEX treatment, EEG revealed no focal epileptic activity, and 6 days after PLEX, brain MRI showed improvement in the left hippocampus but remaining high signal in the anterior left hippocampus and amygdala, with reduced edema . Serum analysis was negative for GABABR1 and GAD65 and CSF positive for GABABR1, but negative for GAD65 .
At hospital discharge, he was more oriented, had less gait disturbances, but still had problems with short-term memory and scored 15/30 (normal score ≥26) on the MMSE and 19/30 (normal score ≥26) on the Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCa) scale , suggesting moderate cognitive impairment.
He stopped with durvalumab because of what was assessed as a severe adverse immunotherapy-related event and had no further treatment for SCLC during the next months.
At ambulatory 1-year follow-up for his SCLC, he was in better general condition. Relatives reported some improvement in cognitive function, which was supported by an improved MoCa score of 22/30, indicative of mild cognitive impairment.
After hospital discharge, we had access to previous MoCa test scores and frozen serum samples from a biobank (stored at -80°C) at several time points before the diagnosis of encephalitis, collected as part of the RCT. The serum samples were screened for relevant antibodies. There was a dip in the longitudinal MoCa scores at the time of encephalitis development and a slight improvement with encephalitis treatment in parallel with the observed clinical improvement. Detectable antibody titers of GABABR1 were found from baseline in serum and during the encephalitis phase in CSF, whereas GAD65 antibodies, using a cell-based assay with human embryonal kidney cells (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany), were seen only in serum from week 16 to 39 . Titers were obtained by testing serial dilutions of serum (starting at 1/10), and CSF (starting at 1/1; undiluted).