A few days after amputation of the left lower leg because of arteriosclerosis obliterans, a 61-year-old man presented with worsening disorientation and was referred to our institution. He had been undergoing treatment for hypertension and diabetes mellitus for around a year and undergoing artificial dialysis due to chronic renal failure for 4 years. He had no symptoms and no family history of neurofibromatosis. Neurological examination demonstrated disorientation in date and time, and finger-nose-finger and heel-knee-shin dysmetria on the left side but no hearing disturbance. A computed tomography scan revealed a cystic lesion (6.5 cm in the largest diameter) in the left hemisphere of the cerebellum with a mural nodule (2.5 cm) with enhancement and focal calcification, in addition to hydrocephalus . Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated that the cystic lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images . The tumor was well defined, and no peritumoral brain edema was observed. The lesion was more than 5 mm from the left acoustic nerves, and the nodular component was located just inside the skull. T2 star-weighted images showed hemorrhage within the cyst and in the mural nodule . Fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery images showed hydrocephalus with periventricular hyperintensity . Pre-operative differential diagnoses included hemangioblastoma, low-grade well-circumscribed glioma, and metastatic tumor of unknown primary origin. The patient underwent suboccipital craniotomy. The surface of the tumor was moderately swollen . The discharge of brownish fluid during drainage of the cystic component implied a history of intra-cystic bleeding. The tumor had feeders from the superior cerebellar artery, and most of the boundary was clear. The tumor was resected totally after detachment from the cerebellum . The post-operative clinical course was good, and hydrocephalus improved. A 5-year follow-up demonstrated no recurrence or neurological dysfunction.
Histopathological examination of the tumor tissue showed proliferation of tumor cells with large nuclei intermingled with various sized blood vessels . The tumor cells were pleomorphic, with polygonal or spindle shapes, and harbored eosinophilic cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei . The size of the nuclei also varied, and intra-nuclear cytoplasmic inclusions were occasionally observed. Nucleoli were occasionally observed and mostly inconspicuous. Cellular areas and hypo-cellular areas were intermingled, and a meshwork of fine fibers was observed in the hypo-cellular areas . Most tumor cells harbored abundant cytoplasm with a low nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio, and no mitosis was detected. Various intra-cytoplasmic inclusions were observed, including eosinophilic granular inclusions or hyaline bodies, concentric cytoplasmic inclusions, and yellow-brownish lipofuscin granules . The lipofuscin granules showed various colors, from faint pinkish to dark brown . Cells with eosinophilic granular inclusions or hyaline bodies tended to be distributed around hemosiderin-laden macrophages or hypo-cellular areas. Hyalinization was diffusely observed in the wall of the blood vessels and intra-tumoral extracellular matrix . On the periphery of the tumor, hemorrhage, aggregation of hemosiderin-laden macrophages, and cystic areas were observed . Calcification was occasionally observed. Neither Rosenthal fibers nor neuronal differentiation were observed within the tumor. The cerebellum surrounding the tumor showed reactive gliosis and mild atrophy, as well as scattered Rosenthal fibers . Immunohistochemical analyses showed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for S-100 protein , vimentin, and neuron-specific enolase and focally positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein . Tumor cells were negative for Olig2 , synaptophysin, chromogranin, neurofilament, NeuN, epithelial membrane antigen, CD34, IDH1 (R132H), Melan A, and Inhibin alpha. The Ki-67 labeling index was less than 1%, with only a few positive cells . Considering various degenerative changes of the tumor tissue and the immunohistochemical features, the final pathological diagnosis of schwannoma with marked degenerative changes (a so-called ancient schwannoma) was made.