A two-year-old Caucasian boy, the first child of non-consanguineous healthy parents, presented with history of recurrent skin lesions. These lesions occurred after BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guerin) and DTP (diphteria, tetanus and pertussis) vaccinations at the age of two months and after each hepatitis B vaccination thereafter. Skin lesions were initially papular, then vesicular with purulent exudate, progressing to multiple ulcers and draining sinuses spreading from the injection site.
On admission, skin examination revealed violaceous, tender; 5-7 mm sized superficial ulcerations with draining sinuses on right forearm, left deltoid area and right cheek . There were no constitutional symptoms or other abnormality in physical examination. Laboratory results were as follows; white blood cell count 9220/mL with 56% polymorph nuclear cells, 40% lymphocytes, 4% monocytes on peripheral smear, hemoglobin 11.4 g/dL, platelets 426.000/mL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 24 mm/h and the C-reactive protein was 0.43 mg/dL. X-rays of humerus, radius and ulna were normal. Possibilities of combined immunodeficiency, hyper IgM syndrome types I/III, chronic granulomatous disease, IL-12/interferon-gamma pathway defects were excluded: Immunoglobulin G-M-A serum concentrations, lymphocyte subsets, expression of CD40 on B cells, CD40 ligand on active T cells, complement levels (C3, C4), adenosine deaminase level, phagoburst test, expression of CD119 (interferon-gamma receptor) and IL-12 receptor β-I on lymphocytes were within normal ranges. Functional and genetic studies related with IL-12 β1 and IFN-γ receptors were normal. Histopathology of skin biopsy specimen showed 'noncaseating granuloma'. Regarding the initial appearance of the lesions after BCG vaccination and histopathology, scrofuloderma was considered. However, acid-fast bacillus smears and initial cultures for nonspecific bacteria and mycobacteria were negative. The patient was empirically treated with isoniazid 5 mg/kg, rifampicin 10 mg/kg and pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg and skin lesions improved gradually.
Five months after initiation of anti-mycobacterial treatment, an elevation in ESR to 74 mm per hour was obtained. On physical examination, he did not have new skin lesions. Nonspecific and mycobacterial cultures of blood and urine, peripheral and bone marrow aspiration smears, Mantoux skin test, serological investigations for Brucella and Salmonella, abdominal ultrasonography were normal. Rheumatic and auto-inflammatory diseases including sarcoidosis and vasculitis were searched out; HLA-B27 antigen, anti-nuclear antibody, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody and rheumatoid factor were negative. Genetic analyses for 'Familial Mediterranean Fever', 'Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor-Associated Periodic Syndrome' and IL-1 receptor defects were performed with negative results except IL-1 receptor antagonist intron 2 variable tandem repeat polymorphism (IL-1RN-1/1). Ciprofloxacin was added to anti-mycobacterial treatment and ESR decreased to normal (18 mm per hour). After a period of two months with no complaints, he developed new purulent skin lesions on the left forearm and left medial malleolus. Increased activity was seen on right frontoparietal bone with bone Tc 99m MDP scintigraphy; X-ray of the distal metaphyseal region of the radius revealed osteolytic lesions . Bone biopsy was planned but parental consent was not given for the procedure. The patient was treated with intravenous teicoplanin for three weeks. Cultures of abscess material, taken before antibiotic treatment, for bacteria (including acid-fast bacilli) and fungi yielded negative results. During the following three months, he was given anti-mycobacterial treatment including isoniazid and rifampicin for nine months and pyrazinamid for five months. After this period, the patient was readmitted with pain and swelling on both ankles. The ankles were swollen and warm. X-ray of the left distal tibia showed 'osteolytic lesions surrounded by reactive hyperostosis' consistent with chronic osteomyelitis. He was diagnosed as CRMO based on four clinical exacerbations and repeatedly negative cultures. Prednisolone (0.8 mg/kg/day) treatment was started and all other medications were stopped. X-ray of tubular bones showed disappearance of all osteolytic lesions two months after the initiation of corticosteroid therapy. He was complaint-free during the following 18 months.
According to the initial presentation with multiform skin lesions affecting left deltoid area and right cheek just after BCG vaccination at the age of two months and the biopsy findings of the skin lesions, our patient raised the suspicion of scrofuloderma and empirical anti-mycobacterial treatment was given . Mycobacterial disease was not supported by skin tests, lesional smears or repeated cultures before treatment. Possible inherited defects in the defence against mycobacterial infections such as IL-12 β and IFN-γ receptor deficiencies were ruled out with functional and genetic investigations. On admission, X-rays of left humerus, radius and ulna were normal.
During follow-up, he had new skin lesions as well as recurrent, sterile, multifocal, osteolytic bone lesions with reactive hyperostosis interpreted as chronic osteomyelitis. As broad-spectrum antibiotics and anti-mycobacterial treatment were not effective, he was treated by corticosteroids and complete remission was then obtained. The prompt response to steroid rather than antibiotic treatment raised the possibility of an inflammatory condition rather than an immunodeficiency. Collectively, we diagnosed the patient as having CRMO at 29 months of age with a history of disease course of more then three months and failure to cultivate a micro-organism.