In 2010, a 26-year-old Moroccan man was referred to our oncology and radiotherapy center for management of recurrent tumor of his right subscapularis. No pathological medical or surgical history was reported and no alcohol or tobacco habits. One year before, he had presented to his surgeon with a subscapularis tumor which had appeared gradually and increased in size during 6 months without associated pain or other symptoms. A physical examination reported a mass size 10cm, palpated in his right subscapularis region. A first resection was realized. Histopathological analysis demonstrated spindle-shaped cells with no identifiable nuclear pleomorphism or mitotic activity. There was no necrosis. A benign tumor with spindle-shaped cells is suspected. On immunohistochemical analysis, the cells stained positive for anti-smooth muscle actin, favoring a smooth muscle origin. The diagnostic of AF was retained. Unfortunately, the mass recurred within a period of 10 months and continued to increase in size reaching 13cm on a computed tomography scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Figure ) without regional structures involved (bone, muscle or vascular). A second tumor and lymph nodes resection were performed by another surgeon who reported “a very hard resection without cleavage plane”. Histological analysis regarding two fragments size 4×3cm and 14×10×8cm led to a conclusion of AF tumor; hormonal receptor was not found. The resections of margins were narrowed and lymph node resections regarding four nodes were not involved. At assessment in our oncology and radiotherapy center after this second resection, his World Health Organization performance status was zero, weight 84kg, height 177cm. There was no induration or palpable mass. A MRI performed after the repeat surgery was normal. During follow up, a recurrence was suspected 1 year after the second resection. An axillary MRI was performed and a large mass was found in the last tumor site, measuring 12.6cm involving deltoid muscles and extending to axillary area. A third resection was realized and a histopathological examination showed the same AF tumor with a low positivity of c-KIT. Margins were narrowed. Post-surgery MRI was performed and showed a right axillary residual tumor measuring 2.1cm. Diagnosis of recurrent AF tumor with positive c-KIT and without hormonal receptor was retained. The decision to administrate imatinib 400mg daily by mouth was taken. His follow up was performed by clinical examination and was normal during 6 months. When we stopped imatinib administration during 1 month, the tumor grew to a size of 4cm. Retreatment with imatinib was decided. Clinical and MRI evaluation were performed regularly and they reported a stable tumor. The last MRI was performed in January 2014; it showed a stabilized tumor and many intratumoral calcifications. We reported no side effects regarding Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events. Currently he is feeling well but he continues to have ankylosis (90°) in his right upper limb due to the particular localization of AF and surgery .