A 48-year-old, right hand dominant female sustained a fracture of the left distal radius. She underwent open reduction and internal fixation 10 days after injury with a volar locking plate. Approximately 2 months after surgery, she described a “pop” in the wrist and was subsequently unable to extend the thumb out of the plane of the palm. She continued with rehabilitation but eventually presented to our institution due to persistent limited range of motion (ROM) 3 months post-operatively. Clinical evaluation confirmed deficiency of the EPL tendon while extension to the remaining digits was maintained (including independent extension of the index and small fingers). Radiographs revealed solid union of the fracture and a volar plate with prominent dorsal screws . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed by the referring physician, but this was of limited utility due to metal artifact from the plate and screws. As a result, the musculoskeletal radiologist report could not conclusively confirm continuity or discontinuity of the extensor tendons.
After our initial evaluation, treatment options were discussed and surgical management involving hardware removal and EIP to EPL transfer to restore thumb extension was offered. Informed consent was obtained in accordance with our institutional guidelines.
At the time of surgery, the previous volar incision was utilized, and all hardware was removed. An incision was then made dorsally over the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint of the thumb and the EPL tendon was isolated and confirmed to have sustained an attritional tear. A second dorsal incision was made at the level of the index MCP joint and the EIP and EDC II tendons were identified. The EIP was isolated and transected just proximal to the extensor hood. A third incision was made to retrieve the EIP tendon at the level of the wrist, just ulnar to Lister’s tubercle. During EIP retrieval, the fourth extensor compartment tendons were identified, and exploration revealed a concomitant attritional rupture of the EDC II tendon at this level. The proximal stump of the EDC II had retracted and was of insufficient quality and mobility to perform a direct repair. The remaining tendons were explored and found to be intact. This finding left a deficit in extension of both the thumb and index finger as the EIP tendon was transected distally for the planned transfer. As such, we elected to proceed with EIP to EPL tendon transfer to restore thumb extension. In addition, a weaved end-to-side transfer of the EDC II to the long finger (EDC III) was performed to restore index finger extension, with tensioning to recreate normal digital cascade. Both transfers were performed using a Pulvertaft weave technique and secured with non-absorbable braided suture. After wound closure, the patient was placed in a thumb spica and a volar resting splint to maintain full extension of the index finger and full radial abduction and extension of the thumb.
At 2 weeks, the patient was provided with a custom thermoplastic splint to protect the repairs and started gentle ROM using wrist tenodesis. Starting at 6 weeks, she was gradually progressed through further rehabilitation as tolerated with stretching and strengthening exercises without formal limitation on IP, MCP, or CMC ROM. At 12-month post-operatively, the patient had obtained full ROM with regard to the thumb and index finger and had returned to full activities without restriction ( and ).