A 60-year-old white female with a 45-pack-year smoking history and history of asthma presented to the emergency department with several weeks of generalized, nonfocal headache, and dizziness. She denied any visual obscurations, nausea, or vomiting. The patient’s family history was only notable for maternal and paternal hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, but no hypercoagulable diseases. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the brain with and without contrast demonstrated innumerable round, bilateral lesions with peripheral hyperdensity suspicious for metastatic disease with internal hemorrhage but no midline shift . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a 2.2-cm right upper lobe spiculated mass and extensive hilar lymphadenopathy, suggestive of a primary lung malignancy with metastatic adenopathy . She decided to leave, against medical advice, but agreed to follow-up in the outpatient setting; she was given dexamethasone 4 mg every 6 h to take at home. At 2 weeks later in the pulmonary clinic, immunohistochemistry of samples from the right hilar lymph node obtained via endobronchial ultrasound confirmed thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) + adenocarcinoma and low positive programed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) at 30% . Gene amplification unveiled driver mutations in Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) G12C and EIF1AZ. These findings all but confirmed stage IV lung adenocarcinoma. During the procedure, the patient became dyspneic and mildly anxious. Her vitals at the time were notable for sinus tachycardia with a heart rate (HR) of 101 bpm and mild hypoxia saturating 93% on room air. She denied any chest pain, pressure, cough, radiating pain to the left upper extremity, jaw pain, back pain, or sense of impending doom. The pulmonary team sent the patient to the emergency department (ED) for further evaluation. In the ED, the patient’s symptoms had improved. Her vital signs and physical exam findings were within normal limits. A respiratory pathogen panel, which included severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), was negative. A CT angiogram of the chest identified a new 2.4 × 1.1 × 1.1 cm thrombus within the proximal aortic arch , but no pulmonary emboli or intrapulmonary right to left shunts were identified. A hypercoagulable workup was negative at both presentation and at 4 week follow-up . The patient was promptly heparinized and carefully watched for symptoms of stroke, limb, or abdominal ischemia. A transthoracic echocardiogram with Definity contrast enhancement noted an left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 65%, but failed to show an LV thrombus, areas of LV akinesis or hypokinesis, left atrium (LA) dilation, or any atrial septal defects (ASDs), ventricular septal defects (VSDs), or patent foramen ovale (PFO) via agitated saline. An ultrasound of the lower extremities was similarly negative for deep vein thrombosis. Given the considerable procedural risk and skepticism about recurrence, surgical thrombectomy was deferred. The patient was transitioned to 1 mg/kg twice daily enoxaparin dosing. She remains asymptomatic and a repeat CT of her chest to gauge resolution is in process. She has undergone 2 weeks of whole brain radiation therapy and is pending initiation chemoimmunotherapy with carboplatin, pemetrexed, and pembrolizumab.
IgG immunoglobulin G, IgM immunoglobulin M, PT prothrombin time, INR international normalized ratio, PTT partial thromboplastin time