The patient was a 73-year-old man with a past medical history of significant diabetes, asthma, hypertension, and percutaneous coronary intervention for coronary stenosis, and he took aspirin. He had a history of three TURBT with pathologically confirmed high-risk NMIBC followed by RC and reconstruction of an ileal conduit by Wallace plate technique at age 69. Pathological examination revealed a UC, low grade (G2), pTa, and the bilateral margins were negative. Furthermore, he underwent right open nephroureterectomy due to right lower ureteral recurrence at age 72. During the operation, because part of the ureter-ileal anastomosis was firmly adhered, the ureter was dissected and cut as far as possible distally. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered based on the pathological findings of UC, high grade (G2), pT2, and absence of lympho-vascular invasion and a resection margin.
One year after the right nephroureterectomy, CT showed left hydronephrosis and acute pyelonephritis. A recurrent mass at the left uretero-ileal anastomosis was noted . After left percutaneous nephrostomy placement and antibiotic therapy, irradiation therapy of 50 Gy/25 fractions was administered, because complete surgical resection was deemed difficult due to the high degree of adhesions associated with previous surgeries.
Six months after irradiation, CT showed multiple lung metastases, lumbar bone metastases, and aortic lymph node metastases, and then systemic chemotherapy with gemcitabine/carboplatin was planned.
However, at the time of chemotherapy induction, the patient developed severe anemia with a Hb level of 5.6 g/dL due to ileal conduit bleeding. CT showed re-enlargement of the recurrent mass at the uretero-ileal anastomosis . The patient had multiple metastases and a history of radiation therapy, so we chose palliative therapy. We considered the location of the bleeding site and decided that direct hemostasis was preferable. Because of persistent bleeding after blood transfusion, flexible gastrointestinal endoscopic hemostasis was initially attempted. However, a tumor was observed, but the source of bleeding could not be identified . So, we could not perform any invasive procedures, only observation. Due to persistent bleeding afterward, we performed coagulation via an ileal conduit approach using a rigid scope and bipolar electrocautery, which is usually used as a modality for TUR under general anesthesia. We inserted a rigid cystoscope through the ileal conduit opening in the supine position. Removal of the internal coagula as much as possible allowed us to identify the anastomosis and recurrent mass. When the surface of the recurrent mass was scraped with a loop electrode, the source of the hemorrhage could be determined. We performed coagulation and hemostasis using rollerball and loop electrodes. Finally, we applied oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel®, Johnson & Johnson, America) to the surface of the residual mass (Surgery time: 122 min).
Postoperatively, systemic chemotherapy was introduced, and no rebleeding was observed during the 8-month follow-up.