A previously healthy 19-month-old boy initially presented with fever, cold, cough, and diarrhea about 3 weeks before to admission. At that time, he was treated with oral cefixime for 5 days by his pediatrician. His fever and diarrhea resolved after 1 week. However, he developed difficulty walking following that and became completely bedridden in the next week. At the time of admission, he was unable to stand up and had some intermittent dribbling of urine. There was no disturbance in the bowel habits. The only significant information in his medical history was that he underwent lumbar puncture in the neonatal period in the 1st week of life for suspected sepsis and meningitis. However, he recovered well from that illness and remained healthy thereafter. His growth and developmental milestones were appropriate for age. He was running around and was a very active child before the onset of this illness. Physical examination at the time of admission showed an afebrile, nontoxic but tired looking child confined to his bed. He had paraparesis from L1 to L2 level. His lower limb muscle power was Grade 1—/5. He had intermittent dribbling of urine and absent cremasteric reflex. His anal sphincter reflex was sluggish. There were no external abnormalities noted in the spinal region . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of spine showed an intradural lesion, probably a tumor or abscess, and edema of the Conus in the lower cord. A laminectomy was performed the next day at the level of L1, L2, and L3. Exposure of the dura showed a mass measuring 4 × 2 cm. Opening the dura revealed pus and cheesy material. The tumor was excised completely, and the area was cleaned and repaired (, , , and ). Microbiological study of the material showed heavy growth of enterococci sensitive to cephalosporins. He was treated with antibiotics for 14 days . His post-operative period was unremarkable without any complications. The child had a complete recovery of his muscle power and other neurological functions, including bladder control. He was discharged home on the 15th day after surgery. Close follow- up was done for 6 months and his neurological status remained normal without any residual symptoms or recurrences of symptoms. So far, his growth and developmental milestones are progressing appropriately. Picture of child at discharge.