A 34 year old female was admitted to the Royal University Hospital, Saskatchewan, after noticing petechiae on her legs and inside of her mouth. The complete blood count (CBC) was remarkable for demonstrating particularly thrombocytopenia (4x10e9/L, RI 150–400 x10e9/L) and lymphopenia (0.88x10e9/L, RI 1.5–4.0x10e9/L). Hemoglobin concentration (141 g/L, RI 110–160 g/L) was normal. The patient had a history of multiple sclerosis (MS), and management with Alemtuzumab™ monoclonal antibody therapy, most recently administered (36 mg over three days) approximately two months prior to patient admission. She was investigated and treated for thrombocytopenia.
Blood was drawn for viral serology testing that included cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgM and IgG antibodies, hepatitis virus antibodies (hepatitis A total, hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B surface IgG, hepatitis B core IgM, hepatitis B total, hepatitis C), hepatitis B surface antigen, and HIV investigations. All serologies were performed on an automated Roche Diagnostics e601 platform analyzer according to manufacturer’s instructions. Serology test results indicated that the patient had immunity status for hepatitis B surface IgG antibody (i.e. > 1000 IU/L). However, the patient did not exhibit immunity or presence of the other hepatitis markers tested . These results were consistent with the patient history over the course of several years. The patient had no prior evidence of blood borne disease, having been reported negative for CMV, HIV and hepatitis panel testing, although the patient did have positive hepatitis B surface antibody test results, consistent with the prior immunization for hepatitis B in 2018.
The patient was administered 20 g of IVIg (Gammagard™ 20 g) as part of the treatment plan for thrombocytopenia.
Additional serology was ordered in error after the IVIg administration and generated discrepant results , prompting an investigation by laboratory medical staff. Repeat testing on the initial specimen demonstrated the same result initially reported. Similarly, the post-IVIg specimen was retested, and the result was consistent. Additional blood draws consistently demonstrated the apparent newly-positive results for viral serology. Plasma samples drawn prior to and following the IVIg therapy were also investigated. These specimens were measured for total IgA, IgG and IgM immunoglobulins, and demonstrated a substantial increase in the IgG component , consistent with expected results following treatment with 20 g of IVIg. Neither HIV testing, nor hepatitis C testing interpretation were changed by IVIg administration (data not shown), which is consistent with donor screening-out criteria by the manufacturer. Similarly, CMV IgM status was negative pre- and post-IVIg administration (data not shown).