An 11-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with delayed secondary sexual characteristics. She was the first baby of non-consanguineous parents and was a full-term birth. The birth weight was 2950 g, and the length was 51 cm. She started walking alone at 19 months. She was admitted to her doctor for unstable walking with an ataxic gait at four years. Abnormal hearing and nystagmus were first noted at the age of three. Bilateral severe sensorineural deafness was diagnosed at four years, and unilateral cochlear implantation was performed. Speech development was age-appropriate. The level of intelligence was normal. No epilepsy or unconsciousness seizures occurred.
Her height was 147.5 cm (+0.14 SD) and weight 38 kg (+0.29 SD). She had a highly arched palate and horizontal nystagmus. Pubic hair and bilateral breast development were all at stage 1, according to the Tanner staging. She had no scoliosis but had cubitus valgus. Her muscle strength was normal, and she had no muscle atrophy. Deep tendon reflexes were absent. The left Babinski reflex was suspicious positive, and the Romberg sign was positive.
Laboratory data were normal, including liver and renal function, serum electrolytes, blood glucose and lipids, myocardial enzyme profile, adrenal function, thyroid function, lactate, and pyruvate. Lactate was 1.41 mmol/L (normal range: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L) and pyruvate was 48.9 μmol/L (normal range: 20–100 μmol/L), Unfortunately we did not perform the aerobic exercise test to evaluate the levels of lactate and pyruvate during exercise. Sex hormone studies showed a low level of serum estradiol (E2) (<20 pg/mL) and raised levels of gonadotropins (LH 26.77 mIU/mL and FSH 78.27 mIU/mL). Serum anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) concentrations were 0.01 ng/mL, and Inhibin B was 11.5 pg/mL, indicating diminished ovarian reserves and poor ovarian response. Gonadotropic hormone stimulation tests showed high levels with LH peak 142.31 mIU/mL and FSH peak 141.78 mIU/mL. Bone age was ten years. The karyotype was normal (46, XX). Pelvic ultrasonography revealed the uterus was smaller than other children of the same age (1.7 × 0.5×1.0 cm), and there were no pubertal changes in the ovary (about 1.6×0.8 cm on the left side and 1.7×0.9 cm on the right side). Several small anechoic areas could be seen. The larger one, which was a follicle, had a diameter of about 0.2 cm. The electroencephalogram showed sharp waves and spike waves released in the left frontal and central areas during sleep.
Genomic DNA was purified from peripheral blood using standard procedures. A library was prepared using a GenCap Whole-exome capture kit (MyGenostics GenCap Enrichment Technologies). Sequencing was performed on Illumina HiSeq X ten sequencer. After sequencing, the raw data were saved as a FASTQ format, then followed by the bioinformatics analysis. First, Illumina sequencing adapters and low-quality reads (<80 bp) were filtered by Cutadapt. After quality control, the clean reads were mapped to the UCSC hg19 human reference genome using Burrows–Wheeler Aligner (BWA). The average sequencing depth was more than 100×, and the targeted region was more than 20× for >90% and 10× for >95%. Duplicated reads were removed using Picard tools, and mapping reads were used for variation detection. Second, the variants of SNP and InDel were detected by Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) Haplotype Caller, then GATK Variant Filtration was used to filter variants. After these steps, the data were transformed to a VCF format. Variants were further annotated by ANNOVAR and associated with multiple databases, such as gnomAD, 1000 genomes, dbSNP, and predicted by SIFT, PolyPhen-2, MutationTaster, GERP++, phyloP, and phastCons. The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines were employed for sequence variation interpretation.
The literature was searched up to April 2021 from PubMed, Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD), and some Chinese databases, such as CNKI, Wanfang, and China Science and Technology Journal Database with “Perrault syndrome”, “TWNK”, and the corresponding terms in Chinese. Clinical features and gene mutations were summarized.