A 60-year-old Asian woman presented to a nearby hospital with the chief complaint of left facial palsy. A diagnosis of Bell's palsy was made, however at the same time, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed an incidental meningioma located on the inner-third of the left sphenoid ridge.
The tumor was initially observed, and meanwhile, symptoms of Bell's palsy gradually relieved. Two years after the diagnosis of meningioma, she began to suffer from progressive visual deterioration and central scotoma on her left eye. The visual acuity was completely lost 2.5 years after the diagnosis. She was finally referred to our hospital 3 years after the diagnosis. Head MRI taken at our hospital showed enlargement of the tumor. A neurological examination revealed no pupillary disturbances, including pupillary light reflex and pupil size. Slight Bell's palsy was also observed, however, it had improved by then. Therefore, we considered that Bell's palsy and the intracranial meningioma had no connection. We consulted with an ophthalmologist about the patient's visual acuity. After the examination by an ophthalmologist, the patient was revealed to be completely blind on her left eye with no light perception. Preoperative visual field examination and visual evoked potential (VEP) was not performed for this reason.
Computed tomography (CT) showed an isodense, well-demarcated mass lesion, 35 mm in diameter, that was attached to the inner-third of the left sphenoid ridge. The lesion showed no apparent calcification inside and was enhanced strongly with intravenous administration of contrast media. Bone-image CT showed thickening of the anterior clinoid process. On MRI, the lesion was hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging. In addition, the lesion was attached to the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, anterior clinoid process, and frontal skull base . Coronal MRI showed tumor invasion to the left optic canal . MR angiography showed middle meningeal artery as the feeding artery. The tumor had no edematous effect on the brain parenchyma. A preoperative diagnosis of inner-third sphenoid wing meningioma was made, and surgery was planned for the lesion.
The main purpose of the operation was not to improve visual acuity but to prevent further tumor invasion into the cavernous sinus and contralateral optic nerve. This was why VEP was not monitored during the operation. However, because the pupillary light reflex was not disturbed, we considered that there was still a possibility of optic nerve recovery. Thus, we took the precaution of performing optic canal decompression at the same time.
Tumor removal was performed via a left pterional approach. A surgical navigation system (Medtronic, Tokyo, Japan) and electrooculography were used. Briefly, the temporal dura was detached from the middle cranial base, and the middle meningeal artery passing the foramen spinosum was identified, coagulated, and cut.
Then, the left anterior clinoid process was removed, and optic canal decompression was performed by an extradural approach . We chose extradural approach because feeding arteries through the basal bone can be cut-off earlier in this manner. There are also some reports that indicate the safety of Dolenc's extradural approach. The tumor was soft and bled easily, and it was not easy to exfoliate from brain parenchyma. We had difficulty in resecting the tumor en bloc. The tumor beneath the optic canal, surrounding the internal carotid artery, remained. The tumor attached to the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus was completely removed. Enough decompression of the optic nerve was achieved with Simpson's grade 3 removal of the tumor. The histopathological diagnosis of the tumor was atypical meningioma (MIB-1 5%).
Subtotal resection (95% removal) of the tumor was confirmed by postoperative CT images . There were no major complications in the postoperative course. Two days after the surgery, partial recovery of the left visual acuity was observed. An ophthalmologist pointed out that she could count fingers in front of her face. Her visual field had further improved 11 days after surgery . The patient was discharged from our hospital 14 days after the surgery with no additional neurological sequelae. Left visual acuity and her visual field had improved even further 2 months after the surgery .