A 56-year-old previously healthy man was admitted with an acute coronary syndrome. He did not have any significant past medical history and was not on any regular medications. He was a smoker and consumed three to four standard drinks of alcohol per day, with no known significant family history. Coronary angiography revealed a severe mid left circumflex (LCx) artery stenosis, which was stented with a drug-eluting stent 3.0 × 32 mm ( and B). He was discharged uneventfully after 2 days with recommendation of 12-month dual antiplatelet therapy.
Just under 6 months later, the patient presented to a regional hospital with severe chest pain and associated inferior ST-segment elevation following 1 week of worsening exertional angina. He was successfully thrombolysed with Tenecteplase and transferred to our centre. On initial examination, he was afebrile and had no significant clinical examination, with no cardiac murmurs or signs of heart failure. Coronary angiography demonstrated an aneurysmal dilatation adjacent the proximal segment of LCx stent. There was also severe in-stent restenosis at the distal edge of the stent with no other new coronary lesions. Working on a presumption that the aneurysmal dilatation was a pseudoaneurysm resulting from a poorly sealed dissection, a covered stent (3.0 × 16 mm) was placed. In addition, the re-stenotic segment was stented with another everolimus eluting stent (3.0 × 28 mm) ( and D; Video 1).
Immediately post-procedure, the patient developed fever and rigors with a rise in serum inflammatory markers [white cell count 12.9 × 109/L (normal range 4.5–11 × 109/L), C-reactive protein 105 mg/L (normal range <5 mg/L)]. Three sets of blood culture grew Staphylococcusaureus sensitive to methicillin. A new pansystolic murmur was noted, though no stigmata of infective endocarditis were evident. He did not have any risk factors for infective endocarditis, was not immunocompromised, and was HIV negative.
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) (, Video 2) revealed a 12 mm × 12 mm circular echo-free region at the location of the circumflex stent consistent with an abscess cavity or aneurysm. There were multiple small mobile echo-densities on the anterior and posterior mitral valve leaflets (Video 2), consistent with vegetations associated with severe mitral regurgitation from a flail anterior leaflet likely secondary to chordal rupture (Video 3). There were also thickening of the inter-atrial septum and inter-valvular fibrosa suggesting extension of infection . On computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan ( and B; ), changes consistent with inflammation involving the LCx stent and inter-atrial septum were noted. Indium white blood cell scan also demonstrated activity at the region of coronary LCx stent consistent with an inflammatory collection ( and D).
Treatment was instituted immediately with intravenous flucloxacillin, gentamicin (for 10 days), and oral rifampicin. Due to the scope of cardiac involvement, the cardiothoracic surgeons felt it unwise to attempt an extensive debridement and suggested attempt at medical sterilization with anti-microbials for 2 months. The patient improved on the antibiotic regime, with resolution of fever after 10 days and improvement in inflammatory markers after 2 weeks. Repeat TOE after 2 months revealed a reduction in abscess size (12 mm × 8 mm), less vegetations on the mitral valve leaflets with residual flail anterior mitral valve leaflet and severe mitral regurgitation, and almost normalization of the size of the inter-atrial septum and inter-valvular fibrosa. Elective progress angiography at the time showed widely patent stents and coronary intravascular ultrasound unable to visualize the cavity behind the stents due to the presence of the covered stent.
As the patient gradually developed signs of heart failure, it was decided to proceed with an elective mitral valve replacement, and surgical team recommended cessation of clopidogrel 1 week before surgery. This unfortunately resulted in the LCx stent thrombosis requiring re-intervention with balloon angioplasty ( and F). He recovered but surgery was postponed for another 6 weeks.
Mitral valve replacement was performed 4 months after the initial presentation of mitral valve endocarditis and stent infection diagnosis. The LCx stent and abscess were not removed due to dense adhesions hampering access. The patient was maintained on intravenous flucloxacillin and oral rifampicin throughout these 4 months. Antibiotic therapy was continued for a further week and then ceased. Six months later, the patient remained well with no recurrence of sepsis and the inflammatory markers remained normal. He was well with the satisfactory mitral valve function in annual follow-ups for the subsequent 6 years.