A 53-year-old asymptomatic woman presented with hypercalcemia during a medical examination and visited the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism at our institution. She had a serum calcium level of 11.7 mg/dL, a urinary calcium/creatinine ratio of 0.39, and an intact PTH level of 268 pg/mL. She was suspected to have PHPT. A fracture of the vertebral bone was not detected, but the T-score was -3.8, indicating osteoporosis. The creatinine clearance was 79.9 mL/min and the urinary calcium excretion was 409 mg/day. Neck ultrasonography (US) showed a solid thyroid nodule measuring approximately 5 mm and no swelling of the parathyroid gland was observed. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed an anterior mediastinal nodule . Abdominal CT did not show urinary stones or calcification of the kidney. Technetium-99m-methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile (99mTc-MIBI) scintigraphy showed no accumulation in the delay phase in the thyroid gland, but accumulation was observed both in the early and delayed phases in the anterior mediastinal nodule , and the diagnosis of EMPA was established.
We decided to remove the EMPA through collaborative consultation between the Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Head and Neck Surgery, and Department of Thoracic Surgery. As per the discussions, it was decided to perform EMPA resection while performing intraoperative PTH monitoring. Cinacalcet hydrochloride was administered orally at a dose of 50 mg/day before surgery. A three-port robotic partial resection of the thymus with the EMPA was attempted , but bleeding from a swollen pericardial diaphragmatic vein led to the addition of an assist port along the way. Intact PTH value was measured after the induction of anesthesia, immediately before removal of the adenoma, and 5 min, 10 min, 15 min, and 60 min after removal. The intact PTH levels were 326.1 pg/mL, 975.0 pg/mL, 252.0 pg/mL, 195.7 pg/mL, 155.1 pg/mL and 57.2 pg/mL, respectively. After confirming that the 15-min intact PTH value after removal of the tumor was less than 50% of the baseline value, the operation was completed without additional resection. Since the intact PTH value was sufficiently low, we decided to omit confirming the absence of residual glandular tissue using methylene blue (MB) staining method. The operation time was 76 min, the console time was 16 min, and the amount of bleeding was less. The tumors were well circumscribed, 12 mm in size, and were covered with capsules . Histopathologically, the cubic cells, with clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm and uniform nuclei, were arranged in solid sheets . Mitoses were absent, and there was no capsule infiltration or failure. However, some small parathyroid gland tissues were observed in the other parts of the thymic tissue ; therefore, it was suspected that microscopic ectopic parathyroid gland tissue may have remained in the thymus. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for PTH-rerated protein and was diagnosed as an EMPA. On postoperative day (POD) 1, the serum calcium level decreased to 8.8 mg/dL and the intact PTH level decreased to 25 pg/mL. Oral administration of calcium lactate and calcitriol was started, and the dose of calcium lactate was gradually decreased, and it was discontinued on the POD 13 as the serum calcium level stabilized. On POD 23, she was discharged from the hospital and is currently an outpatient.