A 71-year-old woman consulted her physician complaining of hoarseness. She was referred to our hospital with suspected thyroid cancer with recurrent laryngeal nerve invasion and cervical lymph node metastasis based on the results of ultrasonography. A diffuse goiter and cervical lymphadenopathy were noted on examination. Blood testing demonstrated a white blood cell count level of 5440 /μL, thyroid stimulating hormone level of 0.44 µIU/ml, free triiodothyronine level of 3.01 pg/ml, free thyroxine level of 1.05 ng/ml, thyroglobulin level of 285 ng/ml, and anti-thyroglobulin antibody level of less than 10 IU/ml. Ultrasonography revealed a hypoechoic mass in the left lobe of the thyroid and lymphadenopathy suspicious for metastasis in the right paratracheal and left cervical regions . Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated the presence of a thyroid tumor invading the trachea and esophagus with no evidence of distant metastasis . Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed significant uptake by the thyroid tumor and a left cervical lymph node without uptake in distant organs. Fine needle aspiration of the left cervical lymph node indicated the lymph node metastasis of ATC. Biopsy of the left cervical lymph node was performed to screen for RET mutations using the Oncomine Dx Target Test (Thermo-Fisher, USA). The sampled lymph node tissue was negative for RET mutations; however, a BRAF mutation was identified. As the tumor had widely invaded the trachea and esophagus, unresectable ATC was diagnosed and treatment with lenvatinib was initiated at a dose of 24 mg/day. Since there was the fatal risk of fistula formation, we had fully informed the patient about serious adverse events before starting lenvatinib. Furthermore, we decided to perform CT earlier to investigate whether fistula formation occurred. On day 2 of lenvatinib administration, the patient developed grade 3 hypertension and treatment with a calcium channel blocker and an angiotensin receptor blocker was initiated accordingly. On day 7 of lenvatinib treatment, the patient developed grade 2 palmar–plantar erythrodysesthesia that was managed with managed conservatively. On day 13 of lenvatinib treatment, the primary tumor and lymph node metastases demonstrated a partial response to therapy . As the tumor was now considered resectable, the decision was made to perform conversion surgery. On day 14 of lenvatinib administration, the patient was discharged and the lenvatinib dose was reduced to 14 mg/day to reduce the risk of further adverse events (AEs) such as fistula formation. Total thyroidectomy and left lateral neck node dissection were performed 7 days after the withdrawal of lenvatinib. The operative duration was 163 min with minimal blood loss. As the tumor encased the left recurrent laryngeal nerve, we performed combined resection of the tumor and left recurrent laryngeal nerve. As the tumor was found to be invading the first tracheal cartilage, tracheal shaving was performed to preserve the trachea. On the other hand, there was no obvious invasion into the esophagus and dissection was easy. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 5 with no complications. Histopathological examination demonstrated that the tumor contained the component of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC), squamoid ATC cells, and granulation tissue . Those squamoid ATC cells with prominent nuclear atypia were weakly positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), and thyroglobulin. Furthermore, PAX8 staining was negative and p53 staining was positive. These results were considered representative of ATC. In areas of granulation tissue, atypical cells with spindle-shaped or polygonal morphology, pyknotic nuclei, and scant cytoplasm were observed . Immunohistochemically, these cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 , TTF-1, and p53 and negative for thyroglobulin and PAX8. Given the above findings, the areas of granulation tissue observed within tumor samples were also considered ATC that were affected by lenvatinib treatment. The tracheal invasion area also had similar findings that contained squamoid ATC cells and granulation tissues. In total, the proportion of ATC component was approximately 50% among the whole tumor. Additionally, we diagnosed that 70% of ATC component had been changed to granulation tissue . Postoperative radiotherapy was planned; however, lenvatinib was restarted at 30 days postoperatively due to tumor recurrence in the subcutaneous tissues and lymph nodes of the right neck. The summary of treatment and clinical course is shown in Fig. .