Our patient is a 34-year-old Iranian man of Gilaki ethnicity from consanguineous parents, who was 2 years old at the onset of the disease, with recurrent sinopulmonary infections, poor weight gain, urticaria, and sinusitis at age of 7 years. Owing to the low serum level of IgA, he was first diagnosed with selective IgA deficiency. At the age of 8 years, he developed post-infection glomerulonephritis and then was treated as a case with nephritic syndrome. Lack of factor XI is another complication that was diagnosed at the age of 10 years. At the same age, owing to a decrease of IgM–IgG along with recurrent infections, he was diagnosed with CVID, and since then he has undergone regular intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy. Also, he was treated separately for other comorbidities, including bronchiectasis, hypothyroidism, and growth hormone deficiency.
As his sister presented with similar immunodeficiency manifestations, they were genetically examined by whole-exome sequencing (WES) analysis. A novel homozygous nonsense mutation in codon 56 (W56X) was detected on the RAC2 gene, which was confirmed by Sanger sequencing .
About 4 months ago, the patient was first diagnosed with nausea and headache, which gradually worsened along with progressive blurred vision, paresis, and paresthesia on the left side of the body. On brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), subcortical lesions in the left occipital and right temporoparietal area , as well as the involvement of parts of the corpus callosum and thalamus , suggested the possibility of diseases involving cerebral white matter, such as posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) or PML. To confirm the diagnosis, the patient underwent a more accurate workup. The combination of clinical and radiological findings, along with positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for JCV in a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample, confirmed the PML diagnosis. Other tests that were performed on the CSF sample, including glucose, protein, and inflammatory cell counts, were reported to be normal. To determine the risk factors for PML, other than PID, in the patient, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Ribonucleic acid (RNA) Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing was performed, which was reported negative. In general, the patient’s PID can be considered the most important risk factor for PML. Despite the treatments, our patient died within a month of diagnosis. He was the first case reported with PML due to mutations in the RAC2 gene.