A 5-year-old Chinese girl who had exhibited sensory exotropia in her right eye for 2 years and had been losing her vision for 6 months was referred to our department. There was no history of postnatal asphyxia and no family history of tumors, or other ocular disorders. A general examination of the child revealed no other abnormalities. On examination, the visual acuity in the right eye revealed no light perception and an intraocular pressure of 7 mmHg. The anterior chamber reaction and pigment cells in the vitreous were observed. A fundus examination showed a large, yellowish-white, elevated, subretinal mass lesion in front of and inferior to the disc that showed hemi-inferior-quadrant retinal detachment . The retina was greyish-yellow with scattered yellow spots. Examination of the left eye showed no abnormalities. B-scan ultrasonography and fluorescein angiography (FA) of the right eye revealed an intraocular solid mass located in front of the disc . The mass measured 11.0 mm in diameter and had moderate-to-high internal reflectivity, a distinctive border and no calcification on B-scan ultrasonography. Fundus fluorescein angiography showed double circulation and mottled fluorescence on the mass, with no obvious leakage . Computed tomography of the orbit revealed a semi-round, slightly high-density shadow with a CT value of approximately 46 Hu . Then, a vitreous biopsy for tumor cells produced negative results. After 9 months, the parents of the child agreed to further diagnosis and treatment, and a vitrectomy with lensectomy and neoplasm resection with silicone oil tamponade were performed to achieve a histopathological examination. The tough mass had a distinctive border and no obvious capsule and showed no involvement of the extraocular muscles, optic nerve or orbital tissues. Histopathologic examination of the intraocular mass revealed a GCT . The tumor cells were positive for CD68, NSE, S-100 , and CD163 expression but negative for GFAP, Syn, and CD123 expression. The Ki-67 index was 1%, which strongly suggested that this tumor was benign. At the last follow-up, which was performed more than 2 years after the first visit, no GCT recurrence was noted and the right eye remained stable, but with permanent blindness eventually.