A 25-year-old single Nigerian man was admitted via the surgical outpatient clinic with a two-year history of scrotal swelling which was initially small in size, non-painful and not associated with fever. The swelling gradually increased in size to the extent of impairing free movement of the patient both because of its weight and size in between the lower limbs. The swelling made sexual intercourse and voiding in the standing position impossible. The skin was intact without associated ulcerations, and there was no difficulty in voiding though the penile shaft was buried in the swelling. There was no history of chronic cough suggestive of pulmonary or disseminated tuberculosis. He had no problems with his eyesight and no other swellings on his body were known.
He had a history of surgery to the two inguinal areas about 10 years before presentation; surgical details were not available nor was any histology available. He was from a polygamous home and took neither alcohol nor any other substance of abuse. There was no history of a similar lesion in his relatives or his acquaintances at his place of abode.
Physical examination showed a healthy looking young man with a giant scrotal swelling of a size greater than that of his head. There were hyperpigmented giant ruggae in otherwise intact skin with the penile shaft buried in the scrotal wall skin . The swelling was non-tender, non-pitting and non-reducible with the cord barely discernible at the neck. Bilateral inguinal scars were seen with significant lymphadenopathy.
Hemogram, serum electrolyte, urea and creatinine, urinalysis, urine microscopy culture and sensitivity were all within normal limits. Scrotal ultrasound showed a thickened scrotal wall but the scrotal content was normal.
He subsequently underwent a modified Charles' procedure with a primary penile shaft split-thickness skin graft performed by a team of general surgeons and plastic surgeons. His immediate postoperative condition was satisfactory . On the postoperative day seven, the penile skin graft showed good skin take and some good granulation tissue over the exposed testicles.
The patient continued to have wound dressing until the perineal wound had healed and contracted appreciably leaving about a 3 cm raw area of the wound at the six postoperative week . He had an uneventful postoperative course with the scrotal wound healing completely by the eighth postoperative week . He is now about one year post-surgery and doing well. The patient is physically and socially satisfied with his improved quality of life.