A 12-year-old girl born in the Zhejiang Province of China was admitted to the Department of Pediatrics, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine in February 2016 with chief complaints of constipation for 12 years and neck lumps for 2 years. She was the first-born child to her parents and was born at 38 weeks and 4 days of gestation after an unremarkable pregnancy. No obvious abnormalities were found during her neonatal period. She had experienced constipation since infancy. The patient had no family history of MTC or HD. Nevertheless, she had a younger half-brother with pancreatic dysplasia with whom she shared a father. She underwent colonoscopy in a local tertiary hospital due to her intractable constipation when she was 2 years old. However, the diagnosis of congenital megacolon could not be confirmed according to the results of the intestinal biopsy. Afterward, she was followed up at a clinic. Two masses were found in her neck 2 years ago and have gradually increased in size since being identified.
On the examination, her weight was 26.8 kg (− 2.08 SD), her height was 136 cm (− 2.56 SD) and she had a BMI of 14.49 kg/m2 (− 1.57 SD). She had not exhibit Marfan-like habitus. Her external genitalia and breasts were Tanner stage I, and she had no pubic hair. Therefore, she had not yet undergone puberty. Her blood pressure was 100/64 mmHg. The physical examination also revealed multiple painless, firm nodules on her gingival tissue, tongue and buccal mucosa, and these were considered mucosal neuromas . Her thyroid was enlarged, and multiple hard nodules could be palpable on the surface of the thyroid . There was no palpable mass in her abdomen.
Her serum levels of free triiodothyronine (FT3), free tetraiodothyronine (FT4) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) were normal, but her calcitonin level was very high (1187 pg/ml), and her parathyroid hormone (PTH) level was slightly elevated . Moreover, her serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was much higher than normal (655.4 ng/ml). The level of insulin-like growth factor 1 level (61 ng/ml) was lower than the normal reference according to her age. Her other hormone (serum insulin, growth hormone, prolactin, cortisol, adrenaline, norepinephrine) level and electrolyte levels were normal .
Two masses were found in each lobe of her thyroid along with multiple metastatic lymph nodes by ultrasound . The size of the right mass was 37 mm × 20 mm and that of the left mass was 43 mm × 20 mm . Both masses were classified as Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System (TI-RADS) 5. The abdominal X-ray and CT scan revealed transverse colonic dilatation and colonic wall thickening , which suggested a diagnosis of megacolon. There were no obvious abnormalities in her head MRI or adrenal CT scan.
She underwent an extended radical thyroidectomy and cervical lymph node dissection for thyroid cancer. As expected, the postoperative pathological diagnosis changed to bilateral MTC (T3N1bM0 (stage IV A)), with 24/38 metastases observed in the lymph nodes .
A pathogenic mutation in the RET gene (c.2753 T > C, p. M918T) was found in the proband but not in her father or in her younger half-brother . Since her mother’s DNA was not obtained, it was impossible to determine whether the mutation was de novo. However, this is a hot spot variation in RET, and it has been proven to be a causative mutation of MEN2B. According to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines, this mutation was defined as a pathogenic variation . Finally, a diagnosis of MEN2B was confirmed by phenotyping and genotyping.
After the operation, the patient was given L-thyroxine 50 μg/d as substitution therapy. The dosage was adjusted according to her thyroid function, which was reviewed regularly in our pediatric endocrinology clinic.
Her calcitonin level decreased gradually from 1187 pg/ml to 850.8 pg/ml. The calcitonin level increased again and reached 1072.1 pg/ml 5 months after the first operation. Then, she was arranged to undergo another CT scan. Afterward, cervical lymph node and mediastinal metastases of the MTC were confirmed. In September 2016, she underwent mediastinal tumor resection and extended radical surgery for thyroid cancer. Since this surgery, the serum levels of calcitonin and CEA have fluctuated within 442.5 pg/ml ~ 2000 pg/ml and 9.95 ng/ml ~ 98.32 ng/ml, respectively.
In October 2017, the child underwent colectomy in another hospital because of severe constipation induced by megacolon. She was diagnosed with HD since the pathology of colon indicated ganglioneuromatosis in the whole colon.
Since then, she has achieved catch-up growth and has been followed in our pediatric clinic for monitoring of her growth and development, IGF-1 level, blood pressure, thyroid function, adrenal function, and levels of CEA and calcitonin . She began puberty after the MTC was removed and menstruated 1 year ago. During the most recent follow-up, she was 156.8 cm (− 0.62 SD) tall.