A 57-year-old man had suffered from low back and bilateral lower extremity pain for 3 years, and had been diagnosed with lumbar disc herniation by a general practitioner. He had a history of hyperlipemia and diabetes. However his symptoms were getting worse, and he developed additional symptoms: right upper extremity pain, and gait disturbance. He went to a nearby orthopedic clinic, and was soon referred to us for additional examination and treatment. His neurological examination revealed numbness in the right forearm and both thighs. Weakness of the interosseous muscle on the right side was detected, with grade of 4/5 recorded by manual muscle testing. His gait was very unstable, and he needed to be assisted by a walker. His right patellar tendon and Achilles tendon reflexes were hyperactive and the Hoffmann and Babinski reflex were positive. Laboratory values including full blood count, electrolytes, and inflammatory markers were all within normal limits.
The plain radiological findings of his cervical spine indicated an osseous protrusion in the right C6/7 foramen . Computed tomography (CT) scans showed an osseous tumor originating in the neighborhood of the right C6/7 facet joint and occupying a part of the spinal canal . Magnetic resonance images (MRI) revealed the compression of spinal cord at the C6/7 and spinal canal stenosis at the L3/4 level. The tumor was hypointense or isointense on T1-weighted and T2-weighted images.
We diagnosed him with cervical myelopathy caused by the compression of the spinal cord due to an intra-canal tumor, and performed a C6 laminectomy and a C7 partial laminectomy with posterior approach. The tumor did not show the adhesion to the dural membrane, and en bloc resection of the tumor was performed. The resected tumor was about 2 cm in diameter, and its surface was covered with cartilaginous tissue . The pathologic examination indicated mature trabecular bone with a cartilaginous cap, and we had a diagnosis of a benign osteochondroma . On the next day after the surgery, the pain on the right upper extremity was improved, but the symptoms on the lower extremities remained. Therefore, we performed a decompression of the spinal canal at L3/4 level 1 month later. And then the symptoms improved clearly. He was discharged from our hospital at 6 weeks after his first operation. Post-operative radiograph of the cervical spine did not show each segmental instability. Also, post-operative CT scan showed the removal of the lesion, and demonstrated that over 2/3 part of the facet was preserved . Recurrence was not observed at the time of examination 1 year after the first surgery.