A 53-year-old male patient presented to another medical center with sudden left popliteal pain, associated with knee swelling and limited knee flexion. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a gastrocnemius strain, a meniscus tear and the presence of a popliteal cyst. Symptomatic treatment was indicated. The patient progressed unfavorably with increased swelling and pain . A week later, the patient was evaluated at our hospital. He was afebrile with stable vital signs. A Doppler ultrasound ruled out a deep vein thrombosis and showed a voluminous fluid collection (15 cm × 3 cm) located at the popliteal fossa tracking down up to the distal third of the calf . Blood tests showed high acute-phase reactant levels (ESR 59 mm/h and c-reactive protein 51.8 mg/dL) with an increased white blood cell count (WBC) (18.200 cells/dL; 79% polymorphonuclear [PMN]). We performed a calf puncture obtaining 150 ml of a bloody viscous fluid. The laboratory results showed pH 6.7, glucose <20 mg, proteins 4.7 mg/dL and WBC 85.000 cells/mm3 (60% PMN). Cultures were positive for Staphylococcus aureus. An MRI revealed the presence of a complicated (ruptured) Baker’s cyst and a fluid collection around the gastrocnemius muscles . Afterward, we performed an articular knee puncture, obtaining a purulent fluid also with a positive culture for S. aureus. A surgical debridement of the knee and the calf was performed. Through arthroscopic portals, the joint was irrigated with 6 L of saline solution and the knee was then sterilely bandaged. Following that, a longitudinal posteromedial approach in the middle-third of the leg was performed to drain the collection . The cavity was debrided and the joint was irrigated again to reverse any retrograde contamination. Drainage and an elastic bandage were left to prevent post-operative swelling. Five days after the surgical procedure the patient presented no pain, the swelling had decreased significantly and the articular range of motion had been restored. The patient was discharged with a light toe-bearing gait; he was allowed to walk supporting himself only in his non-operated leg with crutches for 15 days (he could only touch the floor with his operated leg to maintain balance, this prevents wounds complication such as hematoma and dehiscence). The patient progressed to full weight bearing gait 2 weeks postoperatively. As he was a young patient and had no risk factors for deep venous thrombosis, we prescribed aspirin 325 mg a day during 3 weeks for thromboprophylaxis. Intravenous antibiotic treatment was maintained during 6 weeks with ceftriaxone. This was indicated as septic arthritis protocol for cultures positive for S. aureus. No oral antibiotic was administered afterward.