A 14-year-old girl presented with gradually progressive deformity of the right forearm since the past 1 year associated with mild pain (, , ). There was no history of localized trauma or fever. Family history for similar deformity or swelling was absent. Local examination revealed a palpable thickening with deformity of the proximal two-thirds of the right radius. There was restriction of terminal forearm pronation. However, function of the elbow and hand was unaffected. There was no evidence of distal neurovascular or tendon deficit.
Skeletal radiographs (frontal and lateral view) of the right forearm revealed an expansile lytic lesion with ground glass appearance involving the proximal meta-diaphysis of the right radius, with its resultant bowing (, ). The zone of transition was narrow and there was no evidence of matrix calcification. The lesion was causing thinning of the bony cortex. No obvious cortical breach, fracture, or periosteal reaction were noted. The overlying soft tissue was intact. Skeletal survey revealed no similar lesions elsewhere. With this radiographic appearance in mind, a diagnosis of FD of the radius was put forth. The patient’s symptoms and deformity warranted surgical intervention.
In FD, cancellous bone grafts undergo resorption and replacement with the same type of poorly formed woven bone and thus recurrence occurs, which may lead to fracture and deformity. Hence, a different surgical approach was envisioned with the use of non-vascularized cortical bone graft. The lesion in the radius was explored using the Henry’s approach (, ). Inter-muscular interval being flexor carpi radialis and brachioradialis while inter-nervous plane being median nerve and radial nerve. The proximal three-fourth of the radius bone was exposed and the lesion was excised along with 1 cm of normal bone on the distal side (, ). Proximally, a thin shell of the cortex was preserved after curettage of the proximal end of the radius. Fibular cortical strut graft was harvested from the leg of same side . Graft length was kept 2 cm more than the excised bone to avoid shortening of the forearm. The graft was beveled on the distal end and jammed into the shaft of the distal radius such that 1 cm of graft was inside the original bone (, ). Immediate post-operative radiographs were obtained and a long arm or above elbow splint was applied keeping the elbow at 90 degrees of flexion and the forearm in supination for a total of 6 months.
The patient was being followed up regularly. Follow-up radiographs obtained at 7 months revealed complete incorporation of the cortical bone graft with reformation of the intramedullary bone canal and restoration of hand and elbow function (-).