A 64-year-old Caucasian woman underwent allogeneic peripheral blood stem-cell transplantation from her human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-identical sister against aggressive lymphoplasmocytoid immunocytoma. Conditioning comprised of hyperfractionated total-body irradiation with 4 Gy on day 8 of the transplant, 3 Gy on day 7 (total dose 7 Gy), fludarabine 30 mg/m2 on days 7 to 4 (total dose 120 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide 30 mg/kg on days 5 and 4 (total dose 60 mg/kg). Immunosuppression was accomplished by cyclosporine A (CsA) and mycophenolat mofetil. When starting the treatment, our patient had only a few factors associated with increased risk of veno-occlusive disease (VOD): previous treatment with cyclophosphamide, acyclovir prophylaxis during conditioning and female gender. Both, donor and patient were cytomegalovirus immunoglobulin g-positive. The patient had no history of abdominal irradiation or pre-existing liver disease. Thus, we abstained from SOS prophylaxis with heparin or ursodeoxycholic acid following our intern transplant policies.
Three days after transplantation, the patient developed neutropenic fever. Empiric antibiotic therapy with teicoplanin 400 mg daily after a loading dose of 800 mg and piperacillin/combactam 4 g/1 g three times daily were started. The fever persisted for more than 2 days, and voriconazole was started with 200 mg two times daily. Twenty-four hours later, an infection of the permanent central venous catheter was identified as focus. The catheter was removed and clindamycine 600 mg four times daily was added to the antibiotic regimen. Apart from voriconazole, no medication associated with microangiopathia was administered.
On day 7 after transplantation, the patient developed fluid retention. The patient complained of right upper quadrant pain, she gained weight, and her total bilirubin serum levels started to rise . Abdominal ultrasound showed liver enlargement. CsA serum levels were in the normal range. Although ultrasound on day 10 did not show any flow abnormalities of the liver veins, we established the diagnosis SOS according to the modified Seattle criteria with 1) jaundice and bilirubin >34.2 μmol/l; 2) hepatomegaly or right upper quadrant pain; and 3) fluid retention >2% of the initial body mass. We initiated treatment with defibrotide (starting with a dose of 200 mg four times a day, escalated up to 800 mg four times a day on day 13) and 80IU unfractionated heparin/kg/day on day 9. There was no other causal treatment.
Despite early treatment, multiple organ failure (MOF) with kidney failure requiring dialysis and ventilator-dependent lung failure aggravated the clinical course. Symptomatic treatment comprised of dialysis and diuretic therapy with torasemide 10 mg/hour. Lung function was sustained by mechanical ventilation. Furthermore, central nervous dysfunction as well as transfusion refractory thrombocytopenia was observed. We classified this case as severe SOS defined by MOF and according to the criteria of DeLeve . A transjugular liver biopsy performed on day 22 confirmed the diagnosis SOS , with the typical associated histological findings such as sinusoidal congestion with centrolobular necrosis and, later, fibrous obliteration of the hepatic venules and perivenular fibrosis [,]. Fifteen days after the onset of the disease, the clinical symptoms vanished and liver enzymes normalized. In a control computer tomography scan of the abdomen, liver size and ascites declined. Defibrotide was ceased on day 59. Because of massive gastrointestinal haemorrhage, we paused defibrotide for 3 days. Finally, complete restitution was achieved.