A fifty five year old gentleman with no past history of diabetes mellitus or hypertension, presented a history of a Cerebrovascular event three years ago followed by complaints of rotatory vertigo for three years. Episodes lasted 5-10 minutes but there was no hearing loss, tinnitus or hyperacusis associated with the vertigo. This episodic vertigo had been more frequent in the recent past. It was not associated with any headache or preceding aura. His Cerebrovascular event was diagnosed as left-sided lateral medullary syndrome with left hemi paresis, left Horner syndrome and left upper motor neuron facial palsy. MRI suggested multiple lacunar infarcts in the left medullar region. Over time the patient had shown slow but progressive improvement in all neurological deficits.
At the time of presentation he had residual intermittent nasal regurgitation, dysphagia to solid food, and change in voice. He also had tingling sensation, paresthesia, and decreased touch sensation of the left half of his face and the right side of his body. He had no history of seizures.
Neurological examination revealed decreased sensation on the left half of the face and the right side of the body. Cranial nerve examination revealed that the Vagus nerve (right vocal cord palsy) and the trigeminal nerve (decreased touch sensation with paresthesia over the left half of the face) were affected; furthermore, gag reflex was sluggish. Cerebellar signs were positive on the left side with ipsilateral tilt on Romberg’s test. He had a wide-based gait with difficulty in turning. There was no significant spontaneous nystagmus. Gaze nystagmus was present on the left. Dix–Hallpike revealed non fatigueable left-beating horizontal nystagmus with no latency in sitting as well as supine positions.
He had saccadic intrusions of the smooth pursuit evident in Electronystagmography . Optokinetic test was normal. Caloric tests revealed bilateral hyperactive response pure tone audiometry and impedance audiogram was within normal limits.
Subjective visual vertical (SVV) and subjective visual horizontal (SVH) were tested using a pre-programmed computed equipment (MUS_VS-V1.3.2.RevB-Synapsis company). The subject was seated in a darkened room (to avoid any visual cues). Head and neck was stabilized in an erect neutral position using a headband fixed to the patient’s high back chair. The stimulus was projected on a large screen monitor mounted at a distance of 2 metres, in front of the patient.
The patient was fitted with a contour mask with binocular vision fitted with a set of 3 obturators so as to further reduce the chance of any visual cues. The stimulus was a projected vertical illuminated ‘line’ on the screen provided by the software from the SVV and SVH equipment. It was presented at a preset angle (between 5 degrees and 30 degrees) in a random fashion. He was required to adjust the ‘line’ to absolutely vertical and horizontal as perceived by him, using a joy stick (remote controlled potentiometer). For the dynamic assessment, the background was made to rotate clockwise or anti-clockwise. It was repeated six times, each for static and dynamic settings and values were recorded. The above procedure was in accordance with standard recommendations (,).
Static SVV was 1.45 degree and static SVH was 1.81 degree, which was within normal values. The dynamic SVV and SVH were found to be 5.48 degrees and 3.08 degrees which were noticeably abnormal .
Imaging three years after a Cerebrovascular event revealed an old left PICA (posterior inferior cerebellar artery) infarction and MRA suggested absence of flow in the left vertebral artery. He was advised a short course of vestibular suppressants and prolonged vestibular rehabilitation exercise. He was significantly relieved of his symptoms after four months.