A 36-year-old gravid2 live1 pregnant Iranian woman at the 36th week of her gestation came to Imam Khomeini (Tehran, Iran) Obstetric Emergency Department in March 2021 complaining of subacute visual disturbance. She had well-controlled gestational diabetes (on diet) in her current pregnancy and history of hypothyroidism since 10 years ago, soon after her first delivery, which was well controlled before and during pregnancy by taking 150 microgram oral levothyroxine daily. She also denied any cigarette smoking or alcohol consumption, and she did not take any other medication except for daily levothyroxine, multi-prenatal, and ferrous sulfate tablets (each one tablet per day). She was a housewife living in a small county in Tehran Province with middle socioeconomical status. Regarding her family history, no thromboembolic event or similar visual or neurological disorders had been evident in her first- or second-degree relatives. She had been suffering from decreased vision that she described as central scotoma since 5 days ago. Her first visual attack had lasted for nearly 15 minutes, but thereafter, similar attacks had reoccurred frequently, finally leading to persistent decreased vision since 2 days before her arrival. She had been hospitalized in another center for 2 days. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and neurologic consult were done there, and the first impression was papillophelebitis at that center, but the patient had discharged home at her own request and referred to our hospital for further assessment. Upon her admission, she was completely conscious, her vital signs were all within normal ranges (blood pressure: 115/75 mmHg, pulse rate: 88 beats/minute, respiratory rate: 14/minute, oral temperature: 36.9 °C), and she had no complaints of poor signs (headache, nausea, vomiting, and/or epigastric pain) other than visual disturbance. Her body mass index was 24.9 kg/m2, and obstetrical examination was unremarkable (no evidence of uterine contraction or hypertonicity, rupture of membranes, vaginal bleeding, or any abnormalities in fetal heart rate tracing). Moreover, reviewing different body systems, sensorimotor neurological examination, gate assessment, lung and heart auscultation, musculoskeletal and dermatological examination, and also liver and spleen palpation (as far as doable due to presence of a large gravid uterus), no pathological findings were revealed. On ophthalmological examination, uncorrected visual acuity was counting fingers at 3-meter distance and 10/10 in her right and left eye, respectively. Direct fundoscopy of the right eye revealed evidence of retinal ischemia and scattered hemorrhages as well as optic disc swelling. Previous brain MRI was reviewed by another radiologist, and no pathologic findings were documented. Furthermore, no abnormalities were found on carotid sonographic examination or transthoracic echocardiography (TTE). Subsequently, we consulted with an ophthalmologist in Farabi Eye Hospital. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 13 mmHg in both eyes, and there was no abnormal lesion in anterior segment, as well as no vitritis in both eyes. Posterior segment assessment in her right eye revealed evidence of retinal ischemia, cotton-wool spots, and scattered flame-shaped hemorrhages, as well as optic disc swelling, in favor of CRVO and CLRAO . The next day, spectral-domain ocular coherence tomography (SD-OCT) confirmed our clinically suspected diagnosis . According to the ophthalmologist's opinion, as no macular edema was evident, no further interventions or early delivery was necessitated. The ophthalmologist highly recommended us to check thrombophilia disorders or other relevant systemic diseases as potential predisposing factors and also to rule out preeclampsia syndrome. Additionally, they emphasized continuing prophylactic dose of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) 40 mg subcutaneously daily, which had been initiated on her admission, and they arranged an outpatient follow-up a week later. As our investigations ruled out potential comorbidities and preeclampsia syndrome (all blood pressure measurements were normal, and there was no abnormality in laboratory tests except for D-dimer and CRP) , she was discharged home and no drugs except for LMWH were prescribed for an additional 7 days. There were no changes in her symptoms, and visual acuity remained stable at 3-meter counting fingers at 1-week follow-up. Six days later, she experienced labor pain and thus was admitted again at Imam Khomeyni Hospital; due to establishment of active labor, she subsequently underwent an uncomplicated emergency cesarean section through a Pfannesteil skin incision under regional anesthesia, and a 3300-g female newborn with Apgar score of 9 and 10 at the first and fifth minute was delivered. The baby’s height and head circumference were also 51 and 35.5 cm, respectively. Finally, both mother and baby were discharged home 48 hours later without any complications. We strongly recommended her to organize an ophthalmologist’s appointment as soon as possible. Finally, she visited her ophthalmologist 2 weeks after delivery; the follow-up examination and imaging results are shown in Figs. B and C, D. She had improvement in visual acuity to 4/10 and somewhat decrease in retinal findings. At 8-week postpartum follow-up, her visual acuity was 8/10 in the right eye and ocular coherence tomography angiography (OCT-A) was performed, revealing no edema as well as a decrease in vascular density in cilioretinal artery supply in superior of the macula . She had no complications such as IOP rise or neovascularization. One-year follow-up examination was done by the same ophthalmologist, showing that all hemorrhage and exudate had resolved and cilioretinal artery occlusion was barely visible at the superior macula, while on imaging, no macular edema was seen . Moreover, thyroid stimulating hormone, complete blood cell count, and 75-g glucose tolerance test were all within normal limits.