A 47-year-old man (weight, 78 kg; height, 168 cm; body mass index, 27.6 kg/m2) was referred to our hospital’s pain clinic with a 9-year history of left brachial plexus avulsion injury that was sustained in a motorbike accident. He had previously undergone abdominal and left upper limb surgeries. He presented with extensive neuropathic pain, flaccid paralysis, and complete sensory loss, but without allodynia, in the whole left upper limb from the shoulder to the hand . The Numerical Rating Scale (NRS) score for his left upper limb was 7 on the 11-point scale. Regional anesthesia, including cervical epidural anesthesia and brachial plexus block, had no analgesic effect on his neuropathic pain. Treatment with oral mirogabalin (30 mg/day), duloxetine (40 mg/day), and a fentanyl patch (6 mg/day) did not adequately alleviate the pain. We treated the patient with neuromodulation by magnetic field exposure using an AT-04 device, in addition to these pharmacological treatments. The AT-04 is a portable magnetic field-generating device comprising a controller and four dual-coil emitters . The dual-coil emitters simultaneously generate alternating magnetic fields at 2 kHz and 83.3 MHz, with field strengths of 20–30 μT and 400–700 nT, respectively. The overall energy produced by the magnetic fields generated by the AT-04 is approximately one-third of terrestrial magnetism [, ]. We applied four dual-coil emitters around the patient’s umbilicus . Because he lived alone, he could not place the dual-coil emitters on his left upper limb by himself. Baseline NRS scores were obtained three times daily during the baseline period (days 1–5). Magnetic field exposure was then performed at home for 30 min three times daily (morning, noon, and evening) for 36 days, which was termed the intervention period (days 6–41). The NRS score was obtained after each exposure session during the intervention period. Adverse effects were self-recorded by the patient during the intervention period. NRS scores are presented as the median value with the minimum and maximum values and were analyzed using the percentage of nonoverlap data (PND) in single-subject research . During the baseline period, the median NRS score was 7 and the baseline NRS score for calculating the PND was 6. During the intervention period, the median NRS score was 4 and the PND value of the NRS score was 77.8% (28/36) . Neuromodulation by magnetic field exposure through the AT-04 effectively decreased the patient’s NRS score. The patient had no adverse effects during the intervention period. Treatment by magnetic field exposure using the AT-04 was discontinued after the intervention period at the request of the patient due to the economic burden of the rental fee for the AT-04 device (approximately 20,000 Japanese yen per month). The NRS score of his neuropathic pain was 7 at day 28 after stopping treatment by magnetic field exposure using the AT-04.