A 30-year-old woman complained, during a hemodialysis session, of diarrhea and subsequent melena for one-day. The patient was on a schedule of hemodialysis three times a week at the dialysis unit of our hospital; she had chronic renal failure due to lupus nephritis, and was being treated with oral prednisolone, 20 mg daily, for control of lupus disease activity. In addition, the patient was usually treated with nafamostat mesilate as a hemodialysis anticoagulant.
At that time, a physical examination revealed anemic conjunctivae but no icteric sclera, abdominal tenderness or organomegaly. The blood pressure was 150/95 mmHg, pulse rate 88/min, and body temperature 36.4°C. Laboratory investigations on admission were as follows: hemoglobin 8.4 g/dL; white blood cell count 1320/mm3; platelet count 77,000/mm3; prothrombin 96.2% with INR 1.02; partial thromboplastin time 68.4 seconds; serum albumin 3.58 g/dL; serum aspartate transaminase (AST) 15 IU/L; serum alanine transaminase (ALT) 9 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase 123 IU/L; and total cholesterol 152 mg/dL. Hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C antibody, and HIV antibody were all negative. Since the patient had been treated, at various times, with corticosteroids and pulse cyclophosphamide, the C3, C4, ANA and anti-ds DNA were normal; however, she had a positive antiplatelet antibody test. Because of the suspicion of active gastrointestinal bleeding, emergency gastrofiberscopy was performed immediately after the hemodialysis session. Endoscopy revealed two oozing ulcers in the duodenal wall at the duodenal bulb with exposed vessels and one round ulcer at the high body of the lesser curvature of the stomach. An injection of 0.2% epinephrine to a total of 2.5 mL with subsequent hemoclipping was performed for the duodenal ulcers with active bleeding . The patient was treated with intravenous administration of omeprazole. After the endoscopic hemostasis, the patient developed sharp epigastric pain, nausea and intermittent vomiting. The physicians considered the symptoms were due to the endoscopic procedure. The next day, the patient appeared pale, with a decreased hemoglobin level to 5.8 g/dL. Follow-up endoscopy showed no further bleeding evidence of the corresponding duodenal ulcers. Three days after the endoscopy, progression of the anemia was noted without hemodynamic instability; the patient required frequent transfusions.
On the fourth day after the endoscopic treatment, the patient had diffuse abdominal distension and tenderness with persistent nausea and vomiting. An emergency computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a 13 × 6.5 cm mixed-density hematoma at the second and third portions of the duodenum with compression the ampulla of Vater, resulting in dilatation of the common bile duct and the intrahepatic ducts . In addition, there was a moderate amount of high-attenuation fluid in the perisplenic area, paracolic gutters and pelvic cavity, indicating a hemoperitoneum. Without inflammatory changes in the peripancreatic fat, to support a diagnosis of pancreatitis based on the CT findings, the serum amylase level had increased from 145 IU/L (normal, < 200 IU/L) on admission to 373 IU/L, with elevation of the serum lipase of 694 IU/L (normal, < 200 IU/L). The serum total and direct bilirubin values were 0.96 IU/L and 0.48 IU/L, respectively. A repeat endoscopy showed nearly complete obstruction of the lumen, at the site of treatment of the duodenal ulcer, by a very large hematoma . A diagnosis of duodenal obstruction, due to an intramural duodenal hematoma with hemoperitoneum, was made on the basis of the CT and follow-up endoscopic appearance and the progression of the anemia. The development of fever posed a therapeutic dilemma for the clinicians, who had to rapidly decide whether to perform a surgical evacuation or external drainage; the patient was conservatively managed with intravenous omeprazole and antibiotics, continuous nasogastric suction, and total parenteral nutrition. After 10 days, an upper gastrointestinal series using gastrograffin revealed a partial obstruction at the level of the second portion of the duodenum without definite evidence of leakage . Total parenteral nutrition was discontinued on the 14th day and the patient was slowly and carefully given liquids and then a soft meal. The patient was asymptomatic and was discharged shortly thereafter. Serial CT findings 4 weeks and 12 weeks after the onset of obstruction showed progressive resolution of the hematoma.