An 87 year-old (gravida 2, para 2) Caucasian woman was referred to our clinic with a large abdominal pelvic mass, ascites, ureteral obstruction, and a serum CA-125 of 745 U/ML in November 2005. Despite her advanced age, the patient insisted on aggressive management.
The patient underwent a laparotomy, abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. She had approximately 150 cc of clear, straw colored ascites. There was a 20 cm intact, largely solid lower abdominal pelvic mass adherent to the mid and distal sigmoid colon mesenteric serosa, which extended down into the cul-de-sac and left pelvic sidewall peritoneal regions. The patient had a preoperative right ureteral obstruction that also appeared to result from extrinsic pressure related to the 20 cm abdominal pelvic mass. Further examination revealed approximately 6 to 7 cm bilateral solid, whitish ovarian tumors involving the serosa of the mid and upper sigmoid colon mesentery. There were no intra- or post-operative complications and estimated blood loss was 500 cc. The patient is currently doing well clinically ten months postoperatively and adjuvant therapy was not indicated.
Frozen section of the 20 cm abdominal pelvic mass was consistent with a benign fibroma. Pathology further reported that the ovary was white and enlarged, with a smooth and glistening surface. Cross section revealed a unilocular cyst containing yellow translucent fluid. The remainder of the tumor was solid except for small areas of yellow cystic degeneration. There was no identified necrosis. The immunohistochemical findings are significant in that the tumor is only positive for actin, which is not specific but is typically seen in fibrous or smooth muscle tumors. The findings of trichrome and reticulin positivity also favor a fibroblastic lesion.
The case was referred to Stanford Pathology for an independent review. They remarked that the low-grade spindle cell proliferation with fibroblastic features were very rare. The negative immunologic findings exclude more specific markers for smooth muscle, fat tumors, solitary fibrous tumor, hemangiopericytoma, or GIST. They also indicated that these multiple tumors shared the same low-grade appearance and demonstrated a lack of nuclear atypia, increased mitosis, or necrosis. The differential diagnosis included low-grade fibrosarcoma and the solid/low-grade dedifferentiated portion was indicative of an atypical lipomatous tumor .