A seven-year-old girl had a trauma with twisting her left knee. She had pain, swelling and instability. The patient used crutches. The knee had an extension deficit of 15° with flexion up to 70°. Knee examination revealed a grade two Lachman and anterior drawer test with a soft endpoint. No valgus- or varus-instability was examined. Initial anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were inconspicuous. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a displaced femoral avulsion fracture of the ACL . The physes presented unfused.
The patient and parents were consented for an arthroscopic procedure with refixation of the avulsion with or without meniscal repair. Surgery was performed 18 days after trauma.
Examination under anesthesia confirmed a grade two positive Lachman and anterior drawer test with a soft endpoint as well.
Setup: The patient was positioned supine with the leg placed in a static leg holder flexed to 90°. A tourniquet of 150 mm Hg was used after exsanguinating the leg.
Portals: An anterolateral viewing portal, an anteromedial working portal and a far medial drilling portal were created in vertical direction.
Diagnostic arthroscopy: Diagnostic arthroscopy was performed. An unstable vertical longitudinal tear of the lateral meniscus in the posterior horn was detected. The ACL was proved to be lax with the expected femoral avulsion ( and ). The medial meniscus as well as the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) was intact. No cartilage defect was observed.
Lateral meniscus repair: An all-inside meniscal repair system (TruespanTM, DePuy Mitek Inc., Raynham, USA) was used for fixation of the lateral meniscus.
ACL avulsion refixation: The femoral ACL insertion site was debrided using a 4.0 curved shaver (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA). Using a 5.5 mm offset drilling guide, a beath pin was inserted at the anatomic femoral insertion site of the ACL via the anteromedial portal . Fluoroscopy was used to ensure appropriate positioning of the transphyseal pin. Using an arthroscopic lasso, 2 strands of No. 2 DynacordTM (DePuy Mitek, Raynham, MA, USA) non-absorbable sutures were shuttled through the proximal part of the ACL stump . The strands were passed through the beath pin tunnel. A 3 cm longitudinal incision was performed at the distal lateral femur, the iliotibial band was split longitudinally, and the suture strands were retrieved. The knee was placed into 20° of flexion, and the sutures were then tied over a suture button (Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA) under direct arthroscopic visualization of the ACL stump. At this point, subtle manipulation of the avulsed osteochondral fragment was performed with a probe and arthroscopic forceps to ensure anatomic reduction of the fragment into its original site ( and ). No redon drainage was used.
No intra- or postoperative complications occurred. The patient was mobilized with partial weight bearing using crutches and a hinged knee brace. Range of motion limitation was set to 0° extension for three days postoperatively and then 0°/0°/80° (extension/flexion) until the second postoperative week. Between the third and sixth postoperative week we recommended 0°/0°/90° limitation in the hinged brace. Partial weight-bearing recommendations were: sole contact for the first week, half a body weight for the second week and pain adapted full body weight-bearing for the third and fourth week.
At the first follow-up exam at eight weeks postoperatively, the patient had a stable knee with a negative Lachman and negative anterior drawer test. Range of motion showed 120° of flexion with full extension.
The seven months follow up MRI scan shows complete healing of the avulsion and the meniscal tear. The growth plates proof to be intact. No further bone marrow enhancement is evident.