Our patient, a 22-year-old Caucasian woman under evaluation for infertility, had experienced secondary amenorrhea from the age of 18 years. She had received hormonal replacement for the past two years, which resulted in cyclical bleeding, but she remained anovulatory. No positive family history was noted regarding premature menopause.
Pelvic ultrasonography showed the presence of an anteflexed uterus, with a normal profile, echostructure and dimensions. Her endometrium had a normal echographic aspect. Both her right and left ovary were normal with respect to dimension and form, without any liquid effusion. A hysterosalpingogram confirmed the normal uterus-tubal anatomy.
Magnetic resonance imaging of her encephalon and hypophysis using paramagnetic contrast showed that her sellar cavity had regular morphology and dimensions, without any structural alterations. The adenohypophysis was devoid of alterations. Her hypophyseal peduncle oriented normally. Serum anti-ovarian and anti-adrenal antibodies were absent. As it is possible to see from the Table , our patient had high levels of gonadotropins (LH: 41.17IU/L and FSH: 79.90IU/L; hypergonadotropic amenorrhea) . Her thyroid-stimulating hormone, free tri-iodothyronine and free thyroxin hormone levels were normal, while the levels of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies were very high.
It was necessary, at this point, to conclude the diagnostics by studying her karyotype. Her karyotype was obtained from T lymphocytes extracted from peripheral blood using the common culture technique. The obtained chromosomes were banded with Q-banding methods using quinacrine. An examination of her karyotype revealed the presence of a mutual translocation, apparently balanced, that involved the X chromosome long arm (q13) and the 14 chromosome short arm (p12), with consequent karyotype 46,X,t(X;14)(q13;p12) (Figure ).
Breakpoints were confirmed with fluorescent in situ hybridization (Figure , Table ). To evaluate the inactivation of the X chromosome, we used the human androgen receptor (HUMARA) assay, which uses the locus of the androgen receptor in Xq11.2. In the first exon of the gene there was a highly polymorphic tri-nucleotide repetition (CAG) next to the cleavage sites of restriction enzymes sensitive to methylation (HpaII or HhaI), methylated only on the inactive X chromosome. The assay demonstrated that the active X chromosome was translocated (X-autosome: X; 14).
To assess whether this was a de novo or a segregating chromosomal abnormality, we studied the karyotype of both parents. Their karyotypes were normal, implying that the chromosomal abnormality was de novo. Furthermore, our patient did not present clinical manifestations associated with X-linked recessive diseases.