A 59 year old female who is nonsmoker, non-hypertensive, non-diabetic with a known history of Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA), temporal arteritis on prednisone for 6 years and systemic lupus erythematous, presented with sudden onset shortness of breath, left sided chest pain and back pain. Initial chest x ray revealed widened mediastinum, opacification of left hemithorax & rightward mediastinal shift . CT chest revealed crescentic aortic IMH and large left sided hemothorax . Subsequent aortic dissection protocol CTA confirmed a focal dilation of distal transverse aortic arch (maximum diameter of 3.7 cm), a focal intimal irregularity in the distal transverse aortic arch and leaking IMH extending from the origin of the left subclavian artery to the origin of celiac artery without any evidence of active extravasation . There was no CT evidence of active aortitis or atherosclerosis. The patient was hemodynamically stable. Patient was urgently taken to an interventional radiology suite with an intention to perform an endovascular repair of this contained aortic rupture. Through a right groin access, an aortogram was performed and it showed a patent three vessel aortic arch, a distal transverse aortic arch dilatation near the origin of left subclavian artery and absence of active extravasation. It was suspected that this focally dilated segment of distal transverse aortic arch near the origin of left subclavian artery was responsible for large IMH and left sided hemothorax. Hence prior to aortic stent graft insertion, cerebral angiography was performed. It confirmed that the right and left vertebral arteries were communicating at the basilar confluence. The right groin access was then serially dilated to accommodate a 24 French sheath. Then two overlapping Gore thoracic stent grafts 37–37 mm × 15 cm and 31–26 mm × 10 cm were deployed within aortic arch intentionally covering the left subclavian artery and descending thoracic aorta respectively. We intentionally did not oversize the aortic stent grafts to reduce the risk of aortic intimal injury and possible dissection. Post stenting aortogram showed complete exclusion of dilated aortic arch segment. Follow up aortogram, initially showed intermittent active extravasation which ceased once the aortic stent graft was balloon molded. Then left hemothorax was decompressed by placement of a large bore chest tube. On postoperative day 1, repeat CTA showed widely patent aortic graft, significant decrease in the left hemothorax and resolution of mediastinal shift . Follow up CTA after one month showed widely patent aortic stent graft and complete resolution of aortic intramural hematoma . There was no evidence of active extravasation or endoleak. One year after the TEVAR, patient remained asymptomatic. Patient never reported any arm claudication.