Our patient was a 10-year-old female, who presented with discontinuous thrombocytopenia of 8 years, abnormal renal function of more than 2 years, cough of more than 10 days, and weakness of the left limb of 3 days. She was delivered at full term by caesarean section and weighed 3 kg, without asphyxia. Her parents were non-related and her mother was healthy during pregnancy. She was fed formula milk after birth. No family history of the genetic disease was available for assessment. She had no history of infectious diseases, no history of exposure to toxic substances or contaminated water, and no history of surgery, traumatic injury, blood transfusion, and drug or food allergies. Her vaccinations were performed as planned. At age of three, she was hospitalized for skin purpura, but no abnormality was observed in the bone marrow smear and she was diagnosed with “idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura”. Afterward, her platelet count decreased after each cold, and she was hospitalized intermittently. At age of eight, the patient was admitted to our department for "thrombocytopenia". Her blood urea concentration was 7.78 mmol/L and total bilirubin was 41.6 μmol/L. After symptomatic treatment, her platelet count returned to a normal level, but the blood urea concentration was still elevated. The patient took prednisone for approximately 3 months. After discharge, she did not experience nausea, vomiting, swelling, reduced urine production, etc. At age of nine, the patient was hospitalized again in our department for "acute gastroenteritis". Her blood urea concentration was 8.86 mmol/L and total bilirubin was 65.2 μmol/L. After symptomatic treatment, the symptoms disappeared and she was discharged from the hospital. The patient did not attend a follow-up visit. She had experienced coughs 10 days before this admission, but no fever. The symptoms were not improved by taking oral cough syrup. In the last 3 days, she exhibited weakness in the left limb, but no fever or convulsions.
Physical examination: At the time of this admission when the patient was 10 years old, her body temperature was 36.9 °C, her pulse rate was 88/min, her breathing rate was 20/min, her blood pressure was 141/81 mmHg, and her weight was 46 kg. Her development was normal and consciousness was clear, but her gait was unstable. Slight pharyngeal hyperemia was observed, and bilateral tonsils were swollen in degree I. The breath in her lungs sounded thick, without dry or moist rales. No deformities of limbs and spine were observed. The muscle tension and volume of the limbs were normal. An ecchymosis was detected on the left knee and calf. The muscle strength of the right limb was normal. The muscle strength of the left upper limb was V-. The muscle strength of the left lower limb was normal. There was tenderness in the left gastrocnemius muscle, no sensory disturbances or pain, and no warmth disturbances. The rest of the respiratory, cardiovascular were normal.
Laboratory examination: The laboratory examination results of this admission showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, reticulocytosis, and hypertriglyceridemia. The results of her coagulation function analysis and renal function analysis also showed abnormalities. Her blood lactate dehydrogenase was elevated. Urinalysis revealed the presence of mild proteinuria. Meanwhile, her ADAMTS13 activity was lower than 2.5%. Other hepatic analyses, cerebrospinal fluid analyses, myocardial enzymes, and immunoassay were normal .
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging: The right side of the basal ganglia region-lateral ventricle showed a flaky and slightly longer signal on T1 and T2 images, a short signal on T2 images of the lesion center, slight hyperintensity in the center of pressure water sequence lesions surrounded by a ring of hyperintensity, hyperintensity in most of the DWI sequence lesions with flaky hypointensity inside the lesions, hypointensity in the lesions corresponding to the ADC figure, an obviously enhanced signal in the lesion center on the enhanced scan and no obvious abnormal signals and non-enhanced lesions in the brain parenchyma .
Renal needle biopsy: The images showed 1 renal cortex tissue, 11 glomeruli, 1 fibrocystic crescent, 1 cellular crescent, 1 region displaying focal segmental sclerosis, mild hyperplasia in the glomerular mesangium, the incomplete opening of the capillary loops, tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and low levels of inflammatory cell infiltration, vacuolar degeneration in renal tubule epithelial cells, calcification in certain tubule epithelial cells, a few swollen endothelial cells in the afferent vessel and the formation of a pink thrombus in the lumen of some small vessels. We considered that the girl may have suffered from nephropathy associated with the thrombotic microvasculature . Immunofluorescence showed that only one glomerulus was found in the puncture specimen, C3 (++), C1q (±), IgM (++), IgA (±), and were deposited in the segment-mesangial zone, IgG (−).
Electron microscopy images showed glomerular mesangial cell hyperplasia (1–3 cells/zone) with moderate nodular hyperplasia in the matrix, no obvious electron deposition, endothelial cell hyperplasia in part of the capillary (1–3 cells/vessel), cytoplasmic swelling, capillary basement membrane thickening (600–1000 nm), endothelial loosening, extensive podocyte fusion, edema in some renal tubular epithelial cells, interstitial fibroproliferation, two small arteries with necrotic endothelial cells, and the deposition of particles. The glomeruli showed moderate mesangial hyperplasia and basement membrane thickening and loosening, as well as hyperplasia and edema in endothelial cells .
Gene sequencing: The patient’s ADAMTS13 gene contains compound heterozygous nucleotide variations: c.1335delC (p. Phe445LeufsTer52) is a frameshift variation inherited from her father. c.2130C > G (p. Cys710Trp) is a missense variation inherited from her mother . The frameshift variation changes the amino acid synthesis starting from phenylalanine 445 and ends at the 52nd amino acid after the change, resulting in a significant change in the structure of the protein. The missense variation causes amino acid 710 to be changed from Cysteine to Tryptophan . We submitted these two variants to ClinVar, the submission numbers are SUB10260642 and SUB10296888 respectively.
Variant's pathogenicity: We qualified the functional impact of the reported variants by using in-silico algorithms. The pathogenicity of p. Cys710Trp was quantified by using Polymorphism Phenotyping v2 (PolyPhen2) and Protein Variation Effect Analyzer (PROVEAN) algorithms; since frameshift mutations are not applicable to the " PolyPhen2" and " PROVEAN " algorithms, we used "AutoPVS1" algorithm to quantify the pathogenicity of p. Phe445Leufs*52.
"PolyPhen2" algorithm shows that the pathogenicity of p. Cys710Trp mutation is predicted to be "PROBABLY DAMAGING" with a score of 1.000 (sensitivity: 0.00; specificity: 1.00). "PROVEAN " algorithm shows that the pathogenicity of p. Cys710Trp mutation is predicted to be "Deleterious" with a PROVEAN score of − 9.836 (cutoff = − 2.5). AutoPVS1 shows that the pathogenicity of p. Phe445Leufs*52 is "PSV1', which means very strong evidence of pathogenicity.
The girl was diagnosed with hereditary TTP, which was treated with oral nifedipine, dipyridamole, and coated aldehyde oxystarch capsules. She was discharged from the hospital after two weeks and continued to take the medications at home. In January 2018, the patient was readmitted to PICU in our hospital for the same disease. Her condition improved after treatment with plasma exchange, after which she was discharged.