A 58-year-old woman presented to the accident and emergency department of our hospital with left-sided chest pain exacerbated by exertion. Associated symptoms included shortness of breath, nausea, vomiting, and diaphoresis. She had a background of type 2 diabetes mellitus, myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation on warfarin, heart failure, and stage 4 chronic kidney disease. At presentation, an examination revealed raised blood pressure of 207/140 mmHg with clinical signs of decompensated congestive cardiac failure.
Her electrocardiogram demonstrated ST depression and T-wave inversion in the lateral leads, and her chest x-ray confirmed the clinical findings of pulmonary edema. Bedside echocardiography demonstrated moderate to severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction with left ventricular hypertrophy and a calcific but unobstructive aortic valve. Given her risk factors, particularly her past history of myocardial infarction, an acute coronary syndrome was suspected, which was later confirmed with a raised high-sensitivity troponin I. Other differential diagnoses considered included aortic dissection and malignant hypertension.
The patient was treated with aspirin, clopidogrel, fondaparinux, and a high-dose statin. To help settle her chest pain, intravenous glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) was also started, she was given diuretics to treat her heart failure, and coronary angiography was planned. Despite this, her blood pressure remained high; therefore amlodipine was added.
The patient improved clinically within a few hours of admission; however, the following morning the patient was noted to have a fine, petechial, non-blanching rash over the dorsum of her left hand and forearm, as well as over her right hand and forearm, although to a lesser extent. There was no evidence of rash on her face, trunk, or lower limbs.
No features of meningism were present. Careful examination revealed the rash to be isolated to the areas shown in Fig. .
Owing to the petechial appearance of the rash, a vasculitic screen was requested. The appearance of the rash soon after admission raised the concern of a drug-related reaction; as such, clopidogrel and fondaparinux were withheld temporarily. The patient’s coronary angiography procedure was placed on hold pending the results of the vasculitic screen and to allow time to observe if the rash spread further or if the patient became systemically unwell.
The non-progressive nature of the rash over the following 24 hours and a clear, somewhat symmetrical demarcation below the level of the sphygmomanometer cuff raised the possibility of the Rumpel-Leede phenomenon due to acute dermal capillary rupture secondary to raised pressure in the dermal vessels with inflation of the sphygmomanometer cuff. The patient’s blood pressure had been regularly checked at 15-minute intervals after initiation of the GTN infusion. Initial measurements were done on the left arm, but later the sphygmomanometer cuff was switched to the right arm, at the patient’s request, due to pain because of the repeated high blood pressure readings in the first few hours.
Once our patient’s blood pressure was brought under control, her rash started to settle, and she went on to have successful stenting of her left anterior descending coronary artery with no adverse reaction to the reinstitution of clopidogrel. She experienced a 2-day delay in her treatment as a result of the rash. Greater awareness of this diabetic and hypertensive complication would have prevented this delay.