Two years before consulting us, a 36-year-old Japanese woman without a relevant medical history developed systemic joint pain. A chest radiogram acquired at a local hospital revealed a tumor in the left lower lobe; its diameter was 3-cm. She was referred to Department of Respiratory Medicine at our hospital and underwent bronchoscopy; cytology of the tumor resulted in a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Gadolinium-enhanced brain MRI scans and bone scintigraphy revealed no metastases. The tumor was clinically classified as T1N1M0, stageIIa. The lower lobe was resected and cytotoxic chemotherapy was administered. Two years later she presented with recurrence and received carboplatin, pemetrexed, and pembrolizumab (immune checkpoint inhibitor) therapy.
A PET scan incidentally revealed intracranial cold spots and a CT scan disclosed multiple cystic lesions without calcification in the parenchyma of the left hemisphere; they measured 10–35 mm in diameter . On MRI scans most of the cysts were ring-enhancing and some were surrounded by perilesional edema .
An eccentric nodule observed on a T2-weighted image of cysts outside the left lateral ventricle appeared to be a scolex . On MRI scans, the size of the lesions had increased very slowly in the course of 7 months . As single-photon emission CT (SPECT) denied the accumulation of thallium-201, a definitive diagnosis of malignant tumor could not be made.
At the time of admission to our Neurosurgery department, her consciousness was clear. She had no significant family- or employment history. She did not smoke or drink alcohol. Her blood pressure was 125/72 mmHg, her pulse rate was 68/min, and her temperature was 36.8 °C. Neurological examination revealed slight motor aphasia. Physical examination showed that more than 10 subcutaneous lesions were palpable on her chest, back, lower abdomen and her right knee . Chest CT revealed that one of the lesions on her back was calcified .
In a patient interview she reported that between 2009 and 2018 she had visited Canada, the USA, Bolivia, Peru, Chile, Cambodia, the Philippines, Indonesia, New Zealand, and Australia and that each sojourn lasted from 3 weeks to several months. In 2012 and 2013 she had often eaten whole roasted young pig in the Philippines and Korean Kimchi during her 2013–2014 visit to Canada. Based on this information we suspected that she may have become infected with cysticercosis in the endemic areas she visited.
We started treatment with the anti-epileptic drug levetiracetam (1000 mg/day) for seizure prophylaxis and asked for a cysticercosis analysis. Both DNA analysis from biopsy specimens from her right knee and lower abdomen and serum immunoblotting assay performed at the National Institute of Infectious Diseases (NIID) were negative for cysticercosis. We rejected cystic lesion biopsy because molecularly-targeted therapy with crizotinib had elicited strong pancytopenia. Instead, we administered ABZ (400 mg twice per day at 15 mg/kg/day), and decadron (4 mg twice per day at 0.1 mg/kg/day). However, we interrupted this regimen 5 days later because she developed fever, headache, a generalized rash, and swelling of the oral mucosa; we thought them to be reactions to treatment with ABZ.
Follow-up MRI studies performed 1 week after the start of treatment showed that the size of many of the cystic brain lesions had shrunk and that perilesional edema had decreased . With the exception of the large left frontal mass, most lesions had resolved on day 30 and no tapeworm scolex was detected . We continued treatment with crizotinib.
Follow-up 10 months later revealed no new lesions or seizures. Her lung adenocarcinoma was controlled without crizotinib. However, the left frontal cystic lesion had not regressed. During the 10-month interval she frequently suffered left frontal headaches and motor aphasia. Considering them to be symptoms of intracranial hypertension and a mass effect induced by the lesion located at a depth of 10 mm subcortically, we resected almost all of the lesion. It was thin-walled, well delineated from surrounding brain tissue, and contained a yellow, pus-like fluid. No cysticericus was found. Histological examination revealed metastasis from the lung adenocarcinoma; PCR assay for NCC returned negative results. The cell count in the pus-like fluid was 24,000, bacteriology rendered no findings. A gamma-knife procedure was applied around the operative scar in the left frontal lobe. Crizotinib administration was continued and she reported no headaches, no aphasia and her lung adenocarcinoma did not recur. A brain MRI scan performed 11-months after her admission to our hospital confirmed the absence of active and/or degenerative lesions.