An 83-year-old female patient with multiple medical comorbidities presented to the emergency department for severe left knee pain and decrease range of motion. She is known to have a unicompartmental prosthesis implanted in her left knee 20 years ago with good functional and clinical follow-up. On physical examination, she had a swollen and erythematous knee, in addition to diffuse tenderness and remarkable pain throughout her arc of motion. 3 months before presentation, she had infectious endocarditis on her native aortic valve and spondylodiscitis. AP chest X-ray showed enlarged cardiac silhouette due to pericardial effusion and the germ that was isolated by cultures that time was methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). She was treated with intravenous and oral antibiotics for 3 months duration. AP and lateral left knee radiographs showed osteolysis of the medial femoral condyle without prosthetic loosening .
Blood tests showed high CRP level (207 g/L) and blood culture showed MRSA bacteremia. Serum chrome and Cobalt were not done and left knee scintigraphy showed abnormal hot spots in the left medial knee compartment all around the prosthesis. Aspiration of the knee joint yielded the growth of MRSA. Based on the clinical and paraclinical information, a diagnosis of periprosthetic joint infection was confirmed, and a decision to do a two-stage revision arthroplasty was taken. Utilizing the same old incision and through a medial parapatellar approach, surgical exploration showed diffuse infiltration of the synovial tissue throughout the knee with metallic debris .
Extensive synovectomy was done, and multiple specimens were sent for bacteriological and pathological analysis . Medial unicompartmental knee prosthesis was removed and replaced by a cement spacer . The patient was then hospitalized for IV antibiotics, and 6 weeks later, a second stage revision to implant a total knee prosthesis was done after confirming that the knee joint is clean of any infection. Left knee anteroposterior and lateral radiograph post-second stage revision are shown in .
At 1-year post-operatively, she patient was free of symptoms with good functional and clinical outcome (Range of motion: 0–120°). Left knee anteroposterior and lateral radiograph at 1-year follow up are shown in .