A 39-year-old male was referred by his family physician to our out-patient clinic, complaining of right-sided thigh pain. He had recently moved to our region from Romania (a hyperendemeic area for echinococcosis) and worked as a shepherd.
His previous history included a routine right sided inguinal hernia repair, because of persistent groin pain 9 years previously. As there was no symptomatic improvement after his hernia repair anterior-posterior and lateral radiographs of the affected hip were obtained, showing a cyst in the femoral neck. A few months after the hernia repair, the cyst was explored, curreted and the cavity was bone grafted using corticospongiosus autograft from the iliac crest. The histological examination from the excised tissue showed the presence of Echinococcus granulosus.
The radiographs taken at his recent presentation, 8 years after the previous surgery, showed a multiloculated cyst around a previously implanted cortical screw, which was fixing the bonegraft .
We were aware of the previous histological results which were positive for E. granulosus. Blood tests showed a high serological titer for E. granulosus, but otherwise normal values. To investigate for other potential parasitic sites a CT scan of the brain, skull, chest, abdomen and pelvis was performed, with special attention to the right thigh. The scan confirmed a large (17 × 3 × 5 cm) cyst in the anterolateral part of the proximal thigh within the vastus lateralis . The CT scan is essential in determining the extent of bony disease, especially in the proximal femur. If hip replacement is necessary, the feasibility of using routine implants depends on the destruction of proximal femoral structures, best shown by a CT. If the calcar and/or the greater trochanter have to sacrificed, the surgical plan (implant use, rehabilitation, potential outcome) changes. There were no other cysts visible.
The patient was scheduled for a relatively urgent elective operation, because of the prefracture state and was discharged. Two days prior to the planned procedure, he represented with severe thigh pain, and inability of weight-bearing on the affected side. Subsequent imaging confirmed a non-traumatic pathological fracture in the intertrochanteric region .
A two step procedure was performed under the same anesthetic, utilizing an extended lateral (Hardinge) approach, with distal extension. During the first part of the procedure an en-bloc excision of the cyst was performed. The lesion was localized between the vastus lateralis and rectus femoris muscles. It had eroded the anterior cortex of the proximal metaphysic, just above the lesser trochanter. After thorough debridement, an adjuvant was used, which is well-established in tumor surgery. The bony bed was exposed to a concentrated phenol solution (70%) via a soaked gauze, followed by copious lavage with a concentrated alcohol solution. No spillage or anaphylaxis was observed during the first part of the procedure.
During the second stage of the procedure, a cemented THR was implanted using an Aesculap implant (Centrament stem, PE-CUP, 28 mm isodur head). The patient received oral Mebendazole (Vermox, Richter Gedeon), 400 mg bid, preoperatively for 5 days. Unlike with intraabdominal pathology, preoperative chemotherapy was only possible for a short period of time, as emergent fracture treatment was necessary. The chemotherapy was continued for 6 weeks postoperatively using the same agent and dose (Mebendazole). The role and length of post-operative adjuvant chemical therapy in musculoskeletal hydatid disease is unclear. In alveolar echinococcosis, it is recommended that chemotherapy is continued for up to 2 years after surgery. The role of life-long chemosuppression is being explored .
Several samples were taken intraoperatively. The histopathological examination confirmed the suspected diagnosis . The patient had an uneventful postoperative period, with uncomplicated wound healing. He was asymptomatic at the latest follow-up, one year postoperatively, with a normal plain radiograph . Inflammatory markers are within the normal threshold, however the serological titer remains high (>1024). Patient remains under close (3 monthly) follow-up.