A 40-year-old Moroccan man who was a chronic cigarette smoker was followed up for a bladder tumor which manifested 2 months earlier with coagulant hematuria. Resection of his bladder tumor was suggested. He reported headaches, dizziness, and a facial erythrosis. A general examination found a facial erythrosis without any peripheral adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, or physical masses. A clinical examination showed a middle prostate hypertrophy of 40g with lower vesicle flexibility.
The preoperative biological assessment showed a hemoglobin level of 20.3g/L, a hematocrit of 63.7%, red blood cells of 6,570,000/mm and a hyperleucocytosis of 14,000/mm.
An arterial blood gases study and imaging examinations including thorax radiography, spirometry, renal and hepatic ultrasound, thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans, a CT scan of his brain and echocardiography showed no abnormalities. The cortisol rate of 8 hours, the urinary free cortisol, and the hemoglobin electrophoresis and markers’ dosage were without abnormalities. Hence, diagnoses of secondary polyglobulia and primary neoplasia were discarded. His total globular volume was found to be higher than the normal value at a rate of 40mL/kg confirming the essential characteristic of this polyglobulia; the result of a JAK2 mutation test was positive.
The patient was treated using iterative bleeding. It is notable that he neither drank alcohol nor presented with any particular stress and/or depressive characteristics. His blood pressure, glycemia and lipids assessment were all normal. The vesicoprostatic ultrasound and the testicular echo-Doppler were without abnormalities.
Indeed there was a correlation between the episodes of erectile disorder and the bleeding: significant improvement of sexual performance was noted and lasted 4 days after each bleeding session. Each time the bleeding therapy was stopped the erectile disorders restarted (Figure
).
The patient reported satisfactory sexual activity while presenting with hematuria (Figure
). Since his marriage of one year earlier, the patient has been significantly affected by these disorders which required treatment with 5-phosphodiesterase inhibitors that unfortunately demonstrated very limited benefits.