A 27-year-old woman had experienced right flank soreness for around one year.
She did not seek medical help until two months before the admission when she felt increasing painful swelling over the right flank and the right abdomen. There were no gastrointestinal or genitourinary complaints and body weight loss throughout the previous year.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
At presentation, the physical examination disclosed a huge palpable bulging mass over the right abdomen with slight tenderness.
The laboratory tests revealed hemoglobin of 11.4 g/dL, white blood cell count of 7.4 × 109/L, serum creatinine of 1.5 mg/dL, estimated glomerular filtration rate of 44 mL/min/1.73 m², and urine red blood cell count of 30-50/high power field. Other laboratory biochemistries were unremarkable.
The abdominal sonography revealed a huge well-defined mass measuring about 15 cm in diameter over the right kidney. The tumor was multicystic with the solid component. The subsequent computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a huge, mainly hypodense, multi-loculated cystic tumor measuring about 18 cm × 14 cm × 11 cm .
Concerning the probability of malignancy, she underwent a right radical nephrectomy. No lymph node was dissected at the time of surgery. The resected kidney measured 18.4 cm × 14.5 cm × 11.0 cm and weighed 1680 g. The cut surface revealed a variable-size of multi-loculated cystic spaces filled with clear serous fluid. Protruding from the cystic wall was yellowish-gray solid nodules with focal areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. A narrow rim of residual kidney tissue was noted at the edge of the specimen . Microscopically, the tumor was confined to the kidney and consisted of cystic and solid components. The cystic component was lined by a single layer of benign cuboidal cells . The solid areas were composed of spindle cells with marked nuclear atypia admixed with multinucleated cells. Mitosis was frequent . Myxoid changes were found . Neither chondroid differentiation nor blastema-like cells were found in the sections studied. Immunohistochemical evaluation of tumor cells exhibited diffuse positivity for CD56, p53, and vimentin, and focally positive for desmin . The remaining markers, including GFAP, CD34, S-100 protein, and WT-1, were negative. The positivity for P53 could be a reflection of anaplasia. Focal positive staining represented focal muscle differentiation.