A 16-year-old right-handed male who was a high school handball player was referred to our department by a nearby hospital 5 months after the onset of pain of unknown etiology in the dorsal aspect of his right wrist. At the outside hospital, imaging findings led to a diagnosis of avascular necrosis of the capitate, but wrist immobilization using a brace did not improve the pain. At the initial visit to our department, the patient was noted to have mild swelling of the dorsal wrist, tenderness of the proximal capitate, and painful trigger wrist occurring with flexion and extension of the right wrist, with a range of motion in his wrist limited to 30°/60° of flexion/extension. The visual analog scale (VAS) score for pain was 71, with a grip strength of 70% relative to the unaffected side. Plain X-rays showed collapse of the proximal capitate and evidence of osteosclerosis, as well as palmar flexion of the lunate . The carpal height ratio and the radial lunate angle were 0.46 (unaffected side, 0.49) and 27° (unaffected side, 11°), respectively. The capitolunate angle was 32° (unaffected side, 24°). Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a bone cyst of the proximal capitate and a free body from the palmar proximal capitate . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the proximal capitate had a low signal intensity on T1-weighted images , and a high signal intensity on short TI inversion recovery (STIR) images . Fluoroscopic examination showed that the proximal articular surface of the capitate interfered with lunate motion during wrist flexion and extension. These findings led to a diagnosis of trigger wrist caused by capitolunate instability secondary to avascular necrosis of the capitate, for which surgery was performed. A longitudinal incision was made over the dorsal aspect of the right wrist, and the joint capsule was longitudinally incised over the capitate and lunate for exposure of the joint, revealing proliferation of inflammatory synovium in the joint. Morphological changes were noted on the proximal articular surface of the capitate, including flattening and eburnation. Intraoperative inspection revealed that limited compatibility between the capitate and lunate caused the triggering phenomenon during passive wrist flexion and extension . The proximal portion of the capitate was resected piece by piece using a bone chisel, while observing for any triggering during wrist flexion and extension. A palmaris longus muscle tendon ball was used to fill the cavity of the excised proximal capitate. The scaphoid and lunate were temporarily fixed using a Kirschner wire. A long-arm splint was applied for the first two weeks postoperatively, after which it was changed to a short-arm splint for an additional two weeks. Wrist rehabilitation was begun when the splint and the Kirschner wire used for fixation were removed at four weeks after surgery. Resumption of sports activities was permitted at 3 months postoperatively. Histopathological examination revealed a lack of osteocyte nuclei in the bone lacunae and incomplete ossification of the necrotic bone. These findings were consistent with avascular necrosis of the capitate . Two years after surgery, the patient’s clinical outcome was favorable, with no recurrence of wrist pain or triggering despite resumption of sports. He had an improved range of motion (75°/85° on flexion/extension) and increased grip strength (113% relative to the unaffected side). Plain X-rays showed no further collapse of the capitate, with a carpal height ratio of 0.49, a radial lunate angle of 10°, and a capitolunate angle of 18° .