A 16-year-old Hispanic male was booked into a county juvenile detention and rehabilitation facility. Upon arrival at the facility and during the medical screening, he complained of persistent intractable epigastric pain, along with pleuritic chest pain with multiple episodes of vomiting over the previous 4 days. He further complained of dysphagia and odynophagia. At the time, he denied any past medical history and/or swallowing any foreign body. He admitted to smoking marijuana on a daily basis. During the initial care, he was given ondansetron (Zofran) 4 mg tablets and 30 mg of aluminum hydroxide/magnesium solution as well as two hydroxide/simethicone tablets orally.
The patient subsequently became more subjectively comfortable, but the chest pain continued to persist. An electrocardiogram (EKG) was done during the same period and was evaluated by the on-call physician as being suspicious for acute pericarditis .
On the basis of the assessment by the on-call physician, he was transferred to a local emergency department (ED) for further evaluation. In the first ED, physical examination indicated a normotensive, mildly tachycardic patient with moderate epigastric pain and otherwise normal physical examination. He admitted that his vomiting has improved but he still continues to have dysphagia. The patient underwent a series of laboratory tests that included complete blood count, serological liver function tests, a complete serum chemistry panel, and a computed tomography (CT) of abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast. The initial laboratory findings were significant for a mild leukocytosis, and the CT revealed pericholecystic fluid, distal esophageal edema, and dilation with questionable air in the esophageal wall, and possible hiatal hernia .
The repeated EKG in the ED confirmed the possible diagnosis of pericarditis as well as concern for possible cholecystitis. Subsequently, the patient was transferred for a higher level of care to a regional medical center for further evaluation. During the course of care at the new ED, the patient continued to present with tachycardia, nausea, vomiting, and persistent epigastric and chest pain. The patient’s EKG continued to show diffuse ST elevation, while his cardiac markers remained within normal limits. Chest X-ray revealed a questionable infiltrate. Formal right upper quadrant ultrasound was performed and showed gallbladder wall thickening near the fundus of unclear etiology but no gallstones and was otherwise normal. His laboratory results were significant for white blood cells 12.5 × 109 per liter, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 28 millimeters per hour, C-reactive protein 21.77 milligrams per decilitre, and procalcitonin 11.02 nanograms per milliliter, all elevated. Troponin and the remainder of the complete blood count and basic metabolic panel were grossly unremarkable.
The patient was treated with 2 liter of normal saline intravenously and 4 mg Zofran intravenously. Pain medication of hydrocodone/acetaminophen 5/325 mg orally as well as famotidine (Pepcid) 20 mg orally and gastrointestinal (GI) cocktail (aluminum hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide/lidocaine) 30 ml orally were given. Additionally, the patient was given ceftazidime 1 g intravenously and azithromycin 500 mg orally. While in the ED, he continued to deny swallowing a foreign body or ingesting chemicals that may have caused his symptoms. Upon further review of the patient’s symptoms, imaging studies, laboratory results, and recommendation by the surgery team, the patient was transferred to a nearby pediatric subspecialty hospital for further evaluation by pediatric surgery and gastroenterology and possible endoscopic evaluation of his esophagus.
On arrival to the pediatric subspecialty hospital, he continued to be tachycardic, but afebrile. In the ED, he received 4.5 gram (g) piperacillin/tazobactam (Zosyn), 20 mg Pepcid, and 4 mg Zofran, all intravenously. He immediately underwent an esophagram with water-soluble contrast that revealed a filling defect in the distal esophagus. After further questioning by the pediatric surgery team, he admitted that he had swallowed “a bag” prior to his arrest but would not disclose the contents of the bag. Subsequently, he underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and a plastic bag with content suspicious for marijuana was discovered in the distal esophagus and removed . Further analysis confirmed the presence of marijuana in the retrieved bag.
Patient was hospitalized with antibiotic therapy with intravenous Zosyn 3.375 g every 8 hours for suspected aspiration pneumonia and transitioned to oral amoxicillin/clavulanate (Augmentin) 875 mg tablets on the third day post-procedure for an additional 7 days of treatment. The patient also continued on 20 mg oral Pepcid twice a day. Further evaluation by pediatric cardiology and repeated EKG confirmed the diagnosis of pericarditis, likely post-infectious in etiology. His esophagus also showed evidence of achalasia, which was attributed to the prolonged irritation of the epithelial surface with the foreign body and the inflammation in the surrounding region. The patient was treated with ibuprofen (Motrin) 600 mg orally every 8 hours for the pericarditis. Furthermore, cardiology recommended outpatient follow-up in 2 months along with referral to pediatric rheumatology if symptoms persisted to explore other potential causes. The patient was discharged 3 days after the hospitalization and planned for a follow-up with outpatient pediatric surgery service 1 week later.
While awaiting for the outpatient follow-up, 7 days after discharge, he returned to the local ED with persistent left-sided chest pain and dyspnea worsened with exertions and wheezing. The patient was noted to have significant leukocytosis, and a CT of his chest revealed a left-sided loculated hydropneumothorax with central cavitary lesion. He was then transferred back to the pediatric surgery service at the same subspecialty hospital for further evaluation. Given concern for esophageal perforation, a repeat esophagram was performed showing normal esophageal caliber and contour without extravasation of contrast. The patient was then admitted to pediatric service with placement of a thoracostomy tube by the interventional radiology service. He received 4 days of thrombolytic therapy via the thoracostomy with satisfactory output. The thoracostomy tube was removed 10 days later. Infectious disease was also consulted and agreed with an antibiotic regimen of intravenous vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and clindamycin during his course in the hospital. The patient experienced resolution of his pericarditis symptoms with normalization of the EKG after the removal of the thoracostomy tube and was discharged home on continuation of intravenous ceftriaxone and vancomycin via peripherally inserted central catheter line as well as oral clindamycin.