A 14-year-old Caucasian boy presented to our Pediatric Neurosurgery clinic for evaluation of a scalp mass. Our patient was a previously healthy child who had a basketball strike to the back of his head four months prior to presentation. Our patient did not have loss of consciousness and had immediate scalp swelling near the impact site. While initially painful, the pain subsided over the next two days, but a firm mass persisted for months after the incident. He was then sent to our Pediatric Neurosurgery clinic for evaluation of the persistent mass.
On examination, our patient was found to have a 2.5cm firm, non-tender, non-pulsatile, mobile mass in the left posterior temporal area approximately 6.5cm superior to the mastoid tip and 4.5cm lateral to the external occipital protuberance. The mass was not bothersome to our patient other than it being unsightly. Upon palpation, no palpable thrill was present, and we did not auscultate the lesion. A skull X-ray showed no bony abnormalities. A magnetic resonance imaging scan showing heterogeneity within the lesion suggested partial thrombosis of the scalp mass or evolving hematoma of differing ages . Due to the very mild symptoms, the decision was made to observe the lesion. Two months later, however, our patient returned with cosmetic concerns related to the mass. Surgery was offered to remove the lesion and provide a definitive diagnosis.
Our patient was brought to the operating room, and a curvilinear skin incision was made superior to the mass. The firm, smooth, non-pulsatile mass was encountered just under the galea aponeurotica. It was circumferentially dissected and associated with brisk arterial bleeding from vessels proximal and distal to the lesion. We had not anticipated an aneurysm and, therefore, encountered significant bleeding until the proximal and distal arteries were coagulated. The bleeding was easily controlled with bipolar electrocautery and division of the proximal and distal artery. The mass was excised en bloc and sent for pathologic examination. However, we did not section the mass on the operating table to look for intraluminal thrombosis. Our patient tolerated the procedure well and was sent home later the same day.
Gross examination of the specimen demonstrated a smooth, fluctuant, intact cyst . Sectioning revealed a thin, tan-white wall and red-purple, soft-to-friable contents. Microscopic examination showed a well-circumscribed thrombosed artery with fibrosis and granulation tissue . The lumen was filled with hemorrhage, fibrin and abundant papillary structures with fibrinous cores lined by a single layer of endothelial cells. There was no cytologic atypia, mitosis or necrosis of the endothelial cells. Movat’s pentachrome stain highlighted elastic lamina, consistent with the wall of an artery.
Our patient returned to our Pediatric Neurosurgery clinic for follow-up, and at 15 months has had no recurrence of this mass.