A 38-year-old Caucasian woman with body mass index (BMI, kg/m2) of 28.7 kg/m2 and medical history notable for anxiety, uterine fibroid treated with fibroid embolization, and human papilloma virus infection was transferred from an outside hospital with neck computed tomography (CT) concerning for cervical abscess and septic arthritis of the left sternoclavicular joint. Four days prior to this presentation, she presented to a local urgent care clinic, where she was tested positive for influenza A and was treated with oseltamivir. While on the therapy, the patient developed acute-onset edema and anterior neck pain, worse upon movement of the neck and the chest. The patient denied any recent trauma, injury, or travel. The patient’s physical examination was notable for diffuse erythema over neck, upper back, and anterior chest wall with tenderness at the left SC joint, bilateral deltoid muscles, and central sternal area. She was afebrile with temperature of 98.7 °F, and laboratory results were unremarkable with white cell count of 18 x 109/L, hemoglobin level of 7.8 g/dl, and blood urea nitrogen level of 4 mg/dL.
The patient underwent emergent IV antibiotic treatment (piperacillin + tazobactam, 3.375 g, Q6H, IV) with surgical exploration, debridement, and drainage, and the intraoperative cultures grew Fusobacterium necrophorum. She recovered and was discharged on postoperative day 7 on oral amoxicillin + clavulanic acid (875 mg + 125 mg/day) with close follow-up. At time of discharge, she complained of pain in her left shoulder but magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated no evidence of septic joints.
Two weeks after discharge, the patient reported ongoing left shoulder pain upon movement with persistent local edema and tenderness in her left chest. CT scan revealed a new erosion at the left clavicular head and the articular surface of the manubrium at the left sternoclavicular joint, suggestive of new septic arthritis. Her examination was notable for well-healed neck incision and mild erythema and swelling of the left sternoclavicular joint with tenderness. The patient was afebrile, and her laboratory results were notable for erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 85, C-reactive protein level of 10.5, and normal white blood cell count. Metronidazole (500 mg/day) was added to her amoxicillin + clavulanic acid (875 mg + 125 mg/day) antibiotic regimen.
Three weeks after discharge, the patient presented with worsening chest pain, fever, and chills, worsening pain and swelling over her central chest. Repeat CT showed increased erosions of the left sternoclavicular joint . She was admitted to the hospital, placed on IV antibiotics (pipercillin + tazobactam, 3.375 g, Q6H, IV) and underwent interventional radiology-guided drainage of the left SCSA. She responded well and was discharged with intravenous piperacillin + tazobactam regimen for 7 weeks.
Upon completion of her antibiotic regimen, she was symptom free, with CT showing only minimal residual fat stranding overlying the left pectoralis muscle. The patient was transitioned to sole oral amoxicillin + clavulanic acid treatment for additional 6 weeks. The patient remained well, without symptoms for more than a year.