An 86-year-old woman experienced recurrent massive hematuria for the past 4 years that used to disappear temporarily with oral antibiotics. The condition had been diagnosed as bacterial cystitis.
On admission day, her hematuria had lasted for 2 days prior despite taking antibiotics. She was transferred to the emergency department of our hospital.
The patient’s medical history includes chronic heart failure, chronic kidney disease, angina pectoris, subarachnoid hemorrhage, uterine prolapse, and lumbar spinal canal stenosis. She also had a history of surgeries for a uterine myoma and femoral neck fracture and medications included aspirin and carvedilol.
On arrival, she appeared drowsy, and the following were noted: Glasgow Coma Scale, E4V4M6; body temperature, 35.7°C; blood pressure, 90/48 mmHg; and heart rate, 60 bpm. Her conjunctiva was slightly pale, and her extremities were cold. Laboratory findings revealed severe anemia (6.6 g/dL of hemoglobin) and an increased creatinine level (2.53 mg/dL). Her coagulation function was normal. Urinalysis revealed hematuria and pyuria. A urine culture was negative, probably because of the oral antibiotics she had taken before being transferred. On abdominal ultrasonography, the inferior vena cava was observed to be collapsed. A computed tomography scan revealed blood clots in the bladder but no ascites . Although septic shock from a urinary tract infection was at first suspected, peripheral coldness, the collapse of the inferior vena cava, a negative blood culture, and a low hemoglobin level led to the diagnosis of hemorrhagic cystitis with hemorrhagic shock.
Blood transfusion, continuous bladder irrigation with saline, and a ceftriaxone drip (1 g once a day) were immediately initiated after admission. The hematuria resolved on the second hospital day, and the anemia improved on the third. The patient was discharged 10 days after admission.
Two months later, however, the patient returned to the emergency room complaining of massive gross hematuria. This time, her blood pressure was 62/44 mmHg and heart rate was 62 bpm. Laboratory examination revealed a hemoglobin level of 8.0 g/dL. Noradrenaline was used in addition to the same treatment as had been used in the previous admission. Her blood pressure improved the following day. She underwent cystoscopy, which revealed inflammation of the bladder walls but no tumor . Tests for anti-myeloperoxidase ANCA and anti-proteinase-3 ANCA, cytomegalovirus, urinary BK virus, and urinary adenovirus were negative. Hematuria ceased on the ninth admission day.
During her hospitalization, the patient experienced frequent episodes of urinary incontinence with residual urine of more than 150 mL. Therefore, she was diagnosed with a neurogenic bladder. Her past medical history of a lumbar spinal canal stenosis and total hysterectomy for a uterine fibroid were suspected as the underlying causes of the neurogenic bladder. A urinary catheter was inserted to stop the recurrence of urinary infection, following which the gross hematuria ceased.