A 15-year-old East African boy was referred to our hospital with a diagnosis of recurrent TB. Upon review, the patient was found to have a history of productive cough and intermittent low-grade evening fevers for one year and shortness of breath for one week prior to presentation. One year and five months prior to his presentation to our hospital, he had presented to a peripheral hospital with similar symptoms and had been diagnosed with sputum acid-fast bacilli (AFB) and smear-positive TB. He had been treated with anti-TB medications, which brought him only mild relief. Two months after completing anti-TB therapy, his cough and fevers worsened, for which a re-treatment regimen of anti-TB medications, including two months of intramuscular streptomycin, were started on the basis of clinical findings. The sputum examination for AFB had not been repeated. Four months into the course of his second course of anti-TB therapy, the patient stopped taking his medications because he reportedly experienced only mild relief of his symptoms. Repeat Ziehl-Neelsen staining performed two months prior to his admission to our institution was negative for AFB, and no more drugs were given. One week prior to his admission to our hospital, the patient developed progressively worsening shortness of breath, which was even worse while he was lying flat and was associated with dull left-sided chest pain.
His social history was significant for crushing stones (rock cutting) for two years, but he had no history of smoking or working in the mining industry. He had no history of TB or other lung disease in his family.
His physical examination revealed that he was fully conscious, afebrile, slightly wasted, and dyspneic. His oxygen saturation level was 96% on room air, and his other vital signs were normal. His respiratory examination revealed a respiratory rate of 25 cycles/minute and chest bulging on his left side, but his trachea was centrally located. Other findings on the left side included decreased chest expansion, increased tactile vocal fremitus, dull percussion note, and bronchial breath sounds. The rest of the respiratory examination was unremarkable.
The patient was admitted to the medical ward with a diagnosis of recurrent TB with massive left-sided consolidation. A complete blood count revealed a white blood cell count of 8.7 cells/mm3 with a differential of 69% neutrophils, 23% lymphocytes, 6% monocytes, and 1% eosinophils. His hemoglobin level was 10.6 g/dL, and his platelet count was 504 cells/mm3. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 20 mm/hour. His renal and liver function tests were within normal ranges. A rapid test for HIV was performed and was negative. Sputum tests for Gram staining and Ziehl-Neelsen staining were both negative. A chest radiograph revealed features of huge left-sided consolidation with complete opacification of the left hemithorax . His chest ultrasound revealed that the left lung was completely consolidated. There was no pleural or pericardial effusion, and his right lung was completely normal. Following these examinations, the patient was empirically re-started on the retreatment regimen for recurrent TB, and the cardiothoracic surgery team was consulted about performing a lung biopsy. The cardiothoracic surgery team felt that the patient was too unstable for surgery and requested that medical management be continued until the patient's condition improved.
On hospital day 3, the patient's condition started deteriorating, with worsening shortness of breath, wheezing, and hypoxia (oxygen saturation 82% to 90% on room air). He was admitted to the intensive care unit, where his anti-TB medications were continued, together with oxygen therapy. On hospital day 7, the patient died before any further intervention could be performed.
A post-mortem examination was performed by the hospital's pathologists. As shown in Figures and , the histopathologic examination revealed a huge mass in the left lung with necrosis and suppurative caseation. Microscopic examination of caseous material was negative for AFB. PAS staining was positive and cytological examination revealed yeast cells and capsules of non-viable fungi, suggestive of H. capsulatum. Because of resource limitations at our hospital, no further tests could be performed. The pathologist's impression was that the patient had had pulmonary histoplasmosis.