In May of 2013, a twenty-six-year-old male patient was involved in a motor vehicle accident. Cervical MRI at the time of the accident revealed multiple herniated discs. Following this accident, the patient was incarcerated. While in prison, he complained of back pain and was administered a corticosteroid injection. Soon after the injection, the patient reported increased bilateral lower extremity weakness. He denied any bladder or bowel control problems, fever, nausea, chills, or vomiting. In September of 2013, following two months of bilateral lower extremity weakness with difficulty ambulating, he was brought to the hospital for further evaluation.
The twenty-six-year-old patient had a history of cocaine addiction, used non-steroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAIDs) frequently for back pain, and denied using intravenous drugs. He may have received multiple intramuscular methylprednisone while in prison for his back pain. Additionally, the patient was known to be positive for hepatitis C, with an unknown etiology.
An MRI of the spine showed a sizeable epidural abscess at the T3-T7 level . Besides elevated C-reactive proteins, his blood work was normal. The patient was started on Vancomycin and Metronidazole. However, due to the size of the abscess, edema beginning to spread to the cervical region, and neurologic deficits, surgical intervention was scheduled for the following day.
In the operating room, laminectomies were performed from T6 to T8. Upon exposure of the epidural space, no pus formation was found as demonstrated on MRI. The pedicle of T7 was removed to allow exploration of the ventral epidural space and the space contained no evidence of abscess, tumor, or phlegmon. Due to the patients declining motor function, a durotomy from T6-T8 was performed. Purulent material was seen upon incision and no spinal fluid was appreciated. Because of the severe edema, primary repair of the dura was not possible. Distally the dura was approximated, and a duroplasty was performed for closure of T6-T7.
Despite the operation, the patient's neurologic function did not improve as they still had no below sensation below the T5 dermatome and no lower extremity motor control. However, we believe our high suspicion of an intradural infection during operation prevented further morbidity and mortality as we were able to decompress the spinal cord and get a culture for proper treatment of the infection. Labs revealed the infecting organism was C. albicans and the patient began 800 mg of IV fluconazole daily. After a week of intravenous Fluconazole, the patient was transferred to the hospital's rehabilitation center and started on 800 mg oral doses of the medication. The patient was stable, and an MRI of the thoracic spine demonstrated improvement.
Six weeks after the index surgery, the patient began having pain at the base of his neck and radiating down his arm. His blood work showed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and increased C-reactive protein levels. An MRI of the cervical spine revealed a mass at T1 that was not present in the MRI from October .
The patient returned to the operating room for a T1 corpectomy to expose the dura, due to the fact the patient had retrovertebral compression. Visualization of the spinal cord revealed tense area with discoloration. A needle was placed into this portion of the dura, and aspiration revealed no fluid. The dura was therefore incised over this area and exposed a frank purulent material and granulation tissue. This material was cleared from the intradural space and sent for culture. The spinal cord was irrigated with standard saline solution before the dura was closed. The patient underwent a fusion between C7, T1, and T2. He was then transferred to the ICU in stable but critical condition. The cultures returned positive for C. albicans, which remained susceptible to fluconazole.
He maintained 5/5 motor strength in the upper extremities. To treat the C. albicans infection, the patient was started on 5 mg/kg per day of liposomal amphotericin B for six weeks. After this, he resumed 400 mg/day of fluconazole for two months.
The patient suffered from medical commodities in the following years, many related to his lower extremity paraplegia. These problems included multiple urinary tract infections, chronic kidney disease, and decubitus ulcers, some of which required surgical excisional debridement. The patient also lived with a catheter, a colostomy bag, and underwent a Girdlestone procedure for bacterial osteomyelitis of the hip. Additionally, a right iliacus abscess that tracked to the psoas was surgically evacuated. Ultimately, the patient became septic secondary to a presumed urinary tract infection and succumbed to his illness in 2019.