A 6-year-old male was hospitalized due to persistent productive coughs, otalgia, and recurrent persistent purulent rhinorrhea without complaint of chest tightness or breathlessness. He was the only child of the family whose parents were second cousins with no report of allergic or immunodeficiency disorders in the family members. There was a history of frequent hospital admissions since the age of 7 months with a variety of complaints including allergic and infectious problems . He was diagnosed with cow’s milk protein allergy at the age of 15 months. A strict cow’s milk-free diet was followed until his second birthday when his diarrhea stopped and never recurred.
Medical history was negative for oral candidiasis, persistent ulcers, or abscesses. He was gone through extensive diagnostic workup during the preceding admissions since the age of 7 months. Regarding the patient’s TSH level of 5.6 mg/dl and failure to gain normal weight, injectable growth hormone plus oral levothyroxine was prescribed with the diagnosis of hypothyroidism, about 3 months before his last admission at the age of 6.
The most distinguished findings on physical examination were stunted growth, multiple anterior and posterior cervical, as well as submandibular lymphadenopathies in addition to diffuse crackles, heard in both lungs. The patient’s weight and height were below the 5th percentile for age and gender (age = 6 years old, weight = 17.5 kg, height = 103.5 cm, BMI = 15.9). Despite the history of multiple occasions of otorrhea, no active ear discharge or tympanic perforation was found at the age of 6. Although Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO) was reported in his earlier echocardiography, cardiac auscultation was normal. No hepatosplenomegaly or abdominal tenderness was detected.
Ground glass opacity in basal segments of right lower lobe and patchy infiltration in addition to interlobular septal thickening in the peripheral zone of lower lobes of both lungs along with mediastinal and axillary lymph node hyperplasia were detected on chest computed tomography (CT) scan, performed at the age of 4. Consolidation, peripheral ground-glass opacity, and air bronchogram on both sides, as well as mild peribronchial thickening, were reported on chest CT scan at the age of 6, indicating pneumonia, without any signs of lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion . Pansinusitis features including bilateral opacification of ethmoid and maxillary sinuses with membrane thickening and obstruction of the infundibulum were seen in the CT scan of the paranasal sinuses at the age of 6. Reactive nodes without any evidence of EBV infection were reported in the pathology of cervical lymph nodes after excisional biopsy.
The gastrointestinal examination was carried out during the period of chronic diarrhea, before the second birthday. Esophageal diverticulum, gastroesophageal reflux, and regurgitation without any signs of hiatal hernia, pyloric stenosis, or intestinal obstruction were found in the barium swallow test showed in Fig. . Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, at the age of 2, showed inflammation of the lower esophagus with hiatal hernia and accumulation of a great amount of food in the lower third of the esophagus, but the stomach reported being normal. Further workup including colonoscopy and rectosigmoid biopsy showed nodular lymphoid hyperplasia and exudate in the rectum, colon, and sigmoid in addition to inflammation and increased number of eosinophils in the lamina propria with active lymphoid follicles and active pancolitis, suggesting a form of inflammatory bowel diseases or allergic disorders .
Further workup was performed to rule out the differential diagnosis of malignancies and immunodeficiencies. Complete blood count (CBC) showed hypochromic and microcytic anemia along with eosinophilia . No significant abnormality was found in the assessment of serum electrolytes as well as liver and kidney function tests.
Immunologic evaluation (illustrated in Tables , , ) revealed hypergammaglobulinemia. Despite receiving routine DPT (tetanus, diphtheria, and pertussis) vaccination, anti-tetanus toxoid IgG and anti-diphtheria toxoid antibody were reported to be lower than protective level. Considering the delayed diagnosis, he received MMRV (measles, rubella, and mumps vaccine) at the age of 12 and 18 months in the context of routine vaccination and surprisingly tolerated both doses. Moreover, anti-pneumococcal antibody levels were lower than normal both before and after vaccination. Purified protein derivative (PPD) skin test was non-reactive despite receiving Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine at birth. NBT (Nitroblue Tetrazolium) test result was within normal limits. Cystic fibrosis was ruled out owing to the negative result of the sweat chloride test (PR: 28 mmol/l, NR: < 30 mmol/l). Other general laboratory test findings are summarized in Table . Flow cytometric lymphocyte subsets enumeration showed a decreased total count of CD4+ T lymphocytes and their subpopulations as well as CD8+ T cells. Other subsets of lymphocytes were within normal ranges. The patient’s stimulation index to BCG and candida not PHA (Phytohemagglutinin) in lymphocyte transformation test (LTT), done using BrdU cell proliferation assay Elisa Kit, was lower than the normal range . Lymphocyte proliferation was also assessed by carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) test, in which gradual halving of CFSE fluorescence within daughter cells after cell divisions is evaluated. The proliferation index is the average number of divisions of just the responding cells (cells that underwent at least one division) and the division index is the average number of divisions for all of the cells in the original starting population . The patient's division index was 0.6 (NR > 0.4) and proliferation index was 1.5 (NR > 1.3), both within normal limits.