A 34-year-old gentleman presented to the clinic with complaints of weakness of all limbs, proximal greater than distal, for the past 3 years along with nonspecific mild back pain. His weakness had been gradually progressive, and for the past 1 year, he could no longer walk independently and needed support for daily activities. For the past 10 months, he was bedridden and severely functionally restricted. Examination revealed findings corroborated with the history. While the tone was normal, muscle power in the shoulders and hips bilaterally was ⅗ (MRC Grading), bilateral elbows and knees ⅘ and bilateral ankles, wrists, and grip 5/5 suggesting a predominant proximal muscle weakness. Sensations over the body and deep tendon reflexes were normal. An magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) whole spine was performed that revealed a normal result with no structural pathology that could explain the weakness.
Laboratory tests revealed hypophosphatemia (serum phosphorus levels of 1.84 mg/dl), which explained his proximal muscle weakness, with >5% fractional phosphorus excretion in the urine. An avid focus on DOTATOC positron emission tomography (PET) scan and a corresponding hyperdense focus on a plain computed tomography (CT) suggested the possibility of a PMT of the left side of D10 vertebral body. Even on revisiting the MRI no lesion could be identified at D10. Correction of hypophosphatemia was commenced with phosphorus supplements and calcitriol; however, there was no improvement in the serum phosphorus levels despite correction due to persistent phosphaturia and no clinical improvement before surgery was observed. He underwent a right D10 costotransversectomy and hemivertebrectomy where the sclerotic lesion was drilled and excised. The entire area corresponding to the hot spot in the PET scan was drilled, along with a 3–4 mm margin . Within the third postoperative day, he had subjective improvement in his symptoms and by 14 days made a near-full recovery. His phosphate levels gradually normalized , muscle power returned to normal in all muscle groups and he could walk with minimal support. Histopathology revealed bony fragments infiltrated by a cellular tumor, composed of spindle cells in fascicles having an oval nucleus with moderate clear to pink cytoplasm and minimal atypia with no mitosis . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells stained positive for Vimentin, thus confirming its mesenchymal origin . A PET scan performed 1 year later confirmed no locoregional or distant recurrence . On a 5-year follow-up, he is fully functional with no residual neurological deficit and no evidence of clinical recurrence.