We report the case of a 6-year-old Caucasian girl hospitalized for right orbital preseptal cellulitis, requiring intravenous antibiotic therapy. Medical history included adenotonsillectomy at the age of 2 years and a second adenoid resection at the age of 5 years. She had no ophthalmological history.
Upon emergency room admission, she presented erythematous, sensitive, and edematous eyelids that had developed after 5 days of fever (up to 39.5 °C) and 2 weeks of unilateral clear right eye tearing. A suspicion of bacterial conjunctivitis had been treated with topical antibiotics (ofloxacin) but with no improvement.
She had also reported chronic nasal obstruction, noisy breathing, and rhinolalia over the past 4–6 weeks, suggesting adenoid hypertrophia relapse, as well as purulent anterior rhinorrhea for the last 7 days.
Examination showed a right periorbital tumescence predominant on the upper eyelid , with no ocular discharge. Nasal mucosae were swollen and bilateral neck lymphadenopathy was present, predominantly on the right side. Detailed neurological examination was normal. Ocular movements were within normal range and there was no orbital protrusion. Snellen uncorrected distance visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, and there was no relative afferent pupillary defect. The anterior segment on the right side showed an “S”-shaped palpebral tumefaction with an erythema of the skin overlying the lacrimal sac. Also, palpation of the nasal canthus was painful. The posterior segment was calm (the vitreous humor and the papilla were clear, the macula had no special features, the blood vessels were regular, and the retina was flat). There was no papilledema and no signs of hemorrhages. In addition, abdominal examination did not reveal organomegaly and the back of the throat was not inflammatory.
Blood analysis revealed a minor inflammatory syndrome (normal white blood cell count, left shift, elevated C-reactive protein at 22 mg/l and normal procalcitonin). Owing to the suspicion of a complication in the paranasal sinus, a cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan was performed . It showed right preseptal infiltration attributed to cellulitis, as well as an ipsilateral well-delimited collection measuring 11 × 18 × 13 mm, with enhanced borders suggesting a periorbital abscess. The rest of the CT scan was reassuring and did not reveal any signs of acute sinusitis or intracranial complications.
The patient was treated with intravenous co-amoxiclav 100 mg/kg/day in three doses, as well as topical ocular antibiotics (one drop three times per day of neomycine 3.5 mg/ml and polymyxine B sulfate 6000 U/ml). Nevertheless, clinical status progressively deteriorated . She developed a fluctuating lump in the nasolacrimal region and daily fever persisted up to 96 hours after admission. Upon consensus with ophthalmologist and otorhinolaryngologist specialists, oral systemic corticosteroids were introduced to reduce inflammation. No spontaneous purulent discharge was observed but the lacrimal sac distension became increasingly compatible with a cutaneous abscess . Blood cultures and bacteriological swabs of the eye discharge as well as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) screening were all negative. Nonetheless, in light of this clinical deterioration, surgical drainage and nasolacrimal pathway probing were considered.
At this point, EBV serology came back positive with highly elevated antibodies (immunoglobulines G and M), compatible with an acute infection.
We concluded that EBV primary infection resulted in acute right dacryocystitis, complicated by preseptal ipsilateral cellulitis and adenoid hypertrophy. The multiple bilateral cervical adenopathies were also compatible with this infection.
The excellent general condition of our patient, as well as the slow but favorable evolution motivated the decision to maintain conservative treatment. Digital ocular massages were performed but they allowed only minimal drainage in the internal canthus of the eye. Intranasal corticoids were introduced for the chronic nasal obstruction and adenoid hypertrophy.
On day 8 of the antibiotic regimen, the patient developed a morbilliform rash, justifying the switch from oral co-amoxiclav 80 mg/kg/day in three doses to oral clindamycin 30 mg/kg/day in four doses for a further 13 days (total treatment duration of 21 days). Evolution was slow but gradual improvements were noted. Surgical drainage was avoided and our patient was discharged from the hospital after 1 week.
Follow-up at 1 month showed no sequelae, except for discrete skin redness under the right eye . Periorbital eye swelling and nasal obstruction had completely resolved and tears were evacuated properly by the nasolacrimal duct.