“Naomi” (an alias) is a 53-year-old Japanese woman who was referred to the Division of Clinical Psychology, University Hospital, due to excessive and persistent concerns about smelling her hair, armpits, and feet. When she was a child, her family was poor and her clothes were dirty, so she was bullied for being “dirty” and having “odors.” From the time she was in middle school, she stopped attending school and became socially withdrawn. She had experience working at the company of her relatives and her father's acquaintances, but after a short period, interpersonal relationships did not go well, and she left the company. In her early thirties, surveillance delusions emerged, and she was diagnosed with schizophrenia. She was diagnosed with “drug-induced scoliosis” when her spinal deformity developed during the period of taking olanzapine: she discontinued antipsychotics. For 13 years before the current admission time point, she entered a communal living facility and has been living there since while receiving welfare services. Both of her parents have died. She has friends in the facility and good relationships with the staff.
Naomi became obsessed with the idea that she was being slandered by the residents of the facility about her own “offensive odors” and increased her camouflage behavior using Duo Durand, antibacterial sheets, and deodorant spray, among other methods. She began to wash her body in the bath more frequently and for longer duration and tried to further increase the number of baths taken; however, the rules of the facility prevented her from doing so because of the COVID-19 pandemic. Naomi became overly concerned about her own stench, and she quickly became distraught, often crying, “I can't do anything.” The facility staff and her sister encouraged Naomi to admit herself to the hospital. After agreeing to intensive care, Naomi was admitted to a regional general hospital. During her hospitalization, she bathed every other day, approximately three times a week. This bathing frequency was consistent with the facility she was originally in during the COVID-19 pandemic.
In the first week of her hospitalization, assessments were conducted to measure the severity of various factors, including brain imaging, cognitive function, and psychotic disorders. Magnetic resonance imaging showed no abnormalities, and the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale IV indicated an average intelligence quotient (full scale IQ) of 93. The attending psychiatrist (MNo) diagnosed schizophrenia and initiated treatment with brexpiprazole 0.5 mg during the first week of admission on June 13th, which was increased to 1.0 mg the following week on June 20th. The pharmacotherapy significantly alleviated Naomi's persecutory delusions, characterized by the belief that her belongings were being stolen and she was being mistreated. In contrast, her strong conviction that she had a “bad smell” remained unchanged, leading to continued behaviors, such as camouflage, avoidance of social situations, frequent changing and cleaning, and self-checking her offensive odor. This condition met the criteria for ORD as per the DSM-5-TR diagnosis. The attending psychiatrist (M. No.) asked a clinical psychologist (K. M.) specializing in CBT to provide psychotherapy for ORD.
An intervention consisting of seven intensive sessions of individualized CBT was arranged during a 4-week hospital stay. All sessions were set for 60 min to implement cognitive–behavioral techniques that addressed Naomi's symptoms. CBT modules included case formulation to identify her beliefs, reviewing safety-seeking behaviors, attention shift training, mindfulness, relaxation, behavioral experiments, public opinion polls, and ERP. All sessions were conducted by a trained CBT therapist/clinical psychologist (K. M.). The attending psychiatrist (M. No.) managed the pharmacotherapy and supported exposure and response prevention methods in the ward. A supervising psychiatrist (K. A.) provided guidance to the attending physician's treatment approach and managed the case, while a senior psychiatrist (M. Na., the senior author) organized the psychiatric care team and coordinated overall medicine administration for Naomi. Please see the supplementary file for more detail on the practice of CBT.
The outcomes for symptom assessment utilized the Yale–Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS),, the Olfactory Reference Syndrome Questionnaire (ORS-Q), the Patient Health Questionnaire 9-items (PHQ-9),, and the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-items (GAD-7). Please refer to the supplementary files for descriptions of each scale. Table shows the outcomes at the baseline (first week of hospitalization), second week, third week (at the conclusion of CBT), and 6-month follow-up. At the time of discharge, ORD symptoms had significantly decreased . Naomi's bathing duration reduced from over an hour to less than 30 min, the number of times she washed her body decreased from three times to once per day, and her changing of clothes reduced from four times to once per day. She no longer avoided social interactions and could often engage in conversations with friends made within the ward. However, the belief that she emitted a foul smell persisted. Interestingly, a significant change was observed in her ability to doubt whether her conviction of smelling bad was accurate. Naomi expressed, “I believe I smell, but people around me say ‘you don't smell that bad,’ so maybe it's not as severe as I think.”
At the 6-month follow-up, we observed an increase in Naomi's scores for the Y-BOCS, ORS-Q, PHQ-9, and GAD-7. During this period, a case of COVID-19 was confirmed within the communal living facility where she resides. This event likely introduced significant stress and anxiety, potentially causing a transient exacerbation of her obsessive–compulsive symptoms.