A 67-year-old white female patient was referred for the evaluation of asymmetry in the left lower jaw. On examination, the patient had laterognathism to the left side, limited mouth opening and pain in the right TMJ during maximum mouth opening and palpation. She reported that she had sought medical help due to extensive headaches. The doctor referred her to a dentist specialized in oral and maxillofacial surgery. The patient also reported the facial deviation that was becoming more and more noticeable to other people, interfering with her aesthetics . The patient made it clear that she had had no experience of previous trauma in the TMJ region.
Following the initial examination, a 3D CT scan was performed and it revealed an extensive but well-defined radiopaque lesion on the right condyle, measuring 1.5 by 2.0 cm . Thus, due to the size of the lesion, the decision was to excise the tumor with resection of the condyle and to construct a custom-made total temporomandibular joint prosthesis for reconstruction. The engineer and the surgeons responsible for the surgery discussed the project of the prosthesis and the availability of soft tissue, and the need for symmetry and aesthetics were assessed. This type of prosthesis consist of a component representing the glenoid fossa, which was made of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene cast with pure titanium and is fixed to the mandibular fossa with titanium bolts. The component representing the condyle was made of a molybdenum cobalt-chromium alloy and the titanium branch [, ].
The accurate prototype of the patient’s skull allowed a three-dimensional analysis of the lesion and was of significant assistance throughout the process. A CT scan was used to prepare the prototype and the custom-made prosthesis for the patient . For surgery, the patient underwent general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation.
Initially the movements of the mandible were studied using Posselt’s diagram. This device tracks the components of the cranial cavity of the prosthesis. The model of the prosthesis in resin was approved by the surgeon and scanned three dimensionally (3D). A computer numerical control (CNC) program used these images to machine the final model of the prosthesis. The mandibular component of the Arthroplasty System Promm consists of a condylar head made of cobalt–chromium–molybdenum alloy (ISO 5832-12) and a mandibular body made of pure titanium (ISO 5832-2), while the cranium component has a cavity where the condyle is articulated and machined in polyethylene of ultra-high molecular weight, UHMWPE (ISO 5834-2).
All parts received a finishing process. The mandibular component was submitted to electro coloring, resulting in a blue color. All Promm products are batch mark, which allows the traceability of the raw materials the batch, provider, trader and date of each step, as well as the tools used for quality control of the parts.
After performing asepsis, antisepsis and installation of drapes, the incisions were marked with a Skin Marker. At the location of the incisions lidocaine 2% with 1:50,000 epinephrine was infiltrated to improve homeostasis during the incision. The prosthetic joint was placed via the preauricular access and the submandibular incision access was used to fix the branch ramus and condyle. After exposure of the entire mandibular ramus, osteotomy was made with an incision safety margin until the trailing edge of the mandibular ramus, through the submandibular access, so that the condyle with the tumor could be removed via the preauricular access.
The incised specimen was sent for histopathological examination, which confirmed osteoma. Figure depicts a compact bone tissue with fibrous connective stroma at the periphery, while Fig. presents compact bone with lacuna filled by bone marrow tissue.
After removal of the tumor, the prosthesis was adapted without difficulty and fixed in place with the 2.4 mm screw system. After implantation of the prosthesis the opening and closing mouth movements were tested and were found to be within normal limits. The patient has been in follow-up for 2 years, with no painful symptoms, mouth opening of 32 mm and she continues as an outpatient .