A 26-week-old male fetus presented with a pulmonary mass of 19 cm3, seen at standard ultrasound screening in our tertiary university hospital. A feeding vessel originating from the aorta was visualized and suggested the diagnosis of BPS. Weekly ultrasound monitoring was performed thereafter. At 27 weeks of gestation, moderate PE appeared, for which intramuscular betamethasone was administered to the mother. Ultrasound follow-up showed fluctuation of PE with good response to steroids at each recurrence. Three courses of betamethasone 2 mg/day for 2 days were administrated in total at 27 5/7, 31 2/7, and 34 1/7 weeks of gestation, with PE regression after each course. Amniodrainage was performed at 32 weeks for polyhydramnios (amniotic fluid index 44), because of maternal discomfort and risk of premature rupture of membranes, which yet recurred thereafter. At 34 weeks, when the thoracic lesion measured 23 cm3, scalp edema was observed concomitant with PE, however, followed by its complete regression after the third administration of betamethasone. Prenatal course of PE is summarized in Figure .
At 35 5/7 weeks, premature rupture of membranes occurred, probably due to recurrence of polyhydramnios and previous drainage. Cardiotocogram during labor was without pathological findings and vaginal delivery was uncomplicated. The newborn adapted well with Apgar score of 8/10/10. Birth weight was 2,570 g (P10–P50). There was no sign of respiratory distress or cardiovascular compromise. A first X-ray performed 4 h after birth showed a left basal thoracic mass without significant PE . Yet, the newborn developed respiratory distress at the age of 18 h requiring treatment with high flow nasal cannula. X-ray showed massive left sided PE causing mediastinal shift . Immediate pleural drainage allowed for clinical improvement. The analysis of the pleural fluid showed low protein and low leukocyte content compatible with transudate.
Persistent active pleural drainage during the following days lead to radiological work-up by ultrasound and CT-scan confirming the diagnosis of extralobar BPS, measuring 3.9 cm × 4.8 cm × 3.9 cm, with a feeding vessel originating from the aorta at the level of the diaphragm.
At 1 week of age, pleural drainage increased up to 80 ml/kg/day. Dexamethasone was administered for 1 week, at a decreasing dosage of 0.15 mg/kg/day for 3 days to 0.1 mg/kg/day, followed by complete resolution of PE, and thus removal of the chest tube. One day after discontinuation of the steroid treatment, PE recurred needing a new chest tube insertion. Early excisional surgery was then considered as inevitable, and at day 27 the extralobar BPS was removed by thoracotomy. Histological analysis confirmed diagnosis of BPS and extensive pleuropulmonary lymphatic dilatation. Post-operative course was uneventful with complete recovery within days.