A 32 year-old African-Ugandan woman of nilo-hamitic ethnicity presented to her local hospital with complaints of abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea for 5 days in mid-August, 2012. She was admitted there and treated for amoebic dysentery, though no stool examination had been done. The abdominal pain was generalized and lasted for long periods prior to subsiding. Stools were mucoid and foul-smelling, though not copious in amount. She reportedly improved following empiric treatment with metronidazole, cotrimoxazole, analgesics and IV fluids, and generally felt better for a period of about 2 weeks. Subsequently, her abdominal symptoms changed in character. She felt an abdominal mass and the abdominal pain became colicky in nature, and was associated with vomiting. There was straining while defecating, tenesmus and a feeling of incomplete voiding of stool. A few days later she noticed what she described as "something protruded from the anus". It came as a result of straining to pass stool, and spontaneously reduced. Over the next one week she found that she had to manually reduce it, occasionally. She was consequently referred with a working diagnosis of rectal prolapse.
The patient presented to our hospital on the 23rd September, 2012 with a chief complaint of abdominal pain and “a mass protruding from the anus”. She also complained of a swelling in the abdomen. The pain was colicky and she still passed bloody-mucoid stools, interspersed occasionally with semi-solid stools. This she did with straining and only passed very small quantities. She vomited once or twice daily, through not profusely, and passed flatus. Remarkable physical examination findings were per abdomen and per rectum. She had a firm, mobile mass in the umbilical region that measured 14 cm by 11 cm; located intra-abdominal and only slightly tender. The rest of the abdomen was of normal fullness. On rectal examination, the anal verge was normal. No protruding mass was visible (it had spontaneously reduced). A mobile mass was palpable 3 cm from the verge, and was free of the rectal mucosa all round. The examining digit could not get to its proximal limit; characteristic of intussusception. There was plenty of mucoid discharge and some dark blood. Significantly elsewhere, she was mildly dehydrated and afebrile. She had a blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg and a pulse rate of 80 beats/min. Examination of the mucoid, blood tinged material was negative for ova and cysts of any parasite.
A diagnosis of a prolapsed intussusception with partial intestinal obstruction was made. An abdominal ultrasound scan confirmed this. Our patient was resuscitated and prepared for an exploratory laparotomy. This was performed through a midline incision. On opening the peritoneum, a large section of gut was revealed, ‘crammed’ and invaginated, but stretching from the distal ileum right up to the sigmoid colon, occupying the central aspect of the abdominal cavity . This caused a partial intestinal obstruction. There was no ascites and no distended bowel loops proximal to this. This mass of gut constituted an intussusception with the intussusceptum stretching from the ileum, through the entire colon, right to the rectum, with intermittent anal protrusion (prolapse).
The intussusception was then manipulated. Its intussusceptum’s tip was felt in the sigmoid colon upon tagging on it. The intussusceptum was gently ‘milked’ proximally but could not be freed entirely. The most conspicuous findings were absent hepatocolic and splenocolic ligaments, and the presence of prominent ascending and descending mesocolons. These allowed for free mobility of the colon from is most proximal to distal extents; no part was fixed, retroperitoneally. The mesentery of the right colon had enlarged, soft and discrete lymph nodes and was oedematous . Complete reduction of the intussusception by manual reduction was not possible at the proximal portion (ileo-cecal junction, cecal and proximal ascending colon region). A right hemicolectomy was done with primary ileo-transverse colon, end-to-side anastomosis. All other abdominal and pelvic organs were essentially normal. No intraperitoneal adhesions were found. The anterior abdominal wall was closed in layers. The resected segment was opened revealing thickening of the ileo-cecal junction and adjacent areas, with necrotic mucosa overlying the intussusceptum . However, the mucosa was regular with no polyps, ulcers or constrictions; no gross picture of neoplasia or pre-existing benign structural pathologic lesion. The resected specimen was submitted for histopathological examination. This showed necrotic mucosa and fibrosis of the muscularis propria . The lymph nodes showed reactive follicular hyperplasia. There were neither features of amoebiasis nor malignancy. The patient's post-operative course was uneventful.