A 57-year-old male who had no family history of cancer complained of acute abdominal pain and fever and visited his local hospital. He was diagnosed with gastric perforation and referred to our hospital. We performed emergent surgery for peritonitis caused by a gastric perforation. We evaluated the abdominal cavity laparoscopically and found some cloudy ascites in the abdomen and a pin hole perforation at the anterior wall of the gastric antrum. Because the gastric wall around the perforation was thick and did not have any serous changes, it was difficult to assess whether the cause of the perforation was tumor related. The cytodiagnosis of ascites did not show any tumor cells. There was also a white nodule in the lateral segment of the liver, which was suspected to be a metastatic liver tumor. We performed a primary closure of the defect, applied an omentum flap and washed the abdominal cavity with 10 l of normal saline. The operation time was 120 min, and the volume of blood loss was 10 ml. The postoperative course was uneventful. We performed upper and lower endoscopy, which showed type II tumors in the gastric body (poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, HER2 score 2+) and transverse colon (well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, RAS mutation) , and we considered that the gastric perforation was related to the presence of advanced gastric tumors. Furthermore, the CT showed irregular wall thickness with ulcers in the gastric body, which were suspected to be gastric cancer with lymph node metastases at station no. 3, irregular wall thickness of the transverse colon , which was suspected to be colon cancer, and nodules in liver segments 2/3 (60 mm) and in segment 6 (57 mm) , which were suspected to be liver metastases. We retrospectively reevaluated the CT findings from a local hospital and detected liver nodules in segment 2/3 (35 mm) and segment 6 (26 mm), and the tumors had dramatically grown in size in only 2 months. [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed colon cancer (maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) 14.4) and multiple liver metastases (S2/S3, unclear SUVmax; S6, SUVmax 11.3), but 18F-FDG uptake was not found in the gastric tumor and lymph nodes . The serum blood tests showed normal tumor marker levels (carcinoembryonic antigen, 4.6 mg/dl; carbohydrate antigen 19-9, 20.7 mg/dl) and normal liver function. We diagnosed the patient with synchronous cStage IV (cT3cN0cM1) transverse colon cancer with multiple liver metastases and cStage IIB (cT3cN1cM0) gastric cancer according to the 7th edition TNM classification . Because of the gastric cancer perforation and the dramatic enlargement of the liver metastasis, we believed that a complete resection of the tumors would be difficult, and that chemotherapy treatment would be important to control tumor progression. We chose SOX plus bevacizumab therapy (on day 1 of each 3-week cycle, 7.5 mg/kg intravenous infusion of bevacizumab and 130 mg/m2 intravenous infusion of oxaliplatin were administered along with a dose of S-1 60 mg/m2 twice a day starting after dinner on day 1 until after breakfast on day 15, followed by a 7-day break). After 10 courses, the patient presented with oxaliplatin-induced peripheral neuropathy , and another 10 courses were administered without oxaliplatin. An endoscopic examination did not detect gastric cancer or transverse colon cancer . The liver metastases were dramatically reduced in size to 14 mm in segment 2/3 and 15 mm in segment 6 , and the FDG PET/CT findings showed no 18F-FDG uptake in any of the tumors . The serum blood tests showed the elevated tumor marker levels (carcinoembryonic antigen, 12.6 mg/dl; carbohydrate antigen 19-9, 43.1 mg/dl). After chemotherapy, the clinical diagnoses were ycStage IV (ycT3ycN0ycM1) transverse colon cancer and ycStage IIa (ycT3ycN0ycM0) gastric cancer. We planned a two-step procedure to completely resect the primary tumors and multiple liver metastases. We first performed resection of the colon and gastric tumors. Intraoperatively, there were broad adhesions between the omentum and the abdominal wall. The cytodiagnosis of the ascites showed no atypical cells. A small white nodule in segment 6 was detected. No signs of a “blue liver” were detected. We first laparoscopically performed resection of the transverse colon cancer in the right-side colon along with D3 lymphadenectomy. Then, we performed open distal gastrectomy for the gastric tumor with D2 lymphadenectomy (Roux-en-Y anastomosis). The operation time was 605 min, and the volume of blood loss was 840 ml. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 18 and had an uneventful postoperative course. After 1 month, we performed liver resection for the multiple liver metastases. Intraoperatively, we detected tumors in segment 6 on the liver surface, and with sonography, we detected a tumor in segment 3, which was very close to the umbilical portion of the portal vein. We performed open lateral segment resection and partial resection at segment 3. The operation time was 402 min, and the volume of blood loss was 420 ml. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 12 without any remarkable complications. The pathological findings showed ypT2 (MP) tumors with grade 2 therapeutic effects in the transverse colon and no residual gastric tumor and multiple liver nodules (pathological complete response).