A 67-year-old Brazilian woman, a retired maid, born in São Paulo (Brazil), experienced pain for 12 months during bowel movements associated with tenesmus, hematochezia, increased bowel movements, and weight loss. The patient was admitted to Hospital Estadual Mario Covas (Santo André, São Paulo, Brazil).
The patient has had one pregnancy and one delivery of a daughter who died at 32 years of age from breast cancer. The patient’s family history also includes an 8-year-old granddaughter with adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) undergoing treatment for 2 years and two siblings who died from prostate cancer, one at 65 years of age and the other at 68 years of age.
The patient had no addictions to cigarettes, alcohol, or drugs. She had systemic arterial hypertension, hypothyroidism, and osteopenia and was using orally hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg, levothyroxine 37.5 mg, and alendronate 10 mg once a day.
At hospital admission, the patient was hemodynamically stable, and did not present abnormalities on physical or neurological examination and had a BMI of 20.7 kg/m2. Digital rectal examination indicated a tumor in the anterior wall of the rectum, 7 cm away from the anal margin. At anoscopy and proctosigmoidoscopy, the appearance of the tumor was vegetating and infiltrating. A colonoscopy revealed the lesion was friable and bleeding to the touch of the colonoscope, with an ulcerated, indurated, cranial extension of 6.5 cm that compromised 50% of the circumference and 80% of the lumen of the organ but did not prevent the progression of the colonoscope up to the cecum. The other segments of the large bowel did not show abnormality. A biopsy of the rectal lesion revealed a mesenchymal pattern of neoplasm.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed thickening from the middle rectum to the rectosigmoid transition, without liver nodules or alterations in other abdomen organs. A chest CT showed no abnormalities. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging revealed thickening of the rectum walls 7 cm from the anal border, with suspicion of uterine invasion . The plasma level of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was normal.
Owing to the clinical manifestations and anatomopathological and radiological findings, it was determined that an oncological resection of the rectal mass was indicated, rather than just a bypass colostomy or neoadjuvant therapy. We performed a laparotomy, and there was no free intraperitoneal fluid, liver metastases, or peritoneal carcinomatosis in the abdominal cavity inventory. The main finding was a voluminous medium rectal mass perforated and blocked anteriorly by the body of the uterus and left adnexa. During the pelvic manipulation for en bloc oncological resection of the affected structures, there was inadvertent unblocking in the tumor area, surgical specimen fracture, and fecal content leakage into the abdominal cavity. As a result of this, a rectosigmoidectomy with colorectal anastomosis was considered a high risk for anastomotic leak, and the patient underwent an anterior rectosigmoidectomy with terminal colostomy using the Hartmann technique and en bloc panhysterectomy owing to adhesions of the body of the uterus and the left ovary in the rectal mass .
Macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen revealed a hardened, irregular, and ulcerated lesion at the rectum, for which the longest axis was 6.5 cm in length .
Microscopic examination showed an atypical spindle cell proliferation with myoid features, with some cytoplasmic clearing and frequent fasciculation with long bundles, which extrinsically compromised even the deep portion of the mucosa in foci. Cytological atypia was observed, which was represented by enlarged nuclei and sometimes hyperchromatic or bizarre, and there were few pleomorphic nuclei . The mitotic index was nine mitotic figures per 10 high-power fields (HPFs) (400×/0.5 mm diameter, 4.59/mm2), with no atypical forms. There was coagulative-type necrosis, with fibrohyaline replacement, corresponding to 5% of the tumor volume. Neural structures were confined in the tumor without vascular and perineural invasions. The tumor infiltrated the rectal wall up to the perirectal adipose tissue. The surgical resection margins and 16 identified lymph nodes were free of neoplasia. The gynecological organs were not infiltrated by neoplasia. The histological classification based on sarcomas involving abdominal viscera was T2bN0M0 [TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors, 8th Edition/American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)] .
The immunohistochemical study showed positivity for markers such as smooth muscle actin (SMA), beta-catenin (membrane pattern), h-Caldesmon (strong and diffuse) , estrogen receptor (low intensity), vimentin, and Ki-67 (20% to 30% of the cells of interest). The markers desmin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), protein S100, CD34, CD117 (c-kit), and podoplanin D2–40 were not observed in the tumor tissue. The immunohistochemical profile and the anatomopathological findings for the rectal neoplasm were compatible with sarcoma with smooth muscle differentiation, classified as intermediate grade/grade 2 LMS.
The DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocyte for the genetic study using a genomic DNA isolation kit (Gentra System, Minneapolis, MN, USA).
The search for the variant p. R337H was performed by polymerase chain reaction followed by enzymatic digestion (restriction fragment length polymorphism, RFLP). The amplification product for the study of TP53 exon 10 resulted in a 330-bp fragment. Enzymatic digestion using the restriction enzyme Hhal was performed to recognize the 5′CGC/C3′ sequence in the wild-type exon sequence. After digestion, using the agarose gel electrophoresis, the variant genotype presented three fragments (330 bp, 170 bp, and 160 bp), confirming the presence of the germline pathogenic variant p. R337H in heterozygosis (GA), which was also confirmed in the patient’s daughter and granddaughter.
The patient had an uneventful postoperative course. One year later, she obtained a CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, revealing multiple liver, lung, and peritoneal metastases. Consequently, the patient received first-line chemotherapy initially with six cycles of intravenous doxorubicin (60 mg/m2), followed by two more cycles of doxorubicin with a reduced dose (57.5 mg/m2) owing to a mild neutropenia (1230/mm3) developed after the sixth cycle. There were no other laboratory changes in the blood count, liver, or kidney function. The second-line chemotherapy was with six cycles of intravenous gemcitabine (800 mg/m2) and docetaxel (30 mg/m2). Initially, there was a reduction in the dimensions of the nodules scattered through the lungs, liver, and peritoneum. However, the metastases increased in size and number, and the patient was no longer submitted to disease-modifying therapy proposals. The patient was admitted with persistent and severe anal pain and neoplastic cachexia under the oversight of a palliative care team. For pain control she was taking orally dipyrone 1 g every 6 h, morphine 10 mg every 4 h, and methadone 5 mg every 12 h. The patient died 2 years after the rectal tumor resection.