An 84-year-old man with comorbidities of chronic atrial fibrillation and stage 3b chronic kidney disease was transferred to our hospital with refractory heart failure due to severe SVD and severe aortic stenosis and regurgitation (ASR) of the homograft aortic valve. In 1996, he underwent surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) using a 25 mm homograft for severe aortic regurgitation (AR) in the bicuspid valve. The homograft was implanted using the subcoronary method. In 2015, echocardiography detected severe transvalvular regurgitation and elevated estimated right ventricular pressure with moderate tricuspid regurgitation. Since no subjective symptoms such as shortness of breath were observed, outpatient follow-up was performed. However, in 2020, the patient was hospitalized because of worsening heart failure. Heart failure was initially relieved with diuretics, but shortness of breath persisted, requiring three hospitalizations for worsening heart failure by 2023. Furthermore, after oral treatment with azosemide 60 mg and tolvaptan 15 mg, low doses of dobutamine did not alleviate the heart failure (New York Heart Association functional classification: III), and orthopnoea remained at the time of transfer. Other medications he was taking on admission included carvedilol 1.25 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, and edoxaban 30 mg. His blood pressure was 108/48 mmHg, pulse rate was 109 b.p.m., and SPO2 was 94% for indoor air. Physical examination revealed a Levine 3/6 to and fro murmur with the strongest point at the left margin of the left second intercostal sternum. Serum creatinine level was 1.38 mg/dL (normal range 0.65–1.09 mg/dL), haemoglobin level was 8.7 g/dL (normal range 11.0–18.0 mg/dL), and brain natriuretic peptide was 582 pg/mL (normal range ≦ 18.4 pg/mL). Echocardiography revealed severe transvalvular regurgitation with pan-diastolic blood flow in the abdominal aorta suggestive severe AR. Furthermore, it revealed stiffening, shortening, and complete reduction mobility of the non-coronary cusp side leaflet of the homograft valve, which led to poor coaptation of valve leaflets, resulting in severe ASR with an mAVPG of 32 mmHg and an effective orifice area (EOA) of 1.08 cm2 (index EOA 0.74 cm2/m2) ( and ). Our heart team decided to perform transcatheter aortic valve (TAV) in surgical aortic valve (SAV) because his clinical frailty was 5 and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons predicted mortality risk score was 15.8%. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed severe calcification, thickening of all three prosthetic valve leaflets, calcified fusion in right- and non-coronary cusp , and calcification of the anastomosis of the homograft with the autologous artery . The area and perimeter of annulus plane was 420.3 mm2 and 76.6 mm, respectively. The sinus of Valsalva (37.5 × 39.4 × 42.7 mm) and sino-tubular junction (46.5 × 37.1 mm) were large enough that there was no concern about coronary artery occlusion risk and Valsalva injury due to TAV in SAV, and the minimum vessel diameter for lower extremity arterial access was 6.5 mm. The CT findings suggested that TAVI with a balloon-expandable valve via transfemoral access could be safely performed. In addition, in this case, the self-expandable TAVR was expected to be difficult to implant accurately due to the lack of calcification of the prosthetic valve leaflets. Although we could not find any reports on the exact valve sizing in TAVI for homograft, we chose 23 mm in this case in accordance with the sizing of TAVI for autologous valves. Following a rapid multidisciplinary team discussion, we performed urgent TAVI using a 23 mm SAPIEN3 Ultra RESILIA (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) ( and and , and ). The resulting grade of paravalvular regurgitation was trace, the post-operative EOA was 1.66 cm2 (index EOA: 1.19 cm2/m2), and device success was achieved ( and ). The patient’s post-operative course was good. Post-operative echocardiography showed good prosthetic valve function with mAVPG of 12 mmHg, an EOA of 1.68 cm2 (index EOA 1.15 cm2/m2), and with trace paravalvular leakage. Serum brain natriuretic peptide level decreased to 114 pg/mL. He was able to discontinue dobutamine and was discharged from the hospital on the 14th post-operative day without any other major complications.