A 23-year-old man, who had been diagnosed with NS due to a heterozygous variant at c.335G > C (p.G112A) in the RIT1 gene, developed foamy macrohematuria 3 weeks previously after driving for 6 h . He had no history of either left flank trauma or pain before the onset of the macrohematuria. A physical examination revealed low-set ears and a webbed neck, without mental retardation. Since he had received growth hormone replacement therapy, he did not have short stature; his height was 164.3 cm, and his body weight was 56.1 kg (this had not changed recently). Mild pulmonary valve stenosis was followed up without any intervention.
His body temperature, pulse rate, and blood pressure on arrival were 36.6 °C, 59 beats/minute, and 113/56 mmHg, respectively. His laboratory data are shown in Table . A urinalysis on arrival showed macrohematuria and proteinuria, and a urinary sediment analysis revealed more than 100 isomorphic red blood cells per high power field. The urinary protein creatinine ratio and albumin creatinine ratio were 7.1 and 4.5 g/g⋅Cr, respectively.
Three-dimensional contrast-enhanced CT showed double IVC and narrowing of the LRV after interflow of the left IVC . The aortomesenteric angle on sagittal reconstruction of the CT image was 14.7° . Cystoscopy revealed a flow of macrohematuria from the left ureteral opening . Under the suspicion of NCS, Doppler ultrasonography was performed. The ratio of the LRV diameter at the hilar/aortomesenteric portion was 2.9 (6.7/2.3 mm) and the peak velocity at the aortomesenteric portion was 29 cm/s with a pressure gradient of 0.33 mmHg; ultrasonography provided little evidence to raise the suspicion of the nutcracker phenomenon. On physical examination, no left varicoceles were apparent.
Since the severe albuminuria (3.2 g/g⋅Cr) continued at 5 days after the initial presentation, he was admitted to our hospital to receive a left kidney biopsy. There were 18 glomeruli, which showed minor glomerular abnormalities. Light microscopy showed red blood cells in Bowman’s space and the tubular lumen . An immunofluorescence study was negative for immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, IgM, complement 3 (C3), C1q, and fibrinogen. Electron microscopy revealed disruptions of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) . He was discharged without any complications after kidney biopsy and was followed up as an outpatient. Doppler ultrasonography was repeated; however, the parameters did not show a major difference between the supine and upright position. His macrohematuria and proteinuria improved gradually without treatment. Although he experienced intermittent macrohematuria at home after discharge four times, neither proteinuria nor microhematuria were observed during follow-up examinations in the outpatient clinic at one, two, five, eight and 14 months after discharge.
As vulnerability of the GBM was suspected based on electron microscopy, genetic analyses of COL4A3 and COL4A4 were performed, which revealed a heterozygous variant at c.4793 T > G (p.L1598R) in the COL4A3 gene . Screening for coagulation disorders revealed that the patient’s factor VIII and von Willebrand factor (vWF) values were low at 47.6 and 23%, respectively. A multimer analysis of vWF showed a normal multimer pattern and he was diagnosed with von Willebrand disease type 1. As the bleeding tendency was mild, replacement of factor VIII was not performed.