A 7 year old male presented on account of whitish
speck noted in the right eye of about 5 years duration.
There was a history of the right eye being slightly
bigger than the left as well as poor vision in the right
eye. There was no history of eye protrusion, abnormal
skin pigmentation or seizures. There was no previous
ocular surgeries, nil significant medical illnesses or
previous hospitalization and no family history of
glaucoma.
Visual acuity was count fingers (CF) right eye and 6/5
left eye. Manifest refraction was +0.50DS/-2.75DC/
80 right eye and +0.25DS left eye. A relative afferent
pupillary defect (RAPD) was noted on the right eye.
Applanation intraocular pressures were 44mmHg and
18mmHg in the right and left eye respectively.
Slit lamp examination on the right eye showed a
buphthalmic globe, Haab's striae on the cornea with
corneal diameter of 16.5 x 15.5mm, deep anterior
chamber, round and sluggishly reactive pupil with
RAPD, clear lens and cupped disc with a cup-to-disc (CDR) 1.0. Finding in the left eye were essentially
normal with a pink disc of CDR 0.4.
An assessment of right infantile glaucoma was made
and was temporarily commenced on anti-glaucoma
medications (timolol and dorzolamide combination)
for the right eye. He subsequently had right
trabeculectomy with Mitomycin-C (MMC) under
general anaesthesia. Notable intraoperative event was
sudden shallowing of the anterior chamber upon entry.
Postoperatively, he developed hypotony (an IOP of
0mmHg) with a huge bleb on the 2nd post-operative
day and shallow anterior chamber with choroidal
detachment observed on the 4th post-operative day
.
An assessment of right overfiltration with choroidal
effusion status post trabeculectomy was made. He
initially had conservative management which included
maximum cycloplegia and reduction of the frequency
of topical steroid. This was to allow for deepening
of the anterior chamber by pulling of the iris-lens diaphragm back and for some healing around the
scleral flap and bleb to reduce the overfiltration. Upon
failed conservative management, he had a right anterior
chamber reformation with viscoelastic under general
anaesthesia on post-operative day 7 to augment the conser vative management. However, effusion
worsened progressively, with vision of light perception
(LP) and hypotony persisted as shown in figure 2 ( and ).
At the 11th day post-trabeculectomy, patient eventually
had a right compression suture, repeat anterior chamber
reformation with viscoelastic and sclerostomy with
drainage of effusion under general anaesthesia.
Intraoperative findings include thick tenon capsule and
sclera (which was unusual for an enlarged globe) and
straw coloured suprachoroidal fluid was drained.
Effusion resolved post-operatively with visual acuity
of CF and the retina remained flat as shown in figure
.