A 59-year-old man presented to our freestanding emergency department (ED) with abrupt onset of severe, upper back and neck pain. The patient stated he experienced sudden, severe, upper back and neck pain in the shower as he raised his arms over his head to wash his hair. He stated the pain increased with arm movement. He also complained of mild paresthesia in the left arm. He denied weakness, and there was no history of trauma, injury, or overuse. He denied fevers, chills, chest pain, shortness of breath, or headache. Past medical history was significant for hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, peripheral vascular disease, and coronary artery disease. Medications included metformin 1000 mg twice each day, rosuvastatin 20 mg daily, telmisartan-hydrochlorothyazide 80–25mg daily, fenofibrate 145 mg each day, and aspirin 81mg daily. The patient stated he had quit smoking five years prior and consumed alcohol only on occasion.
The patient appeared uncomfortable secondary to pain. Physical exam revealed a pulse of 76 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 15 breaths per minute, blood pressure 156/82 millimeters of mercury, 97% oxygen saturation on room air, and he was afebrile.
The head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat exam was normal. The heart exam was normal, and auscultation of the lungs revealed clear, bilateral breath sounds. The abdomen was soft, nontender, and without guarding or rebound. The patient exhibited tenderness in the lower cervical and upper thoracic region posteriorly, both in the midline and paraspinal region bilaterally. He described increased pain when he lowered his left arm from the abducted position. On initial neurologic examination, the patient exhibited normal strength, without sensory deficits, in all four extremities. He did complain of left arm paresthesia.
An intravenous (IV) line was established, and the patient was administered hydromorphone 0.5 mg and ondansetron 4mg IV for pain. A stat electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm, normal axis, and no evidence of ischemia or injury. Laboratory studies were sent for a complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic profile (BMP), urinalysis, and a troponin T.
The emergency physician (EP) was concerned the patient was experiencing a dissecting thoracic aortic aneurysm and ordered a computed tomography angiography (CTA) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. The CBC was normal, and the BMP was remarkable only for a serum glucose of 355 mg per deciliter (mg/dL) (Reference: 70–99 mg/dL), with a normal serum bicarbonate. The urinalysis and troponin T were normal.
The patient returned from radiology after his chest CTA, complaining of continued pain. He received an additional hydromorphone 0.5 mg IV. While the CT was waiting to be read, change of shift occurred, and the case was turned over to the oncoming EP.
The chest CTA was interpreted as no active aortic pathology, severe coronary arteriosclerosis, and mild to moderate hepatic steatosis. Given the lack of an identifiable cause of the patient’s severe pain, the oncoming EP performed his own history and physical exam. The patient now complained of new left arm and leg weakness, in addition to the left arm paresthesia. On exam, the patient had 2/5 motor strength in the left leg, and 4/5 motor strength in the left arm. He had strong pulses in all four extremities. The oncoming EP expanded the differential diagnosis to include carotid artery dissection, cerebrovascular accident, and TIA. After discussion with radiology, a low-dose CTA of the head and neck was ordered.
The CTA of the head and neck was interpreted as “no acute arterial disease identified, and no dissection of carotid artery (or any other artery). There is no acute thromboembolism or flow limiting stenosis identified.” Given the negative CTA and abnormal neurologic exam, an MRI of the cervical spine, with and without contrast, was ordered. The patient required two more additional doses of hydromorphone 0.5 mg IV for pain, and was administered IV normal saline at 125 cubic centimeter per hour.
Radiology called the ED immediately after reviewing the MRI. They described a “moderate sized T1 isointense T2 hyperintense left posterolateral epidural collection, extending from the second and third cervical (C2/C3) through mid C7 level, without internal or thick peripheral enhancement.” See . Given the history, this was thought to reflect a hyperacute (less than 12 hours old) cervical epidural hematoma.
The EP immediately consulted neurosurgery at a nearby hospital for transfer and admission. The patient was accepted by neurosurgery and transported via air ambulance to the receiving hospital. The patient’s neurologic exam remained unchanged, with the noted left-sided weakness. Coagulation studies were ordered prior to taking the patient to the operating room (OR). The protime, international normalized ratio and partial thromboplastin time were all normal. However, the platelet function assay was elevated, thought to be secondary to the patient’s daily aspirin use. The patient was transfused one unit of platelets IV and taken to the OR where he underwent a left C3–C6 hemilaminectomy for evacuation and drainage of the epidural hematoma. During the surgery, they found a sizable, left epidural hematoma causing spinal cord and nerve root compression from C3 through C6, on the left side only.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The paresthesia resolved, and the patient gradually regained his strength. He was discharged on postop day six, with a hard cervical collar. He was seen in follow-up eight days later with a completely normal neurologic exam.