A 63-year-old man was referred to Nagoya University Hospital for treatment of a recurrence of resected seminoma. Twelve months prior to his presentation, the patient had undergone high orchiectomy for stage I seminoma (T2N0M0) at a local hospital. Recurrence of the disease was identified by swelling of the left external medial iliac node. After evaluation, he was administered two cycles of chemotherapy with the standard PEB regimen (cisplatin 50 mg/m2 on day 1, etoposide 120 mg/m2 on days 1 to 3, and bleomycin 30 mg on days 1, 8, and 15). On day 17 of the second cycle, the patient developed fever and malaise. His chest CT scan revealed bilateral ground-glass opacities. On the basis of his clinical picture, BILI was highly suspected. Bleomycin was discontinued, and oral prednisone (30 mg per day) was initiated and improved his symptoms and chest X-ray abnormality immediately. After the completion of two additional courses of chemotherapy without bleomycin, he underwent lymph node dissection. Complete remission was confirmed by pathological examination of the dissected lymph nodes.
He had suffered from a gradual increase in exertional dyspnea and dry cough since the discharge after the second surgery. For evaluation of his respiratory symptoms, he was admitted to our department. On admission, his physical examination findings were unremarkable except for fine crackles at his bilateral lung bases. The high-resolution CT (HRCT) findings revealed bilateral ground-glass and reticulonodular opacities that had deteriorated compared to the previous study. The pulmonary function test gas was remarkable for marked deterioration of diffusing capacity .
Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed to exclude other identifiable etiologies, and demonstrated negative results for bacterial culture and an almost normal cell differential count (alveolar macrophages 97%, neutrophils 1%, lymphocytes 1%). Under the diagnosis of exacerbation of BILI, the patient was administered four courses of corticosteroid “pulse” therapy (1 g of methylprednisolone per day, on days 1–3, q7d) to evaluate the maximum effect of corticosteroids. After 1 month of induction therapy, his pulmonary functions and symptoms, as well as HRCT findings, were markedly improved . Oral prednisolone (15 mg per day) was introduced as the maintenance dose and gradually tapered to 10 mg per day due to his impaired glucose tolerance.
On the follow-up visit at 8 months after the induction therapy, his HRCT findings demonstrated newly developed ground glass opacities on the outer fields of the bilateral lungs . Maintenance therapy with high-dose prednisolone did not seem well adapted to the patient due to his complications (glucose intolerance and cataracts) as well as the insufficiency of its long-term therapeutic effect. With the consent of the patient, administration of pirfenidone was initiated for the non-resolving lung injury with the expectation of sparing the dose of corticosteroids and stabilizing the BILI activity. Pirfenidone at 1800 mg per day orally was well tolerated, and had improved the reticular and ground-glass opacity on HRCT 3 months after initiation. Subsequently, the dose of prednisolone was gradually decreased. One year after the addition of pirfenidone, his HRCT findings and pulmonary function test findings remained improved. At the most recent follow-up, he is still in complete remission for seminoma with a successfully tapered dose of prednisolone (2 mg per day) in combination with the gradually tapering dose of pirfenidone.