A 45-year-old male patient presented with an incidentally detected, 6 cm-sized splenic mass in the abdominal computed tomography (CT) after a traffic accident .
He denied fever, night sweat, weight loss and abdominal pain but complained of mild low back pain due to the accident.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient had no family history.
Physical examination revealed an enlarged spleen, two finger breadths below the left costal margin and no palpable lymph node enlargement.
Laboratory findings showed slightly elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 54 U/L (normal 10-37 U/L) but normal lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), and bilirubin levels. Other examinations including complete blood count, C-reactive protein (CRP), coagulation profiles, and renal function tests were within normal limits.
Abdominal CT showed a 6 cm-sized hypodense mass with peripheral enhancing rim in the spleen . Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 6 cm-sized splenic mass, which was heterogeneously hypointense on T1-weighted image , hyperintense T-2 weighted image and peripheral enhancement with a central hypo-enhancing lesion on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted image , which was considered as a rare splenic tumor such as sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation (SANT) of the spleen.
EUS-FNB using a 22G needle (EchoTip Procore®, Cook medical, Limerick, Ireland) was performed for pathologic diagnosis. EUS without contrast medium of the lesion demonstrated a 6 cm-sized, relatively well-demarcated, heterogeneously hypoechoic lesion in the spleen without any necrotic changes . Three needle passes were performed and three biopsy specimens and 8 cytology slides were made. No adverse events occurred during the one-day hospitalization for the procedure. The patient did not receive prophylactic antibiotics, due to the solid nature of the lesion. Histopathology revealed mostly blood clots and a few inflammatory cells and cytopathology was suspicious for poorly differentiated malignancy. Further laboratory exams were performed and splenectomy was planned. Laboratory findings showed elevated soluble interleukin-2 receptor of 3891 U/mL (normal 158-623 U/mL), decreased complement 3 of 69.1 mg/dL (normal 90-180 mg/dL), but normal immunoglobulin E of 15.6 IU/mL (normal 1.5-158 IU/mL) and complement 4 of 27.5 mg/dL (normal 10-40 mg/dL).
Ten days after the procedure the patient was readmitted due to pain in the left upper quadrant. He complained of nausea, vomiting and fever. He had suffered from chills for three days before readmission. On admission, his blood pressure was 70/40 mmHg, heart rate was 86/min, respiratory rate was 20/min, and body temperature was 38.4 °C. Laboratory findings showed leukocytosis of 19200/µL, hemoglobin 12.0 g/dL, platelet count 34000/µL, AST 102 U/L, ALT 55 U/L, ALP 426 U/L, total bilirubin 14.73 mg/dL, LDH 1300 U/L, and CRP 31.08 mg/dL (normal < 0.3 mg/dL).
Abdominal CT and MRI, compared to previous results, revealed slightly increased splenic lesion. Abdominal CT revealed a 7 cm-sized low-density lesion , MRI revealed a low signal lesion on T1-weighted image compared to initial MRI, much higher signal lesion on T2-weighted image with non-enhancing debris or necrotic portions inside and much lower signal with minimal peripheral enhancement showing a capsule development on gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted image , suggestive for abscess formation.
The blood culture revealed G. adiacens three days after readmission. The blood sample was cultivated in a liquid medium and it was identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry.