A 49-year-old woman was referred to our institution with a liver mass of 3 cm diameter that was incidentally identified on abdominal computed tomography during a medical check-up. She had been diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer at the age of 30, when she underwent bilateral modified mastectomy. Abdominal MRI revealed two masses in both the liver and pancreas. The mass in the right hepatic lobe (segment 6) demonstrated low signal intensity on T1‑weighted images and intermediate signal intensity on T2‑weighted images , and was difficult to differentiate from hepatocellular carcinoma. Dynamic gadoxetic acid-enhanced MRI of the liver mass showed intense enhancement on the arterial phase image, and equivocal washout of the tumor on the portal phase and delayed phase images . In the pancreatic tail, a subtle high signal intensity lesion was identified on T2‑weighted images . Dynamic gadoxetic acid-enhanced MRI of the pancreatic mass showed low signal intensity on the pre-contrast image and low contrast enhancement on the arterial phase image, followed by delayed contrast enhancement on portal phase and delayed phage images .
The patient subsequently underwent right hepatectomy and distal pancreatectomy. Gross examination of the liver revealed a well-demarcated grayish-white mass (2.2 × 2 × 1.1 cm) abutting the liver capsule. Microscopically, the mass was well circumscribed, with the surrounding liver tissue . It was composed of epithelioid cells, along with adipocytes and thin-walled vessels . The epithelioid cells contained abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, and the nuclei were large and round, showing mild pleomorphism . Neither tumor necrosis nor mitotic figures were observed. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for HMB45 and showed focal positivity for SMA, but were negative for S-100, SOX10, hepatocyte antigen, and CK AE1/AE3 . The histologic features and immunohistochemical profile of the tumor were consistent with EAML.
Gross examination of the distal pancreatectomy specimen revealed an ill-defined, grayish-white, solid lesion measuring 1.1 × 1 × 0.8 cm. Histopathologic examination identified the presence of atypical glands with desmoplastic stroma in the pancreatic parenchyma . The glands were composed of cells with irregular nuclear membranes, prominent nucleoli, and a tubular growth pattern, which are consistent with a moderately differentiated pancreatic adenocarcinoma . The tumor cells were positive for CK7 and negative for CK20 on immunohistochemistry .
Because of the simultaneous development of multiple primary tumors and the history of early-onset bilateral breast cancer at the age of 30 years in the present patient, the possibility of a genetic tumor predisposition syndrome was suspected. Genetic testing had not been performed when the patient was diagnosed with breast cancer. We analyzed the medical history of the patient’s family in detail, and found that the patient’s father had been diagnosed with esophageal cancer at the age of 45 years and her younger sister had been diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 40 years. The pedigree of the patient was investigated and is shown in Fig. A. Her family history of cancer was suspicious of a familial cancer predisposition syndrome.
We performed whole-exome sequencing of a blood sample from the patient using an Illumina Hiseq 2500 sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) identified a heterozygous germline variant of TP53 (NM_000546.5):c.708C > A , but no deleterious BRCA1/2 mutation was found. In addition, we performed targeted NGS of the liver EAML and pancreatic tumor. DNA and RNA were extracted and libraries were prepared using an Oncomine Comprehensive Assay Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and the products were sequenced using an Ion S5 System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). NGS identified the TP53 (NM_000546.5):c.708C > A variant in both the liver EAML and pancreatic cancer, with a variant allele frequency (VAF) of 53.05% and 51.63%, respectively, and this was identical to the patient’s germline mutation . The VAF of the TP53 variant also confirmed the presence of a germline mutation of TP53. This, plus the patient’s history of early-onset breast cancer, met the 2015 version of the Chompret criteria for the diagnosis of LFS .
The TP53 (NM_000546.5):c.708C > A variant has not been reported to be associated with LFS. In COSMIC database, 19 tumor samples with this variant were identified, but none of them were confirmed as germline mutation. Based on the molecular and clinical findings, the ACMG classification of TP53 (NM_000546.5):c.708C > A in this proband was “likely pathogenic” because it is a nonsense mutation that causes the tyrosine residue at codon 236 to be mutated to create a stop codon (PVS1), and this is not found in gnomAD exomes or genomes (PM2_supporting).
One month following surgery, the patient underwent adjuvant chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil once, and she remained no recurrence. However, 4 years later, a depressed lesion of her stomach was identified by esophagogastroduodenoscopy . Histopathological examination of the lesion led to a diagnosis of a primary stomach cancer of a poorly-cohesive carcinoma type . Therefore, she underwent subtotal gastrectomy and the final pathological TNM classification was pT1 N1 M0. Adjuvant therapy for gastric carcinoma was not considered and she remained alive with no recurrence during 3 years of follow-up.