A previously healthy 8-year-old Japanese girl was referred to our hospital with a 2-day history of symmetrical, multiple, round, light pink, tender erythematous nodules on her lower legs and arthralgia of her ankles 13 days before admission (Figure
). Their sizes were approximately 2cm. The diagnosis of erythema nodosum was made. The lesions gradually improved and disappeared 7 days before admission; however, the patient then developed multiple maculopapular and targetoid lesions over her lower legs 6 days before admission (Figure
A). No involvement of the mucous membranes was found. The diagnosis of erythema multiforme was made. The physical examination also revealed tonsillitis. Specific serum immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies for M. pneumoniae were positive, and clarithromycin therapy (300mg/day) was started. The lesions gradually improved and disappeared 3 days before admission (Figure
). The patient had a mild cough; arthralgia of both hands; painful, localized edema on her scalp bilaterally; and a purpuric rash over her hip and lower legs concurrently 3 days before admission (Figure
B). She also had abdominal pain and was admitted to our hospital. She was born in Japan and had not traveled out of Japan. She had no animal or insect bites. On admission, her body temperature was 36.8°C, heart rate 106 beats/minute and blood pressure 96/50mmHg. She had no weight loss. She had a purpuric rash over her hip and lower legs. The remainder of the examination was normal. Laboratory examinations showed a slightly elevated C-reactive protein level of 0.5mg/dl (normal <0.4mg/dl), white blood cell count of 8.44 × 109/L, hemoglobin of 13.0g/dl; platelet count of 220 × 109/L, normal liver and kidney function, and urinalysis with 2+ protein and 1+ blood. Complement studies showed normal C3 of 119mg/dl (normal, 86mg/dl to 160mg/dl), C4 of 22mg/dl (normal, 17mg/dl to 45mg/dl) and slightly elevated CH50 of 59U/ml (normal, 30U/ml to 45U/ml). A culture from the throat revealed normal flora only. The test for anti-streptolysin O antibody was negative. Hepatitis B surface antigen and hepatitis C antibody were negative. The titer of complement fixation tests for M. pneumoniae was 1:20480. Chest radiograph revealed no significant lung abnormalities. On the basis of the appearance of the latest rash and the associated symptoms, the diagnosis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura was made. The patient was treated with clarithromycin (300mg/day) for 3 weeks. Her symptoms improved gradually and disappeared 2 weeks later.