A full-term, Chinese baby boy was born to a 30-year-old woman at 38 weeks of gestation. The baby weighed 2.8 kg with an Apgar score of 9/10. The baby was noted to have mild jaundice with normal vital signs on day one of life; there was no evidence to suggest other causes of neonatal jaundice such as intrauterine infections and his glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase screen was normal. Laboratory investigations showed that his total bilirubin was 198 μmol/L and hemoglobin was 19 g/dL. The baby's blood group was A RhD positive with a red cell phenotype of ccDEe (R2r) and SS. The result of a DCT was positive and red cell elution studies of the baby's blood identified the presence of anti-D and anti-S antibodies.
The mother was para 3+1. Her first pregnancy was aborted five years ago and unfortunately no investigation was performed to find out the cause of abortion. Subsequent pregnancies were uneventful with no history of HDFN in the last three years. She denied any previous history of blood transfusion. Her transfusion record at our center showed that the mother developed anti-S antibodies during her second pregnancy three years ago. An antenatal antibody screening test performed at 22 weeks identified only allo-anti-S; no anti-D was detected. She was given RhD Ig prophylaxis at 28 weeks of pregnancy. Her other laboratory investigation results showed that she was grouped as A RhD negative with red cell phenotype ccdee (rr), and homozygous ss. At postpartum, the result of her DCT was negative, but the antibody screening test performed using the indirect Coombs' test method and antibody investigations showed the presence of anti-D and anti-S, and the anti-D titer was 1:32 (0.25 IU/mL).
In view of the presence of allo-anti-D and allo-anti-S in the postpartum maternal blood, supported by the presence of similar alloantibodies in the baby's red cell eluates and clinical presentation of hemolytic anemia, a diagnosis of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn secondary to anti-D and anti-S was made. The baby was immediately started on a course of conventional phototherapy with a single tungsten halogen bulb. His serum bilirubin levels subsequently reduced to normal levels over a few days. On the sixth day of life, the baby was discharged well with no complications.