The patient was a 5-year-old male with a birth length of 51 cm (+ 0.33SD) and a birth weight of 4000 g (+ 1.6SD). He is the second child of a non-consanguineous healthy couple and was delivered by caesarean section at 40 weeks. Development was normal before one and a half years of age; subsequently, lower-limb abnormality and short stature were noticed. Since three years of age, he has been suffered from consistent low bone mineral density (Z:1.6 ~ − 2.4, 1–5%) which could not be corrected by calcium and vitamin D supplementation. He occasionally complained of ankle ache after exercise. At 5 years of age, he was referred to our department due to the manifested bone abnormality.
Physical examination showed a flat face, short neck, short lower limbs especially under the knees, brachydactyly, enlargement of the medium interphalangeal joints with normal height (105.8 cm, − 1.29SD) and weight (24 kg, + 1.87SD) . The patient had normal hearing, vision, cognitive development, and expression ability. Chest computed tomography and urinary system ultrasound were normal. X-ray of the spine showed that platyspondyly with irregular vertebral endplates of the lumbar vertebra and thoracic vertebra, and bony defects were observed on the top of T12 . X-ray of the knees and hand confirmed the results found on physical examination and that of the pelvis revealed a heterogeneous bone structure of the proximal femur . Magnetic resonance imaging of the right ankle showed signs of osteochondritis .
Laboratory investigations revealed normal levels of liver function, renal function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, thyroid function, and levels of parathyroid hormone and serum calcium. Additionally, the patient showed elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase (184 IU/L, reference range: 45–129 IU/L) and serum inorganic phosphorus (1.8 mmol/L, reference range: 0.78–1.65 mmol/L). Further, myocardium zymogram examination revealed that creatine kinase isoenzyme-MB (4.8 μg/L, reference range: < 3.7 μg/L) and creatine kinase isoenzyme (193 U/L, reference range: 55–170 U/L) levels were above the normal.
The patient’s father was 173 cm, and his mother was 156 cm in height; both parents were healthy. He also had an 8-year-old healthy brother, with a height of 130.5 cm . The parents’ and the only brother's spines, pelvises, and knees were evaluated using X-ray and no abnormality was observed (Additional file : Figs. S1, S2, S3).
WES was performed on the proband. Sequencing was performed and clusters were generated with an Illumina HiSeq 2000 system (Illumina, Inc.) and an Illumina cBot system (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) respectively. The average read depth was 162.91X (Additional file : Table S1). All variants were annotated and filtered by Ingenuity Variant Analysis (Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, USA). Candidate variants were analyzed while skeletal dysplasia was selected as the main filtering symptom. Among all filtered variants, a homozygous missense variant in COL2A1 was confirmed and explained the patient’s condition (PM2 + PP3 + PP4), according to the guidelines recommended by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) (Additional file : Table S2). The novel variant NM_001844.4: c.3662C > T in COL2A1 led to a serine-to-phenylalanine substitution. Sanger sequencing indicated that the parents and brother were heterozygous for this variant .
Using in silico tools, we evaluated the pathogenicity of the variant of the COL2A1. The position of the variant is highly conserved in multiple species . Functional prediction indicated that the variant has a deleterious effect on the protein according to PolyPhen-2 (probably damaging, score = 0.99), SIFT (damaging, score = 0.003), and MutationTaster (disease causing, score = 1). To better assess the pathogenicity, a three-dimensional model was generated and examined using the I-TASSER server and Pymol v.1.8.4.0 software (; Schrödinger, New York, NY, USA) respectively . Normally, the amino acid residue serine is located in the C-terminal propeptide, which participates in the formation of an α-helix. The variant c.3662C > T is indicated to alter the hydrogen bond resulting in disruption of the normal protein structure. The patient was finally diagnosed with type II collagenopathy caused by a novel homozygous variant in COL2A1.