A 58-year-old male with medical history of a coronary artery disease, peripheral artery disease, renal artery stenosis, chronic kidney disease, hypertension with hypertensive urgency, history of tobacco use, and history of left renal artery stent placement presented to our hospital on 5 December 2017 for symptoms of chest pain, shortness of breath, and left-sided flank pain.His creatinine (Cr) was 3.02 mg/dl at this presentation, compared to his baseline value of 1.2–1.7 mg/dl two years prior in 2015, during which he was urgently admitted for a coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) along with subsequent placement of a left renal stent for arterial stenosis. The patient was lost to follow-up after discharge from his CABG and had been non-compliant with his medications (including aspirin and plavix and his antihypertensives) per patient report.
Pertaining to the current presentation, he initially left the Emergency Department against medical advice and represented approximately 18 h later, on 7 December 2017, with worsening symptoms and Cr level of 8.28 mg/dl. The possible culprits of his acute kidney injury were discussed, with cardiac etiology ruled out with normal electrocardiogram and unchanging echocardiogram. The patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit with a diagnosis of multi-organ failure. He became progressively worse along with subsequent development of anuria, leading to hemodialysis initiation on 12/10/2017. A computed tomography angiography (CTA) on 11 December 2017 demonstrated a chronic aortic occlusion along with bilateral proximal RAO that reconstituted to the mid to distal renal arteries via collateralization from the middle supra-renal/capsular arteries . Vascular surgery was consulted for findings of new renal occlusions. After extensive discussion and evaluation of the patient, it was determined that the best course was to proceed with renal revascularization due to the presence of flow in the renal arteries and branches and the partial cortical enhancement, indicating possibly viable renal parenchyma. On 13 December 2017, the patient underwent arteriogram via left brachial artery access with subsequent placement of bilateral renal artery stent-grafts consisting of Gore Viabahn VBX 6 mm × 39 mm stent (W. L. Gore & Associates, Flagstaff, Arizona) on the left and a Gore Viabahn VBX 6 mm × 29 mm stent on the right.
On the left, the prior stent encroached on the renal artery bifurcation with the proximal end flared using an 8 mm balloon . For the right renal artery, we were able to deploy a stent-graft across the occluded segment, achieving good flow at the end without any significant stenosis . The proximal end was also flared using an 8 mm balloon. Intraoperatively, we found diffuse pruning of the vessels consistent with chronic renal disease. Once we were satisfied with our stent-grafts, we then decided to infuse tissue plasminogen activator, as his renal occlusions were considered acute. No protection basket was utilized due to concern of the device causing complete occlusion of the native vessels and causing further insult to the kidneys.
The patient tolerated the procedure well. Post-operatively, he began to recover his renal function with an increase in urine output. The retrieval of the patient’s renal function eventually resulted in the ability to wean him off intermittent hemodialysis. Concurrent to his improved renal function with improved Cr level and urine output, the patient was also able to be transitioned from a parenteral nicardipine drip and hydralazine to an enteral antihypertensive regimen consisting of carvedilol and amlodipine. During his post-operative course, the patient experienced an episode of melena with anemia while on warfarin and dual antiplatelet therapy. He underwent an upper esophageal endoscopy and a colonoscopy that lead to the finding of mucosal bleeding at the periampullary region. The patient’s warfarin and aspirin were held, and he was restarted on clopidogrel. Thereafter, the hemoglobin stabilized, and no subsequent bleeding episodes reoccurred. The patient continued to remain off hemodialysis with control of his hypertension while on oral medications at his five months follow-up visit. The patient’s Cr and glomerular filtration rate on day stent placement were 11.48 and 5, respectively, and were 5.53 and 11 on day of discharge, and at the five months follow-up, they improve to 2.63 and 25 .