A 4-year-old girl with no significant medical history was brought to the emergency department with febrile status epilepticus. Approximately 10 h after the onset of fever, generalized tonic–clonic convulsions appeared, lasting approximately 50 min. After the generalized seizures subsided, clonic convulsions of the left upper extremity continued in clusters. Midazolam, fosphenytoin sodium hydrate, and levetiracetam were administered. After the convulsions sudsided, in about 90 min, the patient remained mildly unconscious; therefore, head computed tomography and cerebrospinal fluid examination were performed, but no abnormalities were found. Human parainfluenza virus type 3 and human rhinovirus type C were co-detected using FilmArray® Respiratory 2.1 panel and in-house reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification assays from nasopharyngeal specimen, and they were thought to be the source of the fever. Because of the possibility of AESD, vitamin therapy (vitamin B1 100 mg/day, vitamin B6 20 mg/kg/day, and L-carnitine 30 mg/kg/day) was administered on the first day . Although brain MRI including T1, T2, DWI, and ADC map on the second day (33 h after early seizure) showed no abnormalities , ASL showed increased blood flow in the frontal, temporal, and occipital regions with spared central sulcus, similar to the central sparing of AESD . In addition, electroencephalogram (EEG) showed high-voltage slow waves, especially in the right occipital region . The patient was diagnosed with AESD because of the prolonged disturbance of consciousness and ASL results at 33 h that pointed to a diagnosis of AESD in the acute stage. Therefore, she was treated with pulse steroid therapy and immunoglobulin therapy in addition to vitamin therapy from the third day. The patient remained mildly unconscious, but she gradually became conscious by the seventh day, and no late seizures occurred. A brain MRI performed on the eighth day did not show BTA; however, the cerebrum was generally and mildly atrophic , and this could possibly have been caused by pulse steroid therapy. Additionally, ASL performed on the eighth day showed no apparent abnormal CBF distribution . Furthermore, Gln elevation was observed on MRS on the eighth day . This finding together with the clinical course led to a diagnosis of MEEX. The vitamin cocktail treatment was completed after a total of 10 days. Although EEG still showed slow waves in the occipital lobe, there were no problems in motor function, conversation, or the state of consciousness. The patient was discharged on the sixteenth day without obvious sequelae.