A 78-year-old Japanese man presented with intermittent chest/back pain and was admitted to our hospital with a suspicion of a mycotic thoracic aortic aneurysm. The patient had a medical history of hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) (glycated haemoglobin level of 7.9% on admission), and dyslipidaemia for more than 10 years but no relevant family history and history of smoking, drug abuse or alcohol consumption. On admission, the patient was afebrile and showed unremarkable manifestations or physical findings, except for back dysphoria. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (eCT) scan confirmed the appearance of a mycotic thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection at the distal arch, with an intramural fluid density collection and periaortic inflammatory changes . We started empiric intravenous antibiotic therapy with meropenem 1 g intravenously (i.v.) every 8 h and vancomycin 1 g i.v. and micafungin 100 mg i.v. every 24 h. After 3 days, we assessed the effectiveness of the treatment by laboratory examination and eCT. Despite strict blood pressure control and broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy, inflammation scores became exacerbated and were represented by elevated C-reactive protein (11.61 to 28.71 mg/dl) and procalcitonin (0.34 to 0.84 ng/ml) levels and an elevated white blood cell count (9920 to 17,800/μl). In addition, the patient had a high fever (up to 39.9 °C). To prevent aneurysmal rupture and eliminate the infected foci, the patient underwent ascending aorta and aortic arch resection and subsequent total arch replacement with rifampicin-immersed artificial vessels on day five. The resected infected tissue was subjected to pathological analysis , culture examination and 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis to identify the pathogen. A few days after surgical treatment, the culture and sequencing results revealed only B. vulgatus/B. dorei and B. dorei as the pathogen, respectively. Based on the identification of the pathogen and on the results of susceptibility tests, the three antibiotic therapies could be discontinued and were shifted stepwise to a single metronidazole (1500 mg/day orally for 8 weeks) therapy. The patient satisfactorily improved, with no severe complications, and was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on postoperative day 34. There was no recurrence of infection or aneurysm within the following 12 months, as confirmed by blood tests and eCT.