A 38 year old man presented to the Fixel Institute for Neurological Diseases for evaluation of medication refractory tics. His tics began at the age of 6 years and he was diagnosed with TS at the age of 12. He reported multiple different motor and phonic tics. His motor tics included head turning, bilateral shoulder shrugging, kicking of his legs (out to the side), swinging the right arm to the side, and neck jerking with associated eye rolling. His phonic tics included sniffing, throat clearing, grunting, animal noises, and coprolalia.
The patient’s Yale Global Tic Severity Scale (YGTSS) total score was 82 with an impairment subscale score of 40. His tics were disabling in social, occupational, and academic domains. His clinical presentation was complicated by co-morbid obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and depression. However, at the time of surgical implantation, his psychiatric comorbidities were optimized and he was on stable medication dosages. His OCD remained relatively severe, with a Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (YBOCS) score of 26, and he was stable on his psychiatric treatment regimen (pre- and post-DBS) as summarized in Table . The medications were not changed before and after DBS implantation and there were no gaze disturbances, visual symptoms, or change in libido associated with the medications.
Prior to being evaluated at our center, he had tried multiple (unsuccessful) medication regimens for the management of his tics except VMAT-2 inhibitor, a common treatment for hyperkinetic disorders , because it was not required by the IRB protocols. These trials were either ineffective or produced side effects. He declined comprehensive behavioral intervention for tic therapy or habit reversal therapy and the IRB and FDA protocols did not require these therapies to be instituted prior to DBS. Following a multidisciplinary DBS evaluation, his TS was deemed severe, debilitating, and refractory to available treatment. His psychiatric comorbidities were stable and well controlled and he was referred for DBS evaluation.
The patient consented to be part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) funded DBS in TS study (IRB201300850, NCT02056873). Subjects enrolled in the study underwent two stages of stereotactic surgical intervention . During the first stage of the operation, Medtronic Model 3387 DBS leads were implanted bilaterally in the CM nuclei region. The electrode target trajectories for the CM nuclei were planned using direct visualization and manipulation of a modified digital Schaltenbrand-Bailey deformable atlas . The atlas was morphed onto the patient’s pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) FGATIR image and co-registered to a pre-operative computed tomography image (CT) through the utilization of a Cosman-Roberts-Wells (CRW) stereotactic frame (as the reference). Medtronic RESUME II strip leads Model 3587A were placed along a stereotactially planned trajectory towards the hand primary motor cortex (M1). During the second stage of the operation approximately one month later, two Medtronic Activa PC+S neurostimulators (Medtronic PLC, Minneapolis, MN) were implanted in the bilateral subclavicular region and connected to the leads via extension wires. The Activa PC+S was not connected during the initial lead implantation surgery.
A post-operative CT image was obtained one month after the first stage DBS surgery to verify the location of the DBS electrodes. After the DBS surgery, the patient returned for six monthly post-surgical visits. During these visits, an experienced clinician programmer adjusted the stimulation parameters with the goal of optimization through tic reduction. Tic improvement was measured using the YGTSS scale each month. In addition to the clinical programming, local field potential (LFP) recordings were captured using the Activa PC+S system and were analyzed in MATLAB 2016a (Mathworks, Inc).
After three months of clinical programming, the patient’s tics had only improved by 8% . Post-operative CT imaging revealed that the electrode was slightly anterior and superior compared to previous TS cases in the study (n = 3). The LFPs revealed beta band (12–30 Hz) power desynchronization with respect to movement onset during behavioral tasks and the power band remained desynchronized throughout the movement. This beta desynchronization is a common feature observed in the ventral intermediate nucleus (VIM) region. This region is both lateral and ventral to the CM region of the thalamus . Similarly, a strong PAC between the depth electrode (phase) and the subdural strip (amplitude) was observed . Malekmohammadi et al. and our group have both shown the presence of PAC between the VIM and M1 . This PAC was not a feature observed in the three other TS patients recruited into the study. These structural and functional results suggested that the initial lead was closer to the VIM rather than the CM region. The DBS interdisciplinary clinical team performed a careful risk-benefit analysis. The factors in the analysis included absence of clinically relevant tic suppression, subtle imaging differences from previous TS DBS cases, the patient’s initial post-operative imaging, and the use of physiologic data. These data were discussed with the patient and family and a decision was made to attempt repositioning the DBS leads.
The initial DBS placement and repositioning are summarized in Figure using a digital deformable Schaltenbrand-Bailey atlas overlaid on the patient’s T1-MRI after transforming to AC-PC coordinates. The 3D reconstructed atlas, lead position, and lead trajectory are shown in Figure . Following repositioning, there was a reduction in beta desynchronization and disappearance of the PAC between the depth electrodes and the subdural strips . There was also a greater “honeymoon” effect reported at the one month follow up visit following revision surgery. Following lead revision, identical postoperative monthly follow-up visits were conducted by the same clinician programmer. Tic scales were collected by the same rating psychiatrist and there was significant improvement in the clinical outcome .