A Syrian male in his 70s presented to the gastroenterology department with chronic epigastric pain and loss of appetite as his main complaints. His generalized abdominal pain was worse with food ingestion, not associated with the position, and persistent for the past 2 months despite antacid use. He unintentionally lost 6 kg of weight since the onset of his symptoms but reported no nausea, vomiting, bloating, or change in defecation habits. He endured a significant loss of appetite a few weeks before his presentation. His medical and drug histories were unremarkable, aside from over-the-counter medications. He denied smoking or drinking alcohol.
Physical examination was unremarkable. His vital signs included a body temperature of 37°C, 95% oxygen saturation, 110/70 mmHg arterial blood pressure, and a heart rate of 70 beats per minute. His initial laboratory workup, including a complete blood count with differential kidney functions, liver functions, thyroid function tests, electrolytes, and serum and urinary amylase, was within normal range. Tumor markers CA (carbohydrate antigen) 19-9, CEA (carcinoembryonic antigen), and PSA (prostate-specific antigen) were 8.43, 1.06, and 6.6 µg/l, respectively.
An abdominal ultrasound revealed no abnormal findings. The patient was then referred for an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy which uncovered an uncomplicated small hiatal hernia with linear hypertrophic gastropathy in the body and antrum of the stomach. A biopsy of the duodenum revealed chronic duodenitis without villous atrophy (Marsh score 0). Additionally, a lower colonoscopy incidentally found internal hemorrhoids (grade I) with papilloma through retroflexion of the scope.
Despite extensive investigations into the cause of his abdominal pain, no underlying etiology could be recognized. The decision was made to perform a multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) with contrast. The MSCT revealed mild narrowing near the origin of the CA along with a thickened MAL (>7 mm) . These findings confirmed the diagnosis of MALS.
A laparoscopic surgical procedure was scheduled to relieve extrinsic pressure from the CA by cutting the MAL. The surgery was conducted by a senior surgeon, and five laparoscopic ports were used after general anesthesia to access the celiac trunk through the lesser omentum. After isolating the CA , the MAL was cut by a monopolar electrocautery probe, which resolved the stenosis . The surgery was concluded after the placement of a Penrose drainage tube, which was later removed after 24 h. The patient was started on clear oral liquids, which were gradually increased, reaching a free oral diet on day 3 post-operation. The patient had an uneventful hospital stay and recovered without complications.
Another MSCT was conducted after the procedure. It confirmed the successful release of extrinsic pressure over the patent CA . The patient reported significant symptom relief postoperatively and was discharged on day 4 post-operation. His appetite recovered, though he did not regain his lost weight during the follow-up period of 3 years.