Here, we report a 51-year-old female patient who was referred to our hospital due to hypertensive peak and acute kidney injury (AKI) on a background of chronic kidney disease.
The patient whose primary cause of CKD remains unknown reached ESRD at age of 19. In 1988, she received a cadaveric renal transplantation. The posttransplant therapy included cyclosporine and prednisone. After eighteen years, serum creatinine increased from 132.63 to 707.36 μmol/L [normal laboratory values 44-88 μmol/L]. A kidney biopsy was performed in suspicion of acute rejection and graft failure. The biopsy did not show neither features of cellular rejection nor features of antibody mediated rejection. Furthermore, a suspicion for polyomavirus nephropathy was ruled out as no significant polyomavirus DNA replication was detected on quantitative PCR. No significant lesions related to CNI toxicity such as nodular hyalinosis and striped fibrosis nor isometric vacuolization of tubules were found.
Cyclosporine therapy was suspended, starting therefore immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus and prednisone. AKI gradually regressed. Last creatinine baseline value was 158.4 μmol/L.
After three weeks the patient was referred from emergency room to our hospital (February 2nd, 2018) due to hypertensive peak and pulmonary edema.
Basic laboratory investigations showed a pattern of hemolysis: LDH 1,014 IU/L [normal laboratory values <250 IU/L], bilirubin 39.33 μmol/L [normal laboratory values 5.13-20.52 μmol/L], platelets 121,000 per microliter [normal laboratory values 150-450 per microliter], severe anemia (Hb 63 g/L) [normal laboratory values 120–150 g/L], and positive finding of schistocytes on the blood smear. ADAMTS13 activity level was normal (51.9%) [normal laboratory values > 50%] and the Coombs test was negative. No neurological signs were present. Moreover, on the first week of February, the patients showed at baseline CKD stage IV with serum creatinine 290.4 μmol/L, eGFR 15.5 ml/min/1.73m2, and 24-hour proteinuria 0.84 g.
In suspicion of drug-related TMA, tacrolimus was suspended (tacrolimus blood level was 3.9 ng/ml [normal laboratory values 5–15 ng/mL]) and the dose of mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone was increased. However, no response was observed. The severe anemia (Hb 64 g/L) made blood transfusions necessary.
Given the laboratory and clinical pattern consistent with aHUS, and after having ruled out HUS and secondary causes of TMA, we administered eculizumab 900 mg e.v. after the patient had received meningococcal vaccine and antibiotic prophylaxis using the schedule of 900 mg/weekly for four weeks then 1200 mg starting from the fourth week. Due to worsening AKI with serum creatinine and urea values at 608.33 μmol/L and 21478.5 μmol/L, respectively [urea normal laboratory values 1665.00–3829.50 μmol/L], the patient underwent hemodialysis sessions after positioning a central venous catheter in the femoral vein.
According to hematological parameters, especially platelet count, a quick response to eculizumab was observed two days after administration .
Platelet count increased up to 217,000 per microliter, Hb remained stable in the normal range, and haptoglobin levels and clinical conditions improved.
A second administration of eculizumab was given seven days later. We started observing a poor response to therapy: LDH levels remained out of normal range (686 IU/L) as schistocytes were still present on blood smear.
Due to fever onset, blood cultures were performed and resulted negative, while urine culture showed 366 JC Polyomavirus genome copies per mL whose value gradually decreased to normal range over time of hospital stay. Immunosuppressive therapy with mycophenolate was tapered to 500 mg/die. Research for BK Polyomavirus genome turned out to be negative both in urine and in blood.
Three days later, the patient showed tonic-clonic seizures. On the CT scan, a parietal cortical-subcortical hemorrhage was found. The patient was then transferred to intensive care of our hospital where her clinical picture gradually improved.
During stay at intensive care, atrial fibrillation onset was observed and enoxaparin 2000 UI twice a day was started. Eculizumab was administered twice more with a one-week interval. After the last administration, we observed an unsatisfactory hematological response (low levels of haptoglobin, high levels of LDH, and reticulocyte count) and at the same time oligoanuria, tendency to dyspnea, and ponderal increase so that dialysis sessions were repeated regularly every other day. Given the worsening clinical picture, we suspended eculizumab, despite eculizumab induction therapy being incomplete and CH 50 level being low (<15 Ueq/ml [normal value < 70 Ueq/ml]).
As clinical conditions were gradually getting better, the patient was discharged from our hospital.
On follow-up, we observed a partial resolution of the hemolysis pattern: no schistocyte was found, LDH levels showed a decreasing trend, and anemia and thrombocytopenia were no longer observed. The patient kept on being dialysis-dependent until September.
Genomic analysis of the patient's CFH, MCP/CD46, CFI, C3, CFB, THBD, DGKE, CFHR1, CFHR3, and CFRH5 genes by next generation sequencing (NGS) revealed a pathogenic heterozygous mutation in CFI gene (c.292A>G (p.Thr98Ala)) as well as a heterozygous variant in THBD gene (c.1502C>T (p.Pro501Leu)). The clinical diagnosis of aHUS was confirmed.
On September, in consideration of the mutations found and in order to prevent aHUS relapse, we restarted eculizumab therapy with a fixed dose of 1200 mg every two weeks. After the first administration, we observed a clear improvement of renal function and diuresis as the patient stopped being dialysis-dependent. Nevertheless, according to hematological parameters, the response to therapy had never been complete. Haptoglobin levels, indeed, never rose to normal range after eculizumab administration.