A 42-year-old male patient came in hospital with chief complaints of pain and swelling of the left elbow joint with deformity and inability to move the left elbow joint. There was no neurovascular deficit. He had a history of fall 3 months back followed by application of massage and manipulation by local bone setter. The patient did not take medical treatment for same at that time. Radiological examination confirmed posterior type of dislocation of elbow joint without any fracture.
We planned for open reduction, and the extra stability peroperatively can be provided using two cruciate-like ligaments for the ulnohumeral and radiocapitellar joints so that postoperatively early movement is permitted safely. A patient was counseled about the treatment options, their expected results, advantages, disadvantages, and complications. A special consent was taken from the patient for harvesting semitendinosus graft.
Surgical procedure started with single midline posterior skin incision followed by a medial plus lateral approach in the deeper planes .
Identification and preservation of ulnar nerve were first and important step followed by extensive release of fibrosis around the joint . A special care was taken to preserve lateral and medial collateral ligament, or whatever was present left of them. We kept our dissection close to the bone and away from collaterals to avoid any damage. Radiohumeral horn was carefully identified and excised. This step facilitates radiocapitellar reduction. Precaution was taken to preserve articular cartilage, and nibbling of soft tissue around the articular cartilage was avoided. We performed V-Y plasty of triceps. A technique originally published by Arafiles et al. involved construction of an anterior-posterior cruciate ligament like structure using the palmaris longus tendon, but we harvested semitendinosus for our surgery. Total four holes are made using drill, two each in the humerus and ulna to pass the tendon through them in a figure of eight fashion . The tendon passes through the articular surface of the olecranon and enters the articular surface of trochlea, winds back on the lateral condyle and passes the ulna to be finally tied down on the posterior aspect of ulna .We released more contracted tissue until we were achieved full range of motion. We checked for both anteroposterior and mediolateral stability during various degrees of flexion and supination pronation and adjusted our slings likewise. At the end of procedure, we succeeded in achieving good stability which was confirmed by testing ROM in all planes. Wound closed in layers and drain kept in situ . Above elbow slab given postoperatively and later drain was removed after 24 h ( post-operative X-ray). We allowed movement on the very next day of operation. Post-operative analgesic care was taken to allow pain-free movements. Active movements and gradual strengthening exercises started over a period of 3 weeks. Light weight lifting was given after 4 weeks and full weight lifting after 3 months.
Follow-up was done at 3, 6, and 12 weeks and then after 3 months. In our case, we assessed for any pain, range of movements, and stability. Radiographic evaluation was also done.