A 72 year-old man presented in the emergency department with right upper quadrant and epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting. On examination, the patient was sweating and pale with a tender right upper quadrant. A tender 5 × 5 cm2 mass was also noted in the right flank. The provisional diagnosis of acute cholecystitis with incidental finding of abdominal mass was made and further investigation in the form of computerised tomography (CT) of his abdomen and pelvis was performed. The scan confirmed the presence of 50 × 55 mm2 mass in the retroperitoneum on the right side of the urinary bladder but separate from the small intestinal loops without any evidence of local infiltration. The radiological differential diagnosis included carcinoid lesion and teratoma of a right undescended testis. However, undescended testis was ruled out with a fully grown testis on the right side of the scrotum. The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, open cholecystectomy and also excision of the pelvic mass. Intra-operatively, the mass was found to be approximately 8 cms in size, partly haemorrhagic and covered by peritoneum. It was situated lateral to the right ureter and superior to the right iliac vessels. This mass was excised en-block without any intra-operative complications. The patient had an uneventful post-operative recovery and was discharged on the 10th post-operative day. Histological diagnosis of intranodal palisaded myofibroblastoma was confirmed. He did not reveal any signs of recurrence in seven years of follow up. The histopathological findings are described as follows.
A Solid mass measuring 80 × 80 × 50 mm3 with surrounding attached fatty tissue measuring up to 100 mms in maximum dimension was noted. On slicing, a well defined nodule with partially firm, white and solid areas, alternating with haemorrhagic areas, was found. At the periphery there was some calcification. The microscopic study was performed on extensively sampled solid and haemorrhagic areas including the resection margins. The gall bladder was 105 mms with a thick wall and a few tiny stones.
This represented encapsulated, a well defined nodular lesion with variable cellularity. The cells were spindle shaped with slightly wavy nuclei forming short interlacing fascicles, exhibiting areas that were reminiscent of AntonyA/Antony B area . No significant nuclear pleomorphism was visible however mitosis was rarely noted in 1 in up to 30 high power field (× 40 objective). Areas of fresh as well as old haemorrhages were present. At the periphery, reactive lymphoid infiltrate and focal calcification were also noted . The tumour showed a prominent fascicular growth pattern with many short and long interlacing fascicles of tumour cells . Amianthoid fibres were easily identified though in few areas of the tumour .
The spindle cells were positive for Smooth muscle actin (SMA) , Calponin and Vimentin but did not express Desmin and h-Caldesmon. The tumour cells showed strong nuclear expression of Cyclin D1 . The cells were negative for neurofilament, cytokeratin. The staining for S100 protein, CD34, CD99, Bcl-2 and CD117/C-kit were negative in the tumour cells. Immunostaining for Alk-1 and HHV 8 were negative in these cells .