A 46-year-old female was diagnosed with sarcoidosis approximately 15 years ago based on bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy but without any involvement of other organs. The patient was asymptomatic and did not receive any medications. However, she reported progressive exertional dyspnoea and leg oedema in the past few months and was admitted to our hospital, presenting with World Health Organization (WHO) functional Class IV. She had no heart murmur and fine crackles in the lower lung fields. The six-minute walk distance (6MWD) was 300 m, with desaturation from 85% to 61%. Laboratory tests showed serum brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 32.9 pg/mL, KL-6 of 1140 U/mL, and normal serum concentrations of angiotensin-converting enzyme. Chest radiography showed bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy with bilateral interstitial lung opacities in the lower lung fields. Pulmonary function testing revealed a normal pattern but severe impairment of the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO), 16.2% of the predicted value. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed right atrial and ventricular dilatation with dislocation of the interventricular septum toward the left ventricle and trace tricuspid valve regurgitation with an elevated trans-tricuspid pressure gradient (TR-PG) of 42 mmHg, but normal left ventricle ejection fraction of 71%. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy , lung fibrosis, bilateral interstitial opacities, and thickened interlobular septa . First, diuretics and oxygen therapy were initiated for 2 weeks. Leg oedema and dyspnoea improved gradually; however, echocardiography results were almost similar to those on admission, and TR-PG of 40 mmHg. Trans-bronchoscopic lung biopsy could have promoted a better understanding of the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms driving the PH. However, because of her respiratory condition, we decided not to perform it. Instead, endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) of the enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes revealed non-caseating epithelioid cell granuloma, confirming the diagnosis of sarcoidosis . Right heart catheterization (RHC) revealed precapillary PH with a mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of 43 mmHg and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) of 9.59 WU . Based on these findings, the definitive diagnosis of sarcoidosis-associated PH was made. Oral PAH-targeted therapy with an endothelin-receptor antagonist (macitentan 10 mg) was initiated, and, after excluding a deterioration of oxygenation, a phosphodiesterase type-5 inhibitor (tadalafil 20 mg) was added 5 days later. After 2 months, we observed improvements in the patient’s functional status from WHO functional Class IV to II. The 6MWD without supplemental oxygen improved from 300 m to 370 m, with desaturation from 93% to 72%. The second RHC demonstrated that mPAP decreased from 43 mmHg to 35 mmHg and PVR from 9.59 to 6.23 WU . The 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (F-18 FDG-PET) highlighted bilateral uptake in hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes but not in the myocardium . As the patient still suffered from dyspnoea and the mPAP was elevated, we decided to start immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone 30 mg per day for 4 weeks tapering the dose by 10 mg every 4 weeks. Five months after starting prednisone clinical symptoms improved. In 6MWD without oxygen, she covered a walking distance of 400 m with saturation decreasing from 99% to 59%. The third RHC showed improvement of mPAP (23 mmHg) and PVR (5.03 WU) . As exertional desaturation was still evident, domiciliary oxygen treatment was continued.