A 65-year-old man with a high PSA of 12.44 ng/mL was diagnosed with prostate cancer. He underwent radical prostatectomy and pathological analysis revealed adenocarcinoma, pT2aN0M0, Gleason score 4 + 4, and positive margins. Because his postoperative PSA level only decreased to 0.32 ng/mL, local SRT with a total of 70 Gy was administered. After SRT, PSA nadir was 0.02 ng/mL, and serum PSA level was increased. Three years after the RT, bladder hemorrhage due to radiation cystitis was observed, but the bleeding resolved with conservative treatment. In the same year, hyperbaric oxygen therapy was administered. He required hospitalization and treatment for bladder bleeding every year thereafter, and TUC procedures had been required four times in the 10 years after RT. After 9 years of RT, local recurrence, lung and bone metastases were observed. Therefore, ADT was started, and PSA decreased to 0.01 ng/mL. After 11 years of RT, he underwent TUC for bladder hemorrhage again. At that time, a bladder tumor was found, and TURBT was performed the following month. Pathologic results showed urothelial carcinoma, pTa, high grade. Postoperative bleeding was observed, two units of red blood cells were transfused, and TUC was performed 2 weeks after the TURBT. Cystoscopy revealed multiple bladder cancer recurrences 3 months after TURBT. After informed consent was obtained from the patient, the decision was made to perform an immediate RARC, considering the possibility that TURBT would have resulted in uncontrolled bleeding. The operative time was 595 min, and blood loss was 392 cc. The surgeon carefully dissected the space between the bladder and rectum, where the dissected layer was difficult to identify, using digital rectal examination to check its thickness by moving it back and forth from inside the rectum and from side to side. The dissection around the vesicourethral anastomosis was performed while checking the contour of the urethra . The anterolateral side around the vesicourethral anastomosis was dissected at the position where the levator ani muscle contracts and the ventral side was dissected at the line where the pubic bone is exposed. The DVC was dissected without ligation, and the bladder was removed with little bleeding. The pelvic floor defect was minimal and could be closed as in a typical cystectomy. Since the small intestine and ureter did not appear to be grossly affected by the radiation, the procedure was completed with the usual extracorporeal urinary diversion. Dietary resumption occurred on the second postoperative day. One week postsurgery, a postoperative infection was noted, necessitating a 2-week course of antibiotics. Aside from this, the patient's recovery proceeded without incident. The highest complication in the Clavien-Dindo Classification was grade II. Histopathologic analysis revealed urothelial carcinoma, pTa, high grade . There was no pathological local recurrence of prostatic adenocarcinoma in resected specimens. The bladder was generally atrophic. There were lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration, fibrosis, and congestion in the subepithelial layer. One year after surgery, the PSA level of 0.01 ng/mL was maintained with continued ADT. Urine cytology was class II and no recurrence was observed on imaging, indicating no progression of prostate cancer or recurrence of bladder cancer.