A 62-year-old Japanese woman was referred to a nearby clinic because of progressive constipation for six months. Endoscopic examination of her colon revealed two circumferential strictures at the ascending colon and rectum (Figure a). Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) image of the endoscopic biopsy of the rectal lesion led us to a diagnosis of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum (Figure b). The biopsy of the lesion of the ascending colon revealed colitis. Total resection of the tumor was predicted to be difficult due to size and infiltrative border of the tumor. Therefore, the patient was subjected to chemo-radiotherapy. After five courses of the chemo-radiotherapy in total of 45 Gy of radiation plus tegafur gimeracil oteracil potassium (TS-1) and irinotecan (CPT-11) as chemotherapy with minimal clinical response, a proctectomy was performed with low anterior resection. Macroscopically, the rectal mass was a diffusely invasive lesion with no clear border. Cut surface showed white trabeculae penetrating vertically through the muscularis propria (Figure ).
Microscopic examination of resected specimen revealed a diffuse and infiltrative proliferation of small tumor cells (Figure a,b). There was no apparent degeneration or necrosis of the tumor cells, suggesting the minimal pathological effect of chemo-radiotherapy on the tumor cells. Minimal cohesion was observed among the tumor cells. Of note was the single-file arrangement of the tumor cells (Figure b), characteristically observed in lobular carcinoma of the breast, but rarely found in colon cancer. These observations of an HE-stained specimen made us suspect metastatic lobular carcinoma of the breast, instead of primary rectal cancer.
To confirm this, immunohistochemical analysis was performed (Figure c-3f). The tumor cells were positively stained for CK7 (Figure c) and Estrogen receptor α (Figure e), while they were negative for CK20 (Figure d) and E-cadherin (Figure f). In contrast, the background colon epithelial cells were positive for CK20 (Figure d) and E-cadherin (Figure f), while they were negative for CK7 (Figure c) and estrogen receptor α (Figure e).
We reexamined the patient’s history and found that she had undergone surgery for left breast cancer 24 years earlier. The pathological diagnosis of the cancer was found to be ‘poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, scirrhous type,’ with metastasis in her left axillary lymph nodes. Unfortunately, the glass slides and the paraffin blocks of the breast cancer were lost during the turmoil of the Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake in 1995. Therefore, we could not reconfirm the diagnosis of the primary breast cancer.
We reexamined the endoscopic biopsy of the rectum (Figure b) immunohistochemically using the same set of the antibodies used for the resected specimen. The immunophenotype of the rectal biopsy was identical to that of the resected tumor (data not shown). Reexamination and comparison with this biopsy sample revealed that the tumor cells in the resected specimen appeared less cohesive than those in the rectal biopsy. This is probably due to the effect of the chemo-radiation therapy on the tumor cells before surgical resection.
Mammography, ultrasonography, and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET)/computed tomography (CT) examination revealed no evidence of cancer in her remaining right breast and a local recurrence of the left breast cancer (data not shown). There were two hot spots at the rectum and thyroid on FDG-PET/CT examination (data not shown). The former was considered to result from radiation therapy and/or proctectomy procedure, and the latter was presumably due to chronic thyroiditis.
Although we could not reconfirm the diagnosis of the primary breast cancer, the results described above strongly support our final diagnosis of rectal metastasis from lobular breast carcinoma.