A 22-year-old nulliparous Iranian woman presented with 2 weeks of amenorrhea, mild lower abdominal pain, vaginal spotting, vomiting and diarrhoea. She had taken CC due to a history of 18 month's primary infertility. She was pale with a pulse rate of 100 beats/minute and blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg. Laboratory findings revealed haemoglobin of 11.2 g/dL and hematocrit of 34%. The pregnancy test was positive. Ultrasonography (USG) demonstrated the presence of a normal IUP with no other pathological signs, and no fluid effusion was reported in the pelvic cavity.
She was hospitalized and referred to the gynaecology ward for observation and conservative treatment with antiemetic and fluid replacement. Over the subsequent 24 hours, she complained of a sudden worsening of her abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding. On examination, she was tender in the lower abdomen with guarding and rebound tenderness.
A second transabdominal sonography utilizing a 3.5 MHz convex transducer was carried out by another sonologist and the results showed a well-defined foetal pole with a crown-rump length (CRL) of 18 mm equivalent to 7 weeks gestation, and yolk sac. The foetal cardiac motion was positive with a normal tracing by pulse Doppler .
There was also an echo complex mass in the left side of the pelvis . The pelvic cavity, particularly in the left lower quadrant, was full of echo complex images. The boundary of the ovaries and tubes, particularly in the left, was obscure. These findings demonstrated first an IUP with a ruptured tubal pregnancy and if not, then an IUP with a ruptured ovarian cyst.
Her haemoglobin concentration had dropped to 8.8 g/dL and hematocrit to 27%. Because of the clinical presentation, laboratory and sonographic findings, the patient was taken directly to the operating room. She was transfused with three units of whole blood. An emergency laparotomy was done under general anaesthesia that revealed 1500 mL of old blood and abundant clots and a ruptured middle left tubal pregnancy.
A left salpingectomy was performed. The histopathological examination of tissue confirmed a left tubal ectopic pregnancy which was ruptured at the ampullary portion. Postoperatively her course was uneventful, and she was discharged in good general condition on the third day after the operation. Two weeks after surgery, a live IUP with a CRL equivalent to 9 weeks gestation was visualized on a transabdominal ultrasound and which also showed a marked trophoblastic flow on colour Doppler .
The pregnancy continued without any significant complication. She was successfully delivered of a male infant at 37 weeks gestation by CS (due to spontaneous onset of labour and contracted pelvis), the birth weight was 3100 g and her postnatal recovery was unremarkable.