A 73-year-old woman complained of pain and swelling in the right wrist for 4 months. Her body temperature was 37–38 °C, and symptoms, such as pain, swelling, and some movement limitation, were reported. Moreover, clinical laboratory parameters showed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (24 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (51 mm/h), and white blood cells (WBC) count (121,000 cells per cubic millimeter). Also, the rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody were negative. No history of trauma, diabetes, or immunosuppressive drug consumption was reported. Meanwhile, the patient received a local injection of methylprednisolone (20 mg daily/2 weeks). His swollen partially resolved but worsened again.
The synovial fluid sample was aspirated from the wrist and sent to Pasteur Institute of Iran in January 2019 for evaluating the presence of Mycobacterium (M.) tuberculosis. The results of smear test were positive for acid-fast bacillus (AFB).
A needle biopsy was performed for pathological and microbiological tests. After tissue evaluation, the synovium, containing epithelioid cells, fibrotic changes, and numerous noncaseating granulomas, was obviously thickened due to chronic inflammation. Ziehl-Neelsen staining indicated AFB in the tissue.
A synovial fluid sample was cultured on the Lowenstein-Jensen medium. After 5 days, the results indicated rapidly-growing mycobacteria (RGM) with smooth, small, and non-pigmented colonies. The results of biochemical tests were negative for three-day arylsulfatase growth at 45 °C, niacin accumulation, and nitrate reductase, while they were positive for growth on MacConkey agar without crystal violet, heat-resistant catalase, and iron uptake tests.
The multilocus sequence analysis was also performed using partial hsp65, rpoB, sodA, and full 16S rDNA genes, as previously described [–]. The results of biochemical tests indicated homology to M. wolinskyi, while the sequences of hsp65 (441-bp), rpoB (750-bp), 16S rDNA (~ 1500-bp), and sodA (524-bp) genes indicated very high homology to M. jacuzzii , as previously shown .
The drug susceptibility pattern (DSP) test was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines . The results indicated that the M. jacuzzii was extremely resistant to isoniazid, rifampin, clarithromycin, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, capreomycin, cycloserine, tobramycin, cefoxitin, imipenem and streptomycin and highly susceptible to amikacin, levofloxacin, doxycycline, ofloxacin, ethambutol, and ciprofloxacin.
Antimicrobial therapy was performed according to the in vitro susceptibility test, and the patient was treated with amikacin, levofloxacin and ethambutol for 3 months. She recovered slowly, while some wrist swelling was still observed; however, pain and swelling significantly reduced. Eight months after anti-mycobacterial therapy, the patient showed complete recovery, and CRP, ESR, and WBC count were normal.