A 26-year-old Caucasian woman who had mild lung disease presented to our facility. Her pre-partum forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV) was 2.62 L (87% predicted). Her pre-partum body mass index (BMI) was 24. She was chronically infected with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In addition, she was pancreatically insufficient and had CF-related diabetes treated with insulin. Her glycemic control was acceptable with a hemoglobin A1C (HbA1C) level of 6.1%. She did not have microalbuminuria as estimated by a spot albumin:creatinine ratio. Eight years previously she had delivered a healthy child via a normal vaginal delivery after spontaneous rupture of membranes at 36 weeks’ gestation. The pregnancy had been uncomplicated.
Her second pregnancy was unplanned and she had conceived with a new partner. Following confirmation of the pregnancy, she was referred to a high-risk pregnancy clinic where she was reviewed regularly by a multidisciplinary team supervised by an obstetrician, a respiratory physician and an endocrinologist. The first two trimesters proceeded without significant medical complication. During the 26th week of pregnancy, a routine out-patient review revealed a fall in her lung function (FEV1 2.13 L, approximately 71% predicted) accompanied by increased respiratory symptoms. Her blood pressure was noted to be slightly elevated at 118/87. A hospital admission for treatment of her fall in lung function was declined and she was given a two-week course of oral ciprofloxacin at a dose of 750 mg twice a day. This was tolerated poorly due to nausea.
Two weeks later, in the 28th week of pregnancy, she developed worsening nausea and further exacerbation of her respiratory symptoms with some accompanying left upper quadrant discomfort. Her blood pressure was 123/90. The results of a urinary test strip screening for proteinuria were negative. A hospital admission was again declined and treatment with oral ciprofloxacin for a presumed mild pulmonary exacerbation was continued, and she was prescribed oral metoclopramide, with outpatient follow up arranged in one week. She was advised to present to hospital sooner in the event of clinical deterioration.
Our patient re-presented one week later with increasing nausea and a persistent impairment of lung function (FEV1 2.09; 69% predicted). She was admitted to hospital. At this time, her blood pressure was 153/89. Laboratory investigation results revealed hemoglobin of 12.3 g/dL, platelet count of 101 × 109 cells/ml (normal range 150 to 400 × 109 cells/ml), serum alanine transaminase (ALT) of 179 mmol/L (normal range <65 mmol/L), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 279 mmol/L (normal range <240 mmol/L) and urate of 523 mmol/L (normal range 150 to 400 mmol/L). There was no significant proteinuria as assessed by a urinary protein/creatinine ratio and this remained unchanged throughout the admission. Similarly, serial assessment of her coagulation and renal function failed to reveal any abnormality. On admission, a fetal ultrasound was within normal limits.
A diagnosis of pre-eclampsia with some features of HELLP syndrome was made, in the setting of a respiratory exacerbation. In addition to her regular medications, she was put on intravenous aztreonam at a dose of 2 g every six hours. She was given two 11.4 mg doses of intramuscular betamethasone at 12-hour intervals to assist with fetal lung maturation. Aminoglycosides were not given to avoid any potential harm to the fetal kidneys. Over the next five days she remained hypertensive with a systolic blood pressure ranging from 150 to 190 mmHg, but her platelet count increased to 239 × 109 cells/ml and the results of liver function tests (LFTs) progressively normalized. However, on the fifth day there was a precipitous drop in platelet count to 62 × 109 cells/ml and an increase in ALT to 118 mmol/L, accompanied by a fall in hemoglobin to 8.8 g/dL with red cell fragments observed on blood films taken at this time. A diagnosis of HELLP syndrome was made and a semi-elective caesarean section was performed 10 hours later under spinal anesthesia. HELLP-specific treatment, in particular magnesium sulfate was not administered. A healthy baby girl was delivered. Her APGAR scores were 9 and 9 at one and five minutes, respectively. All of our patient’s blood parameters normalized the day following birth of her child. Our patient recovered without further medical complication. Four years later, our patient’s lung function remains stable, although she continues to have intermittent exacerbations of her bronchiectasis. Our patient’s child has reached normal age-specific milestones.