A 66-year-old male patient, who had been under the care of a local urologist for LUTS and had a normal PSA level (0.63 ng/mL), underwent a comprehensive evaluation. Physical examination and metabolic panel results were unremarkable. DRE revealed moderate prostate enlargement with a rubbery consistency but no palpable hard nodule. Subsequent multiparametric MRI of the prostate demonstrated a solid cystic mass in the right periprostatic space, exerting mass effect on the right peripheral zone of the prostate gland and right seminal vesicle, measuring 3.0 × 3.1 × 3.3 cm. The imaging findings suggested a right periprostatic mass with a solid cystic stromal tumor, possibly leiomyosarcoma or rhabdomyosarcoma . TRUS-guided prostate biopsy was performed, revealing BPH and ruling out cancer. One year later, the decision to perform a repeat MRI was made because the initial biopsy, while confirming BPH, did not align with the MRI findings, which indicated a solid cystic mass with characteristics that raised suspicion of a different pathology, possibly a sarcoma. The repeat MRI was conducted to monitor the progression of this mass and gather more information for treatment planning, follow-up MRI showed slight growth of the well-defined solid cystic mass originating from the posterolateral basal right peripheral zone of the prostate gland, displacing the right seminal vesicle. The decision to proceed with laparoscopic radical prostatectomy in this case was primarily based on the discrepancy between the MRI findings and the initial biopsy, which suggested a solid cystic stromal tumor, possibly leiomyosarcoma or rhabdomyosarcoma. This posed diagnostic uncertainty, and surgical intervention was deemed necessary to obtain a definitive histopathologic diagnosis. Preoperative differential diagnoses included stromal tumor with unknown malignant potential suspected leiomyosarcoma. Biopsy in this case was performed using TRUS guidance. The patient underwent laparoscopic radical prostatectomy, during which the cystic lesion was successfully removed. Gross examination of the prostate revealed a well-defined yellowish cut surface with a size of 3.5 × 3.5 cm, comprising a solid component and clear fluid cystic component predominantly involving the right posterolateral base. Histopathological examination, including immunostaining for S100 , and negative for SMA, desmin, and CD34, confirmed the diagnosis of prostatic schwannoma. The patient's postoperative continence and erectile function outcomes were full recovery functions after 6 months.