We present the case of a 39-year-old Caucasian male involved in a car accident in February 2017. The patient sustained a severe TBI requiring surgical intervention for subdural hematoma drainage, followed by post-traumatic coma. Awakened from the coma after 14 days he gradually regained his mental functions. He was then transferred to a rehabilitation center specialized in neurological injuries. In 5 months memory and other cognitive abilities were completely restored as well as body functions except for hip mobility. In fact, no residual motor or sensory neurological deficit remained, but bilateral NHOs surrounding hip joints and entirely limiting hip motion developed.
In June 2018, the patient was admitted to our Institute. He was confined to bed, absolutely unable to walk, stand or sit, although normal neurological functions of the lower limbs and normal power and mobility of the upper limbs were present. No pressure sores were present. Radiological evaluation consisted in Antero-Posterior X-ray view only, due to the inability to open up his hips for lateral views, and 3D computed tomography (CT) scan . Size, location, relation with neurovascular bundles, and intra-articular involvement were investigated. Thorough counseling about treatment and related risk were provided and patient informed consensus was obtained.
In July 2018 and September 2018, the left and right hips were treated, respectively. In the left hip NHO was predominantly anterior and ileoinguinal approach was used. For the right hip a circumferential pattern of NHO was present and a combined triradiate and ilioinguinal approaches were used. The covering muscles and soft tissues were progressively released, thus exposing proximal and distal NHO implantations. “Functional resection” was performed to avoid risk of post-surgical fractures . Tendon insertions were good landmarks, as well as capsule and periosteum planes were useful for guiding resection. In the left hip, excessive release of rectus femoris occurred and a 5-mm corkscrew was needed to reattach the released part of the tendon. Neurovascular bundles were identified and isolated. Electric cautery was thoroughly used to reduce bleeding. In both hips, capsule was not open and articular procedures were not performed, being joint space not involved. Drainage was not applied. No post-surgical hematoma, infection, deep venous thrombosis, or fracture occurred.
In Our Institute of a dedicated Department of Physiatry and Physiotherapy allowed for a multidisciplinary management which is essential for successful treatment of such patients. Thus, rehabilitation protocol started from day 1 after surgery with short sessions of supervised passive pain-free mobilizations twice a day and continuous Passive Motion device during night for the 1st week. Progressively, longer sessions, and active pain-free motion were introduced. Weight bearing on the operated limbs was permitted after 15 days. Indometacin (100 mg) once daily for 6 weeks was administered postoperatively to reduce recurrence risk.
The patients was discharged from our institute 4 weeks after the second operation when he was able to pass from supine to standing and sitting position independently and to ambulate with a walking aid.
At the final follow-up 24 months from the second operation high grade of clinical satisfaction was reported. The patients were able to walk independently, to put on his socks, to drive a car, and bike. He did not refer impairment in the most of the ADLs. Right and left hip ROM was, respectively, 100° and 90° for flexion, 10° for extension, 35° and 30° for abduction, and near normal internal and external rotation . Motion in all planes was painless and patient referred that further little improvement in mobility and fluency were still present day by day. No recurrence of NHO was observed radiologically.