A 28-year-old female presented with a palpable and painful nodule that had been present for five years in the right tibia. The pain was gradually aggravated in the last four months. On the day of presentation, the pain was so unbearable that it limited the movement of the right lower limb. Physical examination revealed a tenderness along the medial portion of the right proximal tibia. There was no external wound, bone friction or rubbing, swelling of the right popliteal lymph nodes or circulation disturbances. Clinical examination failed to show any features of neurofibromatosis, and her familial history was uneventful. Lesion resection and artificial bone graft were performed successively. The patient had a disease-free follow-up 8 months after the surgery.
A conventional anterior-posterior radiograph showed an osteolytic lesion, 2.0*1.6*1.4 cm in size, located in the medial superior metaphysis of the right tibia. The sclerotic rim was observed, indicating its non-aggressiveness . Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated an oval eccentric osteolytic lesion in the right tibial medial condyle, with endosteal scalloping and cortical expansion but no cortical disruption, periosteal reaction or soft-tissue mass, which are also features that suggest non-aggressiveness .
2 months after the surgery, no recurrence was identified by the conventional radiograph (data not shown).
Gross examination showed solid tissues with firm, white cut surfaces, measuring 2 cm in aggregate. Histologically, low-power magnification revealed a well-circumscribed and unencapsulated lesion with variable cellularity. The relatively hypocellular areas, which was the predominant part of the neoplasm, presented with biphasic cellular morphology. One morphology of these areas exhibited epithelioid cells with bland nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm arranging in small clusters within the myxoid or collagenous matrix . The other showed cells bearing wavy and thin nuclei and elongated cytoplasmic processes in a lamellar pattern . On the immunohistochemical examination, the epithelioid cells were diffuse positive for S100 protein , focally positive for Collagen IV (Additional file : Figure S1), but negative for EMA. The cells with slender nuclei and elongated cytoplasmic processes stained positively for EMA in a membranous pattern , but were negative for S100 or Collagen IV. These two different morphological areas alternated with each other and exhibited blurred boundaries . Additionally, in some areas composed of epithelioid cells, several hypercellular nodules with distinct morphologies were observed. These vague nodular structures consisted of spindle cells arranged in a fascicular or storiform architecture. Focally, the cells exhibited a streaming or syncytial pattern . Immunohistochemically, most spindle cells were diffuse and uniformly positive for EMA but negative for S100 ; only a minority of cells displayed the opposite expression pattern. Due to the increased nuclear density, these vague nodular structures imparted an overall blue to purple colour with staining at low magnification . The abrupt transition between these hypercellular spindle cells areas and surrounding epithelioid cells areas were well demonstrated by the non-overlapping expression of EMA and S100. Most cells were positive for CD99, and the expression seemed to be stronger in EMA positive areas than in S100 positive areas (Additional file : Figure S2). Small-to-mid-sized blood vessels with hyalinized walls were scattered throughout the neoplasm. Lymphoid infiltration was also observed and was most prominent around the vessels. Necrosis, haemorrhage and atypical mitosis were absent, the mitotic activity was very low ranging from 0 to 2 per 50 HPF in the lesion, indicating its benign nature. The Ki-67 index was less than 1% throughout the neoplasm. Expression levels of other proteins explored in the study are listed in Table . FISH analysis targeting the rearrangement of SYT was negative (Additional file : Figure S3).
Based on the above findings, the present case was diagnosed as hybrid epithelioid schwannoma/perineurioma primarily occurring in the right tibia.