A 49 years-old Italian woman, married with no children, was referred to our center for a complex multisystemic disease. She presented migraine from adolescence and from 38-years of age a progressive sensorineural hearing loss, fatigue, bilateral cataracts and pigmented retinopathy. Her mother died affected by diabetes, migraine, deafness and not investigated chronic kidney disease. Neurological examination in our patient showed mild cerebellar signs (widened base of support, mild dysmetria). Electromyography showed a myopathic pattern. A short PR interval (100 msec) with normal echocardiogram were detected. Spirometry showed no abnormalities. The brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a global cerebral atrophy, cerebellar atrophy, white matter hyperintensities, bipallidal calcifications with a lactate peak on spectroscopy .
Muscle biopsy revealed myopathic changes with scattered ragged red and blue fibers, as well as COX negative fibers . Sequencing of the whole muscular mtDNA, performed using Nextera XT technology (Illumina, San Diego, CA), showed the heteroplasmic (57%) m.3274_3275delAC MT-TL1 gene variant . This variant has a high score of pathogenicity (94.2%, according to MitoTip ). No other family members were tested for this mtDNA variant.
The patient also presented proteinuria up to 2100 mg/24 hours and albuminuria 1600 mg/24 hours, creatinine 0,79 mg/l; urinalysis showed proteinuria 100 mg/dl and absence of white and red cell. Kidney biopsy demonstrated secondary focal segmental glomerulosclerosis associated to proximal tubulopathy: microscopy showed 7 glomeruli with global mesangial expansion and 2 of these with synecheal capsular adhesions with consensual parietal epithelial proliferation, which were not classifiable as tip lesion or vascular variants; mild focal tubular atrophy (5%) with associated mild fibrosis was also present. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed IgM mesangial deposition in the glomeruli. Moreover, electron microscopy showed proximal tubulopathy with dysmorphic, abnormal mitochondria; tubulocytes had an increased number of mitochondria with polymorphous size and irregular shapes; at higher magnification, despite the suboptimal morphology due to the retrieval procedure, the mitochondria showed a reduction in cristae and the presence of clear vesicles related to the degeneration of the cristae. Finally, glomeruli showed 80% of fusion of podocyte foot processes.
The mutation was detected also in the kidney tissue with a 40% heteroplasmy and blood (10%) heteroplasmy. Therefore, the patient was treated with renin angiotensin system blocking therapy and low-sodium diet.