A 59-year-old female had symptoms of dysphagia.
The patient complained of dysphagia for a month and visited a former doctor. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed and a tumor suspected of esophageal cancer was found in the middle part of the esophagus. After that, she was introduced to our hospital for the purpose of detailed medical examination and treatment.
The patient had a history of hypertension, was a hepatitis B virus carrier, and had experienced a brain stem hemorrhage with sensory paralysis. Her surgical history included total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and peri-arterial lymph node dissection to treat endometrial cancer (endometrial adenocarcinoma, pT1bN0M0) 7 years previously. Six courses of adjuvant chemotherapy (paclitaxel + carboplatin) were prescribed after surgery. Six years ago, a squamous cell carcinoma of the oral tongue (pT1, ly0, v0) was partially resected. She is also a smoker (Brinkman index 800; 20 cigarettes/day × 40 years).
No family history to note.
There were no notable abnormal findings related to esophageal cancer on physical examination, and surgical scars during total hysterectomy were found in the lower abdomen.
Laboratory data revealed a hemoglobin level of 12.9 g/dL, white blood cell count of 5700 cells/µL and platelet count of 339 × 103/μL. The creatinine level was 0.54 mg/dL, total bilirubin level 0.4 mg/dL, direct bilirubin level 0.1 mg/dL, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase level 15 IU/L, glutamic pyruvate transaminase level 7 IU/L, albumin level 3.8 g/dL, and hemoglobin A1c level 6.1%. Tumor marker levels of the carcinoembryonic antigen was 9.2 ng/mL and squamous cell carcinoma antigen was 7.5 ng/mL.
Echocardiography showed almost normal cardiac function with moderate tricuspid regurgitation. Pulmonary function examination revealed vital capacity, 102.0% of predicted; forced expiratory volume in 1 s, 79.1% of predicted; forced expiratory volume in 1 s, 1.78 L.
EGD was performed and detected an advanced type 2 lesion on the middle part of the esophagus, with stenosis . Computed tomography (CT) detected the primary tumor (40.7 mm × 30.7 mm) with suspected invasion of the main left bronchus , 90° of direct contact with the aorta . The upper mediastinal lymph node was swollen (10.16 mm × 8.02 mm) and was suspected to be metastasis to the right recurrent nerve lymph node (#106recR, Figure ), and no distant metastasis was detected.