A 77-year-old female patient who was 153 cm tall and weighed 58 kg was admitted to hospital with chronic diarrhea. Abdominal and pelvis computed tomography showed that she had cholangitis due to gallbladder stones. The patient had a congenital giant hemangioma of the lower lip . She had a history of hypertension and showed elevated liver enzymes. Other preoperative laboratory results, including coagulation tests, were within the normal range.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was planned. Due to the giant hemangioma of the lower lip, airway management was expected to be difficult because it seemed like a mask would not fit. The hemangioma was 12 × 5 × 5 cm . Its surface was dry with no visible bleeding, was soft when pressed, and did not occupy the oral cavity. Manual displacement to the caudad was possible and the lower gum was well exposed. The mouth opening was two fingers wide and we classified the patient as class 2 Mallampati. Neck range of motion, jaw translocation, and thyromental distance were normal. The day before surgery, we explained the pros and cons of various airway management methods and the possible need for invasive airway access and got written informed consent. The written informed consent of publication for the use of photos and case details in this report has been obtained. Initial vital signs checked in the operation theatre showed that her blood pressure was 156/77 mmHg, heart rate was 66 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 97%. Intraoperative monitoring devices were a radial artery catheter to monitor arterial blood pressure, an electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter, a BIS A-2000TM bispectral index monitor (Aspect Medical System, USA), and a train of four scans (IDMED, France). An HFNC Optiflow THRIVE (Fisher & Paykel Healthcare, New Zealand) with an FiO2 of 1.0 and a flow of 50 L/min was used for preoxygenation . During 6 min of preoxygenation, we instructed the patient to breathe through her nose with her mouth closed. Arterial blood gas analysis after preoxygenation showed that her PaO2 level was 462 mmHg and PaCO2 level was 34 mmHg. To avoid bleeding due to the desiccation and friction, we covered the hemangioma with wet gauze to keep it moisturized. Difficult airway trolley, including emergency cricothyroidotomy kit and suction device were prepared. Anesthesia induction was performed using 1% propofol and succinylcholine. During airway manipulation, HFNC was maintained with an FiO2 of 1.0 and a flow of 50 L/min. An assistant applied a backward-upward-rightward-pressure maneuver to assist in visualizing the glottis while also manually displacing the hemangioma caudad. A cuffed endotracheal tube with an internal diameter of 7.0 mm was intubated with a stylet using a video laryngoscope (KoMAC Co., Ltd., Korea). While advancing the blade of the laryngoscope, we avoided it coming into contact with the hemangioma. The vocal cord was well visualized and classified as Cormack-Lehane grade 1 even though the tip of the blade did not reach the epiglottis. Intubation was successful without desaturation or damaging the hemangioma. After connecting the ventilator, the first end-tidal CO2 was 36 mmHg 118 s after propofol administration and analysis of arterial blood gas sampled right after confirmation of proper endotracheal tube position showed that the patient’s PaO2 level was 375 mmHg and PaCO2 level was 44 mmHg. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane and remifentanil and 20 mg of rocuronium was administered at the start of surgery. At the end of the operation, HFNC was applied, all anesthetics were stopped, and muscle relaxation was reversed with sugammadex. The extubation and the recovery were uneventful. The patient was discharged at post-operation day 3.