A 41-year-old woman first visited the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Chonnam National University Dental Hospital, in June 2021 for the excision of a gingival overgrowth in the left mandible area. The patient was diagnosed with tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) at birth. She received treatment for epilepsy for 20 years, managed hypothyroidism for 8 years, and underwent angioembolization surgery for acute pyelonephritis in 2014. The patient had impaired vision, mental retardation, and an inability to communicate. Notably, she had conspicuous cutaneous nodules on the lower 2/3 of her face , which remained relatively unchanged for several decades. However, she recently developed prominent and progressively increasing gingival overgrowths over the past two to three years. Intraoral examination revealed a 6.0 × 5.0 cm gingival overgrowth in the left mandibular region, extending from the mandibular left central incisor to the left first molar . Given the patient’s history of long-term epilepsy medication use (sodium valproate, gabapentin, lamotrigine), the enlarged gingival lesion was suggestive of drug-induced gingival hyperplasia. Multiple enamel pitting (>3) was present throughout the dentition, with the overlying gingiva displaying a loss of stippling. The patient maintained good oral hygiene, with no evident periodontitis or caries. Due to the patient’s inability to cooperate, radiographic surveys (panoramic imaging or cone beam computed tomography) were unavailable. Additionally, two ungual fibromas were observed on the patient’s left thumb, appearing over the lateral nail groove (peri-ungual) and beneath the nail plate (subungual) . The patient also displayed scattered “confetti” skin lesions on both arms and three hypomelanotic macules on the left arm . Furthermore, a shagreen patch with an uneven/bumpy surface was observed on the chest .
Following a comprehensive extra-oral and intra-oral examination, surgical excision was planned for the patient, with appropriate informed consent obtained from the guardian. The procedure was performed under general anesthesia to remove the enlarged gingival tissue in the left mandibular segment. The excised tissue was submitted for histologic examination. Macroscopically, the mass was 3.5 × 3.5 cm and showed an irregular shape with a pink to deep red color . Subsequently, the tissue was fixed in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin, and stained with hematoxylin-eosin. Histologically, the section exhibited a tumor covered with keratotic squamous epithelial lining approximately 15–20 cells thick . Within the underlying tissue, Touton giant cells with nuclei arranged in a wreathlike pattern were interspersed , along with numerous ectatic blood vessels . There were proliferating pleomorphic, stellate-shaped, multinucleated fibroblasts and typical plasma cells aggregated around the lesion .
Immunohistochemistry analysis revealed distinct expression of CD34 and Bcl-2 in the tumor cells, which is compatible with the findings of GCA . Expression of CD31 and smooth muscle actin (SMA) were positive in the vessel area within the tumor but not in the tumor cells . CD138 showed positive expression in the plasma cells surrounding the tumor and the Ki67 index of the tumor was determined as 1–2% . Based on these findings, the pathological diagnosis confirmed the presence of giant cell angiofibroma (GCA) in the gingiva of the TSC patient. During the follow-up visit at 3 months and 1 year post-surgery, the gingival surface and contours displayed uneventful healing, with no indications of recurrence.