A previously healthy, 62 year old man was diagnosed with a gastric antral tumor after investigations for symptomatic anemia. A barium swallow confirmed the presence of tumor causing subacute gastric outlet obstruction. Laparoscopy identified a gastroduodenal tumor and synchronous bilobar liver metastases. No peritoneal disease was identified. The primary tumor was completed excised and a liver biopsy was performed intra-operatively. Histopathology was consistent with metastatic malignant gastrointestinal stromal tumor, with typical spindle cell features on light microscopy. C-KIT was positive and the mitotic rate was 60/50 per high power fields . Subsequent analysis of the tumor revealed an in-frame deletion of Exon 11 in the C-KIT gene.
Post-operatively, this man recovered well from his surgery and was commenced on imatinib 600 mg daily; he subsequently required dose-reduction to 400 mg daily due to grade 3 neutropenia. He still had residual hepatic metastatic disease which was visible on computerized tomography [CT] scan, and was FDG-avid on positron emission tomography [PET] evaluation. For a period of eighteen months after surgery, imatinib was tolerated well and achieved good disease control. CT and PET imaging during this period revealed regression of size of the liver metastases. After two years of therapy, however, a CT scan revealed an increase in size of a dominant segment VI hepatic metastasis which was treated with radiofrequency ablation. He was then maintained on imatinib at 600 mg daily with subsequent disease control.
At four and half years from diagnosis, an asymptomatic infrapyloric mesenteric mass was identified on a surveillance CT which progressively increase in size over the next two months . A PET scan paradoxically revealed no glucose avidity of this mesenteric tumor .
At subsequent laparotomy, the tumor was found to be lying within the peritoneal leaves of the mesocolon extending from the origin of the superior mesenteric vessels to the inferior pancreatico-duodenal vessels. Histopathology showed a tumour mass composed of spindle shaped fibrocytic/fibroblastic like cells amongst intervening collagen with low mitotic rate (less than 1 per 50 hpf). Immunoperoxidase staining was positive for C-KIT but negative for CD34 and S100. Genetic analyses did not identify the previous C-KIT Exon 11 in-frame deletion or mutations of other Exons 11, 9, 13 and 17 and PDGFRA Exon 18.
Imatinib was continued 600 mg daily, with brief cessation during the peri-operative period, as metastatic GIST remained radiologically stable. No specific adjuvant therapy for the soft-tissue tumor was employed post-operatively.