A 69-year-old female patient with coronary artery disease was indicated for myocardial revascularization surgery. She had a medical history of hypertensive heart disease, hyperlipidemia, hyperuricemia, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, and renal insufficiency with mild retention of nitrogen compounds. She was a former smoker and obese (body mass index of 39.2) with large breasts (macromastia).
Myocardial revascularization was performed as a double coronary artery bypass, using the left IMA, with no perioperative complications. Shortly after the surgery, a septicemia, mechanical instability of the sternum and mediastinitis ensued. Targeted antibiotic therapy was administered, the sternotomy wound was cut open, and vacuum-assisted closure was used to drain the wound. The sternotomy was successfully re-sutured 5 weeks after the surgery.
During the treatment of the dehisced sternotomy, the patient was complaining of pain in her left breast which persisted even after the sternotomy had healed. Ultrasonographically, there was a hyperechoic edema of the fat of 2 cm width in the central area of the breast. Although the ultrasound did not confirm any obvious focal structures, the whole clinical condition aroused suspicions of an oncological issue. Seven weeks after the surgery, oncological consultation was undertaken. The consultant clinical oncologist observed slight reddening in about one third of the breast with the maximum in the central area and inner quadrants, where a painful lump 8 × 6 cm in size was palpable. Laboratory tests showed slightly elevated serum level of C-reactive protein. With regard to the case history of wound infection, the condition was suggestive of mastitis. Empirical antibiotic therapy was recommended. During the check-up two weeks later, the antibiotic therapy had no effect and there was one new solid movable lump 2–3 cm in size in the left axilla suspicious of a pathologic lymph node. Ultrasonography showed an edema and the destruction of the normal structure of the mammary gland, without any well-defined masses or fluid collections. Thus, the significant discrepancy between the large palpable lump in the breast and the inconclusive sonographic findings still remained.
After another 3 weeks, ultrasound examination finally revealed a hyperechoic, poorly defined mass in the left breast with irregular hypoechoic zones and acoustic shadowing. Supported by the evidence of nipple retraction and skin thickening, the condition was now suggestive of inflammatory carcinoma. Mammographically, there were asymmetrical findings on the left breast that were smaller than the other one, with thickened areolar skin and nipple retraction. Most of the breast was edematous with the destruction of the normal structure of the gland, of higher density, which further supported the diagnosis of an inflammatory carcinoma .
A core cut biopsy from the breast mass was undertaken with a finding of involutional breast gland with fat necrosis of unknown origin. For the first time—more than 3 months after the surgery—the suggestion was made that the condition was a result of secondary ischemic insufficiency following a harvest of the left IMA. The patient was weepy, and she was suffering from excruciating pains that prevented her from sleeping. Clinically, there was a solid palpable lump 10–15 cm in size, located in the central area of the left breast. At that time, a local cutaneous necrosis around the nipple-areola complex occurred . There were solid palpable nodes in both axillae, more distinct on the left side, 3 cm in size. Given the extent of the process and the very strong pain, a total mastectomy was recommended.
The mastectomy was carried out 19 weeks after the revascularization surgery. Because of obesity and skin folds, a lateral fish-shaped incision was used . The weight of the mastectomy resection specimen was 1753 g. The wound healed by primary intention, and no complications were observed . Histopathological examination of the resection specimen showed an extensive coagulative necrosis with demarcation lines and lipophagic reaction in the periphery. In the axillary tail of the breast, a lymph node of the size 25 mm with reactive changes was found. As for the vessels, no degenerative changes or calcifications were observed.
Five weeks after the mastectomy, the patient’s condition was generally better; she was optimistic and experiencing no pain. The mastectomy wound had healed up, and the patient was referred to her general practitioner with no need for future oncological check-ups.