A 51-year-old man complained of dyspnea. He was a non-smoker and did not consume alcohol, and there was no history of trauma or pancreatitis. Laboratory testing did not show any increase in IgG4 or tumor marker levels. A massive left-sided pleural effusion was detected on chest X-ray. On pleural puncture, it was diagnosed as pancreatic pleural effusion based on the high amylase content of 36,854 IU/L, at a previous hospital. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 35 mm pseudocyst and dilation of the MPD in the pancreatic tail, although no tumor mass in the pancreas or fistula into the thoracic cavity was detected . However, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a fistula opening into the left thoracic cavity . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed that the MPD was stenosed in the pancreatic body and dilated in the pancreatic tail. Endoscopic nasopancreatic drainage (ENPD) was performed; however, it was ineffective, because the ENPD tube could not pass through the stenosis in the MPD. Infection and empyema occurred after the ENPD attempt, and these events could not be controlled via the chest tube. Eventually, thoracoscopic pleural resection was performed, following which the infection resolved. On the 50th day, he was referred to our hospital for further investigation and treatment. Examination revealed a small amount of discharge from the chest tube. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed a hypoechoic mass measuring 15 × 15 mm in the pancreatic body, with calcification. The tumor was not enhanced in the late phase of contrast perfusion, and an invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) was suspected . We presumed that increased pressure on the distal pancreatic duct due to obstruction of the MPD caused by the IDC led to the formation of the pseudocyst, pancreatic fistula, and pleural effusion. We did not perform EUS-fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA), because our preoperative diagnosis based on the imaging findings of EUS was pancreatic cancer, and the patient required distal pancreatectomy for management of the pancreatic pleural effusion as well as the pancreatic tumor. The results of EUS-FNA would not change the treatment plan; moreover, EUS-FNA could cause complications such as bleeding, pancreatitis, and seeding. On the 57th day, we performed distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy and removed the chest tube after the surgery. Intraoperatively, no liver metastasis, peritoneal dissemination, or ascites was observed. Tunneling behind the pancreas was performed at the level of the superior mesenteric vein. Intraoperative ultrasound showed the tumor in the pancreatic body and dilation of the MPD, and the pseudocyst on the left side of tumor. The pancreas was transected on the right side of the tumor, and the splenic artery was ligated at its root. Because of inflammation, there was severe adhesion around the pseudocyst behind the stomach. The serosa and muscle layers of the stomach had to be partially removed. The fistula could not be confirmed during the surgery. The intraoperative blood loss and operation time were 1755 mL and 188 min, respectively. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 14th day after surgery.
Figure shows the resected specimen, and Fig. shows the findings of histopathological analysis. The tumor was a solid neoplastic lesion covered with a fibrotic capsule, and it measured 19 × 17 × 14 mm. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed fibrosis in the tumor. The MPD was compressed and narrowed by the tumor, and eosinophilic cells in the tumor showed a ribbon-like arrangement. Immunostaining revealed positivity for chromogranin A and synaptophysin and a Ki-67 index of 7.9% . The final diagnosis was confirmed as neuroendocrine tumor (NET, G2). There was no metastasis in the lymph nodes. The patient was followed for 33 months after surgery without recurrence.