An asymptomatic 60-year-old woman was incidentally diagnosed with a twin oesophageal mass, which was suspected due to mediastinal widening on a routine chest radiograph. A CT of the thorax discovered the lesions with eccentric oesophageal wall thickening in the distal third of the oesophagus, causing narrowing of the lumen . Gastroscopy revealed an oesophageal submucosal protrusion with a smooth surface located 32 to 39 cm from the incisors, close to the Z line. The lesions were imaged as separate, 4 × 3 cm and 4 × 2 cm, inhomogeneous masses with some calcareous shadows arising from the muscularis propria on endoscopic ultrasound and were suspected to be leiomyomas because of their smooth surfaces and normal colours . According to the NCCN (National Comprehensive Cancer Network—NCCN) Task Force Report, a biopsy may not be necessary if the tumour is easily resectable and preoperative therapy is not required . Thus FNA (fine needle aspiration—FNA) of the lesions was not performed. The results of her physical examination were normal.
Before the scheduled operation, the patient had a history of a soft diet and received a prophylactic dose of LMWH (low-molecular-weight heparin—LMWH) a day before surgery. Third-generation cephalosporin and metronidazol were administered one hour before incision; then laparoscopic-transhiatal surgery was performed. The procedure was done under general anaesthesia with the patient in a semilithotomy, 25° reverse Trendelenburg position. Three ports were inserted in the abdominal cavity along the left costal arch, with one port placed in the epigastrium on the right side and one port, 10–12 mm in diameter, inserted directly above the umbilicus . Slightly lower, intraabdominal pressure was set to 12 Hgmm to prevent pneumomediastinal side-effects. Laparoscopic exploration was done using a 30° camera. After retracting the left lobe of the liver, the peritoneum was divided up to the level of the median arcuate ligament with a Ligasure device (Valleylab, Boulder, CO, USA, Fig. ). A nasogastric tube (size 16 Fr.) was placed into the oesophagus to identify its anatomical patterns and to avoid oesophageal side injuries. After incision of the hiatus (Pinotti’s manoeuvre), the lower third of the oesophagus was mobilised anteriorly; then transhiatal exploration revealed that the masses located right under each other (oral and aboral tumours) and orally had spread high to the middle third of the oesophagus. From the cardia side, approximately 3 cm above it, the muscularis of the oesophagus was cut in the expected line of myotomy to expose the capsule of the aborally located tumour. A well-defined solid tumour was revealed with an intact capsule and rich blood supply. The lower pole of the aboral tumour along the capsule was gradually isolated and removed using fine dissecting instruments and a high-energy cutting device. The incision was extended until it reached the upper edge of the orally located tumour, allowing for exploration of the oesophageal mucosa and gradual isolation of the tumour outside the mucosa until complete tumour resection was achieved. Technically, we opened the oesophageal muscle layer approximately 7–8 cm long, started 3 cm from the cardia and finished intramediastinally. The anterior vagal branch was under close monitoring and retracted during the entire operation. The integrity of the mucosal membrane of the oesophagus was checked with intraoperative endoscopy; the leak test during air insufflation was negative . The oesophageal muscular wall was repaired by absorbable 3/0 monofilament sutures. Fundoplication was not added because the localisation of the duplex tumour was at least 3 cm above the cardia so the natural antireflux mechanisms were not compromised during surgery. On the other hand, the wrapped segment would have formed more distally from the sutured oesophageal wall. The specimens were removed in an endobag. The operation took approximately 120 min to complete . The tumours were approximately 38 × 29 × 27 mm and 37 × 20 × 30 mm in diameter and tough in quality, with a well-defined round shape . After the operation, the patient underwent water fasting, gastrointestinal decompression and acid suppression. Contrast radiography of the oesophagus on the fifth postoperative day showed intact smooth oesophageal mucosa with no obvious leakage, so the nasogastric tube was removed and the patient began to consume liquid food. She was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. She has been followed up for six months with a normal swallowing test, adequate oesophageal function and no complaints observed. A pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of leiomyoma in both lesions. Immunohistochemistry resulted negative for DOG1 (discovered on GIST1—DOG1) and C-kit (CD117) and positive for SMA (smooth muscle actin—SMA) and desmin. The mitotic rate (Ki-67 index) was low. The specimen assessment showed complete removal of the two lesions, with no damage to the capsulae seen.