An independent 71-year-old male retiree presented to hospital with chest pain, thoracolumbar back pain, and hypertension (self-measured systolic blood pressure was elevated to 220 mmHg). He was evaluated for possible acute cardiac pathology. His medical history was significant for atrial fibrillation for which he was anticoagulated, and he had recently had an artificial cardiac pacemaker implanted for treatment of sinus node dysfunction. He had known hypercholesterolemia, hypertension, and several benign skin lesions had been excised previously. While in the emergency department, his back pain escalated in severity. He had a headache and was vomiting. He was investigated for possible aortic pathology with computed tomography (CT) and bedside sonography, but there was no evidence of this. He was treated with analgesia.
He subsequently developed numbness and weakness of the right lower limb. This was only detected after several hours had passed, at which time he was re-evaluated for neurological pathology. CT imaging of the brain and circle of Willis revealed no abnormality of note. He was attributed a presumptive diagnosis of a likely anterior or posterior circulation embolic stroke and was admitted to the care of the inpatient cardiology service, with a plan for continuing anticoagulation (rivaroxaban was ceased in favor of enoxaparin), antiplatelet therapy (aspirin), and non-urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Later that evening, he was reviewed for persisting abdominal and back pain. He had developed allodynia of the lower chest and abdomen and had begun to retain urine, necessitating catheterization.
By day 3 of admission, his right lower limb paresis had progressed to flaccid paralysis and sensory loss. Our patient subsequently developed paresis of his left lower limb and loss of anal tone. He could not feel the tug of his catheter. There were no reflexes in his lower limbs, nor clonus. He could sense punctate stimuli but described the sensation as dull and paresthetic. He was finally referred to the inpatient neurosurgical service for consideration of spinal pathology.
Emergent MRI of the entire spine and brain was performed. Two discrete foci of non-contiguous acute SIEH were discerned, approximately localized behind T1-2 and T10-11. There was associated spinal cord displacement and acute spinal cord edema due to compression, at both sites of hemorrhage. Our patient’s pre-operative radiology is depicted in . Metastatic disease was suspected as the most likely underlying etiology, due to the multiplicity of the lesions. MRI of the brain showed subarachnoid hemorrhage in the dependent foramen magnum. This was favored to be migratory from a spinal origin. This radiology is depicted in . Hematology advice was sought to reverse the effects of enoxaparin, and aspirin. CT pan scan with contrast did not reveal any underlying neoplastic, vascular, or other lesions that might account for the hemorrhages observed. Decompressive surgery was delayed further as enoxaparin had been administered in the morning of the 4th day, and there was concern of unacceptable intraoperative bleeding risk. Surgery was finally performed later that evening, specifically C7-T2 and T9-11 laminectomies. The dura was darkly colored at both foci of hemorrhage. There were no extradural blood products. Durotomy was performed at each site and subdural and subarachnoid clots were discerned. The hematomas were removed in piecemeal fashion until pulsatile neural tissue was observed. No underlying culprit lesions were apparent intraoperatively. Onlay duraplasties with fibrin glue were performed and the wounds were closed in routine fashion.
Immediately post-operatively, there was minimal neurological improvement. Our patient’s pain ameliorated but flaccid paraplegia persisted and he was doubly incontinent. His post-operative radiology is depicted in . His post-operative course was complicated by a hospital-acquired lower respiratory tract infection and a left lower limb deep venous thrombosis. He made modest gains in function with inpatient physiotherapy and occupational therapy and was discharged to a spinal rehabilitation center. At 6-month follow-up, his neurology was unchanged.