A 4-year-old Albanian girl from a rural area was referred to the Department of Neurology of the University Clinical Centre of Kosovo because of abdominal pain, progressive weakness in the lower limbs, and walking difficulty. Prenatal and postnatal history: She was the fourth child in the family and was born as a result of a full-term pregnancy that was not well controlled. No history of drug use or exposure to radiation during pregnancy was reported. Delivery was completed at a regional hospital; she had a birth weight (BW) of 3500 g. Treatment with retinol and cholecalciferol (AD3) for prevention of vitamin D deficiency and vaccinations were irregular. She was breastfed for 1 year, and supplementary food was introduced at 5 months. Her growth and development were normal, and this was her first hospitalization. Family history: Her aunt died from breast cancer at 35 years of age.
Disease history: The first symptoms appeared 2 months before admission and consisted of profuse sweating of the head, neck, and upper part of the body, mostly at night, followed by progressive abdominal pain. Therefore, she sought medical attention and was treated with analgesic and antiparasitic therapy. Despite treatment, the abdominal pain persisted, became more progressive, and was followed by musculoskeletal manifestations in the lower limbs. In general, the physical examination at admission revealed a relatively good general condition; she weighed 15 kg and was conscious, alert and communicative. Moreover, a physical examination of the musculoskeletal system revealed no erythema or swelling, but a reduced range of motion in the lower limbs with no weight- bearing tolerance was observed. In addition, muscle tonus was decreased in the lower limbs, whereas it was within the normal range with intact sensory perception in the upper limbs. The abdomen was slightly distended, soft upon palpation, and not painful. Furthermore, the patient’s blood pressure was within the normal range for her age; likewise, clinical findings in other systems were within normal limits.
Initially, the results of routine blood tests showed a normal blood cell count; hemoglobin (Hgb) was 11.2 g/dl, and platelet count was 249,000/mm3. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 40 mm per hour, and C-reactive protein was negative [1.2 mg/l, normal range (NR) > 6 mg/l]. Furthermore, liver enzymes, coagulogram, urea and creatinine, and acid–base status of the blood were normal. However, her lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 536 U/l at admission continued to increase to 3520 U/l (NR 160–450 U/l). In addition, a progressive decrease in total serum proteins from 6.0 to 2.9 g/dl (6.3–8.0 g/dl) was observed. Other investigations, including urinalysis and urine and blood culture, were negative; abdominal ultrasound was also unremarkable.
Owing to progressive weakness in the lower limbs and walking difficulties, this patient was initially suspected to have acute polyradiculoneuritis (Guillain–Barré syndrome), and thus, lumbar puncture was performed. Cytology and biochemical analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed white cells 10 cells/mm (100% monocytes) and proteins 44.1 g/dl (NR 15–40 g/dl), while the CSF glucose level was normal compared with the plasma values. Moreover, electromyoneurography (EMNG) revealed a reduced amplitude and velocity of the M wave for the peroneus and tibial nerve on both sides.
Therefore, she was suspected to have polyradiculoneuritis and was treated with corticosteroids and immunoglobulins. However, this medication did not improve her clinical condition. Instead, during the second week of treatment, the child began to experience dry cough, chest discomfort, and worsening dyspnea. Therefore, she was transferred to the intensive care unit. Chest radiography revealed a hyperdense homogeneous shadow occupying almost the entire right hemithorax with a slight mediastinal shift to the left, which suggested a massive right-sided mass, while no pleural effusion was noted .
Subsequently, chest computed tomography (CT) was performed, which revealed a large mass of homogeneous density that may have originated in the posterior mediastinum; this mass occupied the entire right hemithorax. A left mediastinal displacement was described with compression of the principle bronchus and minimal pleural leakage (effusion) .
Moreover, since tumors such as neuroblastoma were suspected, the levels of homovanillic acid (HVA) and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) in urine were determined and were found to be negative. Furthermore, echocardiography revealed that the heart had shifted down and to the left without pericardial effusion. On the right side of the hemithorax, pleural effusion was noted around the homogeneous mass; however, when thoracentesis was performed, only 90 ml hemorrhagic fluid could be aspirated from the right infrascapular area after repeated attempts. A pleural fluid study yielded fluid with a reddish color, and cytological examination predominantly showed elements of peripheral blood, while the microbiological culture was negative.
Furthermore, contrast CT of the thorax and abdomen revealed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass 95 × 75 × 70 mm in size in the right hemithorax, with central necrotic areas that likely originated from the outlet roots of spinal nerves of the spinal canal, which shifted the right lung and mediastinal organs. Minimal pleural effusion was observed in the phrenicocostal right sinus (hemorrhagic), with the drain located around the mass that was functional. Moreover, no adenopathy was detected in the mediastinum or axillary regions, and abdominal CT scans were unremarkable .
For the histopathological diagnosis, during CT, a percutaneous needle biopsy of the right mass was performed. Consequently, the histopathology of the examined tissue cylinders identified tumor tissue composed of poorly differentiated malignant small round cells with dark staining, cells with round nuclei (“small round blue cells”), and a confluence of necrotic foci, which suggests the tumor type of blastoma . Conclusively, immunohistochemical (IHC) examination of the markers CD99 , S-100 , and Ki-67 showed that the tumor cells stained positively for S-100 and CD99. Specifically, the proliferative index measured by Ki-67 was approximately 20%, which suggests primitive PNET.