A 23-year-old Hispanic man was admitted to the emergency room of a general hospital without companions. He was found on the street and brought to the emergency room by ambulance. He presented with impaired consciousness and a 4cm right temporoparietal region scalp wound received upon sustaining a severe head trauma during an assault.
At hospital admission, his personal pathological history was unknown. The initial neurological evaluation described him with a Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) score of 10 (eye opening = 3, motor response = 6, verbal response = 1). He was also noted to be stuporous and sweaty, with anisocoria, and he responded only to painful stimulation. He required tracheal intubation for airway protection.A head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed diffuse brain edema, right temporal concussion with subarachnoid hemorrhage, a 7mm laminar subdural hemorrhage without mass effect signs or mid-line shift, linear temporal vault fracture, obliterated basal cisterns, concussion of the splenium of the corpus callosum and normal ventricular morphology. Incidentally, a lesion suggestive of a pituitary macroadenoma, 21×26×32mm in size, with suprasellar expansion was observed (Figure ).
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for neurological surveillance and ventilatory support. He required mechanical ventilation for 7 days and antibiotic treatment for a nosocomial pulmonary infection. He developed grade III axonal diffuse injury, but remained hemodynamically stable with mild arterial hypertension.
On the basis of the radiological pituitary finding, an assessment by the endocrinology department was demanded. The patient had clinical coarse facial features suggestive of acromegaly, with prominent supraciliary and suborbital ridges, wide nose, prognathism, increased interdental spaces, increased breadth of feet and hands and features of gigantism. The initial laboratory test revealed insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) level of 880ng/mL and a GH level of 8.70ng/mL, which are compatible with a GH-producing pituitary tumor. Other hormone laboratory tests were analyzed (Table ). The patient’s cortisol levels were not measured, because he had been receiving hydrocortisone intravenously since admission to the hospital.
After 16 days of hospitalization, the patient’s neurological condition was not stable. An insulin tolerance test was contraindicated. Because of the risk of hypoglycemia in this patient, a thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test for TSH was the only stimulatory test performed (Table ). The rest of the hormonal axes were analyzed after improvement of his critical neurological condition. The TRH stimulation test showed an insufficient TSH response, so a replacement treatment with hydrocortisone and levothyroxine was maintained because of a possible impairment in his pituitary-adrenal/thyroid axes.
In the following three days the patient’s neurological condition improved. He was alert and awake but mildly disoriented, and he was moving his limbs in an uncoordinated manner. He was referred to a rehabilitation center after 23 days of hospitalization.
Eight weeks later after entering the rehabilitation center, the patient was assessed at his first medical appointment as an outpatient in the endocrinology department. He was interrogated for a new and complete medical history. He had been diagnosed with type 2 diabetes mellitus 20 months before sustaining the head trauma, and he was under insulin treatment. He has been the tallest of his four brothers since he was 10 years old. His father’s height is 180cm, and his mother’s is 170cm. He has never worn rings so increase in his fingers width could not be determined, but his shoe size increased during the past year. He indicated that he had excessive sweating prior to the hospital admission. He denied having headaches, visual field defects, diminished libido or sexual dysfunction. He had received insulin treatment during his hospitalization in the rehabilitation center, but it was stopped because of frequent hypoglycemic episodes. The patient’s height was 182cm, his weight was 86.3kg and his blood pressure was 120/80mmHg. He was in good general condition, with no speech abnormalities and no motor sequelae, and with the facial features described above. An examination of his eye fundus and visual field campimetry by confrontation were normal. The laboratory control test showed a decrease from his previous IGF-1 values and a suppression of GH levels (Table ). His thyroid function tests were normal with levothyroxine therapy.
Further hormone laboratory tests were performed to analyze the patient’s acromegaly diagnosis and PTHP (Tables and
). The glucose tolerance test demonstrated a suppressed GH level, which contradicted the initial laboratory and clinical findings of acromegaly. Additionally, the insulin tolerance test showed a lack of stimulation of the GH and cortisol. The control CT scan showed a wide sella turcica with a thin floor wall and a 13×13×14mm homogeneous hypophysis with no specific focalizations (Figure ).