A 7-year-old girl presented with a 1-month history of gait disturbance, dysarthria, dysphagia, and hoarseness and with a 1-day history of muscular weakness of the extremities. Neurological examination revealed oculomotor, trochlear, abducens, glossopharyngeal, vagus, and accessory nerve palsy and tetraparesis. Computerized tomography revealed a giant right VA aneurysm expanding at the vertebrobasilar junction (diameter, 40 mm) without calcification. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging demonstrated a giant aneurysm without intraaneurysmal thrombosis that was compressing the brainstem . Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed the aneurysm arising 2 cm distal to the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) orifice to vertebrobasilar junction, fetal-type left posterior communicating artery, and bilateral VAs of similar caliber [Figure and ]. A 6-Fr guiding catheter (Shuttle; Cook Medical, Inc., Bloomington, IN) was inserted into the right femoral artery and guided into the right VA. An Excelsior 1018 microcatheter (Boston Scientific, Watertown, MA) and a balloon catheter (HyperForm 7mm; 7mm; Micro Therapeutics) were introduced into the parent artery (right VA) through each guiding catheter. Parent artery coil embolization distal to the PICA was performed under flow control by balloon inflation at V4 portion of right VA, and complete PAO with preservation of the right PICA patency was achieved by the end of the procedure [Figure and ]. However, one-third of the aneurysm was not thrombosed . Coil embolization was subsequently performed 14 days after PAO after the patient presented with respiratory depression due to mass effect. A 6-Fr guiding catheter (Shuttle) was inserted into the right femoral artery and guided into the left VA. An Excelsior 1018 microcatheter (Boston Scientific) was introduced into the left VA through the guiding catheter. Thirteen bare platinum coils were introduced into the aneurysm through the microcatheter, and total occlusion was confirmed at the end of this procedure . However, 1.5 months after the first coil embolization, follow-up DSA showed recurrent dome filling at the distal side of the aneurysm because of sinking of the coils into the intraaneurysmal thrombus due to pulsation effect from the VA union . A second coil embolization procedure was then performed using the balloon (HyperForm 4mm; 7mm; Micro Therapeutics) remodeling technique for tight packing and avoiding coil protrusion to the union of VA. An Excelsior 1018 microcatheter (Boston Scientific) was introduced into the aneurysm and a balloon catheter (HyperForm 4 mm; 7 mm; Micro Therapeutics) was placed at the union of VA through the guiding catheter introduced into the left VA. Seventeen bioactive coils were introduced into the aneurysm. The aneurysm was totally occluded , but reappearance of dome filling was noted 1 month after the second embolization . A third coil embolization procedure was performed, and eight bioactive coils were introduced into the aneurysm using the balloon-assist technique. Postembolization DSA confirmed total occlusion of the aneurysm . All procedures were performed with systemic heparinization to maintain the activated clotting time at levels above 2- to 3-fold the baseline value and oral aspirin (100 mg) was started after introducing guiding catheter through a gastric tube. Follow-up DSA at 1 month after the last fourth embolization did not show recurrence of the aneurysm aside from a small neck remnant. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. Although no ischemic or edematous changes of the brainstem were depicted in the course of the treatment, mass effect to the brainstem gradually decreased, and her cranial nerve palsy completely resolved . No new neurological deficits developed, and the patient was able to resume her normal life. Two years later, follow-up MR angiography did not show any recurrence of aneurysm .