We report two cases with fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma that were started on atezolizumab and bevacizumab.
A 33-year-old Arabic female was diagnosed with Alagille syndrome during early childhood after she presented with cholestasis. She was managed conservatively, and her disease was stable during the last 10 years. There were no cardiac or renal abnormalities, but there were dysmorphic facies, consisting of a broad nasal bridge, triangular facies, and deep-set eyes. Total bilirubin was 17.5 umol/l (3–20 umol/l), direct bilirubin 13.3 umol/l (0–8.6 umol/l), gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) 436 u/l, and alpha-fetoprotein was < 2. During follow-up, she started to complain of abdominal pain and loss of appetite. CT scan in January 2019 showed a liver mass in segment VIII measuring 8 cm × 7 cm with central scar. The lesion was attached to portal vein. For further characterization, MRI had confirmed the findings. A biopsy was consistent with fibrolamellar HCC. She was discussed on the tumor board and was found not resectable. She underwent transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), which resulted in a complete radiological response. In November 2019 she had satellite lesions around the previous one and underwent another session of TACE, which resulted again in a complete radiological response. In March 2020, she was found to have a local recurrence with lung metastases and endoscopy did not show varices. She was discussed on the tumor board; it was felt she would not be able to tolerate combination chemotherapy, and the decision was to start atezolizumab with bevacizumab. She consented and received two cycles, 1200 mg of atezolizumab plus 15 mg/kg of body weight of bevacizumab intravenously every 3 weeks; the last cycle was on 9 June 2020. Cycle 3 was delayed due to elevated transaminases. She was started on steroids without improvement. CT scans showed progression locally and distantly. Her general condition deteriorated further, and she was referred to palliative care.
A 22-year-old Arabic male presented with obstructive jaundice symptoms with abdominal mass and loss of weight of 20 kg over the past 3 months. His performance status was 2, he was deeply jaundiced, and there was a palpable liver 12 cm below the costal margin, non-tender with a smooth surface. Total bilirubin was 123 umol/l (3–20 umol/l), direct bilirubin 86 umol/l (0–8.6 umol/l), and alpha-fetoprotein was < 2. MRI showed a large heterogeneous intermediate T2 signal intensity lesion involving all segments of the right hepatic lobe. It measured 20 × 14 × 15 cm. It is associated with the mass effect and obstructs the biliary tree at the level of the porta hepatis. There were also multiple enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes. CT of the chest showed multiple bilateral lung nodules and aggressive suspicious bony lesion in the thoracic cage. He underwent ERCP with plastic stent insertion into the hepatic duct and pancreatic duct, with an improvement of biliary obstruction. Bilirubin levels started to decrease, and his general condition improved. Tru-cut biopsy showed fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma. He started on 1200 mg of atezolizumab plus 15 mg/kg of body weight of bevacizumab intravenously every 3 weeks with good tolerance. After two cycles, he started to deteriorate with more obstructive symptoms and signs of progression documented by CT locally and distantly.