A 13-year-old female student was admitted to our department because of sudden visual loss and central scotoma in both eyes after running 800 m at the school gym for 1 week. She had no history of ocular, systemic disease or trauma. The presenting best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/100 in the right eye and 20/160 in the left eye. Her intraocular pressures were 20 mmHg in the right eye and 18 mmHg in the left eye. Her pupillary response, ocular motility, external and anterior segment examinations were unremarkable. Dilated fundus examination revealed six retinal hemorrhages with the biggest hemorrhage measuring approximately 1.5-disc diameters (DD) in the right eye and two retinal hemorrhages with the biggest one measuring 5.5 DD in the left eye. The hemorrhages showed a double-ring sign, with the outer ring representing the subhyaloid bleed and the inner ring representing the sub-ILM hemorrhage. Several areas of intraretinal hemorrhages located in and around the posterior pole were also observed. Moreover, fundus examination of both eyes showed the tortuosity of second and higher order arterioles which were consistent with FRAT . Her mother has similar arteriolar tortuosity in the fundus . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT; Spectralis HRA + OCT; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) showed a dome-shaped lesion with a hyper-reflective band and a hypo-reflective area beneath consistent with blood at the macula in both eyes. From the OCT, the hemorrhages were confined below the ILM . Findings from fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) in both eyes showed the blocked fluorescence from the retinal hemorrhages, and the second- and third-order retinal arteriolar tortuosity with corkscrew shape in the posterior pole, without vascular filling defects or hyperfluorescent lesions. No lesions were detected in the venous vasculature and first-order arteries . The blood pressure, biochemical test, blood cell count and coagulation were normal. Based on the clinical presentation and her history, the ultimately diagnosis of this patient was Valsalva retinopathy associated with FRAT.
As a student, she and her family request a quick vision recovery. Comparing the potential risks, benefits and costs between surgery and laser, Nd:YAG laser was chosen. Nd:YAG laser (Ultra Q Reflex, Ellex, Australia) with a Goldmann three-mirror contact lens was performed at the lower part of the maximum premacular hemorrhages in both eyes at the same time. The energy was 5–6 mJ with single pulse. Consequently, the hemorrhages were rapidly trapped into the vitreous cavity. Five days after the membranotomy, the premacular hemorrhages had drained mostly with mild vitreous hemorrhages inferiorly, and her visual acuity was improved to 20/16 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. At 7 weeks, the visual acuity of both eyes were stable. All retinal hemorrhages were resolved completely with little grayish vitreous hemorrhages in both eyes and the ILM was wrinkled in the left eye . OCT showed subtle loss of foveal contour in both eyes and in the left eye, a laser perforation in the ILM and hypo-reflective premacular cavity was observed .