A female caucasian baby was born by cesarean section at 39 weeks of gestation to a 37-year-old mother. Family medical history was unremarkable. The pregnancy had a normal course until 32 weeks of gestation when an obstetric ultrasound (US) showed the presence of a cystic abdominal mass of about 3 cm in diameter, localized between the bladder and the umbilicus, which was suggestive of an urachal cyst without other structural alterations of the urinary apparatus. At birth, APGAR score was 9/10 and birth weight 3200 g.
At physical examination, a vascular lesion (4 cm × 4 cm) was detected in the right lower abdominal quadrant. The presence of a soft suprapubic mass was also appreciated, without alterations of the overlying skin. The patient was otherwise asymptomatic.
The dermatologist confirmed the diagnosis of complex vascular malformation: it consisted in a venocapillary superficial lesion associated with multicystic lymphangiomatous lesions in the subcutaneous tissues, involving the right lower abdomen and the homolateral inguinal area and tight. Also, a small angiomatous lesion of the right first toe with no dysmetria of the affected limb was detected at physical examination.
Table summarizes the main clinical and radiologic findings in our patients, which led to the diagnosis of multicystic lymphangioma, and the major steps in the management and follow-up.
On the second day of life the abdominal US was performed, and no congenital urachus abnormalities were detected, but rather some hypo-anechoic cysts of about 3.1 × 0.5 cm that extended from the umbilical to the right inguinal area, reaching the medial surface of the thigh, with a little extremity just above the homolateral knee . The Doppler technique showed some vascular signals from the adipose tissue where these cystic lesions were located. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan with contrast was then performed. In consideration of the age of the patient, sedation was needed during the exam. At MRI, several lacunas with cystic appearance were observed in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of the right lower abdomen. These structures had variable size (maximum 3 cm of diameter) and were hypointense in T1 and hyperintense in T2 sequences. Cysts seemed to be restricted to the subcutaneous tissues since no signals of muscular or abdominal cavity involvement were evident. After the intravenous contrast administration, no significant enhancement of the cysts’ content was seen. All MRI characteristics confirmed the diagnosis of multicystic lymphangioma .
As surrounding abdominal organs were not involved and compressive complications on adjacent organs were not present, given the possibility of spontaneous regression of the lesion, a “wait and see” strategy was adopted, and the patient was closely monitored through a multidisciplinary follow-up program.
A size reduction and progressive discoloration were macroscopically appreciated, and progressive regression was confirmed through serial US evaluations.
Sixteen months later, the presence of a new cystic formation (3.6 cm × 2.1 cm × 1.9 cm) with irregular morphology and corpuscular content was detected at the US scan, referable to an intracystic bleeding. Since the patient was asymptomatic and no other complications were detected, the conservative approach was carried on.
During the following months, some millimetric angiokeratomas developed.
Almost 3 years later, the cystic lymphangioma appears significantly reduced in extension, and the cysts now have a maximum diameter of 0.8 to 1 cm. No alterations or compressions of adjacent organs were present. The patient is 3 years old, has normal neurodevelopment and does not have any abdominal disturbances. No compression on adjacent organs nor dysmetria at the inferior limbs is present.
However, given the risk of bleeding or ulceration of the superficial angiokeratomas, pulsed dye laser seems now the best treatment choice.[