The patient was a 43-year-old male farmer who was admitted to the hospital owing to the diagnosis of chronic myeloid leukemia for 3 mo and a 1-mo history of intermittent vomiting.
The patient showed an elevated white blood cell count during the national grassroots public welfare physical examination at a local hospital 3 mo before admission. He did not report fever, chills, low-grade fever, night sweats, dizziness, headache, or rash. Next, he was referred to a higher-level hospital for a more thorough blood examination, which revealed the following results: red blood cell count, 3.57 × 1012/L; white blood cell count, 150.27 × 109/L; promyelocyte percentage, 15%; mature lymphocyte percentage, 60%; and mature monocyte percentage, 15%. Later, inpatient examination revealed the following results: white blood cell count, 136.59 × 109/L, red blood cell count, 3.82 × 1012/L; neutrophil percentage, 90.7%; and neutrophil count, 123.98 × 109/L. T and B lymphocyte immune function test revealed the following findings: cluster of differentiation (CD)3+, 31.2%; CD3+ and CD4+, 15.7%; CD3+ and CD8+, 12.0%; CD4+/CD8+, 1.31%; and CD3− and CD19+, 4.5%. The bone marrow cytology test revealed the following findings: (1) Myeloid hyperplasia was observed to a significant extent with 93.5% myeloid cells and 6.5% erythroid cells; (2) The granule:red ratio was 14.38:1; (3) The myeloid system was abnormally hyperplastic, particularly with middle and late myelocytes; eosinophils, basophils, and mitotic cells were also observed; (4) The extent of erythroid hyperplasia was relatively low; (5) A decreased proportion of lymphocytes was observed; and (6) Seven megakaryocytes, which were granular giant cells, were observed within 1 wk.
Identifying middle and late myelocytes on blood films was easy. The size of the red blood cells did not change, the bone marrow smear filling was acceptable, and platelets were scattered and clustered. At this stage, chronic myeloid leukemia was considered. The leukemia immunophenotyping test revealed the following results: A blast cell area accounting for approximately 0.6% of nuclear cells was observed; increased proportion of granulocytes by approximately 90.7% was noted; fully expressed cMPO, CD13, CD33, and CD64 along with partially expressed CD16, CD15, CD11b, CD10, and CD4 were observed, and the remaining were negative. An early myeloid development pattern was observed, with most development observed in the middle stage; therefore, mature granulocyte proliferative disease (chronic phase chronic myeloid leukemia) was considered. The level of P170 (CD243) was 0.2%. The digital quantitative analysis test detected the BCR-ABL-p210 fusion gene. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the following results: (1) Micronodules were observed in the posterior segment of the left upper lobe apex, which could be old lesions; and (2) The local bone of the left fifth anterior rib was rough and dense, which could be an old fracture. Color Doppler showed slight tricuspid valve and aortic regurgitation but normal left ventricular systolic and diastolic function.
At this point, the diagnosis of chronic myeloid leukemia was clear , and symptomatic treatment (alkalization, hydration, and plasma cells) was provided. After the white blood cell count reduced to a safe level, he was treated with imatinib mesylate and discharged. One month after discharge, the patient developed pain in the left lower extremity, which was not reported in the consultation. Later, he developed nausea, which was relieved after vomiting a small amount of gastric content. This was accompanied by a productive cough with white sticky sputum, but he did not show fever, chills, abdominal pain, or diarrhea. His body weight decreased by 7.5 kg over 3 mo.
The patient was a healthy individual without diabetes, hypertension, or other underlying diseases.
The patient had no contributory family history.
Physical examination showed slight abdominal tenderness, with no rebound tenderness and tension.
For further diagnosis and treatment, we performed a series of laboratory and imaging examinations. The results of the blood routine and biochemical tests were normal. The four tests for hematopoiesis showed a slight decrease in vitamin B12 and ferritin levels.
CT examination of the chest and abdomen showed an increase in the thickness of the wall of the gastric antrum and pylorus. It revealed a blurred surrounding fat space and the presence of multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the cardia, hepatic hilum, greater omentum, and retroperitoneum . A whole body bone scan revealed abnormal bone metabolism in the bilateral scapula, rib, and iliac bone; thus, multiple bone metastases were considered . Meanwhile, gastroscopy showed the presence of a large amount of retained material in the gastric cavity; yellowish mucus; and huge ulcers in the lower part of the gastric body, gastric angle, and gastric antrum. Although the pylorus was deformed, the lens body could pass through it. These findings were suggestive of gastric cancer (Borrmann type IV) with bile reflux 2 and reflux esophagitis grade C .
Pathological analysis revealed a small number of atypical cells in the gastric antrum. Immunohistochemical results were as follows: CKL(2+), CD56(−), ki67 (40%), CD68 (focal 1+), her-2(1+), MPO(−), CD117(−), CD15 (focal 1+), and CD34 (vascular+). Considering the results of morphological and immunohistochemical analyses , poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was diagnosed.