A 23-year-old pregnant woman without any history of hypertension or migraine suddenly developed a thunderclap headache, dizziness, and eye pain at 35 + 2 weeks of gestation. She did not take these symptoms seriously and also experienced one episode of vomiting without fever and syncope. By the afternoon of the same day, her symptoms worsened, and she was admitted to the emergency department with a complaint of mistiness of vision in both eyes. At the time of admission, her blood pressure was 170/110 mmHg. Neurological examination revealed no abnormal signs such as hemiparesis and seizures. Serological laboratory tests showed no autoimmune conditions or infectious pathogens such as bacteria and viruses. Brain MRI performed on the same day revealed symmetric lesions in the posterior circulation territories, including the bilateral parietooccipital lobes, left basal ganglia, and corona radiata. These lesions showed hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging . DWI and ADC mapping revealed mild hyperintensity in the lesions, which indicated vasogenic cerebral edema. The patient was diagnosed with eclampsia-associated PRES and received intravenous infusion of mannitol (125 ml; q8h × 8 days) for the management of intracranial hypertension. On the same day, cesarean section was successfully performed, and her blood pressure decreased to 154/103 mmHg one hour after surgery. However, she complained of headache and bilateral blindness. On the day after surgery, her headache ameliorated, vision improved, and blood pressure decreased to 140/85 mmHg. Ten days later, i.e., one day after the withdrawal of mannitol, FLAIR imaging, DWI, and ADC mapping showed that the hyperintense lesions (vasogenic edema) had disappeared. However, an isolated lesion with restricted diffusion that showed a high signal in DWI and a low ADC value (cytotoxic edema) was observed in SCC; these findings indicated RESLES type I) . Five days after the discontinuation of mannitol, she showed no abnormal symptoms and was discharged from our hospital. Follow-up brain MRI performed 29 days the clinical onset of symptoms showed no abnormalities .