A 63-year-old Asian woman received her first dose of zoledronic acid (Aclasta®, 5 mg/100 mL solution; Novartis, San Mateo, CA, USA) for postmenopausal osteoporosis. She suffered from a past hepatitis B virus infection. In the past 2 years, she was on oral alendronate (70 mg, once per week), and the patient regularly used calcium and vitamin D supplements. Slit-lamp and fundoscopy examinations before the application of zoledronic acid revealed right epiretinal membrane and bilateral xerophthalmia. Twenty-four hours after the infusion (5 mg in 100 mL normal saline over 15 min at a constant infusion rate), she began experiencing multiple symptoms, including fatigue and weakness, generalized aches and pains, bilateral eye irritation, periorbital swelling, blurred vision, and diplopia.
Upon examination, her best-corrected visual acuity was 20/40 in the left eye and 20/60 in the right eye, and her intraocular pressure was 17 mm Hg, bilaterally. Slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival hyperemia, ciliary injection, flare (2+), keratic precipitates (±), and trace cells in the anterior chamber. Posterior synechiae was also present. Fundus and optical coherence tomography (OCT) examinations revealed right macular edema , and fluorescein angiography showed hyperfluorescence of the optic disk. Hematological exams of complete blood counts and transaminase levels were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation was 95 mm/h, the C-reactive protein was elevated to 2.69 mg/dL, and the serum C4 level was slightly increased to 0.45 g/L. Bilateral acute uveitis was diagnosed and topical ganciclovir, pranoprofen, fluorometholone, and atropine were prescribed. Two days later, the ocular symptoms worsened, and treatment with retrobulbar injection of methylprednisolone and oral prednisolone was started. The patient’s ocular symptoms improved remarkably in the following 3 days, when best-corrected visual acuity reestablished to 20/30 bilaterally, and flare, keratic precipitates, cells, and macular edema disappeared. The patient continued with oral prednisolone, tapering slowly over the following 6 weeks. She achieved complete resolution, with no rechallenge and no recurrence at the 6 month follow-up.