An 82-years old Hispanic woman with a past medical history significant for pulmonary thromboembolism on oral anticoagulation, rheumatoid arthritis on treatment with hydroxychloroquine, and hypertension developed a new onset thrombocytopenia, with a platelet count of 52 x 109/L during a routine assessment. She denied any symptoms and her physical exam was unremarkable. Complete blood count showed a hemoglobin of 14.6 g/dL; and a WBC count, 5.9 x 109/L with 71% segmented neutrophils, 17% lymphocytes (absolute lymphocyte count: 1.0 x 109/L), 11% monocytes, and 1% eosinophil. Her international normalized ratio was in a therapeutic range. Her initial thrombocytopenia evaluation based on the current guidelines did not reveal the presence of an alternative diagnosis. Infectious disease testing including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative. Hence, given her age, a BM biopsy was performed.
Immunophenotypic studies of BM cells, using 8-color ﬂow cytometry approach (FACSCanto ll flow cytometer (BDB), and Infinicyt software program (Cytognos, V1.4)) detected 1% of Lambda-restricted B-cells CD45+, CD20+, CD10+, BCL2++ (A-F), FMC7+, CD38dim, CD200- and CD5- (F). BM biopsy revealed a 1% paratrabecular small cleaved lymphocyte infiltrate. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated CD20 (G-H), BCL2 and CD10 expression in tumor cells.
Assessment with positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed two mass-like foci over right parotid (A-B) and left maxillary (C-D)
Parotid excisional biopsy multiparameter flow cytometry revealed a 42% of lambda-restricted B-cells, with low forward scatter (FSC) and SSC, CD20+, CD10+, BCL2+ (E), CD38+, CD19+, and CD45+; consistent with a diagnosis of follicular lymphoma. Examinations of the histological sections confirmed a low-grade follicular lymphoma, with a 5% proliferation rate measured by Ki-67 (F-I). Translocation t (14; 18) (q32; q21) was detected in parotid lymphoma (J) as well as BM biopsy, by using fluorescence in situ hybridization (IgH/ BCL2 dual color dual fusion translocation probes Vysis-Abbott).
The coexistence of a Warthin tumor composed of cystic spaces lined by papillary bilayered oncocytic epithelium was also observed (L-M). Pathologic examination of maxillary biopsy showed an oncocytic papilloma, constituted by a fibrovascular stroma lined by multiple layers of columnar cells with oncocytic features (N).
The final diagnosis was a parotid primary follicular lymphoma coexisting with Warthin tumor involving the BM in a small extent and oncocytic papilloma located in the maxillary sinus. Given her age, performance status and intermediate risk FLIPI (2 points) she was treated with Rituximab monotherapy, having received four cycles at the last clinical follow-up with improvement on her platelet count up to 165 x 109 /L.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.