A healthy 58-year-old Japanese woman presented to a local clinic complaining of swelling and pain with motion of her left wrist joint, with no apparent trigger, beginning 3 months prior. Upon her initial presentation to our service, she complained of mild wrist pain without a limited range of motion. Plain x-rays showed ectopic calcifications in and around the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ), and she was diagnosed as having subacute arthritis with hydroxyapatite crystal deposition . She was initially given a wrist brace and directed to follow-up, but her persistent pain required the administration of corticosteroid injections into the DRUJ. The treatment resulted in a transient improvement in her pain. However, she continued to experience a gradual worsening of her left ulnar wrist pain, and soon became aware of her limited range of motion. She therefore returned to our department 6 months after her initial presentation. At this time, an elastic, hard, non-mobile mass measuring 1 × 1 cm was palpated on the ulnar aspect of her left wrist. The range of motion of the wrist joint was 80°/65° on extension/flexion and 40°/80° on pronation/supination, demonstrating a limited range of motion of both flexion and pronation. Plain x-rays showed a bone mass at the distal end of the ulna , and computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a pedunculated bony prominence arising from the distal end of the ulna . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the margins of the lesion had a low signal intensity on T1-weighted images , and a high signal intensity on T2-weighted images . An MRI with gadolinium contrast did not enhance the lesion . These MRI findings suggested that the margins of the lesion were consistent with proliferating cartilage. Based on our analysis of these images, we developed a differential diagnosis that included osteochondroma and BPOP. However, in the absence of continuity with the medulla, BPOP was primarily suspected. Moreover, MRI findings showed contrast enhancement of an area between the regions of proliferating cartilage and atypical bone formation detected by plain x-rays and CT scans. While this led to the inclusion of osteochondroma with malignant transformation, parosteal osteosarcoma, and periosteal osteosarcoma into the differential diagnosis, this intralesional contrast enhancement may also occasionally be seen in BPOP . The preoperative imaging studies therefore led to the diagnosis of BPOP. We opted to perform surgery because of the patient’s worsening ulnar wrist pain and her limited range of motion.
The mass was identified through a volar approach. The surface of the lesion was covered by a cartilage cap and its interior was composed of osteoid tissue in continuity with the cortical bone . En bloc resection of the lesion with the capsule and the periosteum was performed along with the decortication of the underlying cortical bone to expose the underlying normal medulla. Histopathologically, cartilage was present at the margins of the lesion, and bone formation was found at the center of the lesion at its base fixed to the ulna . Because the marginal cartilage was not the hyaline type usually seen in the cartilage cap of osteochondromas but instead resembled reactive fibrocartilage , the possibility of an osteochondroma was ruled out. In some areas of the lesion with partially increased cellularity, star-shaped or spindle-shaped atypical cells were scattered against a somewhat myxomatous background. Bone trabeculae showed an irregular distribution, some of which had a basophilic staining pattern (“blue bone”), representing incomplete endochondral ossification. There was also an area composed of a mixture of bone, cartilage, and fibrous granulation tissue that resembled fracture healing with callus formation. Fibrous vascular tissues were arranged loosely among the trabeculae, with little myeloid tissue. Some of the chondrocytes exhibited mild atypia, such as nuclear enlargement and binucleation . There was no neoplastic production of osteoid tissue. Therefore, the possibility of malignant tumors, such as a parosteal or periosteal osteosarcoma, was ruled out, and the diagnosis of BPOP was confirmed. Two years after surgery, the patient has no subsequent pain, an improved range of motion (80°/70° on extension/flexion and 80°/80° on pronation/supination), and no lesion recurrence .