Dizziness for three days, aggravated with general convulsions for two hours.
A 52-year-old man with a one-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus developed dizziness of unknown aetiology, accompanied by lethargy, poor mental status, and delayed reactions. The patient self-administered ‘cold and flu capsules’, although the dizziness symptoms persisted. On the second day, the patient experienced weakness and numbness in the right upper limb during work, accompanied by dizziness. This right upper extremity symptom manifested as weakness/difficulty in fine movements, such as holding chopsticks, with conserved lifting ability. The upper extremity and dizziness symptoms were not accompanied by altered consciousness or convulsions and resolved spontaneously after approximately one hour.
Three days later, the patient presented to the emergency room with worsening symptoms. During the consultation, the patient was in and out of consciousness, with delayed and inappropriate responses, subsequent involuntary lifting of the right upper limb, flexion and tonicity of the limbs with clonus, mouth foaming, upward gaze, and clenched teeth for more than 10 min. The symptoms were relieved with an intramuscular injection of sodium phenobarbital. Upon regaining full consciousness, the patient was able to communicate and answer questions correctly.
The patient was admitted to the neurology department for further treatment. Admission vital signs and neurological examination were normal.
History of "diabetes mellitus" for 1 year, complaining of fair glycaemic control.
No special notes.
Admission vital signs and neurological examination were normal.
His admission blood glucose level was 329.4 mg/dL, and a cerebrospinal fluid sample showed a glucose level of 138.2 mg/dL, with negative tests for antibodies associated with autoimmune encephalitis and paraneoplastic syndrome. Blood glucose levels fluctuated between 129.6 and 351.0 mg/dL after admission.
A head MRI at admission showed a slight hyperintensity in the left parieto-occipital cortex and a subcortical hypointense line in T2WI and FLAIR images . DWI revealed a limited diffusion-restricted signal in the same area and a reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC map) . MRS revealed a reduced N-acetylaspartate (NAA) peak and increased creatine and choline peaks in the left parietal-occipital cortex and subcortical areas, suggesting neuronal damage and metabolic encephalopathy . Contrast-enhanced MRI showed swelling of the left parieto-occipital gyrus and localized soft meningeal enhancement in the parietal lobe . No significant alterations were noted on SWI and MRV. Non-ketotic hyperglycaemia-associated epilepsy is difficult to identify and is even misdiagnosed in the emergency medical setting. It is distinguished from major acute infarction stroke, reversible posterior encephalopathy syndrome, encephalitis, and meningitis by the richness of cranial nuclear magnetic sequence manifestations in conjunction with clinical test indices. On day 5 of hospitalization, an electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed bilateral spike emanations in the frontal and central regions, asynchronous left and right sides, and multiple slow-wave activities in the left parietal, occipital, and temporal regions. These EEG alterations were consistent with the cortical swelling seen on MRI.