A male aged 61 years was admitted to our hospital for intermittent fever and cough on August 16, 2019. In the past 4 years, the patient had developed pulmonary infection repeatedly, which improved after anti-infection treatment. He had a history of hypertension, coronary heart disease and bronchiectasis. In the past 1 year, the patient intermittently developed cough, sputum, accompanied by fever, with a body temperature of about 38.0 °C, without afternoon low fever, night sweats and hemoptysis. He was hospitalized for many times, no pathogens were detected during hospital stay. The patient continued to cough and fever intermittently outside the hospital.
On admission, the patient was conscious, with no enlargement of superficial lymph nodes, slightly coarse breathing sounds in both lungs, and a little moist crackles could be heard. On June 19, 2019, chest CT (computed tomography) indicated space occupation in the right upper lung, bilateral lung infective lesion with bronchiectasis, emphysema, bullae of the lung, right pleural effusion . On August 16, chest CT indicated that the lesion area of the right upper lung mass was significantly larger than before, accompanied by bronchiectasis, emphysema, and pulmonary bulla . After admission, the patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous lung puncture examination, and the tissues were subjected pathological examination and microbial culture. Histopathology showed chronic inflammatory changes accompanied by mild hyperplasia of alveolar epithelium. No bacteria were observed in lung tissue culture. Bronchoscope alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) examination revealed bronchial inflammation. Cytology of lavage fluid exfoliation: no cancer cells detected; mTB-DNA was not detected in BALF by Gene Xpert. No acid-fast bacilli were found in lavage fluid and sputum by acid-fast staining, and no hyphae and spores of bacteria and fungi were found by Gram stain. Mycobacterium culture was negative. IgA, IgG, IgM, C3 and C4 were normal. Blood tests for white blood cells (WBC) 13.6 × 109/L (reference range: 3.5–9.5 × 109/L), C-reactive protein (CRP) 64.67 mg/L (reference range: < 6.0 mg/L), PCT 0.053 mg/L (reference range: 0–0.046 ng/mL).
After treatment with cefoperazone sodium + sulbactam sodium, the patient’s symptoms (fever, cough and sputum) improved, but neurological symptoms such as headache, delirium and memory loss appeared on August 16. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain suggested space occupation in the left frontal lobe, the maximum cross-sectional area of the lesion was about 35 mm × 52 mm; brain abscess was considered . On August 28, the patient underwent minimally invasive puncture drainage under CT-guidance, and about 10 mL yellow purulent fluid was extracted. The puncture fluid was sent to the microorganism laboratory for testing, after 48-h culture, white cotton-like colonies grew . After smear staining, branching and uneven staining of filamentous bacilli could be seen under the microscope. The mycelia could be wound into clusters to form actinomycetes like particles, Gram stain and the weak acid-fast staining were positive . The bacteria were identified as Nocardia farcinica by mass spectrometry, with 99.9% credibility. Then, the patient was diagnosed with Nocardia farcinica brain abscess. After 16 days of treatment with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) (3.0 g, po, bid) and intravenous amikacin (0.4 g, iv, qd), the patient’s temperature returned to normal and his headache completely disappeared, intracranial mass was significantly reduced and the right upper lung mass was significantly absorbed . During subsequent treatment, the patient developed nausea and vomiting for many times, which was considered to be caused by cerebral edema. After treatment with mannitol dehydration, the symptoms were relieved. Re-examination of head MRI on October 23 showed that the brain abscess lesions were smaller than before, the brain edema was significantly better than before. The previous anti-infection treatment regimen was continued.
On December 8, the patient had occasional mild chest tiredness, which relieved spontaneously, intermittent cough, nausea and retching, chest CT showed significant increase in lung lesions, partial bronchiectasis, emphysema and bullous lungs appeared . The patient developed dyspnea on December 12 accompanied by wheezing sound in both lungs, sputum culture suggested Candida tropicalis. The patient was given antifungal and antiasthmatic treatment with itraconazole and doxotheophylline. On December 15, he developed ARDS, blood pressure (BP): 100/75 mmHg, arterial blood oxygen saturation (SaO2) 79%. After a series of treatments, including assisted respiration (mask oxygen inhalation), anti-inflammatory (methylprednisolone), antiasthmatic (doxophylline, salbutamol, ipratropium bromide), hyperensort (dopamine), the patient’s dyspnea symptoms were not relieved and blood pressure did not rise (BP 77/52 mmHg). The patient’s family gave up the rescue. Subsequently, the patient went into a deep coma, lost consciousness, and the heart rate dropped. The patient died on the morning of the 16th, and the family refused an autopsy.