A 53-year-old man presented with gradually deteriorating vision in his left eye that began one year prior and accelerated over the last three months. At the time vision deterioration three months ago, the patient complained of periorbital pressure on his left upper eyelid. His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in the right eye was 20/20, and counting fingers in the left. Intraocular pressures (IOP) measured by Goldmann applanation tonometry in the right and left eyes were 12 and 34 mmHg, respectively. Anterior segment examinations showed no abnormalities other than mild nuclear cataract in both eyes, and the gonioscopic examination using four-mirror gonioscopy lens showed an open angle with clearly visible angular structures. The right optic disc had an intact neuroretinal rim ; however, the left optic disc had advanced glaucomatous cupping with a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.9 . Humphrey 30−2 visual field (HVF) showed normal results in the right eye but complete field loss with a mean deviation of -32.35 dB in the left eye . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography demonstrated an increased depth of lamina cribrosa in the left eye compared to that in the right eye , normal retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFL) in the right eye and diffuse RNFL loss in the left eye . There was a relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) in the left eye, without ocular pain or pain on extraocular movement. Pupillary light reflex in the right eye was normal. The patient was diagnosed with advanced open-angle glaucoma in the left eye and was treated with a combination of 2% dorzolamide and 0.5% timolol, 0.2% brimonidine, and 0.005% latanoprost, which lowered the IOP to 10 mmHg.
Three months later, the IOP in the left eye was 14 mmHg. No abnormality or change was found in the anterior segment; however, pronounced optic disc pallor and thinning of the whole retinal vessels were observed in his left eye . We reexamined the patient, suspecting other concurrent optic neuropathies, and discovered that the patient had been referred to a pulmonologist due to cough and dyspnea. Approximately a month previously, he was diagnosed with sarcoidosis because he had bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy and non-caseating granulomas in the supraclavicular lymph node on radiological and histological examinations. As a result, he was treated with oral prednisolone at a dose of 24 mg/day. Although his BCVA and HVF showed no change, he expressed subjective improvement in his left peripheral visual field after treatment with corticosteroids. Additionally, we performed orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to rule out sarcoidosis-associated optic neuropathy. The images showed enhancement of the left optic nerve , a normal right optic nerve, and mild thickening of the pituitary stalk and right hypothalamus . We diagnosed that the patient had co-existing open-angle glaucoma and sarcoidosis-associated optic neuropathy in the left eye. Administration of IOP-lowering eye drops in the left eye and oral corticosteroids were maintained.
After six months of treatment, the IOP in the left eye was well controlled, and the range of IOP in both eyes was 10–14 mmHg. However, the patient complained of gradually decreasing vision in the right eye. The BCVA in the right eye was 20/40, and positive light perception was observed in the left. The IOP was 14 and 13 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Although anterior segment and funduscopic examinations and follow-up MRI images showed no changes, the HVF showed mild peripheral depression in the right eye.
After 10 months of corticosteroid treatment, he discontinued this medication owing to its side effect, arthralgia. After ceasing medication for two months, his BCVA decreased to 20/60 in the right eye and positive light perception was maintained in the left. Anterior segment and fundus examination showed no signs of sarcoidosis-associated uveitis , and fluorescein angiography presented no signs of active inflammation or abnormal leakage. However, the HVF showed aggravated peripheral depression in the right eye . Additionally, MRI showed newly developed focal enhancement near the junction of right optic nerve and chiasm . Laboratory tests revealed no abnormal serum autoimmune antibodies. We diagnosed the patient with sarcoidosis-associated optic neuropathy in the right eye and restarted corticosteroids at a dose of 40 mg/day and methotrexate at 7.5 mg/week. Ten months after re-treatment (in total, 23 months of follow-up), the BCVA in the right eye improved to 20/50, while in the left, positive light perception was maintained.