A 20-year-old unmarried female presented to the surgery outpatient department with complaint of a right inguinal swelling since 2 years of age, which was reducible. Parents took an opinion about the swelling in her childhood but never followed it. On examination, a firm swelling of size 3 × 4 cm was present on right side which was reducible and showed cough impulse consistent with right sided inguinal hernia.
On general examination of the patient, scoliosis was present clinically with convexity towards left side. The left side rib cage was more prominent than the right side. Left sided Sprengel deformity was present with webbed neck and increased carrying angle of right elbow. Chest examination revealed right sided heart sounds, but no murmurs were heard. There were diminished breath sounds on the right side of chest, but normal breath sounds on the left side.
Patient also complained of primary amenorrhea after attainment of puberty. On examination, vaginal length was approximately 2 – 2.5 cm. On per rectal examination, uterus was not felt anteriorly. Bilateral breast and pubic hair were in tanner stage 4 of sexual development. Ultrasound of the inguinal swelling revealed right ovary within the hernial sac of size 3.1 × 3.3 cm with normal left ovary in the pelvis. Chest X-ray revealed right lung collapse . Echocardiography revealed dextrocardia with normal heart chambers and valves, and ejection fraction of 60%. The patient seemed to have some congenital syndrome by examination and above mentioned findings and hence was subjected to further investigations in consultation with other departments.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of pelvis revealed indirect inguinal hernia with right ovary as its content, normal left ovary and absent uterus . A suspicion of MRKH syndrome was made based on it. Computed tomography (CT) revealed complete collapse of right lung with compensatory left lung hyperinflation and absent right kidney . Pulmonary function test suggested severe obstruction with restriction. X-ray spine revealed fusion of the posterior elements of 2nd to 7th cervical vertebral bodies associated with scoliotic deformity, maximum at 5th thoracic vertebra, with convexity towards left side . Karyotyping of the patient was normal, 46XX.
A diagnosis of MURCS association with unilateral lung agenesis with right inguinal ovarian hernia was made. Blood investigations revealed haemoglobin of 12.8 gm/l, platelets 2.6 lacs/mm , blood urea 21 mg/dl and serum creatinine 0.8 mg/dl. The patient underwent elective open hernia repair wherein, the intraoperative findings revealed indirect hernial sac containing right ovary with fallopian tube. The contents were repositioned back into the pelvic cavity and the hernia repaired by modified Bassini’s technique. Postoperative period was uneventful with the patient being discharged on day 3. The patient is healthy up to 1 year of follow up and is being treated by a multidisciplinary team.