We present the case of a 68-year-old female with a recent viral influenza who presented to the emergency department with altered mental status. Around 7 days prior to admission, she started developing a productive cough associated with body aches and fatigue. She then started getting confused and that was when she was brought to the hospital. She did not have a significant medical history except for hypertension that was controlled well. Her only medication was amlodipine.
In the ED, she was found to have a high-grade fever of 100.8 °F, tachycardia (pulse 115), tachypnea (respiratory rate 30/min), and normal blood pressure of 130/70. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 13. She was found to have left basilar crackles, pan-systolic murmur that is louder at the apex, and weakness in the right-sided upper and lower extremities.
Chest X-ray showed multifocal infiltrates suggestive of pneumonia. CT of the head was unremarkable. Brain MRI demonstrated leptomeningeal enhancement suggestive of meningitis or septic emboli from the heart . CSF analysis showed leukocytosis (WBC 2345/mm3, 83% neutrophils), high protein, low glucose, and positive Streptococcus pneumoniae PCR. Sputum and blood cultures grew Streptococcus pneumoniae as well. Her hemoglobin was 11, platelets 20,000 per mm3, ESR 60 mm/h, white blood cells 18,000 per mm3, C-reactive protein 447 mg/liter, and random blood glucose 6.4 mmol/liter. Initial transthoracic echocardiogram was negative for endocarditis. Due to a high index of suspicion for endocarditis, a transesophageal echocardiography was performed and revealed multiple echodensities on both mitral valve leaflets, the largest measuring 3 × 1 cm. Also, there was a perforation of the mid portion of anterior mitral valve leaflet and sever regurgitation. In addition, a smaller echodensity measuring 0.4 cm in diameter was noted on the aortic valve at the commissure between the left and noncoronary cusps . Further clinical assessment and workup also revealed septic right sternoclavicular (SC) joint.
She was initially given vancomycin (20 mg/Kg IV q 8 h) and piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g IV q 6 h), which was subsequently narrowed to ceftriaxone (2 g IV q 12 h) following the culture and sensitivity results. She had a prolonged hospital course that required intravenous antibiotics, drainage of the right septic SC joint effusion, surgical mitral valve replacement, removal of the vegetations, and replacement of the mitral valve by a mechanical prosthetic valve was performed. During the postoperative period, the vital signs remained stable with no high fever. However, acute renal failure developed in the second week of the postoperative period. Nephrotoxic agents were discontinued. The patient was treated by hemodialysis until the creatinine levels returned to normal levels. The treatment was completed in 6 weeks, and she was discharged with a dramatic clinical improvement towards the end of her hospital stay. She received rehabilitation therapy after discharge from the hospital.