A previously well 52-year-old woman was reviewed in our Rheumatology Clinic via telephone consultation due to SARS-Cov-2/Covid-19 restrictions. The main presenting symptom was a 3-month history of severe inflammatory arthralgia involving both hands, wrists, knees and ankles. Symptoms were attributed to the BNT162b2 Covid-19 mRNA vaccine which she had received 1 week prior. In view of this possibility, the ChAdOx1-S Covid-19 vaccine was administered as a subsequent dose, 3 months following the initial BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine. A 5-day course of prednisolone at a dose of 5 mg daily was commenced by her general practitioner just prior to administration of the ChAdOx1-S vaccine to prevent further arthralgia. At review by telephone, 1 month later, the arthralgia had worsened, and she was commenced on prednisolone 15 mg daily for symptomatic relief. There were no constitutional, cardiac or respiratory symptoms.
Investigations performed prior to the telephone consultation revealed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 101 mg/L (normal < 5 mg/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 64 mm/hr (normal < 14 mm/hr). Rheumatoid factor (RF); anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) were negative. On review 2 weeks later, again by telephone due to Covid-19 restrictions, there had been little improvement with prednisolone and a face-to-face consultation was arranged for more complete assessment. This was undertaken 2 weeks later by a rheumatologist in full personal protective equipment.
On examination, the patient was mildly dyspnoeic, with a temperature of 38°C and a resting heart rate of 100 beats/min. Examination of the musculoskeletal system showed marked bilateral wrist swelling, non-tender bilateral knee effusions and bilateral swollen ankles. Notable was the presence of marked bilateral fingernail clubbing , a loud apical systolic murmur, right ventricular heave and bi-basal crepitations. (The patient astutely recalled the clubbing had only commenced when she became unwell 3 months prior). Peripheral stigmata of infective endocarditis were absent.
Following urgent admission, investigations showed an increased CRP of 207 mg/L and an ESR of 104 mm/hr. There was a microcytic hypochromic anaemia with a haemoglobin of 80 g/L (normal 130-180 g/L) and a low serum albumin of 24 g/L (normal 36–40 g/L). Repeat ANA, ENA, RF, anti-CCP antibody, anti-phospholipid antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and double-stranded dsDNA were negative. Urine and blood cultures were negative, as were Covid-19 polymerase chain reaction on peripheral blood, anti-Streptolysin O titre, bartonella, Q-fever, mycoplasma and brucella serology. A haemolysis screen was negative. Hepatitis B core antibody and surface antibody were positive, but Hepatitis C and HIV antibodies were not detected. Serum procalcitonin was not elevated. Electrocardiography showed a sinus tachycardia. Plain radiographs of the hands, wrists and knees demonstrated no erosions. Arthrocentesis of the left knee obtained fluid that was non-inflammatory, with a white cell count of 181 × 10^6/L (normal < 200 × 10^6/L), with no crystals, tumour cells or organisms seen. Bibasal pleural effusions were noted on a chest radiograph. A computerised tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was normal. Due to concern about infective endocarditis, urgent transthoracic echocardiography was performed and demonstrated a large villous mass with frond-like projections attached to the posterior left atrial (LA) wall, extending across the mitral valve (MV) with prolapse into the left ventricle (LV) in diastole. The LA was dilated and there was a small pericardial effusion . Echocardiographic appearances were suggestive of an atrial myxoma with significant LV inflow obstruction. There were no other valvular lesions. Due to Covid-19, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was unable to be performed. A chest CT demonstrated extension of the mass into the pulmonary veins. Coronary angiography was normal. Due to concern about possible emboli, a brain MRI was performed and showed multiple small right sided infarcts of differing ages .
Because of the mitral inflow obstruction and the potential for further cerebral embolisation, emergency resection of the LA tumour and reconstruction of the LA and MV repair was performed via median sternotomy. At operation, a lobulated mass was found to arise from the posterior LA wall with a broad base between the left and right pulmonary vein origins with prolapse into the MV orifice. A separate drop lesion was found on the posterior MV leaflet. The tumour had encased the entire lumen of the left upper pulmonary vein and extended into the segmental branches - necessitating a left upper lobectomy. The left lower pulmonary vein required reconnection to the LA using a 14 mm expanded polytetrafluoroethylene interposition graft due to involvement of the proximal left lower pulmonary vein. The posterior wall of the LA was reconstructed, and the posterior MV leaflet repaired with autologous pericardial patches and placement of a mitral annuloplasty ring. The postoperative course was complicated by acute renal impairment and pulmonary oedema partly related to transfusion-related lung injury and a systemic inflammatory response. The patient was weaned off cardiopulmonary bypass and made an uncomplicated recovery.
Histopathology of the cardiac mass was consistent with a Grade 3 LA intimal (spindle cell) sarcoma with positive staining for Murine Double Minute Clone 2 (MDM2) , an oncogene amplified in intimal sarcomas . No myocardial or left upper lobe lymph node invasion was seen. One-month post-surgery, fluorodeoxyglucose - positron emission tomography (PET) revealed no residual glucose-avid tumour or extra-thoracic metastatic disease. The patient was commenced on combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin and isofosfamide. Complete resolution of joint pain and swelling and fingernail clubbing occurred within 2 weeks of tumour resection and has not returned. A recent surveillance brain MRI demonstrated a 3 mm T2-hyperintensity of the right caudate suggestive of previous infarct, but no definite metastases. There has been no deterioration in cardiac function. At time of writing, she is awaiting a surveillance PET scan.