A 73-year-old woman presented with sudden decreased visual acuity in the right eye after the fourth cycle of intravenous blinatumomab therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (common ALL, CD10/20 positive). At the time of presentation, her ALL status was complete remission with normal laboratory tests for 12 months. Ocular status in both eyes showed a clear cornea, deep anterior chamber (AC), no cells and no flare in the AC, and a mild nuclear cataract. Intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg on the left eye. Funduscopic examination showed a vital optic nerve in both eyes with no signs of swelling or a difference in color. No retinal abnormalities or hemorrhages were detected. Optic coherence tomography of the macula showed proper retinal architecture and no pathology. Visual acuity (VA) in the right eye was finger counting and in the left eye 20/25. In the right eye, an abnormal relative afferent pupillary deficit (RAPD) could be detected during a swinging flashlight test, whereas the left eye exhibited normal responses. Although fundus examination was normal in the presented case, an ALL relapse was suspected because of the patient´s medical history. A complete oncologic and ophthalmologic re-assessment of the patient, including lumbar puncture, MRI, PET-computer tomography, and visually evoked potentials (VEP) were performed. VEP examination showed no response in the right eye and a regular response in the left eye. Brain MRI showed enhanced uptake of gadolinium in the prechiasmatic region of the right optic nerve and in the optic nerve sheath. Furthermore, unspecific leukoencephalopathy was detected (see Figs. and ). PET-CT revealed decreased metabolism of the right optic nerve compared to the left optic nerve. CSF (cerebrospinal fluid) exam (performed within 2 weeks of the initial presentation) revealed limited cells which were scattered lymphocytes with no sign of activation. Blood counts showed a mild increase in hematocrit and monocytes, but the rest of the blood differential count was unremarkable. Subsequently, direct toxicity from intravenous blinatumomab was also considered. However, the patient then developed a fulminant ALL relapse 1 month later and died of pneumonia and septic shock during intensive care. Autopsy revealed infiltration of the optic nerve with CD10 positive cells, consistent with an ALL relapse in the optic nerve.