A 41-year-old woman with NF-1 was admitted to the Emergency Department with hemorrhagic shock and a large lump in the right lower limb.
Without incentive, the patient suddenly felt swelling in the right lower limb, which was accompanied by pain 2 h later. When the patient was taken to the emergency room, her blood pressure at admission was 86/51 mmHg, her heart rate was 115 bpm, and her oxygen saturation was 92%. The patient was conscious, indifferent, and answered clearly.
The patient complained of a lump on the right lower limb for 5 years, with symptoms worsening for 2 years. She said a chestnut-sized lump appeared on the front of her right calf 5 years prior, and the lump gradually increased in size. The patient was ambulatory, but there was occasional swelling and pain. At the same time, a dark-brown coloration appeared on the skin of the right lower limb, perineal region, buttocks, waist, and abdomen. Then, after accidentally falling on the right lower limb two years before the current incident, she noticed that the lump began to grow rapidly, eventually presenting as elephantiasis. Beginning the same year, the patient was no longer ambulatory and experienced intensifying nocturnal pain.
The family history revealed that the maternal grandmother, mother, two maternal uncles, a sister and a brother were diagnosed with NF-1.
The physical examination upon admission revealed the following: Visible dark-brown pigmentation over a large area ; bilateral congenital talipes equinovarus and right lower limb presenting as elephantiasis . The patient had almost lost range of motion in the right knee and ankle. The longest trail of the lump was 77 cm, and the largest circumference was 50 cm . The rest of the limbs were basically normal.
At admission, laboratory investigation showed that the patient had moderate anemia (hemoglobin 66 g/L), with normal coagulation, hepatic and renal functions.
The X-ray examination revealed soft tissue and skeletal changes in the right lower extremity with growth disturbance at the distal femur, degenerative changes in the right knee joint , and bone morphological changes in the lower segment of the right tibia . Emergency color Doppler ultrasonography showed the following: (1) No obvious abnormalities of the liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, ureter, bladder, or perineum; (2) Multiple, nonuniform echo lumps on the front of the right calf; and (3) Extensive mixed echoes and flocculent echoes in the subcutaneous area in the right lower limb, with unclear boundaries and no obvious blood flow signal. Regrettably, bedside emergency ultrasound imaging was of poor quality, and images were not preserved. We believed the cause of the patient’s hemorrhagic shock was active bleeding in the right lower limb. After anti-shock therapy, the patient underwent emergency computed tomographic angiography (CTA) examination.
CTA examination showed that the right popliteal and posterior tibial arteries were thickened and tortuous, that multiple collateral small blood vessels were formed, and that the superficial veins of the right calf were increased and thickened . Multiple mixed high-density shadows (CT value approximately 23-58 Hu) were seen in the distal right thigh, right knee joint and right calf muscle space. No obvious abnormality was found in the left lower extremity blood vessels. 3D reconstruction of the right lower extremity skeleton revealed skeletal changes in the right lower extremity with growth disturbance and right knee subluxation . The soft tissue window showed the following: (1) Multiple nodules on the epidermis of the abdomen growing inward and outward (white arrow, Figure ); (2) Multiple large masses in the front and back of the right calf (white arrow, Figure ); and (3) A subcutaneous hematoma behind the right calf (yellow arrow, Figure ).