A 46-year-old African-American man presented with an enlarging, tender, left-sided neck mass. The initial evaluation consisted of magnetic resonance and computed tomographic (CT) imaging that demonstrated a 7-cm mass with T1 signal and T2 signal contrast enhancement . On the CT scan, the mass was revealed to be hyperdense. A presumptive diagnosis of nonsecretory paraganglioma was made after catecholaminergic products were absent in serum and urine analyses. Given the size and progressive growth of the mass and symptomatic status of the patient, resection was planned.
After informed consent was obtained, digital subtraction angiography and balloon occlusion testing were performed. Angiography confirmed a 7-cm vascular tumor with very thin vascular channels arising directly from the walls of the common and internal carotid arteries. There was no pedicle large enough to be suitable for embolization . This pattern was unusual because paragangliomas are extremely vascular with very well developed vascular channels that usually arise off the external carotid artery and have a pattern of arborization that is highly amenable to endovascular embolization. In this case there was the appearance that the vascular channels were direct offshoots of the vasa vasorum of the affected vessels. In addition, there was irregularity and dilatation in the region of the carotid bulb suggestive of carotid wall involvement, which is possible but rare in paragangliomas. The patient tolerated the balloon occlusion test; and because the tumor was considered to be invading the wall of the carotid artery, we elected to endovascularly sacrifice the internal carotid artery (ICA) in preparation for surgical resection. The purpose of this sacrifice was to starve the tumor of its blood supply and minimize the degree of intraoperative bleeding. The endovascular sacrifice of the ICA was accomplished without incident. One-week later, the patient was taken to the operating room for resection.
Surgical exposure of the carotid sheath revealed a large mass in the region of the carotid bifurcation. Exposure from the skull base to the omohyoid muscle allowed sequential separation of the jugular vein and the vagus, accessory, and hypoglossal nerves from the mass. The entire carotid bifurcation was dilated without separation of planes between the internal and external carotid arteries, carotid bulb, and tumor. The common, internal, and external carotid arteries were subsequently ligated away from the tumor; and the tumor and neighboring arterial segments were resected en bloc and sent for pathologic examination. Four distinctive lymph nodes appreciated during neck dissection were additionally submitted for examination. After resection of the mass, the sympathetic chain ganglia below the carotid sheath became apparent and appeared uninvolved.
The patient woke up without deficits; however, on the second postoperative day, he developed mild hoarseness and swallowing difficulty with an enlarging neck mass. He was taken emergently for the evacuation of a neck hematoma. No active bleeding sites were noted. Thereafter, the patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home without evidence of cranial neuropathies.
Gross examination of the en bloc specimen revealed a segment of artery surrounded by a mass measuring 4.8 cm × 4.0 cm × 2.4 cm. The tumor had a tan, myxoid surface with yellow tissue, and hemorrhagic changes next to the thrombosed arterial segment. Microscopic examination revealed a large circumscribed cervical lymph node with a large elastic artery coursing through it. The lymph node showed distinctive features including follicles composed of concentric rings of mantle zone lymphocytes around germinal centers as well as prominent vascularity of the germinal centers, often showing a single penetrating arteriole [Figure and ]. Immunostaining patterns from the lymph node revealed CD23, cyclin D1, BCL2, CD20, CD3, CD138, CD56, kappa/lambda, CD30, and CD15, which excluded the diagnosis of lymphoma; and Congo red staining excluded amyloidosis. Additional adjacent benign lymph nodes submitted for microscopic examination showed some of the above-mentioned features of Castleman's lymphadenopathy.