An 8-month-old otherwise healthy African-American boy was presented to our hospital with poor visual behavior. His past medical history was unremarkable, and he had no contributory toxic or medication exposures. His visual acuity at presentation was measured as centered, steady but unmaintained in both eyes, and with a negative induced tropia test. His pupillary responses were sluggish, but he had no afferent pupillary defect. His examination showed very bullous anterior retinal elevations, posterior retinal corrugations, and cystic foveae that appeared to represent severe XLRS with bilateral chronic rhegmatogenous RDs and macular holes (MHs) . Genetic testing revealed a hemizygous R197H mutation in the RS1 gene.
The patient underwent unsuccessful schisis drainage externally, followed by vitrectomy for RD repair. The repair was complicated by multiple recurrences of RD from proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) that ultimately resolved following extensive retinectomy and silicone oil tamponade. The patient’s right eye was started on dorzolamide 2 % twice per day. Following 18 months of therapy, a dramatic regression of both macular and peripheral schisis cavities with residual intraschisis hemorrhage were seen by portable OCT during examination with the patient under anesthesia . Rather than the foveal convexity and central cyst typically observed in typical XLRS, OCT of the right eye showed an abnormally deep foveal depression with termination of cyst walls at the vertical midline of the fovea, consistent with resolved MH and resolution of severe macular and peripheral retinoschisis . Partial vitreous separation accompanied peripheral schisis resolution. The boy’s visual acuity at his last visit was measured as 20/150 in the right eye using the LEA Symbols Test and no light perception on the left, which had undergone surgery. At the boy’s last follow-up visit, reduced compliance with topical dorzolamide 2 % had resulted in increased macular schisis, so the medication will be continued indefinitely to prevent schisis-related anatomic and visual complications.