A 56-year-old male patient was presented to our hospital due to cough, expectoration and dyspnea for more than half a year. Chest CT examination in the local hospital showed that there were multiple cavitary shadows in bilateral lungs. However, there was no significant remission after antibiotic administration. For further diagnosis and treatment, he came to our hospital. This patient had a 30-year personal history of smoking and a 38-year history of heavy drinking. Physical examination: temperature 36 °C, heart rate 70 beats per minute, blood pressure 103/62 mmHg, oxygen saturation 92% (without oxygen inhalation), body mass index (BMI) was 19.43 kg/m2. Symmetric swellings were observed on neck, back and upper chest, which were painless, soft and had clear boundary . Breath sound of both lower lung fields was weakened slightly and there was a little wet rale. Chest enhanced CT scan showed there were multiple nodules in both lungs, some of which had cavities and the mediastinal lymph nodes were swollen . Ultrasound scan of the neck showed diffuse hyperplasia of subcutaneous fat in neck and bilateral supraclavicular fossa . Ultrasound scan of the thyroid was normal. Laboratory testing showed as follows: ALT 63 U/L (normal range: 5–40), AST 48 U/L (normal range: 8–40), total cholesterol 4.01 mmol/L (normal range:3.49–5.18), triglyceride 1.03 mmol/L (normal range:0.25–1.71), hypersensitive C-reactive protein 65.3 mg/L (normal range:< 10),antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive, serum IgG 16.2 g/L (normal range:7–16), galactomannan was normal, however the fungal 1,3-β-D-glucan was 357.6 pg/ml (normal range:< 100). Lung biopsy was performed under CT guidance, however, pathological examination showed chronic inflammation only. To clarify the pulmonary niduses, we decided to operate pulmonary wedge resection aimed at that two typical niduses . After resecting lung tissues containing the niduses, the lung tissues were immediately dissected and observed, we found the nodules were offwhite and necrotic by naked eyes . The pathological examination after operation showed pulmonary aspergillosis . The patient recovered and left the hospital after antifungal therapy (Voriconazole, on the first day of treatment, 300 mg each time, twice a day, and then 200 mg each time, twice a day, intravenous drip, lasting for 6 weeks). The patient was diagnosed as pulmonary aspergillosis with Madelung’s disease finally.