A 51-year-old man presented with a history of a progressive loss of his peripheral visual field in the right eye and photophobia in both eyes that was first noted in February 2003. He had been treated with two courses of 1000 mg intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days by his previous physician. After those treatments, he was referred to our hospital in April 2005.
Our initial examination in 2005 showed that he had no personal or family history of ocular or autoimmune diseases. His best-correlated visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/25 in the right eye and 20/16 in the left eye. A swelling of the optic disc was detected but only in the right eye. The diameter of the retinal vessels in the fundus photographs was narrower in the right eye than that of the fellow eye , and the optical coherence tomographic (OCT; Fig. c) images showed that the outer retinal bands in the right eye were not clear and edema was present in the macula. Fluorescein angiography (FA) demonstrated window defects corresponding to the site of the retinal pigment epithelial atrophy. FA also showed staining of the parafoveal tissue and leakage from the right optic disc . Electroretinograms (ERGs) were non-recordable from the right eye and normal in the left eye . Goldmann perimetry detected a peripheral visual field loss in the right eye . Immunoblot analyses detected no anti-retinal antibodies. During the entire course, no tumor lesions were found by systemic examinations including gastrointestinal endoscopy, computed tomography (CT), and positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT). Because the search for anti-retinal antibodies was negative, npAIR was suspected based on the clinical findings . The response to steroid treatment was poor, and the vision in his right eye decreased to no light perception.
Although the left eye had photophobia since the initial visit in 2005, no abnormal subjective or objective findings were observed until 2014. He noticed an upper visual field defect in the left eye in January 2014, ten years after the first onset in the right eye. The BCVA was 20/16 in the left eye at this time. Fundus photographs showed no obvious abnormal findings in the left eye . However, a reduction in the length of the ellipsoid zone (EZ) and a partial discontinuity of the interdigitation zone (IZ) were seen in the OCT images . In addition, OCT showed macular edema in the left eye in October 2014 . FA detected peripheral window defects in the left eye . No visual field abnormality was observed until 2013, however Humphrey field analyzer (HFA) 30–2 examination in January 2014 showed an upper visual field defect. The visual field defect progressed rapidly to a ring scotoma . Dark-adapted ERGs of the left eye were non-recordable. The amplitude of the light-adapted and flicker ERGs of the left eye were reduced with prolonged implicit times . Immunoblot analyses were positive for anti-α-enolase antibodies. A complete examination including gastrointestinal endoscopy, CT, and PET-CT was performed again, and no tumor lesions were detected. No inflammation was observed in the anterior segment or the vitreous at any time.
Two courses of 1000 mg intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days was given based on a diagnosis of npAIR. After the steroid pulse therapy, oral administration of prednisolone of 30 mg/day and oral immunosuppressant were initiated and were continued. The symptoms gradually worsened in spite of these treatments. Therefore, six plasmapheresis treatments were administered from June 2016. However, the response to these treatments was poor, and the vision in his left eye eventually became no light perception. At that time, funduscopic examination of the fellow eye demonstrated attenuation of the retinal vessels, and fundus autofluorescence of the fellow eye demonstrated retinal pigment epithelial atrophy in the midperipheral area.