An 82-year-old Japanese man with a history of liver cirrhosis developed a solitary hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in segment VIII of his liver. He was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment although he had no symptoms. He had no medical, family, or psychosocial history related to the disease, nor did he have a history or findings of congenital disorders. A physical examination revealed no significant findings. Laboratory tests showed elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase (0.83 μkat/L), alanine aminotransferase (0.99 μkat/L), and total bilirubin (20.35 μmol/L). Testing for the hepatitis C virus antibody was positive, and serum tumor markers for HCC were elevated: alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 13.5 ng/mL, protein induced by vitamin K absence/antagonist-II (PIVKA-II) 68 mAU/mL. Other laboratory test results were within normal limits.
Three days after admission, he underwent unenhanced multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) and 3P-CE-MDCT examinations. The former revealed a solitary hypodense mass in segment VIII of his liver and continuity of the pancreatic tail with the spleen, which was also noted on 3P-CE-MDCT images . Curved multiplanar reconstructed images showed that the pancreatic tail was fused to the lower pole of his spleen . The pancreatic tissue showed homogenous contrast enhancement during the arterial phase, and the splenic tissue the expected heterogeneous pattern. On the portal venous phase, the spleen became homogenous and intensely enhanced compared to the pancreatic tissue, with a distinct line of demarcation between the two organs. Both showed nearly similar contrast enhancement during the delayed phase. Colored maps of the axial and coronal images reformatted from the portal venous phase clearly depicted the fusion border and distinguished between splenic and pancreatic tissues .
One week after the MDCT examination, he underwent MRI; in-phase and out-of-phase T1-weighted images (T1WI), T2-weighted images (T2WI), and dynamic contrast-enhanced fat suppressed T1WI were obtained. A fat plane between the pancreatic tail and splenic tissue could not be identified on out-of-phase T1WI, again suggestive of fusion. In-phase T1WI clearly distinguished the border between the two tissues based on the differences in signal intensity. However, on T2WI, the fusion border could not be easily identified. Fat-suppressed T1WI after gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA) administration showed a pattern of contrast enhancement similar to that seen on 3P-CE-MDCT .
Our patient underwent laparoscopic liver resection for HCC in segment VIII. His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged 2 weeks after surgery. However, HCC recurrence was detected on follow-up CT performed 6 months after his discharge from our hospital. He was treated several times with transarterial chemo-embolization for recurrent HCC, but he died 2 years after the initial admission to our hospital, due to the progression of the tumor.