A 24-year-old female was reported as having "gallbladder stones and acute cholecystitis" by the local hospital, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed. During the operation, the dark brown liver surface, slightly shorter edges, and a stone-filled gallbladder led to the termination of cholecystectomy . She was then transferred to our department for further diagnosis.
She is currently not ill.
She had not consumed alcohol or drugs hazardous to the liver, and reported no family history of liver disease. She had given birth three times and had episodes of jaundice during each pregnancy.
She has no family history of liver disease.
The patient was conscious and stable when she arrived at our department. She presented with visible yellow stains on her skin, mucous membranes, and sclera. Her superficial features were undiluted capillaries on the face, no spider nevus in the anterior of the chest wall and neck region, and negative liver palmar. The abdomen was soft without varicose veins or exposure. The liver and spleen were non-palpable under the ribs and percussion of the hepatic region was barely painful.
The relevant auxiliary examination involved liver function tests, routine urinalysis, immunohistochemistry tests of the blood, and a single computed tomography (CT) scan. The results of these examinations which are summarized in Table .
Pathological examination of the liver showed a massive deposition of pigment particles in hepatocytes, especially in the centrilobular region. These particles showed no refractive properties; therefore, they were assumed to be a biliary pigment . Under the microscope, brownish-yellow pigmental granules were observed in the hepatocytes, especially in those surrounding the central vein. Furthermore, some hepatocytes showed watery and balloon-like degeneration, and nucleated inflammatory cells were present in the hepatic sinus. No obvious abnormalities were found in the portal area, fibrous tissue, bile ducts, or blood vessels between the lobules .
A The whole-abdomen CT scan found multiple gallbladder stones, increased liver parenchymal density, and an enlarged spleen. After excluding liver contraindications, an ultrasound-guided liver biopsy was performed for jaundice. A melanin-like pigment deposition was observed in hepatocyte lysosomes sing laparoscopy. Additionally, periodic acid-Schiff staining was negative, and reticular fiber and collagen fiber staining (Masson) showed no obvious abnormalities. We performed NGS to identify mutations in the ABCC2 gene.
We confirmed the presence of a homozygous mutation, c.2443C>T (p.Arg815*), in ABCC2 in this patient . The mutation was located in exon 19 of ABCC2 and resulted in a change from cytosine to thymine. The amino acid at position 815 of the encoded protein changed from arginine to a stop codon, leading to the premature termination of the peptide chain synthesis. This mutation is novel, and does not appear in HGMD, Esp6500siv2_ALL, or 1000g2015aug_ALL databases. In the dbSNP147 database, it is recorded as rs773850184. According to a comprehensive assessment of the clinical situation, this patient carried a pathogenic mutation in ABCC2, which was the main cause of DJS.