A 70-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of an abnormal chest shadow around the left lung apex on a chest radiography (Additional file ). Paralysis, paraesthesia and amyotrophy on the left arm were not recognized on the physical examination. Sputum cytology suggested squamous cell carcinoma. Enhanced CT (Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation, Aquilion ™ 64-row CT scanner) with iohexol (300 mg/mL, 100 mL, 5 mL/second) injected from the left medial cubital vein, demonstrated a 3D angiography of the PA and subclavian vein by bolus tracking method. It also showed an 8.5 cm tumor infiltrating the chest wall mainly surrounding the second rib, but did not invade the subclavian vein or brachial plexus . 3D-CT revealed that the subclavian vein and artery ran between the clavicle and the second rib because of the first rib hypoplasia . The lingular artery (A4 + 5) and the ventrobasal artery (A8) diverged from the left main PA as a first branch . Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography did not show abnormal accumulation except for the tumor at the left lung apex. We diagnosed the tumor as a primary lung squamous cell carcinoma that infiltrated the second rib. The clinical stage was IIB (T3N0M0) according to the seventh edition of the TNM classification from the Union for International Cancer Control.
Past history of the patient included a laparoscopic low anterior resection for colon cancer one month before entering our hospital, hypertension and Hashimoto disease. He had been a one-pack-a-day smoker for 40 years and had stopped smoking for 10 years.
Left lung upper lobectomy with lymph node dissection and chest wall resection were performed. The patient was placed in a lateral position for posterolateral thoracotomy. The incision at the fourth intracostal space extended toward the anterior, and the scapula was retracted cephalad with Kent retractorⓇ (Takasago Medical Industry CO., Ltd.) to improve exposure of the apical lung cancer. The anterior and middle scalene muscles, which are usually attached to the first rib, were attached to the second rib, and the left subclavian vein was behind the anterior scalene muscle and just above the second rib. The anterior scalene muscle was divided carefully for fear of the left subclavian vein. The anterior parts of second and third ribs were divided at the costosternal junction with a wire saw. The medial parts of the second and third ribs were divided at 4 cm lateral to the extent of tumor involvement. The first rib did not reach the manubrium, and was obviously thinner. After the superior pulmonary vein was divided, A4 + 5 + 8 appeared between the superior bronchus and pulmonary vein. Subsequently, the lung resection was performed with attention to A4 + 5 + 8 diverging as the first branch from the left main PA.
The pathological diagnosis was pleomorphic carcinoma (5.0 × 3.0 × 1.9 cm) that invaded the second costal bone, and the pathological stage was confirmed to be pT3N0M0. Pathologically curative resection was accomplished. The patient was discharged from the hospital on 10 days after surgery.