A 67-year-old male boiler worker (height, 170 cm; weight, 60 kg) was hospitalized on 31st January 2021, with full-body swelling and pain after thermal boiler ash burns with dyspnea for 4 h. A physical examination on admission revealed a clear mind, irritability, a regular heart rhythm, thick lung sounds, moist rales, and a soft abdomen. The patient had a 40-year smoking history and smoked 20 cigarettes per day. He frequently experienced cough and sputum. The patient had no history of other diseases. A burns specialist identified burns of the head and facial hair, burns of the nostril hair, throat swelling, III° area of approximately 70%, and a deep II° area of 18%. The patient had a long-term drinking habit and consumed 50 ml of alcohol per day. Emergency chest computed tomography (CT) findings were consistent with imaging findings of severe inhalation injury . According to the history of burns obtained from hot furnace ash, skin burn manifestations, symptoms of dyspnea, and chest CT, a diagnosis of extremely severe burns of 88% of total body surface area (TBSA), severe inhalation injury, and burn shock was concluded, but the previous existence of pulmonary inflammation was still not clear.
Tracheotomy was performed immediately after admission. Continuous high-flow oxygen was administered to ensure an adequate oxygen supply. Moreover, a sufficient amount of lactate Ringer’s solution, 5% glucose, frozen plasma, and human blood albumin was combined with anti-shock treatment. During the first 2 days, the patient was administered piperacillin and tazobactam (4.5 g three times per day). On the third day, this regimen was adjusted to linezolid (0.6 g twice/day), meropenem (1 g thrice/day), and itraconazole (200 mg once/day). The gastric mucosa was protected by omeprazole (40 mg/day). Sulfadiazine silver powder was coated on the wound surface of the whole body, treated by exposure to red light, and placed on a suspension bed. Urine volume and arterial pressure were monitored during treatment to maintain hemodynamic stability. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed daily, and the airway was lavaged. Lavage fluid was retained for bacterial culture.
On 1st February 2021, blood gas analysis showed that the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) was 66 mmHg. Ventilator-assisted breathing was performed for respiratory distress syndrome. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed yellow scab-like changes in the airway mucosa, local ulceration, no tracheal cartilage exposure, obvious congestion, and edema of the airway wall. No bacterial growth was observed in the alveolar lavage fluid at this point. On 3rd February 2021, the PaO2 returned to 101 mmHg. During ventilator-assisted breathing, occasional ventilator resistance was noted, and spontaneous breathing became faster. After achieving deep sedation and treating pain, the patient demonstrated good adaptability to ventilatory support. We were able to communicate with the patient to assess his condition, and we determined that he required surgical treatment for his burn wounds. Subsequently, his examination results improved, and blood transfusion and enteral and parenteral nutrition were administered.
On 4th February 2021, the 1,3-β-d-glucan/galactomannan (G/GM) test was performed using venous blood samples. The G test was positive (207.1), while the GM test was negative, and no bacteria or fungi were found in sputum culture. Bacteria were cultured using Columbia blood agar medium, chocolate medium, and McConkey agar medium at 37 °C in a carbon dioxide incubator (5–10%) in a dark environment for 3 days. Fungi were cultured using blood agar medium and Candida chromogenic medium at 37 °C for 3 days,and Sapaul medium at 25 °C for 7 days. According to the results of the G test, anti-infection drugs were adjusted to intravenous infusion of linezolid (0.6 g twice daily) + meropenem (1 g three times daily) + voriconazole (200 mg twice daily). On 7th February 2021, escharectomy, skin grafting, and Meek micrografting were performed, and the area of escharectomy and skin grafting was approximately 36% of total body surface area. After blood transfusion, anti-shock treatment, anti-sense treatment, and vasoactive drug treatment, the patient breathed quickly and produced more sputum.
On 8th February 2021, chest X-ray showed a whole-lung white ground glass shadow, with large white lung imaging features . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed severe airway mucosal damage, local tracheal cartilage exposure, no inspiratory obstruction, and expiratory blockage. Moreover, part of the necrotic airway mucosa fell off into a valve. The necrotic mucosa was stripped under fiberoptic bronchoscopy and sent for pathological examination. Alveolar lavage fluid was sent for bacterial and fungi culture.
The culture results of bacteria and fungi in sputum were negative from 4th February 2021 to 9th February 2021. On 9th February 2021, despite ventilator-assisted breathing, blood oxygen decreased. On the morning of 10th February 2021, the patient refused further treatment, requested discharge, and died on the way home.
On 10th February 2021, culture showed Aspergillus growth (determined from alveolar lavage fluid collected for inspection on 8th February 2021, Fig. ). On 12th February 2021, a pathological examination showed Aspergillus . During treatment, the patient’s temperature fluctuated around 36.5 ℃, and no high fever occurred. White blood cell count, procalcitonin, C-reactive protein, PaO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide, and other data are shown in Table .
When the patient was discharged from hospital, his family members said that the patient’s condition was serious, especially his lung disease. They understood that his condition progressed rapidly and that it could not be reversed. The patient’s dyspnea became progressively worse, and they felt that he may have experienced substantial pain.