A healthy 18-year-old male presented to outpatient clinic with chief complaints of painless protrusion on the left side of his upper back for the past 4 years. Protrubence was first noted by his mother at the age of 13 years which had slowly grown in size till the age of 17 years after which it arrested. No history of trauma was reported. There were no constitutional symptoms of fever or any other illness. He reported that his main reason for visiting was cosmesis.
On examination, there was no visible wound, hematoma, scars, or sinuses over the back. The swelling was uniform, rounded, and protrubent, seen, and palpated in the posteromedial region of the left scapula just caudal to medial end of spine .
There was no tenderness and local rise of temperature on palpation. There was no restriction in range of movements. There was no evidence of winging of scapula. Neurovascular structures were intact on examining both the upper limbs. Radiograph of the left scap ula was taken in both anterior-posterior view and lateral view was suggestive of bony outgrowth in the posteromedial border of scapula .
Computed tomography (CT) was done to know the extent of the growth . MRI revealed hyper-intense pedunculated osseous lesion on T2-weighted images measuring 45 × 40 × 40 mm (craniocadual × anteroposterior x transverse) over posteromedial aspect of the left scapula .
Imaging showed solitary protuberance of cortical and medullary bone from the underlying bone which was pathognomonic but histopathology was done to confirm the diagnosis. Histology findings were consistent of osteochondroma. Surgical excision of the swelling was planned for cosmetic reasons and future mechanical complaints. Patient was operated under general anesthesia in prone position. A longitudinal incision parallel to medial scapular border was taken where the protrusion was most prominent. Sharp dissection was carried out to the level of fascia of trapezius muscle and fivers of rhomboid muscles were splitter bluntly for full exposure of the protuberance .
The stalk was excised at the base with osteotome. There was no free body in the space or palpable indurations over the wall .
Wound wash was given, fascia of divided muscle was sutured, skin was subsequently closed, and sterile dressing was done. Post-operative course was uneventful and sutures were removed on post-operative day 14. Patient returned to pre-operative normal life 2 weeks after the procedure. On examination, scapulothorasic rythm was symmetrical, no limitations of active range of movements , or any associated crepitus. Six-month follow-up showed no signs of tumor recurrence both clinically and radiologically.
CT showed no residual mass .