A 29-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0, conceived dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy by in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. At 12 weeks of gestation, ultrasound examination showed one twin with cystic neck mass (twin A), which was considered as lymphocystic tumor . Given this condition, the patient was transferred to our department. Fetal ultrasonography confirmed that one twin with lymphocystic tumor and generalized edema (twin A) and indicated one umbilical vein and two umbilical arteries in another twins’ umbilical cord (twin B) . After extensively counseled by the multidisciplinary team, the couple opted for selective termination of the lymphocystic tumor fetus (twin A). Selective fetal reduction by ultrasound-guided intracardiac injection of potassium chloride was performed on twin A at 14 weeks and 2 days of gestation. The couple refused chromosome examination in twin A, and amniocentesis was performed on twin B. The result of chromosome microarray analysis of twin B was normal. The patient had no history of thrombotic disease or related family history. The couple had no reported history of medication, hereditary disease, substance abuse or family history of congenital anomalies.
After selective termination, the woman was followed up closely. Prenatal examination was performed regularly in our department. Ultrasound examination during following pregnancy remained one umbilical vein and two umbilical arteries in alive twin (twin B). The maternal prothrombin time, partially activated thrombin time and fibrinogen were all normal.
Ultrasound imaging of the umbilical cord in twin B revealed single umbilical artery at 35 weeks and 6 days of gestation . After emergency admission to hospital, an emergent cesarean section was performed. A healthy male baby was delivered weighing 2690 g with Apgar scores of 10 and 10 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively, whereas the dead fetus weighed 10 g. The umbilical cord was about 70cm long and was extremely torsional in 30 laps. Thrombosis was observed throughout one of the umbilical artery . Placental pathological examination revealed mild chorioamnionitis, placental villous parenchyma with punctate calcification and small infarcts, excessive helices in the umbilical cord and umbilical artery thrombosis.
The patient was discharged three days later. The baby is now 2 years five months old and is in good health.