A 36-year-old Greek male, HIV-positive patient was admitted to the Neurology Department due to perineal and left hemiscrotal numbness, lumbar pain, left-sided sciatica, and urinary incontinence; his symptoms began 5 days prior to admission, and were not accompanied by fever. The patient’s occupational history was significant for frequent weight-lifting during his daily duties as an orderly. He had been on a triple antiretroviral regimen with didanosine (ddI), d4T (stavudine), and efavirenz for the past 6 years, while diagnosis of HIV was made 12 years earlier. Recent testing reported a CD4+ cell count of 1036 cells/mL and an undetectable HIV viral load (<50 copies/mL); the Center for Diseases Control (CDC) stage of his disease was C3.
The neurological examination revealed decreased strength of the left gastrocnemius and absence of the left ankle jerk reflex, while his plantar reflexes were indifferent bilaterally. The remaining physical examination was noncontributory.
Given that the patient’s neurological signs and symptoms were indicative of CES, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of his lumbar spine was initially performed. Imaging revealed left dorsolateral intervertebral disc herniation of L3-L4, prominent dorsomedian intervertebral disc herniation of L5-S1, and a small fragment within the vertebral canal (at S1) that was exerting pressure on cauda equina fibers. The latter finding was compatible with a fragment originating from the L5-S1 intervertebral disk. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination, and serological test results for CNS infections, including CMV and herpes simplex virus 1/2 (HSV-1/2) were negative. Further testing for infectious causes would have been pursued in the absence of an obvious anatomical cause of the observed syndrome.
Because of the acute onset of CES in our patient, emergency neurosurgical spinal decompression was deemed necessary. The procedure was successful overall, leading to resolution of most neurological symptoms, with the exception of a persistent, mild urinary incontinence. Specifically, early postoperative neurological findings were largely limited to the left lower limb and perineum, and included: slightly decreased lower limb muscle strength (L5-S1 myotomes), mild sensory impairment on the lateral surface of his foot (L5 dermatome), and mild paresthesia of his buttocks, left hemiscrotum, and dorsolateral thigh. Two-point discrimination was 1.5–2 cm, with a mild decrease on his left side. Vibration sensation in the affected regions was normal, and his plantar reflexes were flexor bilaterally.
Neurological follow-up performed 1 week later revealed physiological muscle strength, no sensory deficits, and partial recovery of his bladder dysfunction. Urological symptoms have been previously described in the literature as presenting a delayed recovery following decompression surgery . Although intervertebral lumbar disc herniation with posterior migration of a sequestered disk fragment has been previously reported as a rare cause of CES in immunocompetent patients , this is the first case report in an HIV-positive patient.