We report the case of a 12-month-old boy who suffered from perinatal asphyxia during delivery, resulting in severe hypoxic encephalopathy with tetraparesis and epilepsy. In addition he suffered from considerable dysphagia from birth. For this reason his parents provided artificial nutrition by a stomach tube at home. The supplied food consisted of hydrolysed milk formula based on amino acids and a natural thickening agent composed of carob seed flour. The patient had a history of abdominal pain, fever and nausea one week prior to being referred to our paediatric clinic with symptoms of acute abdomen, increasing fever (up to 42°C), cyanosis and epileptic seizures.
The clinical diagnostic procedures demonstrated respiratory insufficiency with decreased arterial oxygen saturation (pO2 < 80%). The peripheral blood showed the following values: pH 7.23; leukocytes 28,200/μl; thrombocytes 84,000/μl; haemoglobin 14.9 g/dl; lactate 6.6 mmol/l; and increasing transaminases.
In the abdominal X-ray bloated bowel and pneumatosis coli were detected; ultrasonography showed free air bubbles in the hepatic blood vessels and the portal vein . Blood culture and cerebrospinal fluid were abacterial. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was found in the pharynx.
Due to clinical presentation of sepsis, the patient was intubated and transfused with NaCl, fresh frozen plasma and thrombocyte concentrate. Furthermore, antibiotic therapy was administered with cefotaxime, gentamicin, metronidazole and mezlocillin and catecholamines were prescribed due to insufficiency of the cardiovascular system. However, the patient showed a rapid deterioration and died after two attempts of resuscitation on the day of admission.
An autopsy was performed with permission from the parents. The examination revealed considerable obesity, with a size of 74 cm (25th percentile) and weight of 10.3 kg (65th percentile). After the abdomen was opened extensive subcutaneous and muscular oedema was found, but no ascites and no blood. The bowel was bloated and the small intestine in particular revealed an oedematous intestinal wall with multiple submucosal and subserosal cysts, corresponding to the typical macroscopic picture of a PC . The gastric wall showed no pathological findings.
Histologically, the intestinal mucosa and submucosa showed marked areactive necrosis with no evidence of inflammatory infiltration, especially neutrophils . Within and beneath the cysts, large rod-shaped bacteria were found. These were strongly positive in a subsequent Gram stain . Scanning electron microscopy indicated that the bacteria were about 0.3 to 0.9 μm wide with blunt ends and without flagella , consistent with Clostridium spp. There was no evidence of typical pseudomembranous colitis and no inflammatory infiltration in the necrotic mucosa consistent with the existence of C. perfringens. Molecular subtyping was not possible with the available material. These findings led to a conclusive diagnosis of intestinal gas gangrene.
Furthermore, acute haemorrhages were detected in the liver, kidneys and spleen, corresponding to a disseminated intravascular coagulation. The lungs showed slight focal signs of previous aspirations. Hepatic steatosis with hepatocellular fatty changes in 80% of hepatic tissue was detected. The other organs showed no pathologic changes. Consent was not given for a brain autopsy.
The cause of death was recorded as protracted haemodynamic shock following intestinal gas gangrene.