A 35-year-old male presented at our outpatient department with the right buttock pain. He had a dull aching pain in the right buttock for the past 6 months which had increased in intensity over the previous 2 months. The pain had worsened while sitting, especially on a hard surface and was not associated with swelling. Since 6 months, he had been taking oral analgesics to control the pain and was partially relieved. He complained of low-grade fever on and off with insignificant loss of weight and normal appetite but had disturbed sleep. He had no previous history of contact with tuberculosis in or outside the family.
A physical examination conducted at presentation revealed skin over the right buttock was non-inflamed and tender on deep palpation, but there was no sinus. Range of motion of the right hip was painful in flexion beyond 70° and terminal internal rotation. No inguinal lymphadenopathy was detected. Sacroiliac joints, lumbosacral spine, and knees were within normal limits.
Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin of 9.2 g/dl, total leucocyte count of 10,800/mm3 with lymphocytes predominance, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were 62 mm/hour Westergren, and C-reactive proteins (CRP) levels were 2.6 mg/dl (both elevated). Mantoux test had an induration of 24 mm, and the chest radiograph was clear. A plain radiograph of the pelvis revealed an osteolytic lesion over the right ischial tuberosity clearly distinguishable from the opposite side . However, computed tomography (CT) (, , ) imaging showed irregularity and destruction of the right ischial tuberosity with associated soft-tissue thickening and fat stranding. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed involvement of the right ischial tuberosity with changes in signal intensity without any collection.
Diagnostic confirmation was done by histopathological examination of the tissue obtained by CT-guided fine-needle aspiration cytology from the lesion which showed epithelioid granuloma. However, mycobacteria could not be cultured.
The patient was started on a 12-months course of a four-drug antitubercular chemotherapy regimen which included 2 months of intensive phase and 10 months of continuation phase, comprising Isoniazid (5 mg/kg), Rifampicin(10 mg/kg), Pyrazinamide (25 mg/kg), and Ethambutol (15 mg/kg), along with rest and lifestyle modifications. During the course of treatment, range of motion of the right hip became pain free in both full flexion and terminal internal rotation. At the time of last follow-up, the patient had no pain on sitting and had returned to his normal activities. Plain radiograph revealed consolidation of the osteolytic lesion of the right ischial tuberosity , and laboratory parameters (ESR and CRP) were also normalized.