A 45-year-old man first noticed decreased central vision, blurred vision and metamorphopsia in both eyes in March 2021, which deteriorated within 1 month.
He had a history of PAH, diagnosed in June 2015, with long-term use of low-dose sildenafil. He was alone without brothers or sisters, and his parents passed away about 10 years ago with no family history of PAH documented.
His medical therapy for PAH included sildenafil (2.5 mg, bid) and ambrisentan (5 mg, qd). He was not previously treated with steroids.
The BCVA was finger count (FC)/10 cm in right eye and 0.82 (logMAR) in left eye. The mean refractive error was –3.25 diopter (right eye) and –1.00 diopter (left eye). His axial length was 23.49 mm (right eye) and 22.46 mm (left eye) detected by LENSTAR LS 900 (HAAG-STREIT, United States). The intraocular pressure was 19.9 mmHg (right eye) and 17.4 mmHg (left eye). Slit-lamp biomicroscope examination revealed prominent dilated and tortuous episcleral and conjunctival vessels in both eyes . Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the anterior segment was normal without signs of rubeosis iridis, except for mild opacity of lens in both eyes. Ultrasonic biomicroscopy demonstrated normal anterior chamber depth, i.e., 2.39 mm (right eye) and 2.21 mm (left eye), and open anterior chamber angels (data not shown).
In both eyes, flecked retinas were observed, and mild retinal venous dilation was noticed without hemorrhages. Ultrawide-field color picture (Optos 200Tx, United Kingdom) showed numerous flecks on retina in both eyes, especially in right eye, with subtle yellow subretinal flecks surrounding the macula and optic disc, as well as in the papillomacular region . Retinal pigment epithelial mottling and atrophy in ring-like configurations in both eyes and optic nerve atrophy of right eye were also noticed . Fundus autofluorescence using ultrawide-field imaging (Optos 200Tx, United Kingdom) showed mild hypo-autofluorescence in the foveal center and multiple irregular hyper-autofluorescent flecks with a constellation-like pattern surrounding the optic nerve head and macular region in both eyes . In left eye, gravitational track was observed on fundus autofluorescence .
Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) (RTVue XR, Optovue Inc., Fremont, CA, United States) b-scan demonstrated chronic CSCR-like abnormalities in both eyes with both intraretinal and subretinal fluid accumulation, and choroidal thickening . The enface images (6 mm × 6 mm) of OCTA showed significant corrugation of the retina when segmented in superficial capillary plexus (SCP) and numerous cysts when segmented in deep capillary plexus (DCP) in both eyes. The thickness of central retina was higher in left eye than that in right eye, i.e., 595 μm vs. 414 μm , both demonstrating intraretinal cystoid edema and subretinal fluid, without obvious pigment epithelial detachment. The external limiting membrane was relative intact in right eye. There was shaggy photoreceptors and discontinuous ellipsoid zone in right eye. The vessel densities were also compared between both eyes, demonstrating less vessel densities in right eye than that in left eye in both SCP and DCP .
Since optic nerve atrophy of right eye was observed , swept-source optical coherence tomography (SS-OCT) (DRI OCT Triton, TOPCON, Japan) analysis was performed on both optic discs and macula. The results showed obvious optic nerve atrophy with decreased thickness of the peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer and enlarged cup/disc ratio in right eye, and mild inferior atrophy of the optic nerve in left eye . There was 32% symmetry for retinal nerve fiber layer thickness between right eye and left eye; and as for the thickness of retinal nerve fiber layer, SS-OCT analysis showed that significant decrease in the thickness of retinal nerve fiber layer in right eye than that in left eye, i.e., 74 μm vs. 166 μm (total), 73 μm vs. 159 μm (superior), and 76 μm vs. 142 μm (inferior) . Disc topography of SS-OCT showed the decreased rim area and disc area, while increased cup/disc ratio and cup volume in right eye compared with that in left eye . When comparison, the rim area was 0.12 mm2 (right eye) vs. 6.65 mm2 (left eye), and disc area was 1.59 mm2 (right eye) vs. 7.31 mm2 (left eye). The cup volume was also significantly increased in right eye, i.e., 0.44 mm3 (right eye) vs. 0.07 mm3 (left eye). Thus both retinal nerve fiber layer and disc topography analysis showed severe damage of the optic nerve in right eye than left eye . Consistent with the analysis on the optic disc with SS-OCT, the macular thickness analysis of inner retina was also demonstrated significantly thinner in right eye than that in left eye . SS-OCT analysis showed that the thicknesses were 61 μm (right eye) vs. 142 μm (left eye), 80 μm (right eye) vs. 115 μm (left eye), 142 μm (right eye) vs. 256 μm (left eye), respectively, for the total thickness of retinal nerve fiber layer, the total thickness of retinal nerve fiber layer and ganglion cell layer (+), and the total thickness of retinal nerve fiber layer, ganglion cell layer and inner plexiform layer (ganglion cell layer++) . To further confirm the above changes, the visual field was evaluated with a Humphrey Field Analyzer, model 750i (Zeiss Humphrey Systems, Dublin, CA, United States) by using the 24-2 SITA standard strategy. The deterioration of visual fields in both eyes showed marked central scotoma in right eye than left eye .
When performing fluorescein angiography (FA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) with SPECTRALIS Heidelberg Retina Angiography, the results of both FA and ICGA showed delayed perfusion and slow flow in both retinal and choroidal vessels . FA shows marked leakage of macula and optic nerve head with time, cystoid macular edema, early blocking with late staining of above flecks shown in the backgrounds of infrared (IR) and autofluorescence (BAF) in both eyes; as well as mild leakage in peripheral retina; while ICGA showed dilated and tortuous vortex veins without obvious leakage in early phase and mid-phase . Both FA and ICGA showed the mask of the choroidal detachment (hypo-fluorescence) in both macula. SD-OCT with the SPECTRALIS Heidelberg showed cystoid macular edema with intraretinal fluid and subretinal fluid accumulation in both eyes . In the mid-phase of FA and ICGA, the images of four quadrants including superior, nasal, inferior, and temporal were taken . FA results showed that the peripheral retina vessels, especially the temporal to the fovea, were dilated with leakage over time; and ICGA demonstrated the dilation, tortuosity and congestion of choroidal vessels, which was more obvious for the vortex veins .
Based on the patient history and these findings, we made the tentative diagnosis of venous stasis retinopathy and choroidopathy with CSCR-like abnormalities as a result of PAH undertreated with long-term of sildenafil.