A 23-year-old non-smoker female known case of bronchiectasis, asthma and situs inversus presented to the outpatient department with complain of SOB, dyspnea and cough for 1 day. The patient experienced SOB on lying down with productive cough containing sputum. The sputum was green in color, copious in amount, progressive in nature and sticky in consistency associated with chest pain and difficulty in breathing. There were no associated symptoms of fever and hemoptysis. No history of nausea vomiting and diarrhea. O2 therapy was also given at home via nasal cannula (2 L per minute) but she became so exhausted that she lost consciousness due to excessive respiratory effort.
On arriving hospital, her vital signs were: RR 45 per min, Blood pressure 100/60, Oxygen saturation 68% on 5 L of oxygen, Temperature was 98 F. These findings underscore the severity of her respiratory compromise. General examination revealed no remarkable findings. Cardiovascular examination showed that the apex beat was prominent in the left fifth intercostal space 1 cm lateral to the midclavicular line. On auscultation, bilateral coarse crackles with rhonchi were heard upon inspiration. Heart sounds were more pronounced at the right sternal border.
Complete blood workup was performed. Her laboratory work-up was unremarkable except for mild leukocytosis. The details are provided in . PT, INR and electrolytes were normal. An ECG was also performed demonstrated in , which showed dextrocardia, dilation of right ventricle while other chambers were normal in dimension. Depressed LV systolic function was interpreted while the size of LV was normal. No significant segmental wall motion abnormality was noted. There was no left ventricle hypertrophy seen. Normal RV function. No clot and no vegetation seen. No pericardial effusion seen. No intra cardiac shunt seen. Doppler studies showed mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation with severe Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH). CT findings , computed tomography of the lung demonstrated severe bilateral basilar bronchial wall thickening and bronchiectasis. Bronchiectasis were varicose and cystic with intrinsic air-fluid levels. Situs inversus totalis was confirmed with a tri-lobed left lung, a bi-lobed right lung, dextrocardia, right-sided spleen and left-sided liver. History, clinical signs, and imaging studies proved the diagnosis of Kartagener’s syndrome.
Patient was positive was for coagulase negative staphylococcus species on culture for which antibiotics were advised. She was treated with piperacillin and tazobactam, azithromycin and gentamycin. Further regimen of oxygenation and nebulization with hypertonic solution were planned for her. Patient followed up a week later with improvement in symptoms. The nature of her disease and importance of regular follow-up was explained to patient.