A 29 yrs old male presented to the outpatient department of our hospital with complains of pain in the left ankle and foot for the past 6 months. On local examination, there was tenderness on the dorsal and medial aspect of the left foot. The routine blood investigations were within normal limits. A radiograph of the foot was ordered which revealed irregular, longitudinal extraosseous hyperostosis appearing along the body of the calcaneum and predominantly the 3rd and 4th metatarsals which was consistent with the classical radiological description of melorheostosis- “periosteal hyperostosis along the cortex of long bones, resembling the dripping or flowing of candle wax” (. Classical appearances of melorheostosis affecting the left foot: Anteroposterior and lateral radiograph demonstrates dense cortical and extra-cortical bone formation along the lateral aspect of the calcaneum and the 3rd and 4th metatarsal. “the dripping candle wax appearance”). The patient had been referred to our tertiary care centre from a primary health centre where he was already investigated with bone scan, computed tomography and MRI. Computed tomography revealed cortical hyperostosis of the calcaneum and metatarsals with hyperdense exuberant sclerotic lesions along the medial aspect of the calcaneum (. Computed tomography shows cortical hyperostosis of the calcaneum and metatarsals with hyperdense exuberant sclerotic lesions along the medial aspect of the calcaneum encroaching into the medullary space characteristic of melorheostosis). On magnetic resonance imaging, these lesions appeared hypointense with thickened cortices on all imaging sequences confirming the sclerotic and hyperostotic nature of the tissue (: Axial coronal and sagittal images showing thickened cortices which were hypointense all imaging sequences confirming the sclerotic and hyperostotic nature of the tissue, associated narrowing of the marrow canal was noted. No other marrow or joint abnormality was seen). The patient was treated with a course of analgesics and he responded well with decrease in the intensity of the pain.