A 35-year-old woman was admitted to the Endocrinology Department of Erciyes University Medical School with an adrenal mass and uncontrolled hypertension. The patient's medical history revealed two genital reconstruction surgery in childhood (at the age of 3 and 15) and high blood pressure, which was first detected at the age of 12. In addition, she was given glucocorticoids in childhood. However, she did not use it regularly afterward and did not use it for the last 5 years. She had regular menses and did not describe any severe complaints in terms of hirsutism. There was consanguinity between her parents. At physical examination, there were hypertension, clitoromegaly, deep voice and mild hirsutism (Ferriman-Gallwey score 10). She took no medication except nifedipine, 60 mg/day, for the treatment of hypertension.
On laboratory evaluation, the patient had hypokalemia (2.7 mmol/L), high serum adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) (279 pg/mL), 11-deoxycortisol (140 ng/ml), total testosterone (236 ng/dL), and androstenedione (> 10 ng/dL) levels. Although the clinical picture was not compatible, in order to exclude pheochromocytoma as a differential diagnosis of adrenal mass, 24-hour urinary free metanephrine and normetanephrine levels were measured, and their levels were 44 μg and 141 μg, respectively (normal ranges: 44-261 μg/24h and 111-419 μg /24h). Some other details of biochemical evaluation are given in Table . Classic 11βOHD was diagnosed with her medical history, physical examination and laboratory evaluation.
Adrenal computed tomography showed diffuse-moderate thickening and hypodense nodular appearance in the right adrenal gland, while a hypodense nodular mass, 74x55 mm in size, was detected in the left adrenal gland . Due to the presence of macroscopic fat densities in the mass, myelolipoma was considered as a preliminary diagnosis of the adrenal mass. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed, and the final diagnosis was myelolipoma, as expected. The patient is currently in her postoperative second year and has been receiving glucocorticoid replacement therapy (Hydrocortisone 15 mg/day). The patient does not have any complaints, and her blood pressure is regulated with glucocorticoid replacement and a single anti-hypertensive (Lercanidipine 20 mg/day). In terms of hormonal and biochemical aspects, serum potassium, 11-deoxycortisol, ACTH and androstenedione levels were within the normal range, and total testosterone was unmeasurably low .