A 71-year-old woman was diagnosed with clinical stage T2bN0M0 and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIB cervical squamous cell carcinoma. The primary tumor extended to the right parametrium, and the initial tumor size was 4 × 4 × 6 cm . At the age of 30 years, she was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis and had been on immunosuppressants for a prolonged period. Thus, we planned definitive chemoradiotherapy (CRT) with weekly nedaplatin and external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) followed by BT. The EBRT dose was 50.4 Gy delivered in 28 fractions to the whole pelvis. A midline block (3 cm wide at the isocenter) was inserted into the treatment field after delivering 30.6 Gy/17 fractions to the whole pelvis. After the 30.6-Gy irradiation, weekly definitive BT was introduced. Interim magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) before the first BT session showed no shrinkage of the cervical tumor .
We planned for IC/IS BT with the Venezia applicator. The microSelectron HDR-V3 with Oncentra Brachy (Elekta, Sweden) with Ir-192 was used. The BT dose was 24 Gy in four fractions. In the first and second BT sessions, we used the ProGuide round needle (6Fr × 294 mm). In the first BT session, after placing the tandem and lunar ovoid into the patient’s uterus and vagina, we inserted four round needles (three parallel and one oblique needle) quickly into the right parametrium using an insertion tool. During applicator implantation, anesthesia was induced using an intravenous injection of midazolam, pentazocine, and hydroxyzine hydrochloride. We then performed computed tomography (CT) for treatment planning, and a large space (1.5 cm) was detected between the cervix and ovoid . First, we hypothesized that this phenomenon was caused by the interstitial round needle not being inserted firmly or the lunar ovoid not being placed in the optimal position before needle insertion. The dose distribution during the first BT session was not satisfactory because of the large space between the cervix and the ovoid. In the second BT session, we performed the same procedure; however, an additional CT scan was performed just before needle insertion . Subsequently, we immediately inserted four round needles (three parallel and one oblique needle) into the right parametrium using an insertion tool. Unfortunately, CT after needle insertion again showed a large space (1.5 cm) between the cervix and ovoid . To improve dosimetric coverage for the high-risk clinical target volume (HR-CTV), we attempted to insert an additional 1 cm of the interstitial round needles. However, the gap widened by another 1 cm . Therefore, the dose distribution of the second BT session was worse than that of the first . After the first and second BT sessions, we considered that perhaps the round needles were not being inserted firmly into the cervical tissue during IC/IS BT using the Venezia applicator.
We then used a sharp needle (6Fr × 294 mm) with the Venezia applicator in IC/IS BT during the third and fourth BT sessions; three sharp needles were firmly inserted and the dose distribution was satisfactory . The dosimetric parameters of each BT are described in Table . The total biologically equivalent doses in 2 Gy fractions (EQD2) of EBRT (30.6 Gy/17 fractions) plus BT (24 Gy/4 fractions) based on the linear-quadratic model for HR-CTV D90 were 59.9 Gy assuming an α/β ratio of 10. The EQD2 for D2 cc of the rectum, bladder, and sigmoid were 51.3 Gy, 69.6 Gy, and 51.7 Gy, respectively, assuming an α/β ratio of 3. Unfortunately, 20 months after treatment, local recurrence in the cervix and left pelvic lymph node were detected and chemotherapy was initiated.