A 54-year-old male was admitted to our hospital in October 2019 after a road traffic accident. On admission, he was conscious (Glasgow Coma Scale = 15) and hemodynamically stable. He had severe pain in the right knee and was unable to move his right leg. On examination, his right leg was 2 cm shortened and rotated internally. Skin overlying the right patella had an open wound. Vascular and neurological examinations were normal. Examination of other limbs showed no injury. After primary stabilization of the patient as per advance trauma life support protocol, trauma series radiographs that were obtained showed right posterior hip dislocation and intertrochanteric with acetabulum fractures . There were no further skeletal, spinal, or visceral injuries identified on secondary and tertiary surveys, focused assessment with sonography for trauma and computed tomography scans.
Immediately after resuscitation, the right hip dislocation was reduced in the emergency department with axial traction and gentle manipulation. Reduction was maintained with skin traction. Repeated post-reduction images (-) showed no intra-articular fragments or loose bodies in the hip joint.
He was taken to the OR the next day. On the orthopedic table in lateral position with Kocher-Langenbeck approach, the intertrochanteric fracture was reduced and fixed with dynamic hip screw and derotation anti-rotation screw using C-arm imaging.
The procedure done through one approach. Acetabulum fractures fixation addressed after fractures reduction, then fixed with two reconstruction plates . No drain was used postoperatively. Injuries of the knee were treated by debridement and primary closure.
Postoperatively, the patient started inpatient physiotherapy immediately after surgery, then, he was discharged to complete a planned outpatient physiotherapy. That is, hip joint mobilization exercises were started at 3 weeks after surgery and walking without weight-bearing on the left lower limb was followed at 6 weeks after surgery. Progressive weight-bearing of the injured limb is allowed at 3 months after surgery .
At the end of 1 year, the patient had painless hip with full range of motion. No radiological signs of avascular necrosis have been seen by the end of 1 year.