A 55-year-old man presented to the emergency department at Imam Reza Hospital in Mashhad with abdominal pain, icterus and high serum alkaline phosphatase levels. He had been a raw opium addict for over 20 years. He had undergone cholecystectomy three weeks prior to admission for gallbladder stones, but his pain did not resolve after the surgery. He was admitted on suspicion of remnant common bile duct (CBD) stones after cholecystectomy.
On admission, he complained of abdominal pain of one month’s duration. The pain was constant and severe and usually lasted 1 to 2 hours. The pain was located in the right upper quadrant (RUQ) and periumbelical regions. He also reported postprandial nausea and vomiting. He had no defecation for eight days but did report gas passage. He was also chronically constipated for a period of one year with limited response to common medications. There was no history of pruritus or change in urinary or stool color.
The patient’s physical examination revealed stable hemodynamics, with a bluish discoloration of periodontal tissue and mildly icteric sclera. The chest examination was normal. The abdomen was distended with diminished bowel sounds and mild tenderness to deep palpation of the periumbelical and RUQ regions without rebound or guarding. Fecal material was detected on the digital rectal examination. The neurological examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory findings included a normocytic anemia (hemoglobin: 8.2 g/dL; mean corpuscular volume [MCV]: 82); a normal leukocyte count and differentiation; aspartate transaminase (AST): 100 IU/L; alanine transaminase (ALT): 76 IU/L; serum ALP: 3100 IU/L; gamma glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT): 1057 IU/L (normal range up to 49 IU/L); total bilirubin: 3.5 mg/dL; direct bilirubin: 1.7 mg/dL; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 31 mm/hr; and creatinin (Cr): 0.8 mg/dL. The urine analysis and serum sodium, potassium, magnesium and calcium levels were within the normal range.
The initial differential diagnoses based on the patient’s symptoms and signs and laboratory findings included remnant stones in the CBD, post-surgical complications, a dysfunctional sphincter of Oddi associated with opium addiction, and generalized ileus due to recent surgery.
Plain abdominal x-ray showed generalized ileus with fecal impaction. Ultrasound study of the liver revealed mild fatty liver changes with normal biliary ducts. Therefore, extrahepatic causes of cholestasis were ruled out. There was no history of drug consumption in the recent months to justify related potential intrahepatic cholestasis. Viral serology was negative for hepatitis A, B or C. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ASMA), anti-mitochondrial antibodies (AMA), anti-liver kidney microsome 1 antibodies (LKM 1), perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA) were all within normal limits and the serum protein electrophoresis was unremarkable. Thus, other potential causes of intrahepatic cholestasis including sepsis, viral hepatitis, autoimmune diseases, primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and primary sclerosing cholangitis( PSC) were ruled out with proper laboratory and imaging (i.e. MRCP) modalities. Subsequently, liver biopsy was performed to investigate the remained unestablished cause of the patient’s intrahepatic cholestasis. The pathology report was indicative of a preserved architecture; mild lymphocytic mononuclear infiltration in the portal spaces; foci of canalicular cholestasis, mostly of zone 3; and areas of cells with glycogenated nuclei, hence nonspecific hepatitis (, ).
Four days into admission the patient had severe nausea and vomiting and one episode of generalized tonic colonic seizure. Neurologic investigations including brain computed tomography scan, brain magnetic resonance imaging, and magnetic resonance venography were normal. The patient did not consent to lumbar puncture.
Causes of anemia including iron deficiency and hemolytic anemia were excluded with serum iron and ferritin levels (253 µg/dL and 1139 ng/mL, respectivley), a TIBC of 457 µg/dL, and normal serum lactate dehydrogenase levels (322 IU/L).
Lead poisoning as the culprit for the patient’s anemia was suspected only later, when bluish discolorations of the periodontal tissues and abdominal cramps were considered in association with the patient’s history of opium addiction. The patient’s other clinical findings were consistent with lead toxicity. The diagnosis of lead toxicity was confirmed through serum lead level measurements – whole blood lead levels of 150 µg/dL. Investigation of the patient’s past history failed to reveal any exposure to lead but the use of opium; opioid adulteration with lead in the area has previously been reported (, , -).
According to the toxicology consultation, EDTA and BAL were administered for five days. The use of raw opium was discontinued and methadone was administered for the withdrawal symptoms.
After initial treatment, serum lead levels decreased to 41 µg/dL and by the last day of admission 24-hour urinary lead levels reached 2080 mg/dL, liver function tests had returned to normal values (AST: 46 IU/Dl; ALT: 48 IU/dL; ALP: 269 IU/dL; total bilirubin: 0.5 mg/dL; and direct bilirubin: 0.1mg/dL), and the hemoglobin (Hb) was 10.3 gm/dl. In addition, clinical findings including nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain had subsided without any recurrence of seizures. Ultimately, the patient was discharged from the hospital in good condition and was told to monthly visits for six months. The resulted laboratory findings are summarized in .