A 13-year-old boy presented in the clinic of surgery with chronic and refractory anal fissure. The patients also complained of constipation for a year, intermittent abdominal pain, and bloating. He had no medical or surgical history, and his parents did not mention any remarkable medical issues at birth, hospitalization, or any problems in case of digestion, or defecation before. No history of nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, or losing weight. Although he was treated conservatively with laxative medications in the past 3 months, the constipation was not relieved.
According to the history of chronic constipation and refractory anal fissure, an MR Enterography was performed for surveying inflammatory bowel diseases. All small bowel loops including duodenum, jejunum, and ileum had normal appearance and distribution with normal wall thickness and mucosal pattern. There was no evidence of wall thickening or inflammatory changes. Multiple small lymph nodes were evident in ileocecal mesentery the largest one has 16*10 mm diameter. The MRI remarked an unexpected mass-like lesion in descending and sigmoid colon with a fat component that was suspicious of intussusception . A total colonoscopy was performed to confirm the intussusception and to find the probable cause of the lead point. The colonoscopy resulted in a longitudinal mass-like lesion in sigmoid colon with length of 12 cm and intussusception at the site of sigmoid and descending colon . Finally, the patient was prepared for laparoscopy surgery after pediatric surgeon consult with diagnosis of colocolic intussusception due to an intraluminal lesion.
Laparoscopic surgery was performed under general anesthesia in line with pediatric protocols and standard trocars. The peritoneal cavity was explored, intussusception site and lead point were detected . While the invagination was chronic and to illuminate the suspect lesion and take lymph nodes at the same time for Pathology, a segmental resection and anastomosis were performed by the hybrid hand-assisted surgery through the wound retractor .
The pathology reported only a submucosal lipoma and 8 reactive lymph nodes without the presence of malignancy or inflammatory changes. The patients were discharged in a few days without complications. At3 months later follow-up, constipation was relieved, and the anal fissure improved.