On July 13, 2022, a 55-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology due to persistent aggravation of icteric sclera and skin during the past 6 months. The patient has diabetes mellitus and is currently managing blood sugar levels with insulin injections. Laboratory tests revealed elevated levels of total bilirubin (77.3 μmol/L, reference range, 5.1–22.2 μmol/L), direct bilirubin (58.0 μmol/L, reference range, 0–8.6 μmol/L), alkaline phosphatase (961.30 U/L, reference range, 45–125 U/L), gamma glutamyl transferase (1,724.76 U/L, reference range, 10–60 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (284.73 U/L, reference range, 9–50 U/L), aspartate aminotransferase (193.17 U/L, reference range, 15–40 U/L), tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen 50 (78.68 U/mL, reference range, 0–20 U/mL), and tumor marker carcinoembryonic antigen 199 (100.1 U/mL, reference range, 0–40 U/mL). Hepatitis virus A, B, C, and E were negative. Abdominal ultrasonography showed intrahepatic bile duct dilatation. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed intrahepatic bile duct dilatation and an indistinct image at the confluence of the hilar bile duct, but without evidence of dilatation in the common bile duct or pancreatic duct nor diffuse pancreatic enlargement . Primary sclerosing cholangitis was ruled out due to the absence of band-like strictures or a beaded appearance of the biliary tract on MRCP. Following a consultation with surgeons from the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, a diagnosis of hilar cholangiocarcinoma could not be excluded. After this patient and his family members signed the written informed consents, left hepatectomy and cholecystectomy with hepatobiliary jejunostomy were performed on July 20, 2022. During the surgery, it was noted that the gallbladder was slightly enlarged with mild edema and thickening of the gallbladder wall. The bile duct was noticeably hardened and narrowed. Upon transverse incision of the bile duct, circumferential thickening of the bile duct wall was observed. No bile flow was observed, indicating bile duct obstruction. The amount of bleeding was 400ml. There was neither intraoperative nor postoperative complications. However, pathological examinations of the surgical specimens did not demonstrate malignant cells, but inflammatory lesions, fibrous tissue hyperplasia, and atypical hyperplasia were observed. Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining was positive for IgG4 plasma cells (>10 per high-power field), leading to a diagnosis of isolated IgG4-related-SC . Meanwhile, serum IgG4 level was also measured with a level of 120.31 mg/dL (reference range, 3.92 to 86.4 mg/dL). After that, intravenous methylprednisolone sodium succinate was initiated at a daily dosage of 40 mg for 7 days, which was subsequently transitioned to oral prednisolone acetate tablets at a dosage of 40 mg/day. Gradually, there was notable improvement of liver function and resolution of jaundice . The patient was discharged 25 days after the surgery. The dosage of prednisolone acetate tablets was reduced by 5 mg per week, ultimately reaching a maintenance dosage of 5 mg/day.
On July 4, 2023, the patient was readmitted to the Department of Gastroenterology due to persistent aggravation of icteric sclera and skin for 2 months. Laboratory tests showed elevated levels of total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, gamma glutamyl transferase, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase . The results of imaging examination did not indicate anastomotic stricture . A relapse of IgG4-SC was considered. A relapse of IgG4-SC is commonly characterized by the reappearance of symptomatic, serologic, radiologic, and/or histological abnormalities following complete or partial remission of the disease . The dosage of prednisolone acetate tablets was titrated to 50 mg/day. However, the level of total bilirubin was still abnormal (103.6μmol/L, reference range 5.1 to 22.2 μmol/L). Thus, prednisolone acetate tablets had to be kept at a maintenance dosage of 50 mg/day.
Considering a possibility of steroid dependency in this patient, rituximab therapy was initiated intravenously at 1 g/week twice on August 4, 2023 and August 23, 2023. Prednisolone acetate tablets were maintained at a dosage of 45 mg/day. Despite so, his symptoms did not improve. He refused further intervention and requested to be discharged. Unfortunately, his wife told us that the patient died on November 2023 at the last telephone follow-up visit.