A 31-year-old multigravid woman with a history of a prior low transverse cesarean delivery presented to a family planning clinic at 16 weeks gestation for elective termination of pregnancy. Her obstetric history was significant for a prior cesarean section performed six years prior. Her past medical and surgical history was otherwise unremarkable. A transabdominal ultrasound performed on the day of admission confirmed a fetus of 16 week gestation with an anterior placenta. In order to further delineate the relationship between the uterine scar and the placenta, an abdominal MRI was performed. The MRI demonstrated an unclear uterine scar near the placental implantation site. The patient was counseled on risks associated with abnormal placentation and was offered uterine artery embolization, dilation and evacuation and hysterotomy. The patient, however, decided to proceed with induction of labor for termination. The termination of her pregnancy was approved by the ethics committee of Zhejiang Provincial People’s Hospital. A written informed consent was obtained from this patient before the procedure.
Termination was performed with a loading dose of 50 mg of oral mifepristone (RU486) followed by 25 mg administered every 12 hours until a total of 300 mg had been administered. Following completion of mifepristone, misoprostol was administered at a dose of 200 ug orally every hour. The patient received a total of 1200 ug of misoprostol. She had an unremarkable vaginal delivery with spontaneous delivery of the placenta. Vaginal bleeding was minimal. Four hours after the procedure the patient developed a fever of 38.5°C, but denied further symptoms. The patient’s temperature resolved spontaneously by the next morning without intervention. On post procedure day 1, the patient complained of abdominal distention and dysuria. A urethral catheter was inserted and 800 ml of clear urine was drained. A pelvic ultrasound was performed and demonstrated a 32 x 25 mm abnormal radiodensity at the anterior uterine wall with an unclear boundary at the anterior cervical wall, concerning for retained products of conception versus placenta accreta. Methotrexate was administered. Given the idiopathic urinary retention and abnormal findings on ultrasound, laparoscopic exploration was performed to evaluate for placental growth into in bladder.
At the time of diagnostic laparoscopy, no hemoperitoneum was noted; however, there were significant adhesions between the omentum and anterior abdominal wall. Unexpectedly, a uterine rupture at the lower uterine segment was observed when the pelvic organs were restored to their normal anatomy. There was a 1.5 cm length anterior wall uterine rupture along the left portion of the previous scar . Moreover, a portion of the placenta was found to be adherent to the uterus at the site of the rupture when the omentum was removed . The bladder was firmly adherent to the uterine scar and rupture, and urology was consulted to assist in separating the bladder from the uterus. Dilatation and curettage was performed under direct laparoscopic visualization and the specimens were confirmed to be placenta by postoperative pathology examination . An ultrasound was performed to ensure no residual placental tissue was present. The uterine dehiscence was repaired laparoscopically. The entire procedure was performed using minimally invasive techniques.