A 21 year-old man presented to the refractive clinic for surgical evaluation of myopia. His medical history was unremarkable; he had been using glasses for nearsightedness but did not use contact lens. He was highly prone to hypersensitivity and was allergic to various fruits. His uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) in both eyes was 20/200. Best spectacle-corrected visual acuity (BSCVA) in both eyes was 20/20, with a refraction of − 2.50 − 2.00×5 in the right eye and − 2.25 − 2.00×3 in the left eye. Intraocular pressures (IOPs) of right and left eyes were 16.5 and 16.3 mmHg, respectively. Ocular examination was negative for blepharitis, meibomian gland dysfunction, or other corneal inflammation. The cornea appeared normal, without epithelial defects or infiltrates. Preoperative corneal topography was within the normal limits.
Surgical evaluation indicated bilateral SMILE for myopia correction. Starting 3 days preoperatively, levofloxacin (0.5%; Tarivid, Santen, Inc., Japan) and pranoprofen (5 mL: 5 mg; Senju Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Japan) eye drops were instilled 4 times daily. On the day of the surgery, preoperatively, the patient underwent conjunctival sac flushing; his face was prepared and disinfected with compound iodine cotton swab before surgery, and the patient’s face and body was covered with sterile sheets. Oxybuprocaine hydrochloride (0.4%; Benoxil, Santen, Osaka, Japan) eye drops were instilled thrice at 5 min intervals to induce preoperative anesthesia.
SMILE was performed using a 500-kHz VisuMax femtosecond laser system (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Jena, Germany) with an S-size contact glass (suction ring) under a negative pressure (30 mmHg). The patient was asked to fixate on a light source before the activation of suction. Laser cutting was performed in the following automated sequence: posterior surface of the lenticule (spiral-in pattern), lenticule side-cut, anterior surface of the lenticule (spiral-out pattern), and finally, and a side-cut on the cap. The laser energy was 140 nJ and intended cap thickness was 120 µm. The diameters of the cap and lenticule were 7.6 mm and 6.6 mm, respectively. A 3.00 mm side-cut was made at the 12-o’clock position for lenticule extraction. After making the lenticule side-cut, a spatula was inserted through the side-cut over the top of the refractive lenticule to separate first, the anterior plane, and subsequently, the posterior plane of the lenticule. Lastly, the lenticule was grasped and extracted through the small incision using micro-forceps. The incision was flushed with balanced salt solution (Alcon Laboratories,Inc., Texas, U.S.A.) after lenticule extraction. Postoperatively, levofloxacin (0.5%) and fluorometholone (0.1%; Flumetholon, Santen, Inc., Japan) were prescribed for instillation, 4 times daily.
One day after SMILE procedure, the patient experienced eye pain, foreign body sensation, and tearing bilaterally. Slit-lamp examination showed a circumferential stromal infiltrate, peripheral to the outside of cap edge, intact corneal epithelium, and an intervening clear zone between the peripheral corneal infiltrate and limbus in both eyes . There was no anterior chamber reaction. Based on these clinical features, an immune etiology was suspected; however, corneal scraping was not performed. The conjunctival sac secretions were obtained and sent for bacteriological cultures. Blood sample was taken for immunological testing. The patient was initially treated with oral prednisone (60 mg daily), dexamethasone eye drops (once every two hours), and tacrolimus (immunosuppressant; twice daily). Medical examinations were performed every two hours without fail. At 3 o’clock pm on the same day, anterior chamber reaction was noted. Tropicamide phenylephrine eye drops were instilled for pupillary dilation and to ameliorate eye irritation, and sodium hyaluronate eye drops (0.3%; four times daily) was prescribed to relieve dryness and soreness of the eye.
Two days later, negative results were obtained for bacteriological culture. However, high titers of immunoglobulin E (IgE) with a value of 471 IU/mL was detected in an immunological test of blood. In order to avoid re-invoking the patient's immune response but to further identify the allergen, an allergen test with an applied pressure was conducted after surgery to test for hypersensitivity to the contact glass used during SMILE, the only thing that contacted the corneas. A positive reaction with red and swollen skin was elicited at 10 min . At 3 days after surgery, the pain persisted and the infiltrates remained intense, with additional presentation of stage 2 diffuse lamellar keratitis (DLK) in the left eye . However, the density of the infiltrate started to decrease 7 days after treatment initiation despite manifestation of stage 4 DLK in left eye ; Eventually, the drug dosage was tapered for the right eye; the original dosage was retained for use in the left eye. Ten days postoperatively, the density of the infiltrate decreased markedly . The oral prednisone dosage was tapered gradually and discontinued after 2 weeks; dexamethasone was replaced with prednisolone acetate ophthalmic suspension (1%) and fluorometholone (0.1%) twice daily. Follow-up examination at 1 month showed decreased corneal DLK. However, the IOP readings were high; 18.9 mmHg and 21.6 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Carteolol (2%) was instilled twice daily to reduce IOP. At 3 months, the DLK disappeared and the IOP readings were 13.4 mmHg and 13.6 mmHg in right and left eyes, respectively.
By the fifth postoperative month , the infiltrates resolved completely, and the patient was asymptomatic and maintained a UCVA of 20/25 in both eyes . The topical treatment was tapered for 1 month. Six months after the procedure, UCVA of 20/20 was maintained in both eyes throughout the postoperative period, and the both corneas were clear, without any scarring. At last follow-up, the patient had no complaint, had normal IOP readings, and no incidence of new pathological sequalae.