A 17-year-old male presented to our neurosurgery clinic with progressive vision loss. He had initially been evaluated by a pediatric endocrinologist for delayed puberty as suggested by a high-pitched voice and feminine features. His hormonal work-up revealed panhypopituitarism. Preoperative Humphrey visual field testing demonstrated bitemporal visual field loss.
Further, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluation identified a 2.6 cm mass in the suprasellar region, noted to be hyperintense on T1 and T2 sequences with a nonenhancing, T1 hypointense nodule . There was mass effect on the optic chiasm without extension into the cavernous sinus. The computed tomography scan did not show any calcifications .
Differential diagnosis included proteinaceous CP, cystic degeneration of a pituitary macroadenoma, and less likely RCC.
Given the vision changes, the patient and family consented to resection of the lesion through a transsphenoidal endoscopic endonasal approach. Since the presumptive diagnosis was that of a CP, we discussed with the patient that there was a distinct possibility that the pituitary stalk would have to be sacrificed to obtain gross total resection of the lesion.
The sella was accessed through the standard transsphenoidal approach with stereotactic navigation. After dural opening, the tumor was found to be firm and with a thick capsule. Sharp dissection and radiofrequency ablation were required to debulk the tumor. The tumor center yielded classic motor oil-like fluid as well as large cholesterol granulations that were histopathologically evaluated. There were dense adhesions of the tumor capsule to bilateral optic nerves and chiasm .
The capsule was sharply dissected away from the neural structures. We could now clearly visualize that the tumor capsule emanated from and had infiltrated the pituitary stalk. To achieve gross total resection, the stalk was truncated and the lesion was removed. Closure was performed using fat graft as inlay, followed by fascia lata wedged into the sellar opening using a MEDPOR (Stryker) graft, creating a gasket seal. This skull base reconstruction was then layered with a pedicled nasoseptal flap. The patient tolerated the procedure well.
Postoperative Humphrey visual field testing demonstrated visual improvement after resection of the lesion and decompression of the chiasm. In addition to his preoperative hormone replacement regimen, he continued to require desmopressin acetate tablets at his 1-year postoperative follow-up. His postoperative 3-month MRI shows gross total resection of the lesion with decompression of the optic chiasm. The residual fat graft as well as the MEDPOR (Stryker) skull base reconstruction can also be visualized .
Pathology showed a dense fibrous walled cyst with a focal residual internal epithelial lining consisting of squamous cells, whose membrane stained positive on beta-catenin stain and occasional ciliated epithelial cells which stained positive for cytokeratin AE1 and AE3 .
There were marked degenerative changes with lymphocytic and histiocytic inflammation, hemosiderin deposition, cholesterol clefts, and multinucleated giant cells. The histiocytes stained positive for CD68 and many contained a foamy cytoplasm that highlighted on periodic acid– Schiff diastase stain, which was consistent with them being muciphages. These features in summary were consistent with a RCC with marked XGC and squamous metaplasia.