We report a case of a 23-year-old male with a history of 7 episodes of left elbow dislocation during a two-year period. The first dislocation was the result of a bicycle fall with the arm in extension and mild supination. Treatment in another center included closed reduction and immobilization with the elbow in 90 degrees for 10 days. The other elbow dislocation episodes occurred while the patient performed daily activities; these dislocations reduced spontaneously. Daily activities were significantly limited by subjective instability and apprehension.
Our first examination showed elbow extension apprehension, a positive pivot shift test with engaging, audible clank, and pain in the lateral aspect of the elbow. Elbow medial ligaments remained stable during the stress (valgus and varus) tests. AP and lateral elbow x-rays did not show bone injuries. A pivot shift test was positive with engaging due to the bone defect, resulting in difficult reduction under fluoroscopy.
The preoperative Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score was 76.7 points, and the Mayo Elbow Performance Score was 5 points.
A left elbow CT scan showed a bone deficit at the posterior capitellum site. This finding appeared to be related with the erosion produced by the impact of the radial head in recurrent dislocations.
MRI revealed distal humerus bone edema .
The preoperative treatment plan included lateral ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction and eventually bone defect grafting and osteosynthesis. The examination under anesthesia and image intensifier confirmed posterolateral rotatory dislocation and engaging .
A Kocher incision of 8 centimeters long was performed. A lateral capsular and ligamentous deficit was observed. An autologous graft was taken from the palmaris longus tendon. Two holes were performed in the proximal ulna: one in the supinator crest tubercle and the other at 2 centimeters proximal to the former, close to the annular ligament insertion, keeping the bone bridge between them. The humerus hole was placed 2 millimeters anteriorly and distally from the lateral condyle. Using a tendon hook, the palmaris longus graft was passed through the holes.
Stability was tested. Intraoperative observation revealed that the posterior capitellum deficit was not implicated in the elbow excursion after lateral ligament reconstruction. Therefore, a bone graft was not performed. Elbow immobilization in 90 degrees and full pronation for 4 weeks were performed.