A 52-year-old woman with NF1 was referred to our hospital for an abdominal mass with back pain and anemia. She had undergone mastectomy for left breast cancer and colectomy for colon cancer, 3 and 17 years ago, respectively. In the previous hospital, she had hypotension (blood pressure = ~70 mmHg) with loss of consciousness, and unenhanced computed tomography revealed a retroperitoneal mass suspected to be a neurogenic tumor related to NF1. At that time, her hemoglobin level was almost normal at 11.6 g/dL. However, it gradually decreased to 6.1 g/dL over the next 6 days. She had received a total blood transfusion of 16 packed red blood cell units before admission to our hospital. On admission, her blood pressure and heart rate were 119/96 mmHg and 96 beats per minute, respectively. Laboratory data showed a hemoglobin level of 10.0 g/dL, platelet count of 629,000/μL, prothrombin time of 13.9 s, and activated partial thromboplastin time of 48.8 s. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a saccular SRA trunk aneurysm that measured 3 cm in diameter and was surrounded by an increased large retroperitoneal hematoma . In addition, two hypodense masses protruding from the left second and third sacral foramen were observed, which were indicative of neurofibromas related to NF1 (not shown). Therefore, we treated the ruptured SRA trunk aneurysm with transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE).
Under local anesthesia, employing the femoral artery approach, inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) angiography was performed using a 4-F shepherd hook-type catheter (Medikit Co. Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), and an SRA trunk aneurysm was confirmed . A 2.6-F high-flow-type microcatheter (Masters HF; ASAHI INTECC Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan) was selectively advanced into the SRA over a 0.016-in micro guidewire (Meister; ASAHI INTECC Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan). SRA angiography revealed the distal vessel of the aneurysm . To isolate the aneurysm, we attempted to embolize the distal vessel; however, microcatheter insertion failed via the antegrade approach. Meanwhile, the distal vessel disappeared on the aneurysmogram; this might have resulted from thrombogenesis or retrograde blood flow. Proximal embolization without isolation of the aneurysm was considered insufficient for hemostasis because re-bleeding due to retrograde blood flow could occur. Therefore, we attempted a retrograde approach to the distal vessel. A shepherd hook-type catheter was advanced into the right common iliac artery. Right internal iliac arteriography with a high-flow type microcatheter revealed the middle rectal artery (MRA) arising from the internal pudendal artery. The inferior pudendal arteriogram revealed anastomosis between the MRA and SRA . To pass through the narrow and tortuous anastomosis, a 1.6-F microcatheter (Marvel S; Tokai Medical Products Inc., Aichi, Japan) with a 0.014-in micro guidewire was inserted coaxially into the high-flow microcatheter. Using this double coaxial microcatheter system (Hongo et al. ), the high-flow microcatheter was advanced using the MRA-SRA anastomosis into the distal SRA trunk to be embolized with a coil (Interlock, 3 mm/12 cm, Boston Scientific, MA, USA) . Finally, the aneurysm was isolated with proximal embolization of the SRA trunk via the IMA using three coils (Interlock 2 mm/6 cm × 3, Boston Scientific, MA, USA). The opacification of the aneurysm disappeared on retrograde and antegrade angiography, confirming complete cessation of blood flow into the aneurysm . The post-procedural course was uneventful. Anemia improvement and absence of bowel ischemia were observed. On follow-up CTA performed 3 months later, the aneurysm was not opacified and the hematoma had decreased in size .