A 74-year-old man with a medical history of coronary artery disease, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and lumbar stenosis presented to the ER in January 2018 reporting severe sharp low back pain with radiation down his right lower extremity. He had recently undergone multiple vascular surgeries including repair of the right internal iliac aneurysm, which required a vascular graft, in April 2017, and L1-4 laminectomy in July 2017. His preoperative symptoms had initially resolved; however, in December 2017, he began to have a gradual return of low back pain and radiculopathy. His neurologic examination was normal. Imaging revealed concerns for L5-S1 osteodiscitis . The patient underwent IR aspiration of the L5-S1 disc space from which cultures failed to reveal a pathogen. He was started empirically on vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam with plans to continue this regimen for 6 weeks. A more extensive workup was also sent at that time including serology for Q fever. When titers returned with 32,000 Phase 1 immunoglobulin G, the patient was started on doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine therapy, and vancomycin was also continued. As vascular grafts are a known risk factor for Q fever infections, and the previous reports have shown an association between vascular graft and vertebral osteomyelitis, the suspicion was that our patient’s infection was related to his history of vascular disease and intervention.[,]
Unfortunately, despite antibiotic treatment, the patient pain progressed to the point, he was no longer able to ambulate independently. A positron emission tomography scan was performed in March 2018 that showed progression of the L5-S1 spondylodiscitis with hypermetabolic activity in the paraspinous region as well as around the right iliac artery aneurysm that directly abutted the paraspinous phlegmon. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed progression of the spondylodiscitis as well with now mild height loss at L5-S1 . He was readmitted to the hospital at that time and underwent anterior exposure to the L5-S1 disc space with discectomy and retroperitoneal washout in a combined vascular surgery and neurosurgery procedure. Under the advice of the CDC closed filtration, respirators devices were worn by all operating room staff and surgeons. The room was sealed during the operation with needed materials delivered through a one-way entrance. Cultures from the operative site again were negative for bacteria, acid-fast bacilli, and fungal organisms. Polymerase chain reaction of the pelvic tissue was positive for C. burnetii.
In May, the patient was reporting continue back discomfort with new severe radicular right leg pain. MRI and computed tomography angiography were obtained to reveal a recurrent fluid collection in the prevertebral space. The patient underwent IR drainage/drain placement for this and experienced resolution of his symptoms, and follow-up studies showed resolution of the fluid.
As of the last follow-up, the patient is again ambulating without assistance and has made a marked improvement with plans to continue antibiotic therapy for 12–18 months.