The patient is a 33-year-old man with history of Crohn’s disease who was admitted to the medical ICU with acute hypoxemic respiratory failure. He was in his usual state of health until 36 h prior to presentation, when he developed myalgias, fatigue, headache, and epigastric pain. He denied change in stools consistent with prior exacerbations of Crohn’s disease. Due to his symptoms, he was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation. His past medical history was notable for Crohn’s disease diagnosed in 2000, for which he had been on multiple immunosuppressants. Most recently he was trialed on ustekinumab (Stelara) 2 years prior to this hospitalization, with good response to therapy. However, he discontinued the medication after 5 months due to concerns about potential infectious complications. Two weeks prior to presentation, ustekinumab was restarted due to evidence of active Crohn’s disease. Importantly, prior to this hospitalization he had no respiratory symptoms and no evidence of interstitial lung disease found on prior CT scans.
On presentation to the hospital, his vital signs were noteworthy for temperature of 39.6C, heart rate 120 beats per minute, respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure 117/83 mmHg, oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 98% on room air. Exam was remarkable only for epigastric tenderness on abdominal exam. His lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. Initial chest X-Ray was clear with no acute airspace disease. On hospital day 1, he developed cough, dyspnea, and hypoxemia, requiring 5 L nasal cannula oxygen to maintain SpO2 > 90%. His hypoxemia rapidly worsened, and on hospital day 2 he was moved to the ICU for initiation of high flow nasal cannula with 75% fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2). Repeat chest X-Ray showed diffuse reticular infiltrates. At this time, our differential was infectious (bacterial, viral, or atypical pneumonia) versus inflammatory (Crohn’s disease associated pneumonitis, drug induced pneumonitis). Due to the concern for infectious etiology, he was intubated and a bronchoscopy was performed. Empiric antibiotic coverage with vancomycin, cefepime, and azithromycin was also started. CT chest with contrast showed bilateral consolidations and ground glass opacities without evidence of pulmonary embolism .
Laboratory work up was significant for an initial white blood cell count of 16.3 with 92% neutrophils and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 296.8 mg/L. Infectious workup was negative including blood cultures and respiratory pathogen panel. Bronchoscopy was performed that was also negative for bacterial, viral, and mycobacterial pathogens . Serologic workup for underlying connective tissue disease-associated interstitial lung disease (ILD) was also negative .
Given his negative infectious workup, his respiratory failure was thought to be most consistent with drug-induced pneumonitis versus Crohn’s-disease related ILD. He was treated with pulse steroids (methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days) before being transitioned to prednisone 1 mg/kg/day (80 mg). Prednisone was tapered by 20 mg every 4 days until 20 mg daily, with plans to continue this dose until outpatient follow up. With steroid treatment, his respiratory status significantly improved. He was extubated on hospital day 9 and was discharged on hospital day 18. At the time of discharge, he was not requiring supplemental oxygen. The patient was seen in pulmonary clinic for follow up 6 weeks after hospital discharge to continue to monitor his clinical course and recovery. At that time, he had tapered his prednisone to 5 mg daily. Pulmonary function tests revealed normal forced vital capacity (FVC) and diffusion capacity of lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Repeat CT scan showed dramatic improvement in previously seen ground glass infiltrates . Given negative infectious and autoimmune work up, and dramatic improvement following cessation of ustekinumab, we favor his clinical case to be consistent with drug-induced interstitial lung disease (DILD) secondary to ustekinumab. He has continued to have normal lung function in the 12 months following his initial hospitalization, and no recurrence of respiratory symptoms, reassuring against fibrotic complications and arguing against other underlying ILD.