A 70-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with left hemiparalysis and a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score of 8. He had been diagnosed with subtle right cerebral infarction and right IA–subclavian artery (SA)– proximal CCA stenosis 9 months previously , and he had been treated conservatively with administration of aspirin and clopidogrel in our institute. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed occlusion of the right ICA with an acute cerebral infarction in the right middle cerebral artery area (DWI–Alberta Stroke Program Early Computed Tomography Score of 9) [ and ]. Atrial fibrillation was not detected by Holter electrocardiography.
Because the duration since symptom onset exceeded 4.5 h, the patient was not a candidate for intravenous injection of tissue plasminogen activator. The endovascular procedure was started through a 9-Fr femoral sheath under local anesthesia. A 9-Fr balloon guiding catheter (Optimo; Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was placed in the IA. Angiography showed severe stenosis from the IA to the proximal CCA and occlusion of the right SA . As the balloon guiding catheter was carefully passed over the IA lesion, CCA angiography revealed occlusion of the ICA . We initiated the thrombectomy for the right ICAO, giving precedence to cerebral reperfusion. A CAT 6 catheter (Stryker Neurovascular, Kalamazoo, MI, USA), Trevo Trak 21 microcatheter (Stryker Neurovascular), and CHIKAI 0.014-inch microguidewire (ASAHI INTECC, Nagoya, Japan) were advanced as a coaxial system. The microguidewire and microcatheter traversed the ICA thrombus. A Trevo NXT 4- × 41-mm stent (Stryker Neurovascular) was placed across the occluded lesion. The Trevo stent, Trevo Trak 21, and CAT 6 catheter were pulled back together through the inflated balloon under continuous suction, and a red clot was retrieved. After a second pass using the same system, ICA angiography showed partial recanalization of the inferior trunk of the middle cerebral artery (Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction Grade 2B) . MRA and DWI on postoperative day 1 showed successful recanalization and localized ischemic change [ and ]. We also identified severe IAS by postoperative computed tomography angiography [ and ]. We started postprocedural therapy using an anticoagulant (edoxaban) and dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel and cilostazol) to stabilize the plaque. Because the cause of the repeated cerebral infarction was distal embolization from the stenosed IA, we initiated treatment of this lesion to prevent recurrent stroke. After a conference with cardiac surgeons and cardiologists, we selected carotid– carotid crossover bypass and CCA ligation. The cilostazol was stopped 3 days before the operation and the edoxaban was stopped 1 day before the operation to decrease the risk of perioperative bleeding.
On the 35th hospital day, we performed carotid–carotid crossover bypass and CCA ligation to prevent recurrent embolization from the stenosed IA. The surgery was performed in a hybrid operating room. Endotracheal intubation anesthesia was provided, and the patient’s neck was stretched in the supine position. Monitoring was performed using near infrared spectroscopy (INVOS system; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Linear skin incisions of 6 cm were made bilaterally along the anterior edges of the sternocleidomastoid. The bilateral CCA, ICA, and external carotid artery were exposed; the retropharyngeal space was explored with the fingers; and a 6-mm heparin-bound polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) vascular graft (Propaten; W. L. Gore and Associates, Inc. Newark, DE, USA) was crossed through the space. The graft was trimmed according to the bypass requirements. Before clamping the CCA for the anastomosis, 4000 U of systemic heparin was administered, and the patient’s systolic blood pressure increased by 20% over the basal value. First, end-to-side anastomosis between the graft and left CCA was performed with continuous suturing using CV-6 Gore-Tex (W. L. Gore and Associates, Inc.). The same procedure was then performed for the right CCA . After the systolic blood pressure had decreased to the basal level, the right CCA was ligated using 2–0 silk. Heparin was neutralized and intraoperative digital subtraction angiography was performed to assess the patency of the bypass and ligation of the right CCA. Finally, the bilateral incisions were closed. One day after the surgery, the patency of the bypass, ligation of the right CCA, and anterograde flow of the bilateral intracranial ICAs were assessed by angiography [ and ]. Postoperative computed tomography showed no remarkable change compared to preoperative computed tomography .
Postoperative therapy was performed in accordance with the usual postoperative management of carotid endarterectomy. We started antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 75 mg/day) for lifetime. And the cervical collar was used to protect the bleeding from surgical wound for three days.
The patient was discharged to home with no procedural complications (modified Rankin scale score of 1) on day 56.