A 74-year-old female patient presented to the hospital with a tumor on the posterior scalp that had grown rapidly within two months after a long-standing period over the past 10 years. Ultrasonography revealed a well-circumscribed solid mass with a diameter of 25 mm that was partly cystic with calcification. An excision biopsy was performed. Microscopic examination of the lesion revealed a well-demarcated but non-encapsulated dermal mass that had no contact with the superficial epidermis. The tumor showed two closely intermingled components composed of epithelial and mesenchymal malignant tissue . The epithelial components included basaloid tissue showing follicular differentiation where peripheral atypical basaloid cells transitioned to clear cells and showed degenerative substances at the center of the tumor . One area containing eosinophilic “shadow” cells surrounded by foreign body giant cells were observed with some foci of calcification, which was compatible with a remaining benign pilomatricoma . A cystic structure was present, which was focally covered with basaloid cells . The epithelial component was also admixed with areas of keratinizing atypical squamous cells, indicating squamous cell carcinoma . In contrast, the macrophage-rich mesenchymal components included pleomorphic spindle tumor cells as well as multinucleated pleomorphic giant cells , which was consistent with undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. Part of the sarcomatous lesion also showed features of giant cell tumor showing elongated mononuclear cells and osteoclast-like multinucleated giant cells which resembled a giant cell tumor of the bone . The average mitotic indexes were 14 in one high-power field in the carcinomatous area, and 12 in 10 high-power fields in the sarcomatous areas. Atypical mitotic figures were observed frequently in the sarcomatous area. Vascular or perineural invasion was not observed. The restriction margin was negative.
The results of immunohistochemistry are shown in Fig. and Table . Both epithelial and mesenchymal components tested positive for P53 . The epithelial component tested positive for AE1/AE3 , CK5/6, and P40 (data not shown). The nuclear expression of P63 was intense in basaloid cells and showed partial staining in squamous cells . The mesenchymal tumor stained diffusely positive for vimentin (data not shown) and partially positive for SMA . P63 and AE1/AE3 also stained sparsely positive in the spindle cell element. Macrophages and osteoclast-like giant cells, but not tumor cells stained positively for KP1. A few tumor cells in both epithelial and mesenchymal components stained positively for S100. Based on the above findings, the epithelial component was consistent with pilomatrical carcinoma and the mesenchymal component had features consistent with undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma. Consequently, the tumor was diagnosed as one of a pilomatrical CS. The patient has been well without recurrence or metastasis for 45 months.
For further analysis, we investigated β-catenin and LEF-1 expressions via immunohistochemistry and exons 3, 4, and 5 of the CTNNB1 gene via polymerase chain reaction assay and sequencing. Cytosolic and/or nuclear staining of β-catenin, termed ‘abnormal type β-catenin expression’ in this study, was partially observed in both components, apart from the sarcomatous tumor component which showed a giant cell tumor pattern . LEF1 expression was oberved in nuclei of sarcomatous components but very few in carcinomatous components, which may be transitional cells between basaloid to squamoid . A CTNNB1 mutation was not detected in exons 3, 4, or 5 of the CTNNB1 gene. Both carcinomatous and sarcomatous components stained diffusely positive for P16 . Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis revealed an increase in the copy number of chromosomes 9p21 (CDKN2A, p16 gene), 3, and 7 in both components. A gain in the copy number of chromosome 17 was present in the sarcomatous lesion, whereas the change was minimal in the carcinomatous area, showing a pattern similar to the normal epithelium surrounding the tumor.