A 54-year-old brown-skinned female presented to the Bucco-maxillofacial Surgery and Traumatology Department with a large swelling on the left side of the face. The patient reported progressive symptoms over the last 3 years such as dystopia, dysphagia, trismus, respiratory obstruction and dysphonia.
The extraoral clinical examination of the maxilla revealed a hardened and symptomatic tumour located between the zygomatic arch and the labial commissure, dystopia and depletion of the nasolabial fold with the displacement of the right nostril (A and B), while no palpable lymph nodes were observed. The patient denied smoking, alcoholism, previous radiotherapy and family history of concomitant diseases. The intraoral examination showed an increased volume in the left posterior palate with hardened consistency, normal colouration, absence of ulceration, erasure of the vestibular sulcus and sensitivity to touch.
A multislice CT-scan revealed an expansive hypodense image in the facial middle third that involved hard palate, left zygoma, ethmoid and sphenoid, invasion and destruction of the nasal cavity, total obstruction of the nasopharynx and partial destruction of the orbit. The lesion was poorly circumscribed, which is suggestive of a malignant neoplasm with extensive bone destruction and involvement of structures near the base of the skull such as the ethmoid and sphenoid bones (C and D).
An incisional biopsy was performed under local anaesthesia. The anatomopathological analysis revealed fragments of neoplastic tissue, a proliferation of cuboid cells with nuclear and cytoplasmic pleomorphism, atypical mitoses and block, island and lobe arrangements. The tumour was also observed in the respiratory epithelial tissue with the presence of keratin beads, in situ focal carcinoma, necrotic areas and scarce stroma, bleeding and myiasis .
Moreover, the immunohistochemistry technique was used for diagnostic accuracy and revealed diffuse expression of vimentin and chromogranin, and focal marking of AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 14, EMA, and CD99. The neoplastic cells were negative for S-100, calponin, smooth muscle actin, HHF-35, desmin, cytokeratin 7 and HMB-45; while almost 80% were positive for Ki-67 . All clinical, radiographic and histological features were suggestive of sinonasal carcinosarcoma.
The patient was submitted to partial maxillectomy with subpalpebral surgical access (Weber-Ferguson approach), albeit parts of the lesion were not removed due to large posterior extension. After the removal of a 11 × 6 × 4 cm single piece and curettage of the cavity, the orbital floor was reconstructed with titanium mesh .
After 30 days surgical recovery, the patient presented remission of diplopia due to dystopia correction, the reestablishment of normal nasal breathing, no episodes of epistaxis, reduction of dysphagia, persistent dysphonia due to extensive loss of the hard palate and presence of a buccal fistula as a result of the partial maxillectomy .
At the Oncology Department, the patient was submitted to 30 sessions of radiotherapy treatment (3.700MBq/100mCl) and followed intravenous chemotherapy with cisplatin at 8-h intervals during 3 months. Although clinical follow-ups were performed to control the extremely aggressive malignancy, the patient unfortunately died in 2019.