A 32-year-old Iranian man with headache and dyspnea was admitted to Rouhani Hospital. On initial assessment, his systolic blood pressure was 170/100 mmHg. About a week prior to his admission, he had an open appendectomy and his postsurgery systolic blood pressures were in the range of 140–180 mmHg. In this hospitalization, COVID-19 was suspected owing to his flu-like symptoms (myalgia, headache, and dyspnea). Therefore, computed tomography (CT) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were performed. The results revealed suspicious CT scan and positive PCR.
Because of dyspnea and hypertension, an electrocardiogram (ECG) was performed, which found diffuse ST-segment elevation; hence, he underwent echocardiography. On further examinations, he had positive serum troponin, about 35% ejection fraction (EF), and ventricular wall and papillary muscles thickness. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) also showed moderate-to-severe systolic dysfunction and significant diastolic dysfunction in the left ventricle, but no clot was found. During hospitalization, we observed persistent high blood pressure that could not be controlled using three drugs. Additionally, he had sweating, high pulse rate, and abnormal liver function tests. At this time, he was receiving anticoagulant (heparin), antiviral therapy (remdesivir), and antibiotics (targocid and meropenem) in addition to the routine treatments.
Four days after admission, the patient’s condition worsened. Neurological examination revealed right-sided hemiplegia and dysarthria. However, funduscopic examination was normal. In addition, his level of consciousness had gradually decreased insofar as he could not obey commands and make meaningful eye contact, but he could move his unaffected limbs. Imaging [brain CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans] findings were compatible with the diagnosis of ischemic infarction. Though some brain CT findings were suggestive of cortical vein thrombosis, brain MRI with contrast, brain images, and MR venography could not confirm this diagnosis. The MRI demonstrated multiple bilateral acute ischemic changes with lesions in the right high-parietal cortex as well as left temporal and basal ganglia regions being more prominent. Brain and cervical MR angiography were unremarkable.
Considering the diagnosis of cardioembolic infarct, intravenous anticoagulant therapy with heparin was started. This treatment was discontinued after 2 days because some hemorrhagic changes were seen on imaging studies. His systolic blood pressure was 240 mmHg at this stage.
Two days later, he regained consciousness, and his weakened limbs started recovering gradually.
After 6 days of having high blood pressure, episodic headaches, and sustained tachycardia, pheochromocytoma was strongly suspected.
In Fig. , we provide an overview of the hospitalization course of the patient.
Urinary metanephrine (MN), normetanephrine (NMN), and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) were collected in a 24-h period and were positive, leading to diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
In addition, multiple masses were found in the abdomen and thyroid. Phenoxybenzamine was prescribed, his systolic blood pressure came down to 120 mmHg, and 2 weeks later, his EF was 45–50%. The patient was considered a candidate for surgery to treat pheochromocytoma, but owing to rapid EF, symptom improvement, and the recent CVA, it was postponed 2 months.
Considering a familial syndrome, a survey was done to detect possible familial cases. In this case report, the patient’s mother had high blood pressure and positive pheochromocytoma.
Regarding all signs and symptoms (medullary thyroid carcinoma and pheochromocytoma), the final diagnosis was multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) syndrome.
At first, the patient was admitted with dyspnea and headache; hence, inflammatory tests, CT scan, and PCR were done to assess the patient for COVID-19. As mentioned previously, CT scan was suspicious and PCR was positive for COVID. However, as were unable to justify all of the symptoms with COVID-19, we requested hematologic, cardiac, and hepatic tests. These laboratory tests revealed normal inflammation markers [erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP)] and hematologic tests (CBC diff), and hepatic markers [alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and total and direct bilirubin] were slightly increased, but cardiac markers [troponin and pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP)] were high and procalcitonin was positive. At this stage, myocardial infarction or cardiomyopathy was suspected; thus, the transthoracic and TEE were performed. EF was about 35%, and the ventricular walls were thicker than normal. Furthermore, severe systolic and moderate diastolic dysfunctions were detected on TEE, but no clot was found.
Laboratory tests were rechecked and confirmed the next day. After that, D-dimer was requested, and it was highly positive. Rheumatologic markers were checked during hospitalization, but none was positive.
Then, 6 days later, after clinical suspicion of pheochromocytoma, urinary catecholamines (MN, NMN, and VMA) were tested, and all of them returned positive for pheochromocytoma.
On spinal and abdominal CT scans with contrast, multiple masses were observed in the abdomen, and multiple nodules were seen on thyroid ultrasonography. Additionally, lymphadenopathy was significant in the left thyroid gland.
Biopsy was done from thyroid nodules, and medullary carcinoma was detected.
All laboratory test results can be found in Table .