A 49-year-old male presented to our Spanish tertiary centre with general malaise, cough, chest pain, mild haemoptysis, and progressive shortness of breath over the last week.
His medical history was significant for d-TGA palliated with a Mustard operation at 15 months old and pulmonary venous baffle stenosis treated with percutaneous transcatheter stent placement at 35 years old. Over the years, he developed pulmonary hypertension, and in a more recent follow-up, he was found to have severe pulmonary hypertension of mixed group 1 and 2, with a mean pulmonary pressure of 81 mmHg, a pulmonary arterial wedge pressure of 19 mmHg, and a pulmonary vascular resistance of 10 Wood units. The patient suffered severe biventricular dilatation with moderate dysfunction and severe dilatation of the pulmonary trunk (75 mm) and pulmonary arteries , with a growth rate of 2 mm/year over the previous 4 years. Furthermore, the patient had suffered isthmic atrial flutter successfully ablated and a subcutaneous cardioverter-defibrillator had been implanted for a primary prevention indication due to the systemic right ventricular dysfunction, a QRS amplitude of 140 ms, and World Health Organization functional class (WHO-FC) II–III. The patient was in the process of a heart–lung transplant evaluation.
Outpatient medication included sildenafil 40 mg three times daily, macitentan 10 mg once daily, spironolactone 25 mg once daily, sacubitril-valsartan 24–26 mg twice daily, torasemide 5 mg once daily, amiodarone 200 mg once daily, and a vitamin K antagonist.
At admission, body temperature was 37.1°C, with a blood pressure of 109/78 mmHg, a heart rate of 93 b.p.m., oxygen saturation of 88% on room air, and a respiratory rate of 26 per min.
Physical examination showed mild cyanosis; heart sounds were rhythmic, with an accentuated second sound and a grade 2/4 pulmonary diastolic murmur; vesicular breath sounds were preserved bilaterally, with wet crackles audible in the right lung. Furthermore, there was hepatomegaly of 4 cm below the costal margin, with no jugular vein distension or oedema.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus rhythm at 67 b.p.m., PR 230 ms, QRS 140 ms with a right bundle branch block, and axis +90 degrees . No difference from previous ECG could be noted.
Arterial blood gas test showed pH 7.45 (normal range 7.38–7.42), carbon dioxide partial pressure 31 mmHg (normal range 38–42), oxygen partial pressure 59 mmHg (normal range 75–100), oxygen saturation 93% (normal range 94–100%), HCO3 21.5 mEq/L (normal range 22–28), and lactate 0.5 mmol/L (normal value < 2).
Additional investigations supported congestive heart failure and respiratory failure, with N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) measuring 3800 ng/L (normal range ≤125 ng/L and previous outpatient values of 600–700 ng/L), high-sensitivity troponin I 16 ng/L (normal range <45 ng/L), and D-dimer 673 ng/mL (normal range ≤ 280 ng/L).
Chest X-ray was significant for an enlarged cardiac silhouette with a dense pulmonary infiltration, especially on the right fields.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed moderate-to-severe dysfunction of the subpulmonary left ventricle, moderate dysfunction of the systemic ventricle, and mean pulmonary baffle gradient of 5 mmHg, with a dilated inferior vena cava.
Supplemental oxygen with high flow nasal cannula at oxygen fraction of 60% and 60 L/min was initiated. Differential diagnosis of acute respiratory failure included acute ventricular failure, pulmonary hypertensive crisis, or thromboembolic pulmonary disease.
An urgent CT scan showed severe dilatation of pulmonary arterial circulation (trunk measuring 74 × 63 mm and right pulmonary branch measuring 60 × 56 mm), right PAD with two points of intimal rupture of 0.5 and 1.5 mm, and presence of perivascular fat reticulation and liquid that was suggestive of imminent rupture .
Surgical risk was estimated to be extremely high. Moreover, he was not considered suitable for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and circulatory support due to very high bleeding risk and uncertain destination therapy.
Outpatient pulmonary vasodilators were continued (sildenafil 40 mg every 8 h and macitentan 10 mg once daily), and intravenous epoprostenol was initiated and titrated up to 9 ng/kg/min in order to try to reduce pulmonary artery parietal stress.
After stabilization during the first 48 h, respiratory failure worsened significantly, chest X-ray was significant for acute pulmonary oedema , and NT-proBNP increased up to 7000 ng/L. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed an increase of mean baffle gradient up to 13 mmHg (previously 5 mmHg); this effect was attributed to pulmonary vasodilatation and subsequent increase of pulmonary blood flow caused by epoprostenol. Epoprostenol was gradually discontinued, and intravenous continuous furosemide was initiated, obtaining negative fluid balance.
Respiratory failure responded well to negative fluid balance, and supplemental oxygen therapy could be withdrawn after 21 days. A follow-up CT scan before discharge showed morphologic stabilization of the PAD .
After stabilization, the patient was sent for evaluation in a heart–lung transplant centre, being eventually refused for extremely high perioperative bleeding risk due to abundant bilateral pulmonary neovascularization. He was discharged home in WHO-FC III.
Treatment was optimized by adding oral furosemide. Anticoagulation was not re-started for high bleeding risk. Outpatient CT scan ( and ) showed morphological stabilization of the PAD, with a diameter of 60 × 59 mm and with false lumen thrombosis. Follow-up TTE showed only mild biventricular dysfunction, without pulmonary baffle obstruction. Six months after the acute event, he was stable and recovered his previous WHO-FC II–III.