A 32-year-old male professional bodybuilder athlete presented to the author’s institute’s Emergency Department (ED) complaining of acute-onset pain and swelling of the right elbow (dominant hand). The patient reported that while trying to maneuver his motorbike to avoid a collision with another vehicle, he felt sudden pain at the posterior elbow and heard a popping sound. The patient reported to the ED fully ambulatory and denied falling from the vehicle or any other direct or indirect body contact or collision during the reported event. His past medical history was remarkable for a myocardial infarction 6 months ago that was managed with the placement of two coronary stents. The patient has been on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily) since. He also reported regular use of oral AAS such as Boldenone, Testosterone, Metenolone, Trenbolone, and Mesterolone in cycles for more than a decade and Stanozolol almost daily, with varying doses, for the last 2½ years.
On clinical examination, vital signs were within normal limits, and swelling of the posterior aspect of the right elbow was noted. Active extension of the elbow was reduced to a score of 2 out of 5 in the Medical Research Council Manual Muscle Testing scale , raising suspicion for TTR. Radiography did not disclose any fracture or flake sign , and subsequent ultrasound and MRI of the elbow were performed. Ultrasound and MRI revealed rupture of the triceps tendon at its insertion, confirming the diagnosis .
The patient was admitted for further surgical management. During the operation, the patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position with the right arm supported by a padded post; no tourniquet was used during the procedure. The rupture was approached with a linear incision over the posterior elbow, as outlined by Conti Mica et al. . Intraoperatively, almost complete rupture of the triceps was noted at its insertion into the olecranon, with only a few tendon fibers on the lateral side of the muscle intact . No avulsed fragments were noted. The ulnar nerve was identified and protected. The tendon was debrided at its insertion, the hematoma was removed, and the retraction of the tendon was evaluated . After the recognition and preparation of the triceps’s footprint, two 3.5 mm titanium bone suture anchors (DORATEK PIEX®, TIAN-0351) were placed at the anatomical insertion of the tendon, and the tendon was repaired using a modified double-row technique. Two sutures from each anchor were passed in a Krackow-type whipstitch fashion through the tendon, and each strand from the whipstitch was tied down to the matched suture anchor. Mattress sutures from each pair of stitches were placed in the distal tendon approximately 2 cm proximal to the end. A 2.5 mm transosseous tunnel was made on the proximal ulna, and the sutures’ tails of the lateral anchor were passed through it in a figure-of-eight configuration and tied securely to the remaining sutures’ tails of the medial anchor, providing near complete coverage of the anatomic footprint . Full range of motion (ROM) was documented intraoperatively. The arm was initially placed in 30° elbow flexion with a plaster splint. The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was subsequently discharged.
Close follow-up ensued; 30° elbow flexion was maintained for 2 weeks postoperatively. Subsequently, the patient was moved to a hinged brace with adjustable elbow flexion and extension. The rehabilitation protocol followed Kocialkowski et al. . In the first 2 weeks, the elbow was placed in a 30° plaster splint until the soft tissue and hematoma subsided. At 2–4 weeks, active elbow flexion and extension to 0–60° with supination and pronation exercises were allowed. Up to 6 weeks, active elbow flexion was permitted to 90° and advanced to 120° at 8 weeks postoperatively, when the hinged brace was removed . Further rehabilitation protocols included isometric exercises at varying elbow angles in both open and closed chain mode, with a gradual return to normal activities. Follow-up at 6 months and 1 year postoperatively revealed perfect Mayo Elbow Performance and Oxford Elbow Scores in both appointments with no residual pain or ROM deficit; triceps strength had returned to the pre-injury levels (, ).
Written consent was given by the patient for the publication of this case and the images that accompanied this article on his last follow-up visit.