An 85-year-old female patient was admitted to our outpatient department due to newly diagnosed colorectal peritoneal metastasis. Prior evaluation of progressive fatigue and weight loss in a different hospital revealed a suspicious 4 × 7 cm tumor mass in the upper abdomen. Subsequent extended ileocecal resection and pathological evaluation led to the diagnosis of extraluminal CRC relapse with tumor dissemination from the mesentery extending into the terminal ileum and cecum. The patient had initially been diagnosed with adenocarcinoma located at the junction of the descending and sigmoid colon in April 2016 (pT3, pN2 (4/14), V0, L0; G2; UICC IIIA). The tumor was microsatellite stable (MSS) and harbored a KRAS G12C mutation (NRAS/BRAF wild type). Initial therapy consisted of left hemicolectomy followed by 9 cycles of adjuvant 5-FU monotherapy. In 2017, the patient had an endoluminal relapse (rpT2, rpN0 (0/2), L0, V0; G2), which was treated with low anterior resection (clinical timeline illustrated in Fig. ). The patient has a notable family history of CRC, including diagnoses in her sister, mother as well as maternal uncle, aunt, and grandfather. Comorbidities include diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease, and COPD. Now, upon metachronous dissemination of the tumor, a comprehensive TruSight Oncology 500 (TSO500) assay (Illumina, San Diego, USA), performed on a tumor specimen from the recent ileocecal resection, confirmed the initial KRAS p.G12C mutation and additionally identified an ANK3(Ex.28)::RET(Ex.2) fusion with breakpoints located at position chr10:61865663 and chr10:43595905, respectively . This molecular event combination is particularly unusual, given the existing understanding that known RET fusions are typically exclusive to RAS wild-type tumors in CRC or other tumors like NSCLC. Furthermore, next-generation sequencing (NGS) revealed an activating mutation in IDH1 (p.R132C), a truncating mutation in APC , and several other gene mutations of unknown significance (Supplementary Table ). The tumor exhibited a high mutational burden (10.2 mut/Mb). No gene amplifications or other fusions were detected. The ANK3(Ex.28)::RET(Ex.2) fusion was confirmed using the FusionPlex Lung Kit (ArcherDX, Boulder, USA) and by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH, Fig. ). A retrospective analysis of the primary tumor material from 2016 and a tumor-infiltrated lymph node from the same period revealed the presence of RET gene rearrangement. This finding indicates that the RET fusion was an early event in the disease’s progression (Supplementary Fig. ).