A 66-year-old woman presented at our hospital for the treatment of a dislocation 15 years after hemi-arthroplasty. She had undergone hemi-arthroplasty at another hospital using a porous coated anatomical stem (Stryker, MI) for a femoral neck fracture. The patient had poor posture due to compression fracture but was still able to walk until 4 months before presentation at our hospital. The patient had difficulty walking without experiencing trauma and was diagnosed with an anterior dislocation due to reduction of lumbar lordosis and severe posterior pelvic tilt. Because the dislocation could not be reduced at the other hospital, the patient was admitted to our hospital for treatment.
Physical findings at the time of her first visit to our hospital included height of 148 cm, weight of 38 kg, and body mass index of 17.4 kg/m2. There was no tenderness at the femoral triangle, her left leg was shortened in external rotation, she had limited range of motion (ROM; 70 ° of flexion, − 10 ° of extension and 10 ° of abduction) in her left hip joint, and she was unable to keep standing. An X-ray image of her hip in the supine position showed anterior dislocation of the hemi-arthroplasty with severe posterior pelvic tilt . An X-ray image of her lumbar spine showed a wedge-shaped compression fracture of the fifth lumbar vertebra due to osteoporosis and reduction of lumbar lordosis. The small bone fragment in the anterior part of the acetabulum indicated the occurrence of a dislocation fracture due to stress concentration on the anterior wall of the acetabulum.
The anterior pelvic plane (APP), defined as a plane through the bilateral anterior superior iliac spines to the pubic symphysis, was regarded as the anatomic plane of the pelvis in this patient. The angle between the APP and the coronal plane passing through the bilateral anterior superior iliac spines (ASIS) was defined as the sagittal pelvic tilt angle (APP tilting angle) in the supine or standing position. CT data and the Zed Hip system (Lexi, Japan) showed that the APP tilting angle in this patient at admission was 38 degrees posterior in the supine position.
We planned to transform hemi-arthroplasty into THA because anterior coverage with reduced cup anteversion was required for the prevention of anterior dislocation in this case. Due to the severe posterior tilting of the pelvis, cup positioning was planned preoperatively . Because there was no evidence suggesting the loosening of the femoral component, the stem was planned to be retained. CT showed that the anteversion angle of the stem on the femoral table top plane was 16 degrees. Based on a previously published method of calculation [, ], we planned radiographic cup positioning angle to be 40 degrees of inclination and 26 degrees of anteversion relative to the functional pelvic plane (FPP), which was defined as the coronal plane passing through the bilateral ASIS in the supine position. The anatomic cup positioning angle was planned to be 37.3 degrees of inclination and − 8.3 degrees of anteversion, whereas the radiographic cup positioning angle was planned to be 37 degrees of inclination and − 5 degrees of anteversion and the operative cup positioning angle was planned to be 36.8 degrees of inclination and − 6.3 degrees of anteversion, relative to the APP based on a previously published method . Preoperative planning using the Stryker navigation system (Stryker, MI) [, ], a CT-based hip navigation system . We did not perform ROM simulation before surgery because the patient’s implant was already dislocated at the presence to our hospital and the CT data cannot to be used for the ROM simulation.
The operation was performed using a direct lateral approach. The stem was retained after confirmation of rigid stability during surgery. Exposure of the acetabulum revealed a bone defect in its anterior wall. A 46 mm cup was inserted at 37 degrees of inclination and − 5 degrees of anteversion relative to the APP, as determined radiographically using navigation. Because some patients experience progressive posterior changes in pelvic tilt after surgery, the dual mobility MDM X3 Mobile Bearing Hip System (Stryker, MI) was utilized to reduce the risk of re-dislocation. Intraoperative press fit on acetabular implant was adequate for initial stability.
The patient started standing and walking rehabilitation the day after the operation. Three months later, she was able to walk short distances without pain and had a Harris Hip score (HHS) of 78 points. Measurement of her APP tilting angle showed progressive posterior pelvic tilting after the operation , with CT 1 year later showing an APP tilting angle of 47 degrees in the supine position. Three years after the operation, EOS imaging (Paris, France) showed that her APP tilting angle was 60 degrees posterior in the standing position . The sagittal view of EOS imaging showed the angle between APP and femoral shaft was measured to be − 66 degrees (66 degrees extension), indicating hyperextension of the femur in the standing position. The maximum ROM of this patient was assessed by the Zed Hip system. Implant-to-implant impingement was observed at a flexion of 99 degrees and an extension of 68 degrees relative to the APP , indicating a high risk of posterior impingement in the standing position. Gait analysis was also performed 3 years after surgery using VICON612 (Vicon Motion Systems, Oxford, UK) and plug-in-gait marker placement . The hip joint angle was defined as the angle between the APP and the femoral bone axis. The left hip joint was hyperextended relative to the right hip , although the patient was still able to walk for short distances without pain. At the final follow up of three years after operation, hip flexion, extension, inner rotation and external rotation angle and HHS were improved to 90 °, 0 °, 20 ° and 0 °, and was 74 points.