A 3-year-old boy was transferred to our emergency department, which is a referral center, from a primary care hospital near his house. Tarry stool from a week ago and hematemesis that started yesterday were his main complaints. According to the patient’s mother, his stool began to darken last week, but they didn’t consider it an important issue. Then, 2 days prior to admission, he suddenly vomited blood and was rushed to the nearest local hospital . At the time, he had a drop in hemoglobin level, which was followed by a blood transfusion, and he also started on ondansetron and pantoprazole. The patient’s hemoglobin level was at acceptable levels following transfusion; however, a control complete blood count analysis at 18 hours’ post-admission showed a decrease in hemoglobin level. Therefore, after having packed red blood cell transfusion, he was referred to our hospital for further investigation of the underlying disease. The laboratory course of hemoglobin and hematocrit is shown in Fig. .
First evaluation of the patient at the emergency department revealed that he had a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, a pulse rate of 120 beats per minute, a respiration rate of 18, and an oxygen saturation of 98%. His general appearance was slightly pale, but he did not have any complaints of vomiting or diarrhea. There was no evidence of petechiae, purpura, or bruising on his skin. Oropharynx was without inflammation or lesion, and there was no nasal polyp, obstruction, or abnormal discharge from the nasal mucosa. His parents did not declare any history of trauma or bleeding diathesis. Furthermore, the liver and spleen were not palpable on abdominal examination. The digital rectal examination revealed no anal lesion; however, melena was clearly visible. The patient’s medical history revealed that he was diagnosed with Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) at the age of two. He was on omeprazole 10 mg orally once a day, but had stopped taking it 2 months prior to admission.
In our department, the patient’s laboratory tests were normal, and his hemoglobin level was 6.33 mmol/L, so there was no need to inject the packed cell again. The patient’s coagulation parameters were also in the standard range. However, he was scheduled for an upper endoscopy due to the history of hemoglobin drop during his previous hospitalization. Endoscopy reported the esophagus to be completely intact. Still, the stomach was not entirely visible due to the large volume of fresh blood, and the exact site of the bleeding was not localized , so re-endoscopy was recommended to find the bleeding cause. The next day, while the patient was preparing for re-endoscopy, his mother noticed slight bleeding from her son’s mouth, along with his complaint of severe nausea. He then vomited a three-centimeter-long leech, shown in Fig. . Afterward, he reported a history of swimming in a spring near his home and drinking water there. Eventually, he was monitored for 24 hours, and his hemoglobin status was stable. Therefore, he was discharged in good general condition with the essential recommendations to his parents.