The patient was a 35-year old Ethiopian woman, gravida-V, para-IV, who did not remember her last normal menstrual period (LNMP) but claimed to be amenorrheic for the past 8 months. Her gestation from early first trimester ultrasound was 32 weeks and 1 day. She was sent to the emergency obstetrics/gynecology department after she was referred from a primary hospital as a case of preterm pregnancy, pelvic organ prolapse, and preterm premature rupture of membranes. She presented with a complaint of passage of clear liquor of 10 hours duration. She received three antenatal visits from a nearby medical facility. She began to complain about vaginal bulge about 2 years after her most recent delivery, and it got worse every day after that. She felt ashamed of it, so she didn't want to receive any treatment.
Vital signs were within the normal range, and a physical examination revealed no abnormalities in other systems. On abdominal examination, fundal height was 32 cm, the fetus was in longitudinal lie in cephalic presentation, fetal heart rate was 150 beats/minute, and the uterus was soft, without contractions.
During a sterile Sims speculum examination, the entire uterine cervix and anterior vaginal wall was prolapsed and lying on the vulva, the external cervical orifice was closed with a minimal leakage of clear liquor. According to standard Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP-Q IV) system, she was diagnosed with stage IV POP .
On investigation, hemoglobin was 12.6 g/dl, white blood cell count was 9330/cm3, and urinalysis test was normal. Ultrasound revealed a singleton 32-week normal fetus and an amniotic fluid index (AFI) of 10 cm.
She was managed conservatively by manual reduction of prolapsed uterus and bed rest in the Trendelenberg position. Antenatal corticosteroids and prophylactic antibiotics were administered to accelerate fetal lung maturity and to prevent intraamniotic infection, respectively. Pessary was not inserted due to fear of infection. Then, she was admitted to the maternity ward for expectant management. In her expectant management follow-up, she did not have any complain except protruding mass per vagina during ambulation.
On her 37th week of pregnancy, a reevaluation of the prolapse was done, which revealed a stage 3 prolapse, the cervix noted to be 6 cm below the hymen. The patient gave birth to a healthy 3200 g male neonate with an Apgar score of 9−10 by elective cesarean section secondary to premature rupture of membrane at term. At the same operation, cesarean hysterectomy was done.
She was discharged on the fourth postpartum day. A postpartum follow-up at week 6 and month 6 showed that there was no pelvic prolapse when the patient was standing or walking. Follow-up is ongoing.