A 58-year-old woman was referred to our institution for the evaluation of progressive dyspnoea, dizziness, and general weakness. Initial standard 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed diffuse intracardiac conduction abnormalities . The patient’s medical history was unremarkable. A chest X-ray image showed marked cardiomegaly with bilateral pleural effusions. Echocardiography demonstrated a dilated left ventricle with preserved ejection fraction [left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic volume 160 mL; LV end-systolic volume 71 mL; LV ejection fraction 55%] and grade II diastolic dysfunction with elevated left atrial pressure [ratio of peak early to late diastolic filling velocity (E/A ratio) 1.5; ratio of mitral peak velocity of early filling (E) to early diastolic mitral annular velocity (E′) (E/E′ ratio) 18.9; left atrial volume index 47.5 mL/m2]. Twenty-four-hour ambulatory ECG monitoring revealed the recurrence of sustained atrial fibrillation. Under the impression of heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, the patient was treated with losartan 50 mg/day, furosemide 40 mg/day, and spironolactone 25 mg/day for over 5 months. However, her symptoms gradually aggravated, and multifocal ventricular arrhythmias were observed on follow-up ECGs . Bisoprolol 2.5 mg/day or amiodarone 200 mg/day maintenance therapy failed to suppress the recurrence of ventricular premature beats or atrial fibrillation and was discontinued due to the development of severe sinus bradycardia with dizziness. Finally, the patient was admitted for aggravation of dyspnoea and a sensation of general weakness.
The patient complained of New York Heart Association class IV dyspnoea. Although minimal lower extremity pitting oedema was noted on physical examination, typical signs of heart failure such as pulmonary crackles and internal jugular vein distention were not prominent. Cardiac biomarker studies revealed marked increases in N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide of 10 140 (reference: 0–287) pg/mL, troponin-I of 0.2035 (reference: 0–0.0156) ng/mL, and creatinine phosphokinase of 437 (reference: 0–145) U/L. Antinuclear antibody titer was 1:160 (reference: negative). Although the patient received high-dose furosemide for pulmonary decongestion over a period of 4 days, she required intubation for respiratory acidosis and drowsiness. One day after the initiation of mechanical ventilation, the R-on-T phenomenon began to appear on ECG monitoring at a serum potassium concentration of 3.9 (3.5–5.1) mEq/L in atrial fibrillation at a rate of 70–90 beats per minute. Eventually, polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) degenerated into ventricular fibrillation (VF), and the patient was defibrillated . Unlike conventional acquired long QT syndrome induced by hypokalaemia, non-sustained VTs with various QRS complex morphologies with beat-to-beat differences recurred, frequently, even after the correction of serum potassium concentrations to over 5.3 mEq/L . Echocardiography showed a decreased ejection fraction of 37% with an akinetic basal septum ( and B, Videos 1 and 2). However, coronary angiography showed no stenotic lesions. Under the impression of inflammatory myocardial disease such as sarcoidosis, methyl-prednisolone 125 mg was infused once to prevent the recurrence of polymorphic VT or VF. However, 1 day after methyl-prednisolone administration, a high fever of over 38°C developed and persisted for a total of 2 weeks, although all subsequent laboratory test findings were unremarkable. Broad spectrum empirical antibiotics were administered considering the possibility of infection. Because the recurrence of non-sustained VTs was remarkably reduced after a single infusion of high-dose methyl-prednisolone, endomyocardial biopsy was performed to confirm the diagnosis of inflammatory myocardial disease. However, pathologic examinations showed non-specific inflammatory changes with regeneration . Tracheostomy was performed to maintain mechanical ventilation. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging study has been attempted several times, but it could not be performed due to severe respiratory muscle weakness. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography/computed tomography scan did not show abnormal myocardial uptake . We could not make a clinical diagnosis to explain the occurrence of polymorphic VT and pleomorphic non-sustained VT for more than 4 weeks.
Fortuitously, prolonged ventilator weaning failure with unexplained respiratory muscle weakness in the absence of pulmonary oedema or other active lung disease on chest imaging studies raised a clinical suspicion of systemic myopathy. During a bedside swallowing study, dysphagia was observed. Aggravation of dysphagia and progressive weakness of the upper and lower extremities along with a Medical Research Council score of 3/5 also supported the possibility of systemic myopathy. Needle electromyography demonstrated fibrillation potentials and small-amplitude, short-duration motor unit action potentials as well as increased recruitment in the upper and lower extremity muscles. Nerve conduction study findings were unremarkable. Biceps muscle biopsy revealed necrotic muscle fibres without significant inflammatory infiltrates, findings consistent with necrotizing autoimmune myopathy . We therefore administered immune suppressive therapy. The patient received oral prednisolone 10–20 mg/day for 2 months in combination with human immunoglobulin G (2 g/kg for 3 days, 2 cycles) or methotrexate (2.5–12.5 mg/week) therapy, and maintenance therapy allowed improvement of her respiratory muscle power until she was completely weaned off the ventilator. However, non-sustained monomorphic VT frequently recurred . Although low-dose amiodarone or sotalol maintenance therapy was considered, due to a prior history of severe bradycardia and risk of polymorphic VT recurrence, we decided to continue immune suppressive therapy. Fortunately, high-dose steroid therapy (dexamethasone 10 mg/day infusion for 7 days followed by oral prednisolone 20 mg/day) successfully suppressed the recurrence of non-sustained monomorphic VT with a marked reduction in the daily burden of ventricular premature beat . Because the patient strongly refused implantable cardioverter-defibrillator implantation to prevent sudden arrhythmic death against medical recommendation, we continued prolonged ECG monitoring for the recurrence of polymorphic or sustained pleomorphic VT until discharge. The patient was discharged on methotrexate and oral prednisolone combination therapy after improvements in dyspnoea and general weakness at 38 weeks after admission. During the follow-up duration over 1 year, the patient’s functional status was well preserved with New York Heart Association class II dyspnoea and Medical Research Council score 5/5 motor power. Although occasional recurrences of slow monomorphic VT of 1–2 s were observed on repeated ambulatory ECG monitoring, there were no further recurrences of polymorphic or sustained pleomorphic VTs.