A 13-year-old male patient was diagnosed with bilateral flexible of cavus in suspected Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease, grade 4 according to the Sabir and Lyttle classification .
The right foot was firstly scheduled for surgery and operated under spinal anesthesia, with use of tourniquet control. Surgical treatment included PF, naviculocuneiform arthrodesis with closed superolateral wedge resection of articular surfaces, closed superolateral wedge cuboid osteotomy, extensor hallucis longus tendon transfer (Jones procedure), and lesser toes claw deformity correction .
The surgical treatment was performed as follows. With the patient under spinal anesthesia, a tourniquet was applied at the bottom of the right lower limb. A 2-cm skin incision was made on the medial aspect of the heel, and the plantar fascia was identified. Tension was applied by dorsiflexing the metatarsophalangeal joint and complete stripping at the origin of the plantar fascia was performed with a scalpel. A hemostatic sponge was applied. Before correcting the cavus deformity, the tibiotalar joint was positioned at 90°, the subtalar joint aligned at 5° of valgus, and they were both maintained with a percutaneous 2.5 mm K-wire.
The tarsectomy involved two different skin incisions. The lateral approach, approximately 3.5 cm long, was centered on the extensor digitorum brevis muscle belly. The cuboid bone was exposed, and a closed osteotomy of a superolateral bone wedge was fulfilled. The medial approach, of approximately 3.5 cm too, was centered slightly distal to the navicular prominence. The naviculocuneiform joint was exposed and a superolateral bone wedge spanning the articular surfaces was resected. The medial and lateral gaps were closed, thus correcting the deformity in the three planes, and fixed with 2 percutaneous 2.5 mm K-wires, one to stabilize the cuboid osteotomy and one for the naviculocuneiform arthrodesis.
Subsequently, the medial approach was used to perform an extensor hallucis longus tendon transplant to the 1st metatarsal neck and an extensor hallucis longus-extensor hallucis brevis tenodesis (Jones’ procedure) was realized. Finally, a claw deformity correction through a dosed release of the extensor digitorum longus tendon and an arthrodesis of the two proximal phalanges was performed and stabilized with percutaneous K-wires emerging from the tip of the fingers. After the procedure, the tourniquet was released, and a careful hemostasis was realized before layer closure by absorbable sutures.
Post-operative care consisted of immobilization in a plaster cast, applied directly in the operating room at the end of the procedure. The patient was discharged the 1st day after surgery. Plaster cast was well tolerated, and patient general condition was good.
Discharge recommendation was to keep the leg elevated and to avoid any weight-bearing on the operated leg.
At the 36th post-operative day, the plaster cast was removed. A massive soft plantar bulge was found at the level of the medial surgical incision. Once suture stiches removal was performed, a huge blood collection was evacuated together with an important hematoma, which was shortly clinical defined supplied by active bleeding and not manageable with conservative treatment. A blood test was taken and hemoglobin level was 12.9 g/dl.
An urgent contrast-enhanced angio-Computed Tomography was performed, showing a vascular lesion of the lateral plantar artery, a branch of the posterior tibial artery. The dimension of the hematoma was 9 cm × 6 cm × 7.5 cm, associated with a remarkable extravascular spreading of the contrast agent imposed an urgent surgical approach.
The patient was taken to the operating room for surgical procedure the same day.
A medial approach was performed, centered at the level of the plantar fascia insertion on the previous scar. A total evacuation of the medial-plantar hematoma was performed. The vascular lesion appeared to be about 2 cm from the plantar fascia origin.
After the lesion exposition, a vascular suture was performed.
The day after surgery, hemoglobin level was 9.3 g/dl. After a 6-day hospitalization, the patient was discharged with a walker boot. His hemoglobin was stably increasing (from 9.3 g/dl the day after surgery to 11.2 g/dl 6 days after surgery).
At 1 month follow-up, the foot was in good condition, and 5 months after surgery, the patient reported no pain or limitations. AOFAS score improved from 63 points preoperatively to 95 postoperatively. SF-36 improved from 78 preoperatively to 97 points postoperatively.
Six-month later, the same surgical correction (PF, naviculocuneiform arthrodesis with closed superolateral wedge resection of articular surfaces, closed superolateral wedge cuboid osteotomy, extensor hallucis longus tendon transfer, and claw deformity correction of the lesser toes) was performed on the contralateral cavus foot.