A 73-year-old male with primary angle closure with pre-perimetric changes on optical coherence tomography (OCT) nerve fiber layer in the left eye was on maximal medical treatment including xalacom o.d., pilocarpine 2% q.d.s., simbrinza b.d., and oral acetazolamide 250 mg SR b.d. with an IOP of 30 mm Hg. He had previously bilateral peripheral iridotomies.
Ocular examination showed a visual acuity of 6/5 with patent iridotomies with gonioscopy showing that angles were open in all four quadrants with minimal peripheral anterior synichaie affecting less than 90° inferiorly. A central corneal thickness was 523 μm and the cup disc ratio was 0.4. The axial length was 21.86 mm. In view of the open angles, it was unlikely phacoemulsification on its own would achieve adequate intraocular pressure control. Therefore, we discussed risks and benefits and he underwent phacoemulsification and intraocular lens implantation combined with XEN implantation with mitomoycin C. Two months postoperatively, the IOP was 11 mm Hg with a good position of the XEN. Four months postop, his IOP remained stable at 11 mm Hg but the XEN implant showed signs of migration and 4 mm of the implant was visible in the anterior chamber . Bleb was localized around the tip of the XEN implant with conjunctiva showing no injection . The patient was also noted to have a minimal flare and increased posterior synechiae suggestive of a low-grade uveitis in the left eye. Although IOP was controlled, surgery to reposition the XEN and revise the bleb was discussed in view to prevent further inflammation and possible further XEN migration. He underwent surgery; the fornix-based conjunctival flap was made from 10 to 12 o'clock. The tip of the XEN implant was seen at the scleral bed. While explanting the old implant the tip of the XEN broke . A corneal incision was made in the opposite quadrant and the old XEN was explanted using a 23-gauge Grieshaber advanced DSP tip serrated edge through this incision. A new XEN implant was then advanced through this incision into the 2o'clock position where the original XEN had been sited. On gonioscopy, the XEN was confirmed to be in the correct position. The conjunctiva was closed using three 10’0 nylon sutures at the limbus. Subconjunctival mitomycin C 0.1 cc of 0.2 mg/mL was used to prevent further inflammation and scarring. Postoperatively, the pressure in the eye was 8 mm Hg and remained stable at 14 mm Hg 2 weeks later. One month postoperatively the pressure remained low at 16 mm Hg on topical steroids q.d.s. and the XEN implant maintained a good position .