A 43-year-old male patient with a previous history of arterial hypertension and cholecystectomy for gallstone disease, presented in our clinic in 1986 with renal insufficiency secondary to mesangial glomerulonephritis and without any evidence of a renal mass as analyzed by sonography. In 1992, a renal mass on the left side, compatible with renal adenocarcinoma, was detected during a surveillance annual abdominal sonography and was later confirmed by CT scan. The diameter of the lesion was 5 × 5 cm. The same year, the patient underwent left side radical nephrectomy with histopathological diagnosis of clear cell adenocarcinoma pT2pN0M0 (primary tumor localized in the kidney parenchyma without metastases in the regional lymph nodes and without distant metastases according to "tumour-node-metastasis" (TNM) classification. Mesangial glomerulonephritis in the remaining right kidney progressed to end-stage renal failure. In 2000, the patient had peritoneal dialysis and, because thoracoabdominal CT examination revealed no signs of local or distant renal tumor recurrence, the patient was recommended for renal transplantation.
In October 2000, he received a renal transplant from cadaver and started immunosuppressive medication. The regimen included: Prednisolone, Tacrolimus (calcineurin inhibitor) and Mycophenolate. The immunosupression was not augmented since there were no signs of rejection.
In December of the same year, the patient presented with spontaneous pneumothorax on the left side and underwent pleural punction and aspiration. CT scan showed disseminated pulmonary nodules with mediastinal adenopathy. Abdominal CT scan showed a functional transplanted right kidney without malignant lesions. There were no signs of tumor recurrence in the kidneys. Bone scintigraphy was negative for metastases. Histological analysis of biopsies of pleural parietal and pulmonary nodules from the left lung identified them as metastases from clear cell renal carcinoma. DNA microsatellite analyses using AmpFlSTR Profiler Plus PCR Amplification Kit (PE Applied Biosystems, Madrid, Spain) demonstrated that the metastatic lesions did not originate from the donor kidney but from the the primary renal tumor removed with the diseased kidney 8 years earlier. Importantly, these metastatic nodules appeared two months after initiation of immunosuppressive treatment. It was decided to remove the transplant and stop the immunosuppressive medication. The patient was commenced on hemodialysis. In February 2001, immunotherapy with IL-2 and IFN-alpha was initiated, which was well tolerated by the patient. In August 2001, chest CT demonstrated enlargement and progression of the pulmonary metastases. The patient presented with asthenia, anorexia, anemia and bone pain, and he was referred to the Pain Care Unit. In October 2001, one year after commencement of immunosuppressive medication, the patient died.