A 20-year-old female patient firstly underwent metallic prosthetic valve operation with tricuspid valve endocarditis in 2014. Three years after the operation, complaints of resistant ascites and dyspnea had been started. Electrocardiography (ECG) sinus rhythm revealed that the PR interval and QRS width were normal and there were no pathological ST-T wave changes. Echocardiography showed that the prosthetic tricuspid valve leaflets did not open and the maximum and mean gradients on the valve were 17 and 8 mmHg, respectively. Echocardiography revealed that prosthetic valve was dysfunctional thus reoperation was decided. In the second operation, a 27 mm St Jude Medical Epic porcine bioprosthetic valve was implanted in the patient and AV complete block developed in the postoperative period. Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) was 45% and left ventricular dyssynchrony was found on echocardiography performed under transient pacemaker. Due to the low EF and pacemaker dependence of the patient, it was aimed to place two electrodes into the left ventricle and therefore reducing dyssynchrony. The patient underwent 3 left subclavian punctures and two simultaneous access systems were placed in the CS. In the CS angiography, lateral branch and middle cardiac veins were targeted . Electrodes were placed on the target two branches and right atrium. Threshold was below 1 V in both branches. When the CS was paced separately from the lateral branch and middle cardiac vein, the QRS duration was found as 200 ms. However, when the CS was paced simultaneously from the lateral branch and middle cardiac vein (univentricular bifocal pacing), the QRS duration was 160 ms . Echocardiographic control at first month showed that EF was 50%. QRS width did not change during follow-up. Prosthetic valve function was normal in the 2-year follow-up of the patient, EF was around 55% and pacemaker measurements are within normal limits. Atrial pacing was not required in pacemaker control but there were intermittent episodes of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, longest one being 46 h.