An 87-year-old Hispanic man presented to an emergency room complaining of a 3-day history of abdominal pain and profuse diarrhea. He stated that initially he was feeling constipated, which is the reason he was prescribed with over the counter enemas. Four days later he started to feel generalized abdominal colic-type pain that progressively increased until it became unbearable; he also experienced fever and watery stools for a day, which prompted him to seek care in the emergency room. He denied having bone pains, weight loss, or fever. He had a past medical history of hypertension, diabetes, and chronic constipation and was taking insulin glargine, amlodipine, and valsartan. He had a past family history of hypertension and denied having allergies, surgical history, or trauma history. He stated that he was a lifelong non-smoker of tobacco and consumed alcohol occasionally.
An initial physical examination showed a man in mild distress and with dry mucous membranes. His vital signs were normal except for a blood pressure of 150/87 mmHg. His abdomen was non-distended but tender, especially on deep palpation, with no rebound tenderness. No masses or signs of peritoneal irritation were noted, bowel sounds were normal, and a rectal examination showed a normal sphincter tone, no masses, and no signs of rectal bleeding.
Laboratory testing revealed hemoglobin 13.8 g/dl, hematocrit 39%, white blood cell (WBC) count 6.1 K/uL, neutrophils 71.3%, platelets 197 K/uL, creatinine 1.06 mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 30.2 mg/dl, serum total protein 11.6 g/dl, albumin/globulin ratio 0.2 (normal > 1), globulin 9.7 g/dl (2.3–3.5), calcium 8.4 mg/dl (8.4–10.2), and phosphate 4.0 mg/dL. A viral stool panel was negative. Stool for occult blood and Clostridium difficile toxin were both negative. A chest X-ray showed a left-sided pleural effusion and osteopenia in the thoracic spine. A supine abdominal X-ray denoted generalized colonic distention without signs of bowel obstruction.
Based on these results, our patient was treated with metronidazole, ceftriaxone, and albumin infusions; he was reevaluated and found to have a right lower quadrant mass on abdominal palpation. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast showed a 4.96 cm right iliac crest mass. The mass was biopsied and showed findings compatible with a plasmacytoma. This prompted further testing. His urine protein was 1046.25 mg/24 hours (50–150), beta-2 microglobulin 3.7 mg/L (0.7–3.4 mg/L), and a skeletal X-ray survey showed multiple lytic lesions in his skull, femur, and humeral head , and a thorax CT revealed severe lytic lesions involving several costal ribs . Protein electrophoresis showed an alpha-2 monoclonal peak.
Two days after starting antibiotics our patient had a significant improvement; he was tolerating oral daily diet, his abdominal pain had decreased, and his diarrhea stopped. Urine immunofixation revealed a monoclonal Kappa IgG gammopathy and a bone marrow biopsy showed a high expression of CD38 and CD56, compatible with a plasmatic cell neoplasia. He started chemotherapy with bortezomib.
On day 12, he developed a productive cough with white sputum. X-rays showed a pattern compatible with pulmonary edema and new costal fractures . His brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was elevated at 307 pg/ml (< 100 pg/ml) so furosemide was administered. He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where his mental status progressively deteriorated until he remained somnolent and lethargic. His BNP increased further to 617.9 pg/ml (< 100 pg/ml) and a new chest X-ray showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette . On his 17th day of hospitalization he developed cardiopulmonary arrest and died.
The disease progression could not be stopped with the first-line treatment and support therapy, resulting in the death of our patient in less than a month.