A 63-year-old-caucasian woman attended our clinic in December 2022 due to loss of vision in her left eye (OS). She presented ocular history of glaucoma under treatment in both eyes and history of breast cancer, treated with letrozole (aromatase inhibitor) and having previously received paclitaxel (taxane) until May 2021, pertuzumab (anti-HER2 antibody) and trastuzumab (anti-HER2 antibody) until May 2022.
Best corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA) in OS was 20/60; intraocular pressure (IOP) under topical treatment with Duotrav® (travoprost and timolol) was 18 mmHg in both eyes. Biomicroscopically, she showed a corticonuclear cataract in her OS. The ocular fundus study and spectral domain ocular coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed a full thickness stage II macular hole (MH) with tractional component .
Combined cataract phacoemulsification and PPV was planned, being performed in January 2023 without any intraoperative incidents under local (retrobulbar) anesthesia. To perform the surgery, the EVA Nexus system (DORC Co., The Netherlands) was used placing the three 23-gauge trocars and performing the phacoemulsification and insertion of an Envista (Bausch &Lomb Co., Spain) intraocular lens, with a duration of 19:07 min. After that, central and peripheral PPV were performed assisted by the manufacturer’s stock light probe and using standard endo-illumination vitrectomy settings. Detachment of the posterior hyaloid after impregnation with triamcinolone, and internal limiting membrane peeling after staining with Membrane Blue Dual (DORC Co., The Netherlands) dye during 2 min without light followed. Internal fluid-air exchange and tamponade with 12% C3F8 completed the surgery with a total duration of 59:12 min without complications.
The postoperative period evolved without any notable incidents keeping prone position for 7 days and presenting normal IOP values. However, the patient reported from the first day the presence of a “black spot in the center of her visual field”. When the gas bubble disappeared BCVA in her OS was 20/400. After slit-lamp examination, pseudophakia was correct, while fundoscopy revealed retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) changes in the area that was illuminated by the endoprobe ; OCT showed a complete closure of the MH with alterations in outer retina, and fundus autofluorescence (FAF) testing revealed significant alteration of RPE in that area using both Triton, (Topcon Co, Japan; Fig. A) and blue FAF Spectralis platforms (Heidelberg Co, Germany; Fig. B).
The visual loss was further assessed by performing a visual field study (Humphrey Field Analyzer 3, Zeiss Co., Germany) demonstrating a central absolute scotoma and a multifocal electroretinogram (ERG) (Reti-report/scan 21, Roland Consult Co., Germany) with a marked loss of sensitivity when compared to the right eye (OD).
The diagnosis of macular phototoxicity was established based on all these findings. Two months later, the patient reported a slight improvement with BCVA reaching 20/200 OS; no changes on ocular images were found.