We report the case of a 30-year-old man with no pathologic background, who presented a single tonic-clonic seizure four months ago. He complained of neither intracranial hypertension symptoms, nor visual symptoms. Neurological and physical exam were normal. Brain CT scan showed a right frontal lesion with intra and extra axial components. Brain MRI showed that the extraxial lesion was related to a hypertrophic pachymeningitis underlaying an intraparenchymal mass which showed a heterogenous enhancement following injection of Gadolinium. A finger-like edema signal was surrounding. At this stage, we mainly suspected a CNS lymphoma or a glioma, but the underlying pachymeningitis was against this hypothesis. The decision was to operate the patient for the most complete possible resection and to obtain the pathologic confirmation. Peroperative, the intra-axial lesion was greyish, non-hemorrhagic, and came easily into suction. There was neither necrosis nor thrombosed veins. The pachymeningitis was extensive and had a meningioma-like aspect. We entirely removed the intra-axial portion, whereas the pachymeningitis was extending towards the fronto-basal region, thus inaccessible through our surgical corridor.
Postoperative course was uneventful, and control CT scan showed no complications. The patient was discharged at the 4th postoperative day. Pathological exam concluded to a plasma cell granuloma. A malignant blood disorder became the first working diagnosis, followed by infectious and inflammatory diseases. A whole-body CT-scan showed no more than thoracic aortitis. Complete blood work studies, including serology of infectious diseases, tumor markers screenings, anti-NMO antibodies and vasculitis tests were performed and came back negative.
The patient was also tested for an array of antibodies among which antinuclear antibodies were positive (blood level superior to 1/100). A lip biopsy was also performed and showed no abnormalities. CSF evaluation revealed clear fluid with normal glucose concentration, normal protein levels and lymphocytic pleocytosis. Finally, IgG-4 plasma levels were elevated to 2g/L (normal values vary between 0.040 and 0.870 g/L) which led to the diagnosis of an IgG4-RD. The patient was put under 0.6mg/kg/d of prednisolone during 15 days followed by a progressive degression over 6 months. One year after surgery, the patient showed neither clinical nor radiological signs of recurrence.