An 18-year old man was admitted to our hospital with a 3-day history of fever, associated with myalgia, lethargy and headaches. He reported gum bleeding when he brushed his teeth that morning. He had chicken pox 2 months prior to his admission but otherwise did not have any past medical history of note. He is a teetotaller and does not smoke cigarettes. On examination, his vital signs were as follows; temperature of 39.2°C, pulse rate of 110 beats per minute and blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg with evidence of postural hypotension. His respiratory rate was 24 per minute with oxygen saturation of 94% when inspiring room air. He had a macular confluent rash over the face, thorax and flexor surfaces but review of other systems was unremarkable on admission. Routine blood investigations were performed with the following results; hemoglobin (Hb) 15.8 g/dL, white blood count (WBC) 3.0 × 109/L and a platelet count of 64 × 109/L. Serum creatinine was 88 umol/L, serum sodium 129 mmol/L and potassium 3.7 mmol/L. Liver enzyme results were as follows: alanine transaminases 170 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 44U/L, bilirubin 14umol/L. Protein level was 67 g/L with albumin of 43 g/L. Dengue NS1 antigen was positive but dengue IgM and IgG antibodies were negative. He was diagnosed as acute dengue fever and treated with intravenous infusion of normal saline with strict management of his fluid intake and supportive therapy for his symptoms. The patient did not require any blood products during his illness.
He responded well to medical treatment and his symptoms improved by Day 3 of admission. On Day 6, the patient complained of unsteadiness, falling backwards when walking. This was associated with slurring of speech but he denied any difficulty swallowing food. He also complained of sudden weakness in the right arm, unable to lift it up above his head, which was associated with pain in the shoulder. His mother commented that he seemed slow in his movements and took a longer time to respond to questions.
A comprehensive neurological examination revealed an alert young man with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15/15. His Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was 30/30 although he was noted to be bradyphrenic and his speech was dysarthric. Cranial nerve examination revealed bilateral nystagmus but no opthalmoplegia. He had weakness of the right trapezius, right sternocleidomastoid muscle and his tongue was pushed to the right on protrusion. His gag reflex was intact. Examination of the remaining cranial nerves did not reveal any other abnormality. Examination of the limbs revealed weakness in the right deltoid muscle Medical Research Council (MRC) grade 3/5, right infraspinatus muscle MRC grade 3/5, with winging of the right scapula. There was no muscle atrophy. The reflexes were absent in the right biceps. He had bilateral dysmetria and intention tremor in the upper limbs. There was evidence of bilateral bradykinesia when performing finger and toe tapping. Proprioception and pin-prick sensation was normal. His gait was ataxic and broad based.
Additional laboratory investigations were requested. A repeat IgM and IgG for dengue antibodies were positive at 1 week post admission. Serum B12 and serum folate levels were normal. ESR was elevated at 78 mm/hr. Anti-nuclear antibodies were negative, C3 and C4 levels were within normal limits. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed no white blood cell or red blood cells, total protein of 557 mg/L and glucose of 2.5 mmol/L with corresponding blood glucose of 5.4 mmol/L. Cerebrospinal fluid culture for dengue virus and herpes simplex virus were negative. He was screened for viral hepatitis; Hepatitis A IgM, HBsAg and Anti-HCV were all non-reactive. Similarly, HIV antigen and antibody were also negative. A gadolinium-enhanced MRI scan of the brain with FLAIR sequence was requested and did not reveal any focal pathology . A nerve conduction study was performed and the findings were unremarkable.
A diagnosis of parkinsonism with multiple cranial neuropathies, cerebellar ataxia and brachial plexopathy secondary to dengue fever was made. He was given intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg OD for 3 days.
At 1-month review in clinic, his symptoms of parkinsonism and cerebellar ataxia had resolved but weakness in the right deltoid and infraspinatus muscles remained with marked muscle atrophy. The nerve conduction study was repeated and the findings were normal. However, electromyogram (EMG) revealed chronic denervation changes in the right deltoid and right trapezius muscle, consistent with right brachial plexopathy.