This is the case of a 64-year-old male mason who presented with left shoulder pain and disability. The patient underwent two procedures 10 months before presentation: a revision rotator cuff repair in his left shoulder and placement of a subacromial interpositional balloon spacer in his right shoulder. He continued to have significant pain in his left shoulder and felt a discrepancy between his two shoulders in terms of strength and function, favoring the right side. He presented for a discussion of options regarding treatment for his left shoulder. He denied any traumatic incident since his last procedures. He is taking opioid medication to control his shoulder pain. He has a history of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia, along with a surgical history that included a cerebral bypass and a cardiac stent placement procedure, for which he takes aspirin and ticagrelor. He also had a recent hemithyroidectomy for a thyroid cyst with an uneventful post-operative course. The patient has no history of inflammatory or rheumatologic diseases. He has a strong build with a height of 185 cm and weight of 101 kg.
On physical examination, the patient demonstrated good cervical spine mobility with only mild limitations. The left shoulder showed well healing scars from his previous procedure, with mild muscular atrophy. Range of motion testing showed 140° of forward elevation, 90° of abduction, 30° of external rotation, and passive internal rotation reaching upper lumbar spine. Strength testing showed a score of 5 on forward elevation, 4+ on external rotation, and 5 on internal rotation. The patient had a negative belly press test and was neurovascularly intact. The patient rated his right shoulder to be in a significantly better state than his left shoulder and contemplated the possibility of undergoing a subacromial balloon placement in his left side as well to treat his pain.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left shoulder demonstrated a large retear of the previously repaired rotator cuff, mainly at the supraspinatus tendon and extending into his infraspinatus tendon . Sagittal MRI views showed severe atrophy of infraspinatus His subscapularis appeared intact and the patient displayed low/intermediate grade arthritic changes. Education regarding different treatment options and approaches were provided to the patient, and after careful consideration, it was decided that the patient’s left shoulder would be a good candidate for a subacromial balloon placement procedure. Pre-operative clearance from the patient’s primary care physician and cardiologist was obtained before the procedure, and instructions on when to stop and resume anticoagulant medications were provided.
This was an outpatient procedure, which used a combination of general anesthesia and a peripheral nerve block that helps with post-operative pain. Arthroscopic evaluation of the previous repair and debridement of damaged tissue took place. A large subacromial balloon was inserted into the subacromial space and was filled with saline according to guidelines. The patient tolerated the procedure well . Cultures from the glenohumeral joint were taken to test for any possible chronic indolent infection. The patient was instructed to remain in a sling for 10 days following the insertion of the balloon. At 2 weeks, the patient reported significant improvement in pain and function. On physical assessment, range of motion examination revealed forward elevation of around 140° and abduction of around 110° . The patient was instructed to start physical therapy at 3 weeks post-procedure, and as of 2 months post-operative, he had been having an uneventful rehabilitation process.