A 48-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA). The patient had no symptoms of abdominal pain, diarrhea or bloody stools.
The patient underwent laparoscopic radical colon resection 14 mo previously and subsequently underwent a second local resection due to local recurrence detected by elevated serum CEA and positron emission tomography (PET). However, multiple metastases in the spleen were found 7 mo later by elevated serum CEA and PET-magnetic resonance imaging. The patient then underwent a totally laparoscopic splenectomy. Local tumor recurrence and splenic metastasis from the colorectal cancer (CRC) were found by postoperative pathology.
The patient denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, and other relevant illnesses.
The patient did not have a family history of cancer.
Physical examination was normal.
Complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, and alpha fetoprotein, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), cancer antigen 125 (CA125), and CA153 were within normal limits, except for CEA which was 12.41 ng/mL (normal range 0-5.0 ng/mL), 51.49 ng/mL and 206.89 ng/mL, respectively.
The first endoscopy revealed a sigmoid colon mass. The second and third endoscopies were normal.
A sigmoid colon mass was found by abdomen enhanced computed tomography (CT) . Local recurrence in the descending colon was found by positron emission tomography (PET)-CT and lymph nodes showed no high metabolic shadow. Isolated splenic metastasis was found by PET-magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and lymph nodes also showed no high metabolic shadow.
The clinical stage assessed by enhanced CT before surgery was cT4aN0M0 and postoperative pathological stage was pT4aN2M0 after laparoscopic radical resection of sigmoid adenocarcinoma and one-stage anastomosis. The patient received chemotherapy (Xelox regimen, capecitabine 1000 mg/m2) for 3 wk with a total of 8 treatment courses. However, the CEA level gradually increased 14 mo after surgery, and PET-CT showing a high metabolic shadow in the descending colon. Following MDT consultation, a second laparoscopic exploration was performed. The extent of local resection based on a laparoscopic exploration and no other recurrences were found. Local resection of the recurrence in the intestinal tract and one-stage anastomosis were carried out during surgery. The tumor edge is 5 cm away from the proximal and distal margin. Postoperative pathology confirmed a poorly differentiated colon adenocarcinoma (with extra-serosal and muscular is invasion).The circumferential, proximal, and distal margins were negative. Xelox chemotherapy was again administered for 3 wk per treatment course for almost 3 mo. At a subsequent examination, the CEA level had gradually increased over the 7-mo period after the second operation. After the second MDT consultation, laparoscopic exploration was performed, and no peritoneal metastases were observed and the spleen was removed via laparoscopy. The surgical specimen displayed multiple metastases . Chemotherapy with FOLFIRI (irinotecan 180 mg/m2 + 5-FU 400 mg/m2 d1, injection, +2400 mg/m2, injection, every 2 wk) and bevacizumab (5 mg/kg drop every 2 wk) was administered for 2 wk following the suggestions by a third MDT consultation.
The first postoperative pathology indicated a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma; 4 of 15 perirectal lymph nodes harvested were positive; and circumferential, proximal, and distal margins were negative. The second postoperative pathology showed the same results. The last postoperative pathology indicated multiple metastatic moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the spleen, with tumor sizes ranging from 0.4 to 3.0 cm, and originating from CRC via hematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemistry . Genetic analysis of local recurrence and splenic metastasis showed KRAS exon2, APC exon16, and TP53 exon6 missense mutations, while no mutations of NRAS, KRAF, EGFR, ERBB2, MET, MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 were detected.