We report the case of a 61-year-old Tunisian woman presented to the emergency unit with a 4-hour history of abdominal pain, diffused at both flanks without hematuria. Her medical history was significant for diabetes, hypertension and atrial fibrillation, besides her surgical history indicates left pneumectomy for pulmonary tuberculosis. Her medications consisted of aspirin, metformin, furosemide, and metoprolol. Physical examination showed vital signs as follows: body temperature of 37.2°C, blood pressure of 150/85 mmHg, heart rate of 133 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute; the abdomen was soft with slight tenderness in the renal angles. The remainder of the examination was normal.
An electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation. A biological analysis showed high serum creatinine levels (205μmol/L); her aminotransferases were twice normal the normal levels and her lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level had increased to (8,636IU/L) with high leukocytosis at 15,000 cells/mm3. A urine analysis showed no hematuria or infection. A serum analysis done one month previously showed that her creatinine level was normal (93μmol/L). Nephrolithiasis and mesenteric ischemia were strongly suspected to be the causes for this acute pain.
Ultrasounds of the abdomen were performed and showed peri-renal fluid collection with heterogeneous parenchyma . Contrast-enhanced helical computed tomography (CT) images showed: a thrombus in the left auricle, an increase in kidney’s size besides to perirenal edema and multiple parenchymal perfusion defects of both kidneys that are related to segmental distal arterial lesions which suggest arterial thromboembolic disease. Aorta and renal arteries were permeable with no atherosclerotic plaque; the renal vein and inferior vena cava were both less permeable. Figure .
Subsequent transesophageal echocardiography confirmed the presence of a thrombus in the left atrium without valvular vegetations Figure .
We concluded that it was a bilateral renal infarction of embolic origin caused by migration of an embolus from the left atrium. In addition to analgesic, continuous IV infusion of heparin was administered at the curative dose of 18 units/kg/hour and the outcome was favorable: the abdominal pain disappeared besides to a decrease of serum creatinine to (115 μmol/ l) after 3 days. One month later, the creatinine levels declined to 95 μmol/ l so we also concluded that acute renal failure was due to the infarction.