A 57-year-old female was presented with a history of rheumatic heart disease, replacement of mitral and tricuspid valves (perimount 33 mm) 11 years back. Post-surgery she required a single chamber pacemaker implantation through the PHV in view of a complete heart block. She now presented with progressive dyspnoea (New York Heart Association, NYHA, Class III), oedema feet, ascites, and palpitations for the last 6 months. She also had a history of diabetes. Physical examination showed tachycardia, blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, increased jugular venous pressure, and SpO2 of 90% on oxygen support.
In the hospital, ECG showed paced ventricular rhythm. Echocardiography showed dysfunctional prosthetic heart valves (PHV) at the mitral position, moderate valvular mitral regurgitation (MR), PHV leaflets were thickened with restricted valve opening resulting in significant stenosis. PHV at the tricuspid position showed moderate valvular tricuspid regurgitation along with pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 50 mmHg, global left ventricular hypokinesia with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 35% (see , ). Computed tomography was done to reconfirm valve dimensions, and assessment of outflow tract. The coronary angiogram was normal and was done to delineate coronary anatomy and exclude any high-risk coronary lesion in view of diabetes. Other relevant tests like renal function tests, liver function tests, thyroid function tests, and pulmonary function tests were done prior to the surgery and were normal. Pacemaker interrogation showed a remaining battery life of <2 months.
The patient was managed with standard medications while being prepared for the procedure. In view of the high-surgical-risk society of thoracic surgeons (STS) Score (42 kg frail, with NYHA Class III, with cardiac cirrhosis, reoperation, thin chest walls, post-surgery pancreatic tail mass), surgery was ruled out as in-hospital mortality and morbidity was 57%. Her calculated Euro Score was 55%. She was planned for transcatheter mitral valve replacement (TMVR) and transcatheter tricuspid valve replacement (TTVR) followed by pacemaker battery replacement procedure. The surgical plan was discussed, explained and consent was taken.