A 45-year-old man underwent an annual physical examination and was found to have a tumor in the lower esophagus without any symptoms. He had no significant medical or family history and unremarkable laboratory data. His upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a 2 × 2 cm mass lesion with submucosal elevation in the lower thoracic esophagus . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) indicated a 1.6 × 2 cm homogeneous hyperechoic mass with a sharply demarcated smooth surface originating from the muscular layer . Upper GI series showed a submucosal mass in the lower thoracic esophagus . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a 2 × 2 cm mass lesion with homogeneous high contrast enhancement in the right side of the lower esophagus . There was no evidence of local invasion, lymph node involvement or distant metastasis. Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG–PET) showed no positive uptake in the tumor (data not shown).
Pathologic diagnosis of EUS-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy (EUS–FNA) revealed linear, cordate, vesicular, and perivascular proliferation of atypical cells with foci of hyalinized and fibrous stroma. Atypical cells were small round to spindled shape with increased chromatin, chromatin granularity, and irregular nuclei . Mitotic activity was not detected. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor was positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin , but negative for CD34, desmin, keratin 18, S-100 protein, melan A, c-kit, and STAT6. Therefore, he was diagnosed with esophageal GT. Based on the tumor size, histological characteristics, and patient’s physical status, tumor resection by a minimally invasive thoracoscopic approach was planned.
A Sengstaken–Blakemore (SB) tube was placed in the esophagus under general anesthesia. A right thoracoscopic approach was performed in the prone position under artificial pneumothorax. The tumor was identified on the right side of the lower esophagus. The esophageal balloon of the SB tube was inflated and the tumor was compressed towards the right thoracic cavity. The muscle layer was split and the elastic soft tumor was effectively extruded by the balloon pressure dilatation. The tumor was then successfully enucleated without mucosal penetration. The esophageal muscular layer was closed with a continuous barbed absorbable suture. The operation time was 184 min, and the total blood loss was uncountable. Postoperative fluoroscopy on postoperative day (POD) 3 showed a smooth passage at the suture site , with oral intake started on the same day. He was discharged on POD 9 in good physical condition.
Macroscopic examination of the resected and fixed specimen showed a tumor 15 mm in size, retained within the capsule with no apparent tumor exposure .
Pathologic examination of the resected specimen revealed round to spindle shaped tumor cells with atypical round nuclei and eosinophilic to pallid cytoplasm. Mitosis or vascular invasion was not detected. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin. In addition to molecules such as CD34, desmin, keratin 18, S-100 protein, melan A, c-kit, and STAT6 that were examined in the preoperative biopsy specimen, AE1/AE3, synaptophysin, and DOG1 were all negative in the resected specimen. These findings were consistent with preoperative histologic examination , further confirming the diagnosis of GT.
No surgical complications such as leakage, stenosis or reflux, and no tumor metastasis were observed during the 1-year postoperative follow-up.