A 67-year-old woman was admitted to hospital with central chest heaviness radiating to her left shoulder accompanied by shortness of breath but no nausea or diaphoresis. Prior to developing chest heaviness, she noticed the onset of migraine and took 10 mg of rizatriptan orally. Her symptoms began shortly after taking this medication. She noted that in the past, she had experienced chest heaviness, albeit less severe, after taking rizatriptan. Additional past medical history included dyslipidaemia, type II diabetes mellitus and hiatus hernia. She was otherwise fit and well at baseline, living independently and engaging in regular light exercise involving walking several blocks. At the time of presentation, her blood pressure was 142/86 mmHg, heart rate 73 b.p.m., and SpO2 98%. A cardiorespiratory examination was normal.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with occasional ventricular ectopic beats, normal ST segments, and T waves . Her full blood count revealed a normal white cell count of 10.68 × 109/L (normal range 4.0 to 11.0 × 109/L) but a slightly elevated neutrophil count of 7.98 × 109/L (normal 1.9 to 7.5 × 109/L) which normalised within 12 h. Her high sensitivity troponin T was initially 135 ng/L (normal <15 ng/L), increasing to 179 ng/L at 4 h and 188 ng/L at 9 h. Her chest X-ray demonstrated a normal cardiothoracic ratio with no other abnormalities. The InterTAK Diagnostic Score was 65 (73.7% probability of TS).
A coronary angiogram showed mild diffuse coronary disease. Successive ECGs demonstrated gradual development of deepening T wave inversion in leads I, II, aVL, aVF, and V1–6 over the subsequent 48 h . Echocardiogram on the day of admission showed severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 34% with akinesis of the mid to apical left ventricle including the apex with preserved basal segment (see ). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) performed 2 days later demonstrated evidence of myocardial oedema in the mid to apical left ventricle without late gadolinium enhancement ( and , and ).
In the absence of obstructive coronary disease, the imaging features were consistent with TS. The patient was commenced on oral bisprolol 1.25 mg mane and perindopril 2 mg po mane were commenced. The patient remained well during her hospitalisation and her chest pain resolved. We advised the patient to discontinue use of rizatriptan and she was discharged from hospital with a plan for a repeat echocardiogram and cardiac rehabilitation. During follow up, bisprolol was stopped due to bradycardia and significant lethargy. Perindopril was later discontinued due to hypotension. At the clinic visit, seven weeks after admission, the patient remained well, with no cardiac symptoms to report. Follow-up transthoracic echocardiogram at 3 months showed complete resolution of the regional wall motion abnormalities and normalisation of her LVEF.