A 7-year-old male patient who presented at the Neurology service for a headache in his right temporal region that had evolved during one week, of intermittent nature, mild to moderate intensity, each episode between 3-4 seconds; and with subsequent, complete recovery. No history of trauma; he denies presenting fever or other systemic manifestations. There was no distal coldness, crying, or pallor, no feeling of dizziness, nausea, emesis, photophobia, phonophobia, or autonomic symptoms, no relationship with valsalva, or associated with exercise. Neither the patient nor his parents identified any triggering factors.
The patient reports four episodes of PSH in the week prior to the consultation, without interfering with his sleep hours. There is no history of other neurological symptoms, epileptic seizures or changes in personality. The interrogation did not recognize alterations in neurodevelopment, he presents a good school performance and an adequate sleep pattern. No personal background of relevance. No headaches or other related pathologies are reported in the family history.
On physical examination, he presented normal vital signs, a weight of 22 kg and 1.22 m of height. In the neurological examination, neither alterations nor skin stigmas indicative of neuro-cutaneous syndromes were identified.
The intervention was started with a one-month observation period, in which the child's caregiver was asked to prepare a headache diary that would allow characterizing and quantifying the episodes (date and time, laterality, associated activity, duration and need for medication).
The following month, he was cited for a control, where 21 episodes were quantified with the clinical characteristics described above but without a predominant laterality; no triggering or attenuating factors were identified. A simple and contrasted cerebral magnetic resonance imaging was performed, which showed no alterations of any kind. Based on the characteristics of the episodes, the clinical course and the results of the MRI, he was diagnosed with PSH, so a therapeutic test was prescribed with Coenzyme Q10, in a dose of one 100-mg tablet given orally every 12 hours as a prophylactic treatment, and the diary registry of headaches continued.
After two months of administration of Coenzyme Q10, no improvement in symptoms was identified. Due to this therapeutic failure, it was decided to suspend that medication. Two weeks later, it was initiated a new treatment with half a tablet of 1.5 mg melatonin daily (0.07 mg/kg), administered at night; with this therapy, it was achieved a reduction in the frequency of headaches during the first two weeks of treatment: only two episodes occurred during this period. Along the six months of follow-up, no new episodes or adverse effects have been documented , and both tolerability and therapeutic adherence have been optimal, as assessed by the scale of 8-item therapeutic adherence of Morisky .