A 66-year-old female presented to the emergency room of our hospital for suspected left leg deep vein thrombosis (day 1). Her past medical history included aortic valve replacement with a sutureless bioprosthesis for severe valve stenosis 2 years before, and chronic gastritis. The patient complained of fever and pain in the left ankle 5 days before the present hospital admission. Her left leg was purpuric and painful, and the patient was febrile (37.5 °C). However, the venous Doppler scan was negative. Following admission to an internal medicine ward, routine laboratory analyses were normal with the exception of microhaematuria (26 erythrocytes μl−1 – normal values <10), intense haemoglobinuria and mildly elevated serum creatinine (0.11 mmol l−1 – normal values 0.03–0.09). At day 2, blood cultures were drawn from peripheral veins, and these were negative. Fever and left leg purpura endured and, on day 7, empirical antibiotic therapy with vancomycin and meropenem was initiated. On day 12 two blood cultures were repeated from peripheral veins and, after 48 h of incubation, both specimens were positive for pleomorphic, filamentous and branching Gram-positive rods. Both transthoracic (TTE) and transesophageal (TEE) echocardiograms were negative for echographic signs of endocarditis (day 17). The patient remained febrile and on days 19 and 28 blood cultures from peripheral veins were repeated. On a single blood culture set (anaerobes and aerobes) performed on day 28, the same Gram-positive rods grew again. Even if both samples from day 19 were negative, the day 28 blood cultures were again positive for Gram-positive rods. Subcultures were positive on 5 % sheep blood agar incubated aerobically and on chocolate plates incubated in 5 % CO2 atmosphere, where 2 mm shiny yellow-pigmented colonies were evident after 18 h of incubation. However, they were unidentified by Vitek2 (bioMérieux, France). Further, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization/time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) analysis (Vitek MS, bioMérieux, France) was unable to identify the organism. Since none of the phenotypical tests were able to provide correct identification of the strain, genotypical identification was performed by amplification and sequencing of a DNA fragment encoding for a 16S rRNA sequence, according to the manufacturer’s suggestions (Applied Biosystems, USA). The 1500 bp sequence was compared with those present in GenBank using the blastn program, and similarity of 100 % (891 out of the 891 bases recorded in terms of the 16S rRNA) was found with the genome of strain KH1 (GenBank accession number: AB435177.1). The sequence of the strain was then deposited in the GenBank database with the accession number MN428443.
The MIC values were as follows: erythromycin, 2.0 µg ml−1; penicillin, 2.0 µg ml−1; vancomycin, 0.5 µg ml−1; linezolid, 1 µg ml−1; and rifampin, 1.0 µg ml−1. Since no Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) or European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) breakpoints are provided for this bacterial genus, the Interpretive Standards for the Minimal Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) of provided by EUCAST were used, and the strain was interpreted as being susceptible to vancomycin and linezolid, and resistant to penicillin and rifampin.
On day 57 vancomycin and meropenem were shifted to oral linezolid (600 mg q 12 h), but both fever and left leg purpura endured and renal function decreased further (serum creatinine 0.32 mmol l−1). The histological examination of a renal biopsy was compatible with an IgA nephropathy with tubulointerstitial nephritis. The patient was diagnosed with an ‘atypical’ presentation of Henoch–Shönlein purpura (i.e. without arthritis and gastrointestinal disease). Prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) was started with improvement of renal function, fever and purpuric lesions. The patient was discharged on day 84 with prednisone 1 mg/kg/day and without antibiotic therapy. The subsequent follow-up ambulatory examinations were unremarkable apart for a progressive decrease of renal function. On day 157 the patient presented again to the emergency room with fever, mental confusion, hypotension and acute left arm ischaemia. A brain CT scan revealed multiple ischaemic lesions and intraparenchymal haemorrhages. A left arm ultrasound evaluation revealed an arterial brachial thrombosis. Blood cultures drawn at admission were negative, and empirical therapy with vancomycin and piperacillin/tazobactam was started. A TEE revealed a possible aortic valve periprosthetic abscess. On day 167 a technetium-99-labelled hexamethylpropylene amine oxime white blood cell single photon emission computed tomography (Tc-99m HMPAO WBC SPECT) was performed . The scintigraphic findings were interpreted as aortic valve periprosthetic endocarditis with a septic embolism in the left wrist. The patient deceased on day 170. The autoptic examination confirmed the suspected aortic valve periprosthetic abscess and revealed multiple arterial thromboses and septic embolisms in the kidneys, brain, spleen and myocardium. Cultures from the prosthetic valve were not performed.