A 5 years 8 months old girl addressed pediatric nephrologist from another center and country due to persistent edema and decreased diuresis for over a month and was hospitalized because of generalized edema.
At the age of 2.5 years she was diagnosed with steroid-dependent NS and was treated with prednisolone but due to persistent proteinuria after 1 year and 8 months of treatment Prednisolone was changed to mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 250 mg x 1 daily. Level of persistent proteinuria is unknown due to the lack of past medical history. After 4 months of NS onset the patient was diagnosed with hypothyroidism and got L-thyroxine 50 mcg daily. Unfortunately, thyroid hormone, albumin, creatinine and proteinuria levels at this time are not available.
Mother informed, that at the age of 3.5 months the girl‘s growth velocity has slowed down significantly. There is no information about thyroid hormone levels (TH) that time. The reason for poor growth during infancy prior to clinical diagnosis of NS is unclear. Wrist X-ray to assess patient’s bone age was performed at the age of 4 years and 8 months and evaluated as being of 3 years and 6 months. Auxological data presented by mother was available only from the birth to the age of one year and from the age of 5 years and 8 months, when the patient arrived to our clinic. Patients’ growth chart is shown in .
On admission patient’s height was 93.5 cm (–13 cm <3 percentile), weight 17.2 kg (15–25 percentile), abdominal circumference 63 cm, blood pressure 99/65 mmHg (90 percentile), generalized edema: periorbital edema, edema in hands and legs, sacrum area, ascites with umbilical hernia, pleural effusion. Initial laboratory results were specific to NS with severely expressed hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia. Patient’s kidney biopsy revealed minimal change disease.
Treatment with albumin infusion, methylprednisolone pulse therapy, diuretics and increased dosage of MMF (0.77 g/m2) was started. It took 14 days to achieve partial remission, edema decreased very slowly. Urine dipstick test on three consecutive days showed proteinuria 2+ after the treatment, compared to 4+ before the treatment. To control overt hypothyroidism due to urinary excretion of thyroid transporting proteins and thyroid hormones, L-thyroxine dose was increased to 75 mcg. To rule out other etiologies of hypothyroidism, such as autoimmune thyroiditis, TPOAb was performed and it was normal (12.65 IU/ml). Before being admitted to our clinic, the patient received a high cumulative dose of prednisolone (approx. 7800 mg in 1 year and 8 months) which could have impacted patient’s growth. Hypothesizing that patient’s short stature was caused by thyroid dysfunction because of NS and high cumulative dose of steroids, it was decided to perform growth hormone stimulation test after achieving partial/full NS remission to evaluate growth hormone (GH) secretion and to rule out severe GH deficiency. After 3 weeks of hospitalization the girl was discharged with no edema, unsignificant proteinuria with MMF 250 mg x 2 daily and daily methylprednisolone (24 mg/day for 4 weeks followed by gradual reducing over 1 month) which resulted in NS remission (proteinuria 1+ in urine dipstick test on three consecutive days) .
One month after discontinuation of treatment with methylprednisolone thyroid function normalized and treatment with L-thyroxine was stopped. Two weeks later standard growth hormone stimulation test with clonidine was performed resulting in partially insufficient growth hormone secretion . During NS remission with normalization of thyroid function (TSH 6.680 mU/l, FT4 13.85 pmol/l) and normalization of IGF-1 level (from unmeasurable (<15 mcg/l) to 132 mcg/l) partial catch-up growth was observed (height velocity increased from 3.5 cm/year to 7.3 cm/year, based on 4-month calculation period) . Assuming that basal growth hormone level was not low, reflecting possible spontaneous peak prior to the stimulation procedure, interpretation of growth hormone response is somewhat arbitrary, therefore it was decided to continue careful growth rate monitoring and then decide for a need of another growth hormone stimulation test. Genetic testing was also done with no findings.
The patient is regularly followed by a pediatric nephrologist and her remission continues with MMF 750 mg (1.23 g/m2), Enalapril 2.5 mg and Vit. D 2000 IU daily.