A 57-year-old Japanese man visited our hospital for consultation of asthma attacks with exertional dyspnea. When he was about 30 years old, he was started on asthma treatment by a local physician. However, the asthma attacks occurred frequently despite triple therapy with high-dose inhaled corticosteroids, inhaled long-acting beta-2 agonist drugs, and long-acting anticholinergic drugs. He had no history of smoking. Blood test findings showed 7.1% eosinophilia (460/μL) and an elevated total IgE level at 256 IU/mL (specific IgE for house dust: 0.97 UA/mL; for mite: 1.18 UA/mL). There was bronchial wall thickening on both lungs on plain computed tomography of the chest. Exhaled nitric oxide concentration was increased at 68 ppb. After managing the asthma attack with oral intake of prednisolone at 30 mg/day for 6 days, there was persistence of dyspnea and fluctuations in forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) values from 1.17 L before steroid treatment to 2.33 L after steroid treatment. The patient was diagnosed as intractable asthma based on his history and the clinical course. Using the Alair Bronchial Thermoplasty (BT) System (Boston Scientific Corporation, MA, USA), BT was performed in three treatment sessions with a different region of the lung. Each treatment was performed approximately 3 weeks apart. Because the stenosis was observed in each lobe bronchus due to bronchial mucosal thickening, total sessions consisted of 98 activations. At 1 year after BT, the resting tests for respiration showed no improvement in FEV1, but the forced oscillation technique (FOT) [, ] (MostGraph, Chest M.I., Tokyo, Japan) showed decreases in both inhalation and exhalation respiratory resistance values . Assessment of asthma control scores showed improvement from 19 before BT to 25 at 1 year after BT. CPET (Aero monitor AE310S, Minato Medical Science Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) was performed using a similar treadmill protocol by Sheffield . All the CPET results indicated that exercise was terminated when the target heart rate (THR), which was calculated as 220-age in years was reached; thereafter, the CPET results were evaluated . At the end of exercise, comparison of the findings at pre-BT and at 1 year after BT showed (1) improvement in dyspnea based on the Borg scale; (2) longer exercise time to reach the THR; and (3) increase in arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2).