A 31-year-old man with chronic constipation of 15 years duration presents 6 mounts ago an intermittent clear and watery right nasal discharge accentuated by excessive effort during defecation. Five days before the consultation in the emergency department, the patient reported a persistent headache despite analgesic treatment, with nausea and fever. Clinical examination showed neck rigidity, the diagnosis of meningitis is then retained; we carefully analyzed the patient medical history and found the notion of the right nasal fossa rhinorrhea which was objectified by Valsalva manoeuvers.
We performed a cerebral CT scan and CSF analysis which found a hyperproteinorachia, hypoglycorrachia, and many diplococci suggesting pneumococcal meningitis. The patient underwent an intravenous antibiotherapy based on ceftriaxone and the evolution was favorable.
The clinical examination and paraclinical investigations found a chronic constipation complicated by internal and external hemorrhoids with no abnormalities in the colonoscopy performed by a proctologist. The endocrine assessment, including thyroid and pituitary testing, showed no abnormalities. Radiologic assessment including T2-weighted cerebral MRI and CT scan showed a bony defect in the right side of the cribriform plate [ and ] with no pneumocephaly or intracranial hypertension (ICH) signs, the MR-angiography (MRA) showed free veinous sinus, and ophthalmic examination carried by an ophthalmologist found a moderate papilledema (e.g., Modified Frisen Scale Grade 2).
An ECG with Holter ECG showed an asymptomatic and well tolerated sinusal bradycardia, with no echocardiographic abnormalities, the global cardiac examination with autonomic nervous system assessment was carried by a cardiologist and objectified a rare autonomic dysfunction entity with sympathetic hyperactivity designated as: pure autonomic failure (PAF).
The patient underwent an endoscopic endonasal approach with a repair of the leak, there were no signs of recurrence during the early postoperative period; however, the patient kept intermittent chronic constipation and presented with a recurrent rhinorrhea 17 months following surgery, we performed a cerebral CT scan, a preoperative spinal drainage during 72 h with CSF analysis and ICP measuring, we found an intermittent elevated ICP (e.g., opening pressure > 45 cm H2O (33 mmHg)) with sterile CSF, and we performed a CSF ventriculoperitoneal shunting with endonasal surgical revision. The postoperative course was uneventful with a good outcome at 3 months following the second surgery.