A 77-year-old male patient was diagnosed with prostate cancer on biopsies taken because of a high prostate specific antigen (PSA) serum concentration (10.35 ng/mL). Histological examination revealed prostate cancer with Gleason score 6 (3 + 3) and the clinical stage was determined as T1cN0M0 by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT) and bone scintigraphy. The patient had a previous history of trans-urethral resection of prostate (TURP) for benign prostatic hyperplasia more than ten years prior. He was not suffering from diabetes mellitus, hypertension or neurogenic bladder. He was administered with external beam radiation at a total dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions and high-dose rate brachytherapy at a total dose of 18 Gy in 2 fractions. After treatment, serum PSA value immediately decreased (nadir value 0.21 ng/mL).
Three years later, the patient received medical examination due to dysuria during follow up. Cystoscopy revealed that prostatic urethra was obstructed by yellow necrotic tissue, and prostatic and membranous urethral mucous membrane were white and hemorrhagic. These abnormal findings were thought to be caused by previous radiation therapies. As urethral catheterization was difficult because of the obstruction, he received transurethral resection of the necrotic tissue. Resected tissue did not contain viable cancer. However, after the operation, complete urinary incontinence occurred and gross hematuria and pyuria persisted. Several months later, he returned to the hospital due to inguinal swelling and fever. His inguinal and femoral region turned purple with pus present. Leukocytosis was observed (white cell count 12,870 /mm3), and CRP was elevated at 22.28 mg/dL. CT scan showed extensive gas within the femoral and retroperitoneal tissues and pubic bone fracture . He underwent immediate surgical exploration for suspected necrotizing fasciitis. Exploration of both the groin and right thigh revealed severe soft tissue infection involving the skin, subcutaneous fat and fascia. The pubic bone became necrotic and the ventral part of the prostate was absent, thereby exposing the urethral catheter. These operative findings suggested necrotizing fasciitis was caused by urinary fistulation into the pubic symphysis and subsequent pubic symphysis osteomyelitis. Microbiological exam showed growth of E. coli and Enterococcus faecalis and patient was treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Simultaneously, negative pressure wound therapy was performed. The patient underwent ureterocutaneous urinary diversion on day 8 after surgery. On day 148 post surgery, the patient’s wound recovered and he regained mobility.