A nine-year-old girl, the third child of non-consanguineous parents, was referred to our clinic with severe headache and diplopia. The headache was localized in the right fronto-occipital region with spread to the neck and shoulders. Transient diplopia was her most recent complaint. According to the patient’s previous records, symptoms of low-grade fever, fatigue, myalgia, arthralgia, mild headache, and small-joint arthritis of the hands had been present for four months. She had no photosensitivity, malar rash, skin lesions, oral ulcers, hair loss, or weight loss. Laboratory tests at that time showed mild cytopenia, with platelet count (Plt) of 249,000/µL. Her one-hour erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 20 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) was negative. There were elevated transaminases, with alanine transaminase (ALT) of 108 U/mL and aspartate transaminase (AST) of 70 U/mL, and normal thyroid function tests, with T4 of 8 µg/dL, thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) of 4 mIU/L. The results also showed negative antiphospholipid antibodies and venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) testing, positive anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), negative anti-double stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) of 69 U/mL (positive > 100), decreased complement levels (C3, C4), and normal urinalysis. The results were compatible with juvenile-onset SLE, but optimal follow-up and treatment had not been performed.
After two months, her headache gradually progressed, but showed a good response to aspirin 325 mg 3 - 4 times per day, given by her parents. The neurologic findings included bilateral papilledema, bilateral 6th cranial nerve palsy, normal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA), and high cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) opening pressure (55 cm H2O at the first visit, 32 cm H2O at the 7th day, and normal at the 10th day). CSF analysis was within normal limits, with sugar of 46 mg/dL, protein of 33 mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 64 U/mL, and zero WBCs or red blood cells (RBCs). Acetazolamide was prescribed for PTC, but no significant clinical response was seen. Her parents and other siblings had no history of disease; however, her 50-year-old aunt (mother’s sister) suffered from lupus nephritis and her five-year-old cousin (daughter of mother’s brother) had been treated for myasthenia gravis three years earlier. In the patient’s past medical history, levothyroxine had been prescribed for hypothyroidism since the age of four, with good control.
The patient was admitted to our hospital with symptoms of severe headache, diplopia, fatigue, malaise, and new-onset hair loss. Physical examination showed that she was alert, with an axillary temperature of 38.3°C, weight of 30 kg, height of 137 cm, blood pressure of 95/60 mmHg, and heart rate of 100 beats/min. She had bilateral papilledema, bilateral 6th nerve palsy, mild organomegaly, and small-joint arthritis of the hands.
The laboratory data at the time of admission showed mild leukopenia and lymphopenia, without thrombocytopenia (WBC 4300/µL, 42% lymphocytes, Hgb 12.7 g/dL, and Plt 307,000/µL). She had positive ANA (103 U/mL, positive > 42) and increased anti-dsDNA (497 U/mL, positive > 100). Biochemical markers of renal function (blood urea nitrogen and creatinine) and the urinalysis were within normal limits, without any proteins or RBCs. The mild hypertransaminasemia detected in the previous month decreased to near-normal values. Complement (C3, C4) levels continuously showed low titers. Autoantibodies to ribosomal P proteins (anti-Rib-P) had borderline values according to the laboratory references. Although a high titer of antithyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPOAb) was detected (270 IU/mL, positive > 40), thyroid function tests showed good control.
According to the patient’s history, physical examination findings of arthritis, and positive laboratory findings (positive ANA test, increased anti-dsDNA Ab, and decreased complement [C3, C4] levels), the patient fulfilled four SLE criteria (three laboratory criteria and one clinical criterion) . She was therefore treated for SLE with acetazolamide, prednisolone (1.5 mg/kg/day), and hydroxychloroquine. After 24 hours, the headache dramatically subsided and the patient’s condition improved. She was discharged in good general condition. Acetazolamide was prescribed with a tapering dose for two weeks. After six months, the patient was in good condition, without any complaints of headache or diplopia.