A 41-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of palpitations and fatigue. Three months prior to hospitalization, she received the first vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 (BNT162b2, Coronavirus Modified Uridine messenger RNA (mRNA) Vaccine, Pfizer), and only mild pain at the vaccination site was observed. Three weeks later, she received the second dose of the vaccine. The next day, she had a fever and took acetaminophen orally, and the fever disappeared in one day. Two weeks later, she developed fatigue and gradually worsened. A week before admission, she went to the emergency department because of palpitations associated with atrial fibrillation and demonstrated thyrotoxicosis (TSH < 0.01 mIU/L (0.08–0.54, CLEIA method), free triiodothyronine (FT3) 28.3 pmol/L (3.8–6.3, CLEIA method), and free thyroxine (FT4) 61.8 pmol/L (11.6–19.3, CLEIA method)). At that time, she went home having received only symptomatic treatment. At the follow-up visit, her general status was not improved, and she was hospitalized to treat thyrotoxicosis.
She had no family history of endocrine diseases, including thyroid disease. She was a nonsmoker and nondrinker. She was not exposed to intense stress or excess iodine. She had no past history and did not have a preceding cold. She did not have a prior COVID-19 infection. Two months before the appearance of her symptoms, the electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, and 18 months before, her thyroid hormone levels were normal. Her body weight had decreased by 3 kg in the three months before admission. Her menstruation was regular before hospitalization, and she was not pregnant. She had irregularly taken iron supplements due to iron deficiency anemia.
Her height was 163 cm, her body weight was 39 kg, and her body mass index (BMI) was 14.7 kg/m2. Her consciousness was clear. Her blood pressure was 107/52 mmHg, her pulse rate was 100 beats/min and irregular, her body temperature was 36.7 °C, and her oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 100%. Her anterior neck was not swollen and without pain. She had a tremor. She had diarrhea without stomach pain. The other physical findings were unremarkable. She did not have eye symptoms.
The laboratory findings on admission are shown in Table . She had severe thyrotoxicosis (TSH < 0.01 mIU/L, FT3 33.2 pmol/L, FT4 72.1 pmol/L). The presence of only gastrointestinal manifestation (diarrhea) suggested that she did not have a thyroid crisis. TRAb and thyroid-stimulating antibody (TSAb) were positive (TRAb 5.0 IU/L (< 2.0, CLEIA method) and TSAb 262% (< 120, EIA method)). Inflammatory markers were not elevated. Thyroglobulin antibody (Tg-Ab) and thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO-Ab) were negative. Antinuclear antibody, which was screened to check for other autoimmune diseases, was also negative. Ultrasound revealed heterogeneous tissue and increased blood flow throughout the thyroid gland without diffuse goiter . 99mTc pertechnetate scintigraphy showed diffuse uptake in the thyroid gland, and 99mTc uptake was 11.0% (0.5–3.5) . These findings suggested that thyrotoxicosis in this case was caused by Graves’ disease, not destructive thyroiditis. An electrocardiogram showed slight tachycardia due to atrial fibrillation. Echocardiography revealed no abnormalities.
Thiamazole and bisoprolol were prescribed to correct her condition . Soon after this treatment was initiated, her palpitations and fatigue were significantly relieved, and she was discharged from the hospital. After that, her thyroid hormone levels improved, and the bisoprolol dose was reduced. There were no side effects associated with the treatment.