A 56-year-old female of Mediterranean descent presented with a 1 year history of swelling on the left side of her nose, nasal obstruction and occasional minor epistaxes. Physical examination showed a firm and bulging polypoid mass which filled the left nasal cavity without cutaneous lesions.
Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a tumor, measuring 77 mm in diameter, occupying the left nasal cavity causing erosion of nasal septum and extending posteriorly to the left choana and nasopharynx. There was bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy.
A biopsy specimen was obtained in the nasal cavity. Initially, the diagnosis of angiosarcoma was made. After multidisciplinary consultation meeting, a second pathological opinion was required. Original slides examination revealed a submucosal proliferation composed of intersecting ill-defined fascicles, of spindled cells with mild to moderate nuclear atypia. Slit-like spaces containing red blood cells were noted. Intracytoplasmic and variably sized hyaline globules were seen in some tumor cells. Immunohistochemical study revealed a strong expression of CD31, CD34, and vimentin. Tumor cells showed negative staining for AE1/AE3, CK5/6, HMB-45, and melan-A. As tissue was depleted in the paraffin block, we were unable to perform further immunohistochemical testing, using HHV 8 antibody. A final diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma was rendered.
A chest CT did not showed metastases in the lungs.
Decision in multidisciplinary consultation meeting is to instaure neoadjuvant chemotherapy because surgical excision is not feasible. Then an evaluation must be performed. Chemotherapy drugs ifosfamide (IFO) and doxorubicin (DOXO) was started on December 22, 2014. The detailed treatment regimen was as follows: IFO 1800 mg/m2 i.v. d1-5; mesna dose is 100 % of the IFO dose (3 g) i.v. d1-5 and DOXO 60 mg/m2 d1.
The cycle was repeated every 21 days. Physical examination after the first cycle of treatment showed a complete response. To keep the clinical response, the patient continued chemotherapy until four cycles. The fourth cycle date April 27, 2015.
Computed tomography (CT) of evaluation showed a near complete response in the nasal cavity .
The patient received no further treatment. She needs a regular medical checkups that include a review of a patient’s medical history and a complete physical exam. She is in excellent local control over 12 months.