A 29-year-old male with a past medical history of Kawasaki disease presented to the ED from an outpatient ophthalmology office for diplopia and strabismus for three days. The patient reported frontal headache with rhinorrhea for five days and was being treated with clindamycin for suspected sinusitis by his primary care physician. The patient was subsequently evaluated by an ophthalmologist, who diagnosed him with bilateral cranial nerve VI palsies and referred him to the ED for further evaluation and management. The patient denied fever, chills, slurred speech, facial droop, vision loss, weakness, or recent trauma. The patient also denied any surgical history, medications, allergies, or any history of smoking, excessive alcohol use, or recreational drug use. While in the ED, the patient had a witnessed tonic-clonic seizure, which was successfully managed with intravenous (IV) lorazepam.
On exam, his vitals were as follows: temperature of 37.1 °C, blood pressure 142/88 millimeters mercury, heart rate 94 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and pulse oximetry 100% on room air. The patient was well-appearing and in no acute distress. His head, eyes, ear, nose, and throat exam showed round and equally reactive pupils without nystagmus. The patient’s neurologic exam showed an awake, alert and oriented male with bilateral CN VI palsies. Apart from his bilateral CN VI palsies, the rest of his cranial nerve exam was grossly intact. He had 5/5 muscle strength in upper and lower extremities. Finger to nose test was intact. His skin exam revealed bilateral palmar rashes (, , ).
The patient’s blood tests were significant for mild hyponatremia, leukopenia, and lymphopenia. Computed tomography (CT) of his brain without IV contrast revealed no mass or hemorrhage. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain and cranial nerves were likewise unrevealing for acute pathology.
He was subsequently admitted for further investigation of his diplopia, bilateral CN VI palsies, and new-onset seizure. Further inpatient evaluation involved a CT venography of the brain, which showed no evidence of cavernous sinus thrombosis. A lumbar puncture revealed an opening pressure of 60 centimeters of water (cm H2O) (reference range: 10–25 cm H2O), cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glucose 28 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (40–70 mg/dL), CSF protein 41 mg/dL (15–45 mg/dL), and a positive CSF cryptococcal antigen. Serum rapid plasma reagin and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test were both reactive. The fourth-generation HIV immunoassay revealed positive serum HIV-1 antigen and HIV-1 antibody. Absolute CD4 count was 6 cells per microliter (μL) (490 – 1740 cells/μL). In the presence of cryptococcal meningitis along with an absolute CD4 count of 6 cells/μL, the patient met diagnostic criteria for AIDS. The patient was treated with penicillin, amphotericin B, and flucytosine. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was administered as prophylactic treatment for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. The patient was discharged with anti-retroviral therapy and outpatient follow-up with infectious disease. He returned to the ED a few months later for altered mental status and was found to have recurrent cryptococcal meningitis and CN palsy.