A 41-year-old female was admitted to hospital because of unilateral proptosis in the left eye developing for about six-months. She had suffered from HT for the past 2 years and had been treated with levothyroxine 25 μg daily. She did not present any other significant comorbidities and had never smoked. Her previous personal and family history was negative for thyroid disorders. Laboratory results indicated euthyroidism - TSH level was 2.67 μU/ml (reference range 0.27–4.20 μU/ml), the free T3 and free T4 concentrations were 4.97 pmol/l (reference range 3.90–6.70 pmol/l) and 13.58 pmol/l (reference range 11.5–21.0 pmol/l), respectively. Thyrotropin receptor antibodies (TRAb) concentration was normal (TRAb 0.9 IU/l, reference range < 2). However, anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPOAb) serum levels and anti-thyroglobulin autoantibodies (TgAb) were significantly elevated: 279 IU/ml (reference range 0–34 IU/ml) and 194 IU/ml (reference range 10–115 IU/ml), respectively. The patient’s 25-OH vitamin D serum level was 25 ng/ml indicating mild vitamin D deficiency. Ultrasound examination demonstrated a thyroid gland with features suggesting chronic autoimmune thyroiditis (heterogeneous decreased echogenicity, no focal lesions, normal size and vascularity).
In the neutral position, the left eyeball was positioned convergently and downwards which implied extraocular muscle involvement. In addition, the patient also presented conjunctival erythema, eyelid redness and edema, and an enlarged, swollen lacrimal caruncle . Von Graefe’s, Stellwag’s, Kocher’s and Moebius' signs were positive in the left eye, whereas the Rosenbach’s sign was negative. On ophthalmic examination, vision acuity was not compromised (6/6 in both eyes). The intraocular pressure was mildly elevated in the left eye (24 mmHg), and it was normal in the right eye (19 mmHg). The patient received 4/7 points in the Clinical Activity Scale (CAS) due to the eyelid edema, redness, conjunctival injection, and inflammation of left caruncle. Furthermore, the severity of TAO was classified as IV in the NO SPECS scale due to extraocular muscles involvement in the left eye (I-0, II-a, III-0, IV-b, V-0, VI-0). In terms of the right eye, she received 0/7 points in CAS, and class 0 in NO SPECS scale.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the orbits revealed unilateral left-sided exophthalmos , predominantly caused by the thickening of the medial rectus muscle , with an increase in T2 signal intensity and prolonged T2 relaxation, indicating an active form of TAO. On MRI a 23 mm cyst was found inside the left maxillary sinus. CRP concentration was 0.3 mg/l (normal < 5 mg/l), the patient had no history of sinusitis, and presented no clinical symptoms on laryngological examination. The therapy included the administration of glucocorticosteroids intravenously according to the scheme designed and widely applied at our department, i.e. three pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g of methylprednisolone per pulse on three consecutive days), followed by an intramuscular injection regimen: one dose every three weeks (120 mg, 80 mg, 40 mg), i.e. a cumulative dose of 3.240 g of methylprednisolone during a 9-week follow-up period. The therapy was very well tolerated, with no severe side-effects observed. Simultaneously, the levothyroxine dose was increased from 25 to 50 μg per day in order to keep TSH in the lower half of the normal range. Additionally, the patient also received selenium supplementation (200 μg daily) and vitamin D (4000 IU daily). The administered therapy resulted in a complete remission of ophthalmic symptoms, and the patient has been free of symptoms in the course of a 6-month follow-up period . The timeline representing all vital steps in the patient’s diagnosis and therapy is presented in Fig. .