A 37 year-old male presented to his primary care physician with new right cervical lymphadenopathy, progressing over 3 months, as well as drenching night sweats and low-grade fevers. Computerized Tomography (CT) scan of the neck with contrast revealed numerous non-enhancing, non-necrotic, enlarged bilateral level II and III lymph nodes measuring 2cm each and a conglomerate matted lymph node, measuring 3.3 anterior posterior (AP) x 6.4 cm transverse, in the left supraclavicular fossa. A level III ultrasound-guided cervical lymph node core-needle biopsy showed a few large mononuclear atypical lymphoid cells with prominent nucleoli in the background of small lymphocytes and histiocytes. A few Reed-Sternberg-like cells were also present. By immunohistochemistry, the neoplastic cells were CD30+, CD15+, PAX5+, MUM1+, BCL6+, CD3-, CD5-, BCL2-, with a few cells positive for CD20, suggesting a differential diagnosis including cHL versus T-cell/ histiocyte-rich large B-cell Lymphoma .
A subsequent left axillary lymph node core-needle biopsy showed sheets of large, atypical, pleomorphic lymphoid cells with prominent nucleoli; CD30+, CD15+, CD45-, PAX5+, OCT2+, BOB1+, MUM1+, CD20-, CD3-, CD5- by immunohistochemical staining . Flow cytometry was unrevealing. Cytogenetics and FISH studies were significant for tetraploidy of MYC (8q24.21) and BCL2 (18q21) as well as 3-5 copies of IGH (14q32). The absence of CD45 and CD20 expression and presence of CD15 expression were inconsistent with CD30+ DLBCL. Morphological and immunophenotypic features intermediate between those of cHL and DLBCL led to the diagnosis of GZL. Next generation sequencing was performed on the biopsy specimen and showed low tumor mutational burden (5 muts/Mb), microsatellite stability (MSS), amplification of IKBKE (11 copies) and MDM4 (11 copies) and mutation of ASXL1 (D740fs*6) with variant allele frequency (VAF) of 13.21%.
The patient developed jaundice, and was admitted to the hospital, where laboratory findings were significant for White blood cell count (WBC) 0.8 x103/uL, Hemoglobin (Hb) 6 g/dL, Platelets 23,000/uL, Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) 942 U/L, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 40 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) 15 mg/L, total bilirubin 5 mg/dL, Aspartate transaminase (AST) 86 units/L, Alanine transaminase (ALT) 64 units/L, albumin 2.5 g/dL, and uric acid 3.5 mg/dL. Staging evaluation was performed with positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT), which revealed numerous enlarged hypermetabolic cervical chain lymph nodes bilaterally with a peak SUV of 14.3, an enlarged left axillary lymph node of 2.9cm with SUV of 15.5 and bilateral retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. Splenomegaly with enlargement to 35cm was noted with hypermetabolism (SUV 11), as well as hepatomegaly (23.4 cm) with heterogenous FDG uptake throughout the parenchyma. Symmetric radiotracer activity was noted in axial and proximal appendicular bone marrow. A bone marrow biopsy was positive for involvement with lymphoma. Based on these findings the patient was classified as stage IVA. Echocardiography revealed an ejection fraction of 60% with no valvular disease.
In view of the mixed hepatocellular and cholestatic liver impairment, with total bilirubin peaking at > 20 mg/dL, most cytotoxic therapies were relatively contraindicated; therefore, monotherapy with dose reduced BV at 1.2 mg/kg q21 days for 2 cycles was initiated, with marked improvement in liver enzymes and bilirubin. DA-EP_CH (dose-adjusted etoposide, prednisone, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin), with dose modification for hyperbilirubinemia and omission of vincristine, were added to therapy 3 days following cycle 2 of BV, once bilirubin was less than 3 mg/dL. A repeat PET-CT revealed near complete resolution of abnormal FDG uptake and lymphadenopathy, with only residual mild lymphadenopathy in the left axilla and right inguinal regions, Deauville 2 . There was also a marked decrease in previously seen hepatosplenomegaly. The patient completed five additional cycles of DA-EP_CH and full-dose BV at 1.8 mg/kg. The course of laboratory findings, including serum bilirubin and trends are depicted in . Post-treatment PET-CT revealed resolution of FDG-avid adenopathy, Deauville 1, but new intense uptake in the gallbladder . Ultrasonography revealed several foci of adenomyomatosis in the gallbladder and mildly prominent, echogenic liver consistent with steatosis. Repeat PET-CT 6 months later showed no evidence of FDG-avid lymphadenopathy, Deauville 1. On clinical follow-up 2 years after initial therapy, the patient remained without evidence of recurrent disease and had returned to full-time work.