A 42-year-old man was referred to the Emergency Department in July 2019 with a complaint of a lump found on the left side of his neck with pain and fever for 4 d.
He had a slight sore throat and difficulty swallowing.
He had no history of diabetes, hypertension, smoking or other underlying infectious source such as bad tooth, foreign body, etc.
He had no obvious medical history, irradiation history or family history with regard to tumours in the head and neck. And he had no history of head and neck trauma.
A physical examination revealed a solid and hemispherical lump 6 cm in diameter located on the left side of the neck, and the lump was tender and fixed the underlying tissues. The boundary between the lump and surrounding tissue is unclear. The skin on the surface of the lump was swelling and red and had a high temperature. No jugular venous distention or abnormal carotid arterial pulse was observed.
The routine blood examination was essentially normal except for elevations in white blood cell count, haemoglobin levels, neutrophil count and eutrophilic granulocyte percentage: 11.78 × 109/L (reference limits, 3.50 × 109/L to 9.50 × 109/L), 120 g/L (130 g/L to 175 g/L), 9.81 × 109/L (1.80 × 109/L to 6.30 × 109/L) and 83.2% (40.0% to 75.0%). The remaining laboratory blood tests, including assessments of tumour markers (alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, CA15-3, CA19-9, and CA72-4), and coagulation function, did not reveal abnormalities.
Ultrasound examination showed an irregular hypoechoic mass (dimensions: 10.6 cm × 6.3 cm) in the left neck, which was considered an infectious lesion. Abundant blood flow signals were detected around and within the mass through colour Doppler flow imaging. The size and shape of the parotid, thyroid and submandibular glands were normal, and the echo of the parenchyma was uniform. Plain computed tomography (CT) revealed a soft tissue mass containing scattered air (dimensions: 9.9 cm × 7.3 cm × 4.6 cm; CT value: 22-34 HU) that had a vague boundary and an irregular shape on the left poststyloid parapharyngeal space, and the oropharynx and laryngeal left lateral wall were thickened .
Disease development: We diagnosed the condition as neck infection with abscess formation based on physical examination, routine blood examination, ultrasound examination and plain CT and decided to perform emergency surgery. During the operation, 30 mL of grey and smelly pus was drained from the deep surface of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. There was not any main artery was exposed in the operation field, and no suture or ligation. After the purulent cavity was cleared, iodophor gauze was stuffed into the space. The incision was not sutured. The bacterial culture of the pus was Gram-positive cocci.
The second day after the operation, the patient suddenly exhibited a large amount of haemoptysis and incision bleeding. After symptomatic treatment, the patient underwent enhanced CT examination of the neck. The enhanced CT showed distal occlusion of the left ECA and irregular thickening of the broken ends of the artery encased in an uneven enhancement of soft tissue density. Infected ECA occlusion and rupture were considered .