A 46-year-old previously healthy male presented to Emergency Department with four days of primarily left-sided abdominal pain, low-grade fevers, nausea, and anorexia. His medical history was significant for poorly controlled diabetes and dyslipidemia. No history of abdominal surgery was reported. Two months prior to admission, the patient's serum hemoglobin A1C was markedly elevated at 10.7 and his serum lipid profile was quite abnormal (total cholesterol: 313, triglycerides: 287, HDL: 39, LDL: 217). On admission, the patient's home medications included atorvastatin (Lipitor®; 40 mg orally per day) and subcutaneous isophane/regular insulin (Insulin Novolin® 70/30) twice per day.
The patient's physical exam at presentation was significant for left lower quadrant pain and voluntary guarding. The patient's white blood count at that time was 18.1 × 109 cells/L (absolute neutrophil count: 13.6; 75.1%), hematocrit: 45.2%, serum glucose: 279, blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 31, and serum creatinine: 1.5. Serum electrolytes were as follows: sodium: 133, potassium: 4.2, chloride: 95, and CO2: 23 (anion gap 15). Urinalysis was positive for 2+ albumin, 1+glucose, 1+ ketones, 1+ bilirubin, and hyaline casts. Plain films of the abdomen were obtained in the Emergency Department. A spiral CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with oral and IV contrast was subsequently performed to exclude colonic diverticulitis.
Abdominal plain films demonstrated multiple dilated loops of small bowel with air/fluid levels in the right abdomen (arrows in Figure ), consistent with small bowel obstruction, but also noted, unusually, to herald acute appendicitis. Intestinal malrotation was not considered in the differential diagnosis at that point. No pneumoperitoneum was evident.
Abdominal CT with oral and IV contrast was then performed, which demonstrated the majority of the small bowel positioned in the right abdomen, the cecum located in the left mid abdomen, and absence of the ligament of Treitz. The orientation of the superior mesenteric vessels was abnormal. These findings together were consistent with complete intestinal malrotation. No associated situs, caval, or other congenital anomalies were present and no evidence of volvulus was identified. A dilated, tubular, blind-ending structure was identified arising from the cecumin the left mid-abdomen (arrows in Figures ), with significant stranding in the adjacent fat, indicative of acute appendicitis.
Fluid resuscitation was initiated in the Emergency Department with Lactated Ringer's solution (125 cc/hr). Based on plain film findings of possible small bowel obstruction and absence of history of any abdominal surgery, an abdominal CT was performed, as discussed above.
After extensive review of the CT data for presurgical planning, the patient was taken to the operating room for laparoscopic exploration and appendectomy, where the imaging findings were confirmed and the appendix was found to be perforated. No surgical intervention to address the malrotation, such as Ladd's procedure, was performed. Pathologic examination of the excised appendix verified the diagnosis of acute gangrenous appendicitis with perforation. The patient's post-operative course was uneventful. The patient was treated perioperatively with a 5 day regimen of intravenous cefoxitin (1,000 mg every 6 hours) and as an outpatient with a 14 day course of oral levofloxacin (500 mg per day; Levaquin®).