We present the case of a 3 year 10-month-old boy. At the age of 1 year and 11 months, he had a high fever of over 40°C and tonic convulsions. He was brought to the emergency room of a tertiary emergency hospital in another prefecture. After close examination, he was diagnosed with hemorrhagic shock encephalopathy syndrome caused by HHV-6B. His general condition stabilized after two weeks of inpatient treatment, but his spontaneous breathing was poor and the function of his pituitary gland was severely impaired. This meant he required 24-hour ventilation and tube feeding. His Glasgow Coma Scale was 3 and he could not respond to external stimulation. The parents, however, strongly desired home care and they wished for him to receive as aggressive treatment as possible, including resuscitation, if his condition deteriorated. The family requested aggressive care because there were many things remaining that they wanted to do with their son.
After intensive care at the hospital, he was transferred to ODRC for support and preparation of home care. After the parents moved to Osaka, he was discharged from ODRC after receiving three months of care from our multidisciplinary support program, and transitioned to our home care program. Then we, the home medical support team of ODRC, began home medical treatment, nursing, rehabilitation, and home care. At that time, the wishes of the parents had not changed; they wished him to receive as aggressive treatment as possible, including resuscitation.
The patient and the family were supported by the home support team, as shown in . Intensive treatments of ventilation therapy, tube feeding, and regular medication were continued at home, and he began to use the short-stay service at our ODRC as well as the day care service. He was stable and did not require additional oxygen administration, antimicrobial medications, or hospitalization. However, one day, almost one year after his transition to home care, his condition rapidly deteriorated, and his heart rate increased, oxygen saturation decreased, and urine output decreased. Peripheral circulatory failure was also observed, and he was diagnosed with the condition of preshock. We requested hospitalization at Osaka General Medical Center (OGMC), an acute hospital, and he was transported there for the emergency. A urinary tract infection led to septic shock. He was treated in the intensive care unit. The treatment was successful and he was discharged one month later.
However, the patient was readmitted to OGMC again five days later with a worsened general condition, caused by a respiratory infection. Oxygen administration had to be increased, respiratory settings had to be raised, and tube feedings could not proceed due to gastrointestinal dysfunction, so the intravenous hyperalimentation, which had been started at the beginning of his admission, could not be discontinued. After consultation with the OGMC physicians, we suggested that we discuss next steps and what would be in the child's best interest if his condition worsened and recovery became difficult. The parents, who had been hoping for a full resuscitation in the event of deterioration, agreed to this proposal after discussion with us; they accepted the full invasive intervention was not always good to the best interests of the patient. A basic document was exchanged between the staff of ODRC and OGMC. After the initial ACP was drafted, physicians and nurses of ODRC went to the OGMC and had several further discussions with the family . The draft was amended, incorporating the wishes of the parents , and it was approved by the OGMC Ethics Committee and signed by the parents for completion.
During his hospitalization at OGMC, photos were taken of the patient, he was bathed for comfort, and his nurses and childcare staff made artworks with his handprints and footprints for the family. Although there were restrictions on visits due to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the patient could be moved from the high care unit to a private room, and we were able to fulfill the family's wish to have visits from his sibling and relatives, as well as celebrate his birthday, which had not been possible due to the exacerbation of his physical condition. Although the parents strongly wanted to take the patient home, they could not because the ventilator was set too high to be changed to the usual one at home. The child passed away peacefully shortly thereafter, surrounded by his family. His family received grief support from our team.
When we, the ODRC home visit team, visited the bereaved family three months and one year after his death, his family expressed their gratitude again and said, “We did the best we could, and we have no regrets. The days of taking care of him at home were truly a blessing. We were really happy to be able to see our child, at home” .