A 75-year-old woman was brought to our hospital with a 2-week history of progressive dyspnea and edema. Chest radiography revealed bilateral pleural effusions. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a movable mass (45 × 25 mm) occupying the LA and another mass (68 × 43 mm) in the pericardium . TTE also showed pericardial fluid. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) showed that both masses originated from the posterior LA wall and seemed to be connected. The mass in the LA prolapsed across the mitral valve, without incarceration and extended to the left upper pulmonary vein (PV). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) revealed that the lobular mass in the LA extended from the posterior LA wall to the left upper PV . The masses in the LA and pericardium were heterogeneously different . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that both masses had a high intensity relative to the heart muscle on T1- and T2-weighted sequences. The enhancement sequences showed multiple low-intensity zones within both the masses. CECT and brain MRI revealed no metastatic foci. The CT and MRI findings suggested that the masses were malignant, but we could not completely rule out the possibility that they were benign, partly due to being mobile. If the masses were malignant, completely resection would be difficult since the LA mass extended to the left upper PV and the prognosis was of only a few months. Considering that the patient was older, surgical treatment would not be recommend. However, if the masses were benign, surgical resection would be indicated to prevent the high potential risk of sudden death due to obstruction of the mitral valve or cerebral infarction due to embolism of the scattered mass. In addition, we could get a definitive diagnosis. Eventually, the patient wished to perform surgery to prevent sudden death and cerebral infarction, so we decided to perform surgical resection of both masses urgently.
After the median sternotomy, the LA was approached through the superior septal. In total, 600 mL of bloody pericardial fluid was collected. Macroscopically, the tumor in the LA appeared to be a myxoma . The tumor was fragile and widely attached to the posterior LA wall and extended to the posterior mitral leaflet (PML) and the left upper PV . The PML was not infiltrated, but the left upper PV was infiltrated and obstructed by the tumor. The pericardial tumor was connected to the LA tumor at the posterior LA wall and macroscopically, it was smooth . The pericardial tumor was completely resected from the LA wall. The tumor in the LA was grossly resected along with the LA posterior wall; however, we could not remove the tumor in the PV. Finally, we reconstructed the posterior LA wall defect (20 × 30 mm) using a bovine pericardial patch.
Histologically, the tumor was composed of spindle shaped and pleomorphic cells with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis. Bizarre, multinucleated giant cells, and cells with irregular-shaped nuclei were often noted. Immunohistochemical tests revealed that the tumor cells were positive for vimentin and alpha-SMA, partially positive for CD34 and HHF-35, and rarely positive for desmin . Therefore, the patient was finally diagnosed with myxofibrosarcoma.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Brain and whole-body CT showed no recurrence or metastatic regions at 1 month after surgery. We considered postoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy was necessary as soon as possible because the resection of the PV tumor was incomplete; however, the patient did not wish to receive adjuvant therapy. At 2 months after surgery, a metastatic region was found on the brain CT. At 3 months postoperatively, the patient complained of a sudden headache and nausea. Brain CT showed a brain hemorrhage in the metastatic region, and the patient died.