A 74-year-old Japanese woman visited our hospital in 2016 with visual disturbance and uncontrolled intraocular pressure (IOP) in her right eye. She was diabetic and hypertensive. She had no history of systemic cancer, malignant lymphoma, or ocular manifestations of cancer. Her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/100 OD and 20/200 OS, and her manifest spherical refractive error was − 10.0 diopters OU. The IOP was 28 mmHg OD and 12 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination showed ciliary injection of the conjunctiva, clear and smooth cornea, strong cortical cataract, fibrin-like membrane without a mass on the iris, iris neovascularization without posterior synechia, and infiltration of inflammatory cells . Gonioscopy demonstrated neovascularization of the angle but no hypopyon, nodules, or peripheral anterior synechia. Ophthalmoscopy and fundus photography revealed no vitreous opacifications, retinal exudates, and retinal hemorrhages. The left eye was normal except for a cataract and retinoschisis with high myopia. Hematologic examinations showed increased blood sugar (194 mg/dl) and decreased platelet count (12.2 × 104/μl).
She was initially diagnosed with acute iritis secondary to diabetes mellitus which was partly based on her history and fibrin-like membrane on the surface of the iris in the right eye. The acute iritis and secondary glaucoma were treated with topical steroids and anti-glaucoma medications. The elevated IOP in right eye did not respond to the medications. Thus 1 month after the initial visit, trabeculectomy with mitomycin C and peripheral iridectomy was performed. After the trabeculectomy, the IOP in the right eye was decreased to around 10 mmHg. However, two months after the trabeculectomy, she presented with a bulging iris, and white, frog spawn-like mass resembling fibrin in the right anterior chamber and in the trabeculectomy bleb . The BCVA in the right eye was 20/100 and the IOP was 17 mmHg.
A malignant lymphoma was suspected based on the white, frog spawn-like mass resembling fibrin which did not respond to the steroid application. Six months after the trabeculectomy, we then performed fine needle aspiration biopsy for cytological diagnosis. The cytological results demonstrated foamy histiocyte-like cells with mild nuclear atypia but no signs of malignant lymphoma. Thus iris biopsy was performed. The biopsy specimen showed an atrophic and fragile iris, and pathological examination suggested metastatic adenocarcinoma with intracytoplasmic mucin and signet ring cell features . Immunostaining for CK-CAM5.2, and CDX2 were positive and CK7 and CK20 were negative indicating enteric differentiation of the tumor cells, and primary tumor location might be gastrointestinal tract .
Examination by computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, and esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed advanced gastric cancer with peritoneal and lymph nodes metastasis and ascites. She was treated with combination chemotherapy of Tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S-1) and cisplatin, also known as cis-diamine dichloroplatinum (CDDP), for the gastric cancer. However, the white, frog spawn-like mass in the anterior chamber was not resolved. At the final visit, the BCVA in the right eye had worsened to light perception, and the IOP was 48 mmHg. The left eye did not have any mass lesion and the BCVA was 20/66 because of retinoschisis with high myopia. She died from pneumonia at 8 month from initial visit.