A 32-month-old boy from Libya presented with a picture of microcytic hypochromic anemia. He was previously healthy until the age of 16 months, when he was found to have pallor, loss of appetite and hypoactivity. The patient was diagnosed with iron-deficiency anemia (hemoglobin, 7 mg/dL) and started on iron supplements with no response to treatment. He underwent extensive investigations in six different institutions and three different countries. He received five blood transfusions and was kept on oral ferrous sulphate.
The patient was started on a gluten-free diet on the assumption of celiac disease, but blood test and endoscopic biopsy results of the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract were normal. He was also treated with metronidazole because of amoebic cysts in the stool. Two weeks before referral, the patient was diagnosed with Coomb's negative autoimmune hemolytic anemia and was started on prednisone (2 mg/kg/day) with a dramatic response as his hemoglobin increased from 7.0 g/dL to 9.3 g/dL and reticulocytes increased from 1% to 9%. At our institution, the patient's history and medical record were thoroughly reviewed. He had a history of intermittent abdominal pain associated with chronic constipation treated with laxatives. There were episodes of mucus in the stool associated with streaks of blood. On examination, the child was irritable with facial swelling and abdominal distension. He looked pale with no jaundice. He had clubbing of the fingers. He had normal air entry. Heart auscultation revealed a soft systolic murmur. He had no lymphadenopathy and no hepatosplenomegaly. There were no abdominal masses appreciated on the first visit, but on a later visit, a left side and suprapubic mass was felt, and a hydrocele was found upon scrotal examination. During this time, prednisone was tapered and stopped.
Lower GI endoscopy was performed on the assumption of inflammatory bowel disease; the mucosa of the rectum and sigmoid were normal, but there was a mass in the sigmoid covered by a layer of exudate, and the scope could not go beyond this mass . Lower GI contrast study was carried out to delineate the proximal colon, but the picture was suggestive of intussusception.
A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed a mass in the left side of the abdomen with suspicion of intussusception. Ultrasonography was not helpful in identifying the nature of that mass. Laparotomy was done and showed that there was an intraluminal mass reaching the sigmoid colon originating from the mid transverse colon, causing colocolic intussusception . Resection of the involved segment of the colon was done with end-to-end anastomosis. The patient had a smooth postoperative course, and his hemoglobin level improved dramatically and quickly during the first week after surgery. The histopathology showed extensive surface ulceration and was characterized by a proliferation of plump polygonal or more spindle-shaped cells with amphophilic cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli. The lesion cells were distributed in a patternless fashion within a loose myxoid matrix, which contained numerous thin-walled blood vessels and prominent mixed inflammatory cells, including numerous plasma cells and lymphocytes.
Immunostains showed positivity for S100, keratin AE1/AE3, and more focally for desmin. Smooth muscle actin and anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 were negative.