We report a case of a 35-year-old woman who came with complaints of pain in the tip of the middle finger of her left hand for the past six years, and has worsened in the past two years. The patient has often been treated since she first felt the pain and only consumed pain killer, but the complaint did not change. The pain was supposed to increase when the fingertip was touched and pressed. There was no history of previous trauma.
On physical examination, generally, no abnormalities were found. On the assessment of the localized status on the middle finger of the left hand, there was a bluish nail , there was no mass, swelling, redness, deformity, and the appearance of intact skin with the same color as the surrounding skin, clinical examination with the Love's pin test and the Hildreth test with positive results. Range of motion DIP, PIP within normal limits, and capillary refill time of fewer than 2 s.
On plain radiographic examination of the anteroposterior view, there was destruction with cortical thinning on the medial aspect of the distal phalanx of the left middle finger (A).
On MRI examination, the lesion with size ± 0.43 × 0.90 × 0.56 cm in the distal phalanx of the left hand's middle finger with the head's erosion .
Based on history taking, physical examination, plain X-ray, and MRI, we decided to do an excisional biopsy. Surgery is performed by marking the specific location of the tumor. Local anesthesia was done with a digital nerve block and digital exsanguination and tourniquet for a relatively avascular operating field. Excision with a transungual surgical approach, by experienced oncologic orthopaedic surgeon assisted by experienced hand and microsurgery surgeon, based on the tumor's location on the MRI image to facilitate exposure of the tumor site. A periosteal elevator is inserted between the nail and the nail bed. The nail is removed, being careful not to damage the nail bed. Then the nail is removed from the bed and nail fold, exposing the nail bed, and a tumor is visible under the nail bed. The nail bed is incised longitudinally, and the tumor is carefully removed and completely removed. A synthetic bone substitute was placed to fill the defect in the distal phalanx. The primary suture was made using absorbable Vicryl 7-0 suture, and the nail plate was repositioned after being covered with nylon 4-0. Wound dressing is done using antibiotic cream and gauze. The excised tissue is then sent to the anatomic pathology department for microscopic histopathological examination .
On microscopic examination, the specimen shows a tumor mass that consists of a proliferation of glomus cells. There are capillary vessels that are lined by endothelial cells surrounding the tumor mass. Glomus cell has round to oval nuclei, no atypia, and inconspicuous nucleoli, with eosinophilic cytoplasm with a sheet-like pattern. Between tumor mass, spindle cell also suggests smooth muscle origin . Based on microscopic examination, it can be concluded that the specimen is a glomus tumor.
Postoperative X-ray showing a synthetic bone substitute filling the defect in the distal phalanx of the left middle finger (B).