A 35-year-old cirrhotic male patient was referred for LT evaluation due to BCS and HCC.
The patient had been diagnosed with cirrhosis and BCS four years previously, after presenting with ascites and hematemesis due to esophageal varices. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan on this occasion showed hepatic veins thrombosis and signs of chronic hepatopathy with paraumbilical vein recanalization and extensive collateral circulation in the splenic hilum, around the stomach, and in the anterior and lateral abdominal walls. The liver also showed multiple hepatic nodules of up to 1.5 cm in diameter, some them hypervascularized, which in the context of BCS, were compatible with regenerative hepatic nodules. Hepatic biopsy revealed chronic hepatic outflow obstruction. Laboratory testing for autoimmune hepatitis was negative, as were serological markers for hepatitis C and B viruses. The patient also denied previous alcohol abuse. No thrombophilia was diagnosed, despite extensive hematological investigation. The patient was then maintained on oral anticoagulation with warfarin.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient was a smoker (10 cigarettes/day for 20 years). There was no relevant family history concerning this case.
The patient exhibited mild jaundice and extensive subcutaneous collateral veins in the anterior abdominal wall . Further physical examination was unremarkable.
Blood analysis revealed normal hemoglobin, mild leukopenia and mild thrombocytopenia with mildly elevated total bilirubin, direct bilirubin and gamma-glutamyl-transferase . Kidney function and electrolytes were normal as well as serum albumin, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase. The patient’s prothrombin time was elevated even without warfarin . Considering that the patient did not present encephalopathy or ascites, his Child-Pugh score was A6, and his Model of End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score was 15. His alpha-fetoprotein level was 58.7 ng/mL (normal range < 10 ng/mL), although 6 mo earlier, it was 9.4 ng/mL.
During outpatient follow-up, an abdominal CT scan showed a heterogeneously vascularized nodule in segment V, which increased from 2 cm to 4 cm in three years . He also showed complete thrombosis of the retrohepatic IVC, up to almost the right atrium, with large subcutaneous veins in his abdominal wall . Further evaluation with abdominal liver magnetic resonance imaging with hepatobiliary contrast showed two hypervascularized nodules with hypocaptation in the biliary phase in segments V and II, 4 and 2.3 cm in size, respectively . Considering the previous CT scans with multiple regenerative nodules, these 2 specific nodules were classified as indeterminate lesions. Given their growth, the atypical pattern of contrast uptake and the rise in alpha-fetoprotein serum levels, further investigation with biopsy of these nodules was indicated due to the suspicion of HCC.