A 25-year-old woman, gravid 1, para 0, at 28 weeks of gestation presented with a complaint of massive hemoptysis, palpitation (NYHA III-IV) and dyspnea (NYHA-IV). On physical examination, the patient blood pressure was 88/64 mmHg, and pulse rate was 98/min with regular pulse rate. Her hemoglobin was 8 mg/dL. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with pulmonary plethora. Electrocardiography of the patient showed normal sinus rhythm with normal axis. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated rheumatic heart disease, severe calcific mitral stenosis (MVA ~ 0.9 cm2, Mean gradient ~ 33 mmHg), severe mitral regurgitation (vena contracta ~ 0.7 cm), severe tricuspid regurgitation with ejection fraction of 40-45% and severe pulmonary artery hypertension, left atrial size of approximately 7.4 cm, and dilated left ventricle (end systolic dimension ~ 50 mm). Chest HRCT (High Resolution Computed Tomography) was performed with fetal guard to rule out any lung lesions before preparing the patient for surgery, as her hemoptysis was not controlled with medical therapy. HRCT revealed normal results. On admission, patient was initially managed with beta-blocker (Atenolol), furosemide, spironolactone and other conservative measures like complete bed rest, intensive monitoring of hemodynamics and fetal heart beat. Despite all conservative measures, the patient status was deteriorated. An emergency surgery was undertaken with an increased risk to the fetus’s life, because the mother's life was at risk. After informed consent was obtained, mitral valve replacement with 31 mm St. Jude Medical mechanical heart valve prosthesis (St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, Minnesota, USA) was performed. Fetal cardiac activity was monitored with an external ultrasound transducer. Normothermic, nonpulsatile CPB (cardiopulmonary bypass) was performed using a high flow rate of greater than 2.5 L/m2/min. Flow rate was adjusted to maintained mean arterial pressure greater than 70 mmHg. Prior to initiating Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) full heparinization (3 mg/kg) was provided to keep the ACT (activated clotting time) above 450 seconds. The aortic cross clamp and CPB times were 34 minutes and 1 hour 3 minutes respectively. No fetal distress was noted. Fetal movements were normal postoperatively. Immediate postoperative period, heparin was administered followed by oral anticoagulation (warfarin) after extubation. The patient had uneventful postoperative course and was discharged from the hospital on fifth postoperative day. The woman gave birth to a full-term baby at 38 weeks of gestation by cesarean section. Until the last visit (eleven month after surgery), both the patient and child were well. The patient was followed up for one and half years, she was pregnant with the second child, and was asymptomatic.