A 62-year-old woman of Han ethnicity was admitted at the Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University with a one-month medical history of intermittent upper abdominal pain, and skin and sclera jaundice.
She reported a one-month medical history of intermittent upper abdominal pain, and skin and sclera jaundice.
The patient did not have a specific history of past illness.
Nor did her family.
Slight right upper quadrant abdominal tenderness was the only observed clinical sign at the time of admission.
Serum levels of total bilirubin (53 μmol/L) and direct bilirubin (35 μmol/L) were both above normal ranges (total bilirubin: 3.1-22.5 μmol/L; direct bilirubin: 1.3-7.2 μmol/L), but declined to 23 and 12 μmol/L, respectively, one day prior to operation. All the other laboratory tests including serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 and interleukin-6 were within normal ranges.
Histological examination showed follicular lymphoid hyperplasia and a shortage of lymphatic sinuses. Lymphoid follicles were mainly composed of proliferating mantle cells, and concentrically layered around highly vascularized and degenerative germinal centers . Vascularity was observed in the inter-follicular regions with vessels penetrating the germinal centers . Partial tissues were of hyaline degeneration . Plasma cells were abundant in tissues and Russell’s bodies were sparsely distributed .
Further immunohistochemical examination using a panel of antibodies supported the diagnosis . CD20+ cells were mainly observed in the follicular regions and occasionally in the inter-follicular regions, corresponding to the distribution of plasma cells, since CD20 is expressed on the surface of all B-cells. Paired box protein (PAX)-5+ cells were observed in the follicular regions and to a lesser extent in the inter-follicular regions, since PAX-5 is expressed at early but not late stages of B-cell differentiation. These results imply that B cells were at a proliferative phase. B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2) was negative in, but positive outside of, the germinal centers, indicating degeneration of germinal centers since Bcl-2 regulates cell apoptosis. It has been reported that antibodies against Bcl-2 react with B-cells in the mantle zone. CD38+ cells were mainly observed in inter-follicular regions and sparsely distributed in the germinal centers, in accordance with the abundance of plasma cells since CD38 is downregulated in B cells and mature plasma cells. CD21, a marker of follicular dendritic cells, was positive, indicating the presence of intact follicular dendritic networks. CD3-positive T cells were mainly observed in the inter-follicular regions, but only sparsely in the follicular regions. Ki-67, a cellular marker for proliferation, was highly expressed in 80%-90% of cells within the germinal centers but was expressed in only 5% of cells outside of the germinal centers. Immunoglobulin free light chains Kappa and Lambda-positive cells were observed in the inter-follicular regions with a ratio of 1.2:1. The expression of these two molecules indicates the relative abundance of plasma cells and could be a differential diagnosis from B-cell lymphoma, in which one type of light chain is significantly more common than the other.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed a mass between the hepatoduodenal ligament and the inferior vena cava, reaching the hepatic caudate lobe and the right renal vein plane. The front side was nearby the duodenal descending segment and the pancreatic head. The mass did not have a clear boundary with the caudate lobe and the duodenum, and the portal vein was oppressed . There was no obvious difference in the density of the mass at arterial, portal venous and equilibrium phases of CT scanning . By using three-dimensional (3D) visualization software (Intelligent Precise Service, Shenzhen Xudong Digital Medical Imaging Technology Co. Ltd., China), a 3D visualization model was generated to display the adjacent relationships between the mass and blood vessels, the pancreas, the gallbladder and the dilated bile duct . Apart from this mass, there was an absence of additional lesions in the rest of the body as detected by physical and imaging examinations. A preoperative diagnosis of abdominal lesion was made and the patient underwent exploratory laparotomy after an appropriate preparation. A mass was found located between the hepatoduodenal ligament and the inferior vena cava and successfully excised. The mass had an intact capsule and a clear boundary with adjacent organs including the common bile duct. The mass was 6 cm × 4 cm × 2.5 cm in size and had a greyish-white granular cutting surface with local bleeding regions .