A 75-year-old woman with bilateral Fuchs dystrophy developed bullous keratopathy after cataract surgery in both eyes and evidenced a diffuse and visually significant corneal edema, with no related ocular diseases. CDVA was 20/160 in the right eye (−1.50=−0.75×90°) and 20/63 in the left eye (−2.50=−1.25×90°). Corneal thickness was assessed by anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) (RTVue OCT Optovue Inc., Fremont, CA, USA), and it was 569 µm in the right eye and 560 µm in the left eye. The analysis of anterior corneal surface maps was performed by videokeratography (Oculus Optikgeräte GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). Total higher-order aberrations (HOAs) and root mean square (RMS) from the third to eighth order were evaluated. The RMS was 2.1 in the right and in the left eye . Corneal endothelial pattern and cell density were measured by non-contact specular microscopy (Tomey EM-3000, Tomey Co., Japan); endothelial cell densities were not detectable in both eyes because of bilateral total corneal decompensation.
Patient received a comprehensive eye examination before each surgery and at 1, 6, 12, and 24 months after each DSAEK .
One experienced surgeon performed DSAEK surgeries in both eyes, first in the right and after 6 months in the left eye. A temporal 4.5 mm clear cornea incision was made after administering peribulbar anesthesia and two paracenteses were made inferiorly and nasally. An anterior chamber maintenance cannula was introduced through the inferior paracentesis. Descemet stripping was carried out for a diameter of 8.0 mm using a reverse-bent Sinskey hook (ASICO, Westmont, IL, USA). Precut donor graft from eye bank (San Giovanni Eye bank of Rome, Italy), prepared using the conventional DSAEK technique of a single microkeratome pass, was trephined at a size of 8.0 mm. A Busin glide (Moria, Antony, France) was charged with the donor graft and a microincision forceps was introduced into nasal side entrance and passed through the anterior chamber to grab the graft and drag it into the eye. The air was carefully introduced into the anterior chamber to expand the graft. Twenty minutes after the injection of air, most of the air was substituted with a balanced salt solution.
Postoperative therapy for the first two weeks was 0.3% drops of tobramycin, 0.1% drops of dexamethasone, and 0.1% drops of sodium diclofenac 3 times a day.
The 0.1% clobetasone butyrate drops were administered 3 times a day for the following 3 months, then gradually reduced and discontinued.
No significative intraoperative and postoperative complications were evidenced. Both grafts were attached and cleared up during the first 7 days. The grafts resulted of uniform thickness with no clinically significant interface haze .
After 2 years, the CDVA was 20/25 in both eyes (right eye −0.50=−1.25×170°; left eye −0.50=−1.00×10°). Corneal thickness detected with AS-OCT was 633 µm, with a lenticule thickness of 206 and 439 µm, with a lenticule thickness of 48 µm, respectively, in the right and in the left eye . Then, both grafts were different in thickness from the very beginning and did not suffer many changes during the follow-up period. The RMS was 1.7 in the right eye and 1.4 in the left eye . Endothelial cell density was 2.272 cells/mm2 in the right and 2.154 cells/mm2 in the left eye.