A 45-year-old, previously well, Bangladeshi male presented to Chittagong Medical College Hospital with a 4-day history of fever, headache, prostration, myalgias, nausea, and anorexia. This center is the main referral hospital for the Chittagong Division in southern Bangladesh, which is endemic for malaria with unstable transmission. One day prior he was diagnosed with malaria based on a positive rapid diagnostic test (RDT).
There was no significant past medical history, specifically no prior malaria infections, chronic illness, jaundice, liver or kidney disease, transfusions, malignancy, or auto-immune disease. There was no history of passing red or black urine. He was not taking any regular prescription or traditional medications and had no prior exposure to artemisinins.
On admission (day 0), his temperature was 40.3°C, Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) 15/15, blood pressure (BP) 117/62 mmHg; heart rate (HR) 102 beats per minute (bpm) and respiratory rate 36 breaths per minute with 98% oxygen saturation. He appeared well with mild dehydration and scleral icterus, but otherwise unremarkable examination. He was diagnosed with uncomplicated malaria on admission and received one dose of oral artemether/lumefantrine combination (AL) 80/480 mg (Novartis) since he had no clinical criteria for severe malaria, no initial blood tests and only an RDT-positive test.
Subsequent blood tests confirmed a diagnosis of severe falciparum malaria based on hyperparasitaemia (13.8% erythrocytes infected; 659,000 parasites/μL) and hyperbilirubinaemia (bilirubin 80 μmol/L). He was promptly switched to intravenous artesunate 120 mg, 2.4 mg/kg body weight, (Guilin No. 2, Pharmaceuticals, China) and received three doses at 12-h intervals. He was also randomized to the normal saline arm of a randomized controlled trial of adjunctive l-arginine in severe malaria (ACTRN12612000571875). After 24 h he defervesced and was switched to oral AL for 3 days (total of 480 mg artemether and 2,880 mg lumefantrine). His recovery was unremarkable except for a delayed parasite clearance (estimated half life 8.2 h). Due to this persistent parasitaemia, he received a second 3-day course of AL and his parasites cleared at 148 h. In total he received 13 doses of AL (total dose of 1,040 mg of artemether and 6,240 mg of lumefantrine) and three doses of intravenous artesunate (total dose of 360 mg). He was discharged 8 days later with full recovery, a stable haematocrit and creatinine at a baseline of 86 μmol/L.
At follow-up on day 14 after admission he was asymptomatic, however his white blood count revealed a significant leukocytosis and severe normocytic anaemia (haemoglobin of 60 g/L; Table ). He declined re-admission and subsequently experienced fever, rigors, headache, jaundice, abdominal pain, and vomiting. He had not taken any antibiotics, non-steroidal anti-inflammatories or proton pump inhibitors during this intercurrent period after treatment of the initial malaria episode.
He was re-admitted on day 20 feeling unwell with generalized oedema, particularly of the face and lower extremities. Vital signs were stable: temperature 36.5°C, GCS 15, BP 130/74 mmHg and HR 78 bpm. He appeared sick, anaemic and had periorbital oedema. Cardiac examination revealed a systolic flow murmur at the left upper sternal border with no radiation. There was mild abdominal tenderness on palpation and bilateral lower limb pitting oedema. Biochemistry revealed AKI with a creatinine increased to 1,769 μmol/L, hyperkalaemia, a non-anion gap hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis and severe anaemia with 4+ haemoglobinuria , with other investigations outlined below. Bladder catheterization did not suggest urinary retention with a residual volume of less than 50 mL of dark orange urine. He promptly received calcium gluconate and insulin for hyperkalaemia, empiric ceftriaxone, and was referred for haemodialysis and blood transfusion. Following five rounds of haemodialysis and three units whole blood transfusion, his metabolic acidosis, hyperkalaemia, renal function, and anaemia improved .
He was discharged recovering well on day 44 with stable serum creatinine and haemoglobin. He was followed up weekly thereafter, and by day 81 his kidney function improved further towards baseline (creatinine 115 μmol/L), and his haemoglobin recovered (135 g/L).