A 45-year-old Caucasian woman, a smoker with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, was admitted to our hospital with a 3-month history of progressive exertional dyspnea associated with malaise, cough productive of pink-tinged sputum and a 100-lb unintentional weight loss over the preceding year. She did not use alcohol or illicit drugs, was receiving disability income because of back pain, lived in an apartment with her husband in southeastern Minnesota, did not have pets or animal exposure and had no history of exotic travel.
Her physical examination showed a cachectic, toxic-appearing woman who appeared remarkably older than her actual age. Her vital signs were heart rate 134 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure 118/74mmHg, respiratory rate 32 breaths/min, oxygen saturation 78% on room air and body temperature 37.0°C. She had a weak cough, and auscultation of the chest revealed diffusely reduced breath sounds bilaterally with faint inspiratory crackles. There was no clubbing. Her cardiac examination revealed tachycardia but no murmurs.
Laboratory studies showed neutrophilic leukocytosis and low serum potassium, creatinine and albumin levels. The results of an arterial blood gas study on 2L/min of supplemental oxygen were pH 7.38, partial pressure of carbon dioxide in arterial blood 24mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood 71mmHg and bicarbonate 14mmol/L. Urinalysis was unremarkable. Antibody testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) type 1 and HIV type 2 was negative. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) levels (IgG, IgM and IgA) were within normal limits. The results of serum protein electrophoresis showed no monoclonal proteins, and a connective tissue panel for rheumatologic disease was negative. Chest radiography showed marked, diffuse, bilateral interstitial and alveolar opacities with slight upper-lobe predominance (Figure ). High-resolution computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed extensive bilateral interstitial thickening with ground-glass and cavitary opacities associated with parenchymal destruction that was most pronounced in the upper lungs (Figure A and
B). A CT scan of the chest performed 9 months earlier (Figure ) because of her weight loss was normal, except for subtle centrilobular and subpleural emphysema in the upper lobes.
The patient underwent bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and specimens were sent for microbiologic and cytologic analysis. She was empirically started on vancomycin, cefepime, levofloxacin and, later, amphotericin B. Her condition progressively deteriorated after intensive care unit (ICU) admission. She developed septic shock requiring vasopressors (norepinephrine 0.9μg/kg/min and vasopressin 0.03U/min) and progressive respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation. Her Sequential Organ Function Assessment Score increased from 1 to 11 by hospital day 3, suggesting a poor prognosis for recovery
. The patient’s family decided to withdraw support, and she died on hospital day three.
Post-mortem bacterial cultures of the BAL fluid were negative. Polymerase chain reaction testing for Pneumocystis jiroveci, influenza, adenovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, Legionella and Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. The patient’s histoplasma serology showed elevated complement fixation titers to both mycelial phase (1:512) and yeast phase (1:128), and an immunodiffusion assay showed the presence of H and M bands. BAL fungal cultures grew many H. capsulatum organisms.