The patient was an 80 years old man whose previous medical record included diabetes mellitus type 2, atrial fibrillation, cerebrovascular disease, polymyalgia rheumatica and osteoporosis. His regular prescriptions included metformin, warfarin and prednisolone. He was admitted to hospital with a hematoma at his right thigh after a minor trauma. At clinical examination palpable splenomegaly at inspiration was detected. Standard peripheral blood tests revealed hemoglobin (Hgb) 10.3 g/dL (normal range 13.4–17.0), platelets > 2000 × 109/L (150–450), white blood cell count (WBC) 23× 109/L [–] and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 366 U/L (115–255). Microscopy of the peripheral blood smear revealed a leukoerythroblastic picture including nucleated erythrocytes and promyelocytes as well as myelocytes but no blasts. The bone marrow (BM) smear demonstrated increased cellularity with increased megakaryocytes and 4% myeloblasts; the BM biopsy confirmed this and showed in addition focal bundles of reticulin fibers and in addition proliferation of megakaryocytes with classic atypia, including small size and hypolobulation. There was reduced myelopoiesis, although without evidence of proliferation of immature cells . Mutational analysis for JAK2V617F derived from peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) was positive with an allele burden of 0.6%, and a real time polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) detecting the most common BCR-ABL1 fusions; e13a2/e14a2/e1a2/e19a2, was negative. Hence, our patient fulfilled all WHO major criteria for a Ph− myeloproliferative neoplasia; namely primary myelofibrosis (PMF); with (i) megakaryocytic proliferation and reticulin fibrosis, (ii) the presence of JAK2 mutation and (iii) not fulfilling the criteria for other myeloid malignancies. In addition to all the five minor criteria were also fulfilled with (i) anemia, (ii) leukocytosis, (iii) palpable splenomegaly, (iv) increased LDH and (v) leukoerythroblastosis .
Cytostatic treatment with hydroxyurea was initiated at a dose of 2500 mg daily. The dose was reduced after some weeks due to severe headache. During the next 6 months the platelet count was reduced by hydroxyurea, although with difficulties in achieving satisfactory platelet counts without imposing neutropenia as a side effect. A shift of treatment to anagrelide (1 mg/day) was attempted, however had to be disrupted due to unacceptable side effects with headache, heart palpitations and back pain.
Seven months after the diagnosis of PMF the routine peripheral blood smear showed an increasing blast percentage and flow-cytometric analysis verified 22% immature cells. However, a BM biopsy demonstrated only 7% blasts. The diagnosis of PMF was therefore maintained and hydroxyurea continued.
Six weeks later the patient was admitted to hospital because of increasing anemia (Hgb 6.7 g/dL), leukocytosis (25.2 × 109/L) and CRP 35 mg/L. Peripheral blood smear showed 43% myeloblasts, confirmed by flow cytometric analysis. BM biopsy demonstrated a hypercellular BM without organized hematopoiesis, absence of erythropoiesis and increased myelopoiesis with relatively few mature granulocytes, focal nodes of immature cells and blast cells and significantly increased amount of reticulin fibers . The findings were consistent with transformation from PMF to AML.
Surprisingly the cytogenetic analysis by conventional G-banding detected the Philadelphia chromosome with the translocation t(9;22)(q34;q22) in all ten metaphases analyzed. This was confirmed by BCR-ABL1 fusion in 57% of the cells by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis, and to be the BCR-ABL1 e6a2 transcript variant by sequencing of positive product from reverse transcriptase PCR. RT-qPCR confirmed the existence of an e6a2 BCR-ABL1 transcript, with a BCR-ABL1/GUSB ratio of 69%. Retrospectively, the e6a2 transcript was also detected at the initial diagnosis of PMF, although only with a BCR-ABL1/GUSB ratio of 14% . The JAK2V617F mutation could not be detected at the point of AML diagnosis.
We started treatment with dasatinib 100 mg once daily combined with hydroxyurea (500 mg/day) for the first 22 days and valproic acid (300 mg + 600 mg/day) for the first 20 days . Peripheral blood smears after 11 and 19 days showed no myeloblasts. The BCR-ABL1/GUSB ratio fell from 52 to 7.6% after 3 months . Because of increasing fatigability, the patient was referred to an echocardiography that showed a pericardial effusion of 1.8 cm at the level of the right atrium. This was regarded as an adverse effect of dasatinib , and serous effusions trigged by dasatinib is suggested to be predictive for therapy efficiency in CML [, ]. Due to risk of recurrent pericardial effusion combined with the general condition of the patient dasatinib therapy was discontinued after a treatment period of approximately 4 months.
Five days after dasatinib discontinuation, treatment with imatinib 400 mg daily was started, and a repeated echocardiography 2 weeks later demonstrated reduction in the pericardial effusion to 1.0 cm. At his last visit 2 weeks after initiating imatinib the patient reported that he had gradually improved. He experienced two episodes of diarrhea, but no other side effects of imatinib. Peripheral blood test showed Hgb 11.5 g/dL, WBC 5.3 × 109/L, neutrophils 2.8 × 109/L, and platelets 161 × 109/L. He continued imatinib therapy for 6 months and had detectable although stable levels of BCR-ABL1/GUSB ratio measured by qPCR during this period . Thereafter the patient developed increasing abdominal pain and diarrhea. A CT scan demonstrated a tumor in the pancreatic head, radiological consistent with adenocarcinoma. The patient was considered inoperable and unable to tolerate chemotherapy, and the tumor was not biopsied. He continued the imatininb treatment for an additional period of few weeks and died shortly thereafter.