We present a 72-year-old male with a past history significant for metastatic melanoma, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, type-2 diabetes mellitus, gout, chronic pancreatitis, adrenal insufficiency secondary to immunotherapy, and BMI of 30. The patient was incidentally diagnosed with metastatic melanoma in 2015 after presenting to the emergency department with shortness of breath. Subsequent imaging identified pancreas, brain, and pulmonary lesions, which were later confirmed to be metastatic melanoma after undergoing thoracoscopic wedge resection. Since time of diagnosis, the patient’s oncologic treatment has consisted of chemotherapy, stereotactic radiotherapy, and immunotherapy with pembrolizumab to which he had shown good response.
In late 2018, the patient presented to the emergency department with symptomatic LGIB. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a 6.3-cm lesion of the large intestine in the left lower quadrant, shown in Fig. . The patient subsequently underwent a colonoscopy which demonstrated a friable mass invading the lumen of the sigmoid at 40 cm from rectum, with pathology consistent with primary cutaneous metastatic melanoma. After discussion at the multidisciplinary surgical oncology conference, the recommendation that the patient to undergo a robotic-assisted sigmoid colectomy with primary anastomosis.
Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in supine position, arms tucked. The abdominal cavity was accessed via optical trocar entry technique at Palmer’s point with an 8-mm trocar. Additional 8-mm trocars were placed in upper midline and right flank. The right lower quadrant was chosen as the extraction site, via a 5-cm muscle-splitting incision through which a wound protector was placed. A gelport was positioned over this wound protector, and a 12-mm trocar was inserted. Abdominal trocar sites are depicted in Fig. . The surgical robot (DaVinci, Xi, Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) was docked, and robotic instruments were inserted.
Robotic diagnostic laparoscopy showed no evidence of peritoneal or hepatic metastatic disease. The descending colon and sigmoid colon were mobilized by dividing the lateral retroperitoneal attachments using monopolar electric cautery. The metastatic lesion was apparent on the mesenteric aspect of the proximal sigmoid colon. The mesentery of involved segment of sigmoid colon adjacent to the lesion was divided using the bipolar electrosurgical vessel sealer device, while ensuring adequate hemostasis. Notably, as the procedure was for palliative rather than curative intent, a regional lymphadenectomy along the inferior mesenteric artery was not performed. The colon was divided both proximal and distal to the lesion using a robotic 45-mm stapler with 3.5-mm staples. To achieve a tension-free colo-colonic anastomosis, mobilization of the splenic flexure was required, and dissection was performed in a medial to lateral fashion.
The anastomosis was created by first orienting the proximal resection and distal resection lines of the descending and sigmoid colon, respectively, in an isoperistaltic fashion utilizing silk stay sutures. Enterotomies were created using monopolar cautery on the proximal and distal limb. A common channel was created using the robotic 45-mm stapler with 3.5-mm staples to create the isoperistaltic side-to-side anastomosis, shown in Fig. a. Adequate anastomotic perfusion was ensured by via intraoperative indocyanine green fluorescence angiography, shown in Fig. b. The resulting common enterotomy was closed with an absorbable barbed suture in two layers; the first layer in a running fashion and the second layer imbricated in a Lembert fashion, shown in Fig. c and d, respectively. The specimen was then delivered through the right lower quadrant extraction site utilizing a wound protector site, and the abdomen was closed.
Total operative time was 238 min, with an estimated blood loss of only 50 mL. Postoperatively, the patient had adequate pain control and was tolerating clear-liquid diet by the post-operative day zero. He was advanced to regular diet over the next two days as tolerated. By post-operative day three, the patient was ambulating well, his pain was well-controlled on oral pain medication, he had return of normal bowel function, and was subsequently discharged home. The pathology demonstrated metastatic melanoma of the colon, with ulceration and necrosis. A representative image of the specimen is depicted in Fig. . Zero out of 12 lymph nodes was found to be positive for disease and the resection margins were negative. On 1-month follow-up, the patient was without pain, tolerating a regular diet, and with resolution of his preoperative hematochezia.