A 67-year old male presented in May 2014 with a 12-year history of low-grade fever, symmetric arthralgia of shoulders, wrists, metacarpo-phalangeal joints and knees, with sporadic episodes of mild joint swelling. He had worked for 35 years as quarryman in different Italian mines and over the last 2-3 years has complained of sporadic dry cough and dyspnea on intense exertion. During the last 12 years, based on a variety of articular and systemic manifestations, persistently elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), antinuclear antibody (ANA) positivity and, on some occasions, low-titer RF positivity, he had received different diagnoses including RA, SLE and undifferentiated connective tissue disease (UCTD). Over this period, the patient was treated with prednisone with good response, but symptoms flared when the dose was reduced to 5 mg/day. Every attempt to treat the patient with traditional disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs such as hydroxychloroquine and methotrexate, was unsuccessful, and over time he developed osteoporosis complicated by vertebral fractures, and diabetes.
At the first visit to our center, we recommended tapering and discontinuing the corticosteroids over 2 weeks. After one month, he was febrile (38.4 °C), and had tenderness of wrists, hand joints, and knees, and mild arthritis of the right ankle. Bilateral crackles were detectable on pulmonary auscultation, with otherwise normal physical findings.
Laboratory tests disclosed a normal blood cell count and differential, normal liver and kidney function, ESR 56 mm/h, CRP 7.75 mg/dl (nephelometry; normal value <0.5 mg/dl), and ANA 1/1280, with negative anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies and extractable nuclear antigens, C3 complement fraction levels of 199 mg/dl (normal value 90-180 mg/dl), C4 complement fraction 39 mg/dl (normal value 10-40 mg/dl), and negative RF, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP antibody), and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA). Urine and blood cultures results were negative, as well as interferon gamma release assay (Quantiferon).
A chest radiograph disclosed mild interstitial thickening, and multiple osteoporotic fractures of the D7, D8, and D11 vertebral bodies were present on spinal X-rays. Hand, wrist and knee radiographs demonstrated alterations consistent with osteoarthritis without joint erosions.
HRCT of the lung showed pulmonary fibrosis with pleural plaques suggesting asbestosis .
Based on the patient’s history of asbestos exposure, clinical, laboratory and instrumental investigations, a diagnosis of mild asbestosis with prominent asbestos-induced systemic autoimmune disease features was made, and, considering the contraindication to corticosteroid use due to the severe osteoporotic vertebral fractures, and the recent data reported in the literature showing a pathogenic role of IL-1 beta in pneumoconiosis, subcutaneous canakinumab at a dose of 150 mg every 8 weeks was proposed. After obtaining local ethical Committee approval and the patient’s written informed consent, canakinumab was started. The patient was scheduled to receive the injections of canakinumab in the outpatient office of our rheumatology division.
At the 7-day control visit, the patient was asymptomatic and his ESR and CRP had declined to 36 mm/h and 1.6 mg/dl, respectively. Canakinumab was continued and after 4 months of follow-up the patient was still in clinical remission and laboratory examination demonstrated normal acute-phase reactants (ESR: 12 mm/h; CRP: 0.19 mg/dl) and a diminished ANA titer of 1/320. The therapy was well tolerated without adverse events or side effects.