We report the case of a 19-year-old male who presented to the emergency department with fever, chest pain, and dyspnoea for 2 days. On examination, he was febrile (39.5°C), normotensive, tachycardic (154 b.p.m.), tachypnoeic (22 b.p.m.), and hypoxemic (SpO2 93% room air). Head, eyes, nose, throat, and neck examinations were unremarkable. Breath sounds were decreased in the bases, and fine crackles were noted. Auscultation of the heart revealed muffled heart sounds. The abdomen was soft and non-tender. The extremities were well perfused with strong and symmetric pulses. No oedema or jugular venous distention was appreciated. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed depression of the PQ interval in aVF, LI, and LII, elevation of the ST-segment in leads V4–V6, aVL, LI, and LII, and ST segment depression in aVR . Arterial blood gas showed mild hypoxaemia pO2 63.8 mmHg and hyperlactacidaemia 2.9 mmol/L. Laboratory tests revealed normal haemoglobin 13.6 g/dL, leucocytosis 11.949/µL, neutrophilia 10.500/µL, lymphocytopaenia 890/µL, normal platelet count 135.000/µL, elevated C-reactive protein 30 mg/dL, elevated procalcitonin 0.48 ng/mL, N-terminal-proBNP of 632 pg/mL, and undetected troponin I. Renal function was normal. Chest radiography showed severe cardiomegaly, bilateral pleural effusion (more severe on the right), parabronchial cuffing, and perihilar haziness suggestive of congestion . Echocardiogram showed normal size ventricles with preserved systolic function, valves with normal morphology and function, and a large circumferential pericardial effusion (22–25 mm) without collapse of the cardiac chambers or haemodynamical instability. Empirical antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin, loop diuretics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d.), and colchicine (0.5 mg b.i.d.) was started. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), and a right thoracentesis was performed with insertion of a chest drain in the right fifth intercostal space (8–10 cm) and drainage of 600 cc of serosanguineous fluid. Pleural fluid culture was negative, and immunohistochemical analysis was compatible with exudate. A thorax computed tomography confirmed a circumferential pericardial effusion with maximum dimension of 40 mm (yellow star) with a thick pericardium and bilateral pleural effusion (with chest tube inserted in the right fifth intercostal space, red star; and ).
Two days later, the patient became haemodynamically unstable with hypotension (94/56 mmHg), and an echocardiogram confirmed enlargement of the pericardial effusion (red star) with collapse of the right cavities and significant tricuspid inflow variation . An urgent pericardiocentesis was performed with success. Immunohistochemical analysis was compatible with exudate with inflammatory cells. Autoimmunity laboratory tests were requested. Lupus anticoagulant and antinuclear antibody (ANA) with a speckled pattern were positive (1:160). Complement C4 was mildly reduced (7.6 mg/dL), and C3 level was normal. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, and anti-dsDNA were all negative. Interferon-gamma release assay, atypical and serology screening including herpesviruses, enterovirus, adenovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, coxsackie A and B, viral hepatitis, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, and Aspergillus were unremarkable. A score of 11 in the European League Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology (EULAR/ACR) criteria for SLE was obtained confirming the diagnosis. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d.) and colchicine (0.5 mg b.i.d.) were continued, and high-dose corticosteroid [methylprednisolone 1 g/day during 2 days and then oral prednisolone 60 mg/day (1.0 mg/kg)] was started. The patient remained haemodynamically stable with normalization of the heart rate and resolution of the fever and pericardial effusion. The chest tube was removed after 3 days, and the patient was discharged after 7 days.
One month later, the patient returned to the emergency department with dyspnoea and a recurrence of fever, and a recurrence of polyserositis with small pleural and pericardial effusions without haemodynamic instability was confirmed. Loop diuretic and corticosteroid [oral prednisolone 90 mg/day (1.5 mg/kg)] were titrated. The patient improved without the need for thoracentesis or pericardiocentesis and was discharged after 4 days.
Corticosteroids and NSAIDs were tapered over 7 months and then suspended. Colchicine was maintained for 1 year and suspended afterwards without recurrence. To date, the patient remains asymptomatic, and follow-up echocardiogram 6 months later showed a very mild pericardial effusion without haemodynamic compromise or constriction.