An 80-year-old woman with a history of cerebral infarction and hyperlipidemia complained of a sudden visual field defect and hemiparesis without disturbance of consciousness, and was hospitalized.
Head computed tomography (CT) performed 1.5 h from onset showed subcortical hemorrhage in the left occipital lobe. The patient received antihypertensive therapy. Four days after admission, her consciousness level decreased and she underwent a head CT. She was diagnosed with perihematomal edema and considered for hematoma evacuation and decompressive craniotomy. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. Neurological examination revealed consciousness disturbance, anisocoria, and right hemiparesis. She scored 5 points on the Glasgow Coma Scale (E1M3V1). Head CT during admission to our hospital showed a low-density area (LDA) enlargement, niveau formation in the hematoma cavity, and uncal herniation with worsened midline shift, compared with the head CT taken during admission at the previous hospital . LDA CT values ventral to the hematoma at the time of admission to the previous hospital and our hospital were 19.32 Hounsfield units (HU) and 24.40 HU, respectively [ and ]. Hematoma CT values at the time of admission to the previous hospital and our hospital were 67.60 HU and 72.05 HU, respectively [ and ]. Emergent craniotomy was performed for hematoma evacuation. A hard clot (first observed in the occipital lobe after corticotomy) was removed, which revealed an aspirable fluid-containing blood . An aspirable soft clot was present at the bottom of the hematoma cavity , beyond which a thin ventricular wall with a small hole was observed, through which the CSF entered the cavity . Although postoperative CT showed residual hemorrhage, an improved midline shift was also observed, and the uncal herniation had disappeared . The consciousness disturbance in the patient was resolved, and the right hemiparesis improved. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital (modified Rankin scale [mRS] score: 4) after a 16-day stay at our hospital, and her mRS score at 8 months from onset was 1.