A 46-year-old man presenting with hematuria underwent a diagnostic CT urogram revealing a 14.2×10.6×9.3 cm left renal mass with proximal renal vein thrombosis and retroperitoneal adenopathy. Chest imaging at the time identified small pulmonary nodules which were too small for characterization. The patient underwent a left radical nephrectomy with pathological evaluation identifying a T3N1M0 (14.2×10.6×9.3 cm) renal cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid differentiation (40%).
Two months after nephrectomy, surveillance scans identified extensive presumed metastases in the abdomen, pelvis and both lungs, with the largest mass consisting of a left renal fossa mass measuring 8.9×3.2 cm. Biopsy of a presumed metastatic lesion in left anterior abdominal wall was consistent with poorly differentiated carcinoma with 50%–60% rhabdoid and sarcomatoid differentiation that stained for Pax-8, suggesting metastatic renal cell carcinoma. The patient was considered poor risk as assessed by IInternational Metastatic RCC Database Consortium.
After 3 months on maintenance nivolumab therapy, the size of the patient’s retroperitoneal and abdominal wall metastases approximately doubled as assessed by CT scanning of the abdomen and pelvis . In consideration of possible subsequent treatments, we noted the patient’s prior response to ipilimumab, previous tolerance of combined immunotherapy, good performance status, and sRCC histology which has historically poor outcomes with VEGF inhibitors. Given this information, it was decided to retreat the patient with ipilimumab 1 mg/kg along with continued nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks. A partial response was demonstrated on imaging after two additional doses of ipilimumab plus nivolumab, with all but one lesion shrinking by more than 50 per cent (see , ). The patient remained on combined immune checkpoint blockade therapy for a total of 9 months with stable disease before treatment was discontinued due to grade 3 fatigue, arthralgias and progression of disease in the right ventricle alone.