A 33 years-old man with a history of severe alcohol dependence and schizophrenia was seen by a neurology consultant in the emergency department of a hospital in northern Baden-Württemberg, Germany. The patient reported diarrhea for at least 2 weeks and progressive muscle weakness. He denied fever and associated myalgias or painful paresthesias. He had stopped drinking (6–10 × 0.5 L bottles of beer per day) 2 days before admission. Neurological examination revealed leg-accentuated tetraplegia with global areflexia. Muscle strength was 0/5 for foot and toe flexors and extensors, 2/5 for pelvic girdle muscles and 4/5 for shoulder girdle muscles. Sensory examination revealed a stocking-like hypesthesia of the feet. There was also a complex oculomotor dysfunction with an immured left eye, abduction deficiency of the right eye and a vertical skew deviation. Cognitive assessment revealed mild mental impairment.
Blood analysis showed elevated transaminases, γ-glutamyltransferase, lipase, slightly decreased thiamine level (26 μg/L; n: 28–85) and severe hyponatremia (110 mM; n: 135–145). Other electrolytes and renal function were within the normal range or borderline (K+ 4.4 mM, n: 3.3–5.1; Ca2+ 1.15 mM, n: 1.15–1.35; GFR 57 mL/min, n: >60). The CSF on admission showed a normal cell count and cytological assessment, protein concentration within the normal range and an intact blood-CSF barrier. Control lumbar puncture at day 6 after admission showed no changes except an increase in CSF protein (78.2 mg/L, n: 15–46). MRI of the entire spine and a CT-scan of the head showed no abnormalities.
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) revealed severe proximal nerve conduction block, as evidenced by greatly increased F-wave latency, and distal nerve conduction block, as evidenced by increased dmL and decreased motor NCV in all peripheral nerves studied. Chronodispersion of the tibial nerve compound muscle action potential (CMAP) was also evident. No intermediate conduction block was observed. and show representative recordings of the ulnar and tibial nerves. summarizes the absolute values on admission.
Some of the electrophysiological findings are reminiscent of GBS. However, GBS typically has an NCV of less than 30 m/s and often intermediate conduction blocks. Therefore, we concluded that GBS may not be the underlying pathology and that hyponatremia may be the more important underlying pathology. Therefore, we refrained from treatment with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and compensated the hyponatremia only by slowly increasing the sodium concentration with intravenous sodium infusion. We also replaced the mild thiamine deficiency (200 mg/day intravenously). Within 24 h after admission and the start of sodium replacement [(Na+)0h 110 mM; (Na+)24h 125 mM; (Na+)48h 132 mM; (Na+)72h 137 mM], the oculomotor dysfunction and mental abnormalities improved completely. Muscle strength also improved. At the same time, follow-up electroneurography showed an impressive improvement in NCVs and conduction blocks (, and ).
Further analysis in the course revealed negative results for autoantibodies against gangliosides (IgG + IgM immunoblotting, all negative for GD1a, GD1b, GM1, GM2, GM3, GQ1b, GT1a, GT1b;) and antibodies against Campylobacter jejuni (IgM + IgA ELISA: 5.7 and 6.3 U/mL, n < 20), making GBS even less likely. The following pathogens were also excluded: Salmonella-, Yersinia- and Shigella species and Treponema pallidum, Borrelia burgdorferi, Hepatitis A, B, C virus and SARS-CoV-2.
The patient’s symptoms improved as described above and he was transferred to a neurological rehabilitation clinic.