A 51-year-old female patient presented with bilateral swelling of the upper eyelids for 2 years, which worsened in the past six months. She also reported having dry mouth and dry eyes which could be tolerated. The Schirmer’s test showed that the right eye was 2 mm/5min, and the left eye was 0 mm/5min. Ophthalmic examination showed: visual acuity—right eye, 1.0; left eye, 1.0; and intraocular pressure—right eye, 14 mmHg; left eye, 15 mmHg. Performances in the anterior and posterior segments were normal. Soft masses could be palpated in the bilateral lacrimal gland area. And the laboratory tests indicate positive syphilis antibodies, serum total IgE, IgG, IgA, light chain K and light chain L increased. Orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination showed bilateral lacrimal gland prolapse, and no abnormalities in the eyelids, extraocular muscles, and nerves . The preoperative diagnosis was bilateral lacrimal gland prolapse, but according to the clinical manifestations of dry eyes and dry mouth and the results of Schirmer’s test, the possibility of SS cannot be ruled out.
In order to confirm the diagnosis, the patient underwent repositioning of the right and left lacrimal glands under general anesthesia. During the operation, the lacrimal glands were soft and slightly enlarged, a small part of the lacrimal glands was removed for histopathological examination. The results showed obvious atrophy of the lacrimal gland acinus, hyperplasia of the lacrimal duct epithelium, and infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells in the tissue, which was considered as MD . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining results were positive for Bcl-2, CD3, CD20, CD21, CD38, CK, Ki67, IgG, and negative for IgG4. In view of the similarity in the pathological manifestations of MD and SS, and the negative expression of IgG4 by immunohistochemical staining in this case, combined with the specific clinical features and tear secretion test results of the patient, the possibility of diagnosis of SS cannot be ruled out. In order to further clarify the diagnosis, we performed SS-related laboratory tests: anti-SSA antibody (+++), anti-SSB antibody (+++), anti-Ro-52 antibody (+++). According to the new primary SS classification criteria (ACR-EULAR) in 2016, the final diagnosis was SS. After the operation, the patient was treated with oral methylprednisolone with an initial dosage of 24 mg per day for 1 week and a taper over 6 weeks. The patient recovered well in a follow-up examination a year later, and no recurrence was found.