In 2007, a 38-year-old female was hospitalized for an ulcerated uterine cervical lesion which, after cervical biopsies, showed an in situ squamous cell carcinoma. Subsequently, an abdominal CT scan revealed an enlarged, dishomogeneous uterus, with hypodense mass of 5 cm adjacent to the posterior wall of the bladder. Two months later, the patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. In the intraoperative phase, the uterus was found to be mobile and ovaries were normal. Neither enlarged lymph nodes nor peritoneal lesions or ascites were noted.
On histological examination of the surgical specimen, a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma in situ of the cervix, measuring 4 mm in maximum diameter, with basaloid morphology, was identified. Three additional leiomyomata of the uterine corpus, besides the larger one already identified on CT scan, were also microscopically found.
In 2014, the patient presented to medical observation with a pulmonary mass . Upper left lobectomy was performed. The final pathologic diagnosis was carcinosarcoma of the lung.
A second histological revision of the lung surgical specimen was performed in March 2014 in the Pathology Unit of our Institute. The preferred diagnosis, after extensive immunohistochemical analyses, was spindle-cell sarcoma, consistent with high grade EESS.
Post-operative staging with thoracic, abdominal and pelvic CT scan did no have any abnormal findings and a follow-up was proposed. After five months, a CT scan was performed: it revealed a left pulmonary lesion with a maximum diameter of 18 mm. Chemotherapy treatment with carboplatin AUC 5 and paclitaxel 175 mg/mq every three weeks was started. After three courses of antiblastic therapy, the lesion in the left lung appeared to be increased in volume (27 mm of diameter) on CT scan. After multidisciplinary discussion, a surgical intervention (atypical segmentectomy of lower lobe of the left lung) was performed.
Almost three months after surgical intervention, a new pulmonary lesion located in the right lung was detected by CT scan. The lesion was subsequently treated with radiofrequency ablation. As a consequence of the procedure, right pleural effusion after 24 h and after five days by the appearance of right pneumothorax after five days appeared. Shortly after tube insertion, additional radiographs were taken: they showeda rapid decrease in the size of the pneumothorax. The thoracic drainage was removed and patient was discharged from the hospital.
After one month, a CT scan was repeated. The scan showed surgical and radiofrequency ablation effects and a new pulmonary lesion of uncertain nature, measuring 4–5 mm of maximum diameter. Hormonal therapy with progestin (acetate medroxyprogesterone 1 gr daily) was prescribed.
No radiological signs of progression were noted until December 2015, when new lung lesions located in the lower lobe of the right lung and upper lobe of the left lung were detected on CT scan.
In January 2016, the patient referred the appearance of a soft tissue mass, rapidly enlarging, located in the left periscapular region. A tru-cut biopsy of the soft tissue lesion was performed: histological examination revealed a neoplastic lesion with spindle cell morphology, reminiscent of the upper left lobe EESS.
A second line polychemotherapy with epirubicin and ifosfamide was started. After three courses of chemotherapy, radiological evaluation through CT scan revealed a decrease of the diameter of the right lung lesion and the disappearance of the lesion in the left lung. At the follow-up visit, the patient was in good conditions well, with no clinical signs or symptoms of the disease and no pathological findings on CT scan; routine laboratory tests were normal.
Signed written consent was obtained from the patient for this case report.