A 49-year-old Syrian male patient presented to the outpatient infectious diseases clinic at our hospital with a chief complaint of acute right flank pain associated with dark urine as well as passage of several stones and cream-colored grape-skin-like structures in urine . No hematuria or other lower urinary tract symptoms were present. Of importance, the patient reported a remote history of hepatic hydatid cyst several years ago that was managed with percutaneous aspiration–injection–reaspiration (PAIR) drainage and albendazole that he sought to discontinue after several months of use. He acknowledged failing to seek medical follow-up owing to financial constraints after symptom resolution and no further recurrence. The patient is a shepherd by profession, spending most of his adult life in Syria before fleeing the civil war in 2015 and immigrating to Kuwait. He has a long-standing history of tobacco dependence, but the rest of the history is otherwise unremarkable.
At the time of his initial visit, the patient did not appear to be in acute distress or in pain. He was afebrile and hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 134/78 mmHg and a heart rate of 76 beats per minute. Abdominal examination was remarkable for right flank tenderness to percussion with no evidence of hepatosplenomegaly. No abdominal masses or signs of peritoneal irritation were noted. The rest of the examination was normal. The patient was admitted for a workup and further management.
Initial laboratory workup showed no evidence of leukocytosis or eosinophilia. His serum creatinine was 1.03 g/dL (normal value: 0.9–1.3 g/dL) and hemoglobin was 13.6 g/dL (normal value: 14–16 g/dL). Electrolytes were normal and so were liver function tests. Urinalysis showed excess of leukocytes and microscopic hematuria (6–7 red blood cells/high-power field), with no bacterial growth on culture. Calculated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) was 81 mL/minute/1.73 cm2 (normal value >90). Excreted stones were collected and sent for analysis, which later showed a mixed composition of calcium oxalate and urate. Hydatid serology using Echinococcus indirect hemagglutination assay (IHA) (ELI.H.A, kit number 66604) was run once and came back positive at a titer of 1:2048. Imaging was obtained next. Kidney, ureter, and bladder (KUB) x-ray was normal while a renal ultrasound showed multiple unilocular hypoechoic cystic structures in the right kidney with mixed homogeneous and heterogeneous components. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) KUB revealed three sizeable thick-walled exophytic cystic lesions occupying the mid and lower zones of the right kidney with heterogeneous, nonenhancing, and hyperdense components (Bosniak category III), with the largest measuring 9 × 8 × 7.5 cm and compressing the pancreatic head, right colon, and second part of the duodenum . Occasional border calcification and communication between the cyst and the pelvicalyceal system (yellow arrow) were also seen.
Of concern, the cystic lesions were encroaching the right renal hilum, resulting in renal pelvic compression and grade III hydronephrosis. The calyces were filled with debris and a small nonobstructing stone measuring 11 × 4 mm. By contrast, the left kidney was entirely normal and pathologically uninvolved. Consistent with his previous hepatic involvement, a defective segment of the right hepatic lobe with border calcification was also seen and is suggestive of prior intervention to treat the hepatic cyst. In light of the CT scan findings, referral to the urology service was initiated, and the patient subsequently underwent dynamic renal scintigraphy to assess the function of the right kidney. Scintigraphy revealed a markedly decreased tracer uptake and poor excretion indicative of negligible function (5%) of the right kidney due to extensive parenchymal destruction and replacement by the cysts as opposed to the well-functioning left kidney. The CT and scintigraphy findings strongly suggest nonsalvageability of the right kidney but without evidence of overt renal failure as supported by the normal serum creatinine and only slightly decreased GFR due to noninvolvement of the left kidney.
Based on the patient’s suggestive occupational history, past history of hydatid disease, positive serology, pathognomonic presentation of hydatiduria, and CT KUB findings, a preliminary diagnosis of renal echinococcosis with significant unilateral renal impairment was made. A diagnosis of necrotic renal cell carcinoma was briefly considered given the heterogeneous nature of the lesion, presence of calcification, and the patient’s smoking history, but the constellation of the above-mentioned findings renders a malignancy diagnosis less likely. Of note, border calcification can be detected in hydatid cyst and, when complete, is indicative of quiescence or death of the parasite . Inherited cystic disorders of the kidney, such as polycystic kidney disease, tuberous sclerosis, and Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome, were unlikely due to unilateral involvement, sparing of other organs, and lack of positive family history. The possibility of multiple renal abscesses was raised, but the patient’s unsuggestive symptoms, marginally abnormal urinalysis, and normal urine culture moved it lower on the list.
After collecting data from the patient’s history and investigations and consulting with the urology service, the patient was thoroughly informed of his diagnosis, prognosis, and available surgical treatment options. Due to kidney nonsalvageability, unilateral nephrectomy was recommended to allow for complete eradication of the infection and prevention of recurrence; he was elaborately informed of the risks, benefits, and alternatives to surgical intervention, including PAIR and exclusive medical therapy. The patient chose to opt out of surgery and settle for exclusive pharmacotherapy. Reasons for surgery refusal are reported in the patient perspective section below. The patient was started on dual antiparasitic therapy with albendazole (400 mg × 2 day) and praziquantel (40 mg/kg once weekly). He was also advised to increase fluid intake and take acetaminophen on an as-needed basis for pain.
The patient decided to continue seeking follow-up medical care in his home country and probably consider undergoing PAIR in Syria. From our standpoint, the plan is to continue treatment with albendazole and praziquantel for 3–6 months duration for now and repeat serology titers and imaging to evaluate disease progression and response to treatment. After initiating therapy, the patient continued to follow up at our clinic for 4 months and reported complete resolution of symptoms, including hydatiduria. Follow-up investigations, including serum creatinine, remained normal whereas repeated Echinococcus serology showed a dramatic decline in titers by 50% to 1:1024, which collectively indicate clinical and serologic improvement and a satisfying response to therapy till this point. The patient confirmed his adherence to medications and reported no adverse effects and was therefore asked to continue his pharmacotherapy. The patient refused to undergo additional imaging to assess for radiological improvement in the meantime but has expressed his will to keep the team informed of his follow-up updates in his home country.