A 73-year-old Japanese male patient fell into a canal in Kyoto City in the summer of 2017 and was transported to an emergency department. He had a medical history of alcoholic hepatitis, hypertension, and hyperuricemia. He had no significant family medical history. He was an ex-smoker (stopped smoking 10 years prior) and had a history of alcohol consumption, drinking 50 g of alcohol daily. He had a 10 cm contusion wound on the back of the head and multiple fractures of the spinous process of the cervical vertebrae. On examination, his temperature was 36.1 °C, heart rate was 88 beats per minute, blood pressure was 170/96 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute. On admission, the physical and neurological examination revealed no abnormalities except for neck pain or the pre-existing mild ptosis in the left eye. He vomited on day 5 and had diminished consciousness on day 6. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the head revealed no obvious abnormalities, and a spinal tap was performed. Laboratory findings on day 6 of admission are presented in Table . The analysis revealed findings of bacterial meningitis with increased numbers of neutrophils, decreased glucose levels, and increased protein levels. The spinal fluid specimen exhibited a cloudy yellow appearance, and Gram staining revealed numerous Gram-negative rods along with inflammatory findings and increasing neutrophil levels . On the same day, blood culture samples were collected with two sets of aerobic bottles (BacT/ALERT SA; BioMerieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and anaerobic bottles (BacT/ALERT SN; BioMerieux) and tested by BacT/ALERT 3D (BioMerieux). Meropenem (2 g q8h) and vancomycin (1.25 g q8h) administration by infusion was initiated, and vancomycin administration was stopped after 3 days. Gram-negative rods were detected in all blood culture bottles, which all exhibited the same appearance as the spinal fluid. Cultures of spinal fluid and subcultures from the blood culture bottle were performed on sheep blood agar (Becton Dickinson: BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), Drigalski modified agar (Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan), and McConkey II agar medium (BD) at 37 °C for 48 hours . From each specimen, yellow colonies with β-hemolytic rings developed on blood agar, and green colonies developed on Drigalski modified agar. Small colonies developed on McConkey II agar medium (BD) . These colonies were nonproductive pigments. They were identified with the MicroScan WalkAway 96Plus (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA), resulting in a biotype of 40002007 with a 99.65% probability of being C. violaceum (the second candidate was Vibrio damsel with a probability of 0.35%). Identification testing by BBL CRYSTAL/NF (BD, version 5,4,2) resulted in the identification of biotype 3001310113, with only C. violaceum as a candidate for identification; MALDI Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics Inc., Billerica, MA, USA) yielded no peaks, and microbes were not identifiable. The main biochemical characteristics of this strain were oxidase (+), indole (−), mannose (−), and citric acid (+). Susceptibility testing was performed using the EN1J panel of the MicroScan WalkAway 96Plus. The results showed high minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for penicillins, first- and second-generation cephalosporins, and ceftriaxone . On day 8, the patient had frequent generalized convulsions, and he died on day 9. An autopsy was performed, and infiltration of inflammatory cells was detected in the subarachnoid space, which supported the diagnosis of meningitis.
A water culture survey was conducted at the site of the accidental fall, and the canal was approximately 1 m wide and 10 cm deep. Water samples were taken from eight locations over a 10 m stretch, and 50 µL of each sample was cultured on BTB lactose-supplemented agar medium. As a result, 20–30 colony-forming units (CFUs) of colony growth were suspected to comprise Chromobacterium spp. and were observed in samples from all locations, and these were identified as C. violaceum by MicroScan WalkAway 96Plus.
Whole-genome sequencing was performed with 151-cycle paired-end reads on an Illumina NextSeq 550 platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). All of the Illumina read data obtained from clinical and environmental isolates were deposited into the National Center for Biotechnology Information Sequence Read Archive database, SRA (accession numbers SRR20306466 and SRR20306467). Average nucleotide identity (ANI) analysis using JSpecies V1.2.1 showed that the concordance rates between the clinical isolate strain and C. violaceum (ATCC12472), C. haemolyticum (DSM19808), and the strain from the canal were 85.42%, 96.49%, and 99.89%, respectively, and these clinical and environmental strains, each identified as C. violaceum by conventional methods, were C. haemolyticum. Then, phylogenetic analysis was performed using kSNP v3.1 with default parameters (k-mer = 21) . There were only three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the strain from the patient and the strain from the canal. This finding indicates that both analyzed strains may have been derived from the same strain.