A 78-year-old woman was admitted with dyspnoea on exertion. When she was 46 years old, she was diagnosed with severe rheumatic mitral stenosis and received a tilting disc mechanical mitral valve (Size 26#, Shanghai made) implantation which required an optimal international normalized ratio (INR) between 2.0 and 3.0. The patient has been taking warfarin ever since, monitoring the INR level regularly during follow up and adjusting the dose of warfarin based on the INR value. However, she underwent three times of gastrointestinal haemorrhages when the INR exceeded 2.5, and based on some studies regarding the optimal INR level in Asian patients, an INR between 1.8 and 2.5 was therefore recommended, and the patient did not undergo episodes of stroke or systemic embolism. Thereafter, a routine echocardiography examination during follow up indicated a normal aortic valve and the mechanical mitral valve worked normally. A series of blood tests revealed the anti-streptolysin O titre was in the normal range. Sixteen years after mitral valve replacement, the chest radiography during her medical check-up was unremarkable and 5 years later, the chest radiography revealed a mild diffused tracheobronchial calcification ; however, she was asymptomatic. Twenty-five years after mitral valve replacement, the patient started feeling dyspnoea on exertion and swelling of both legs. Then echocardiography indicated a severe aortic valve calcification and stenosis with a valve orifice area of 0.7 cm2. She was suggested to receive a surgical or percutaneous aortic valve replacement, but she refused the intervention. From then on, she only received medical therapy including diuretics, beta-blockers, and a follow-up chest CT showed extensive calcification of the tracheobronchial rings, which was more significant than 5 years before. She was advised to seek the causes of calcification in the respiratory tract and aortic valve; however, there was no evidence of bone disease, thyroid abnormality, renal disease, autoimmune diseases, and serum calcium and phosphorus were normal. Moreover, the patient had no history of hypertension, dyslipidaemia, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, etc. Due to the long-term use of warfarin, the association between warfarin with the calcification in the respiratory tract and aortic valve was suspected. One month prior to admission, her dyspnoea became worse, and therefore she was readmitted. Upon admission, she was hemodynamically stable with a heart rate of 72 beats per minute and blood pressure of 109/60 mmHg. Physical examination revealed mild bilateral ankle oedema and a systolic murmur in the aortic area. A chest imaging showed a progressive calcification of the tracheobronchial ring compared with before . Echocardiographic examination revealed severe aortic stenosis with a valve orifice area of 0.5 cm2 . Moreover, a CT angiography showed diffused calcification in the abdominal aorta and mild calcification in the left anterior descending artery . The patient was treated with warfarin 1.25 mg/day for anticoagulation therapy and furosemide 20–80 mg/day according to the urine volume to relieve symptoms of heart failure. Due to the severe aortic stenosis and symptom of heart failure, aortic valve replacement was recommended. The patient preferred to receive transcatheter aortic valve replacement because of the high risk of surgical intervention. A biologic aortic valve (Size L23, Venus, MedTech) was successfully implanted , and the symptom of dyspnoea and oedema significantly improved after transcatheter aortic valve replacement and the patient was discharged afterward. Medications after discharge included warfarin 1.25 mg/day for anticoagulation and furosemide 20 mg/day for diuresis. Six months post-aortic valve replacement, the patient remained free of exertional dyspnoea and oedema of the lower limbs.