A 28-year-old woman who was 7 months pregnant experienced persistent fever and myalgia. Both tests for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-Cov-2) antigen and influenza were negative. The patient initially stayed at home and took acetaminophen but eventually felt worse, with fever, confusion, and restlessness. Thereafter, she was immediately transported to our hospital.
On physical examination, the initial Glasgow Coma Scale was 11 (E4V2M5), heart rate was 150/min, blood pressure was 95/77 mmHg, respiratory rate was 40/min, and axillary temperature was 38.5°C. There were bilateral coarse crackles on auscultation. The blood test showed hypoxemia, lactic acidosis, thrombocytopenia, systemic inflammation, and coagulation dysfunction . Both nasopharyngeal swab SARS-Cov-2 PCR and vaginal discharge antigen test for group A β-hemolytic streptococcus were negative.
She was immediately intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation. After massive fluid infusion and continuous noradrenalin administration at 0.1–0.5 μg/kg/min, the systolic blood pressure reached approximately 100 mmHg. Echocardiography showed a hyperdynamic state but no right heart failure. Computed tomography showed bilateral nodular opacities with infiltration, including air bronchograms in the dorsal pulmonary area , the fetus in the uterus, and no other abnormalities in the abdominal and pelvic areas . Ultrasound confirmed intrauterine fetal death, based on the absence of fetal heartbeat. After giving meropenem for severe pneumonia, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU).
At the ICU, her blood pressure decreased again, and massive blood transfusion was administered. Despite aggressive fluid resuscitation and subsequent addition of vasopressin and catecholamines, the circulatory and respiratory status collapsed, and the patient finally succumbed to pulseless electrical activity 4 h after ICU admission. Despite cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the patient died 7 h after the symptom onset. Although we proposed doing an autopsy to the family, they were initially extremely confused to accept it. We took time to explain the need to identify the cause of death, and they finally understood and consented.
On autopsy, there were minimal bleeding, congestion, and edema on the surface of skin, lung, liver, and spleen. On microscopic examination , there were no infectious changes in the lungs, but there were hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow, vascular obstruction in the nephron, and intervillous neutrophil accumulation in the placenta. The tissues were sent to Osaka Women's and Children's Hospital, and genetic examination proved the presence of C. psittaci in the placenta, lungs, liver, and spleen. Consequently, gestational psittacosis was diagnosed.