A 50-year-old female patient who had a mass in the lacrimal sac area for more than 3 months is presented in this report. The mass exhibited slow but progressive swelling. She experienced occasional epiphora and pain, without blood discharge or impaired vision. After 6 months, the patient underwent dacryocystectomy for the left lacrimal sac mass. Postoperative pathological examination confirmed the presence of malignant melanoma. Three months after the operation, a lump in the lacrimal sac area had gradually increased. Local recurrence was suspected and she was referred to ophthalmology department for further treatment.
A physical examination revealed a scar from the previous operation. In addition, a 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm firm, localized and relatively clearly defined mass was observed in the left medial canthus. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. A CT scan demonstrated a partially well-defined soft mass in the fossa of left lacrimal sac extending into the nasolacrimal duct and anterior ethmoid sinus . CT plain scan revealed that the lesion had a CT value of 49HU. The CT value of the tumor was similar to that of the extraocular muscle and wall of eyeball. Enhanced CT scan detected a CT value of 103HU for the arterial phase and 95HU for the venous phase . There was no eyeball involvement. Bone windows showed that the left nasolacrimal duct was enlarged and partial bone destruction of the nasolacrimal duct was confirmed. There was no regional or distant metastasis.
MRI plain scan demonstrated a partly well-demarcated mass of 1.2 cm × 1.3 cm × 2.3 cm in the lacrimal sac lesion. The tumors had infiltrated the septa orbital and subcutaneous adipose tissue. MRI revealed intermediate signal intensity on T1 and iso-or hyper-signal on T2 weighted images . The lesions displayed slight hyperintense signal on DWI. A dynamically enhanced MRI scan showed intense enhancement of the lesion margin and inhomogeneous enhancement of the lesion center .
A biopsy was obtained from the patient before the operation. Histopathological examination on the biopsy confirmed fusiform malignant tumoral cells with hyperchromatic nuclei. The tumor had high number of pigmented cells, inhomogeneous pigment granules and massive hemorrhage . Immunoreactivity to the S-100 protein, Melan-A, HMB-45, Nestin, and CD56 was positive . Therefore, a diagnosis of malignant melanoma was confirmed. Further examination of the whole body, including computed tomography scanning and B ultrasound revealed that there was no metastasis in the head and neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis regions. Thus, total excision of tumor was performed. The patient refused to undergo radiotherapy and chemotherapy.