A 55-year-old female presented with swelling of the lower lid of the right eye for 2 months without redness, ocular pain, or decreased visual acuity. This patient had a long and complicated course for 6 years, as shown in Table . Ophthalmic examination indicated a visual acuity of 20/20 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left eye and intraocular pressure of 12 mmHg bilaterally. The right eye showed proptosis, lower lid swelling, mild conjunctival injection, and limited ocular motility when looking upward. Other aspects of the examination, including the anterior segment, optic disc, and fundus, were within normal limits in both eyes. There was no palpable regional lymphadenopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging showed significant enlargement of the right inferior rectus muscle belly . Laboratory tests showed normal complete blood count, hyperuricemia, hyperlipidemia, elevated serum complement factor 4 (49.5 mg/dl), and elevated C-reactive protein (6.2 mg/L). Thyroid function tests were normal, including serum total T3, total T4, free T3, free T4, thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone-receptor antibodies, thyroglobulin antibody, and thyroid microsomal antibody.
Incisional biopsy under general anesthesia was performed. The enlarged right inferior rectus muscle appeared friable with a greyish cut surface. A biopsy was taken from the muscle belly and the hematoxylin-eosin staining of the lesion showed diffuse and dense infiltration by small lymphoid cells with slight nuclear atypia . In some regions, tumor cells were seen to invade the striated muscle tissue . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD20 , CD3, CD43 , CD21 (FDC+), CD138, CD38, SOX10 and Bcl-2 , and negative for cyclinD1, CD5, and CD10, with a low-level Ki-67 expression of 10%. All pathological specimens were reviewed by a single pathologist. Histologic sections were visualized under an Nikon ECLIPSE Ni-U microscope. The acquisition software is OPLENIC CAMERA.
After the operation, the patient was treated with oral methylprednisolone with an initial dosage of 24 mg per day for 1 week and a taper over 6 weeks. Besides, it was recommended that the patient take radiation therapy in a general hospital. The patient was followed up after 4 months and reported she did not take radiotherapy and had a recurrence of proptosis of the right eye 2 months after the operation. Additionally, the patient had elevated IgG4 levels (124.6 mg/L) in another hospital 1 month after the MALT lymphoma diagnosis. A whole-body PET/CT scan post 18F-FDG administration was conducted and revealed a hypermetabolic retro-orbital mass in the right orbit, considered to be residual tumor after resection, and slightly increased uptake in bilateral submandibular lymph nodes, considered to be inflammation. No abnormally hypermetabolic lymph nodes were seen systemically.