The patient was referred to our hospital, because of nausea and oliguria.
About 20 d prior to visiting our hospital on May 7, 2018, a 37-year-old Chinese woman experienced decreased visual acuity bilaterally, accompanied by increasing periorbital swelling; she also gained 4.5 kg over the past 2 wk and complained of worsening anasarca.
She showed leukopenia during routine health checkup five years ago. She underwent no further examination or therapy.
There was no significant family history or ocular disease.
The patient was in poor general condition, including fatigue and malnutrition, heart rate 91 beats/min and breath 17 beats/min. Blood pressure in the right upper arm was 145/87 mmHg. The major systemic ﬁndings were periorbital swelling and conjunctival chemosis, decreased breath sounds in both bases detected via auscultation, and pitting edema in both ankles. Visual acuity was “count ﬁngers” at 20 cm OD and “hand motion” OS. On ophthalmologic examination, visual acuity was 2/100 and 1/100 for the right and left eyes, respectively.
Complete blood count showed leucocytes at 1.69 × 109/L (normal range, 3.5 to 9.5 × 109/L), and normal platelet and hemoglobin levels. Laboratory data (May 8, 2018) revealed erythrocyte sedimentation rate at 60 mm/h (normal range, 0 to 20 mm/h), and low total protein and serum albumin levels at 61.7 and 30 g/dL, respectively. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels, and serum potassium amounts were normal. Proteinuria was 0.81 g/24 h and D-dimer was 4.86 µg/mL (normal range, 0-0.5 µg/mL). Moreover, blood tests for anti-nuclear, anti-Smith, anti-SSA, anti-nRNP and anti-Ro52 antibodies were positive. The levels of complements were low (C3 at 19.5 mg/dL and C4 at 2.5 mg/dL). Small focal cerebral ischemia was detected in the frontal lobe bilaterally by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient declined lumbar puncture. Thoracentesis was performed, and the collected ﬂuid was analyzed by the Rivalta reaction, which showed the presence of exudate.
Slit lamp examination showed normal anterior segment, with mildly swollen optic disc. Ocular coherence tomography (OCT) and ophthalmoscopy revealed bilateral serous retinal detachment . Fundus ﬂuorescein angiography (FFA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) were postponed for another two weeks, since the nephrotoxicity of the contrast media used in both tests may aggravate the patient’s renal disease in this acute clinical phase.