A 24-year-old male with established Alagille syndrome, complicated by hemodialysis-dependent end-stage renal disease and liver cirrhosis, presented with an 8-month history of headaches and hearing loss (right worse than left). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 3 cm, extra-axial, diffusion restricting, posterior fossa mass involving the right temporal bone posterior to the mastoid air cells, invading and occluding the transverse/sigmoid sinuses, and distorting the cerebellum Surgery was recommended for the goals of pathological diagnosis and maximal safe resection.
A C-shaped retroauricular incision was made, and the underlying muscle and fascia were reflected to expose the retromastoid region. Drilling was performed to create a quarter-sized retrosigmoid craniotomy; then, dissection under the operating microscope showed an epidural white keratinizing pearly lesion displacing the cerebellum inferomedially. Samples of the lesion were removed and sent for pathological analysis. The lesion was hypovascular and removed completely with suction and microdissection to carefully elevate the capsule of the lesion from the dura. The exposed mastoid air cells were covered with muscle grafts and oxidized cellulose along the superior and anterior aspects. The lesion was further resected to the occluded transverse and sigmoid sinuses, which were filled with thrombus. The surrounding bone was thoroughly curetted, and the surgical cavity was copiously irrigated, then carefully inspected to confirm the absence of gross residual disease. A small myofascial free tissue graft was placed over the resection cavity. There were multiple small rents in the dura, which were covered with a synthetic dural graft. A titanium mesh was used to cover the entire craniectomy defect. The fascia and skin were closed in standard fashion.
On microscopic examination, permanent sections showed multiple portions of tumor wall containing acellular keratin debris. The tumor was lined by keratinizing stratified squamous epithelium with a granular layer. This was most consistent with an epidermal inclusion cyst with dystrophic calcification .
Postoperative brain MRI demonstrated gross total resection of the lesion. Postoperatively, he received hemodialysis while hospitalized and was quickly weaned off of steroids and restarted on his home antihypertensive medications. He made an uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 3, and was doing well when evaluated at 3 months postoperatively.