A 69-year-old male patient (172 cm, 73.5 kg) with a medical history of hypertension and coronary artery disease was scheduled to undergo a left upper lobectomy for space-occupying lesions in the lung. A preoperative echocardiography demonstrated trivial tricuspid valve regurgitation and normal ejection fraction (62%). The chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a space-occupying lesion in the left upper lung lobe, chronic inflammation in the right upper lung lobe, bronchitis, and emphysema . The coronary CT showed right coronary dominance and a severe lesion in the proximal left anterior descending coronary artery with 70% luminal narrowing. Electrocardiography (ECG) results showed sinus bradycardia and an incomplete bundle branch block. However, the patient did not report any significant discomfort and no significant laboratory abnormalities were noted. The patient was given an American Society of Anesthesiologists grade of Ⅲ. Perioperative anesthesia was maintained using a nerve block combined with general anesthesia.
After entering the operating room, vital signs including ECG, SpO2, heart rate, respiratory rate, and invasive blood pressure were continuously monitored. The ECG showed sinus rhythm. Anesthesia was induced with etomidate (0.2 mg/kg), rocuronium (0.6 mg/kg), and sufentanil (0.3 mg/kg). After tracheal surface anesthesia, a double-lumen tracheal tube was inserted using a visual laryngoscope. Correct tracheal positioning of the catheter was confirmed using a fiberoptic bronchoscope. The patient was then placed in the right lateral decubitus position. A thoracic paravertebral block was performed under ultrasound guidance at the T7 level. The patient was mechanically ventilated using volume-controlled ventilation with a breath volume of 6 ml/kg using a mixture of gases in proportion to 50% oxygen and 50% air. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (2%–2.5%) and rocuronium was administered as needed. An arterial blood gas analysis was performed before surgery, with normal results. The circulatory parameters were also stable.
For the procedure, the seventh intercostal space of the axillary midline was used for the endoscope and the fourth intercostal space of the axillary front line was used for the operation. At this time, the ECG showed occasional premature ventricular beats. As the lens entered the pleural cavity, we discovered a complete absence of the pericardium in the heart (, ). The frequency of premature ventricular contractions gradually increased as the surgery continued. The blood pressure became unstable and began to decrease. Ephedrine (6 mg) was administered to improve the blood pressure. The adhesions were separated, freeing the lung lobes. At this time, his heart rate suddenly increased to 110 mmHg and blood pressure decreased to 90/56 mmHg. ECG revealed paroxysmal ventricular tachycardia. Lidocaine (1 mg/kg) was administered immediately. Continuous lidocaine and norepinephrine were then administered using the micropump, at 80 mg/h and 0.06 µg/kg/min, respectively. The blood pressure increased to 121/78 mmHg. As the patient was in the right lateral decubitus position, his heart experienced significant stimulation during the operation. To obtain a more satisfactory surgical field and complete the operation as soon as possible, the surgeon decided to perform an open thoracotomy. Premature ventricular contractions continued to occur frequently after opening the thoracic cavity. ECG showed polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, accompanied by profound hypotension, which was immediately followed by ventricular fibrillation. The patient’s blood pressure decreased to 45/31 mmHg. Intrathoracic cardiac compression was immediately performed: a single hand was extended straight into the thoracic cavity and the heart was intermittently compressed. A continuous intravenous infusion of amiodarone (30 mg/h) and epinephrine (1 mg) was initiated immediately. Fortunately, the patient quickly regained sinus rhythm. Lidocaine spray (2%, 10 ml) was then administered onto the surface of the heart. No further incidences of ventricular arrhythmia occurred for the remainder of the surgery. The patient was extubated in the postanesthesia care unit and was maintained on continuous monitoring. The patient was then returned saftely to the ward and discharged on postoperative day 7. No further cardiac-related adverse events were observed at the 1-month follow-up.