A 25-year-old woman presented to a ski resort hospital in January 2020 with chest pain and dyspnoea while skiing. She had no fever or flu-like symptoms. Smoking (5 cigarettes/day) was the only risk factor for coronary artery disease. Past medical history included suspicion of myocarditis at the age of 5. Her physical exam revealed a heart rate of 86 b.p.m., blood pressure of 110/65 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 26 breaths/min. Auscultation of the chest revealed vesicular breath sounds without crackles and normal heart sounds. No peripheral oedemas present. Elevated troponin (14 809 ng/L) and creatinine phosphokinase (972 mmol/L) levels, along with negative T wave findings on the ECG, slightly reduced left ventricle (LV) systolic function [LV ejection fraction (EF) −58%], and preserved right ventricle (RV) (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion-28 cm), raised suspicion of acute myocarditis. Cardiac magnetic resonance image (CMRI) revealed active inflammation in the LV and focal inflammation on the diaphragmatic wall of the RV. Left ventricle wall abnormalities included akinesia of basal inferior wall and hypokinesia of mid-infero-lateral wall, as well as akinesia of basal and mid-anterior wall. T2-weighted images revealed oedema on the medio-basal inferior wall. Focal intra-myocardial scar on antero-septal wall and basal diaphragmatic wall on late gadolinium enhancement was present. Based on these findings and symptoms, the patient was diagnosed with acute myocarditis. After 1 week of treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), patient’s condition improved.
Dyspnoea and chest pain with minimal activity reoccurred after 6 months, and patient was referred to our centre. ECG and physical exercise tests showed no abnormalities, and blood tests for systemic diseases or cardiopathies were negative. CMRI indicated slightly reduced LV systolic function (LV EF-57%) with hypokinesia of antero-septal wall and subendocardial scar in the mid-antero-septal segment, occupying 25–50% of the LV wall on late gadolinium enhancement . Suspecting an old MI, CCTA was performed.
CCTA revealed a 10 mm in diameter aneurysm with wall calcification and proximal S6 90% stenosis in LAD , a 7 mm in diameter aneurysm in the S11 of RCx, as well as occlusion of the calcified RCA. Conventional coronary angiography confirmed these findings . Due to ongoing recurrent grade III angina, clinical symptoms and medical findings revascularization possibilities were discussed in a heart team meeting. As there are no technical possibilities of successful angioplasty percutaneous coronary intervention in case of giant CAAs, patient was referred to a cardiac surgeon. In August 2020, coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery was performed . An internal thoracic artery graft was placed on the proximal LAD, and saphenous vein grafts were used for the Ramus obtusus marginalis and RCA with no intraoperative or post-operative complications.
Uncharacteristic aneurysmal changes in a young patient raised suspicion of vasculitis, leading to a multidisciplinary analysis involving a cardiologist and rheumatologist. The rheumatologist conducted a comprehensive analysis for systemic diseases, but all specific enzyme tests were negative. After reviewing the patient's detailed medical history, suspicion of systemic vasculitis arose: at the age of 5, the patient experienced persistent fever episodes for over 6 months, a red ‘raspberry’ tongue, and enlarged lymph nodes. The suspicion of myocarditis has been made at the age of 5 without any further analysis: no cardiac MRI has been performed or cardiotropic enzymes analysed according to medical data. Treatment with oral NSAIDs was prescribed. Upon reviewing the old medical data, which fulfilled three out of five diagnostic criteria (fever, red ‘raspberry’ tongue, and enlarged lymph nodes), the presumption of undiagnosed KD at the age of 5 was made. There is no specific treatment for an old KD, but it would clarify the origin of coronary artery aneurysms as of being a complication of undiagnosed and untreated [with intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG)] KD. Unfortunately, we were not aware of KD in childhood at time of CABG, so no myocardial biopsy was completed to clarify histological changes.
In December 2021, the patient was referred to a cardiologist due to persistent chest pain. Physical tolerance remained unchanged. Electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiography, and myocardial perfusion scintigraphy showed no abnormalities. Troponin levels were within normal limits. CCTA confirmed that all three bypass grafts were patent with normal contrast flow. In the 2022 follow-up, the myocardial scintigraphy and dobutamine stress test revealed no abnormalities. Further medical follow-up includes regular examinations for recurrent ischaemia (pharmacological stress test) once a year or in case of recurrent symptoms.