A 50-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to the authors’ hospital for further investigation of hypoxia and progressive dyspnoea. She had been newly diagnosed with follicular lymphoma (FL) grade 2, stage 3A, and had started standard dose R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone) chemotherapy 4 months previously. She had developed non-productive cough and dyspnoea on exertion after the fifth cycle without chest radiographic or echocardiographic abnormality. On the sixth (final) cycle, she presented with hypoxia and deteriorating symptoms.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable, except for FL. She had no history of allergy. She had never smoked and had not been exposed to dust or toxic chemicals. She did not regularly take any prescription or non-prescription medicine.
She was afebrile and her respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min. Oxygen saturation was 89% on room air and 98% on 3 l/min oxygen, but had been normal (98% on room air) just before chemotherapy. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed hypoxaemia, while other laboratory data were unremarkable . Breath sounds were decreased in the bilateral lower lung fields.
Chest radiography revealed a dropped heart and a hyperinflated lung which developed after symptom onset . CT of the whole body showed bulky intraperitoneal lymph nodes reduced in size, with other previously enlarged lesions now normalized . High-resolution CT (HRCT) of the chest revealed bronchial dilatation and a mosaic pattern consisting of high- and low-density areas that represented bronchiolar air trapping, which was enhanced at the end-expiratory phase, although CT of the chest before chemotherapy had not demonstrated abnormal findings . Pulmonary function testing (PFT) revealed severe obstructive and restrictive failure (forced expiratory volume in 1 s, 19% of predicted; forced vital capacity, 43.9% of predicted) without bronchodilator response .
The patient was certain her PFT results had been normal several years previously. Pulmonary ventilation and perfusion scintigraphy revealed a mosaic pattern of radio-isotope uptake decrease without ventilation-perfusion mismatch .
BO was strongly suspected clinically and these results met the current criteria for BOS[. A lung biopsy for the diagnosis of BO was not performed due to the patient’s poor performance status and the risk of serious respiratory injury being caused by the surgical procedure. The patient was diagnosed with BOS after other differential diseases had been excluded.
Steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 1 g/day) was administered for 3 days, followed by prednisolone 1 mg/kg. The patient was also treated with low-dose oral azithromycin and inhalation of tiotropium. However, she developed respiratory failure on exertion and required positive pressure ventilation support twice during a 1-month period. Steroid pulse therapy was repeated and cyclosporine was added. Her respiratory condition stabilised and she was discharged home on oxygen therapy. However, soon after discharge, her respiratory symptoms deteriorated and she was hospitalized in a palliative care unit. The patient died of respiratory failure within a year of symptom onset.