In September 2004, a 67-year-old Italian man presented to our medical center. In 1964 he was subjected to heavy metal (mercurials) therapy to treat a syphilis infection. The patient remembered that the treatment (which was performed one time a week for 4 months) consisted in 10 ml intravenous injection of a mercurial solution (possibly calomel, e.g. mercurous chloride, Hg2Cl2, or cinnabar, e.g. mercury sulphide, HgS). Contemporarily, the patient was administered with penicillin (he referred the daily dose of 500,000 units, at alternative months, for 12 months). The patient completely recovered from the disease. However, ten years after (in 1974), he developed some symptoms such as shiver, pallor, asthenia, which lasted for 2 weeks, then disappeared. Such symptoms recurred about any two years. The patient has been examined by a physician, who found hepatomegaly, whereas the blood tests revealed increased azotemia. In 1984, the patient developed convulsions (3 episodes), and 8 years ago he presented headache, tremors, vertigo (often resulting in falling out of bed during the night), memory loss, anxiety, depression, insomnia, muscular cramps, tachycardia. These and previous symptoms were never attributed to any one specific disease by the internists and neurologists who visited the patient over the course of forty years. Only more recently (five years ago) the patient was examined by a physician expert in chelation therapy. The physician, by using the bioresonance method (VEGA test) evidenced the presence of elevated levels of mercury in the patient's body. The physician collected from the patient some samples of urine and analyzed them for mercury. The samples revealed levels of mercury <4 μg/g creatinine, which represent the normal urine reference range of this metal. The same physician provoked the mercury "challenge" of the patient, by treating him with disodium edetate (EDTA) (2 g/10 ml, Salf, Brescia, Italy) diluted in 500 ml physiological saline and intravenously administered by slow infusion (about 90 min) and inviting him to collect urine for 12 hours. After the challenge, the urine mercury levels were 10 μg/g creatinine. The patient has remembered at this time the old mercurial therapy and was addressed by the physician to our centre to perform the chelation therapy. We took the patient's anamnesis, and his past and recent blood tests. On the whole these tests revealed normal levels, with the exception of increased creatinine serum values (1.3 ± 0.7 mg/dL = mean ± SEM, reported in ten different blood tests taken between 1990 and 2004) and a reduced creatinine clearance (63.60 ± 6.2 ml/min).
The inorganic form of mercury, as cinnabar, has been shown to possess neurotoxicological effects, when orally administered in mice . In fact, Huang et al. have demonstrated that mercury of cinnabar (10 mg/kg/day, through oral application by gavage for 11 consecutive weeks) could be absorbed by gastro-intestinal tract and significantly accumulated in cerebral cortex, cerebellar cortex, liver and kidney. Indeed, inorganic mercury is able to pass the blood-brain barrier. A recent work suggest that mercury uptake into hair mimics uptake into brain for both organic and inorganic mercury, e.g. the hair is the best biological indicator of mercury specie levels . Even if the patient was treated with mercurials many years ago, we decided to measure the concentration of heavy metals in his hair samples, having the patient especially neurologic symptoms . We have also measured, before and after the chelation therapy, the oxidative stress profile of the patient, tacking into account that the levels of endogenous antioxidant systems could improve, as compensatory pathophysiological response to the oxidative damage induced by mercury . Indeed, we measured the patient plasmatic levels of the reduced and oxidized forms of glutathione (GSH and GSSG, respectively), and the levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) (expressed in Carratelli Units or U CARR).
Hair samples were taken from the occipital and temporal regions of the head. Samples were collected with scissors from three different areas of the scalp by cutting 1 cm above hair insertion. About 200 mg of hair samples were obtained, stored in plastic envelopes and transported to the Laboratory of Toxicology (Doctor's Data Inc., St Charles, IL, USA). Hair heavy metal concentrations were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (which guaranteed precision and accuracy of measurements) and were expressed in micrograms per gram (μg/g).
The first hair sample was taken on 3 September 2004. It revealed a high content of bismuth (0.23 μg/g: reference values ≤ 0.060 μg/g) and mercury (3.2 μg/g; reference values ≤ 1.1 μg/g) . The patient was given chelation therapy by intravenous EDTA (2 g in 500 ml saline in about 90 min). The therapy was administered once a week for the duration of a year. We also recommended a diet rich in vitamins and vegetables and invited him to drink large quantities of water. Six months after the beginning of the therapy the patient reported that some of the neurological symptoms had disappeared. He did not fall out of bed at night and had recovered his memory. A year after EDTA chelation therapy was initiated, on 7 September 2005, we carried out the second evaluation of heavy metal levels in the hair . It showed a very significant increase of mercury levels (11 μg/g) and the normalization of bismuth levels (0.021 μg/g). We continued chelation therapy once a week for another year and on 29 September 2006 carried out the third evaluation of heavy metal levels in the hair . This evaluation showed mercury levels of 1.6 μg/g. We then administered chelation therapy once monthly to the patient until hair mercury levels were normal. During these periods, the neurological symptoms of the patient (anxiety, depression, insomnia) completely disappeared, his muscular skeletal cramps improved. During the chelation therapy with EDTA we monitored the creatinine levels of the patient once every 90 days. These levels improved after the beginning of chelation therapy over the eight successive evaluations carried out (1.0 ± 0.5 mg/dL), as well as the creatinine clearance values (70.20 ± 5.4 ml/min). Before the beginning of the chelation therapy (which started in September 2004) the patient blood tests showed a GSH/GSSG ratio of 6 and ROS values of 515 U CARR. At the end of chelation (in October 2006) the values were: GSH/GSSG = 13 and ROS = 308 U CARR. At the end of the chelation therapy, we have also measured the urine mercury levels after a 12-h period collection following the EDTA challenge: they were < 4 μg/g creatinine.