An 80-year-old woman was referred with floaters in her right eye in June 2012. Visual acuity (VA) was 20/25 in her both eyes. She had a glaucoma attack in her left eye, and laser iridotomy had been performed more than 20 years ago. Following that procedure, she had cataract surgeries with intraocular lenses in both eyes. She takes eyedrops for glaucoma in her left eye and her intraocular pressure was 12 mm Hg in both eyes under good control. Her right fundus showed a ruptured RAM at the superotemporal vascular arcade with subinternal limiting membrane and subretinal hemorrhages not involving the macula . Her blood pressure (BP) was 163/77 mm Hg, and she did not know that she had systemic hypertension. We recommended that she should be examined by an internist who diagnosed her with systemic hypertension and prescribed antihypertensive medications. Six weeks after initiation of a calcium antagonist, her BP decreased to around 140/75 mm Hg. Retinal hemorrhage was absorbed gradually by itself and her VA improved to 20/20.
Two years after the first ruptured RAM, she was referred due to visual loss in her right eye. The second RAM at the proximal superotemporal vascular arcade developed and impending BRVO occurred with macular edema at the distal site of the RAM . Her VA had dropped to 20/60. Fluorescein angiography showed that this second RAM was located close to the arteriovenous crossing. Intravitreal injection of ranibizumab was performed for the macular edema. One month after anti-VEGF therapy, macular edema was resolved and her VA had improved to 20/30 in January 2015.
Five months later, she realized a sudden vision loss of 2/200 in her right eye once again. Her posterior pole showed massive pre- and subretinal hemorrhages, and posterior capsular opacity also existed. Vitrectomy and posterior capsular opacity removal were then performed. The source of bleeding was the rupture of the third RAM on a different artery . The fluorescein angiography showed no retinal vasculitis or exudates. Indocyanine green angiography was also performed. The unaffected left eye showed no RAMs. Her vision in the right eye improved to 20/30, and there has been no recurrence to date.