A 72-year-old right-handed Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital 1 d after she suddenly developed mild right hemiparesis and involuntary movements of the muscles on the left side of her face. There was winking and grimacing of the left side of her face.
One day prior to admission, the patient had left-limb weakness abruptly when she was walking, but she was able to carry out actions with her hands and walk normally. She denied headache, nausea, or vomiting. Loss of consciousness was not found during the course. About 10 min later, winking and grimacing of the left side of her face appeared. One day after admission, she developed involuntary irregular movements of her left limbs . The involuntary movements affecting the face and distal parts of the left limbs were non-rhythmic. The involuntary movements were most noticeable when she was at rest. The movements involve the fingers, wrist, forearm and toes, ankle, and leg. The limb movements like twisting. They were aggravated by emotional stress, and disappeared completely when she was asleep.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years, which was well controlled with amlodipine 5 mg/d. She had no history of any medication or infection prior to onset of symptoms. She had no previous history of chorea or other involuntary movements.
The patient denied a past history of drug or alcohol abuse, smoking, or promiscuous sexual behavior. There was no family history of stroke, epilepsy, or other neurologic diseases.
After arriving at our emergency department, the patient's Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15. Neurological examination confirmed involuntary, irregular movements of the left face and limbs consistent with right hemichorea. There was no cranial nerve involvement. Sensation was normal. Muscular tone and deep tendon reflexes were normal, but there was a subtle right limb weakness. The right upper and lower limb muscle strength was level 5. No other positive neurologic signs were found.
Blood cell counts; serum glucose and calcium levels; liver, renal, and thyroid function tests; tumor markers; serology for human immunodeficiency virus and Treponema pallidum; and arterial blood gas analysis were all normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an acute infarction in the left dorsal thalamus and left cerebral peduncle zone , together with signs of chronic ischemic microangiopathy in the periventricular areas. Magnetic resonance angiography showed severe stenosis of the P1 segment of the left posterior cerebral artery . Carotid duplex sonography showed bilateral nonstenotic carotid atheroma. The 24-h ambulatory electroencephalogram was normal.