Lower back pain and lower extremity numbness for 10 h.
A 70-year-old man with a history of lumbar spinal stenosis, hypertension, and gout presented to our emergency department because of severe lower back pain and lower extremity numbness. He has been receiving intermittent physical therapy and medical treatment for lower back pain and lower extremity numbness. On the physical examination, he had tenderness in the lower back, and no obvious decrease in skin sensation around the anus. He had 4/5 of strength in both legs and decreased sensation below the knees. Lasègue signs were negative. The bilateral knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were normal. He had joint deformity and gout nodules between the fingers and toes. Babinski’s sign and other pathological reflex signs were negative. Laboratory testing was largely unremarkable, aside from a uric acid level of 462 μmol/L. X-rays showed degenerative changes of the lumbar spine and the L4 vertebral body had slipped forward slightly. He was diagnosed with spinal stenosis by an orthopedic surgeon and admitted to the Department of Spinal Surgery for further workup.
After admission, he was treated with steroid injections, analgesia, and nervous system nutrients for symptom relief. MRI demonstrated lumbar spinal stenosis (L4/5). Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with lumbar spinal stenosis. After conservative treatment failed, he underwent transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion. Postoperatively, his paraesthesias and muscle weakness did not improve markedly and he reported numbness and weakness in both upper extremities. On postoperative day 2, he had 2/5 of strength in his upper extremities and 1/5 of strength in his lower extremities. Deep tendon reflexes (for example triceps reflex, biceps reflex, and knee and Achilles tendon reflexes) disappeared. He also reported dysphagia and numbness in the upper extremities. We requested a neurology consultation. Careful review of the patient’s history, as provided by his family and community doctor, revealed that he got the flu vaccination 10 d ago.
An electromyogram was obtained, but no lumbar puncture was performed because of his recent surgery. The electrophysiological study showed reduced motor and sensory responses in his extremities. Given his symptoms, physical examination, and laboratory tests, he was diagnosed with GBS (the form is acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy). Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was started (0.4 g/kg/day for 5 d)[,]. He reported some improvement during therapy. He gained 4/5 of strength in his upper and lower extremities and denied paraesthesias after 5 d of therapy. Then, he was given ultrasound therapy, electroacupuncture, and electronic biofeedback therapy and postoperative rehabilitation. He regained 5/5 of strength in his extremities and could ambulate without aid after about 4 wk, when he was discharged. At the follow-up, he was asymptomatic.
The patient had a history of hypertension for nearly 20 years, but the blood pressure is normal after taking valsartan capsule (80 mg per day). He also had a history of gout for 15 years, and was receiving the oral administration of febuxostat (40 mg per day).
The patient worked as a farmer. He neither smokes nor drinks. He got the flu vaccina-tion 10 d ago.
He had tenderness in the lower back, and no obvious decrease in skin sensation around the anus. He had 4/5 of strength in both legs and decreased sensation below the knees. Lasègue signs were negative. The bilateral knee and Achilles tendon reflexes were normal. He had joint deformity and gout nodules between the fingers and toes. Babinski’s sign and other pathological reflex signs were negative.
The uric acid level was 462 μmol/L.
X-rays showed degenerative changes of the lumbar spine and the L4 vertebral body had slipped forward slightly. MRI demonstrated lumbar spinal stenosis (L4/5). The results of electromyogram are listed in Table .