A 69-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of bilateral ataxia and dizziness. He had not been taking any medications and had been smoking 40 cigarettes per day for 49 years. Laboratory tests revealed mild dyslipidemia and impaired glucose tolerance. Blood pressure on admission was 188/92 mmHg. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed acute brain infarction at the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres and the right thalamus. The lesions in the cerebellum were not perfectly consistent with vessel-dominant regions supplied by the anterior inferior cerebellar artery or posterior inferior cerebellar artery. Head magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed bilateral VAs but posterior communicating arteries were not observed bilaterally. Neck MRA indicated right VA but did not show left VA . Contrast-enhanced three-dimensional computed tomographic angiography (3D-CTA) showed right VA severe stenosis at the origin and did not show the left VA from the ostia to the lower edge of the second cervical vertebra [, left]. Relatively thick OA was also shown. Cerebral angiography revealed right VA severe stenosis similar to 3D-CTA, but showed near-occlusion of the ostia of the left VA and markedly delayed poststenotic blood flow in the left VA. Stenosis was detected only at the ostia, in contrast to 3D-CTA. Argatroban, antiplatelet medication (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg daily), rosuvastatin, and omarigliptin were started. After the acute phase, amlodipine and olmesartan treatment were also begun. The patient was discharged home with mild bilateral ataxia.
We planned surgical reconstruction of posterior circulation in order to avoid fatal brain infarction due to posterior circulatory insufficiency, which is related to high morbidity and mortality. In terms of preoperative neurological symptoms, the muscle tones of extremities were intact. The gait on a flat surface was normal without assistance, but the tandem gait was unsteady when attempting to touch the heel of the right foot to the toe of the left foot. Mild dysmetria was seen when finger–nose–finger test was performed with the left forearm. He felt a difficulty to use his left hand as a subjective symptom. Dysarthria was mild to moderate with some slurring of speech so that we asked the patient to repeat sometimes.
We performed left OA to left distal extracranial VA anastomosis 3 months after the first admission avoiding hemorrhagic infarction . The OA and VA were carefully exposed with maintenance of blood flow by dissecting suboccipital muscles layer-by-layer through the lateral suboccipital approach. Craniotomy was not required because the arteries were extracranial. The VA from the foramen transversarium of C2 to foramen magnum (V3) was temporarily trapped and incised to make a 3.5-mm hole by vessel punch. The OA was cut adequately for end-to-side anastomosis to the VA with 16 sutures using 8-0 monofilament nylon at the occipito-atlantal (C0-C1) level. The temporary occlusion time was 38 min and 40 s .
On the day following the operation, the patient walked without assistance but watching and the bilateral ataxia improved. 3D-CTA just after the operation showed that the anastomosis was patent, and the left VA was observed from the ostia to the union [, right]. In terms of postoperative neurological symptoms, he was able to walk more swiftly than before the operation and the tandem gait was slightly improved. The mild dysmetria was still seen when finger–nose–finger test was performed with the left forearm, but the subjective symptom that he felt difficult to use his left hand was improved. Dysarthria was improved a little so that what the patient said could be understood easily. Furthermore, the mini mental state examination score and the frontal assessment battery at bedside score were improved from 24 to 29 and from 15 to 17, respectively. The patient was discharged home under his own ambulation. Three months after the operation, MRA indicated that the bypass was widely patent, and OA had developed from 3.0 to 3.6 mm in diameter. The patient remains under observation and has experienced no recurrent symptoms due to posterior circulatory stroke for 6 months. He restarted to work in his farm field.