A 48-year-old man with a chronic history of smoking and alcohol use complained of wake-up onset dysarthria and left-sided weakness.
Seven hours after stroke onset, the patient visited the emergency department. He stated that he had recently suffered a traumatic head injury but did not complain of headaches.
He had no other past medical history.
He had no family history of cerebrovascular disease.
The patient was alert and oriented, and his vital signs were stable. A neurological examination revealed left-sided facial palsy and hemiparesis (Medical Research Council grade 4/5).
Laboratory examination demonstrated elevated white blood cell count (11.64 10³/μL; normal range 4.0-11.0) and homocysteine (27.42 µmol/L; normal range 5.08-15.39). His erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein level, chest X-ray, and electrocardiogram findings were unremarkable.
Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed high-signal intensity lesions in the territories of the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) and some of the posterior cerebral arteries . Brain computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed bilateral fusiform aneurysms in the petrous segment of the internal carotid artery (ICA) bilaterally and in the third segment of the right vertebral artery .
The patient was prescribed 300 mg aspirin and 40 mg atorvastatin and was admitted to the hospital. Approximately 5 h after presenting to the emergency department, he suffered from a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. His seizures resolved after the administration of intravenous lorazepam. He was semi-comatose and his right-sided extremity was weaker than his left extremity. Brain CT did not show signs of hemorrhage; MRI showed a new ischemic lesion in the territories of the left anterior cerebral artery and left MCA, in addition to the hemorrhagic transformed index right-sided lesions . Non-contrast magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed fusiform aneurysms and a double-lumen appearance of the bilateral petrous ICAs . The proximal ICAs were unremarkable. Subsequent tests revealed elevated IgM anticardiolipin antibody (29.0 CU; normal range ≤ 20) and IgM anti-beta-2 glycoprotein I (23.5 CU; normal range < 20), and decreased antithrombin III (51%; normal range 75-125) and protein C (63%; normal range 73-142). The following investigations were unremarkable: transthoracic echocardiography, Holter monitoring, glycated hemoglobin, low-density lipoprotein, alpha-1 antitrypsin, protein S, and lupus anticoagulant.