A 70-year-old female presented with intraventricular hyperdensities that were occasionally found on computed tomography (CT). She experienced complicated retinal detachment in both eyes due to diabetic retinopathy and underwent vitrectomy and bilateral silicone oil tamponade 2.5 years prior. The patient’s intraocular pressure was normal after the operation. However, her vision recovery was poor. Physical examination showed the following: no light perception in the right eye; finger count at 30 cm in the left eye; an oval right pupil with a maximum diameter of approximately 3 mm; a round left pupil with a diameter of 2.5 mm and no light reaction; right eye exotropia with slight limitation of adduction; and normal results for other items of the neurological examination.
Initial brain CT showed nondependent hyperdensities in the bilateral anterior horns of the lateral ventricles, in the third ventricle, and the right suprasellar cistern, as well as in the bilateral eye globes . The patient was suspected of having an intraventricular hemorrhage because the attending physician initially failed to associate the intraocular silicone oil with the intraventricular lesions. Further brain MRI in the supine position revealed abnormal signals in the bilateral eyeballs, bilateral lateral ventricles, third ventricle, and right suprasellar cistern, showing hyperintensity (relative to the cerebrospinal fluid), surrounded by low-signal chemical shift artifacts, on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI); variable signals on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) (hypo- or hyperintensity); hypointensity on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR); no diffusion restriction (hypointensity) on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI); and hypo- or hyperintensity on the corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) sequence. The lesion in the anterior horn of the right ventricle was smaller on MRI than on CT, yet most of the lesions were unexpectedly found to have moved to the posterior horn of the right ventricle . The final craniocervical CT angiography (CTA) showed multiple high-density foci on both eyes, in the bilateral anterior horns of the lateral ventricles (the lesion in the posterior horn had moved back to the anterior horn of the right lateral ventricle), in the third ventricle, and the right suprasellar cistern, without enhancement and the presence of an aneurysm , as shown by nonenhanced CT. However, the right optic nerve had a larger density than the left, which was close to intraocular silicone oil . A review of the head CT images obtained before intraocular silicone oil injection revealed no high-density intraventricular lesions, suggesting that the lesions on CT, MRI and CTA might have been silicone oil and that intraocular silicone oil had migrated into the ventricular system, optic chiasm, and suprasellar cistern. Because the patient had no symptoms of high intracranial pressure, no treatment was performed for intraventricular silicone oil migration. The patient was followed up by telephone until August 31, 2021 (5 years after intraocular silicone oil tamponade). Her vision was the same as before, and no headache, eye pain, nausea or vomiting were reported. Additionally, a further study with spinal MRI recently performed on this patient did not demonstrate silicone oil migration into the subarachnoid space of the spinal cord .