A 68-year-old Japanese man fell in his living room and was stuck headfirst by a shoji frame. The patient visited a local ophthalmologist the day after the injury in the right upper eyelid, where he was suspected of penetrating orbital injury by a broken shoji frame. At presentation, the patient was well oriented. However, marked swelling and redness were noted on the right upper eyelid. In addition, the edge of the broken shoji frame was superficially exposed in the lateral part of the eyelid . Watery discharge from the wound was noted. His visual acuity appeared intact on confrontation test. Considerable restriction of ocular movement was found on the lateralward gaze, while other extraocular movements were intact. The blood examination revealed normal findings. Cranial CT revealed a linear structure in the upper lateral sector of the orbit. It appeared homogeneously hypodense, well demarcated, and partially protruded into the middle cranial fossa. Contrast CT showed that the ophthalmic artery and superior ophthalmic vein were intact . Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned supine and underwent a right frontotemporal craniotomy. Initially, the site of the localized inner protrusion of the middle fossa (MF) dura, caused by the proximal edge of the broken shoji frame, was identified from the intradural side . The site was accompanied by a tiny laceration of the dura, while cerebral contusion or subdural hemorrhage was not observed. Next, the proximal edge of the broken shoji frame was secured from the extradural side . The edge was then pushed out from the cranial cavity using a Penfield dissector, while simultaneously pulling the distal edge through the stab wound in the upper eyelid . Using these methods, the shoji frame was successfully extracted in two pieces without hemorrhagic complications. The frame was flat, measured 1 cm in width and 5 cm in length, and had smooth surfaces . Wound debridement was made around penetrating site in the upper eyelid. Postoperatively, the patient received intravenous antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone sodium hydrate (4 g/day) for 18 days, which was sensitive for possible contamination of staphylococcus epidermidis. Marked swelling and redness initially found in the upper eyelid resolved 2 weeks after surgery without infectious complications. Visual deterioration was not identified. However, restriction of ocular movement on the lateralward gaze persisted, accompanied by horizontal skin depression in the affected upper eyelid . The patient followed an uneventful post-treatment course for a year without administration of antibiotic agents, with stable findings on periodic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).