A 54 year old Caucasian man presented to eye casualty with a history of blurred vision and grittiness in his right eye (RE) for over six months. Snellen visual acuity was 6/5 in both eyes. Examination revealed mild injection and a stromal opacity with deep vascularisation in the superior aspect of the right cornea. There was no associated inflammation in the anterior chamber and corneal sensation was normal. Examination of the left eye was unremarkable. A diagnosis of probable non necrotising herpetic stromal keratitis was made and the eye treated with topical prednisolone acetate 0.5%. Three weeks later, the patient was asymptomatic and the injection had resolved. The topical treatment was tapered and discontinued.
The patient, re-attended 3 months later with similar symptoms along with acute onset tinnitus in the right ear and deafness of 3 weeks duration. Ocular examination revealed the corneal stromal opacity, which was now diagnosed as interstitial keratitis. There were no signs of active inflammation in the eye. Blood tests were performed and a high ESR (88 mm at 1 hour) was the only positive finding. All autoantibodies including ANA, cANCA, pANCA were negative, serum ACE was within normal limits, no antibodies were found against treponema pallidum and borrelia bergdorfi. The patient was referred to an otorhinologist, who performed an audiogram, which revealed bilateral sensorineural deafness.
Two years later the patient presented with blurred and distorted vision in both eyes. Aided Snellen's acuity was 6/9 bilaterally. The right cornea still had the deep stromal opacity with ghost vessels superiorly . There was mild anterior uveitis. There was mild anterior uveitis and bilateral cystoid macular edema (CMO) . Topical steroids and ketorolac were commenced. Blood tests revealed a raised ESR, serology for autoantibodies, Treponema and Borrelia, serum ACE, chest X ray were normal.
A diagnosis of Cogan's syndrome was made after taking into account the history, clinical findings and results of investigations. The visual acuity over the next 2 weeks deteriorated to 6/18 in the RE and 6/12 in the LE. Oral Prednisolone (40 mg/day) was commenced as treatment. The CMO resolved and hearing improved 2 weeks following treatment. However, once Prednisolone was tapered to 10 mg per day, the CMO recurred. Over a period of 1 year, the CMO fluctuated in severity inversely to the dose of steroids. Triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg) was injected into the orbital floor on two occasions with no benefit. The patient developed secondary posterior subcapsular cataract in the RE and steroid induced diabetes mellitus. He was therefore commenced on intramuscular methotrexate. The CMO did not respond to methotrexate, this was therefore substituted with Azathioprine 125 mg daily. The patient was intolerant to the azathioprine and was commenced on Mycophenolate mofetil. CMO finally settled with Mycophenolate mofetil which enabled tapering off the oral steroid. There was no further deterioration of vision and no recurrence of CMO over 6 months with snellen visual acuity stabilising at 6/24 in the RE (6/12 with pinhole) and 6/9 in the LE.