An 83-year-old man presented with fever and purpura of both lower limbs for one month .
The patient presented with fever and purpura of both lower limbs for one month. He had chills and fever, with the highest body temperature of 40 °C, accompanied by cough and phlegm, no nausea and vomiting, and no abdominal distention, abdominal pain, dizziness, headache, or other discomfort.
The patient was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus for more than one month, had a history of hypertension for more than 30 years, coronary heart disease for 10 years, and renal insufficiency for many years. He denied any history of tuberculosis.
Physical examination showed an appearance of mild anemia, neck, armpit, and groin lymph node enlargement, splenomegaly, and edema and visible purpura of both lower limbs, without other special manifestations.
Groin lymph node puncture showed disappearance of the normal structure of lymph nodes and heterogeneous infiltration of small to medium-sized lymphoma cells, with proliferation of eosinophils . The lymphoma cells were positive for CD3, CD4, CD10, and PD1, but negative for CD7 and CD8 by flow cytometry . Bone marrow examination showed hemophagocytosis without evidence of lymphoma involvement. The hemoglobin concentration and platelet count declined rapidly, with the minimum value of 65 g/L and 53 × 109/L, respectively. A serological examination showed hypertriglyceridemia (triglycerides 3.14 mmol/L), normal value of serum ferritin (299.50 μg/L), elevated levels of soluble interleukin (IL)-2 receptor (16080 U/mL), and hypergammaglobulinaemia. The capillary electrophoresis revealed monoclonal IgG kappa , without evidence of monoclonal plasma cells in bone marrow and lymph nodes. The coagulation function examination rapidly showed the maximum level of D-dimer (3.85 mg/L), prolonged prothrombin time (52.6 s), prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (54.1 s), maximum value of International Normalized Ratio (4.57), and hypofibrinogenemia (fibrinogen 1.2 g/L). The dynamic changes of white blood cell (WBC) count, lymphocyte cell count, neutrophil count, and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) from nearly onset to death are listed in Table .
Positron emission tomography showed splenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy, and enhanced activity in the posterior pharyngeal wall, bilateral neck, hilum of the lung and mediastinum, pelvic wall, mesenteric lymph nodes, and groin, suggestive of lymphoma .