This report describes the case of a 56-year-old gravida 4, para 3 woman with no notable medical or family history. The patient had hypertension and hyperlipidemia, conditions for which amlodipine, rosuvastatin, and esomeprazole were taken internally. An asymptomatic pelvic tumor was detected by chance during the abdominal ultrasound of a general medical examination at another internal medicine hospital. For this reason, the patient was referred to the hospital’s department of obstetrics and gynecology for further evaluation. Vaginal ultrasonography revealed a large pelvic mass approximately 11 cm in size. It was diagnosed as an ovarian tumor or a degenerated uterine myoma. The patient was subsequently referred to the department of obstetrics and gynecology at our hospital for more detailed examination and medical treatment.
A huge type IV pelvic tumor (as classified by The Japan Society of Ultrasonics in Medicine) measuring 104×118×116 mm was observed by ultrasonography at our hospital. Tumor markers were elevated, with CA125 at 86.1 IU/mL and CEA at 34.7 IU/mL. No apparent metastases were observed on contrast CT . MRI identified a suspected right ovarian tumor .
Endoscopy was performed preoperatively, and showed no obvious lesions in the lower digestive tract. Thereafter, surgical treatment was performed based on the diagnosis of suspected ovarian cancer. Ascites cytology was performed because there was a small amount of ascites. In addition, rapid histopathological examination was performed during the operation, with a provisional diagnosis of mucinous adenocarcinoma. The findings were as follows: The tumor was solid and cystic. The cysts were filled with mucus. Diffuse proliferation of the ducts of glands was present in the solid part of the tumor.
In accordance with these findings, the operative method employed was abdominal total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, partial omentectomy, and pelvic lymphadenectomy. The operating time was 2 h 26 min, and intraoperative bleeding was 171 g. No intraoperative rupture of the tumor was observed. No clear peritoneal lesions were found by visual inspection or palpation. Intra-abdominal adhesions were not observed, including around the tumor. The solid tumor’s diameter was about 15 cm, including its partially cystic section .
The postoperative course was good, and the patient was discharged from the hospital without complications on her 9th postoperative day. Pathological findings showed a mixture of cord-like, island-like, and tubular structures, as well as follicular structures, including colloids (, , and ). The results of immunohistochemical staining showed that the structure showing cord and insular sequences was positive for CD56 , chromogranin A , and synaptophysin , whereas the follicular structure was positive for TTF1 . The result of histopathological examination was a diagnosis of strumal carcinoid. Lymph node metastasis was negative, and no abnormal findings were observed in the omentum, uterus, or left adnexa. In addition, ascites cytology was negative. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with ovarian strumal carcinoid, stage IA, pT1aN0M0. There was no sign of recurrence at 6 years post-operation. Moreover, the patient’s tumor markers remained under the threshold of concern.