A 65-year-old white man with a history of hyperlipidemia, hypertension, and chronic angina, presented with a sudden onset left-sided visual field deficit with left upper extremity weakness. The symptoms started abruptly while he was working at his computer. On arrival at an Emergency Department (ED), his visual symptoms had resolved, but he still had residual weakness and difficulty coordinating his left upper extremity. A physical examination revealed a body mass index (BMI) of 40.5 kg/m2, blood pressure of 147/82 mmHg, partial left-sided hemianopia, 4/5 strength in left arm/hand with pronator drift, and normal heart sounds. A chest X-ray revealed a mildly enlarged cardiac silhouette. Computed tomography (CT) of his head without contrast was unremarkable. His National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) was 3 and he was within the 3-hour window, thus tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) was given without delay. However, his symptoms did not improve. He denied any similar prior episodes or any family history of premature coronary artery disease and/or stroke. He had a previous cardiac stress test which was negative.
Further workup with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain discovered small, scattered, bilateral, cortically based acute infarcts with a distribution pattern suggestive of an embolic event. The scattered areas had T2 hyperintensities in the right frontal, parietal, and occipital regions, all with associated diffusion and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map abnormalities . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) noted a small rounded echodensity on the right coronary cusp of the aortic leaflet. Repeat TEE reported structurally normal aortic valves with a round, pedunculated mobile mass measuring approximately 11×15 mm, attached to the right coronary leaflet . The appearance of the mass was characteristic of a PFE. Prior to surgical removal of his PFE, our patient underwent left-sided cardiac catheterization owing to his history of angina and multiple surgical risk factors. The results of which revealed normal coronary arteries except for mild luminal irregularities with proximal and mid-segment stenosis (20%) of his left anterior descending (LAD) artery. He eventually underwent a bioprosthetic aortic valve replacement with excision of the leaflets and mass. The mass was soft, pink-yellow in color, and measured 1.3×1.0×0.7 cm. It had narrow, elongated papillary fronds and a hyalinized central core surrounded by flat endocardial lining. Pathology results confirmed PFE with myxoid degenerative changes . He developed transient postoperative atrial fibrillation which was initially controlled by amiodarone before reverting to a normal sinus rhythm. He was discharged to short-term rehabilitation and has made a successful recovery.