A 45-years old woman presented at our health centre (IRCCS Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Milan, Italy) with some episodes of gross hematuria. The ultrasonography and voided urinary cytology, and the physical examination were negative. The patient never had any gastrointestinal symptom and presented a negative regress medical history. The enhanced abdomen computed tomography (CT) scan evidenced a solid mass [6 cm (at the maximum diameter) × 2,5 cm] at the level of the anterior bladder wall . Cystoscopy confirmed the presence of a 6 cm extended solid broad-based mass localized at the level of the anterior wall of the bladder. A transurethral resection was therefore performed and the first pathological examination revealed a mucinous adenocarcinoma suspicious for primary of the bladder (approximate weight: 10 gr), infiltrating the full thickness of the visceral wall . Tumoural cells were found immunopositive for cytokeratin 7, CDX2 (nuclear immunoreactivity), and β-catenin (membranous immunoreactivity) . Subsequent laparotomy showed a thickened appendix and caecum adherent to the bladder posterior wall without its infiltration. Intraoperative frozen analysis revealed foci of adenocarcinoma with mucinous components suspicious of colonic origin in sections of appendiceal tissue, and the presence of tumoral cells colonizing a mesenteric lymph-node. Appendectomy and right hemicolectomy with ileocolic anastomosis, lymphadenectomy and partial cystectomy limited to the anterior wall of the bladder was therefore performed. The definitive pathological examination revealed a mucinous cystoadenocarcinoma of the appendix (2,5 cm × 3 cm × 2 cm) invading the caecal wall with metastasis of the anterior wall of the bladder . Adjacent to the tumour in the intestinal mucosa foci of high grade dysplasia/adenocarcinoma in situ were also identified . In addition, metastasis were found in 15/37 (40%) peri-colic lymph-nodes. The pathological staging was: pT4N2M1 (TNM classification), stage D (Dukes, Astler and Coller classification). A mutational analysis for k-Ras was done and the tumour resulted k-Ras mutated. A radiological tumour assessment after surgery showed a suspicion of disease persistence to the intra-abdominal lymph-nodes and to the pelvis (cystic lesion), with an increased of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) serum level (29 ng/ml). From May to October 2009 the patient received 12 cycles of a first line chemotherapy with fluorouracil, folic acid, irinotecan (FOLFIRI regiment), and bevacizumab. Radiological tumour assessment after 4 and 8 cycles showed stable disease with a reduction of CEA serum level (14 ng/ml and 10 ng/ml, respectively). The radiological tumour assessment at the end of chemotherapeutic treatment (November 2009) showed a volumetric progressive disease at the level of the pelvic cystic lesion (confirmed by cytological analysis), whereas a further reduction of CEA serum level (7 ng/ml) was observed. The patient is going to receive a second line chemotherapy with fluorouracil, folic acid (de GRAMONT regiment), and bevacizumab. At this time no further bladder lesions have been detected during a cystoscopy inspection.