A 61-year-old Japanese male was referred to our hospital due to abnormal liver function tests without abdominal pain during a routine check-up for type 2 diabetes mellitus. He had history of alcoholic liver disease and hyperuricemia. He did not have a personal or family history of cancer. Laboratory data revealed marked elevations of liver and biliary tract enzymes with slight jaundice. Level of cancer antigen 19-9 (Ca19-9) was elevated while that of CEA was within normal range . Abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a 40-mm-sized hypovascular mass in the pancreatic body, which was radiologically consistent with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . The pancreatic tumor and adjacent lymph node together contacted bifurcation of the celiac artery (CeA), common hepatic artery (CHA), splenic artery (SpA) and left gastric artery (LGA) . Increased hazy attenuation on CeA was present ≦180 . There was contour irregularity in SpA showing tumor invasion . The main pancreatic duct was slightly dilated (3.4 mm) . Focal narrowing was seen in Splenic vein . He underwent magnetic resonance cholangio pancreatography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and confirmed disruption of the main pancreatic duct in the body of the pancreas with slight main pancreatic duct dilatation and unilateral narrowing over 3 cm long of the lower common bile duct . Endoscopic transpapillary bile duct biopsy resulted poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the extrahepatic bile duct. Endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage was also performed. He was radiographically staged with T4N1M0 borderline resectable pancreatic cancer (UICC 8th) and T1N1M0 lower bile duct cancer (UICC 8th) received chemotherapy targeting pancreatic cancer (GEM, 1600 mg/m2 body surface area plus nab-PTX, 200 mg/m2 body surface area on days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle). At diagnosis the CA19-9 level was remarkably high at 1266 U/mL; this level decreased to 186 U/ml after ERBD. After two cycles of induction chemotherapy with GEM plus nab-PTX, level of CA19-9 resolved to the normal range at 34.8 U/mL. The pancreatic lesion showed shrinkage after five cycles of chemotherapy, improving the deformity of the SpA and SpV, the involvement of CeA and the dilatation of MPD . The level of CA19-9 dropped further to 10.4 U/mL after total of seven cycles of chemotherapy. Seven months after diagnosis, we performed pylorus-preserving PD-SAR, subsequently avoiding total pancreatectomy . The proximal part of SpA was resected with the pancreatic tumor: SpA was resected at its root and the level where the posterior gastric artery was preserved. Since LGA could be isolated and preserved, total gastrectomy was not required. SpV was partially resected with the tumor. Portal veins had to be resected and reconstructed for its kinking after SpV resection. The surgical duration was 430 min with a blood loss of 1800 mL. Macroscopic examination of the surgical specimen revealed a 38-mm-sized firm mass in the body of the pancreas and a 43-mm-sized flat infiltrative tumor in the lower extrahepatic bile duct . Microscopic examination of the pancreatic lesion showed a moderately differentiated pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma with remarkable fibrosis in the pancreatic body. The tumor degeneration grade was Evans grade III . Histologically, there was no invasion into the SpA; however, venous and perineural invasions were noted. Two para-pancreatic lymph nodes had metastasized. The final diagnosis of pancreatic tumor was ypT2ypN1M0, ypStage IIB pancreatic cancer (UICC 8th). There were no residual cancer cells in the dissected margin and/or pancreatic resection margin (R0). Synchronous poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in the distal bile duct was also pathologically diagnosed as ypT2(SS)ypN1M0, ypStage IIB (UICC 8th). The therapeutic response was Evans grade IIa . These two tumors showed no histopathological continuity, and according to the Warren and Gates criteria , the tumors were classified as double primary malignancies. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 16. Although intensive insulin therapy was not required in the perioperative period, insulin or oral hypoglycemic drugs were required to maintain blood glucose levels 4 months after discharge. The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 (TS-1; Taiho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) one month after surgery. No signs of recurrence have been observed for 22 months after surgery with continuing S-1. However, he developed multiple liver metastasis and para-aortic LN metastasis. GEM + nab-PTX was reintroduced as salvage chemotherapy. He had seven cycles of that chemotherapy, but he died 32 months after surgery.