A 52-years-old Han Chinese woman with a two-years history of painless and reduced visual acuity in both eyes without any metamorphopsia and color anomalopia was examined at the Department of Ophthalmology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Jilin University in May 2018. She has been diagnosed with left-side breast cancer, and given tamoxifen 80 mg per day for 6 years since 2011. A modified radical mastectomy was performed and postoperative chemotherapy was given for 6 times in 2015. Pathology results revealed an invasive ductal carcinoma with negative left axillary lymph nodes. At the time of presentation, the patient was 6 years postmenopausal and discontinued tamoxifen treatment for 6 months and the total dose of tamoxifen at that time was greater than 170 g. The developmental history as well as the family history remained unremarkable, and no previous history of diabetes and hypertension was present.
On examination, her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye. The anterior segment examination and intraocular pressure in both eyes were normal. Fundus examination revealed yellow-white refractive deposits in the macular and paramacular areas . The spatial domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) imaging showed CME, refractile deposits in both eyes, and macular white crystalline deposits in the superficial retinal layers . Optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA), of both eyes showed telangiectasia. Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) in the arteriovenous phase showed telangiectasia, while a typical, petalloid-like pattern of hyperfluorescence was observed in the late phase . Similar changes were seen in both eyes.
Considering the overall clinical picture and the recent use of tamoxifen, the patient was considered to be finally diagnosed with tamoxifen-induced rentinopathy.
Both eyes were subsequently treated with intravitreal ranibizumab 0.5 mg injection. The patient received first injection to the left eye in May 2018 followed by the right one a month later. The patient was followed up for 23 months including 1 week after the first injection to the left eye. The patient received reviews every month for the first 6 months after the first injection. Color fundus photography (CFP) and SD-OCT were performed at each visit. Also no significant CME was observed 1 month after the injection to both eyes . Her BCVA was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/50 in the left eye. However, the best condition in the right eye was maintained only for less than 2 months . Therefore, the patient received second intravitreal ranibizumab injection in the right eye and the improvements lasted for only 3 months. Compared with the right eye, normal retinal anatomical structures were observed in the left eye, which lasted for nearly 3 months following the injection. CME showed recurrence 3 months after the first injection . Considering the unsatisfied visual acuity (VA) gain and the economic burden, the patient refused anti-VEGF therapy but continued follow up with CFP and OCT. SD-OCT still showed mild CME in both eyes 10 months after the first presentation in her penultimate visit, i.e., on March 2019 . However, CME in both eyes was completely solved at the next and last follow-up visit in April 2020. The yellow-white refractory deposits showed slight reduction when compared to the first visit and BCVA was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/63 in the left eye.