A 3 year old female presented with a one-month history of abdominal pain and anorexia. The abdominal ultrasonography showed a retroperitoneal mass (7 × 6 × 6 cm) confirmed by CT scan with a right hydronephrosis without evidence of metastatic spread . An open biopsy of the lesion was performed. The pathology revealed a malignant neoplasm composed of tubules, papillary structures, ribbons of primitive stratified columnar cells, vesicular nuclei, and high nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio. This histopathology is similar to the structure of the primitive epithelium of the medullary plate and neural tube. The absence of cilia and blepharoplasts ruled out the hypothesis of a papillary ependymoma. The neoplastic cells showed a diffuse positivity for CD56 and WT1 (cytoplasmic) and a variable positivity for NSE, Synaptophisin, S100 protein and Cytokeratin MNF116, while they were negative for CD99, alpha-fetoprotein, CD30, OCT3/4, β-HCG. The diagnosis was neuroectodermal embryonal tumor with patterns of ME .
The child started chemotherapy according to our local protocol for Ewing Sarcoma Family Tumor . After 2 ICE courses (Ifosfamide 2 gr/m2 for 3 days, Carboplatin 400 mg/m2 for 2 days and Etoposide 150 mg/m2 for 3 days) and 2 CAV (Cyclophosphamide 1.5 mg/m2 for 2 days, Vincristine 0.5 mg/m2 for 3 days and Doxorubicin 25 mg/m2 for 3 days), she achieved partial response, the mass measuring 5 × 3.3 × 3.8 cm . Grade 4 bone marrow toxicity that required red blood cells and platelets transfusion and hospitalization for neutopenic fever, was recorded after all courses.
A complete resection of the lesion was performed. The pathology showed extensive involutive post-chemotherapy aspects. The residual viable tumor showed histologic aspects overlapping with these of the first biopsy, partly characterized by more solid areas, with the same immunophenotypic pattern .
The child, in complete remission, completed the treatment with two CE courses (Cyclophosphamide 1.5 gr/m2 for 2 days and Etoposide 150 mg/m2 for 2 days) and a last CAV course. As a consolidation treatment, she received a high-dose chemotherapy based on Busulfan and Melphalan with autologous peripheral blood stem cells rescue and, finally, radiotherapy to the primary tumor bed (19, 5 Gy). During the entire chemotherapy treatment, only grade IV bone marrow toxicity was recorded. During radiotherapy the patient presented only grade I diarrhea.
Six months after treatment discontinuation, she presented with an abdominal relapse . Surgery was performed, achieving a second complete remission. The pathology confirmed a ME with the same characteristics of the primary tumor. At relapse, expression of tumor target proteins was evaluated on tissue specimens obtained both at diagnosis and at recurrence. Immunohistochemistry showed the tumor cells always negative for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). By contrast, there was some positive staining with platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR) in the primary specimen, with a few cellular clusters showing cytoplasmic positivity, while at recurrence a clear diffuse cytoplasmatic positivity for PDGFR reaching almost 100% of the cells was observed. ADAR2 (adenosine deaminases that act on RNA) was absent in both primary and recurrent tumors; ADAR1 was expressed in the nucleus and cytoplasm, both at diagnosis and at recurrence. Figure shows the EGFR, PDGFR, ADAR 1 and ADAR2 expression in tumor specimen at diagnosis and at recurrence. (See also Table ).
According to the target protein expression, the patient started sorafenib 200 mg once daily orally, plus temozolomide 100 mg/m2/day orally for five consecutive days and irinotecan 10 mg/m2/day orally for 14 consecutive days; the course was repeated every 28 days.
Treatment was well tolerated, only generalized skin rash associated with grade I dry skin not requiring treatment discontinuation was recorded. A progression-free survival was achieved for five months when peritoneal carcinomatosis with an important neoplastic peritoneal effusion appeared. The patient died for progressive disease a few weeks later.