A 30-year-old Caucasian primagravid (G1P0) was referred to our university hospital at 10 weeks and four days, for termination of the pregnancy due to a 14 cm myoma causing severe pain, constipation and urine retention. Six weeks following the abortion, she was to have a myomectomy with her primary physician.
During her first prenatal visit at eight weeks gestation, her uterus was noted to be larger than expected by dates. She was experiencing significant pelvic pain and constipation. An ultrasound showed a right-sided posterior 11.5 × 11 cm uterine myoma, displacing her uterus to the left. Two weeks later, a repeat ultrasound showed enlargement of the myoma to 14 cm in diameter; 2 cm of myometrium was noted to be between the myoma and the interuterine cavity. Our patient continued to have worsening pelvic pain, which was refractory to oral narcotics and nonsteroidal analgesics. She also experienced severe constipation; her last normal bowel movement was three weeks prior to presentation. An aggressive bowel regimen, including dietary modification, bisacodyl, magnesium citrate and enemas, was only minimally successful, and our patient remained considerably uncomfortable. Voiding every 60 minutes was also necessary to prevent urine retention. After two and a half weeks of outpatient medical management, she refused inpatient admission, indicating that she could not tolerate continued expectant management.
On presentation to our university hospital, magnetic resonance imaging was performed and showed compression of her colon, bladder and proximal urethra . The large fibroid was noted to be posterior and the placenta, anterior. During options counseling at our institution, our patient decided that she was unable to proceed with an induced abortion and opted to undergo a gravid myomectomy. She understood that elective surgery is typically postponed until the second trimester to minimize the fetal exposure to anesthesia and to reduce potential for fetal loss. Due to her tremendous discomfort, she decided to proceed with a first trimester myomectomy, accepting the risks of pregnancy loss, fetal injury and hysterectomy.
A myomectomy was performed at 11 weeks gestation via a vertical skin incision. Upon entry into her pelvis, her uterus was found to be displaced into the left lower quadrant, and the subserosal myoma obliterated the posterior cul-de-sac on the right. Vasopressin was injected into the capsule of the myoma (13 cm × 6 cm × 9 cm) to decrease operative blood loss, and the tumor was shelled out with a blunt dissection and Bovie cautery. Following removal of the dominant myoma, a second, smaller myoma (7 cm × 5 cm × 2.5 cm) with areas of cystic degeneration was discovered at the level of the internal cervical os. This was also resected. The uterine incisions were closed with multiple layers of 0 Polysorb. Excellent hemostasis resulted. The remaining pelvic and abdominal organs were inspected and found to be normal. The estimated blood loss was 500 cm3. Fetal heart tones were confirmed by ultrasound at the conclusion of the procedure; a moderate amount of post-procedure vaginal bleeding was noted. Our patient remained in the hospital for four days postoperatively and was discharged home having normal bowel movements, voiding regularly and with a reassuring fetal status. Although vaginal bleeding persisted throughout her postoperative course, her hematocrit remained stable and fetal heart tones were documented daily. Since our patient did not have symptoms of cramping, but vaginal bleeding was persistent, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were not started. There was no disruption of the corpus luteum during the surgery, so progesterone supplementation was not administered. Our patient required routine narcotic postoperative pain management; intravenous patient-controlled analgesia was discontinued on postoperative day two. She was no longer requiring pain medication at her two week postoperative clinic visit.
Our patient returned to her primary physician, received routine prenatal care and the pregnancy progressed without complications. She was offered a vaginal trial of labor at our institution since the uterine cavity was not entered during the myomectomy; however, a primary Cesarean delivery was performed after she failed to go into spontaneous labor by 40 weeks and three days. She delivered a healthy girl with an Apgar score of nine and nine and a weight of 4356 g. Her postpartum course was uncomplicated.