A 63-year-old woman was seen at a local hospital for chest bruising secondary to an accident. Chest radiography revealed an abnormal shadow in the left middle and lower lung fields . The finding was diagnosed as an anterior mediastinal mass, and the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment. The patient had a history of bronchial asthma. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a giant, well defined mass measuring 16 × 10 cm in the left thoracic cavity. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a mass with heterogenous enhancement that was in direct contact with a large area of the chest wall and diaphragm and pressed against the heart and left upper pulmonary lobe . F18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed abnormal FDG uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value of 3.77. Laboratory examination showed high serum levels of acetylcholine receptor (AchR) antibody (5.3 nmol/L), although the patient had not complained of any symptoms suggestive of myasthenia gravis (MG). A thymoma was suspected, and surgical resection was recommended. Since the CT findings suggested adhesions between the tumor and the chest wall, diaphragm, pericardium, and left lower lobe of the lung, or infiltration by the tumor, we performed a median sternotomy and left anterolateral thoracotomy without changing position of the patient for the resection.
A 16-cm anterolateral incision was made in the fifth intercostal space. The tumor occupied approximately half of the left pleural cavity . It was excised from the anterior mediastinal fat tissue and thymus. Fibrous adhesions extending from the tumor to the left lung and diaphragm were sharply peeled off, and the tumor was resected without involvement of the pericardium or trunk of the pulmonary artery . The findings of an intraoperative frozen section of the tumor were diagnosed as thymoma. An extended total thymectomy was thus performed through the same incision used for the resection.
The resected specimen was 16.5 × 11.8 × 7 cm, and showed a well encapsulated tumor with lobules separated by fibrous bands . Microscopic examination revealed the tumor to be composed of a lymphocyte associated area , and the findings were diagnosed as World Health Organization Type B2 thymoma with capsular invasion (Masaoka stage II). The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she remains free of recurrence and signs and symptoms associated with MG 1 year after the surgery.