A 64-year-old man presented with symptoms of constantly worsening right upper quadrant distension and pain for 1 d.
The patient’s symptoms started a month ago with symptoms of right upper quadrant distension and pain, which had worsened the last 48 h.
The patient did not have a previous medical history.
The patient denied any personal or family history.
Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen showed a 5.8 cm × 4.5 cm heterogeneous mass localized in both the gallbladder and liver and a gallbladder with remarkably thickened wall, indicating a malignancy. Computed tomography (CT) and contrast-enhanced CT of the liver revealed infiltration of GBC into the adjacent liver, with enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes .
The patient underwent radical cholecystectomy for GBC. The gallbladder was intraoperatively observed to adhere tightly to the greater omentum. Moreover, miliary lesions were observed in a portion of the omentum. Neoplastic entities were present at the bottom of the gallbladder, which had invaded the V hepatic segments of the liver.
The gallbladder and a part of the liver tissue were surgically resected (dimension of 13 mm × 5 mm × 8 mm). The gallbladder contained dark green bile. The thickness of the gallbladder wall was approximately 0.2-0.3 cm, and the size of the tumor near the neck of the gallbladder was approximately 5 cm × 4 cm × 6 cm. Part of the mass was grey and soft, and the neoplastic section of the tumor revealed purulent necrosis. The boundaries of the mass and surrounding liver tissue were vague .
Hematoxylin and eosin staining: For paraffin-embedded tissue specimens, consecutive 3-5 µm thick sections were cut and used for histological analysis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed moderately differentiated SCC. The tumor cells invaded the full-thickness of the serosa and approached the surrounding adipose tissue. Part of the tumor also infiltrated the liver tissue. Lymph nodes in the hepatic duodenal ligament were examined, and resected lymph nodes were negative for carcinoma metastasis .
Immunohistochemical staining: Immunohistochemical analysis showed strong staining for AE1/3 and CK5/6 in the tumor. Staining for CK19, CK7, and CAM5.2 was positive in the cytoplasm, and P40 and Ki-67 were positive in the nucleus. In contrast, the expression of hepatocyte marker and AFP was not detected .