A 71-year-old male patient was referred to the emergency department by his general practitioner because of dyspnoea, thoracic pain, and elevated D-dimers. On initial evaluation, blood pressure was 135/92 mmHg, heart rate was 102 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation was 97%. Physical examination revealed elevated jugular venous pressure, indicative of raised central venous pressure, and muffled heart sounds. His medical history included recurrent prostatitis and recent Guillain-Barré syndrome without any previously reported cardiac antecedents. He was not taking any medication.
An electrocardiogram revealed a sinus tachycardia with low voltages. Due to the elevated D-dimers in combination with distended jugular veins, a computed tomography pulmonary angiography was performed. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography excluded pulmonary embolism but did show a large pericardial effusion. Urgent transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) confirmed a pericardial effusion of 3 cm with partial collapse of the right atrium and right ventricle, compatible with tamponade. Transthoracic echocardiography also showed a right-sided cardiac mass of 36 × 23 mm located in the atrioventricular groove , which needed further investigation. An urgent pericardiocentesis was performed with the removal of 1200 mL of haemorrhagic pericardial fluid. Histopathologic examination of the pericardial fluid showed atypical lymphocytes, not otherwise specified.
To further differentiate the cause of this pericardial effusion and to characterize the cardiac mass, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the heart was performed. This confirmed a large sharply outlined infiltrating mass surrounding the right coronary artery (RCA), with the extension of the mass from the proximal to the distal segment of the RCA (arrows). The mass was iso- to hyperintense on T1-weighted spectral presaturation with inversion recovery and T2-weighted turbo spin-echo sequences. Short-TI inversion recovery sequence showed a slightly hyperintense mass when compared with the normal myocardium.
Short axis rest perfusion shows no early contrast enhancement of the mass surrounding the RCA , while inhomogeneous contrast enhancement can be observed on T1-weighted images with fat suppression after intravenous administration of gadolinium (, acquisitions obtained 10 min after administration of gadolinium). Cardiac MRI also showed normal ventricular and valvular function .
Further staging by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography–computed tomography (18F-FDG PET-CT) revealed pathological tracer uptake of the mass and two enlarged lymph nodes surrounding the aortic arch. No extranodal involvement was seen.
Based on multimodality imaging, the main differential diagnoses of the mass included IgG4-related disease and cardiac lymphoma, both of which can present with a (pseudo-)tumoural formation and both of which are histopathological diagnoses. Consequently, a computed tomography-guided transthoracic biopsy of the cardiac mass was performed. Histopathology was compatible with a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Further cytogenetics showed both C-MYC and BCL-6 translocation and a final diagnosis of a double-hit DLBCL with primary cardiac involvement was made.
The patient was treated with rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine, prednisone (R-CHOP) every 3 weeks combined with high dose methotrexate to prevent spreading to the central nervous system. After initial pericardiocentesis, the symptoms of dyspnoea quickly resolved. Treatment with 0.5 mg colchicine twice a day (1 mg daily) was initiated to prevent the recurrence of pericardial fluid and tamponade. After three cycles, the patient was asymptomatic, and 18F-FDG PET-CT showed a complete metabolic response with complete regression of the mass. Transthoracic echocardiography showed full resolution of the pericardial fluid and a stable left ventricular ejection fraction of 58%.