A 5-month-old boy with no other medical history underwent emergency transfer from another hospital due to a left thoracic cystic lesion and left pneumothorax detected on chest radiography, which had been taken because of a 2-week history of persistent wheeze and cough .
Chest contrast-enhanced computed tomography taken after insertion of a chest drainage tube revealed marked deviation of the mediastinum to the right .
Surgery was performed on hospital day 2 because retractive breathing was unimproved with oxygen administration through a nasal cannula while under sedation with Dexmedetomidine. Thoracotomy was done by the left fifth postero-lateral intercostal incision in the lateral position under general anesthesia. A cystic lesion was seen to have developed from the distal alveolar region of the left lower lobe . The tumor showed a tiny adhesion to the left diaphragm, with a tiny rupture near the adhesion. Since it was difficult to determine whether the lesion was benign or malignant during surgery, partial lung resection with cystic lesion and adhesion detachment were performed. Lymph node dissection was not performed in the surgery because there are currently no established clinical practice guidelines for PPB that can be used to predict disease prognosis or guide treatment like the Tumor, Node, Metastasis (TNM) staging system.
Histopathological investigations revealed immature blast cell-like mesenchymal cells and differentiated striated muscle cells present in a dense cambium layer under the epithelium of the cystic lesion . Immunostaining of the excised specimen showed positive findings for desmin in immature mesenchymal cells and striated muscle differentiated cells. Striated muscle differentiated cells showed positive staining for myogenin. Ki67 staining showed a high positive rate (hot spot; 80%) consistent with immature mesenchymal cells showing a cambium layer-like growth pattern . The patient was pathologically diagnosed as type I PPB.
Because the respiratory condition quickly improved and an atelectasis in the right upper lung field disappeared after surgery, the patient was transferred to another hospital and received 5 courses of VAC (vincristine, actinomycin D and cyclophosphamide) chemotherapy. About a year since surgical treatment and chemotherapy, the patient is doing well without recurrence.
Genetic testing revealed that both the patient and his mother had the hereditary mutation in DICER1 gene.