A 44-year-old, right-handed female presented with sudden hand motor deficits in her left hand. There was no trauma to the arm, she used no medications and she had no vascular risk factors.
Examination revealed severe motor deficits of the left hand with extension of the three ulnar fingers and wrist, muscle atrophy in the first dorsal interosseous muscle, and claw hand deformity without sensory deficits . According to the Medical Research Council scale examination revealed grade 1 in the left wrist flexor, grade 4 in the left wrist extensor, grade 3 in the left fingers flexor and grade 4 in the left fingers extensor. Adduction and abduction of the left fingers were also severely impaired (grade 3). Deep tendon reflexes were mildly brisker ipsilateral to the affected hand. No Babinski sign was observed.
Cervical computed tomography (CT) was unremarkable. Peripheral motor nerve conduction velocities were normal. Small, discrete ischemic lesions appeared hyperintense on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequence (upper arrows on Fig. ). The infarct was located in the right posterior part of the precentral hand knob area (upper arrow on 1d), near the central sulcus (lower arrow on Fig. ). CT angiography showed significant stenosis in the right proximal middle cerebral artery (MCA) trunk.
Transesophageal echocardiogram and carotid ultrasound did not suggest an embolic source. Hypercoagulable screening and levels of markers specific to systemic vasculitis were all normal. An embolism arising from the ipsilateral MCA stenosis was subsequently considered as the etiology of the patient’s symptoms, and she received acetylsalicylic acid and clopidogrel for secondary stroke prevention.
At the 2-month follow-up, the patient complained of fatigue and progressive headaches. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal. Follow-up 3-Tesla MRI with gadolinium contrast revealed focal wall enhancement in the right proximal MCA , indicating cerebral angiitis. Multiple stenoses at the same location were seen on digital subtraction angiography (DSA) . Brain biopsy was not performed.
Cyclophosphamide infusions were administered with glucocorticoids over the subsequent 15 weeks. Left-hand motor function improved, aside from her left fifth finger.