An 87-year-old woman was referred to our hospital in poor general condition (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 3) with dyschezia and loss of appetite for the past week. A colonoscopy confirmed an obstructive descending colon cancer that could not be penetrated by the colonoscope , and computed tomography revealed an obstructive ileus . The patient’s medical history included coronary artery bypass surgery 11 years ago, surgery for dissecting aortic aneurysm 8 years ago, pacemaker implantation for sick sinus syndrome a year ago, chronic renal failure, and type 2 diabetes. Although a colectomy to reduce the obstruction was required at the earliest possible time, we first placed a colonic stent on the first day of admission to gain some time for preoperative evaluation to reduce perioperative risk . Then, preoperative echocardiography on the second day after admission revealed severe AS with an aortic valve area of 0.78 cm2, mean aortic pressure gradient of 48 mmHg, a maximum jet velocity of 4.2 m/s, and an ejection fraction of 63%. Although manifestations of severe AS were not clear due to her reduced activity levels, we thought that treating severe AS prior to the colectomy was not entirely wrong because having symptoms were undeniable, and the brain natriuretic peptide, which is one of the risk factors for complication of AS, was high (216.1 pg/mL). Furthermore, the high surgical risk for colectomy calculated from the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Improvement Program Surgical risk calculator (20.9% of serious complication and 5.0% of mortality risk) was also a reason to prioritize the treatment of AS. It is because the deterioration of the general condition, which was one of the main factors of surgical risk, might be caused by severe AS. However, as SAVR mortality risk was evaluated to be high at 8.7% (according to the European system for cardiac operative risk evaluation II) and adverse events and surgical stress after SAVR may delay or prevent the colectomy, we proceeded with TAVI instead of SAVR.
The patient underwent TAVI through the right femoral artery on day 31 after colonic stenting. A 26-mm Evolut R valve was placed under fluoroscopic guidance and echocardiography 7 days after the procedure showed an improvement in the mean aortic pressure gradient to 7 mmHg with an aortic valve area of 1.82 cm2 and the ejection fraction to 70%.
To reduce probable tumor bleeding, we administered aspirin alone from TAVI until colectomy, even though dual antiplatelet therapy is recommended. The patient received 10,000 unit/day heparin administration for 7 days instead of aspirin until 5 h prior to surgery and then underwent laparoscopic colectomy 22 days after TAVI. We ligated left colic artery, which was the main feeding artery of the tumor, and performed D3 lymph node dissection using a 5-port technique in the supine position. The colon was resected with sufficient distal and proximal margins from the tumor and anastomosed. The operation time was 346 min and the estimated blood loss was 10 ml. Pathologically, the tumor was diagnosed as T4a, N1b (3/32), M0, Stage IIIB. Her postoperative course was unremarkable, and she was discharged 14 days after colectomy. No recurrence was observed for more than 1 year without adjuvant therapy.