A 37-year-old woman complained the development of multiple, painful nodules and abscesses on both cheeks about one week after injection of a mixture containing hyaluronic acid (exact product name could not be recalled) for facial depression filling at a private clinic a month ago. The patient has received antimicrobial treatment (oral clarithromycin) for 3 weeks at another hospital, but the symptoms did not improve. The patient denied fever or other systemic symptoms. The patient had no previous filler injection or surgery on her face in the past. Dermatological examination revealed multiple erythematous, non-tender nodules on both cheeks, without palpable lymphadenopathy .
Results of routine laboratory tests were normal. Smear test of abscess fluid showed gram-positive cocci. Acid fast staining of the puncture fluid was also positive. Mycobacterium abscessus was identified in the bacterial culture of puncture fluid . Moreover, both the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and mass spectrometry (MS) analysis confirmed Mycobacterium abscessus in the puncture fluid of abscess. Histopathology showed infectious granuloma and infiltration of lymphocytes, plasma cells, multinucleate giant cells, as well as neutrophils in the dermis .
The patient explicitly resisted to take oral medicine because of potential side effects and a long course of treatment. Following needle aspiration of pus, abscesses were washed with 4.4 mL solution containing 7mg diprospan and 600u hyaluronidase. Seven months later, lesions on the left cheek completely disappeared, while lesions on the right cheek showed no significant change. Because of no improvement on the right cheek after an additional drainage and irrigation of the abscess, surgical excision of abscess was performed. The infected skin and subcutaneous tissue were removed during surgery. After operation, mupirocin ointment was applied outside the incision, and dressing was changed every other day until the stitching was removed after 1 week. No recurrence was observed during 18-month follow-up .