A 49-year-old male with relevant medical history of migraines and hyperlipidemia (for which he was on 20 milligram [mg] daily atorvastatin) presented to our hospital after approximately 12 hours of decreased vision in his left lower visual field. Patient’s history was notable for this quadrantanopia being consistent with prior migraines; however, he decided to present to the ED as this presentation was significantly different from his usual migraine duration. The headache had nearly resolved on presentation to the ED, but the patient still complained of decreased vision. The majority of the patient’s exam was normal, including vital signs, cranial nerves II–XII, coordination, gait and balance. Confrontational visual fields were concerning for possible incomplete left inferior homonymous quadrantanopia. His electrocardiogram demonstrated normal sinus rhythm with no ischemic changes. Non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head was obtained and revealed no bleeding or mass. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was ordered, but was not immediately available. Optometry service was consulted to confirm visual field defects and performed the Humphrey visual field 24-2 Swedish Interactive Threshold Algorithm Fast, which tests 54 visual field data points per eye and takes approximately five minutes to perform depending on the reliability of the test and size of the defect. Test reliability aids the provider in assigning diagnostic value. The optometrist’s exam was reliable and consistent with left inferior incomplete homonymous quadrantanopia . The patient was administered 324 mg of chewable aspirin but given his delayed presentation and low NIHSS, systemic thrombolytics were not administered. After consultation with internal medicine, the patient was admitted to a telemetry-capable ward for further evaluation and management.
A brain MRI with angiography was obtained the following day, which demonstrated acute cerebral infarction within the medial aspect of the right occipital lobe and small infarcts within the right cerebellum and the vermis . There was also 50% luminal narrowing at the origin of the left vertebral artery, and scattered narrowing of less than 50% in the bilateral internal carotid arteries.
The following day, the patient reported no change in his visual symptoms. Neurology recommended increase of his aspirin to 325 mg daily as well as continuation of atorvastatin increased to 80 mg daily. Transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, and a two-day Holter (followed by 12-day cardiac event monitor) was initiated. The patient was discharged on ischemic secondary prevention therapy as noted above, pending cardioembolic etiology rule out.
Implanted loop recorder (ILR) was arranged by referral to a capable tertiary center in Okinawa, Japan. Transthoracic echocardiogram with bubble study interpretation resulted days later, revealing early positive agitated saline study consistent with patent foramen ovale (PFO). Additionally, neurology started a hypercoagulability workup to include assessment of lupus anticoagulant, protein C/S panel, factor V Leiden mutation, antithrombin III activity, and prothrombin mutation. Only the prothrombin workup was abnormal, revealing a heterozygous mutation (G-20210-A). However, in the absence of venous thromboembolism, prolonged antithrombotic therapy is generally not recommended for prothrombin G20210A heterozygotes.
At the tertiary center, the patient underwent ILR placement, and a transesophageal echocardiogram was performed. The latter ruled out intracardiac thrombus, and demonstrated right to left shunting via his PFO. However, cardiology stated PFO closure was not indicated due to cryptogenic stroke etiology with unfavorable risk-benefit analysis. The ILR showed no cardiac dysrhythmias. In the first month after discharge, the patient had mild improvement in vision subjectively. At three-week ophthalmology follow-up, he had similar improvement on repeat visual field testing, and was cleared to return to driving. In an eight-month follow-up telephone consult, the patient stated he had no further improvement in vision, and had no recurrent strokes despite increased awareness of stroke symptoms. Repeat visual field testing performed at three and eight months showed no significant improvement or worsening.