An 18-year-old male patient with a past medical history of renal calculi, asthma, environmental allergies, irritable bowel syndrome, and frequent nosebleeds presented to the pediatric clinic for evaluation of nosebleeds.
Patient has had recurrent nosebleeds throughout his life, which seemed to have worsened as a teenager. The bleeding would usually last for 15 min and resolve with nasal compression. There was no history of nose picking or trauma to the nose.
The patient denied bleeding while brushing his teeth, long duration of wound healing or swelling of joints. He denied bruising or petechiae but reported to have small red spots on his chest. Patient was known to have episodes of syncope during the episodes of nosebleeds. There was no history of black, tarry or grossly bloody stool, vomiting or blood in urine. There was no history of chest pain, shortness of breath, hemoptysis, hematemesis or seizures.
He had a history of mild intermittent asthma and dust mite allergy for which he was taking albuterol and montelukast. The family history was positive for primary biliary cholangitis, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, psoriasis, asthma, arthritis along with pulmonary and liver AVMs and telangiectasias of the finger in the mother. Father had atrial fibrillation, hypertension and hyperlipidemia. Further family history revealed extensive bleeding history in the maternal side, including intestinal telangiectasias in maternal aunt and cousin and frequent nosebleeds in the maternal uncle. Maternal grandmother has had “bleeding problems in intestine and brain”.
Physical examination revealed stable vital signs with blood pressure of 120/78 mmHg. Skin examination showed telangiectasias on gum line and inner lips along with cherry hemangiomas on the chest and back . There were no other skin rashes or lesions suggestive of autoimmune disease. Nasal examination showed erythematous mucus membranes with excoriation in bilateral nares, dilated blood vessels in anterior nares with no active bleeding, and no mass or polyps . Conjunctiva was injected. Rest of the physical examination was normal.
Investigations showed evidence of iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin 9.5 gm/dL), which was thought to be secondary to long standing history of spontaneous recurrent epistaxis. Stool occult blood was normal. Liver function test was normal. Coagulation and bleeding profile were normal. Upper and/or lower GI endoscopies were not performed as there was no history suggestive of GI bleeding. Renal function panel showed serum creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL and stable electrolytes. Urinalysis was negative for proteinuria or hematuria. Thyroid function test was normal.
Chest X-ray was normal. Although he did not have clinical evidence of pulmonary or hepatic AVMs, screening for the latter with computed tomography (CT) of chest and abdomen showed no evidence of pulmonary or hepatic AVMs. Given absence of headache, seizures, and altered sensorium, a CT scan of the head and neck initially was not performed. The prior history of syncopal attacks during episodes of epistaxis was attributed to hypotension from significant blood loss. He was also referred to Genetics for genetic testing and was found to have mutation of ENG in chromosome 9, typical of HHT type 1. After genetic confirmation, a further screening with CT angiogram of head and neck did not reveal presence of AVMs.