The main complaints were a 7-d history of fever, weakness, decreased appetite and progressive jaundice with icteric conjunctiva.
A 79-year-old Caucasian female presented to our emergency department with a 7-d history of fever, weakness, decreased appetite and progressive jaundice with icteric conjunctiva. She denied nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain.
Her past medical history was remarkable for hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
Home medications include hydrochlorothiazide, losartan and simvastatin. She denied any family history of deep venous thrombosis, hypercoagulable states, known liver disease or risk factors for liver disease. There was no weight loss, bowel habits alteration or previous contact with sick individuals or recent travel.
The relevant findings of the physical examination were skin jaundice with icteric conjunctiva and tenderness in the right upper quadrant. There were no evidence of splenomegaly, ascites, peripheral edema or lymphadenopathy on physical examination.
Laboratory results showed increased white blood cell counts 16.92 × 109/L and increased C-reactive protein 29.70 mg/L. Liver enzyme levels were elevated (aspartate aminotransferase 77 U/L; alanine aminotransferase 110 U/L; gamma-glutamyl transferase 325 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase 747 IU/L). Liver function was abnormal with total bilirubin (Tbrb) of 11.90 mg/dL. Creatinine (Cr) was elevated at 1.8 mg/dL. Serum amylase (Amy) was 216 U/L.
As there was no ultrasound (US) available in the Emergency Department, an abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan was conducted revealing minimum peritoneal leaking, gallstones with no biliary tract dilation and heterogeneous contour of the pancreas, with focal pancreatic fatty infiltration .
The patient was admitted to the hospital and observed; no antibiotics were administered. She persisted with skin jaundice, but no fever was registered. Considering the spectrum of elevated Tbrb, mainly direct bilirubin (Dbrb) levels, a magnetic resonance cholangiography was performed, which showed globosity of the head and uncinate process of the pancreas, with no notorious heterogeneity, associated with multifocal and multicentric altered pattern of liver parenchyma, mostly periportal, with suspicion of metastatic disease and stenosis of the distal main bile duct with dilation of the biliary tract to be further studied with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). At this point CEA levels were normal 2.09 ng/mL but elevated CA125 of 90.9 U/mL and CA19.9 of 59.2 U/mL were registered .
Suspecting neoplastic disease, the CT scan was repeated on hospital day 10, showing multiple hypodense liver lesions and heterogeneity of the pancreas head with nodular lesions. The intrahepatic duct and pancreatic duct were not dilated. The common bile duct showed 8-10-mm dilatation.
On day 14, an ERCP was performed. It showed distal common bile duct stenosis, suspicious of pancreatic head tumor with metastatic hepatic lesions, as shown in the CT study. However, the patient had no history of weight loss, along with improvement in cholestatic pattern, and these findings were against the hypothesis of neoplastic disease. Subsequently, the patient was evaluated with endoscopic US (EUS) for further pancreatic biopsy. The EUS showed thrombus within the main PV concerning an infected thrombophlebitis and left hepatic lobe with multiple lesions suggesting pyogenic liver abscesses, the larger one with a 5-cm diameter. An US-percutaneous guided biopsy of the left hepatic lesion was performed since a thin linear solid liver lesion was present.
The histology showed the finding of an intrahepatic abscess and a 6-mm filiform fragment, confirmed as a fish bone.