We present a 52-year-old female with schizoaffective disorder bipolar type, cutaneous lupus erythematous, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic kidney disease stage III, and seizure history requiring no antiepileptic medication. She presented to the emergency room febrile, with altered mental status, lead pipe rigidity, mutism, grasp reflex, stereotypies, autonomic dysfunction, tachycardia (110 beats per minute), hypertension (systolic blood pressure of 180 mm Hg). Creatine kinase and white blood cell counts were within normal limits. Within 48 h of admission, she experienced acute hypoxic respiratory failure and unspecific seizure activity requiring intubation. She received 2 mg intravenous lorazepam and a 30 mg/kg loading dose of levetiracetam with 500 mg every 12 h. This was complicated by aspiration, presumed to be from either rigidity or seizure, that led to MRSA pneumonia being treated with intravenous antibiotics. However, motor rigidity and autonomic abnormalities remained unchanged despite resolution of her pneumonia.
EEG monitoring revealed multiple head and arm shaking events; however, the recording did not have an electrographic correlate, wherein non-convulsive seizures were ruled out. Brain MRI was unrevealing. Lupus cerebritis and meningitis were ruled out through serologic testing, urosepsis was ruled out with urinalysis. The patient was subsequently extubated after being deemed able to protect her airway.
Her BFCRS was 24. Her current home medications included hydroxychloroquine 200 mg daily, prednisone 5 mg three times daily, amantadine 100 mg daily, venlafaxine extended release 75 mg daily, and lamotrigine 100 mg nightly. Of concern was her previous catatonic episode 1 year prior that had failed to respond to a four-week course of lorazepam that had been titrated to divided doses of 9 mg daily. However, that previous episode of catatonia remitted rapidly after initiation of amantadine. Unfortunately, further details regarding the treatment course of that episode are unknown.
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome vs. malignant catatonia were both high on the differential diagnoses. The emergency room had given a report of a rapid reduction in her amantadine, suggesting the potential of disruption in central dopaminergic activity, such that a presumptive diagnosis of NMS was made. The patient’s home amantadine was restarted. However, she showed only minimal, partial improvement in rigidity following amantadine resumption, and continued to exhibit severe catatonic symptoms.
After failing to improve with both intravenous lorazepam 4 mg four times per day and re-initiation of amantadine, an urgent index series of ECT was initiated once legal consent obligations were met. On the morning of her first ECT (now hospital day 12), she remained obtunded and continued to exhibit lead pipe rigidity, mutism, stereotypies, a grasp reflex, tachycardia, and hypertension. Bitemporal electrode placement was selected to afford potentially the fastest response rate . ECT stimulus parameters prioritized low frequency over stimulation train duration which offer the most efficient means for seizure induction. The initial total charge dose was 379 mC (0.9A, 0.5 ms, 7.0 s, 60 Hz). Although only theoretical as quality indicators, device seizure quality data is listed for reference: time to peak coherence (6 s) and to peak power (8 s), with the maximum power at 6406 μV . Maximum sustained coherence was 91.8%. The seizure abruptly stopped at 31 s with notable post-ictal suppression. All the remaining ECT-induced seizures ranged between 26 and 31 s, and all were deemed efficacious in quality based on seizure morphology.
By 12 h post ECT #1 she was no longer obtunded, becoming alert for the first time since her admission 12 days prior. Her rigidity had also lessened. After ECT #2, her agitation and mutism ceased. She was able to follow commands, state her name, and engage in brief conversation. Her bilateral rigidity was notably improved. The following day post- ECT #2, she reported feeling “much better” have some recollection of her feelings of agitation on the previous days. The remainder of the ECT series (totaling #7) was without complication and well-tolerated. During mid- ECT series, her seizure threshold was suspected to rise based on seizure EEG morphology and duration. This led to subsequent total charge dose titrations with a final charge dose of 454 mC.
After the resolution of the presumptive NMS, our patient manifested symptoms consistent with her long-standing diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder. Despite improved orientation, symptoms included looseness of associations, response to internal stimuli, and auditory hallucinations such that she was transferred to a free-standing community psychiatric hospital for ongoing treatment. It was strongly recommended that she enter a continuation ECT taper, especially given her ongoing psychosis with potential need for an antipsychotic which was concerning given the recent episode of NMS.