A 47-year-old white female patient with known prior history of estrogen-receptor-positive invasive ductal carcinoma of the right breast, post-bilateral mastectomy, and prolonged history of systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) and scleroderma on long-term therapy with hydroxychloroquine presented to the head and neck surgery (ENT) clinic after a biopsy from the right anterior maxilla was positive for invasive melanoma. The patient’s dentist first noted a lesion on her right hard palate 4 months prior to initial evaluation, but it was not biopsied at that time. The lesion continued to grow over the next few months, and a biopsy was obtained. Initial pathology showed a Breslow depth of at least 1.2 mm with no ulceration and margins positive for malignancy. The BRAF was wild type. A clinical examination showed a dark, discolored lesion on the hard palate from the right canine to the second premolar tooth, with some extension to the labial surface and gingiva, measuring about 1.5 × 0.5 cm2 . Another small, approximately < 1-cm area of submucosal fullness with dark pigmentation was identified on the posterior left soft palate, just posterior to the hard palate junction . A flexible fiberoptic laryngoscopy on initial evaluation was negative for further local spread in the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, and oropharynx; no additional gross mass or lesion was seen, and there was no evidence of invasion on the nasal cavity from either lesion.
A positron emission tomography (PET) computed tomography (CT) scan showed avidity at both lesions. The left soft palate hypermetabolic focus had a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 6.5, but no evidence of other suspicious active or distant metastasis was seen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed no metastases, and facial MRI images identified the right hard palate and left soft palate lesions with no further local extension of the masses. The options for treatment were reviewed with the patient. Surgical treatment would have involved a right infrastructure maxillectomy and a separate soft palate resection with free-flap reconstruction and a possible obturator for the maxilla. The possible short- and long-term effects of surgery were reviewed with the patient with the primary concern for post-surgical velopharyngeal insufficiency. The case was reviewed at our multidisciplinary tumor board with the recommendation to proceed with systemic therapy in a primary versus neoadjuvant format given the presence of a mucosal skip lesion and the risk of future metastatic disease.
The patient was offered chemoradiation with paclitaxel or intratumoral injection therapy with T-VEC. She elected to proceed with T-VEC owing to the advantages of local response with minimal risk for distant toxicity. The patient tolerated the initial test dose of 0.5 ml of 106 plaque-forming units (PFUs) intralesionally well and proceeded per standard protocol to the recommended intralesional treatment dose of 1 ml of 108 PFUs every 2 weeks. The total dose of 1 ml of 108 PFUs was split between the two oral lesions. The goal for treatment was to continue T-VEC injections to the hard and soft palate lesions until there was no further detectable disease. The soft palate lesion regressed after 4 months of every-other-week T-VEC injections; a small subcentimeter scar without discoloration appeared at the site. A small new discolored lesion was noted on the right labial gingiva next to the last molar around 7 months after treatments were started but regressed with a single T-VEC injection at that site (lesion never biopsied). Another new lesion at the right soft palate at the superior tonsillar pillar appeared 10 months after the start of initial treatment; this was treated with T-VEC injections and resolved in just over 1 month (lesion never biopsied). The patient had an excellent response in the hard palate lesion after 21 cycles with no new lesions noted . A PET CT scan repeated just over 1 year after her initial examination showed interval resolution of the hypermetabolic foci with no new suspicious lesions. Repeat biopsies of both the maxilla and soft palate lesions showed no evidence of active disease with hyperplastic mucosa with inflammation and scar tissue. Further treatments were held, and the patient was transitioned to active surveillance having received 21 cycles of T-VEC injections over a 10-month period.
The patient remained disease-free for 1 year off treatment, but then developed new metastatic disease in her right adrenal gland and small bowel on repeat PET CT scans as described in the attached timeline . She required surgical resection and adjuvant immunotherapy after approval from her rheumatologist. She remained locally disease free throughout, with her oropharynx intact, and continues today.