A 70-year-old man receiving home oxygen therapy (2 L/min) for severe respiratory disorder due to interstitial pneumonia presented with progressive exertional dyspnoea. The patient had no other medical history, including lifestyle diseases. On examination, his body temperature, blood pressure, pulse, and oxygen saturation in the supine position were 36.5°C, 100/56 mmHg, 56 beats per minute, and 97%, respectively. The dyspnoea worsened in the sitting position (desaturation to 80%) rather than in the supine position. Physical examination revealed that fine crackles were noted bilaterally at the base of the lung field, and the heart sounds were of a regular rhythm, without gallop. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed right-to-left shunts through the PFO with the patient in the head-up position (60°). Subsequent transthoracic echocardiography with a bubble test revealed massive right-to-left shunt flow in the sitting position, which was diagnosed as PFO-related POS . Right heart catheterization revealed no finding of heart failure and pulmonary hypertension (mean right atrial pressure, 0 mmHg; pulmonary artery pressure, 16 mmHg; pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, 13 mmHg; cardiac index, 2.3 L/min/m²; and pulmonary vascular resistance, 101 dynes/sec/cm⁵), and no significant step-up in oxygen saturation. Chest computed tomography showed emphysematous changes in the lungs bilaterally with ground-glass opacities in the right upper lobe, suggesting interstitial pneumonia, and no anatomical abnormalities such as kyphoscoliosis, tortuous or elongation of the ascending aorta, or hemi-diaphragmatic paralysis. Because general anaesthesia was challenging due to severe respiratory dysfunction [vital capacity (%vital capacity), 0.86 L (25.5%)], transcatheter PFO closure was performed under local anaesthesia and intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) guidance (8-Fr ACUNAV, Siemens Medical Solutions, USA). First, a 7-Fr sheath for PFO closure and a 9-Fr sheath for ICE was inserted via the right and left femoral veins (FV), respectively. The patient was on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin, 100 mg/day; clopidogrel, 75 mg/day) for 5 days before the procedure and received intravenous heparin (5000 U) after sheath insertion to maintain an activated clotting time of ≥250 s during the procedure. A 5-Fr multipurpose catheter, connected to a 2.5-cc syringe to check the blood backflow and to prevent air contamination, was inserted into the 7-Fr sheath and passed through the PFO without a guidewire. During this procedure, the patient suddenly coughed and breathed deeply. Thereafter, ICE showed massive microbubbles in all cardiac chambers and the ascending aorta, and visualization of the echographic images subsequently became difficult ( and ). Electrocardiography revealed significant ST-segment elevations in the anterior and inferior leads . Emergency coronary angiography revealed complete occlusion of the mid-left anterior descending (LAD) artery, suggestive of CAE . While the intravenous administration of catecholamines supported his haemodynamic, an intracoronary infusion of saline, nicorandil, and nitrates into the LAD was performed. However, the coronary blood flow did not improve completely. We then performed air aspiration using a 6-Fr Thrombuster® III GR (Kaneka, Osaka, Japan), achieving coronary blood flow improvement and ST-segment resolutions in leads V2–4 ( and ). Thereafter, intracoronary infusions of saline and nicorandil into the RCA resolved the ST-segment elevations in the inferior leads . We controlled his respiratory condition under intravenous sedation and positive pressure support using manual bag-valve-mask ventilation to avoid coughing and subsequent deep breathing. The right femoral sheath was down-sized from a 7-Fr to a 5-Fr catheter to prevent air contamination via the catheter-to-sheath gap. A 25-mm nitinol-occluded device (Amplatzer Cribriform, Abbott, St. Paul, MN, USA) was implanted using a 9-Fr long sheath without further air contamination . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged five days later with a drastic improvement in exertional dyspnoea and no neurological disorders.