A 55-year-old male presented with a rapidly growing, painful palpable mass in the left groin region involving the femoral nerve and blood vessels. Magnetic resonance imaging performed 18 days before surgery revealed a 10.5 x 7.6 x 11.0 cm large intramuscular tumour. No metastases were detected on CT scans of the chest, abdomen and pelvic area performed 14 days before surgery. Microscopic evaluation of a biopsy revealed a high-grade malignant spindle cell sarcoma . Due to extensive locoregional growth into the skeleton and intractable pain, a hemipelvectomy was performed. Small focus with metastatic disease was detected in two lymph nodes removed during the surgery. Macroscopic examination showed a well demarcated nodular tumour with white and fleshy cutting surface with small necrotic areas and bleeding. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positive finding for CD99 and AE1/AE3, and negative staining for S-100, SMA, EMA and CD31. Cytogenetic analysis showed massive clonal chromosomal rearrangements, and PCR and FISH were negative for fusion genes normally seen in synovial sarcoma. The differential diagnoses were synovial sarcoma and malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour. Lymph node metastasis is more commonly seen in synovial sarcoma and the immunohistochemical finding is also in favour of a synovial sarcoma, but the genetic findings did not support that diagnosis. According to the WHO classification , the tumour was classified as an undifferentiated spindle cell sarcoma.
Targeted resequencing of the tumour and normal genomic DNA was performed following a SureSelect protocol (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California, US) and a custom in-solution capture panel, containing exons of 900 cancer-related genes, developed by the Norwegian Cancer Genomics Consortium (NCGC, cancergenomics.no) . The methods are provided in (Additional file ). The sequencing revealed eight somatic mutations in the primary tumour. Among these, seven point mutations were identified in the genes COL2A1 (intronic), NF1 (p.K354R), PTGS2 (intronic), LRP2 (p.Q4132E), KRAS (p.G12V), PRRC2C (p.R1257G) and GATA6 (p.A29A), as well as a frameshift deletion in PRG4 (p.R791fs) . Copy number analysis revealed a homozygote deletion of TP53 (Additional file ). Targeted resequencing using a smaller ThunderBolts Cancer panel (Raindance Technologies, Billerica, Massachusetts, US) confirmed the identified KRAS mutation in the primary tumour at an allele frequency of 66%, similar to the 60% frequency found using the 900 gene panel (Additional file ). The additional seven mutated genes were not included within the ThunderBolts Cancer panel.
The patient was scheduled for adjuvant chemotherapy, but repeated radiologic imaging six weeks postoperatively showed widespread macroscopic metastatic disease in the lungs and skeleton, as well as numerous soft tissue metastases in the pelvic region. Targeted resequencing of the plasma samples, using the NCGC 900 cancer gene panel, confirmed the presence of six of the eight above mutations in all three plasma samples with allele frequencies ranging from 2.1-75% . The mutation levels in plasma before surgery were comparable to the ones in the primary tumour with a Pearson’s correlation of 0.93 between frequencies in tumour and plasma. The mutations in GATA6 and PRG4, with the lowest allele frequencies in the primary tumour, were not detected in the plasma samples. The mean sequencing depth of the six detected mutations in all three plasma samples was 260x (11-474x), and the two undetected had a depth of 360x (199-433x). One new mutation in the splice site of RAD52, a C > T mutation with an allele frequency of 5.5%, was detected in the cfDNA collected before surgery. This region was sequenced at high coverage, but the mutation was not observed in the primary tumour nor in the plasma samples collected at later time points (Additional file ).
Targeted resequencing using the ThunderBolts Cancer panel confirmed the presence of KRAS (p.G12V)) in all plasma samples (Additional file ). No other mutations with >5% allele frequency were detected in more than one sample.
The level of total cfDNA was monitored during disease progression. High quantity of cfDNA was detected one day before surgery (110 ng/ml plasma), and a decrease was seen three days after surgery (76 ng/ml plasma). Six weeks after surgery, the quantity of cfDNA had increased to more than twice the initial level present before the surgery (316 ng/ml plasma) .
The ctDNA level was estimated from the somatic allele frequency of the recurrent mutations in the genes COL2A1, NF1, PTGS2, LRP2, KRAS and PRRC2C. The ctDNA level in plasma collected one day before the surgery (Plasma1) was high, and comparable to the level in primary tumour. Three days after surgery, the ctDNA level had dropped, but was still detectable in plasma (Plasma2). In the sample collected six weeks after surgery (Plasma3), there was again an increase in ctDNA level similar to the levels before surgery . When also taking into account the amount of cfDNA released, the number of mutated genomes per ml of plasma were three times higher at this time point than before surgery (Additional file ). This reflected the disease progression of the patient and correlated with the tumour burden, as multiple distant metastases were detected at this time. The patient’s general condition was considered too poor for administering chemotherapy, and he succumbed to the disease 13 weeks after surgery.