A 28-year old female visited the Toyama-Yatsuo General Hospital in January 2016, because she noticed a mass in her left breast. Mammography and sonography showed a round, well-defined, 5.5-cm mass in the left breast. It was clinically suggested to be a fibroadenoma. She underwent tumor excision through a transverse medial incision in the left breast under general anesthesia. After surgery, a histological diagnosis of marked degenerative and necrotic induration was made suggesting benign PT. In January 2017, however, follow-up mammography showed multiple round or oval tumors with smooth contours (size: 1.2 cm, 1.6 cm, and 1.7 cm in a diameter) in the left breast. Sonography showed four oval or lobulated well-defined masses in the inner quadrant of left breast (size: 2.1 cm, 1.5 cm, 0.8 cm, and 1.2 cm in longest diameter). Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy was performed and the tumor was histologically diagnosed as borderline or malignant PT. Total mastectomy was recommended as the treatment of choice. However, she desired to receive IBR after total mastectomy and visited the Kanazawa Medical University Hospital. Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple tumors in the left breast. 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) showed neither distant metastases nor regional metastases. The options for treatment were discussed with the patient. In April 2017, she underwent NSM with IBR using a tissue expander. Sentinel lymph-node (SLN) biopsy was performed using peritumoral injection of radioisotope and subareolar injection of blue dye. After SLN biopsy, the entire breast tissue was subcutaneously removed through a transverse medial incision in the left breast and an axillary incision using wound retractors . Intraoperative histological examination of frozen sections showed that the retronipple biopsy was negative for disease and SLN was not involved. A subpectoral pocket was made by electrocautery and a tissue expander was placed into the pocket to achieve breast symmetry.
The resected specimen showed multiple tumors, including a tumor 2.3 cm in diameter in the inner quadrant, a tumor 2.3 cm in diameter in the upper inner quadrant, a tumor 0.8 cm in diameter below the areola, and a tumor 3.0 cm in diameter in the lower quadrants . The gross appearance of the cut surface of the tumor is shown in Fig. . Histological examination showed a fibroepithelial tumor with marked stromal overgrowth , focal necrosis, and hemorrhage. Stromal cells showed pleomorphism with a maximal mitotic rate of approximately 25 per 10 high-power fields and maximal Ki-67 proliferation rate of 75% . The tumor was pathologically diagnosed as malignant PT. Although the tumor infiltrated into the surrounding fatty tissue , all surgical margins were histologically negative for malignancy.
Postoperatively, expansion of the tissue expander was terminated when it was filled to a volume 20% greater than the volume of the opposite breast. Exchange of the tissue expander for an implant and autologous free fat grafting using the Coleman technique were performed 6 months after surgery. Radiation treatment was not performed for the reconstructed breast. One year after surgery, postoperative breast MRI and PET-CT showed neither local recurrence nor distant metastases and she desired to have a baby. In January 2020, a baby was born without evidence of abnormalities. At 3-year and 4-month follow-up, to date, she remains free of disease and highly satisfied with the cosmetic results .