A 59-year-old, previously well, white woman of Anglo-Saxon descent was admitted to our hospital with a 4-day history of intermittent fevers, rigors and chills. She denied pain, shortness of breath, cough or urinary symptoms. There was no history of illicit drug use, recent travel or infective contacts. Her past medical history included a previous cholecystectomy and anxiety for which she was medicated with 200 mg desvenlafaxine.
On presentation, she was febrile at 39.2 °C, had a pulse rate of 80 beats/minute, blood pressure of 130/64 mmHg, respiratory rate of 14 breaths/minute and oxygen saturations of 99 % on room air. There was no visible rash, lymphadenopathy or evidence of pharyngitis. Her cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable.
Although her initial full blood count indices were within normal limits, biochemistry revealed a mixed picture of deranged liver function tests (LFTs) as shown in Table .
A repeat examination the following day revealed marked icterus in addition to generalized abdominal discomfort and myalgia, with biochemistry showing progressively worsening cholestatic LFTs and conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, peaking on the seventh day of admission (see Table ).
Her albumin was 25 g/L (34–48) and coagulation studies were within normal limits. Full blood count and blood film demonstrated a reactive lymphocytosis: 7.34×109/L; reference range (RR) 1.5–3.5×109/L.
Viral studies revealed a positive EBV IgM and IgG antibody. No hepatitis A IgM antibodies were detected. Hepatitis B and C serology was negative. Smooth muscle and mitochondrial antibodies were not detected. An abdominal ultrasound revealed no evidence of intra- or extrahepatic duct dilatation or choledocholithiasis. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) demonstrated an enlarged spleen at 16 cm but was otherwise unremarkable. EBV-PCR was performed detecting 68,300 copies of EBV-ribonucleic acid (RNA) and a diagnosis of acute cholestatic hepatitis secondary to Epstein–Barr infection was subsequently made.
She was managed supportively, with paracetamol 1 g four times daily to help control pyrexia and a short course of cholestyramine 4 g three times daily to assist in managing intractable pruritus. Her clinical condition gradually improved and on review 3 months after initial admission her LFTs had returned to within normal limits.