A 51-year-old woman presented with dyspnea on exertion that had started 2 weeks earlier. Physical examination revealed only conjunctival pallor. Breast palpation revealed no obvious masses. Laboratory examination demonstrated severe anemia, with a hemoglobin level of 5.3 g/dL. Since the patient also had a very low platelet count of 31 × 103/mL, bone-marrow biopsy was performed to evaluate hematopoietic function. Pathological examination revealed bone-marrow carcinomatosis with widespread metastatic signet-ring cell carcinoma cells and very few hematopoietic cells. Immunohistochemical staining yielded positive results for mammaglobin A (Cosmo Bio, Tokyo, Japan) and estrogen receptor (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland), indicating that the metastases had originated in the breast . Neither mammography nor ultrasonography (US) revealed the primary tumor. Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) demonstrated bone-marrow metastases with diffuse 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in both vertebral bodies and pelvis . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both breasts finally showed a non-mass-enhancement (NME) lesion on the right side that was suspected to be the primary tumor . Neither second-look US nor US with elastography could reveal the lesion detected with MRI. MRI was one and only modality that could depict the primary breast cancer lesion. We, therefore, applied the RVS technique, which clearly revealed the primary cancer as a diffuse area of low echogenicity . Core needle biopsy was finally performed. The pathologic diagnosis was ILC that was positive for both estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor, with 1 + immunohistochemical staining for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 and a Ki-67 index of 5%.
We prefer chemotherapy as a primary therapy, because the cancer had spread systemically. Chemotherapy was started, along with red blood cell and platelet transfusions. The chemotherapeutic regimen consisted of intravenous paclitaxel 60 mg/m2 on days 1, 8, and 15 and intravenous bevacizumab 10 mg/kg on days 1 and 15, every 4 weeks. After 8 months of aggressive chemotherapy, the hemoglobin level and platelet count returned to normal. Levels of the tumor marker carbohydrate antigen 15–3, decreased from 1105 to 780 U/mL (normal range, < 35 U/mL). Anastrozole was initiated as adjuvant hormonal treatment. Approximately a year has passed since the initial cancer diagnosis with no progression identified.