A 33-year-old white woman with no significant past medical history developed right-sided sciatica during the third trimester of her pregnancy for which she received acupuncture on several occasions. One of the puncture locations was located on her back at the level of S2, 5cm to the right of midline, which corresponded to a position directly above her right sacroiliac (SI) joint space. One week after her last acupuncture treatment, she had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a healthy infant weighing 4.54kg (10lb). No epidural anesthesia was used. Five days postpartum, she developed rapidly worsening pain over her right buttock to the extent that she was unable to walk and was admitted to our hospital. She denied fever, chills, illicit drug use or trauma to the spine. Her temperature was 37.7 °C, heart rate 90/minute, and blood pressure 121/74mmHg on arrival. A physical examination revealed no swelling or erythema at her hip or spine, but was notable for pain on passive flexion, hyperextension, abduction, adduction, and external and internal rotation of her right hip. There were no other sites of inflammation and no cardiac murmur was heard.
Her white blood cell count (WBC) was 13.4, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 105, and C-reactive protein (CRP) 192.5. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her lumbosacral spine revealed significant fluid in her right SI joint associated with inflammatory changes extending through the posterior margins of her right iliopsoas musculature and right paraspinal musculature in addition to osteomyelitis changes in the adjacent iliac bone and sacrum. During this time, she developed a fever of 39 °C and she underwent a computed tomography (CT)-guided aspiration of her SI joint. Both blood and joint fluid cultures grew methicillin-sensitive S. aureus. Urine analysis and urine cultures were unremarkable and an echocardiogram did not reveal any valvular vegetations. She was treated with nafcillin administered intravenously; she had rapid improvement and was discharged home for completion of a 6-week course of antibiotic therapy. Since completion of therapy there has been no evidence of recurrence. Her SI joint tenderness had resolved and her hip pain had improved substantially; she was ambulating independently and laboratory markers of inflammation had dramatically improved.