A 63-year-old male diabetic patient presented to the emergency department (ED) on two consecutive episodes. In the first presentation, he reported chills and dysuria for a few days but was not febrile. He reported slight right flank pain. He had been seen in a private clinic a few days before this presentation. At that time, he was febrile and received antibiotics. The most important element in his medical history was a left nephrectomy done in 2007 following a complicated course of kidney stone and infection. Therefore, he was classified as a mild case of APN and was discharged home on oral antibiotics for seven days.
Three days later, he again presented to the ED. This time, he had high-grade fever (40.1° Celsius) and severe right flank pain. There was no frank hematuria, nausea, or vomiting. On examination he had severe tenderness of the right costovertebral angle. His laboratory results showed leukocytosis (20,000/microliter (μL) (reference range: 4,000–10,000/μL) with markedly elevated C-reactive protein (196 milligrams (mg)/L [<10 mg/L]) and procalcitonin (6 nanograms (ng)/mL [≤ 0.15 ng/mL]). Kidney ultrasound confirmed the left nephrectomy with compensatory hypertrophic right kidney and no gross abnormalities apart from a rim of perinephric fluid. The urinary bladder was well distended with normal wall thickness. There was no evidence of mass, sludge, or stone. The prostate was of normal volume.
Blood and urine cultures were taken in the ED, and the patient was admitted as a case of APN and started empirically on meropenem at a dose of 1 gram three times daily as his kidney function was normal (creatinine was 105 micromoles [μmol]/L; reference range: 62–115 μmol/L). After 48 hours of antibiotics, the patient remained febrile with no improvement of the costovertebral tenderness. At this time, we received the results of the urine and blood cultures, which revealed an extended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) Escherichia coli sensitive to meropenem. All these elements prompted a request for contrast-enhanced CT, which showed right renal ill-defined cortical hypodense areas with poor enhancement compatible with the diagnosis of multifocal bacterial nephritis .
The patient’s condition improved after another 48 hours of meropenem. We then discharged him on ertapenem since its once daily administration is more convenient for outpatient treatment than the three daily doses of meropenem. A repeat contrast-enhanced CT after a three-week course of antibiotics revealed a remarkable improvement of the kidney lesions . We decided to prescribe an additional week of ertapenem considering his severe condition and solitary kidney. After that, the patient was followed up monthly in the outpatient clinic and remained completely asymptomatic after six months of follow-up with normal kidney function.