An 18-month-old Caucasian girl was referred to our department after the fortuitous discovery of a renal mass. She presented with history of microcrania, cataract, and strabismus with no specific malformative syndrome. There was no family history of consanguinity, malformative or oncologic disease. She was operated on for her congenital cataract with uneventful course. She was treated by valproic acid for one episode of idiopathic epileptic crisis. On initial physical examination, hemodynamic constants and temperature were normal, we found a microcranium with cranial perimeter of 41 cm under 3 Standard Deviation (SD) with nothing to notice on the rest of the neurological examination. There was also no abdominal tenderness nor a palpable mass. On biological assessment: hematology, electrolytes, renal, and hepatic functions were normal aside from a polycythemia. The activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) or activated clotting time (ACT) was extended with a value of 63 s, prothrombin time was at 100%, and Rosner index was at 16.43%, which could be due to a lupus anticoagulant, although specific investigations ruled out this probability. Urine cytology and culture results were within normal limits, without hematuria. As part of an assessment for other malformations, an abdominal ultrasound was performed, which showed a mass arising within the left kidney.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a small left round solid central renal mass, hyperechoic, well defined, weakly vascularized without calcifications. It measured 26 × 28 mm.
CT scan of the abdomen showed a small round subcapsular tumor, arising from the medial part of the left kidney (28 × 27 × 27 mm). It was well defined and compressed the adjacent renal tissue. The tumor was not clearly enhanced in the early phase on CT. There were some areas of necrosis, but there was no evidence of metastatic disease . Wilms’ tumor was evoked, but the radiological characteristics of the mass were not conclusive enough. After an interdisciplinary discussion, the decision was to perform a CT-scan-guided biopsy of the tumor so that adequate treatment could be performed. The pathological examination concluded on a metanephric adenoma by showing a specimen composed of tightly packed tubules and ductular structures with little intervening stroma. There was no cytologic atypia. Mitotic figures were rare. There were no papillary areas. Knowing that nephron-sparing surgery could be safely performed thanks to the preoperative tumor biopsy findings, we decided to proceed with open left flank retroperitoneal conservative management.
A left flank retroperitoneal incision exposed the left kidney. The inspection showed a well-circumscribed nonencapsulated polylobed tumor. Its appearance was similar to that of normal kidney tissue. The tumor measured 30 × 20 × 30 mm with a noticeable cleavage plane. An easy wedge resection of the tumor was performed using the electric scalpel, ensuring perfect hemostasis and respecting the caliceal cavities.
Macroscopically, the tumor was well circumscribed and yellow–white and had an intact tegument with homogeneous and gray cutting surface . Microscopically, on hematoxylin–eosin staining, the tumor was composed of small, uniform, tubules and acini in loose scant stroma. The lining epithelial cells were uniform and small with hyperchromatic rare and small nuclei and scant acidophilic cytoplasm. No mitotic activity or necrosis was present . Wide clear surgical margins were identified between the kidney and the tumor. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positive immunoreactivity for vimentin and Wilms’ tumor 1 (WT1) and partially positive for CD56, CD57 and negative immunoreactivity for CK7, CK20, chromogranin, and synaptophysin. The final pathological diagnosis was metanephric adenoma of the left kidney.
Oncologists and surgeons recommended no further treatment. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on the fourth day. The patient was followed postoperatively by physical examination, abdominal ultrasound, and biological renal function every 3 months during the first year, and then every 6 months. The clinical, biological, and radiological follow-up was uneventful 4 years later.