A 70-year-old Japanese male was referred to our department for a diffusely spreading mass in the upper right pole of the renal parenchyma, which was observed on follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan 1 year after endoscopic submucosal dissection for rectal cancer. At the initial examination, there were no abnormalities in physical and laboratory findings. Contrast-enhanced, early-phase CT scan revealed an internal heterogeneous mass with poor contrast, and diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging showed a high signal intensity . However, no obvious metastases were observed. Percutaneous needle biopsy indicated the presence of poorly differentiated carcinoma, ductal carcinoma in situ, and spindle cell carcinoma in situ with sarcomatous changes. Therefore, a radical right nephrectomy was performed. Pathological examination of the kidney revealed the presence of CDC with sarcomatoid features and urothelial carcinoma. The gross findings demonstrated cysts containing small stones in part, and the urothelial carcinoma component in that area. The uroepithelial components were cytokeratin (CK)-AE1/AE3(+); CK7(+); CK20(+), partial; CK-34β1E12(+); GATA3(+); p63(+), partial and weak; and PAX8(−) . The CDC components were CK-AE1/AE3(+); CK7(+); CK20(−); CK-34β1E12(+), partial; GATA3(−); p63(+), partial and weak; and PAX8(+), partial . Spindle-shaped cells as well as hobnail patterns and carcinoma in situ were observed in the CDC tissue , and immunohistochemistry using an anti-PD-L1 (clone 28-8) antibody demonstrated that PD-L1 was highly expressed with a tumor proportion score of more than 10% . Despite the diagnosis of double cancer, we did not observe evident submucosal connective tissue invasion from the urothelial carcinoma component and therefore concluded that CDC was the primary cancer. The TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors (UICC7th) for this case was pT3aN0, venous invasion 1, lymphovascular invasion 0, Fuhrman nuclear grade 4.
Two months after the surgery, a follow-up CT scan showed multiple metastases in both lungs, right hilar lymph node, and the S6 segment of the right liver lobe. Nivolumab and ipilimumab combination therapy (fixed dose of 240 mg and 1 mg/kg body weight, respectively) was initiated in the third postoperative month. Fever was observed 1 day after ICI administration, and CT scan performed 3 days later showed interstitial pneumonia. Bronchoscopy was not performed, but after consultation with a pulmonologist, a diagnosis of drug-induced interstitial pneumonia was made and methylprednisolone (4 mg/kg/day) was administered. No further tumor treatment was provided after the initial administration of ICIs. However, the metastatic lesion showed CR to treatment within 6 months, and the CR was maintained after 3 years as evidenced by follow-up CT scans every 2 months . Interstitial pneumonia was treated with a gradual decrease in steroid dosage and terminated after 500 days; no flare-ups of pneumonia were observed on CT scans every 2 months for 3 years.