A 4 year-3 months old female neutered Great Dane presented with vague symptoms that included whining, tachypnoea and hyporexia. The patient, who was up to date with endo- and ecto-parasitic preventatives but not up to date with her vaccinations, had a history of mild chronic recurrent otitis. On presentation to the referring vets (RV) she was very nervous, had a rectal temperature of 39.9 C and mild discomfort on neck flexion sideways but not on dorso-or-ventroflexion; no other abnormalities were detected. She received a treatment trial with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (15 mg/kg every 12 h, for 10 days), gabapentin and carprofen but remained pyrexic. She subsequently became hyporexic and displayed a ‘praying position’ stance. Presence of haemoglobin in the patient’s urine (dipstick) led to a provisional diagnosis of urinary tract infection leading to extension of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (10 mg/kg every 12 h, for a further 4 days).
The patient presented as an emergency 4 weeks following initial presentation to the RV, with ongoing lethargy, hyporexia, ‘praying position’ stance and acute onset of third eyelid gland prolapse (also known as ‘cherry eye’) of her right eye. On examination, the patient’s heart rate was 148 beats per minute (bmp), respiratory rate was 30 breaths per minute (br.pm) and rectal temperature was 39.7°C. After careful examination and palpation no spinal, neck or joint pain was detected but she appeared sensitive when attempting to wide-open her mouth. Abdominal palpation was unrewarding. On thoracic auscultation, a previously undetected subtle grade II/VI diastolic heart murmur was noted at the left base of the heart; the rest of the thoracic auscultation was unremarkable. Mucous membranes were pink but tacky and the capillary refill time (CRT) was 2 s. Haematology revealed a haematocrit of 54%, increased white blood cell count 28.11 X 109/L (neutrophilia, left shift, normal range 6.0—17 X 109/L) and moderate thrombocytopenia 71 X 109/L (normal range 165 – 500 X 109/L). Serum chemistry and electrolytes were unremarkable and prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were within normal range. A fresh free-catch urine sample presented by the owner was submitted for culture; in house analysis revealed urine specific gravity of 1.060; urine dipstick revealed protein (2 +), ketones (1 +), blood (1 +), leukocytes (1 +) and pH of 7.5.
Echocardiology in the right parasternal long axis view revealed a hyperechoic, irregular triangular shaped lesion adhered to the ventricular aspect of the aortic valve measuring 22 mm in length . Colour flow Doppler identified aortic insufficiency, with a turbulent jet of aortic regurgitation. Continuous wave Doppler revealed a mildly increased left ventricular outflow velocity (2.94 m/s, normal velocity < 2 m/s). There was no evidence of a subvalvular ridge. The right parasternal short axis view at the level of the aortic root showed the hyperechoic lesion in the region of the left coronary cusp . The left ventricular diastolic diameter was slightly increased [(LVDd 5.7 cm, 1.83 normalised, range 1.35–1.73: LVDs 2.7 cm, 0.8 normalised, range 0.79–1.14) with increased fractional shortening (FS) of 50% (normal range 28 – 45%). The left atrium to aortic diameter ratio was slightly increased (ratio of 1 to 1.8, normal < 1.6). A provisional diagnosis of aortic valve endocarditis was made. A single 5 ml blood sample was aseptically collected from the left jugular vein, placed in blood culture medium and submitted for culture. A peripheral EDTA blood sample was submitted for Bartonella qPCR. Pending results, the patient was discharged on oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 15 mg/kg every 12 h, marbofloxacin 2 mg/kg once daily, paracetamol 10 mg/kg every 8 h and eye drops containing polymyxin B, neomycin and dexamethasone for her cherry eye. Urine culture from the free catch sample yielded a coliform growth which was resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid but sensitive to marbofloxacin. Bartonella PCR was negative. Following 10 days of incubation, blood cultures yielded moderate growth of aerobic Gram-positive filamentous rods. This gram-positive organism was further biochemically (using BioMerieux API Coryne profiling strip) identified as Actinomyces neuii subsp. anitratus.
The patient returned two weeks following discharge for further investigation; she was found to be normothermic, she had stopped displaying the praying position stance and her heart murmur had changed to a systolic, grade IV/VI at the base of the heart. Radiographs of her spine, head and chest were obtained and an abdominal ultrasound was carried out. A fresh urine sample was obtained via cystocentesis and submitted for culture. Arthrocentesis from multiple peripheral joints (right and left carpi and stifles, left tarsus) were performed for cytological examination and culture. The most significant findings from the radiographic study included cervical articular process joint osteoarthritis, possible C5/C6 intervertebral disc space narrowing and multiple sites of mild thoracic and lumbar spondylosis deformans. No radiographic evidence of dental, auricular, pulmonary disease or diskospondylitis were present. The abdominal ultrasonographic study was unremarkable. No evidence of inflammatory arthropathy was noted on cytology and both the urine collected via cystocentesis and joint cultures yielded no growths.