An 8-month-old African male, born by spontaneous vaginal delivery from nonconsanguineous parents, was admitted at our hospital because of persistent eczematous skin rashes since day 9 of life. The rash started on the face, later progressing to involve the entire body except the palms and soles of the feet. The skin lesions were itchy with obvious peeling. He had significant improvement of the symptoms while using steroid creams, with flares upon cessation.
He also presented with a history of recurrent purulent nasal discharge with the first episode being at 4 months of age. Four episodes were reported since the onset of symptoms, which were at least a month apart, all being treated with a course of oral antibiotics.
Additionally, he had three episodes of bilateral purulent ear discharge starting at 4 months of age, which were associated with an on and off low-grade fever. Ever since, he had been experiencing multiple episodes of similar symptoms at least once a month.
There is a history of death of a male sibling at 8 months of age who had similar symptoms to the index patient. The only sibling who is alive is an 8-year-old female who is healthy with no similar symptoms. Furthermore, there is history of early pregnancy loss at 2 months of gestational age, but the sex of the abortus was not determined.
His mother received adequate prenatal care. He was delivered at term via caesarean section owing to abnormal lie with birth weight (BWT) of 3.5 kg with no obvious perinatal insult. After 72 hours they were discharged home with no reported complications.
Immunization was up to date; however, the Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine scar was not visible. Although he had weight faltering, his developmental milestones were appropriate for his age.
On examination, he had extensive confluence of hypopigmented patches with eczematous papules on the trunk, extremities, and scalp, as well as crusted plaques and excoriations on the periauricular area and skin folds. The lesions spared the palms, soles of the feet, and mucocutaneous membrane .
On otoscopic examination, there was purulent discharge visible on the external auditory meatus, with an intact keratinized tympanic membrane but with loss of the normal reflex.
Cardiovascular, respiratory, nervous ,and abdominal systems examination was normal.
Blood was taken for complete blood count (CBC), and the results showed mild normocytic normochromic anemia, low platelet count, and low mean platelet volume (MPV) . A peripheral blood smear showed microthrombocytopenia . HIV serological test was negative. Immunoglobulin assay revealed significantly elevated immunoglobulin E (IgE), elevated immunoglobulin A (IgA), and immunoglobulin G (IgG) with normal immunoglobulin M (IgM) .
Given the clinical and laboratory presentation of our patient and his biological sex, we had a high index of suspicion of WAS. A dried blood spot was sent to Rostock, Germany, to test for WAS gene using CentoXone Solo [including next-generation sequencing (NGS)-based copy number variation (CNV) analysis]. A hemizygous pathogenic variant was identified in the WAS gene (NM_000377.2:c.403C>T). The WAS variant c.403C>T p.(Gln135*) creates a premature stop codon. Loss of function is the reported disease-associated mechanism for WAS.
The patient’s eczematous skin lesions were treated with hydrocortisone cream 1%. Mupirocin and clotrimazole creams were applied on skin folds. Antihistamine cream was given to curb severe itching.
Ear painting with cream (clotrimazole + gentamycin + betamethasone) was done on a weekly basis. The patient was discharged after a week with prophylactic oral cotrimoxazole 240 mg once daily (OD) and hematinics. Live attenuated vaccines (LAV), such as measles–rubella, were deferred for our patient.
Given the fact that our patient was coming from upcountry 330 miles away, we advised them to a monthly clinic in a nearby facility and to our clinic once every 3 months. In follow-up clinics, the patient’s platelet level kept decreasing gradually, but no bleeding tendencies were noticed initially. Hemoglobin levels remained low with high white cell count. The patient was maintained on prophylactic oral clotrimazole and hematinics.
In the days leading up to his death at a peripheral hospital, he presented with critically low levels of hemoglobin and thrombocytes. He had severe epistaxis and gum bleeding. He received multiple units of blood transfusion per body weight. He had torrential bleeding for several hours; however, platelet concentrates were not immediately available. Through verbal autopsy, we were able to establish the possible cause of death to be hypovolemic shock.