A 69-year-old Chinese woman was presented with left waist pain for 1 month. She had no fever or other pain. There were no abnormal results in the blood routine examination, renal function, and urine routine examination. And the result of urine culture was negative. A preoperative computerized tomography (CT) scan and intravenous pyelogram (IVP) revealed bilateral incomplete duplex kidney and ureter . The stone of calyceal diverticulum was located in the upper kidney of left incomplete duplex kidneys by CT scan . In the meanwhile, IVP and CT scan revealed that a ureterocele was located in the left ureterovesical junction .
The patient had hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus for 5 years. The risks of surgery and general anesthesia were relatively higher. The diameter of the stone in the calyceal diverticulum was 12 mm by CT scan and it’s difficult for the stone to pass out spontaneously. The patient and her family wished to remove the stone because they were extremely worried about stone-related complications. Moreover, they wouldn’t like to perform second operation and anesthesia due to relatively higher risks. Therefore, we planned to make an attempt to remove the ureterocele and calyceal diverticulum stone in one operation.
The contraindications for surgery in such cases mainly included untreated urinary tract infection, severe urinary tract stricture, and anesthetic contraindications like cardiopulmonary dysfunction. Relevant examinations such as lung-function testing and Holter electrocardiogram were conducted. We also paid special attention to the results of urine routine and urine culture. When we made sure all these examination results were normal, we decided to perform the surgery.
Flexible ureteroscopy with the holmium laser was conducted for solving the ureterocele and stone of calyceal diverticulum. To begin with, the ureterocele was confirmed in view of ureteroscopy and the holmium laser was used for the resection of ureterocele. The ureterocele resection surgery was completed in 10 min and no complications like bleeding occurred intraoperatively. Then, we made an attempt to remove the stone of calyceal diverticulum. During the operation, we found the calyx neck of calyceal diverticulum where the stone was located had obvious stenosis. It took us a lot of effort to find out the stone because of calyx neck stenosis. Fortunately, the stone was discovered when calyx neck stenosis was incised internally by holmium laser. After dilatation of the narrow calyx neck, a 200-μm holmium laser through flexible ureteroscope was used to make the stone fragmented gradually and carefully. The parameter of the holmium laser was set at a power of 0.8 J and a pulse frequency of 10 Hz. Higher power and frequency might cause renal damage and hemorrhage because the calyceal diverticulum stone was near the edge of the kidney and the renal cortex was thin by CT scan. In order to prevent the formation of ureteral steinstrasse postoperatively, a nitinol stone basket was used to remove large stone fragments as soon as possible, and the smaller powdered fragments were flushed out of the diverticulum using an automated irrigation pump. At last, the pelvicalyceal system was examined once again to ensure no large remaining stones. The overall surgical time was controlled in 60 min for the purpose of preventing postoperative infections. A double-J ureteral stent was inserted and remained in place for 1 month. The symptom of left lumbar back pain disappeared post the operation and no complications were developed during the placement of the stent. There were no stone residents observed by CT scan before removing the ureteral stent 1 month later .