A 56-year-old male was admitted to the Department of Urology Surgery with left iliac pain associated with nausea, vomiting, and irritative lower urinary symptoms. The pain was colicky in nature, responding well to analgesics, and had been occurring intermittently over the previous few years. The patient had a medical history of recurrent lower urinary infections that were diagnosed and successfully treated without the need for hospitalization. The patient’s family history is significant for SIT, with his daughter and his brother both diagnosed with this anatomical variation. The patient’s parents were not consanguineous, while the patient and his wife are consanguineous. A chest X-ray showed dextrocardia . Ultrasound and computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated SIT of all the abdominal organs, with an ectopic pelvic kidney on the left. The left Kidney was located in the pelvis alongside the vertebrae L3–L5, with one large pelvic stone (1*2 cm) and 3 smaller stones (≤ 1 cm) in the lower pole calyx shown on CT KUB . This led to a distended left renal pelvis, along with thickening (4 mm) of its wall, indicating chronic inflammation. Ultrasound of the urinary tract showed distension following an obstruction at the left ureteropelvic junction. A renal scan using Tc-99 m diethylene-triamine-pentaacetate revealed that the relative function of the left kidney is 15.5% of the total function of both kidneys, with a glomerular filtration rate of 14 ml/min. There were no associated comorbidities or other congenital anomalies. A left nephrectomy via open surgery was planned due to extensive renal damage and limited access to laparoscopic tools. During the surgery, the pelvic ectopic kidney was found to be anteriorly rotated with the anterior renal pelvis and several abnormally located blood vessels. A Gibson surgical incision was made, retroperitoneal access was obtained, left ureter and renal vessels were isolated and clamped, the left kidney was dissected and removed successfully. Left kidney’s pathological studies reported chronic interstitial nephritis and hemorrhage, along with Florid Von Brunn’s nests and squamous metaplasia in the pelvis and calyces, without evidence of neoplasm. The patient’s condition was very good on the 3-monthly follow-up visits, with significant improvement in renal function and no serious complications.