A 58-year-old woman, without significant past medical history, presented with a 3-week history of shortness of breath associated with facial and neck swelling. On examination, she was found to be haemodynamically stable with distended neck veins, flushed face and blue tinge to lips. Laboratory studies revealed elevated C-reactive protein (69 mg/L; normal range 0–10) and cardiac troponin (150 ng/L; normal range <11.6) levels. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with an otherwise normal heart and mediastinal contour ( 2).
Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram ruled out pulmonary embolism but demonstrated an irregular mass in the right atrium with a moderate pericardial effusion . Whole-body CT did not detect a primary lesion elsewhere.
Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a large echogenic mass in the right atrium with evidence of vascularity on contrast echo, protruding into the right ventricular cavity, causing mild tricuspid inflow obstruction, and superior vena cava (SVC) obstruction . A large global pericardial effusion with signs of mild haemodynamic compromise and a large left pleural effusion were also seen.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed for further assessment and for tissue characterization. A sinister-looking ill-defined soft-tissue mass was seen infiltrating the right atrial free wall and extending into the atrioventricular groove, infiltrating the right ventricular anterior and inferior walls. The left ventricular inferior wall was also infiltrated by the mass. Cardiac magnetic resonance velocity mapping demonstrated caudal flow in the azygos vein, suggestive of SVC obstruction . The mass was encasing the aortic root, the right coronary artery and the main pulmonary artery without invasion or compression . There was a lobulated extension of the mass into the right atrial cavity with limited extension to the suprahepatic inferior vena cava. The pulmonary veins appeared patent. There was possible involvement of the base of the anterior tricuspid valve leaflet, but no inflow obstruction. The mass was isointense on T1 weighted images and mildly hyperintense on T2 weighted images . There was mild enhancement of the mass during the first pass perfusion and heterogeneous enhancement on the early and late phase post gadolinium images . Anatomical location and tissue characteristics by magnetic resonance imaging were highly suggestive for malignancy. The CMR features were suggestive of lymphoma rather than any other malignant tissue, but tissue biopsy was recommended for confirmation.
Cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) imaging with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) after proper dietary preparation (prolonged fast and a no carbohydrate diet) was performed to determine if the mass was indeed malignant. The PET imaging features were in keeping with a large intensely metabolically active irregular mass in the right side of the heart with further extension into the aortic wall, main pulmonary trunk and left ventricular pericardium . There were also metabolically active lesions in the spleen, possibly kidneys, thoracic and abdominal lymph nodes, likely to be due to distant metastases.
Endomyocardial biopsy of the right ventricle was performed. Fragments of myocardium with sheet-like proliferation of small to moderately large malignant cells with large nuclei and minimal cytoplasm were detected. Numerous mitoses and focal necrosis were also noted. Histology was diagnostic for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of probable non-germinal centre phenotype (MUM1+) corresponding to a stage IIIE DLBCL. The clinical course was complicated by complete heart block requiring urgent permanent pacemaker implantation. Six cycles of R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine and prednisolone) chemotherapy in addition to previous R-CVP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine sulfate, and prednisone) treatment were completed without complications. A complete metabolic response with no residual disease was documented by a PET/CT at 6 months after the initial diagnosis .