A 63-year-old woman, with arterial hypertension as the only relevant medical history, presented with a sudden binocular diplopia. Right 6th nerve palsy was evidenced on physical examination at admission. AngioCT revealed a right ICCA aneurysm with signs of partial thrombosis without evidence of rupture . Patient’s symptoms worsened to complete cavernous syndrome 5-days later, and a new AngioCT showed progression of the thrombosis with discrete mass effect , so steroids and antiplatelet therapy were initiated. Angiography on admission confirmed the presence of a giant aneurysm of the anterior portion of the right ICCA [-]. Since endovascular techniques seemed inappropriate due to the partially intraluminal thrombosis and very wide neck, PAO was considered as the optimal treatment choice. A balloon test occlusion (BTO) was performed to evaluate the preoperative risk of ischemia without relevant findings and no evidence of retrograde filling of the aneurysm by anterior or posterior communicating arteries [ and ]. Then, the patient underwent surgical ligation of the cervical CCA at the level of C6 with a 3/0-silk, and anticoagulation was started 3 days after surgery. Symptoms of cavernous sinus syndrome resolved with the exception of 6th nerve palsy during postoperative recovery. A cerebral magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed decrease of the size of the aneurysm lumen and no ischemic lesions were detected .
Nine months later, and without new neurological symptoms, signs of aneurysm growth were detected in a serial MRA , and a new angiography was planned. Right CCA angiogram showed the therapeutic occlusion of the right ICA, but the right vertebral angiogram demonstrated proximal partial recanalization of the ICCA aneurysm. Collateral supply was explained from the external carotid artery (ECA) through the occipital artery with an inverse flow to the ICA . Therefore, surgical occlusion of the cervical ICA at the level of the ansa cervicalis of the hypoglossal nerve with a 0-silk was performed, and intraoperative Doppler ultrasound revealed no efferent flow in ICA. Postoperative new angiography confirmed the total occlusion of the aneurysm . After 6 years of follow-up, we have not detected refilling or thromboembolic events .