A 53-year-old male presented with a 14-day history of mild pain, redness, swelling, watery discharge, and a foreign-body sensation in his left eye (OS) following trauma with a wooden stick in a rural, semi-arid region. He arrived accompanied by his relatives in a personal vehicle. He had initially been treated by an ophthalmologist at a secondary-level eye care unit using topical natamycin 5% eye drops and moxifloxacin Q3 in the affected eye. However, despite 14 days of treatment, his symptoms had not abated, and he was referred to our university hospital for further management. The patient had an 18-year history of diabetes mellitus and was maintained on metformin 500 mg Q8 and insulin. Upon consult, his last HbA1c level was 9.3%.
On examination, the patient's best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in the right eye (OD) and 20/200 OS. The intraocular pressure (IOP) measured by a Tono-Pen (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was 15 mmHg OD and 14 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination (Topcon Healthcare, Oakland, NJ, USA), OS, revealed a diffusely congested conjunctiva and ring-shaped, grayish-white, central stromal infiltrates (1 × 2 mm) with an overlying epithelial defect and surrounding corneal edema. A corneal lesion with feathery margin and Descemet's membrane folding with a 1-mm hypopyon was also noted, OS (A). Anterior chamber reaction was present, with 2+ cells, flair, and a hazy view of the fundus. B-scan ultrasonography of the OS was anechoic. OD examination was unremarkable. Differential diagnoses included bacterial, viral, Acanthamoebal, or fungal keratitis; a provisional clinical diagnosis of fungal keratitis, OS was made. The patient was subsequently admitted for further management.
After applying topical anesthesia and ensuring aseptic precautions, the primary investigator (an attending ophthalmologist) took multiple scrapings from the corneal lesion's surface using a number 15 scalpel blade. The specimen was first smeared onto glass slides for Gram staining and a 10% KOH wet mount. Scrapings obtained were also inoculated directly onto solid media, namely blood agar, chocolate agar, Löwenstein-Jenson agar, and Sabouraud Dextrose Agar (SDA). These specimens were then transported to the microbiology laboratory for microscopy and fungal culture.
The patient was treated with topical natamycin 5% Q4 and atropine sulfate 1% eye drops Q8, alternative fortified antibiotics (ceftazidime and vancomycin) eye drops Q30 min, and intravenous paracetamol. He was monitored daily by a consultant ophthalmologist, and his diabetes was kept under strict control. Clinical improvement was noted after 2 days, with reduced conjunctival congestion and corneal infiltrates, as well as resolution of the hypopyon. This treatment regimen was based on our institution's guidelines for fungal keratitis treatment.
On the 5th day post-hospitalization, the microbiology report showed growth of a whitish-to-brownish cottony mold, appearing rapidly on SDA at 25 °C (B). Microscopically, thin, septate hyaline hyphae without conidia or conidiophores were noted. Arthroconidia alternating with empty cells were also present (C). All other cultures were negative. Primary identification suggested a Malbranchea species; final identification required confirmation by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry. After diagnosis, the fortified antibiotics eye drops and natamycin were discontinued and topical voriconazole Q4 (1 mg/mL) and moxifloxacin 0.5% eye drops Q6 were started. Careful monitoring and strict diabetes control were maintained.
Fourteen days post-admission, despite treatment adherence and careful monitoring, the patient's clinical status progressively worsened. Repeat corneal scraping revealed a Malbranchea species on SDA culture. Itraconazole 200 mg was administered orally for 2 weeks, and topical amphotericin B (1 mg/mL) Q2 was also started.
On day 36 after hospitalization, repeat cultures were found to be negative. His symptoms had also resolved; the keratitis was believed to be controlled. He was thereafter discharged on topical amphotericin B (1 mg/mL) Q4 and two eye drops of prednisolone acetate 1% Q6 tapered over 6 and 4 weeks, respectively. He was also instructed about the importance of treatment compliance. The patient's eye and diabetes control were monitored weekly in the outpatient setting.
Four months after discharge, the patient returned with symptom recurrence despite treatment compliance. He had an HbA1c level of 8.5%. Again, he reported ocular pain, redness, and a foreign-body sensation; examination showed a 0.5mm hypopyon. This time, however, the corneal scrapings’ fungal culture was negative. The patient was treated with itraconazole 200 mg Q12 for 2 weeks and topical amphotericin B (1 mg/mL) Q4 for approximately 6 months. Over this period, the patient recovered without symptom recurrence.
At the patient's last follow-up, the HbA1c level was 7.5%, and BCVA was 20/30 with an IOP of 12 mmHg, OS. Slit-lamp examination revealed a corneal opacity without an epithelial defect or infiltration. His anterior chamber was clear, and the pupil was round and reactive to light. No ciliary congestion was identified with resolution of the keratitis (D). The patient was grateful he had successfully endured his long treatment course without residual visual deficits.