A 58-year-old North African man presented with complaints of dyspnea and right-sided chest pain for the previous two months. He had a 25-year history of tobacco use, smoking one pack of cigarettes per day for 25 years, but had no additional risk factors. Three liters of blood-stained fluid was removed from the right side of his chest in another hospital and then was referred to our hospital for further evaluation and management. A biochemical analysis of the pleural fluid revealed that the nucleated cell count was 7800/mm3 (23% neutrophils and 71% lymphocytes), total protein concentration was 32 g/dL (a pleural fluid-to-serum ratio of 0.52), lactate dehydrogenase level was 460 IU/L, and glucose level was 110 mg/dL. The pH of the pleural fluid was 7.30. These findings were consistent with exudative pleural effusion. The results of pleural fluid cytology were negative for malignant cells. The pleural fluid was cultured for bacteria (aerobic and anaerobic), fungi, and mycobacteria, and the results were negative. During a clinical examination, the breath sounds were decreased on the right side. A chest radiograph showed the presence of an opaque right hemithorax, and the mediastinum was pushed toward the right . Computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a right-sided cavity with thick and irregular walls extending throughout the pleural space in the right lower lobe, pleural effusion, and a partially collapsed right lung . An interventional radiologist performed a transthoracic needle pleural biopsy, which revealed a mesenchymal lesion consistent with a smooth muscle cell-type lesion. On microscopic examination, the tumor consisted of neoplastic spindle cell proliferation arranged in interlacing bundles with hyperchromatic nuclei and frequent mitoses (greater than 10 mitoses per 10 high-power fields) . No areas of hemorrhage or necrosis were seen. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining was performed. The panel of monoclonal antibodies consisted of cytokeratin 5/6, 7, and 20, vimentin, smooth muscle actin, calretinin, CD-117, TTF1, EMA, CD-34, and S-100 protein. The tumor cells were positive for vimentin and smooth muscle actin strongly and uniformly . These cells were immunonegative for all other markers tested, ruling out carcinoma (cytokeratin), sarcomatous mesothelioma (calretinin), solitary fibrous tumor (CD-34), and neurogenic sarcoma (S-100 protein) . After the pathological diagnosis, a CT scan of the whole body was performed but did not reveal any tumors. The authors diagnosed the lesion as primary pleural leiomyosarcoma. However, the tumor grew rapidly, with pleural effusion. Our patient was treated only by palliative care. He died one month later due to acute respiratory failure.