A 20-year-old Japanese man presented with a 2-month history of fever, night sweats, and mild weight loss. He had no rash or palpable peripheral lymphadenopathy. Laboratory tests revealed anemia (hemoglobin, 9.5 g/dL), leukopenia (white blood cell, 2.4 × 109/L), and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH, 1175 U/L; normal range 120–250 U/L). The EBV-DNA level was extremely high in the whole blood (4.0 × 106 copies/mL). Abnormal cells were not detected in the peripheral blood (PB). Other laboratory data are shown in Table . Chest radiography showed bilateral pulmonary lesions predominantly in the upper lung. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple nodules diffusely mixed with consolidation and ground-glass opacity pattern in both lungs . Enlargement of the mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes and hepatosplenomegaly were also observed. Positron emission tomography (PET)/CT showed abnormal uptake of 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in multiple lung lesions, as well as the mediastinal and hilar lymph nodes, bilateral humeral bones, lumbar spine, liver, and spleen. The maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of lung nodules (median, 4.7; range, 3.2–9.6) was lower than that of hilar lymph nodes (median, 16.7; range, 7.5–18.3) .
Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgical lung biopsy (VATS) was performed the next day. Visual inspection revealed dark purple patchy lesions on the whole lung surface, and specimens were obtained from the left S6 and S1 + 2. Pathological examination showed large-sized atypical cell infiltration localized mainly in the lumina and perivascular areas of the distended vessels beneath the pleura and in the pulmonary parenchyma . These abnormal cells had irregularly contoured nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and narrow cytoplasm. The tumor cells were positive for cytoplasmic CD3ε, CD56, and perforin, and negative for cytokeratin, CD20, and CD30 by immunohistochemistry. EBV infection was detected by in situ hybridization analysis for EBV-encoded RNA. The Ki-67 proliferation index showed 70–80% nuclear staining. T-cell receptor γ chain rearrangement was not proven, which was consistent with an NK-cell origin. Based on these findings, he was diagnosed with ENKL (Stage IV). The bone marrow was normocellular with an increase in activated histiocytes containing engulfed red blood cells, nuclear debris, and platelets, but no neoplastic cell infiltration was observed. This finding was compatible with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH).
One week after admission, he received combination SMILE regimen chemotherapy (dexamethasone, methotrexate, ifosfamide, l-asparaginase, and etoposide). After two cycles of SMILE, complete remission (CR) was confirmed by FDG-PET/CT, and EBV-DNA became undetectable in the PB. Subsequently, he received a single unit CBT after myeloablative conditioning of cyclophosphamide (120 mg/kg) plus 12 Gy total-body irradiation. Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis consisted of tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil. On day 16, he achieved successful neutrophil engraftment. On day 21, he developed biopsy-proven gastro-intestinal acute GVHD (grade II), which gradually improved with prednisolone at doses of 0.5 mg/kg daily. On day 88, he was discharged in complete remission with no other major complication. Four months later, he developed mild cutaneous chronic GVHD limited to the head and neck, which could be managed with topical steroids. He has been alive with continuous CR for 1 year after diagnosis.