A 13-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department complaining of recurrent attacks of severe headaches for 1-month duration. The headache was associated with dizziness, blurred vision, nausea, and vomiting. Despite the chronic mild headache, the patient asserted that she had never experienced pain similar to this before. The patient reported no personal and/or family history of cancer, any acute, repeated, or discontinued medications, any allergies, any genetic or psychosocial issues, and had a free past surgical history. There was no history of trauma. Upon admission, physical assessment and routine laboratory evaluation, including a complete blood count and metabolic panel, were unremarkable. The initial brain neuroimaging was performed with a nonenhanced computed tomography scan and revealed a hypodense mass located superior to the cerebellum and posterior to the midbrain. MRI showed a heterogeneous mass demonstrating low T1, high fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)/T2 signal, and no definite diffusion restriction measuring 3.5×2.5×3 cm, resulting in compression over the cerebral aqueduct, which appears effaced with no cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow through the occluded duct. MRI also revealed a moderate supratentorial ventricular dilatation with periventricular edema . The pineal gland could not be clearly identified. A pineal gland tumor was suspected. MRI of the spine showed no metastatic lesions. The patient was admitted to the department of neurosurgery and underwent an endoscopic third ventriculostomy under general anesthesia. Five days later, microscopic occipital craniotomy via a supracerebellar approach for total resection of the penial gland lesion was performed. The procedure was performed by a consultant at the neurosurgery department at a private hospital. The resected lesion was sent for routine histopathology, which showed a tumor with moderate cellularity arranged in a pseudo-rosette and sheet patterns, consisting of cells that are comparatively uniform in appearance with a weak eosinophilic cytoplasm, oval nuclei, and granular chromatin. The mitotic index was low. Immunohistochemical staining showed positivity for synaptophysin and KI67 . In light of these findings, a PPTID was diagnosed. Postoperative MRI showed no residues of enhancing lesions and total relief of the obstructive hydrocephalus. The patient reported significant improvement in headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and visual disturbances. She was started on a radiotherapy regimen as well as platinum plus etoposide chemotherapy. The patient adhered to and tolerated the provided advice, avoiding vigorous exercise and heavy lifting. She also had a good tolerance to chemotherapy agents and was followed up for 2 months without any reported adverse events or complications.