This was a 56-year-old man of Black ethnicity and Ivorian nationality without any relevant past medical history, who consulted for abdominal pain with an abrupt obstipation of solids and gas for 2 days. The physical examination displayed a patient in good general condition. There was abdominal distension associated with tympanism. The rectal examination was normal, and examination of the other organs was normal. The lymph node areas were normal. Abdominal X-rays revealed dilated bowel loops with fluid levels consistent with descending colonic obstruction. An exploratory laparotomy was indicated. Numerous polyploid formations of the left colon and sigmoid were palpated, and the largest obstructed the colon lumen. A subtotal colectomy was performed with reconstruction via an ileocolostomy. There were no apparent signs of polyposis in the distal sigmoid and rectum. The surgical specimen was sent to the anatomic and cytologic pathology department of the teaching hospital of Treichville (Ivory Coast). Macroscopy of the surgical specimen showed multiple polyploid formations in the colonic mucosa . Microscopic examination after standard paraffin embedding techniques identified a diffuse lymphoid proliferation of the submucosa, made of small lymphoid cells with a hyperchromatic crenelated nucleus. . These features suggested a lymphomatous polyposis of MALT lymphoma type, either lymphocytic lymphoma type or mantle cell lymphoma type. Immunohistochemical analysis showed the positivity of the tumor to CD20, CD5, Bcl2, and cyclin D1, while it was negative to CD10 and CD23. The Ki67 proliferation index was 25%. . In view of the morphological and immunohistochemical results, we made the diagnosis of primary mantle cell lymphomatous polyposis. The clinic-radiological assessment classified our patient at stage II according to the Ann Arbor classification modified by Cheson et al. . The patient received chemotherapy according to the cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP) protocol associated with rituximab. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient has maintained a good general condition without recurrence.