A 59-year-old woman was admitted because of high blood glucose for 25 years, maintenance hemodialysis for 7 years, and recurrent dizziness and fatigue for more than 2 years.
Approximately 2 years ago, the patient suffered from recurrent dizziness, chest discomfort, and weakness of both lower extremities, but had no hematemesis, black stool, bone pain, or gingival bleeding. She was in poor spirits, had a poor appetite, and was sleeping badly, which deeply influenced her daily life. She was hospitalized several times because the dizziness was unresolved, and the weakness in both lower extremities worsened.
She had been diagnosed as having diabetes mellitus for 25 years and grade 3 hypertension for more than 10 years, and she received subcutaneous injections of insulin before meals and bedtime. She also took levamlodipine benzenesulfonate (5 mg), metoprolol tartrate tablets (25 mg), and prazosin hydrochloride (1 mg) daily, and calcitriol and materials for hematopoiesis (iron, folic acid, and vitamin B 12) were administered. Her blood pressure and blood glucose were well-controlled.
Approximately 7 years ago, she underwent an arteriovenous fistula surgery and began hemodialysis (3 times per week). In the past 2 years, she had frequent blood transfusions (once every 1 to 2 mo) because of severe anemia.
The patient’s personal and family history was unremarkable.
The patient presented with the following vital signs: Body temperature, 36.3 °C; blood pressure, 135/80 mmHg; pulse rate, 75 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min. She was chronic and ill-looking with an anemic appearance. She had clear breathing sounds in both lungs. Her heart rate was 75 bpm, with a normal rhythm, and no other abnormalities were noted.
Hematological examination revealed an erythrocyte count of 1.58 × 1012/L, hemoglobin (Hb) level of 54 g/L, platelet count of 80 × 109/L, and ferritin of 4218.40 ng/mL . The weekly dose ESA-to-Hb ratio was calculated as an index of ESA responsiveness, and basal state was 35.6 UI weekly/kg/g Hb.
The results of the first bone marrow biopsy showed that she had bone marrow hyperplasia. The proportion of erythroids, primarily including polychromatic normoblasts and orthochromolatic normoblasts, was increased. The morphological characteristics of the granulocytes and erythroids were normal.
Reticulocyte tests had the following results: Total reticulocyte count, 0.019 × 109/L; Immature reticulocyte fraction, 10.7%; low fluorescent reticulocytes, 89.3%; and middle fluorescent reticulocytes, 10.3%.
A cluster of differentiation (CD) tests was performed on CD55 and CD59. In peripheral red blood cells, the levels of CD55 and CD59 were both 97%, while in blood granulocytes, the levels of CD55 and CD59 were both 96%. Flow cytometry was used to diagnose paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. Flow cytometry assays were mainly based on the detection of CD59 (membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis) and CD55 (decay accelerating factor) on red blood cells, which provided an estimation of the haemolysis severity. By detecting the lack of CD55 and CD59 on the cell surface, it can be used as the most direct evidence for the diagnosis of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Bone puncture was performed again, and no obvious abnormalities were found in the bone marrow smear and by fluorescence in situ hybridization
Genetic tests showed that the patient carried a splice site mutation c.2408 + 1 G > A (low frequency hybrid, 5.21% of mutation frequency, sequencing depth, 2455 X) in the DNMT3A gene, which was deemed associated with myeloid hematological system diseases and a bad prognosis.
The antigen results related to autoimmune thrombocytopenia, coagulation test, cardiac biomarkers, thyroid function tests, and other blood biochemistry were within normal ranges.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed diffuse lesions in renal parenchyma on both sides. Cardiac ultrasound images showed heart changes caused by hypertension. Chest-computed tomography scans detected recurrent pneumonia, bilateral diffuse exudation, and pleural effusion. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that foreign objects were deposited in the liver and spleen, and the patient was suspected to have iron overload.