A 55-year-old female of Chinese origin presented with sudden onset of headache and left orbital pain without any history of head trauma a month ago. She also suffered from progressive left-sided exophthalmos and diplopia since then. Physical examination on admission demonstrated left-sided pulsatile orbital bruit, chemosis, and abducens nerve paresis . This patient had a history of surgery for femoral shaft fracture 3 years ago, but it was decided this was probably irrelevant to the present complaint. Computed tomography showed an enlarged left superior ophthalmic vein (SOV). Left ICA angiography revealed a left-sided CCF associated with a ruptured PPTA aneurysm, with major drainage to the ipsilateral SOV . Vertebral angiography also revealed a retrograde blood flow of PPTA from BA to CS .
Endovascular embolization with detachable coils and Onyx-18 liquid embolic system (Medtronic-ev3, Minneapolis, MN, USA) by a transarterial approach was planned. Under general anesthesia, 4,000 units of heparin were intravenously administered to the patient. A 6F Envoy guiding catheter (Codman & Shurtleff, Inc., Raynham, MA, USA) was introduced through a femoral sheath into the petrous segment of the left ICA. Under an optimal projection for PPTA emitting from left ICA , an Echelon-10 microcatheter (Medtronic-ev3, Minneapolis, MN, USA) guided by a Synchro2 microguidewire (Stryker, Salt Lake, Utah, USA) was directed into the PPTA aneurysm which was confirmed by super-selective angiography . Partial embolization of fistula and proximal ruptured PPTA aneurysm exhibited the PPTA trajectory more obviously than untreated . Finally, the fistula and aneurysm were completely embolized with four Axium detachable coils (Medtronic-PLC, Dublin, Ireland) followed by a 1.6 ml Onyx-18 liquid embolic system, while the CS and PPTA were well-preserved .
The left orbital bruit and chemosis of the patient subsided immediately after embolization, while residul mild abducens nerve paresis lasted for a month. There is no focal neurological deficit during hospitalization. Four-month follow-up angiography demonstrated complete obliteration of the fistula and PPTA aneurysm. However, the preserved PPTA vanished , but the patient had no neurological deficit. No evidence of recurrence was observed during the 1-year clinical follow-up.