A 39-year-old male general worker sustained a compression injury to his right hand in the dorsiflexion position while pushing a heavy object that was rolling down. Physical examination of the injury revealed noticeable swelling of the entire hand, palpable high skin tension, numbness in each finger, and a positive Tinel sign at the wrist; the pain was elicited on palpating the CMC joint. Owing to the swelling and pain, active mobilisation of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints was limited. The mobility of the wrist joint was normal, and the blood circulation in the fingertips was good.
We considered the CMC joint space as a line, the metacarpal base was below the line, the distal carpal bones were on the line, and the middle finger and the capitate bone were the centre line. The angle between the base of the first metacarpal bone and the hamate bone was considered the diagonal angle. Radiography of the right hand revealed fracture and dislocation of the bases of the first and second metacarpals and enlarged spaces at the bases of the third and fourth metacarpals (anteroposterior radiograph, Fig. a); dorsal displacement of the base of the fourth metacarpal with compressed fracture fragments of the hamate bone (oblique radiograph, Fig. b); and indistinguishable dorsal dislocation of the CMC joint (lateral radiograph, Fig. c).
Based on the injury mechanism and physical examination results, injury to the third CMC joint or even the fifth CMC joint was suspected. Because the aforementioned radiographic examination could not detect all injuries, computed tomography (CT) was performed. CT confirmed the dorsal dislocation of the third CMC joint . The fifth CMC joint seemed normal, which was confirmed intraoperatively.
The patient underwent open reduction and internal fixation under brachial plexus anaesthesia 10 days later. After the Bennett fracture was reduced and clamped, two Kirschner wires were used to fix the fractured end from the radial side of the distal end of the metacarpal fracture to the trapezium bone. The fracture of the base of the second metacarpal was comminuted; however, there was no bone mass loss. Therefore, the second CMC joint fracture dislocation was reduced before being obliquely and longitudinally fixed to the capitate bone with a Kirschner wire.
Intraoperative exploration revealed that the third CMC joint was dislocated and significantly unstable, and the joint capsule was ruptured. Therefore, a Kirschner wire was used for oblique and longitudinal fixation, which was conducive to the healing of the joint capsule. The compression fracture of the hamate bone was comminuted, with bone mass loss. Transarticular fixation was performed with miniature steel plates. The compressed fracture fragments and articular surface were restored to their original positions, and one Kirschner wire was added to strengthen the fixation. The median nerve was not examined because the patient’s symptoms had been significantly relieved before surgery and were considered to be caused by traction injury.
Postoperative radiography indicated favourable alignment of each CMC joint . The patient was advised to exercise each metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joint with plaster cast protection for 3 weeks after surgery. At that time, the cast was removed, and functional exercises of the wrist were started. The Kirschner wire was pulled out 6 weeks after the surgery. Whereas the plates were not removed because they did not create any negative impact on the patient’s range of motion (flexion and extension). Subsequently, functional exercises of the first CMC joint were initiated. Radiographs obtained 4 months after surgery revealed favourable fracture healing , and the symptoms associated with the median nerve were completely relieved. The patient regained mobility of the injured hand 5 months after surgery and returned to work 7 months after surgery. During the follow-up period of 1 year and 4 months, there was no pain in the injured hand, and the grip strength, muscle strength, and joint range of motion of the operated hand were comparable to those of the contralateral hand.