A 34-years-old Caucasian male of Italian nationality was admitted to our department complaining for a 2-months history of diarrhea associated with abdominal pain, progressing from the upper to the lower abdomen, and weight loss. The patient did not report any other previous disease or surgery.
Moreover, no familiarity for metabolic or neoplastic diseases was found. The patient denied alcohol or tobacco use. Clinical examination revealed a distended abdomen, increased bowel sounds and a lightly painful mass at the left lower quadrant of the abdomen. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) showed a mass of 9 × 5 cm of mixed echogenicity in the proximity of the sigmoid colon with some hypoechoic lymph nodes of increased volume in the adipose adjacent tissue. Colonscopy with biopsy was performed because of the presumed diagnosis of intestinal neoplasm. Interestingly, at endoscopy, a polypoid vegetating mass, involving the 2/3 of the intestinal circumference was found, whereas, in the remaining colonic segments, no signs of mucosal injury were reported. At histopathologic standard examination, the mass showed microscopic aspects of adenocarcinoma. The abdominal computer tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast showed some thickened ileal loops and increased in volume mesenteric lymph nodes . At routine laboratory tests, no alterations of the principal biochemical parameters were found, except the levels of the following tumoral markers: CA 19-9 = 85.7 U/ml (normal value: up to 37 U/ml), CEA = 13.7 ng/ml (normal value: up to 3 ng/ml), CA 50 = 51.3 U/ml (normal value: up to 19 U/ml). Laparotomy was performed because of the diagnosis of malignant colonic neoplasm. At surgery a condition of intestinal malrotation was observed: the third and the fourth part of the duodenum descended vertically without Treitz’s ligament in support of the duodenojejunal junction and the small bowel and colon were located in the right and left side of the abdominal cavity, respectively . Particularly, the transverse colon did not clearly appear, being the ascending colon connected with the descending by a short segment of large intestine of 15 cm in length. The caecum and the right colon were attached through a long mesentery, which was a prolongation of the small bowel mesentery . In addition, the latter presented an anomalous curvilinear attachment, from the right side of the second lumbar vertebra to the left sacroiliac junction. For these reasons, although the neoplastic lesion was located in the caecum, it appeared placed in the left side of the abdomen, in the proximity of the sigmoid colon.
However, the supramesocolic organs maintained their normal position.
The presence of this anatomical abnormality strongly influenced some aspects of the surgical strategy. First of all, we decided, because of the associated vascular and lymphatic anomalies, to mark lymphatic vessels with peritumoral subserosal injection of patent blue violet, at the four cardinal points, to achieve a radical lymph node dissection. Therefore, right colectomy, extended from the distal ileum to the descending colon, by ligature of the right colic artery and vein at the origin from the superior mesenteric vessels, and patent blue guided lymphadenectomy, were performed, with curative intent. Subsequently, a mechanical ileo-colic anastomosis was carried out.
We did not perform the Ladd’s procedure for the intestinal malrotation because, after an extended right colectomy and ileo-descending anastomosis, it was unnecessary.
Pathological examination revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the caecum infiltrating the subserosal layer without nodal involvement. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course.