We present the case of an 86-year-old woman with a past medical history of endometrial cancer, treated by hysterectomy, oophorectomy and radiotherapy, and with consequent radiation cystitis; she also had dyslipidaemia and osteoporosis, associated with thoracic kyphosis, chronic back pain and mobility impairment (need of walking stick support, help with daily activities and house-keeping). The patient presented with fatigue on moderate exertion with progressive aggravation in the last 4 months. On cardiac auscultation, a mid-systolic murmur was audible along the upper right sternal border. The electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with left axis deviation and repolarization abnormalities . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed: left ventricular (LV) concentric hypertrophy (LV mass index of 123 g/m2; relative wall thickness of 0.49); non-dilated LV (end-diastolic volume of 45 mL/m2), normal ejection fraction (57%), and diastolic dysfunction (e/a ratio of 0.5; e/e′ of 13; left atrium volume index of 44 mL/m2; and tricuspid regurgitation velocity of 2.9 m/s); ascending aorta dilatation (49 mm); tricuspid aortic valve, severely calcified, with severe stenosis (sAS)—mean gradient of 52 mmHg and valve area of 0.87 cm2. Blood tests showed N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide of 1302 pg/mL (0–300 pg/mL), without other significant abnormalities . Coronary angiography was normal. Due to symptomatic sAS, the case was discussed in Heart Team, in order to decide the best approach to aortic valve replacement. Considering the advanced age, moderate frailty (Clinical Frailty Scale assessment of 6, normal body mass index of 22 kg/m2), restricted mobility, and intermediate surgical risk [Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) score: 4.2% risk of mortality], TAVI was considered the best option. Pre-TAVI computed tomography angiography was performed to determine the best vascular access and the appropriate dimensions of the aortic valve prosthesis. It confirmed dilatation of the ascending aorta (50 mm) and diffuse atherosclerotic disease, without any obstructive lesions. Elective transfemoral TAVI was scheduled.
The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia and guided by transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE), via the right femoral route. Balloon valvuloplasty (20 × 40 mm balloon) was performed prior to aortic valve prosthesis implantation (Edwards Sapiens 3™, 23 mm, through a NovaFlex™ delivery system). Valvuloplasty and prosthesis deployment were accomplished during a burst of rapid ventricular pacing, using a temporary pacemaker, with 30–40 s of intentional low cardiac output state—systolic blood pressure (SBP) of 40–50 mmHg. After valve deployment, the patient presented a short period of hypotension (SBP 60–70 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure ±20 mmHg; heart rate ±100 b.p.m.), with spontaneous recovery in less than 3 min. The final result was satisfactory, with a slight leak in relation to the native left coronary cusp, a maximum transvalvular gradient of 12 mmHg, and a mean gradient of 5.3 mmHg. The patient was extubated at the end of the procedure and was admitted to the intensive care unit, with maintained haemodynamic stability and on spontaneous ventilation. Dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT)—acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg—was initiated, in addition to the patient’s usual medication (otilonium bromide, trospium chloride, nitrofurantoin, simvastatin, risedronate, calcium, and vitamin D).
Despite the favourable initial evolution, during the second day after TAVI the patient presented with acute abundant haematemesis (coffee ground colour vomitus) associated with hypotension (decrease of SBP from 130 mmHg to 90 mmHg) and haemoglobin drop from 12.7 g/dL to 9.6 g/dL (12–15.5 g/dL). C-reactive protein was slightly elevated (7.55 mg/dL; reference range 0–0.5 mg/dL), as usual following an invasive procedure . Intravenous pantoprazole infusion was administered, the patient was kept nil by mouth, intensive crystalloid fluid therapy was initiated, and an emergency upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed. Endoscopy showed striking diffuse, circumferential, black-appearing oesophageal mucosa with signs of friability, and under-distension of the lumen, involving the distal oesophagus . These findings were compatible with ANE, also known as black oesophagus. Accordingly, haemodynamic stabilization measures (fluid therapy and replacement of blood products) and proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy were maintained, domperidone and sucralfat were initiated, and DAPT was temporarily suspended. Haematemesis stopped and the patient was stabilized 48 h after the acute event. Computed tomography angiography was performed to evaluate any abnormality in oesophageal vascularization or aortic lesion and to exclude complications: it showed wall thickness of lower oesophagus with mucosal enhancement and densification of perioesophageal fat, without other abnormalities. Upper endoscopy was repeated 72 h later, showing resolution of the previously described lesions . Afterwards, oral diet was progressively initiated, PPI was switched to oral formulation, and DAPT was re-instituted under surveillance, with good tolerance. Oral iron supplementation was initiated. The patient was discharged on the eighth day after TAVI, clinically well. She was referred for short-term outpatient clinic evaluation by Cardiology and Gastroenterology.
At follow-up, the patient remained without symptoms of heart failure or related to ANE complications. Transthoracic echocardiography evaluation 3 months after discharge showed maintenance of a very slight leak in relation to the native right coronary cusp, with no significant changes in all other parameters. Endoscopic reassessment was not performed, since the previous showed good evolution and the patient had no symptoms or signs of stenosis or relapsing necrosis.