The patient was a female aged 33 years old. Three years ago, she manifested auditory hallucinations (hearing that someone was talking about her), persecutory delusions (feeling that someone would kill her) and disorganized behaviour (talking solely, laughing solely, and saying that she was a robot). She was diagnosed with schizophrenia by The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5) . After a short-term hospitalization, she went home with symptom remission. The treatment method was not clear. Although she did not take medications regularly after discharge, she could work and live normally. One year ago, similar symptoms recurred. She was discharged with remission of symptoms by 0.2 g/d quetiapine and 7.5 mg/d dexzopiclone. Three months ago, she felt stressed and worried that someone would kill her again. After prescribing amisulpride, quetiapine, benzhexol hydrochloride and propranolol hydrochloride, the symptoms were controlled. The exact doses were not clear. After discharge, she took those medications regularly. Ten days ago, she was depressed because she could not get a job. She felt useless and complained of palpitations. She also said that a robot appeared around her. She was diagnosed with schizophrenia and major depressive disorder by DSM-5 . Except for increased prolactin (195.7 ng/ml; reference range, 6.0–29.9 ng/ml) and cortisol (659.4 nmol/l; reference range, 147.3–609.3 nmol/l), blood examination showed no abnormalities. Ferritin (88.30 ng/ml; reference range 24–336 ng/ml) and renal function (glomerular filtration rate = 104.47 ml/min/1.73m2; reference range, 56–122 ml/min/1.73m2) were in the normal range. She had no pregnancy and immune diseases. Physical examination and imaging diagnosis showed no abnormalities. She also had no family history of psychiatric or neurological illness. Treatment was started with 0.6 g/d amisulpride to control psychiatric symptoms, 0.1 g/d quetiapine to improve sleep, 75 mg/d venlafaxine sustained-release tablets to relieve depression, 4 mg/d benzhexol hydrochloride and 20 mg/d propranolol hydrochloride. After 3 days, the patient reported daytime sleepiness and itch in her arms. When she rested, the itch worsened. In contrast, the itch could be relieved when she moved her arms. There was no rash, redness, swelling or pain on the arms. She did not report any discomfort in the legs. A nocturnal polysomnogram but not electromyogram channels in the arms was conducted on the patient. The time of wakefulness were 47.5 min. The numbers of wakefulness were 14. The periodic limb movement index was 6. The results indicated poor sleep continuity (see Table and Fig. in detail). She was diagnosed with RAS, a variant of RLS, according to the International RLS Study Group Criteria . On the second day, the patient reported remission of itch in her arms without adjusting the medication. She did not complain of itch on the arms again in the ward and the half-year follow-up period.