A 53-year-old woman with bilateral hallux valgus (HV) deformity complained of bunion pain, metatarsalgia, and spasms of the left second toe in walking. She noticed her balance was getting poorer and had to be very cautious in walking downstairs lest she lost her balance and fall. There was no history of rheumatoid arthritis. Her left big toe had obvious pronation deformity , and her first metatarsals were hypermobile in transverse and sagittal planes. There were also mid-metatarsal calluses . Standing anteroposterior (AP) X-ray of her feet revealed obvious rotational deformity of her left hallux lying on its side . Both her feet had the positive round head sign for first metatarsal pronation according to Yamaguchi’s lateral edge shape of the first metatarsal head and Eustace’s inferior tubercle shift sign . Her right hallux was not pronated because its lateral sesamoid had not turned around the lateral side of the metatarsal head. Her left foot metatarsophalangeal angle (MPA) was 47.4°, and intermetatarsal angle (IMA) was 19.2°. They were 31.6 and 14.3°, respectively, on her right foot , all by Hardy’s mid-axial method .
A straight 2-cm dorsal incision was made to expose the distal first intermetatarsal space. The contracted distal lateral soft tissues were released with an inverted “T” incision. The horizontal incision released the metatarsosesamoid ligament to facilitate fibula sesamoid realignment, and the vertical incision released the lateral collateral ligament of the metatarsophalangeal joint to facilitate hallux realignment. However, the adductor hallucis tendons were not released to prevent hallux varus complication. Four 2-mm drill holes were made in the distal half of the first metatarsal. Two double-strand no. 2 absorbable PDS and two 2-O non-absorbable Ethibond sutures were passed through drill holes and around the second metatarsal. They were tied with moderate compression force after the opposing cortices of the distal half of the first and second metatarsals were scarified in a fish-scale fashion with an osteotome. Through a medial incision, all feet had their redundant medial skin and capsuloligamentous tissues over the bunion protuberance excised along with exostectomy of the bunion.
She was allowed and could walk with full weight-bearing on her 1st post-operative day but was limited to <5000 steps a day. A forefoot cast was applied on the 10th post-operative day for 3 months. She was allowed to walk back to normal, but no running and hiking until after the first 6 post-operative months.
At her final 1-year post-operative examination, she had not had bunion pain since her surgery, and her balance was markedly improved. A photograph of her feet in standing revealed correction of hallux pronation satisfactorily . Her mid-metatarsal calluses had disappeared , and the first metatarsal was stable in the transverse and sagittal planes on examination. She was extremely pleased with her feet’ function being restored. Her standing AP X-rays showed a left foot MPA of 22.4° which was above the desired MPA of <15° although the IMA was 6.9° and within the normal upper range of 9°. Her right foot MPA was 7.7°, and IMA was 6.0° . The slight right hallux varus appearance was not evident by X-ray examination. The radiological round head signs of both her first metatarsals were reduced to angular shape, and the inferior tubercles had shifted from 20° pronation preoperatively of both her first metatarsals to 0° and 5° of her left and right foot, respectively , according to Eustace’s definition . The left hallux radiological pronation was also corrected .