A 72-year-old Japanese man, who was a smoker (53 pack-years), presented to our hospital with a chief complaint of cough. His medical history included diabetes mellitus and dyslipidemia. He had no family history of cancer or asbestos exposure. A computed tomography (CT) scan of his chest revealed a 15 mm-sized nodule in the right upper lung (S3b) with nodules in the visceral pleura of the upper lobe of the right lung. No other abnormalities were observed. He subsequently underwent wedge resection. On macroscopic examination, a 15 × 7 mm-sized nodule in the lung parenchyma was identified, and the visceral pleura was thickened with hemorrhagic and myxoid nodules (A). Microscopic analysis revealed that the tumor in the visceral pleura was composed of two different cell components: epithelial and spindle-shaped cells. Each component accounted for more than 10% of the tumor. Epithelial cells with ovoid nuclei formed a tubular structure. Spindle-shaped cells with scant eosinophilic cytoplasm and hyperchromatic nuclei proliferated in myxoid stroma containing thin-walled blood vessels, mimicking myxofibrosarcoma. Intralesional fibrous septum existed between the two components; however, there was a gradual transition between the two components (B-F). Necrosis and scattered mitoses (8 mitoses/10 high-power fields) were detected. Neither multinucleated giant cells nor osseous or chondroid elements were observed in the sarcomatous component. Asbestos bodies were not detected.
In immunohistochemical analysis, the epithelial cells were observed to be diffusely and strongly positive for CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, calretinin, mesothelin, D2–40, and HEG-1, whereas spindle-shaped cells were negative for all of them, except for D2–40 (A, B). Both epithelial and spindle-shaped cells were negative for WT-1, CEA, Ber-EP4, and TTF-1. The loss of BAP1 (BRCA1-associated protein 1) expression in both the components was observed (C, D). Additionally, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed homozygous deletions of CDKN2A in both the components (E, F). RT-PCR analysis revealed no alternative splice forms of SS18-SSX fusion, which led to the exclusion of synovial sarcoma (data not shown). Based on histological, immunohistochemical, and molecular analyses, we made a diagnosis of diffuse pleural mesothelioma, the biphasic subtype. In contrast, the nodule in the lung parenchyma was papillary adenocarcinoma that was immunohistochemically negative for all mesothelial markers, including calretinin, and retained BAP1 expression (A, B). To further unravel such an unusual case in which lung adenocarcinoma and malignant mesothelioma were simultaneously identified, next-generation sequencing was performed using the 50-gene Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hot Panel v2 approach with the Ion GeneStudio S5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Mutations in EGFR (L858R) were documented with 13% allelic frequency in lung adenocarcinoma (C), whereas no mutations were detected in both the components of biphasic mesothelioma, although it was unclear whether tumor cells harbored BAP1 mutations because Ion AmpliSeq Cancer Hot Panel v2 does not include BAP1. The patient is alive and well, with no evidence of disease recurrence 7 months after surgery.