A 73-year-old woman presented to the emergency department of our hospital with sudden onset chest and back pain accompanied by dyspnea. Her medical history was only radiation therapy after partial mastectomy for left breast cancer. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) angiography revealed a mediastinal hematoma due to a 9.7 mm rupture of a mediastinal BAA originating in the aortic arch, with mild compression of the left atrium . Moreover, the rupture also resulted in acute bilateral hemothorax with greater right-sided involvement. Given the deteriorating pre-shock condition of the patient, emergency angiography was performed under local anesthesia. The right common femoral artery was punctured, followed by selective catheterization of the right bronchial artery using a 4Fr catheter. Selective bronchial arteriography revealed a saccular BAA originating from the proximal right bronchial artery . The BAA was embolized using a microcatheter, and its proximal and distal sides were successfully embolized using coils . After BAE, the patient's vital signs stabilized, but she required blood transfusions because of a drop in her hemoglobin level (from 13.1 to 8.9 g/dL). CT scan performed the following day revealed an expanding hemothorax in the right chest cavity and mild compression of the left atrium associated with a mediastinal hematoma. Additionally, the patient's respiratory status slowly deteriorated (from 0.5 to 4 L/min via nasal cannula), and VATS hematoma evacuation and mediastinotomy were scheduled two days after BAE . If the intrapleural hematoma is coagulated, thoracic drainage alone may not be sufficient to drain the intrapleural and mediastinal hematomas; therefore, we chose VATS, which ensures drainage. Surgery was performed with the patient in the left lateral decubitus position using one-lung ventilation. During the procedure, the hematoma was predominantly located on the ventral side of the pulmonary ligament and diaphragm. Moreover, a tear in the pulmonary ligament adjacent to the hematoma was identified as the site of the perforation . The mediastinal pleura on the cephalic side of the inferior pulmonary vein was stretched due to the swelling of the hematoma, which was also observed in the superior mediastinum. An incision was made in the mediastinal pleura over the azygos vein and below the tracheal bifurcation with great care not to touch the BAA and approximately 1400 mL of blood was drained from the mediastinal hematoma. No surgical complications occurred, and the postoperative recovery was uneventful, with complete lung re-expansion. No further deterioration of vital signs was noted during the perioperative period, and the patient was discharged eight days after surgery.