A 32-year-old Caucasian female patient was referred to the renal clinic nearly 4 years ago for further evaluation of azotemia and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Her medical past revealed an 8-month history of nonhealing ulcers in the left leg and increasing fatigue. She was treated by her general practitioner with painkillers, oral antibiotics (cloxacillin), and local wound care. There was no history of smoking or alcohol. She was employed as a clerk. She is a mother of three healthy children. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease was found in her father who died at the age of 50 years, and in two of her siblings.
At the first renal clinic visit, she was comfortable and well orientated in place, time, and person. However, she was severely pale, her blood pressure was normal, and her body mass index was 33 kg/m2. There was no dyspnea, jaundice, or cyanosis. Neck vessels appeared normal and the hepatojugular reflux was normal too. Cardiovascular examination revealed a hyperkinetic nonsustained apex beat at the fifth intercostal space on the midclavicular line. No murmurs were heard. Abdominal palpation yielded palpable bilateral flank masses with ballottement. In the distal left half of her leg, a well-demarcated ulcer over the medial aspect was noted. The center of the lesion was very dark in color and dry. There was another extensive ulcerative area below and more distal to the previous lesion, toward the medial position, approaching the anterior dorsum of the foot . On touch, there was tenderness, increased local temperature, and induration. A light bluish macular lesion with ill-defined borders and a warm and tender indurated area about 5 cm wide with intact skin was found above the right knee as well.
The laboratory tests were reviewed prior to the initiation of continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) and at each follow-up visit at 4–6-week intervals. Severe anemia related to ESRD was managed successfully with erythropoietin (Recormon®; 10,000 IU/month) and intravenous iron (200 mg/month) support. Study of the coagulation profile revealed no concerns. Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and severe hyperparathyroidism were documented in the predialysis evaluation. Echocardiogram showed diastolic dysfunction, normal valves, and no left ventricular hypertrophy, but there was an ejection fraction of 87% that did not fit with the study; it was therefore ignored in this report. Chest X-rays were normal. Neck computed tomography scan indicated tracheal calcifications. Lateral abdominal X-ray revealed linear calcification of the descending aorta . A technetium sestamibi parathyroid scan study done 2 months after initiating CAPD had suggested hypertrophy of the inferior right parathyroid gland and an adenoma in the left inferior parathyroid gland. Skin biopsy showed steatonecrosis with multiple mineral deposits suggestive of Ca in the subcutis; some blood vessels exhibited Ca deposits in the muscle layer and some vessels were partially thrombosed.
Two weeks after the initial consultation, the patient was placed on CAPD. Hypercalcemia was treated with low-concentration Ca dialysates (1.25%). Cinacalcet (60 mg daily) was prescribed for 18 months and discontinued due to the prohibitive cost of the drug. Hyperphosphatemia partially subsided with dietary counseling and the use of aluminum hydroxide. The patient never took Ca pills or vitamin D analogs. The skin ulcers were managed with wound care by her general practitioner. The ulcers resolved 2 months after the initiation of dialytic treatment . Three months after the cessation of cinacalcet, multiple indurated, tender, and warm areas of various sizes ranging from 4–9 cm in width appeared on her thighs and below the knees . A bone scan of the whole body supported Ca deposits in the subcutaneous tissue . The patient sought medical assistance in the private sector since our center does not provide parathyroidectomy. Parathyroidectomy was performed after 17 months of cessation of cinacalcet. She experienced relief of her skin symptoms shortly after the parathyroidectomy, but complained of mental blunting and muscle cramps for 3 weeks. She continues to be followed up at our dialysis clinic, and is well overall. There has been a correction of hypocalcemia and of the associated symptoms.