A 70-year-old patient came to our outpatient clinic, in the patient's own words, “asking for a miracle.” He had been submitted to multiple surgeries and chemoradiation due to a recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the hypopharynx, ending in a major cervical amputation, construction of a neopharynx, and definitive surgical closure of the esophagus. After years being fed through a gastrostomy, he had not lost his hope to be able to eat again.
Eight years before, the patient, a heavy smoker and social drinker, was diagnosed with a cT2N1 pyriform sinus squamous cells carcinoma. He underwent chemoradiation therapy, complicated by bilateral neurosensorial hearing loss, and implantation of a hearing aid.
One year later, a left epiglottic tumoral recurrence was histologically confirmed. The patient underwent a total laryngectomy with left hemi-thyroidectomy and implantation of a voice prosthesis (Provox®).
After additional radiation therapy, he developed an esophageal stricture and a new tumoral recurrence at the hypopharynx. He then underwent subtotal pharyngectomy, an orostomy, and an esophagostomy with deltopectoral flap. Recovery was complicated with carotid artery exposure and necrosis of the flap requiring an urgent repeated surgery. A myocutaneous pectoralis major flap and a free cutaneous flap were used for wound closure, and surgical reconstruction was later performed: pharyngoplasty with a myocutaneous flap of the left pectoralis major, closure with the right deltopectoral fasciocutaneous flap and tracheoplasty, closure of the proximal esophagus, and placement of a gastrostomy for definitive feeding.
When the patient presented 5 years later, he was under oncological surveillance and the cancer was in remission. After detailed explanation, he consented for an attempt at endoscopic reconstruction. A combined endoscopic examination was undertaken by 2 endoscopists under general anesthesia to evaluate the pharyngeal and the superior esophageal closures and the distance between them: (1) using a therapeutic endoscope (Olympus GIF1T190, Hamburg, Germany) through the mouth up to the neopharynx pouch, and (2) using an ultra-slim (Olympus GIFP190) endoscope in a retrograde approach through the gastrostomy, passing the stomach and the cardia up to the proximal portion of the esophagus.
Fluoroscopically, before and after contrast injection through both approaches, it was possible to confirm that the distance between both ends was <10 mm . Transillumination was evident (after turning off the light of the slim scope) and an imprint on the closed proximal esophagus was visible from the esophageal lumen when manipulating a closed biopsy forceps from the pharyngeal pouch (shown in Fig. ).
Using a Zimmon® diathermic needle (COOK Medical, Winston Salem, NC, USA) and under fluoroscopic and endoscopic control both proximally and distally (to visualize the bulging at the time of needle compression), we punctured (using a pure cutting current) through the neopharynx into the distal esophagus (shown in Fig. ). A 0.035-inch Jagwire was then placed and grasped with a snare through the working channel of the ultra-slim endoscope. Dilation of the tract was then performed using a MaxforceTM through-the-scope balloon (6 mm/4 cm, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA; shown in Fig. , ) and a fully covered biliary WallFlexTM stent 60 × 10 mm (Boston Scientific) was placed under endoscopic and fluoroscopic control (shown in Fig. , ). Antibiotic prophylaxis with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 2.2 g intravenous was administered before the procedure and in the following 48 h.
One week later, a second endoscopy was performed. After confirming the adequate position of the stent and free progression of the contrast through its lumen , the stent was removed using a rat tooth grasping forceps. The upper part of the re-permeabilized segment was marked with a clip and a partially covered esophageal UltraflexTM esophageal stent 18 × 23 × 120 mm (Boston Scientific) was implanted (shown in Fig. ) over a metallic Savary guidewire.
Oral intake with a liquid diet was then started and quick progression to pasty food was possible, with excellent tolerance. Four weeks later, a tailored fully covered esophageal WallstentTM was placed inside the previous stent, and 1 week after both stents were removed without complications.
One month after the removal of the stents, the patient complained of slight dysphagia for pasty food and a dilatation up to 20 mm with a CRETM balloon (Boston Scientific), with complete disappearance of the waist, was performed at the level of the neopharynx-esophagus stenotic anastomosis. Regular endoscopic surveillance will be maintained to control/treat the luminal stenosis of the neoesophagus. Logopedic treatment is ongoing to further improve deglutition/swallowing.