A 30-year-old female presented with a 3-month history of progressive quadriparesis and urinary incontinence. The neurological examination revealed atrophy of the intrinsic muscles of the hands, mild bilateral triceps weakness, and bilateral lower extremity weakness (4/5). Deep tendon reflexes were absent bilaterally at the triceps levels but hyperactive in both lower extremities with bilateral Babinski responses.
The MR revealed multifocal heterogeneous intramedullary masses extending from C2 to T4 and T12–L1; similar intensity lesions were seen within the central cord from T5 to T11 level [-]. Signal characteristics were inhomogeneous on both T1- and T2 weighted sequences. Fat-suppressed images were consistent with lipid content in all the lesions and there was no enhancement with contrast. Further, there was mild accompanying intramedullary edema surrounding the tumors.
The patient underwent a C2–T4 and T12–L1 laminectomy utilizing intraoperative SSEP and MEP neuromonitoring. Once the dura mater was opened, an expanded spinal cord was immediately identified . Following a midline myelotomy, partial resection of the intramedullary lesion was performed. The conus lesion was yellowish, waxy, friable, and contained with intermingled well-formed hair. Internal debulking was continued until we encountered an adherent capsule; at this point, a subtotal resection of the C2–T4 and T12–L1 lesions was performed (without resecting tumor at other levels) to avoid incurring increased neurological morbidity. Once the cord was decompressed, the dura was closed primarily. No additional laminoplasties were performed.
The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 6 requiring intermittent catheterization. Within 1 month, she reported improvement in all modalities. No further postoperative MR imaging was available.
Biopsies from multiple sites were suggestive of a dermoid cyst showing: stratified squamous epithelium along with fibro-collagenous tissue with blood vessels, glial tissue, hair shafts, adipocytes, and areas of calcification .