A 52-year-old male underwent TOF repair at the age of 4 years and permanent pacemaker implantation for complete atrioventricular block (CAVB) at the age of 9 years, resulting in PiCMP caused by long-term dyssynchrony. Furthermore, when he was 48 years old, he underwent cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) for dyspnea with a reduced LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of approximately 35%. However, the transvenous lead could not be placed in the optimal position through the coronary sinus due to the access difficulty.
Four years later, progressive PR, which is an independent comorbidity of biventricular failure after the TOF repair mainly caused by PiCM, developed with a heart murmur. One year before the reference to our institution, PR progressed from mild to moderate (Vena Contracta = 3.9 m). At that time, although the right ventricle was small, the fractional right ventricular area change (RVFAC) was 57.5%, so right heart function was preserved. Six months ago, PR progressed further (Vena Contracta = 7.9 m) and his right ventricular function worsened (RVFAC = 48.0%). When he referred to our hospital, PR had progressed to severe range (Vena Contracta Width/pulmonary valve diameter = 0.8) and his right ventricular function had deteriorated further (RVFAC = 42.1%). Furthermore, he suffered from depression one year ago, and antidepressant medication caused QT prolongation with fragmented QRS on an electrocardiogram and weight gain as side effects. we believe that these facts increased cardiac load. Therefore, he was referred to our hospital for surgical treatment. One hypothesis regarding the mechanism of PR progression during these this period It is possible that deterioration of left ventricular function collapsed the pulmonary circulation, putting adding a stress on the pulmonary valve and causing dilatation of the pulmonary valve annulus, even though but there is not sufficient evidences. Echocardiography showed severe PR, and the LV end-diastolic/end-systolic diameters (LVDd/Ds) were 53 mm/38 mm, respectively with LVEF 33%. A catheter hemodynamic study showed an elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) to 17 mmHg.
At the initial stage, we started administration of diuretics and a soluble guanylate cyclase (sCG) stimulator in addition to foundational quadruple therapy for heart failure, to decrease LVEDP. This avoided postoperative lung congestion after the PVR, and 2 months later the LVEDP was finally decreased to 4 mmHg.
Second, we performed PVR with Epic™ Plus Supra Aortic Valve® (27 mm; Abbott Japan, Tokyo, Japan) and annular enlargement using a bovine pericardium . In addition, pericardial lead, a sutureless, unipolar, myocardial, screw-in lead ( Medtronic Model 5071) was placed at the LV lateral wall mid to basal portion around the obtuse marginal branch region, with the other end placed beneath the generator pocket of the previous intravenous device through 3rd intercostal space . No record was available in this case’s childhood surgery. The operation took 6 h 56 min, with 233 min of cardiopulmonary bypass and 123 min of cross-clamp time.
Finally, 3 weeks after the surgery, CRT was adjusted using an epicardial lead in addition to intravenous defibrillator septal lead implantation. Postoperatively, echocardiography showed LVEF improved to 38% and LV shrank to LVDd/Ds 47 mm/31 mm. Furthermore, the symptoms of dyspnea on exertion resolved. Serum BNP was 89.1 pg/ml at the first visit, but had slightly decreased to 71.2 pg/ml one year after surgery. The ECG one after surgery showed a slight prolongation of QRS duration from 186 ms to 190 ms compared to preoperatively. Unexpectedly, one year after surgery, QRS fragmentation disappeared. These suggest that myocardial damage may have improved. QT prolongation was unchanged.