A 78-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our stroke unit because of the sudden onset of a headache associated with speech and visual disturbances during early morning sexual intercourse. He had been lying in a supine position with his head hanging off the bed in a slightly downwards position. The patient was brought to the hospital few hours later. On admission, neurological examination showed a right hemianopia with alexia. His systolic blood pressure was 115 mmHg and the diastolic pressure was 60 mmHg.
A thorough review of familial and personal clinical histories suggested no other possible cause for this condition. In particular, there were no signs of arterial hypertension or hematological disorders and our patient was not taking anti-coagulants or anti-platelet drugs. He had not experienced any head trauma and had no other risk factors for cerebrovascular disease. He had also not taken sildenafil citrate or any other cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) inhibitors.
A cerebral CT scan showed a small left cortical temporo-occipital hemorrhage with mild mass effect and hypodense halo . A carotid and vertebral duplex scan was normal, as was an arterial trans-cranial Doppler. Neuropsychological testing and a neuropsychiatric interview showed no cognitive impairment (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was 29 out of 30). Routine blood tests, including a platelet count and the plasma level of coagulation factors gave results within normal ranges. A peri-umbilical biopsy for systemic amyloidosis was normal. A cerebral MRI was not carried out because of the presence of abdominal vascular clips. Therefore, a contrast-enhanced CT scan and a traditional digital subtraction angiography (DSA) were performed the following day to rule out the possibility of cerebral venous thrombosis or arteriovenous malformations. These tests provided no evidence of venous thrombosis or vascular malformations, whereas an air contrast ultrasound venography (ACUV) of the jugular veins showed a severe bilateral jugular valve incompetence, with a huge reflow to the brain during a Valsalva maneuver [,].
Our patient was discharged a week after presentation, with mild left hemianopia and alexia. The control CT scan showed a partial regression of the cerebral hemorrhage. He was advised to be careful during physical activity and to frequently measure his blood pressure.