A 60-year-old man who had been undergoing intermittent chronic hemodialysis for 35 years developed severe gangrene in all the digits of his right foot (Rutherford 5). Skin perfusion pressure (SPP) demonstrated 23 and 3 mmHg at dorsal and bottom of the foot, respectively. The Wound, Ischemia and foot Infection (WIfI) classification was stage 3 with W-1, I-3, fI-1. Medical treatment was not effective for the severe ischemic gangrene of this patient. Since non-invasive imaging findings revealed severe IP arterial diseases, we performed angiography. The patient received 100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel prior to catheterization. We opted for antegrade puncture of the right common femoral artery and inserted a 4-Fr 10-cm long regular sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) into the right superficial femoral artery. Immediately after sheath insertion, an intra-arterial bolus of 5,000 units of unfractionated heparin was administered, and the activated clotting time was controlled to ≥ 250 s during the procedure. Angiography of the right lower extremity revealed occlusion of the distal anterior tibial artery (ATA) and mid posterior tibial artery (PTA) with severe calcification . The Global Limb Anatomic Staging System (GLASS) classification was stage III with femoropopliteal grade 0 and IP grade 4; inframalleolar (IM) disease with GLASS IM P2 was also present. Since optimal great saphenous vein (GSV) for bypass grafting was not available in this patient, we implemented EVT for limb salvage.
We exchanged the 4-Fr regular sheath for a 4.5-Fr Parent Plus 45 guide sheath (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan). The initial antegrade guidewire for the occluded PTA advanced into the subintimal space due to severe calcification, and we could not intentionally manipulate the guidewire anymore. At that point, as the lateral plantar artery was perfused by collateral blood flow from the peroneal artery , we established a retrograde approach by angiographically puncturing the lateral plantar artery with a 20-gauge puncture needle (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) and introduced the retrograde guidewire (Gladius MG: ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) into the antegrade microcatheter . After first guidewire externalization, we conducted successful balloon (Coyote 2.0-mm/150-mm: Boston Scientific, MA, USA) angioplasty of the PTA for 10 min, simultaneously completing hemostasis of the puncture point by balloon tamponade .
Next, since the antegrade guidewire via ATA could not pass through the occluded dorsal artery (DA), we tried to establish trans-pedal arch approach from the revascularized PTA. Microcatheter tip injection of contrast medium enabled clear visualization of distal end of the occluded DA . However, acute bend of the pedal arch hampered the guidewire penetration retrogradely into the DA occlusion. Therefore, we retrogradely punctured the first dorsal metatarsal artery under the angiographical guidance with 22-gauge indwelling needle (Surf flow: Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and advanced a guidewire (Gladius MG: ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) to the occluded DA . The retrograde guidewire (Naveed Hard30: Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) could advance as far as distal ATA along with the course of antegrade guidewire, but the microcatheter (Corsair Armet: ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) could not follow the guidewire .
To make pull-through formation using Rendezvous technique in occluded DA, retrograde microcatheter advancement into the DA occlusion was mandatory. For that purpose, we punctured the occluded distal ATA with 20-gauge puncture needle (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) making the vessel calcification as a target under fluoroscopy guidance and introduced the retrograde Naveed Hard30 guidewire into the puncture needle . After the second time guidewire externalization , the puncture needle was exchanged for Ichibanyari PAD microcatheter (KANEKA: Osaka, Japan) and we pulled up the retrograde Corsair Armet microcatheter into the occluded DA using the BAlloon Deployment using FORcible Manner (BADFORM) technique (Nakabayashi et al. ) . Thereafter, we were able to advance the antegrade guidewire (AstatoXS 9–40: ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) into the retrograde microcatheter . After the third guidewire externalization, a Coyote antegrade balloon catheter was delivered into the occluded DA using the BADFORM technique and was inflated to dilate the vessel and for hemostasis at the distal ATA puncture site for approximately 10 min .
Subsequently, antegrade guidewire was advanced to the first digital artery after releasing guidewire externalization . Subsequently, Coyote balloon dilation for about 5 min was added for puncture site hemostasis of the first dorsal metatarsal artery and complete hemostasis was achieved . Finally, we confirmed good vascular patency and favorable blood flow . SPP restored to 47 and 39 mmHg at dorsal and bottom of the foot, respectively. Two weeks after revascularization, transmetatarsal amputation (TMA) was performed and the wound finally healed favorably .