A 69-year-old male patient was diagnosed with a cT3, cN+, cM0, G2 adenocarcinoma of the distant esophagus (AEG tumor, 35 to 39 cm distal of tooth row). The patient participated in the ESOPEC trial (NCT02509286) , a prospective, randomized, open-labeled two-armed study comparing perioperative chemotherapy according to the FLOT protocol (fluorouracil/leucovorin, oxaliplatin and docetaxel) to neoadjuvant radiochemotherapy according to the CROSS protocol in the treatment of locally advanced esophageal cancer. The patient was assigned to the radiochemotherapy trial arm, which comprised administration of five cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel on a weekly basis. The radiation dosage was 39.6 Gy of calculated 41.4 Gy. After an interval of six weeks, he underwent distal esophageal resection with gastric elevation according to the study protocol. By protocol, follow-up was performed by clinical assessment, by magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, and by esophagogastroduodenoscopy in intervals of three months. Until admission, the patient was free of recurrence and/or residual disease. Apart from known type II diabetes mellitus (HbA1c 52 mmol/l, upper limit of normal (ULN) 39 mmol/l) and asymptomatic sigmoid diverticulosis, the patient suffered from no other chronic, nor otherwise immunosuppressive disease or previous malignancy. The patient stopped smoking prior to AEG diagnosis.
Seven months after initiation of therapy, the patient was admitted to hospital with first onset of latent paresis (left hand, right foot, right facial paresis) and non-fluent aphasia. Apart from these symptoms, no further cognitive impairment- was clinically evident. CT scan of the neurocranium showed small central cerebral lesions accompanied by perifocal edema. Due to the patient’s malignancy, cerebral metastases were (retrospectively wrongly) assumed and anti-edematous treatment with dexamethasone (12 mg/d) was initiated. Additionally, in further work-up performed MR imaging did not show central lesions, but unspecific subcortical alterations were observed in T1- and T2-weighted images . Electroencephalography detected right frontal delta-/theta-wave patterns and abnormal alpha-shaped ground rhythm both upon admission and in three-week intervals. There was no hint for tumor recurrence or other pathological findings in the thoracal and abdominal CT scans.
Due to deterioration of symptoms including neglect, apraxia and progredient aphasia, the patient was transferred to the department of neurology for further diagnostic workup. Vascular pathology of the carotids was excluded by ultrasound. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) comprised normal cell count (1/nl, ULN 5/nl) with discrete lymphomonocytosis and no oligoclonal banding, but elevated tau protein (647 pg/ml, ULN: 450 pg/ml). Analysis of CSF by polymerase chain reaction finally detected JCV (720 copies/ml) and PML was diagnosed. HIV and other viral or bacterial infections were repeatedly ruled out.
Within 6 weeks after initiation of carboplatin and paclitaxel containing chemotherapy, laboratory parameters showed no relevant pathology, besides mildly reduced leukocytes (minimum value of 3.0/nl, normal range 4.0-11.0/nl, ). By differential blood count, persistent lymphopenia of 12.6% (normal range: 20-45%, total lymphocytes: minimum of 300/nl) was observed until death . No subdifferentiation of lymphocyte populations was performed.
Upon PML diagnosis, treatment with dexamethasone was immediately discontinued. Therapy targeting PML comprised mirtazapine (30 mg 1x/day), mefloquine (250 mg 3x/day), cidofovir (370 mg/every two weeks), vitamin b12 and folic acid as proposed in the literature . However, there was no relevant relief in neurologic symptoms over the following weeks and Mini–Mental State Examination score gradually declined (19 to 9 points). Physiotherapy and speech and language therapy were performed but showed no relevant improvement in symptomatic burden. Despite the short duration of treatment up to this point, the above-mentioned agents were discontinued according to the patient’s will after 2.5 weeks. To limit further neurologic deterioration, a rehabilitation program was arranged. However, the patient lost his mobility and developed further clinical decline within a few weeks and palliative care was finally initiated. The patient died two months after the onset of first symptoms.