A 58-year-old Japanese man, with a history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia, was initially diagnosed with symptomatic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (PAF) about a year ago. At that time, he was prescribed an anti-arrhythmic drug, pilsicainide 50 mg three times a day and edoxaban 60 mg daily, for the primary prevention of thromboembolic events. He remained in normal sinus rhythm for about 1 year, followed by recurrence of atrial fibrillation (AF) with frequent episodes of palpitation. According to current guidelines given by European Society of Cardiology, catheter ablation for AF refractory to anti-arrhythmic drug has a Class I indication. He was admitted to our hospital for the management of symptomatic PAF by catheter ablation. At admission, he was on an anti-arrhythmic drug to control PAF, but had no treatment for other comorbidities. The physical examination revealed the following: blood pressure, 150/80 mmHg and heart rate 70 bpm. There was no cardiac murmur and pulmonary rales. Blood tests showed serum creatinine of 0.70 mg/dL, haemoglobin of 13.5 gm/dL. The electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm.
On the next day of admission, cryoablation was performed under conscious sedation, with dexmedetomidine and fentanyl. One internal jugular (7 Fr), three femoral venous, and one femoral arterial access were gained. The right femoral vein/artery punctures were performed by the Seldinger technique. An 8.5 Fr steerable sheath (Agilis™ NxT steerable introducer; Abbot, St Paul, MN, USA), a 9 Fr long sheath (Radifocus®; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), and an 8.5 Fr transseptal sheath (Swartz™; Abbott) were placed in the right femoral vein, while a 4 Fr long sheath (Radifocus®; Terumo) was placed in the right femoral artery. The 8.5 Fr transseptal sheath was exchanged with the 15 Fr FlexCath Advance steerable sheath (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) for cryoballoon ablation. The activated clotting time was controlled between 300 and 350 s, using heparin. Cryoballoon catheter (Arctic Front Advance™; Medtronic), Achieve™ mapping and guiding catheter (Medtronic) were used for the pulmonary vein isolation (PVI). Each targeted PV was occluded by the proper positioning of balloon, and the PVI was completed. After successful PVI, haemostasis at the femoral puncture site was achieved by figure of eight-suture technique and by additional manual compression after removal of the sheaths. Once the haemostasis was achieved, a period of 6 h of bed rest, followed by groin compression bandage was indicated. Several hours later, the patient complained of sustained abdominal pain and a palpable mass in the lower right abdomen. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a haematoma in the right rectus abdominis, with signs of active bleeding from a branch of the right IEA . We suspected a complication associated with the puncture and planned transcatheter arterial embolization to stop the bleeding.
We performed a TPI to avoid further complications . We gained access to the right posterior tibial artery (PTA) by ultrasound-guided puncture using a micropuncture access set (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) and inserted a 6 Fr sheath (Glidesheath Slender®; Terumo) through the puncture. We used a 6 Fr Judkins right 4.0 guide catheter to intubate the IEA ostium . A 0.014 guidewire (Cruise®; Asahi Intec, Aichi, Japan) was carefully advanced to the bleeding lesion with the support of a microcatheter (Transit microcatheter; Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA). Angiography from the tip of the microcatheter revealed extravasation from a branch of the right IEA . This was embolized using a microcoil (Tornado® Embolization Microcoil; Cook Medical; ). No leakage of the contrast media was observed after the procedure , and the abdominal pain improved.
The patient was satisfied with this procedure, because he was able to sit-up immediately, was ambulated soon after the procedure, and was discharged 2 days later, in a stable condition. At the 1 month follow-up visit, the patient had no clinical symptom or cardiac events. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and the ultrasound evaluation showed patent PTA, with antegrade flow.