A 34-year-old Asian male with hyperechoic masses in the RV found incidentally on the transthoracic echocardiogram during a routine physical examination was admitted to our cardiology department. There was no past medical history of coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, heart failure, dysrhythmia, sudden death, or autoimmune disease. On admission, the physical examination, vital signs, and laboratory profile were normal, and the patient had a normal sinus rhythm.
The repeated transthoracic echocardiogram showed three solitary and well-demarcated masses in the RV (Supplementary material online, TableS1, Video 1). The size of these three lumps of poplar homogeneous isoechoic shadows were about 23 mm × 17mm, 12 mm × 33mm, and 21 mm × 25mm, respectively. The boundaries were clear and their internal echo was similar to that of point-like particles. The residual cardiac structure (including pericardial thickness), intracardiac flow, and left ventricular function (ejection fraction 65%) were unremarkable. The preliminary diagnosis was multiple solitary and well-demarcated masses in the pericardium (considering the possibility of lipoma or fibrinous cystadenoma).
The computed tomography also demonstrated multiple circular low-density shadows near the interventricular septum in the RV with a mean value of −56 HU . The preliminary consideration was lipomas. It was not possible to identify the degree of subvalvular apparatus involvement.
Given these findings, CMR was performed for better tissue characterization. CMR demonstrated four irregular but well-circumscribed masses (the largest size being 20.5 mm × 13.6m × 15.7 mm). Two bases were attached to the interventricular septum and arranged up and down, the other two were attached to the lower wall of the RV . The CMR diagnosis was intracardiac partially occluding the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) (, Video 2), and similar findings were found on the echocardiography . The T1-weighted image revealed a hyperintense signal and was uniformly suppressed in the fat-suppression mode, but an unusual malignant tumour with high-fat content could not be excluded (, Video 3).
Considering the age of the patient and the concrete possibility of the future development of significant RVOT obstruction, the surgical treatment was recommended. Surgical excision was performed to avoid potentially fatal embolism and obtain a definitive diagnosis, excluding the small possibility of malignancy. Thus, an operation involving tricuspid valve repair and resection of the tumour was electively planned.
Once the patient was intubated, a transoesophageal echocardiography was performed (Supplementary material online, VideoS1). The operation was carried out through a median sternotomy with standard hypothermic cardiopulmonary bypass. After opening the pericardium, the masses were seen. Through the right atrium incision, the tricuspid valve and papillary muscle were covered by four adipose masses in the RV that arose from the interventricular septum and the tricuspid chordae tendineae, which partially occluding the RVOT (, white asterisks). These multiple yellowish masses partly merged with each other, integrated with packs of chordae and papillary muscle of the tricuspid septal leaflet, as well as the right interventricular septum. While trying to maintain the integrity of papillary muscles and tricuspid valve chords, a part of the chordae tendineae was severed and four masses were fully exfoliated . After that, saline was injected into the RV and severe tricuspid valve insufficiency was found. The severed chordae tendineae were sutured to the papillary muscle using a prolene 4–0 suture for two stitches. Again, it was found that the tricuspid closure improved and only with a small amount of reflux. After an aortic cross-clamp time of 3 h, the patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed 1 day after surgery (Supplementary material online, TableS1). The S′, peak systolic tissue velocity at the tricuspid annulus was 8.6 cm/s, and there was no sign of tricuspid regurgitation or RVOT obstruction, which indicated that the patient had an uneventful in-hospital recovery without any signs of right-sided cardiac failure. The macroscopic appearance of the four ovoid fat masses was histopathologically confirmed as lipomas, characterized by the mature adipocytes with entrapped myocardial cells. No atypical features or malignancy were identified .
The patient had no complaints and his echocardiogram was unremarkable in the scheduled 1-month follow-up after the surgery.