A 42-year-old Asian man presented to the emergency room with progressively worsening dyspnea over the past five days, now at minimal exertion and occasionally also at rest, associated with productive cough with pinkish sputum for the same period of time. He complained of chest tightness, diaphoresis, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and decreased effort tolerance for over the same period of time. Past medical history was remarkable for hypertension, hyperlipidemia for ten years, non-compliant with medications, active smoker, and Family history of coronary artery disease, father died of myocardial infarction at the age of fifty-two.
On physical exam patient was in respiratory distress sitting up right, blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg, heart rate 100 bpm, regular, respiratory rate 28/min. Neck veins were not distended and he had no ankle edema. On examination of the cardiovascular system he had a regular S1 S2 with a S4 gallop. No murmur was appreciated. He had bilateral coarse crepitation all over the lungs. Initial EKG showed ST depression at inferolateral leads . The chest radiography showed cardiomegaly with congestive heart failure.
The patient was admitted to the coronary care unit with the diagnosis of decompensated heart failure secondary to acute coronary syndrome (CK 294/308/426, Troponin 0.126/0.122/0.105), and treated accordingly. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, revealing a normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and moderate to severe mitral regurgitation (MR). A transesophageal echocardiogram was performed subsequently which showed that the mitral valve was normal in thickness with a flail anterior leaflet not coapting with the posterior leaflet. Color flow Doppler revealed severe MR. Effective Regurgitant Orifice (ERO) was 5 mm2, regurgitant volume by PISA was 60 ml, regurgitation fraction was 60%, and the Vena Contracta width was 8 mm. There was a holosystolic flow reversal of the pulmonary vein. Echo density visualized in the left ventricle suggested partial ruptured anterolateral papillary muscle . Left ventricle was hyperdynamic, no wall motion abnormalities were seen and the LVEF was more than 65%. The diagnosis of severe MR with preserved left ventricular function was made. Subsequent coronary angiogram revealed a non dominant circumflex with a small caliber first obtuse marginal (OM1) totally occluded at the proximal end and a large caliber second obtuse marginal with a 75% stenosis in the mid portion . The other coronary arteries had wall irregularities but no stenosis, and the right coronary artery was dominant.
The patient underwent a mitral valve replacement with a St Jude mechanical valve and concomitant coronary artery bypass grafting of the first and the second obtuse marginal arteries . He had an uneventful recovery, and was discharged with minimal dyspnea on exertion. He was then seen in the follow up clinic two weeks after the surgical intervention, patient was asymptomatic and with a class II heart failure (NYHA). The transthoracic echocardiogram performed in the clinic showed a normal LVEF, mild flattening of the IV septum – a common finding after a valve replacement – and a functional mechanical mitral valve with no paravalvular leaks.