A 64-year-old man was admitted to our institution with a recent onset of upper abdominal pain and weight loss. His medical and family history was unremarkable, and he was not taking medications. The physical examination was unremarkable, with normal vital signs and a non-cushingoid appearance. Laboratory data revealed slight leukocytosis, whereas other data, namely, serum tumor markers and plasma-free metanephrines, aldosterone, potassium, and testosterone, were within their normal ranges . Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed a 15 cm enhancing left adrenal mass compressing the pancreatic body ventrally (a). The tumor embolism continued to the IVC below the liver approximately 4–5 cm downstream from the left renal vein (b–d). Positron emission tomography illustrated that only the tumor and thrombus exhibited increased uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, and there were no obvious distant metastases. No abnormal uptake in the tumor was seen on I-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy. The patient was diagnosed with left ACC with an IVC tumor thrombus. He underwent radical surgery after transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) of the main supplying arteries of the tumor and IVC temporary filter placement 1 day before surgery.
The tumor was located on the posterior wall of the body of the stomach and the body of the pancreas (a), extending above the body of the stomach, on the right side of the aorta, and below the left renal vein. Because the tumor had adhered to the pancreatic body and left kidney, the pancreatic parenchyma was divided at the level of the root of the splenic artery (b). This was followed by mobilizing the left kidney, pancreatic tail, and spleen. We then taped the left renal vein, which was dilated by a tumor thrombus (c). The IVC upstream and downstream of the confluence of the left renal vein and right renal vein were clamped. Subsequently, the confluence of the left renal vein and IVC was opened, the tumor thrombus was successfully removed from the IVC with no adhesion observed in the IVC, and we divided the left renal vein and removed the specimen en bloc (d–f). The IVC clamp time was 11 min, the operative time was 443 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 3,480 mL.
The excised specimen weighed 1.2 kg (a), and histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of ACC, T3N1M0, stage III (International Union Against Cancer, eighth edition). Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for anti-steroidogenic factor-1 antibody, its cells were positive for calretinin and inhibin α were positive, and approximately 38% of the cells were positive for Ki-67 (b–f). Postoperatively, the IVC filter was removed on postoperative day 2, and the patient developed a pancreatic fistula (Clavien-Dindo IIIa) and an intra-abdominal abscess (Clavien-Dindo IIIa), which were treated conservatively. The patient received mitotane as adjuvant chemotherapy on postoperative day 14, and he was discharged on postoperative day 50. Radiotherapy (54 Gy) was also administered as local treatment. Unfortunately, two liver metastases developed recurred 6 months after the operation (a). However, chemotherapy with etoposide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin was continued, and no new lesions or tumor progression were observed. Posterior segmentectomy was performed for the liver metastases 16 months after the first operation (b, c). Postoperatively, mitotane chemotherapy was continued, but peritoneal dissemination was observed 7 months after the second operation, and the patient requested palliative treatment. The patient subsequently died 4 months later due to the liver failure.