A 7-year-old boy was hospitalized for the evaluation of multiple progressive complaints over the previous 2 years, including frontal headache, fatigue, tics, leg pain, nocturnal sweating, constipation, and poor food intake. He had a normal birthweight/height following an unremarkable pregnancy, and his family history was normal. His growth curve showed normal growth until the age of 3 years, followed by a marked decrease to about −2 standardised deviation scores (SDS) at the age of 6 years . Thereafter, his growth increased rapidly compared with the Dutch national standards. His parents were of modest stature (father, 170 cm and mother, 164 cm) by the current Dutch median height standards (men, 182.9 cm and women, 169.3 cm). A sellar tumor with an enlarged sella turcica was discovered . Laboratory analysis showed an insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) level of 56.5 nmol/L (normal range [NR], 8.3-38.2; SDS, +3.49), prolactin level of 0.5 nmol/L (NR, <0.36 nmol/L), TSH level of 1.07 mU/L (NR, 0.6-5.6 mU/L), free thyroxine level of 20.2 pmol/L (NR, 13-26 nmol/L), afternoon cortisol level of 270 nmol/L (NR, <700 nmol/L), and undetectable luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone (normal for prepubertal state). Over time, the growth rate accelerated further , in parallel with rising IGF-I (71.2 nmol/L; +4.53 SDS), a random GH of 30.8 μg/L (NR, <4.0 μg/L), and prolactin increase to 0.75 nmol/L. The nadir GH value during an oral glucose tolerance test was 26.7 μg/L. He complained of vomiting and loss of appetite. Treatment of the GH-secreting macroadenoma was initiated with lanreotide 120 mg once in 4 weeks, which resulted in no biochemical response (IGF-I level, 76.6 nmol/L and GH level, 28.0 μg/L) or inhibition of tumor growth after 4 doses. Lanreotide was switched to pasireotide 60-mg long-acting release (LAR) once in 4 weeks. One month after switching, he developed a new onset of bitemporal field defects and headaches that indicated symptomatic optic chiasmal compression, and he underwent transsphenoidal surgery for the first time. Two months postoperatively (3 months after the initiation of pasireotide LAR), IGF-I (70.3 nmol/L) and GH (23.4 μg/L) levels remained elevated. Pasireotide LAR showed no hormonal or tumoral effects, and the GH receptor antagonist pegvisomant was started with a weekly dose of 40 mg. Although IGF-I levels dropped to 34.1 nmol/L (NR, 10.9-47.3 nmol/L; 0.87 SDS), the local GH assay, which does not detect pegvisomant, continued to show an elevated random GH level (48.6 μg/L). After 1 month of pegvisomant, severe headaches returned, and bitemporal hemianopsia reoccurred due to an increase in tumor volume . Pegvisomant was stopped, and a second transsphenoidal resection followed . The histopathologic report revealed a pituitary adenoma staining positive for GH and negative for prolactin . One month after the second transsphenoidal surgery, his IGF-I level declined to 29.3 nmol/L (0.4 SDS), GH level was 2.7 μg/L, and prolactin level declined from 0.60 to 0.38 nmol/L (NR, 0.1-0.5 nmol/L). Five months after surgery, the headaches returned, and magnetic resonance imaging 1 month later showed a small remnant lateral to the right internal carotid artery . IGF-I increased again to +2.9 SDS. A third transsphenoidal surgery was performed, leading to the normalization of GH and IGF-I levels. Thirteen months after his last surgery, he received stereotactic radiotherapy (54 Gy), and 4 months after radiotherapy, his last IGF-I was −0.8 SDS.
Due to the presentation with a macroadenoma at a young age, germline genetic testing for sequence variants and deletions in AIP and MEN1 genes was performed. A novel heterozygotic truncating variant in the AIP gene was discovered (c.606C>G; p.Tyr202∗; GnomAD database mean allele frequency (0), which was accompanied by a second missense variant (c.695C>T: p.Pro232Leu; mean allele frequency, 0.00002502), both of which were paternally inherited. Screening by magnetic resonance imaging and hormone evaluation of his 37-year-old father was negative.
Histopathologic analysis revealed a loss of SSTR5 expression between the second and third operations . In vitro characterization of the second surgical sample showed no statistically significant inhibition of GH secretion to incubation with pasireotide (10 nM) or coincubation with pasireotide and cabergoline (both 10 nM; ). Other compounds could not be tested due to the limited amount of available tissue. These interesting findings should be confirmed in a wider series of tumors from patients with AIP mutations and in appropriate wild-type acromegaly controls.
Given the lack of tumor size control with first- and second-generation somatostatin analogs (SSAs) and the unresectable remnant that required radiotherapy at the age of 10 years, the patient will require intensive (endocrinological) follow-up, although no pituitary deficiencies have occurred to date. If needed, excessive GH can be controlled by pegvisomant, albeit with high vigilance for tumor regrowth.