An 86-year-old, Farsi-speaking male with a past medical history of type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease stage IIIb (baseline serum creatinine 1.7–2.2 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL), iron deficiency anemia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, peptic ulcer disease, colon cancer status post resection, coronary artery disease status post percutaneous coronary intervention in 2016, and Parkinson disease presented to an outpatient infusion clinic for a routine iron infusion. He had previously received ferumoxytol infusions twice monthly with no documented reactions and was being switched to FDI to decrease infusion requirements. Home medications included atorvastatin, calcitriol, carbidopa-levodopa, furosemide, lisinopril, tamsulosin, aspirin, and sodium bicarbonate. He had no known allergies.
Ferric derisomaltose was initiated at 10:10 am. At 10:16 am the patient became unresponsive with agonal breathing and no palpable pulse. Chest compressions were initiated, and ROSC was achieved after one two-minute round of compressions. Epinephrine was not administered. Post-ROSC blood pressure (BP) was 60/30 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), and point-of-care blood glucose was 220 mg/dL (reference range during fasted state: 70–100 mg/dL). A normal saline 1,000 mL bolus was initiated. The patient was placed on 100% oxygen via nonrebreather mask (NRB); intubation was not required. The patient was transferred to a nearby emergency department (ED) and found to be in complete heart block with significant ST depressions in the precordial leads . Transcutaneous pacing was initiated. Heart rate at the time of transcutaneous pacing initiation was not reported. Norepinephrine and vasopressin were initiated following the placement of right tibial intraosseous and right femoral central lines. Pacing was discontinued after a heart rate above the pacing threshold was achieved (60 beats per minute [bpm]). Vasopressin was discontinued, and the patient was transferred to our tertiary-care ED by emergency medical services.
Upon arrival, the patient’s vital signs were documented as heart rate 92 bpm, BP 136/49 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation 92% on NRB with respiratory rate range 12–37 breaths per minute. Norepinephrine was the only medication infusing for hemodynamic support and was continued at 0.25 micrograms per kilogram per minute. Calcium gluconate 1 gram intravenous (IV) and magnesium sulfate 2 grams IV were administered empirically. On exam, the patient was alert and oriented and exhibited bilateral lower extremity edema. Upon arrival to our ED, electrocardiogram (ECG) was repeated with resolution of previously appreciated ST depressions . Therefore, a posterior ECG to investigate for posterolateral myocardial infarction was not performed. Troponin T was slightly elevated at 0.11 nanograms (ng) per mL (reference range 0–0.01 ng/mL) in the setting of chronic kidney disease. Creatinine kinase-MB isoenzyme resulted within normal limits , making acute coronary syndrome less likely. No further acute interventions were required in the ED.
The patient was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit (ICU), and vital signs at time of transfer from the ED to the cardiac ICU were documented as heart rate 75 bpm, BP 134/64 mm Hg, and oxygen saturation 99% on 1 liter nasal cannula. The patient was afebrile throughout his ED course. Upon electrophysiology evaluation in the cardiac ICU, the patient was found to have a right bundle branch block and left anterior fascicular block. During admission a dual-chamber, permanent pacemaker was placed with no complications, and the patient was discharged shortly afterward.