A 66-year-old Japanese man with a history of hyperuricemia and bronchitis developed sudden urinary retention and fever and was diagnosed with prostatitis. Three days after onset, he received 500 mg/day levofloxacin and 8 mg/day silodosin; however, the voiding condition did not improve, and an indwelling urethral catheter was inserted. Since his symptoms persisted, the patient was admitted to the Department of Urology at Sapporo Medical University Hospital. His existing medications included febuxostat, theophylline, ambroxol hydrochloride, and long-acting β-agonist/inhaled corticosteroid combination therapy. He had no urinary symptoms related to benign prostatic hyperplasia prior to this event. On admission, the patient’s blood pressure was 139/75 mmHg, pulse rate was 85 bpm, and body temperature was 37.5 ºC. Initial laboratory tests indicated mild impairment of renal function, with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 51 mL/min/1.73 m2 and a serum creatinine (SCr) level of 1.09 mg/dL. C-reactive protein was elevated at 14.0 mg/dL, whereas serum calcium levels remained within the normal range at 9.4 mEq/L. Notably, the level of prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was elevated at 16.3 ng/mL. Urinalysis revealed dipstick proteinuria (1 +) without pyuria or casts. Although microscopic hematuria was observed on urine sedimentation upon admission, subsequent urinalysis did not show hematuria, suggesting that the insertion of a urethral catheter may have caused temporary microscopic hematuria. Both blood and urine culture tests yielded negative results for bacterial infection. Additionally, Skin rashes were observed on his face and extremities, with a skin biopsy confirming the diagnosis of erythema nodosum. Although meropenem (1000 mg/day intravenous) was administered, his clinical status did not improve. The patient also developed misty vision and was diagnosed with uveitis by an ophthalmologist. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed lymphadenopathy of the hilar, mediastinal, inguinal, and other lymph nodes. Furthermore, 18-F fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/CT showed uptake in the same lymph node, subcutaneous soft tissue and spleen and diffuse mild uptake in the kidneys (Supplemental Fig. ) and the prostate (Supplemental Fig. A and B). Transbronchoscopic lymph node biopsy revealed epithelioid cell granulomas, which led to the diagnosis of systemic sarcoidosis. Although initial laboratory tests showed a mild decrease in eGFR, renal function rapidly declined during hospitalization. Following consultation with a nephrologist, laboratory tests showed renal failure, with an eGFR of 22.4 mL/min/1.73 m2 and an SCr level of 2.2 mg/dL. Additional urinalysis showed elevated β2-microglobulin (β2MG; 38,952 µg/L) and proteinuria (0.45 g/gCr) without hematuria. Additional laboratory tests showed elevated serum levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (3010 U/mL) and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (85 pg/mL). Serum intact PTH levels (47.0 pg/mL) and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels (10.1 U/L) were within the normal range. Tests for myeloperoxidase anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (MPO-ANCA), proteinase 3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3-ANCA), and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody were all negative. The workup was negative for neoplasia; autoimmune disorders, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Behçet’s disease, and cryoglobulinemic vasculitis; and infectious diseases, including fungi and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Kidney and prostate biopsies were performed to confirm the histological diagnosis of systemic sarcoidosis.
Kidney biopsy: Light microscopy revealed the presence of 16 glomeruli, 2 of which showed global sclerosis. No glomeruli exhibited hypercellularity, capillary wall abnormalities, fibrinoid necrosis, or crescents . Tubulointerstitial injury with moderate lymphohistiocytic infiltration indicated granulomatous interstitial nephritis . Immunohistochemistry showed that the interstitial tissue was positive for the macrophage marker, CD68 . Additionally, fibrinoid necrosis and elastic lamina disruption were observed in multiple small vessels, suggesting the coexistence of necrotic vasculitis . Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed weakly positive immunoglobulin (Ig) A and complement component C3 depositions in the mesangial areas but negative depositions of IgG, IgM, C4, C1q, and fibrinogen. Finally, electron microscopy indicated only minor deposits in the mesangial area, without mesangial hypercellularity or changes in the capillary loop or podocytes.
Prostate biopsy: Light microscopy revealed multiple epithelioid cell granulomas . There was no evidence of prostate cancer or vasculitis.
The patient's clinical course following admission is shown in Fig. . Oral prednisolone (PSL; 60 mg/day, 1.0 mg/kg) was administered 23 days after admission. The SCr level rapidly decreased to 1.1 mg/dL 50 days after admission, and the urinary β2MG level declined to 586 µg/L. In addition, urinary retention improved after oral PSL initiation, allowing the urethral catheter to be removed. The patient was discharged 56 days after admission, and the PSL dose was gradually tapered. Seven months later, the patient remained on PSL maintenance therapy (10 mg/day), and his renal function remained stable. He had no recurrence of urinary retention, and four months after initiating treatment, his PSA level decreased to the normal range of 3.18 ng/mL.