A 70-year-old female was referred to our division with a right ectopic kidney incidentally diagnosed via magnetic resonance imaging for chronic lumbago. The patient had no remarkable family or medical history, including no abnormal development or pregnancy and delivery complications. A fist-sized mass was palpable at the right side of the naval, and an ultrasound examination detected a heteroechoic mass.
CT detected the right kidney located at the lumbar (L3-L4) level and an early-enhanced 44-mm-diameter mass at its lower pole . The renal hilum of the kidney faced the lateral direction . CT angiography indicated that the largest artery originated from the abdominal aorta and the two smaller arteries originated from the left and right common iliac arteries . In a horizontal CT section, the largest artery appeared to pierce the renal parenchyma from a medial to lateral direction . Figure c shows a preoperative sketch that presumed the perirenal anatomy based on CT images. The patient was diagnosed with RCC of clinical stage cT1bN0M0.
An open radical nephrectomy with a peritoneal approach was performed. An abdominal incision was made and the omentum was moved aside, promptly identifying the main renal vein on the surface of the renal parenchyma . The two small renal arteries originating from the iliac arteries were resected , and the largest renal artery that pierced the renal parenchyma was ligated . The renal vein was resected, followed by resecting the main artery. The tumor did not adhere to adjacent organs. The operating time was 1 h and 57 min and blood loss was 20 mL.
The resected surgical specimen included the renal vein, main renal artery, tumor, and ureter and was consistent with CT images . The main renal artery and the small artery from the left iliac artery macroscopically pierced the renal parenchyma. The tumor was lipid abundant and surrounded by a clear boundary of normal parenchyma . The pathological diagnosis was clear cell carcinoma (pT1a, G2, INFa, v0, ly0) . No postoperational complications were observed, and the patient experienced no recurrence for 2 years post-surgery.