A 60-year-old Indian man with a history of hypertension and hyperuricemia; presented to our hospital initially with a clinical and laboratory picture of obstructive jaundice, for which he underwent ERCP (Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography), sphincterotomy, and common bile duct (CBD) stent for a distal CBD stricture which was biopsied. The histopathological assessment showed no high-grade dysplasia or malignant cells.
The patient had no other positive findings in his past surgical (including no previous appendectomy), medical, family, psychosocial, or genetic history.
Diagnostic imaging procedures showed incidental right hepatic lobe mass (segment VI) with exophytic growth, which was fairly defined by the CT scan and was located in segment VI with the dimensions of 4 cm (anterior–posterior) by 3 cm (width) by 3.5 cm (height). The mass was iso- to hypodense compared to the liver parenchyma with a central hypoattenuating area representing mainly breakdown. No evidence of calcification or haemorrhage was seen. The mass was causing a contour bulge of the liver capsule inferiorly into the adjacent fat. However, there was a clear fat plane between the mass and the right kidney After IV contrast administration. The mass is seen enhancing at the arterial and venous phases with washout at the delayed phase . A Well-differentiated HCC was a high clinical suspicion .
PET CT scan for Systemic staging showed no evidence of metastasis or another primary site for the tumour . Moreover, the right hepatic mass showed metabolic activity more diminutive than the adjacent hepatic parenchyma, especially in its centre with SUVmax 2.8 (SUVmax of adjacent normal hepatic parenchyma = 4.27). In the delayed study, the FDG uptake of the normal hepatic parenchyma has decreased to reach an SUVmax of 3.8. The hepatic focal lesion showed a mild increase in activity to reach SUV max of 2.98 metabolic activity, in correlation with the post-contrast CT revealed LI-RADS 5 lesion. The whole picture suggested a probably well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma LR-4 per the Liver Imaging Reporting and Data System (LI-RADS® version 2017).
Percutaneous CT-guided true-cut biopsies of the liver lesion were obtained for histopathological assessment, which, unfortunately, was non-confirmatory and showed distorted glands and surrounding fibrosis.
The patient, therefore, underwent laparoscopic non-anatomical tumour resection with a margin. The tumour was laparoscopically accessible with an exophytic component under the surface of the right liver . Both monopolar and ultrasonic sealant devices were used for the resection. These electric devices achieved good hemostasis. It was ensured by applying the hemostatic surge-snow product to the operative bed. One tube drain was inserted and removed on the second postoperative day before the patient was discharged.
Cytopathological examination revealed a single greyish-brown fragment measuring 4.5 × 3 × 3.5 cm3 showing a greyish-white cut surface with hemorrhagic contents. It was mixed forming with periductal infiltrate without perineural or lymphovascular invasion . IHC staining revealed that neoplastic cells are positive for CK (Ventana clone AE1/AE3), synaptophysin (Ventana clone SP11), CD56 (Ventana clone MRQ-42), CK19 (Dako clone RCK108), EMA (Dako clone E29). And negative for Hepatocyte (Dako clone OCH1E5), CK7 (Ventana clone SP52), CK20 (Ventana clone SP33), CEA (Dako clone Monoclonal/II-7), Chromogranin A (Ventana clone LK2H10), GATA-3 (Ventana clone L5-823). The Ki67 proliferation index (Dako clone MIB-1) was 5%. The picture is consistent with a Neuroendocrine tumour, grade 2, moderately differentiated, T1aNxMx.
Upper and lower GI endoscopy series were performed and showed no suspicious pathology. Serum Chromogranin level was checked at 3, 6 months post-surgery and was in the normal range. Octreotide scanning at 6 months revealed no other intra or extrahepatic lesions. However, the patient had no complaints after six months of follow-ups.