On May 1, 2021, a 56-year-old female patient was hospitalized with intermittent diarrhea lasting for 6 d and fever lasting for 3 d. Six days earlier, the patient had unprovoked diarrhea with vomiting and fatigue, after which she visited a local clinic. The doctor’s treatment plan was unclear, but the patient still had diarrhea. Three days later, the patient developed fever where the highest temperature was 39.4°C. The patient visited another local hospital and was diagnosed with infectious diarrhea. The physicians there prescribed antibiotics and antivirals, protected the stomach, and treated the symptoms, but the patient’s symptoms remained unabated. The patient subsequently developed shock, cognitive decline, and abdominal pain. After treatment at the local hospital, she was transported to Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University. The patient had fever of unknown origin, so she was admitted to the intensive isolation ward.
Except for unexplained diarrhea and fever, the patient also had hypertension, hyperthyroidism, and type 2 diabetes mellitus.
On admission, she had a body temperature of 37.6 °C, heart rate of 95/min, respiratory rate of 24/min, and blood pressure of 111/77 mmHg. Heart and breathing sounds were generally normal; she had no swelling of the superficial lymph nodes. The laboratory tests indicated thrombocytopenia (platelet: 32 × 109/L) and leukocytopenia (WBC: 2.87 × 109/L). The lymphocyte ratio (34.30%) and lactate dehydrogenase levels were normal. However, alanine aminotransferase (64 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase (140 IU/L), procalcitonin (0.45 ng/mL), creatine kinase-MB (9.15 ng/mL) and TnI-Ultra (0.367 ng/mL) levels were elevated.
After admission, the treatment plan was antibiotics (cefoperazone sodium and tazobactam sodium, 2 g, q8h; ganciclovir, 250 mg, q12h), recombinant human thrombopoietin (TPO, 15,000 IU, subcutaneous injection), recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (200 ug, subcutaneous injection), nutritional support, and organ protection treatment.
However, the patient’s condition gradually deteriorated. She developed disturbances in consciousness, mixed aphasia, and could not answer questions. On physical examination, she had equally large bilateral pupils (3.5 mm), obvious stiff-neck, and bilateral positive Kernig symptoms. We continued to improve our inspection. The Widal reaction was negative, and the echocardiogram, electroencephalogram, and chest X-rays showed no abnormalities. The brain magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance venography, and diffusion weighted imaging displayed abnormal signal in the centrum semiovale and parietal and occipital lobes, indicating possible inflammatory lesions . The neurologist recommended a lumbar puncture, but it was refused by the patient’s family due to her low platelet count and consequent high risk of bleeding.
At this point, the patient’s diagnosis remained unclear. We followed up on her medical history. Before the onset of her symptoms, she had traveled to a mountainous area to pick tea leaves and may have been bitten by ticks. Tick bites had been reported in the local area. Therefore, combined with the patient’s clinical manifestations and biochemical results, we suspected that she had SFTS.
We took blood and sputum samples for pathogenic microorganism culturing. As SFTS is an infectious disease, we also sent the blood sample to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of Hubei province.
Given that the disease may be caused by atypical pathogens, the low detection rate of conventional detection methods, and the patient’s critical condition, we proceeded with mNGS. Two days later, Aspergillus flavus/A. oryzae and SFTSV were detected in the blood mNGS, and A. flavus/A. oryzae and Epstein-Barr virus were detected in the sputum mNGS. We ultimately established a diagnosis of SFTS and reported it to the CDC. In addition, before the onset of illness, the patient was consuming soaked black fungus long term and so the possibility of aflatoxin poisoning was considered. After platelet-boosting therapy (TPO, 15,000 IU) and platelet transfusion, her platelet count increased. In combination with antibiotics (cefoperazone sodium and tazobactam sodium, 2 g, q8h; ganciclovir, 250 mg, q12h; voriconazole for injection, 0.2 g, q12h), we also gave the patient human γ-globulin (20 g, qd) infusions to strengthen her immunity.
On the fifth day after admission, the patient gradually regained consciousness and was able to intermittently vocalize. While her blood and sputum culture results were negative, based on her medical history and the mNGS results, her diagnosis was clear. With treatment, her condition gradually improved. The patient’s temperature returned to normal and by day 10, she could properly communicate with doctors. The results from the laboratory examination indicated normal platelet counts (149 × 109/L). All indicators returned to normal except for mild anemia . Accordingly, the patient was transferred out of the intensive care unit, recovered, and was ultimately discharged from the hospital on day 18.