A 60-year-old woman, who was diagnosed with cancer of the thyroid gland in 2015, was treated with total thyroidectomy and lymph node dissection. Her postoperative pathology showed carcinoma showing thymus-like differentiation (CASTLE). She was discharged on Levothyroxine 100 mg/day. She did not attend her follow-up appointments. After 2 years, the patient found a lump in the left side of her neck. The tumor grew very slowly and did not cause any symptoms; hence, she did not seek medical advice. In May 2020, about 3 years after the appearance of her left neck tumor, the patient was admitted to our hospital with shortness of breath due to tracheal compression from the tumor. Clinical examination showed enlarged solid painless cervical lymph nodes at levels III and IV, stuck in a block size of 3 × 6 cm in diameter. There was no involvement of the hypopharynx, and her vocal cords were intact. CT scan of her neck revealed a 16 × 54 mm lesion compressing the trachea, and several enlarged left cervical lymph nodes with the size of about 25 mm . The patient was offered a tracheostomy and tracheal stent before undertaking further investigations.
Her subsequent fluorine-18-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG PET/CT) scan revealed previous total thyroidectomy, no evidence of recurrence in the surgical bed, enlarged left cervical lymph nodes at levels III and IV, and extranodal extension into sternocleidomastoid muscle measuring 29 × 43x59 mm, with the maximum standardized uptake value (SUV max) of 6.8. Her thymus measured 19 × 31x37mm, with increased metabolism of FDG (SUV max 3.6). There was a 33 × 39x49 mm mass on the left side of the anterior mediastinum, showing an undefined margin with neighboring organs in the trachea and the thorax (SUV max 6.0). It also showed multiple lymph nodes near the lower trachea, next to the superior vena cava, posterior thymus, and aortic loop; the largest node was 26 × 40 mm, with increased metabolism of FDG (SUV max 7.9). The other organs were unaffected. There was no metastasis in other organs .
Thyroid function tests showed TSH: 0.00726 mIU/L[0,4-5], FT4: 22.34 pmol/L [12-22] and FT3: 4.0 pmol/L [1, 3-3, 1]. We reviewed the pathology of the current cervical lymph node specimen and that of the thyroid specimen from 5 years ago (2015). This showed that the thyroid tumor consisted of invasive cells which were poorly differentiated with squamous cell morphology, different from conventional thyroid carcinoma. The immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis showed positive staining with CK5, CK7, p63, C-kit, CD5 and negative with TTF-1, Thyroglobulin, GATA3, ER, CD99, and NKX2.2, confirming CASTLE pathology in both the specimens.
The patient was diagnosed with a recurrence of the CASTLE thyroid gland in cervical lymph nodes. She was assessed by thoracic, and head and neck surgeons for the possibility of removing the maximum of recurrent tumors. However, it was considered a difficult, high-risk procedure; she and her family declined to go ahead with the surgery. Then, we offered the patient treatment with palliative radiotherapy. However, she and her family declined the treatment and got the patient discharged from the hospital. She was followed up without intervention and is currently stable 15 months after the recurrence.