The patient was a 76-year-old Japanese woman with a primary complaint of a subcutaneous nodule in her back. She had a smoking history of 180 pack-years spanning the period from when she was 20 years old through her 73rd year. We suspected the tumor of being a lipoma, and so tumorectomy was performed as usual with no other preoperative inspection. A specimen of the tumor revealed a subcutaneous solid tumor measuring 40 × 40 mm . Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed evidence of malignant spindle-cell proliferation . Also, immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed that these tumor cells were positive for cytokeratins (CK) AE1/AE3 and CK7 and negative for CK20 . Also, the cells were negative for all mesenchymal markers tested (data not shown). Therefore, subcutaneous metastasis of an epithelial tumor of unknown origin was suspected.
Her laboratory data including tumor markers showed no abnormalities. Also, bronchofiberscopic washing cytology was negative. However, a chest computed tomography (CT) scan and positron emission tomography (PET) revealed an irregular tumor in the right upper lobe . Abnormal findings to suggest a nasopharyngeal tumor were not detected by the CT scan or PET (data not shown). Hence, in order to make a definite diagnosis, right upper lobectomy and lymph node dissection were performed. An operative specimen revealed a lung tumor measuring 40 × 30 mm . HE staining of the tumor showed an undifferentiated carcinoma with poorly defined nests of neoplastic cells and a stroma exhibiting prominent lymphoplasmacytic infiltration . Also, CD3 and CD8 were detected in the lymphocytes around the tumor . In situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded RNA (EBER) gave a negative result (data not shown), but IHC showed the tumor to be positive for latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1; Fig. e). Also, IHC showed that the tumor was negative for p63 and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1; Additional file a, b). The Ki-67 cell proliferation index was approximately 70–80% (Additional file c). There was no lymph node metastasis. These morphologies were similar to those of her subcutaneous tumor. Indeed, the same results of IHC were obtained for the subcutaneous tumor specimens . Based on these findings, we concluded the patient to have PLELC with subcutaneous metastasis (pT2a pN0 M1b pStage IVA). Because the patient declined chemotherapy, we observed her carefully without it. The patient was followed every 3 months by performing a blood test that included a tumor marker and by doing a semi-annual CT scan. Over the past 5 years, she has remained alive and with no evidence of recurrence.