A 48-year-old Han Chinese man presented with a neck mass and progressive foreign body sensation in his throat.
The patient reported no sore throat, dyspnea, or dysphagia during the course of the disease.
The patient had no history of past illness.
The patient had no personal or family history.
Basic physical examination showed no obvious abnormalities.
Laboratory tests showed that the routine blood and urine results as well as blood biochemical indices, including serum calcium-albumin-creatinine, blood urea nitrogen, lactate dehydrogenase, β2-microglobulin, and 24-hour urine for total protein, moreover, the results of serum immunoglobulin and complement assay , were all within normal limits.
Electronic laryngoscopy and plain computed tomography (CT) showed thickening of the left epiglottis , arytenoid and aryepiglottic folds , osteolytic lesions of the left hyoid , and thyroid cartilage plate . The left piriform fossa was occluded, and enlarged cervical and submandibular lymph nodes were observed bilaterally. The patient underwent selective neck dissection and partial hyoid resection to relieve neck compression, and a final diagnosis was made. 18F-FDG positron emission tomography (PET)/CT revealed focally increased radioactivity centered around the hyoid body and its left greater horn (SUVmax = 8.8) and the left submandibular and submental soft tissue (SUVmax = 4.8) exhibited on PET , CT , and PET/CT fusion . Osteolytic lesions were identified on the plain CT bone window. PET maximum-intensity projection image showed no other sites with abnormal 18F-FDG uptake, except for the perihyoid region. These findings were suggestive of a malignancy.
Histological results revealed angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia of the hyaline-vascular type arranged in an onion-bulb appearance , and the presence of mature plasma cells characterized by an oval shape, abundant basophilic cytoplasm, perinuclear halo, round eccentric nuclei, and indiscernible nucleoli[,,] . Histopathological results were positive for plasma cell markers [CD138 , CD38 , κ and λ light chains, CD79α , IgG, IgM], and focal expression of T-cell markers [CD43 , CD45], and CD56; however, deficiency of B-cell markers [CD20 , CD19] was observed. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 3% . No paraproteins and pathological elevation of κ and λ chains were detected by the serum protein electrophoresis and free light-chain assays[,]. Bone marrow biopsy indicated normal trilineage hematopoiesis with only 0.2% plasma cells in all leukocytes. Additionally, polyneuropathy and other minor symptoms were absent.