A 13-year-old boy with reverse overjet and maxillary retrognathia was referred for orthodontic therapy. Patient’s medical history showed no problems, and no systematic disease that would interfere with orthodontic treatment could be found. The patient had a missing upper left second molar and a supernumerary tooth that was present palatal to the upper left first molar and second premolar . The supernumerary tooth would not affect orthodontic treatment, and a decision was made to not extract the tooth until completion of treatment.
Clinical examination depicted a skeletal Class III malocclusion with a straight profile, retrognathic maxilla and upper lip (A). The patient had an anterior crossbite with -2mm overjet and both canines and molars had a Class III dental relationship (B). Upon guiding the patient towards the centric relation, the patient had close to an edge to edge anterior occlusion (overjet: -0.5 mm) and the reverse overjet, at least partially was caused by an anterior shift of incisors by the patient. There was a size discrepancy between the anterior maxillary and mandibular teeth (anterior Bolton analysis: 81.7%). The cephalometric analysis also confirmed the Class III malocclusion with maxillary retrognathia as the main cause (SNA=79.9◦, SNB=82.3◦, ANB=-2.5◦). Vertical relations were normal (GoGn-SN=31.9◦, FMA=26.8◦) and the patient had proclined maxillary and retroclined mandibular incisors (U1 to SN=105.3◦ and IMPA=83.9◦) (A, , ).
Our treatment objective was to correct the maxillary-mandibular discrepancy by maxillary advancement to eliminate the reverse overjet and to attain an ideal overbite and overjet. Different treatment plans were suggested for achieving the treatment objectives: Use of extra-oral appliance (Facemask), deferring treatment and then performing orthognathic surgery after the completion of growth; or to use miniplates and intermaxillary elastics to protract maxilla.
Two pairs of bilateral orthodontic miniplates (CMF miniplate; Ortho Select GmbH Implant Technology, Wurmlingen, Germany) were placed in the canine area of the mandible and infrazygomatic crests of the maxilla. Mandibular miniplates were inserted first, and after a week maxillary plates were placed under local anesthesia (2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine) by a maxillofacial surgeon using the same surgical protocol described by Cevidanes et al. Three weeks after the surgery, maxillary-mandibular elastics with ¼-in size (Wildlife elastics; American Orthodontics, Wisconsin, USA) between the hooks of the miniplates on both sides were used . A removable appliance with posterior bite blocks was also used to help remove occlusal interferences. The elastics force was measured at 250 g . The patient was instructed to use the intermaxillary elastics 24 hours a day, except when eating or brushing, and to change his elastics every day. After four weeks, a posterior crossbite was starting to develop, so an expansion screw was added to the removable appliance and the patient was advised to open the screw two times a week. After three months the patient had an edge to edge occlusion, and the elastics were changed to 3/16-in medium size elastics. The force delivered by this elastic was 350g. After eight months of orthopedic treatment, patient gained a 2-mm positive overjet and the anterior crossbite was eliminated (B). After the active orthopedic therapy, fixed orthodontic treatment began using a fixed MBT (0.022-in) appliance during which elastics were still used for retention until peak height velocity (PHV) was over. Because of the Bolton discrepancy between the anterior maxillary and mandibular teeth, the anterior maxillary teeth were built-up using composite veneer techniques following orthodontic treatment. After twelve months of fixed orthodontic treatment, the ideal dental midline relationship, overjet, and overbite were achieved, and the orthodontic treatment was finished .
A 2-mm overjet was attained after eight months of active orthopedic treatment (T1). Soft tissue and skeletal relationship were also improved (A). Post-orthopedic cephalometric analysis showed that the ANB has been increased by 4.1◦. Maxillary and mandibular incisors were protracted by 1 mm and 1.4 mm, respectively, in relation to their corresponding jaw. Maxillary incisors inclination angle did not change, but mandibular incisors inclination angle (IMPA) increased by 2.8◦. Mandibular angle (SN-GoGn=34◦) was slightly increased (2.1◦) and P-A facial height ratio was decreased by 1.9%. The palatal plan was rotated counterclockwise by 4.8◦ (, , ).
After completing the 12 months fixed orthodontic treatment using 0.022-in appliance with MBT prescription (T2), the 2-mm positive overjet was maintained and the posterior open bite was eliminated. The cephalometric analysis after completion of orthodontic treatment showed that the ANB angle was further decreased (by 0.8°) (T2vs T1) whereas the maxillary and mandibular incisor inclination was increased (U1-SN by 3.2° and IMPA by 5.8°). Mandibular plane angle decreased after fixed orthodontic treatment (by 1.9°). P-A facial height ratio was increased to 64.4% after orthopedic and fixed orthodontic treatment, which was the same as before the orthopedic treatment had even begun (T0). These results show that the increased facial height caused by the bi-maxillary plate treatment is temporary and after the fixed orthodontic treatment, facial height ratio and mandibular angles return to the same numbers as before the treatment. The palatal plane was rotated clockwise by 1.1 degrees (, , ).