In November 2017, a 21-year-old man fell 7 m from an operation frame and injured his right upper extremity, lumbar spine, and pelvis. He presented to our institution 2 h after the injury. Physical examination revealed high-grade swelling, pain, deformities and limitation of function of the wrist and elbow as well as pain and limitation of function of the lumbar spine and pelvis. Radiographs of the wrist, elbow, lumbar spine, and pelvis revealed fractures of the magnum bone, scaphoid bone, the radial head, the coronoid, the first lumbar vertebrae, and pelvis. Moreover, dislocation of the distal radioulnar joint, elbow, and lunate subluxation were noted. The diagnosis included carpal bone fracture-dislocation, Essex-Lopresti injury, terrible triad of the elbow , lumber fracture, and pelvic fracture. He received analgesia for reduction of the elbow dislocation in the emergency room. Seven days later, surgical treatment was performed. Under general anesthesia, we performed the following techniques: open reduction and internal fixation with a k-wire and Hebert screw via a dorsal incision to treat the carpal bone fracture-dislocation; open reduction and internal fixation with a Herbert screw to fix the radial head; suture anchor to fix the ulna coracoid process and radial collateral ligaments of elbow joint to treat the Essex-Lopresti injury and the terrible triad of elbow through an anterolateral approach of the elbow; and K-wire fixation to fix the distal radioulnar joint via a dorsal incision of the wrist . X-rays show the malposition of the distal radioulnar joint 1 week after the surgery. We removed the K-wire. Two months later, the patient felt pain in his wrist. We found that the malposition of the distal radioulnar joint was unchanged . After a discussion with his parents, revision surgery was performed. The radial head was replaced with a metal prosthesis, and the distal ulna was removed. .
After 12 months, the patient regained elbow flexion and extension strength (range of motion, 10°–130°). His wrist was stable with subluxation of the distal radioulnar joint. The following forearm motion range was observed: supination, 0°–70°; and pronation, 0°–60°. The patient had returned to work. Three years later, we had checked the elbow joint and forearm function..