A 48-year old man with a history of mild asymptomatic mitral regurgitation (MR) was admitted to our hospital because of recent onset of malaise, fever, jaundice and peripheral edema. The patient was a known case of alcoholic liver disease (Child A). He denied any history of nausea, vomiting, gastrointestinal bleeding, dental extraction, or recent weight loss. On examination, he had a temperature of 39°C, a pulse rate of 120 beats/min and blood pressure of 106/70 mmHg. Other notable findings were the presence of poor dental hygiene, a loud grade 4/6 holosystolic murmur (best heard over left sternal border with thrill and radiation to the right sternal border), Osler’s nodes in the palms, and lower limb edema. Routine laboratory exams showed mildly elevated liver function tests (ASAT 2.86 μmol/l, ALAT 1.71 μmol/l), leukocytosis (17.8 Gpt/l), elevated CRP (98.0 mg/l) and normal renal function tests. Electrocardiography was unremarkable.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a flail posterior mitral leaflet (P2) with multiple flickering vegetations, and severe centrally originating eccentric jet of mitral regurgitation towards the atrial septum (medially and anteriorly). Following an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, which revealed Grade I of lower esophageal varices, tranesophageal echocardiophy (TEE) was performed the following day, confirming TTE findings (Figures
, and
). It is worth noting that on close scanning of the aneurysmal interatrial septum (IAS) an overlying relatively fixed and sessile echogenic mass (30 × 10 mm) attached was observed. Although thrombus formation was a differential diagnosis, our first provisional diagnosis was AE, keeping effects of jet lesions in mind (Figures and
; Additional file
: Movie 1 and Additional file
: Movie 2). Three Dimensional TEE (3D-TEE) facilitated us in delineation of the lesion. The blood culture was found to be positive for Streptococcus oralis and treatment was started immediately with penicillin G and other supportive medications. After 7 days of antibiotic therapy, although hemodynamically stable, a consensus decision (following discussion with patient) was made for early surgical intervention. Decision for surgical intervention was based on the large burden of infective tissue on the Mitral Valve (MV) and IAS. Using cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and cardioplegic arrest, the patient underwent minimally invasive resection of the atrial mass (Figures and
), direct closure of the defect, resection of the diseased portions of anterior (surgical finding) and posterior mitral leaflet and implantation of a biological mitral valve prosthesis (Epic™ stented tissue valve, St. Jude Medical # 33). The patient was weaned from CPB and admitted to the intensive care unit. Culture of the specimens was negative for bacterial growth. Histopathological evaluation of resected tissues from mitral valve and atrial septum (Figure ) was conclusive for atrial and mitral valve endocarditis, showing an old focal subendocardial bleeding, a focal mild to moderate fibrosis and presence of some neutrophil granulocytes.
During the postoperative course, the patient developed a secondary intracranial hemorrhage with right hemiplegia, likely explained as a result of endocarditic micro-embolization and late hemorrhagic transformation. The bleeding was drained surgically and the patient was sent to rehabilitation. It was reported that he died several weeks later because of sudden cardiopulmonary arrest. Autopsy permission was denied by patient’s relatives.