A 33-year-old Caucasian Greek woman presented to the emergency department of the Hospital with a continuous epigastric pain of four hours duration and intermittent vomiting. Her medical history included hypercholesterolemia and type 1 diabetes for 16 years treated with insulin injections twice daily. Our patient had omitted all insulin injections since 36 hours prior to presentation. Regarding coronary risk factors, apart from diabetes and hypercholesterolemia, she was a smoker of more than two packs of cigarettes daily.
On initial assessment she was drowsy with tachycardia (112 pulses/minute), tachypnoea (28 breaths/minute) and hypotension (85/44 mmHg). A physical examination of her abdomen had normal results. Her initial ECG revealed sinus tachycardia, ST segment elevation in the anteroseptal leads consistent with anterior myocardial infarction, and intraventricular conduction delay . A urine dipstick test detected ketones, bedside capillary testing using a glucometer showed high glucose concentrations, and arterial blood gas analysis indicated metabolic acidosis (pH = 7.16, carbon dioxide partial pressure = 13 mmHg, oxygen partial pressure = 123 mmHg, bicarbonate concentration = 4 mmol/L, base excess = -24 mmol/L). We provisionally diagnosed diabetic ketoacidosis, possibly precipitated by an acute myocardial infarction.
We initially treated our patient with fluid replacement with normal saline, intravenous insulin at seven units/hour, sodium bicarbonate, aspirin, clopidogrel, and low molecular weight heparin. Biochemical results showed the following serum concentrations: potassium = 7.2 mEq/L, sodium = 127 mEq/L, urea = 97 mg/dl, creatinine = 2.26 mg/dl, and glucose = 676 mg/dl. A bedside cardiac ECG showed no segmental wall motion abnormality and a normal ejection fraction. As there were findings both for (epigastric pain, ECG pattern, presence of three coronary heart disease risk factors) and against the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction (young age, normal ECG), we performed coronary angiography in order to exclude anterior acute myocardial infarction, which could lead to severe myocardial damage and possible severe complications (heart failure, among others) if treatment was delayed. During angiography, which revealed normal coronary arteries, ST segment elevation in the anteroseptal leads was still present in her ECG findings.
A repeat biochemical test after three hours showed the following values: sodium = 130 mEq/L, potassium = 4.9 mEq/L, and glucose = 255 mg/dl. A repeat ECG showed a complete resolution of the anteroseptal ST segment elevation and intraventricular conduction delay . Her troponin I concentration 12 hours after admission was normal (0.1 μg/L). Our patient subsequently made an uneventful recovery. When she was discharged seven days after, both her ECG and biochemical results were normal.