The clinical course and corresponding figures are shown in . A 36-year-old male had five craniotomies and five transsphenoidal surgeries between the ages of 12, when adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma was first diagnosed. He also received local irradiation at 15 years of age. When he was 31 years old, tumor regrowth occurred in the left cavernous sinus . We removed this lesion , which appeared to be an adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma, and performed gamma-knife surgery (GKS) because of frequent cyst formations. When the patient was 36 years and 3 months of age, the tumor recurred in the cavernous sinus and surrounded the left optic nerve . Transsphenoidal biopsy was performed; the pathological findings showed squamous metaplasia, and CyberKnife surgery was performed on the residual lesion . However, the residual tumor regrew rapidly in the irradiated area during the next 4 months [ and ], suggesting malignant transformation of the tumor. The patient was then readmitted to our department. Neurological findings at admission were blindness in his left eye and multiple complete nerve palsies of the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves on his left side. Because tumor invasion had spread into the cavernous sinus involving the carotid artery, we used a dual approach to resect the tumor, carotid artery, and cavernous sinus: Transcranial and transsphenoidal surgeries with an extracranial-intracranial (EC-IC) bypass using the radial artery. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the tumor was completely removed [–].
Serial pathological changes are shown in Figures and . In the specimen taken at 31 years of age, the tumor was covered with prickle cells, and a single layer of nonatypical basal cells and cholesterin crystals were present in the interstitial tissue Internal layer of stellate cells in loose connective matrix was found [ and ]. Similar findings had been reported in all serial pathologic examinations before 31 years of age, and the tumor was diagnosed as an adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma. The specimen taken at 36 years and 3 months of age showed densely packed squamous cells and stratification of basal cells with an atypical appearance characteristic of squamous metaplasia. The features of adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma were no longer apparent [, ].
A specimen from the transcranial and transsphenoidal dual surgeries consisted chiefly of squamous cells . The lamina propria was collapsed, and infiltration of atypical cells was observed in interstitial tissue. Tumor cells had enlarged nuclei and clarification of the nucleolus. Parakeratosis and intercellular bridges were also present in the tissue, which resembled squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). As shown in immunohistochemistry, the abundance of p40 (a specific marker of squamous cells) and p53 (the indicator of malignancy) progressively increased between the ages of 31 and 36 years and 9 months . On the basis of these findings, the case was ultimately diagnosed as malignant transformation of craniopharyngioma.
After the transcranial and transsphenoidal dual surgeries, the patient received chemotherapy consisting of docetaxel (75 mg per body surface squared), cisplatin (100 mg per body surface squared), and fluorouracil (1000 mg per body surface squared) (TPF chemotherapy). The tumor has been well controlled for more than 12 months after surgery.