A developmentally normal 13-year-old African American female with a history of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and mild scoliosis presented for evaluation of new onset right elbow contracture. Three years prior, she experienced a sudden inability to straighten her right elbow and simultaneously developed stiffness and pain in the right shoulder. Acutely, she reported recurring episodes of enuresis, concerning for spinal cord pathology. She has no significant family history pertaining to presentation. Physical examination revealed hyperreflexia of her right upper (3 +) and lower extremity (4 + with clonus and positive Babinski reflex). She had right upper and lower extremity weakness (4/5 strength), decreased bulk, and increased tone. No evidence of dysmetria, ataxia, or changes in gait. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine revealed a 4.1 × 1.2 × 1.5 cm mixed cystic and solid intramedullary mass spanning C3-C6 with cord edema extending superiorly and inferiorly to these levels . An osteoplastic laminoplasty with tumor resection was performed.
Cervical C3-6 laminectomy was performed followed by semi-laminectomy of inferior C2 and superior C7. A key technical nuance is to perform adequate bony exposure to afford a generous operative window for the tumor. Next, epidural ultrasound was used to identify the tumor, which appeared mixed density but generally hyperechoic. The dura was opened and then direct stimulation was used for dorsal column mapping. Physiologic midline was identified with stimulation, which corresponded to an anatomic midline. After midline myelotomy, we exposed tumor which appeared gray and firm. We exposed the rostral and caudal extent of the tumor. The tumor was biopsied, and then microsurgical technique with an ultrasonic aspirator was used to debulk and resect the tumor. Gross total resection (GTR) of the tumor was achieved without any residual tumor as confirmed by intraoperative ultrasound and visual inspection. Laminoplasty was then performed and previously removed laminae reapproximated. Intraoperative neuromonitoring was used to maximize tumor resection and minimize neurological morbidity. No complications arose during surgery.
Immediate postoperative MRI showed GTR of tumor. The patient did have new temporary worsening deficits in strength, endurance, balance, and mobility after surgery. She remained inpatient for approximately 2 months for rehabilitation, making good recovery. She then received adjuvant proton beam radiation therapy to the C2-7 tumor bed at a dose of 50.4 Gy (relative biological effectiveness). The family declined chemotherapy, including a trial of temozolomide or other early phase therapeutic studies, after careful consideration with the clinical team. At 3-month follow-up, she reported that her weakness and muscle deficits were improved with physical therapy, but she had developed new onset of upper back pain that began around the time she started radiotherapy. MRI at 1 month revealed subtle enhancement around the surgical resection site that may indicate postsurgical scar tissue . Approximately 6 months after surgery, she presented with headaches, vomiting, behavioral changes, and new seizure activity. New MRI demonstrated disease progression with leptomeningeal enhancement in the thoracic and lumbar spine , intracranial metastasis , and hydrocephalus . She received medication to control her headaches and seizures, a ventriculoperitoneal shunt for the hydrocephalus, and additional radiation therapy to the untreated locations of disease. She enrolled in hospice care and died of disease 11 months after the date of GTR.
Histologic analysis showed a pleomorphic neoplasm with atypical glial and dysmorphic neuronal cells, some of which displayed binucleation . In addition, there was an area of hypercellularity with increased atypia , consistent with anaplastic transformation, and presence of mitoses (focally up to 8 mitotic figures per ten high-power fields). Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) highlighted neoplastic glial cells and synaptophysin highlighted neoplastic neurons . Immunohistochemistry additionally showed strong and diffuse nuclear staining for p53 in 90–100% of cells consistent with a mutational profile, and increased Ki-67 proliferation rate in 70–80% cells in the anaplastic region. While the most recent edition of the WHO classification of tumors of the CNS does not establish definitive histologic or molecular diagnostic criteria for AGG, the presence of markedly increased mitotic activity and accompanying proliferative index warranted that diagnosis. Tumor molecular profiling with the Texas Children’s Hospital Solid Tumor Comprehensive deoxyribonucleic acid/ribonucleic acid panel revealed mutations in: H3F3A K27M (c.83A>T, p.Lys28Met, allele fraction 31%), TP53 (c.731_748del, p.Gly244_ Pro250delinsAla, allele fraction 41%), and NF1 (c.3058delG, p.Glu1020LysfsTER2, allele fraction 59%, and c.4245T>A, p.Asn1415Lys, allele fraction 31%). While uncommon and midline tumors with GG morphology and cooccurring H3F3A K27M and RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway mutations have been previously reported; this was felt to be concordant with the histologic diagnosis. Tumor DNA methylation profiling is an emerging molecular technique with promising diagnostic utility for CNS tumors, however, is not yet widely available for clinical use.