A 33-year-old Japanese woman with a history of IgAN and diabetes mellitus was admitted to our hospital for the initiation of insulin therapy and evaluation of persistent proteinuria in 2015.
She had undergone a renal biopsy for proteinuria and had been diagnosed with IgAN at our hospital in 2009. At the current presentation, she had 0.7–1.0 g/day of urinary protein excretion without significant haematuria. Although her mean blood pressure was 110/60 mmHg, she was treated with an angiotensin receptor blocker (ARB) for IgAN with persistent proteinuria. Her urinary protein excretion levels had been about 0.5 g/day after the initiation of ARB. Two years later, a tonsillectomy for persistent proteinuria was performed. The patient was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus based on the fasting plasma glucose levels and haemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels during regular visits and was started on a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor and Pioglitazone in 2012. One year later, she discontinued both the regular visits to our hospital and her medication. Seven days prior to admission at our hospital, she visited a clinic for fatigue. Her random blood glucose level was 375 mg/dL; based on this result and persistent proteinuria, she was referred to our hospital.
Regarding her family history, her younger sister was diagnosed with impaired glucose tolerance, while her maternal grandmother was diagnosed with diabetes . The physical examination was unremarkable; she had a height of 147.0 cm and weight of 46 kg (body mass index [BMI] 21.3). Laboratory testing revealed several abnormal values, including a random blood glucose level of 355 mg/dL, HbA1c level of 10.8%, 95 mmol/mol (reference; 4.6–6.2%, 27–44 mmol/mol), lactic acid level of 19.4 mg/dL (reference, 3.0–17.0 mg/dL), and pyruvic acid level of 1.28 mg/dL (reference, 0.30–0.94 mg/dL). Her renal function was preserved, as her creatinine level was 0.52 mg/dL (reference, 0.47–0.79 mg/dL) and her estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 107.5 mL/min/1.73 m2. No antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) or islet cells were detected. Urinalysis revealed 1+ protein and 4+ glucose without blood by dipstick. A 24-h urine collection test showed a creatinine clearance (CCr) of 175 mL/min, 2.08 g of protein with poor selectivity, and C-peptide immunoreactivity (CPR) of 33.3 μg (reference, 29.2–167 μg). During closer evaluation, the patient recalled having a hearing impairment during her school days. Therefore, audiometry was conducted and revealed mild bilateral sensorineural hearing loss > 4 kHz. Electrocardiography and echocardiography showed no abnormalities. No diabetic changes or macular retinal dystrophy were observed on funduscopic examinations.
Based on the above findings, we suspected mitochondrial disease. A second percutaneous renal biopsy was performed to identify the cause of the persistent proteinuria in 2015 . The biopsy specimens for light microscopy contained 25 glomeruli, of which 6 were globally sclerotic. The remaining glomeruli revealed no mesangial hypercellularity or expansion of the matrix . There was no evidence of thickness of the glomerular basement membranes, crescents, necrotising lesions, or lesions of focal segmental sclerosis. Moderate tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis involving up to 30 to 40% of the sample were observed . Abnormally distended epithelial cells containing numerous small intracytoplasmic granules that were positive for periodic acid-Schiff staining were present among the collecting ducts . These cells were identical to ‘granular swollen epithelial cells (GSECs)’, which have previously been reported as a morphologic feature of mitochondrial nephropathy. Immunofluorescence staining for IgA and C3 was negative . On ultrastructural examination, no significant deposits were observed in the glomeruli . Podocyte foot processes were globally preserved. No cell type with an abnormal shaped or increased number of mitochondria was observed either in the glomeruli or the tubules. The GSECs that had been observed in the microscopic analysis were not apparent in the specimen for electron microscopy.
A review of the first renal biopsy specimen revealed the presence of 12 glomeruli; of these, none were globally sclerosed . The glomeruli exhibited mild mesangial widening accompanied by IgA deposition , but no crescents, mesangial hypercellularity, or segmental sclerosis. These findings correspond to M0, E0, S0, T0, and C0 in the Oxford-MEST-C classification of IgA nephropathy . IgG was negative, and C3 was dimly positive on immunohistology (data not shown). We stained the first biopsy specimen with a monoclonal antibody (KM55) against Gd-IgA1 (IBL, Gunma, Japan) ; this immunofluorescence analysis revealed that the IgA1 deposits in the patient’s glomeruli consisted of Gd-IgA1 . No tubular atrophy or interstitial fibrosis were evident ; however, numerous GSECs were present among the distal tubules and collecting ducts . On electron microscopic analysis, cells containing dysmorphic mitochondria were not apparent in the glomeruli or tubules.
Mitochondrial DNA analysis from peripheral blood revealed a m. DNA3243A > G mutation. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with MIDD. After the initiation of insulin therapy, her blood glucose levels returned to a normal range, and she was discharged.