A 54 year-old male presented to a small community hospital in eastern Massachusetts with complaints of dull left upper quadrant abdominal pain, fever of 102.3 degrees Fahrenheit, nausea, chills, night sweats and dark urine for 48 hours. The patient recently traveled in Maine, northeastern Massachusetts, and Nantucket Island, Massachusetts. During his travels these symptoms progressed prompting him to seek medical attention. The patient was noted to be leukopenic, thrombocytopenic, and anemic with peripheral blood smear showing ring forms consistent with Babesia microti. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed revealing perisplenic fluid in the subphrenic region with an upper limits of normal-sized spleen, and a small amount of free fluid in the pelvis suggesting hemoperitoneum. The patient was started on atovaquone and azithromycin and transferred to the Boston Medical Center. Upon presentation the patient reported improved abdominal pain.
The patient's past medical history is significant for Lyme disease, left rotator cuff surgery 8 weeks prior to presentation, and a laparoscopic right inguinal hernia repair. He denied any medications. The patient reported travel in the upper east coast of the United States but denied recent travel beyond that. Of note, he has two homes both of which are in endemic areas of tick-borne illnesses. The patient denied smoking, significant alcohol use, and drug use.
On physical exam, vitals signs were as follows: temperature 99.3 degrees (F), pulse 94 beats per minute, blood pressure 133/80 mmHg, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation 99% on room air. In general, the patient appeared pale but was awake, alert, and oriented to person, place, and time. On inspection, the abdominal exam revealed no rashes and negative Cullen and Grey-Turner signs. There was minimal tenderness to palpation of the left lower quadrant; otherwise, the abdominal exam was benign. Furthermore, the remainder of the physical exam was unremarkable.
Laboratory values were significant for white blood cell count 4.0 × 109/L, hemoglobin 102 g/L (10.2 g/dL), hematocrit 28.8%, platelet count 26.0 × 109/L, bilirubin total 32.49 μmol/L (1.9 mg/dL), bilirubin direct 17.1 μmol/L (1.0 mg/dL), LDH 591 units/L, ALT 180 units/L, AST 68 units/L, and alkaline phosphatase 116 units/L.
A repeat CT scan performed showed the spleen measured 14 cm in longitudinal length with multiple lacerations (the largest extending near the hilum), and perisplenic/perihepatic/peripelvic hemorrhage . Infectious Disease (ID) and General Surgery were consulted for further evaluation. ID reviewed the peripheral blood smear and confirmed the presence of Babesiosis with 3% parasitemia. Atovaquone and azithromycin were continued with the addition of doxycycline for presumptive coverage of Lyme disease and Ehrlichiosis. The patient was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit for expectant management of the splenic injury which included bed rest, serial abdominal exams, serial hemoglobin/hematocrit checks, and platelet transfusion to a goal of greater than 50.0 × 109/L.
Non-operative course of management was chosen for several reasons. First, the patient was minimally symptomatic by the time of transfer with hemodynamically normal vital signs. Second, the parasite count was 3% indicating a high likelihood of prompt, successful response to pharmacological therapy. Lastly, the patient has a history of Lyme disease, and he resides in a highly endemic region for tick-borne diseases. It was the belief of the team that the patient would therefore be at significant risk for additional tick-borne illnesses in the future, and if infected again would have a higher risk of mortality if he were asplenic.
Blood cultures and DNA polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies were sent for Babesiosis, Lyme disease, and Ehrlichiosis. Babesiosis serum IgG was low/normal and IgM was positive, which was interpreted as equivocal; however, Babesia PCR was positive for active infection. Borellia species PCR was negative and Ehrlichia chaffensis IgG/IgM antibodies and PCR were also negative.
The patient was observed in the hospital for four days with improved symptoms each day. At the time of discharge his leukopenia had resolved, hemoglobin increased to 103 g/L (10.3 g/dL) from a low of 85 g/L (8.5 g/dL). Platelets increased to 439.0 × 109/L from a low of 26.0 × 109/L status post transfusion of 15 units, and his bilirubin (direct and indirect) levels were also normal at discharge. The patient received a 10-day course of antibiotics in total. At his follow up appointment the patient was doing well and deemed appropriate to resume normal activity.