A 77-year-old male with a medical history significant for acoustic schwannoma, anterior cranial fossa meningioma, and immune thrombocytopenic purpura presented with the right-sided weakness after repeated falls. Non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a left-sided subdural hematoma. On examination, he was found awake, but disoriented. He had weakness of the left arm and leg, along with long tract signs that included sustained clonus and hyperreflexia of the bilateral lower extremities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain demonstrated leptomeningeal enhancement of the brain and skull base, ventricles, and the cranial nerves MRI of the spine demonstrated florid enhancement of the leptomeninges from the cervicomedullary junction to the cauda equina. Most pertinent was focal thickening of the leptomeninges at T1 and T6 with mass effect on the spinal cord . Both lesions appeared to be intradural and infiltrative to the spinal cord, with an intramedullary component, with the T6 appearing larger and more infiltrative. An initial lumbar puncture demonstrated elevated immunoglobulin (Ig) G levels, but cytology and flow cytometry were nondiagnostic.
For once having platelets within normal range a month prior, he developed thrombocytopenia with platelets of 40,000 uL. He was initially treated for this thrombocytopenia with intravenous Ig and platelet transfusion with minimal improvement. Once his thrombocytopenia was improved a biopsy was offered to the patient’s family and they wished to proceed.
Subsequently, a T6 laminectomy was planned and completed. Intraoperatively, we noted a firm infiltrative lesion of the spinal cord. There was no clear plane separating the tumor and the spinal cord. A subtotal resection was achieved secondary to the infiltrative nature of the lesion. No intraoperative neuromonitoring changes were observed. The pathology report of the biopsied specimens demonstrated hypercellularity with atypical mitotic nuclei and astrocytic features. In addition, there were foci of microvascular proliferation . The histopathological staining of the biopsy sample demonstrated positivity for vimentin, glial fibrillary protein , ATRX and negative for CAM 5.2, epithelial membrane antigen and IDH 1 . A p53 mutation was also seen. These findings were diagnostic for glioblastoma WHO grade IV IDH1-wildtype of the thoracic spinal cord.
Postoperatively, he was fully oriented and following commands in all extremities with more diminished strength and sensation on the right lower extremity compared to the left lower extremity. Over the course of a few days, he developed worsening encephalopathy. A lumbar puncture was completed as part of encephalopathy workup. Elevated opening pressures with an elevated protein level were observed. On placement of a lumbar drain, we identified a meaningful clinical improvement. A ventriculoperitoneal shunt was placed for cerebrospinal fluid diversion. Given the diagnosis with extensive leptomeningeal spread and overall poor neurological function, chemotherapy and radiotherapy were deferred by the oncologists and the family. The patient continued to decline and subsequently passed away 2 months after his surgical diagnosis.