A 29-year-old gentleman, bank employee by occupation, was brought to emergency department in a stuporous condition. According to his parents, he had headache and blurring of vision which got relieved after rest. Later, he had two episodes of generalized convulsions. There was a history of upper respiratory tract infection, fever, and headache for 5 days before the seizures. The patient was drowsy at the time of admission. Computed tomography (CT) brain revealed right sigmoid sinus and right distal transverse sinus venous thrombosis with hemorrhagic venous infarct in the posterior temporo-occipital lobe. During primary assessment, the patient had ecchymosis around right shoulder, for which right shoulder plain anteroposterior (AP) X-ray was done. It revealed right shoulder posterior fracture dislocation. Left-sided X-ray was not done as primary assessment did not reveal significant findings. Once the patient regained full consciousness, he complained of pain in both shoulders. Left side X-ray was also done, which showed left shoulder posterior fracture-dislocation too. CT scan of both the shoulders was done. These studies revealed bilateral shoulder posterior fracture dislocation, bilaterally Neer’s three-part fracture ( and ). Regular monitoring of international normalized ratio was done as the patient was on anticoagulants. The patient was given initial care by the neurologists. He was put on low molecular weight heparin. Once the diagnosis of bilateral posterior fracture-dislocationwas established and surgery planned, he was converted to heparin the day before surgery. He was operated under general anesthesia by bilateral shoulder open reduction and internal fixation with proximal humerus locking plates and greater tuberosity reconstruction . Low molecular weight heparin was restarted on the 1st post-operative day. The patient was put on pendulum exercises for both shoulders post-operatively. Oral anticoagulants were started at the time of discharge. Neurologists have kept him on anticoagulant nicoumalone 4 mg (acitrom) and anticonvulsant levetiracetam (levipil). He was discharged in a satisfactory condition. Sixteen days’ post-operatively, he had another episode of convulsion, which lasted for less than a minute. Check X-rays showed well-reduced shoulders with implants insitu bilaterally. He had no specific problems in rehabilitation program. 2 years post-operatively, he had functional upper arms bilaterally: Right shoulder forward flexion 160°, abduction 80°, external rotation 80°, and internal rotation upto D7 and left shoulder forward flexion 160°, abduction 70°, external rotation 80°, and internal rotation upto D7 . Despite the restriction of abduction of both the shoulders, the patient is highly satisfied with the functional result, feels comfortable and has no pain. The patient had no signs of avascular necrosis (AVN) at 2 years follow-up .