This is a case of a 25 years old Malay girl with learning disability and no significant past medical history, who started noticing a sacral mass since August 2015. The mass was painless and gradually increasing in size. The family members of this patient brought her to a traditional healer. They did not seek any medical treatment until late 2017. By this time, the mass over the sacrum was extremely large. Family members claimed the mass was preventing the patient from lying down flat supine. The patient was also unable to ambulate for the past 2 years. Hence, she was bedbound most of the time. It was difficult for her to sit on the wheelchair. She also felt tired to move because the mass was quite heavy. The family members claimed when the patient was lying down flat, she had to flex her hips and knees to achieve a more comfortable position. In addition, she often slept either in prone position or in supine with multiple pillows below her body. The mother also claimed over the last 2 months, the patient’s body had been getting thinner despite her physical weight was increasing due to the increase in size of the sacral mass. The patient had been passing stool and urine in pampers. There was no past medical history and no family history of cancer. Socially, the patient lived with her mother and siblings. The mother was the main care taker. Her father passed away 10 years ago because of heart attack. The patient previously attended a special needs school, but she stopped going to school since 2015 after developing the sacral mass.
This patient was managed in the Southern Region referral centre for Orthopaedic Oncology in Malaysia. On clinical examination in the Orthopaedic Oncology ward, the patient appeared cachexic, she had slightly pale conjunctiva, but she was not dysmorphic. Vital signs were Blood Pressure 142/90, Pulse Rate 98 beats per minute and Temperature 37 degrees Celsius. There was a large mass 40 cm × 30 cm × 20 cm over the sacrum. The mass was firm to hard in consistency and involved both buttocks and the gluteal fold . Dilated veins were noted under the skin overlying the sacral mass. Neurological exam of bilateral lower limb was normal. However, there was generalized wasting of all muscles over the bilateral lower limb. Anal tone was intact.
Laboratory investigations taken were unremarkable. Computed Tomography of the Pelvis showed a large destructive sacrococcygeal mass measuring 43 cm × 38 cm × 27 cm with extension into the presacral space resulting in anterior displacement of the rectum, urinary bladder and uterus and posterior extension into the dorsal soft tissue with involvement of the gluteus, piriformis, and left erector spinae muscles . Superior margin of the sacral bone involvement was up to S2. The mass was predominantly of fluid density with internal enhancing septation and calcifications which suggested primary chordoma more likely . Magnetic Resonance Imaging done showed similar findings. Skeletal Survey Radiograph did not show any distant metastasis. A Trucut biopsy of the mass was done. Histopathological analysis showed tumour cells with “physaliphorous cells” positive for pancytokeratin, EMA, Vimentin and S-100 immunohistochemistry stainings with minimal mitotic figures and mild nuclear pleomorphism . Brachyury immunohistochemistry staining was not available in our centre. However, the clinical history, morphology of tumour on microscopy and immunohistochemistry staining available were consistent sacral chordoma.
The diagnosis of Sacral Chordoma was confirmed. Multidisciplinary team discussion done among Orthopaedic Oncology, General Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Blood Bank, Anaesthetic and Plastic Surgery teams. A family conference was done. The family’s aim was for removal of the sacral mass to allow the patient lie supine on bed and sit on the wheelchair.
Subsequently, the patient undergone Wide Resection and En Bloc Sacrectomy. The Posterior-Only Approach was used with a “Mercedes Star” 3 limbed incision. Duration of surgery was 8 h. The patient was supported with blood products transfusion during surgery. Intraoperatively, the sacral tumour had eroded the sacral bone from S2 to S5 . Sacrectomy was done at the level of S2. Sacral nerve roots S2-S5 were all infiltrated by the mass and therefore were unable to be preserved. The mass and surrounding gluteal muscles invaded by the tumour were also all resected. All resection margins were less than 1 mm from the tumour. Primary closure was done without any distant or local flap as per consultation with Plastic Surgery team. The tumour weight was 25 kg . Post operatively, the patient was monitored in Intensive Care Unit for 3 days. The patient developed neurogenic bowel and bladder post sacrectomy requiring enema and long-term urinary catheter. In addition, the post-operative course was complicated by wound breakdown and surgical site infection requiring wound debridement. Dressing was done as per local protocol until wound bed granulating well. Split Skin Graft was done about 3 months post wide resection once the tissue culture results were free of significant infection.
The patient also required extensive rehabilitation for transfer, ambulation and bowel and bladder care. Rehabilitation was difficult because the patient had learning disability and she had been habitually keeping her hips and knees flexed because of the sacral tumour for the past 2 years. During the last review 5 months post operatively, patient was able to sit on the wheelchair comfortably. The surgical wound was healing well with good uptake of the Split Skin Graft .