Nausea, vomiting, weakness, and lethargy.
A 47-year-old woman with a history of alcoholic cirrhosis status post OLT and a complex post-transplant course had elevated liver function tests (LFTs) 69 d post-transplant.
The patient has a history of decompensated cirrhosis secondary to alcohol use underwent OLT at our institution. Her Model for End-stage Liver Disease score was 33, and she received a liver allograft from a 61-year-old deceased donor who died from complications of a cerebrovascular accident. The arterial anastomosis was formed between the donor celiac axis and a branch patch of the recipient’s proper hepatic and gastroduodenal arteries. Initial graft function was good. Post-transplant course was complicated by failure to thrive, pneumonia with respiratory failure, intractable nausea and vomiting, and chronic kidney disease on dialysis. She remained an inpatient during her convalescence, and on POD #69 she developed newly elevated LFTs.
Vitals: within normal limits; General: Alert, oriented, and cooperative; Neck: Tracheostomy in place, healing well; Heart: Regular rate and rhythm, no murmurs; Lungs: Clear to auscultation, mildly decreased lung sounds at bases; Abdomen: Soft, non-tender, bowel sounds normal, no masses, no organomegaly, chevron incision. Gastrojejunostomy tube in place; Extremities: No edema, pulses normal; Skin: Skin color, texture, and turgor are normal.
At 69 d post-transplant, the patient’s LFTs became elevated .
Initial Doppler ultrasound (DUS) showed patent vasculature, but was notable for a subtle parvus et tardus waveform and relatively low resistive indices throughout the hepatic artery, ranging from 0.4 to 0.5 . A liver biopsy showed no evidence of acute T-cell mediated rejection, biliary obstruction, or ischemic injury. Ultimately, a computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the abdomen and pelvis performed on post-transplant day 90 identified a diminutive and irregular proper hepatic artery, which appeared smaller when compared to 1 mo prior .