A 30-year-old Middle Eastern male with a history of multiple surgical interventions in the gastro-intestinal tract following carcinoma was chosen to be the subject of this preliminary report. The patient initially underwent colonic transposition as a reconstruction followed by a delayed jejunal transposition due to the development of a 12 cm upper oesophageal corrosive stricture.
History and clinical examination revealed no history of further carcinoma; upper endoscopy and radiological examination revealed residual 8 cm upper oesophageal stricture and right recurrent laryngeal palsy.
The surgical access was through a previous pharyngectomy scar in the line of the right sternomastoid muscle with the raising of sub-platysmal flaps. Dissection continued to reveal the thyrocervical trunk and inferior thyroid artery with the excision of the previously fibrosed jejunal graft and the preparation of good vascular supply to the proximal jejunum. During which a generous cuff of muscosa was preserved with good exposure of the right piriform fossa and the remaining 8 cm gap from the pirifom fossa to the oesophagus.
An upper midline laparotomy was performed with local adhesionolysis. The second loop of the jejunum was identified and harvested on good arcade. The pedicle was ligated and remaining jejunal continiuity established and abdomen closed.
The free flap was transposed to the neck with posterior serosal layers to the proximal and distal ends in an iso-peristaltic fashion. A micro-vascular technique was used to create an end to end arterial anastomosis to the transverse cervical artery and an end to side venous anastomosis to the internal jugular vein.
Once good flow was confirmed (by microendoscopy) with satisfactory peristalsis and mucosal reaction the flap was further inset with proximal and distal fish mouthing techniques
An operating room Storz Hopkins II Forward oblique 30° microendoscope (4 mm diameter and 18 cm long) attached via a stroz fibre optic cable was connected to a three chip "Olympus" camera and video monitor. Photographs were taken using a "Sony" video photo-printer.
After suction clearance, the tip of the micro-endoscope was firmly applied to the area of interest to obtain an occlusive contact and then moved for dynamic assessment of the graft's vasculature and blood flow. Both the mucosal and serosal surfaces were examined at 10 randomly chosen sites to show qualitative blood flow in the graft. The examination was reproducible between operators. The depth of field was altered on the microendoscope to visualize the sub mucosal and sub serosal capillary networks . Further direct microendoscopic monitoring of the mucosal surface was possible in the postoperative period.
Using this method we were able to directly visualise the flow of blood through the sub-mucosal capillary networks of the transferred free jejunal graft . This was further confirmed by direct intra-operative visualisation of the blood flow through the vasculature of the graft's serosal surface . This method was used successfully to assess the viability of the flap.
Blood flow was seen to be pulsatile, with individual erythrocytes visible in the capillaries. The best view was obtained when the scope was focussed directly on the capillary rather than the graft surface . The view of the unstained mucosal surface was bland apart from the fine capillary loops which were seen to fill with each pulsatile event; two consecutive stills were taken to show the capillary loops filling with blood . Approximately three capillary loops were visible per high power view (×150). Between each pulse of blood flow the mucosal capillary loops were seen to collapse and reduce in visibility.
The microendoscopic examination of the serosal surface revealed much larger calibre vessels with obvious blood flow . The serosal vessels were much easier to visualise and did not collapse between pulses although blood flow through them was seen to be pulsatile.
Microendoscopy was used intraoperatively in a few seconds to assess actual small capillary blood flow in addition to direct observation of the pedicle and edge bleeding. The flow of the erythrocytes can be observed and a time gated image analysis may allow an objective assessment of blood flow. The observations can occur in a real-time and continuous manner during the operation. Perhaps later differentiation of arterial or venous dominant occlusion may be possible through the assessment of oxygen carriage through flow colorimetry. Poor persistent blood flow may be an indication for early surgical intervention.