An 83-year-old woman was admitted to our institution for recurrent shortness of breath. Her past medical history revealed hypertension, CAD with coronary artery bypass grafting in 1998 with right internal mammary artery (RIMA) to right coronary artery (RCA) and left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to left anterior descending (LAD) artery with percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) to circumflex artery during follow-up. The patient was taking ramipril, furosemide, clopidogrel, bisoprolol, and simvastatin. During the outpatient clinic follow-up, she developed progressive shortness of breath (New York Heart Association III) within the last 3 months. Finally, she came to emergency department with recurrent dyspnoea and angina. The physical cardiovascular examination revealed a mid-systolic ejection murmur that radiates to the carotid arteries, tachycardia, and clinical signs of heart failure.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed severe AS (max velocity 4.1 m/s, aortic valve area 0.5 cm2, mean gradient 42 mmHg) and mild mitral regurgitation. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was 45% with inferior wall hypokinesia. Pre-procedural computed tomography showed suitable percutaneous transfemoral access, an aortic valve area of 43 mm2 and a perimeter of 74 mm. Coronary angiogram showed chronic total occlusion of both the LAD and RCA, with patent LIMA and RIMA to RCA and LAD, respectively, but importantly, a severe calcified RCA stenosis distally to the graft anastomosis . Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) and EuroSCORE II were 5.5% and 6.39%, respectively. The case was discussed during the heart team meeting that concluded that porcelain aorta precluded conventional redo surgery.
First, we performed a percutaneous right transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) under conscious sedation using the ACURATE neo™ M Aortic Valve System (Boston Scientific) bioprosthesis . Post-TAVI TTE demonstrated an LVEF of 45% with same inferior wall motions abnormalities (WMA). The aortic mean gradient was 6.5 mmHg with a peak velocity of 1.7 m/s. There was mild paravalvular leak (PVL) with no pericardial effusion.
One month later, the patient still complained of angina and shortness of breath. The follow-up TTE showed inferobasal WMA with good transcatheter valve prosthesis function (mean gradient 4 mm Hg and mild PVL). We planned to treat the heavily calcified RCA using RA. Through a right radial access and using a 7/6 Fr Glide Sheath Slender® (Terumo, Japan), we selective engaged the RIMA using a 7 Fr 90 cm IMA guiding catheter. Then, we advanced a Finecross® MG (Terumo, Japan) microcatheter over an ASAHI SION blue® (ASAHI INTECC, Japan) coronary wire. Next, a 7 Fr Guidezilla® guide extension catheter (Boston Scientific, USA) was advanced up to the distal anastomosis of the RIMA-LAD graft . Then, we switched for the Rotawire® floppy (Boston Scientific) to perform RA using a 1.25 mm bur with three short runs at 180 000 rpm . After successfully debulking the lesion, we predilated with a 2.0 mm × 15 mm Emerge® semi-compliant balloon (Boston Scientific) and then we delivered a 2.5 mm × 18 mm zotarolimus-eluting stent Resolute Onyx® (Medtronic, USA) . Finally, we optimized the stent deployment with using a 2.75 mm × 12 mm Pantera Leo® (Biotronik, Germany) non-compliant balloon.
The patient was discharged on the following day without any complications. At the 6-month follow-up visit, she was still free of symptoms.