A 75-year-old Chinese man visited the department of urology of The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University in March 2022 complaining of experiencing a palpable painful mass in the right scrotum for 6 mo.
The patient had received subtotal gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy for gastric cancer more than 9 mo before. Histopathological analysis revealed mixed, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the gastric corpus invading the serosa and lymph node metastasis of the lesser gastric curvature (5/8) (pT3N3aMx). Immunohistochemical examination showed that the neoplastic cells were positive for EGFR, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, PD-L1 (22C3) (CPS:5), and Ki-67 (60%) and negative for HER2 and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). Interstitial vascular cancer embolus was revealed by positive CD31 and D2-40 staining. Neural invasion and vascular invasion were also observed by positive S100 and elastic fiber staining. The patient underwent six cycles of oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy.
The patient had a history of type 2 diabetes for over 20 years, and his blood glucose was well controlled. He also had a history of juvenile orchitis and had undergone vasoligature more than 10 years before.
The patient had no remarkable personal or family history.
Physical examination revealed hardness and haphalgesia in the right testis, a painful induration in the right epididymis, and a moderate hydrocele on the right testis.
Laboratory tests revealed elevated serum levels of beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) (12.25 IU/L) and normal serum levels of AFP (2.49 ng/mL), prostate alkaline phosphatase (1.83 ng/mL), total prostatic-specific antigen (TPSA) (0.648 ng/mL), free prostatic-specific antigen (FPSA) (0.35 ng/mL), and FPSA/TPSA (0.54).
Urinary and scrotal B-ultrasound examination revealed that the right testis was abnormally shaped, with an uneven echo, a 2.3 cm × 1.9 cm hypoechoic mass in the caudal epididymis, and a hydrocele (2.2 cm deep) on the right testis. Computed tomography urography (CTU) revealed a mixed solid-cystic mass in the right testicular and epididymal area .