A 57-year-old Japanese woman felt a lump in her left breast more than 10 years previously that remained untreated. She now sought medical attention because the mass increased in size over the last year. Palpation revealed a 10-cm hard, non-movable mass in the medial left breast . Breast ultrasonography (US) showed a large breast mass with slit formation and heterogeneous internal echoes. Fine needle aspiration cytology of the lesion suggested a phyllodes tumor (PT), but needle biopsy suggested a fibroadenoma. Malignancy could not be ruled out based on the clinical course, so vacuum-assisted breast biopsy was performed for qualitative diagnosis. A PT was suspected. Whole-body search included lung computed tomography (CT) that showed multiple metastatic lung tumors (metastatic lesion suspected), but no lymph node metastasis .
A partial mastectomy with 10 mm surgical margin was performed for a definitive diagnosis, and pathological diagnosis of the resected specimen showed a malignant PTB (10.0 cm, f, ly0, v0, ew-, nuclear atypia score 3, mitotic count score 3, nuclear grade 6). Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was not given at the patient’s request.
Two months after surgery, masses appeared at the right and left occipital, parietal, and temporal area of the head. Skin biopsy revealed skin metastases from the malignant PT, and these were resected with 10 mm surgical margin. In addition, 7 months after initial surgery, pharyngeal pain, swelling, and a feeling of dyspnea developed, and tumor was found in the left palatine tonsil. CT for further evaluation showed a tonsillar lesion with contrast enhancement, and tonsillar metastasis was suspected . The metastatic lung tumors had not progressed. Laryngoscopic biopsy showed a tonsillar metastasis from the malignant PT . Despite the diagnosis of PTB with tonsillar and pulmonary metastases, the patient refused further treatment and died about 1 month later. Palliative care was performed according to the intention of the patient.