A 53-year-old man with a diagnosis of hyperparathyroidism was referred to our department in December 2018. The results of laboratory examinations were compatible with hyperparathyroidism: intact-PTH 94 pg/ml (normal range 10–65 pg/ml), serum Ca 11.9 mg/dl (normal range 8.2–10.4 mg/dl), and serum P 2.4 mg/dl (normal range 2.5–4.6 mg/dl). Thyroid function tests (TSH, Free-T3, Free-T4) were all within normal limits. Cervical tumors and lymphadenopathy were not identified on palpation. The patient showed no signs of hoarseness, dysphagia and dysphonia. His past medical history included ureter stones and type 2 diabetes, and he had no kidney diseases that can cause secondary hyperparathyroidism. There were no notable family medical histories. US was performed with a 7.5-MHz linear transducer (TOSHIBA MEDICAL SYSTEMS; SSA-790A, TOCHIGI, JAPAN). A tumor was found in the inferior pole of the right lobe of the thyroid gland and no parathyroid mass was observed. The tumor had an irregular round shape and showed heterogeneous hyperechogenicity with a defined margin, but within it, there were a few unclear margins, irregular and hypoechogenic area, and the tumor had a mosaic appearance at first glance . The size of the tumor was 18 × 13 × 11 mm (anteroposterior × transverse × craniocaudal dimension). Color Doppler sonography showed that the blood vessels flowing into the tumor were thick and marked blood flow was observed within the tumor . No lymph node swelling was observed in the cervical regions.
Images obtained by CT revealed a low density mass which was slightly enhanced by contrast injection in the right thyroid lobe . No other abnormality was identified on thoraco-abdominal CT. The MIBI scintigraphy showed accumulation near the lower right pole and strong accumulation even in the delayed phase, suggesting parathyroid adenoma . The image was very atypical for a parathyroid adenoma, and the possibility of hyperplasia and cancer was also considered. Considering the risk of dissemination, we decided not to carry out fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) but to attempt intraoperative diagnosis using frozen section and to treat at the same time.
The patient underwent resection of the tumor under collar incision on April 2019. As the tumor could not be identified on both naked eye and palpation, we used US intraoperatively and confirmed that the tumor was located in the inferior pole of the right lobe of the thyroid gland. The cranial side of the tumor was identified, from which the thyroid was incised and a right partial lobectomy was performed. Pathological examination revealed a parathyroid adenoma that was surrounded by a thin capsule and showed no variant type . However, there were some nodular areas composed of cells with clear cytoplasm , and there was scattered fatty infiltration. There was no evidence of malignancy. The final diagnosis was IPA. The patient recovered well after surgery and was discharged on the 5th day. Postoperatively, serum calcium and I-PTH were rapidly normalized, and no increase has been observed as of July 2019.