A 20-year-old male patient with a free past medical and surgical history, presented to emergency room (ER) complaining of right sided hand swelling after sustaining a snake bite. The bite was associated with severe pain and numbness at the back of his hand, in addition to nausea, vomiting and diffuse sweating. He had a blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg, a heart rate of 120 beats per minute (bpm), a temperature of 36.6 degrees, and an O2 saturation of 90% on room air. He was sweaty and anxious, his right hand, shown in , was edematous, nearly doubling in size compared to the left side with two obvious puncture wounds as seen in . These findings were associated with ecchymosis and tenderness to palpation extending from the dorsum of the hand to above the elbow joint. Range of motion was limited at the wrist joint, while the elbow joint had a full range of motion. Sensation was intact and both the radial and brachial pulses were full and palpable. Otherwise, his examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, mostly related to stress (shown in ). Complete blood count (CBC) showed a hemoglobin level of 15.8 mg/dl, white blood cell count was 13 300, platelet count was 430 000. Prothrombin time (PT) was 14.3, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) was 25, international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.1.
The snake was killed and brought to the ER, it was identified as the Palestine viper, known by its scientific name D. palaestinae. The snake is shown in .
The patient received eight vials of polyvalent anti-venom while in the emergency room, after which he reported significant improvement in terms of pain. He was admitted to intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring. On the second day of admission, the patient developed sudden onset palpitation associated with shortness of breath without chest pain. His heart rate was 155 bpm, blood pressure 130/65 mmHg, O2 saturation 95%, temperature 36.6. CBC, obtained during morning routine labs prior to the episode, showed the following findings: hemoglobin: 14.4 mg/dl, white blood cell count: 17 500, platelet count 355 000. Other labs, including a comprehensive metabolic panel, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): 243. PT: 14.7, INR: 1.3, aPTT: 28, fibrinogen 271 mg/dl. His troponin I peaked at 0.04 ng/ml (Reference range < 0.029), creatine kinase-muscle/brain was 0.3% (reference range 0–25). Electrocardiogram (ECG), shown in , showed irregularly irregular pulse with absent P-wave, these changes were absent on the ECG done on admission, as it showed a sinus, regular heart rate (shown in ). The picture was suggestive of new-onset atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiography noted normal biventricular function with no focal wall motion abnormality, and no valvular heart diseases with normal ejection fraction.
As the patient had a free past medical history, review of medications did not disclose any medication that could incite such an event, no previous episodes within the patient known relatives was reported by the patient. The new onset cardiovascular findings were considered part of the disease process, and a manifestation of ongoing venom toxicity. Based on that interpretation, six more vials of polyvalent anti-venom were administered.
Cardiology team was consulted and the patient was started on bisoprolol 5 mg per os (PO) once daily (OD), which failed to control his rate. He was given amiodarone 300 mg STAT then kept on continuous infusion of 900 mg over 24 h. The patient was monitored for any new onset hematologic or cardiac events via serial CBC, INR, fibrinogen and troponin I every 6 h.
The patient’s cardiac enzymes improved the next day, CBC parameters and coagulation profile remained within normal. After 24 h of monitoring, in which the patient had no new concerning events, the patient was transferred to the medical ward. ECG next day showed normal sinus rhythm with ventricular rate of 76 bpm (shown in ). Left upper limb swelling improved over the following three days, and the patient was discharged home on oral amoxicillin-clavulanate for 7 days.
He was seen in the outpatient clinic 5 weeks later, the swelling of his upper limb had completely resolved, he reported no new episodes of palpitation of chest discomfort. CBC, basic metabolic panel, and coagulation profile were within normal limits. New echocardiography showed no abnormalities. The patient was maintained on bisoprolol, 5 mg PO OD. As no new episodes were reported, no further investigations were requested as the entire episode was deemed secondary to snake envenomation, which had completely resolved by the time of follow up.