A 62-year-old woman came to our department for a consultation due to multiple recurrent HBs. In May 2016, she presented to our neurosurgery with a half-year history of persistent lower back pain that was radiating to left leg. She was initially diagnosed with lumbar disk herniation and received symptomatic treatment, but the clinical condition continued to deteriorate. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a space-occupying lesion at L1-L2 . Then she underwent a complete surgical resection under general anesthesia and symptoms were significantly alleviated after the operation. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of HB and immunohistochemical results showed EMA (-), S-100 (-), GFAP (-), Vimentin (++) and Ki-67 (10-15%). The patient has no similar family history and no other lesions characteristic of VHL disease were found, so she was diagnosed as a sporadic HB case. A MRI was done every six months postoperatively to follow up.
In July 2019, the patient was admitted to our clinic again due to a one-year history of left leg pain which progressively worsened over the last three months with difficulty in urination and defecation. She underwent a MRI of the lumbar spine which showed a space-occupying lesion at S1 , thus the tumor resection was performed again. Immunohistochemical results showed EMA (-), S-100 (-), GFAP (-) and Ki-67 (sporadic +). Recurrent HB was diagnosed according to pathological results and medical history. Postoperatively, her pain significantly relieved. In June 2020, MRI indicated tumor recurrence at L2 and S1-S2 . The patient did not receive any treatment due to free of symptoms in the next one year.
In June 2021, tumor progression was observed. the MRI showed that the diameter of two lesions at L2 and S1-S2 increased to 1.8cm and 2.3cm respectively . Despite the fact that the patient was symptom-free, she came to our department for further treatment. Anlotinib was begun after obtaining informed consent. Then, anlotinib (8mg qd d1-14, q3w) was orally administrated. There was a considerable improvement in the T2 signal change around the enhancing component, as well as a decrease in the size on the MRI from 1.8cm to 1.0cm at L2 and from 2.3cm to 2.0cm at S1-S2 after use of one month . To date of Sep 22, 2021, the MRI demonstrated further decrease in the dimensions of residual lesions . The patient was in good condition, evaluated as having partial response in accordance with the RECIST 1.1 system. In addition, apart from hypertension (grade I), no other adverse side effects of anlotinib such as hemorrhage, thrombopenia, fatigue and hypertriglyceridemia were observed in the patient. All of these adverse effects were evaluated pursuant to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) Version 5.0. The treatment timeline of the patient is depicted in . The patient has given her consent for the case report to be published.