A 60-year-old man with hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus was admitted to the local community hospital for a six-week history of low grade fever and recent development of chills and shortness of breath on October, 2005. Prior to this admission, the patient had been treated as an outpatient by his primary care physician for possible sinusitis and pneumonia with three different kinds of oral antibiotics including levofloxacin. On admission, the patient had a fever of 37 degrees centigrade and elevated white cell count of 17 × 109/L. Physical examination was significant for a hyperdynamic precordium, 2+ parasternal lift, grade 2–3 out of 6 continuous murmur best heard at the left sternal boarder, and gallop at the apex. The chest x-ray showed right pleural effusion and features consistent with congestive heart failure. An echocardiogram showed a markedly dilated sinus of Valsalva, measuring at least 6.4 cm, with turbulent blood flow in a RVOT. This was felt to possibly represent a left-to-right shunt and the possibility of a ruptured sinus of Valsalva was raised. The echocardiogram also showed a vegetation on one of the pulmonary valve leaflets . The patient was subsequently treated empirically for infective endocarditis with vancomycin and gentamycin for 28 days. During cardiac catheterization, oximetry studies showed there was no step-up in saturation in the pulmonary valve. This made the presence of a significant left-to-right shunt less likely. Aortic injection revealed significant dilation of all of the coronary sinuses. There was no jet noted from the coronary sinus to the right side of the chamber. Minimal aortic regurgitation was present. Pulmonary artery injection showed mild pulmonary insufficiency. Blood cultures did not grow any organisms.
On May 2006, the patient underwent resection of a large aortic root aneurysm, replacement of the aortic valve using a 23 mm St. Jude medical valve conduit, re-implantation of left coronary artery, coronary artery bypass grafting using a saphenous vein graft to the right coronary artery, and exploration of the pulmonary valve with debridement of pulmonary valve leaflet vegetation. No evidence of a ventricular septal defect was noted during the surgery .
The pulmonary valve vegetation was sent for pathological examination. Gross appearance consisted of multiple tan-white soft tissue fragments, measuring 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.3 cm in aggregate, the largest piece measuring 0.4 × 0.4 × 0.3 cm. Microscopic examination revealed fibrinous debris with acute inflammation and organizing fibrosis with chronic inflammation, compatible with a vegetation. Special stains were negative for bacteria and fungi.