A 52-year-old man presented to our Emergency Department with sweats, lethargy and weakness 5 weeks following tissue aortic valve replacement with a 23 mm bioprosthetic valve. His background included severe aortic stenosis, mild left ventricular impairment, atrial fibrillation, hyperthyroidism, obstructive sleep apnoea and autistic spectrum disorder.
Following the original aortic valve replacement, the patient had made a good recovery, although he had been noted to be sweating at times. He maintained a normal white cell count and was apyrexial throughout, and was discharged home on postoperative day 6. Immediately following discharge, he did reattend via the Emergency Department with sweats and back pain, and was diagnosed with a lower respiratory tract infection.
Having re-presented with generalised weakness, lethargy and sweats, clinical examination was unremarkable and bloods demonstrated only a raised C-reactive protein (CRP) of 48. Trans-thoracic echocardiography demonstrated no evidence of endocarditis. Blood cultures taken on admission were initially reported as negative. However, during his admission the patient became pyrexial with worsening sweats and rigors. Urine culture, viral throat swab, CT scanning and dental review revealed no clear source of infection. There was no suggestion of immunocompromise or other risk factors for infection with this unusual pathogen.
Trans-oesophageal echocardiography on day 6 revealed infective endocarditis of the prosthetic aortic valve (see Fig. ). Antibiotic cover was broadened to IV vancomycin, IV gentamicin and oral metronidazole. Pyrexia and inflammatory markers improved following this. IV gentamicin was later stopped on microbiology advice. Four days following admission, one set of blood cultures grew a Gram-positive anaerobe coccus, later identified as Finegoldia magna on day ten. Antibiotic sensitivities were assessed using gradient strip diffusion and are shown in Table .
Intravenous antibiotic therapy was commenced. The decision was taken to resort to surgical intervention with replacement of the infected prosthetic valve. The patient underwent re-do surgery with removel of the infected valve and implantation of another bioprosthetic valve. Culture and sensitivities from the excised valve were negative.
After 19 days of IV vancomycin and oral metronidazole, vancomycin was stopped. Given the excellent oral bioavailability of metronidazole, the decision was taken to treat the anaerobic infective endocarditis with oral metronidazole monotherapy. The patient’s improving clinical condition, improving inflammatory markers and the achievement of source control through surgery supported the decision to switch to oral therapy.
The patient progressed well and was discharged on post-operative day 13 to complete a total 8-week course of oral metronidazole from the date of re-do surgery. Regular monitoring of CRP confirmed continuing improvement. He was discharged from follow-up eight weeks later, with final “test of cure” blood cultures reported as negative. No adverse effects following re-operation and prolonged antibiotic treatment were reported.