A 58-year-old diabetic lady presented with complaints of inability to stand or walk subsequent to a fall at home 1 month back. She had a history of high-grade fever with general malaise and anorexia at the time of presentation. There was no history of back pain, abdominal pain, bowel, or bladder disturbances. She had no history of any chronic illnesses other than Type-II diabetes, with adequate control. When she presented to us, empirical anti tuberculosis (TB) treatment had been initiated.
She had bilateral hip tenderness with bilateral inguinal tender lymphadenopathy; the largest being 2.5 × 2.5 cm. Movements of both hips were painfully restricted in all directions. Blood investigations revealed elevated white blood cell count (26000/cumm) with predominant neutrophils. C-reactive protein was elevated (60 mg/l). Her glycaemic control was adequate. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the spine taken 1 week after the fall from the previous treating center showed an L4 -L5 disc bulge and she was managed with rest ,dexamethasone (8 mg) twice daily, and analgesics. 3 weeks later, MRI was repeated as symptoms persisted and bilateral iliopsoas abscess with synovitis of the hip was diagnosed . Empirical anti TB drugs were started at that time, following which she presented to us.
In view of the diagnosis of bilateral psoas abscess, we investigated for any sources of occult infection. Urine culture, blood culture, and sputum culture did not grow any organism. Widal and Brucella antigen was negative. Stool occult blood was also negative. She underwent bilateral iliopsoas abscess drainage through ilioinguinal approach (first window) and the pus grew Streptococcus faecalis sensitive to Gentamycin, Ampicillin, Linezolid, Tetracycline, and Chloramphenicol. Her Xpert TB Polymerase chain reaction was negative and anaerobic and fungal culture also was negative. Following initial I/V antibiotics, she was maintained on oral Linezolid for 6 weeks.
During her subsequent follow-up period, her general condition improved and CRP dropped to normal levels. However, she continued to complain of bilateral hip pain with restricted movements. X-rays of both hips showed mortar and pestle appearance. MRI of both hips showed complete resorption of both femoral heads . After a disease-free interval of 3 months which was confirmed by a negative C-reactive protein level and negative culture from hip arthrocentesis, she underwent staged total hip replacement of both hips [, , ]. Intraoperative tissue culture and synovial fluid culture were negative and histopathology did not show any acute inflammation.
Patient has been under regular follow-up for 2.5 years. She remains symptom-free and ambulates independently (Video 1).