A 69-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of ileus. His abdomen was extremely distended. Colonoscopy revealed severe stenosis caused by transverse colon cancer at splenic flexure. We inserted a transanal ileus tube for decompression. Enema X-ray showed transverse colon cancer, a light narrowing and rough mucosal surface from the transverse colon to the ascending colon . Because of the mild inflammatory response, cefmetazole was administered as an antibiotic for 11 days until surgery. Because the patient’s general findings, abdominal findings, and blood examination findings were improved, transverse colon resection was performed on the 11th day after the insertion of the transanal ileus tube. Pathological findings showed no mucosal necrosis in the transverse colon surrounding the tumor. During the perioperative period, cefmetazole was administered as an antibiotic from the operation day to the first day after operation.
The patient had a high fever on the 6th day after the operation. CT showed portal venous gas over the entire area in the liver and pneumatosis intestinalis in the thick wall of the ascending colon . Blood examination showed severe liver damage . The patient did not complain of abdominal pain. On examination, the patient’s abdomen was flat and soft. There were no signs of anastomotic leakage or bowel necrosis, so we decided to use conservative therapy with fasting and antibiotics. We selected tazobactam/piperacillin as an antibiotic since the 6th day after the operation, considering gas-forming bacteria. Although the blood was taken for the blood culture on that day, the blood culture was negative on the 14th day after the operation. Gradually, the severe liver damage improved, as assessed through blood examination, since conservative therapy was started. The patient began oral intake on the 10th day after the operation. Finally, CT showed that both the hepatic portal gas and pneumatosis intestinalis had disappeared on the 19th day after the operation . The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 29th day after the operation.