An 84-YEAR-OLD MAN experienced left internal carotid artery/posterior communicating artery aneurysm rupture and subarachnoid hemorrhage (WFNS, grade V; Fisher, group 3). He underwent craniotomy and clipping on the day of admission, followed by left external decompression . He additionally underwent percutaneous revascularization on day 8 for cerebral vasospasm and tracheotomy on day 17 for inability to wean from the ventilator. Glasgow Coma Scale improved to E4VTM5. However, the cranial skin surface recessed, causing midline shift . The patient successfully underwent cranioplasty with artificial hydroxyapatite bone on postoperative day 58. An s.c. drain was placed on the exterior surface to facilitate negative pressure. Immediate postoperative computed tomography (CT) showed right intraventricular hemorrhage, left trigone bleeding, and left-sided cerebral edema . Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography showed no recurrence of clipped aneurysm nor any new blood vessel abnormalities, including cerebral vasospasm, on postoperative day 65 (7 days after cranioplasty). These findings progressed on 6-h postoperative CT, causing right midline shift . Given our suspicion that the bleeding was due to overperfusion, the patient underwent propofol sedation and strict blood pressure control. We administered glycerol and mannitol and clamped the s.c. drain to decrease negative pressure. The bleeding ceased, the edema improved, and his neurological symptoms returned to presurgical baseline (E4VTM5) . Ventricular expansion was observed and a ventriculoperitoneal shunt was placed on postoperative day 128. The patient was transferred to rehabilitation on day 176.
Perfusion magnetic resonance imaging (MR System Achieva 1.5T release 3.2; Philips Medical Systems, The Netherlands) was obtained on postoperative days 44 (14 days before cranioplasty), 65 (7 days after cranioplasty), and 159 (101 days after cranioplasty). Following cranioplasty, the ipsilateral anterior and middle cerebral artery cortical territories showed increased cerebral blood flow and volume compared with the healthy contralateral territories, but ultimately stabilized .