A 25-year-old neurologically intact male was admitted for elective fusion of a nonunion C2 fracture attributed to a diving accident 9 months earlier. Four months later, when neck pain appeared and worsened, both CT and MR studies demonstrated a type II odontoid fracture with a chronic nonunion accompanied by C1-C2 subluxation but without cord compression .
Before the C1-C2 posterior arthrodesis, the patient underwent an awake endotracheal intubation requiring SUPLANEB. The patient received hydroxyzine 50 mg orally, and the anesthesiologist performed a superior laryngeal nerve block. A 21-gauge needle (1 ½ inch) attached to a syringe containing 5 mL of 1% lidocaine was used once on each side (total injection of no more 10 mL of lidocaine), following which the patient was intubated using a video laryngoscope. The posterior cervical C1-C2 fusion was uneventful.
Nevertheless, after recovering from the general anesthesia, the patient complained of the left eye blindness without ocular pain, periorbital swelling, or oculomotor paresis; he also demonstrated left-sided hearing loss and facial numbness (all trigeminal territories). The direct eye examination revealed the left side anterior segment and fundus was normal, but confirmed complete left-sided visual loss, isolated direct mydriasis, and intact consensual light reflex.
The STAT cranio-orbital computed tomography scan showed no acute intracranial or oculo-orbital lesions, but demonstrated mild bifrontal, interhemispheric, parasellar, sellar, and prepontic pneumocephalus; there was no skull base lesion . The subsequent CT angiogram documented air in the left carotid sheath, near and along the carotid bifurcation, the internal carotid artery (ICA), and all around the internal jugular vein (IJV) . There was also diffuse subcutaneous emphysema in the left paralaryngeal area and in the posterior cervicothoracic regions . No intracranial hematomas or extraintracranial vascular lesions (no vasospasm) were present.
The patient was placed in strict horizontal position and treated with inspired pure oxygen plus systemic steroid pulse therapy (120 mg of methylprednisolone each 6 h) and nimodipine (30 mg each 6 h). The 1st postoperative day, the visual acuity remained unchanged, but nearly completely recovered the left hearing loss and facial hypoesthesia in the V2 distribution. Brain and orbital MR studies were normal. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated postischemic retinal edema with permeability of the intraocular blood vessels while retinal angiography showed delayed choroidal filling . Flash visual evoked potentials were absent, while the electroretinogram revealed decreased potentials amplitudes.
The pneumocephalus and subcutaneous emphysema completely resolved on postoperative day 3. At the time of discharge on the 4th postoperative day, there was a complete resolution of symptoms excepting for the left blindness and the V1 trigeminal hypoesthesia; the patient was sent home on nimodipine (120 mg/day) and oral steroid therapy (60 mg prednisolone) with a tapering dose over the next 4 weeks. Two months later, he remained blind in the left eye without any return of function.