A 77-year-old female patient had her plasma sample collected during the 47th epidemiological week of 2023. DENV-NS1 antigen and CHIKV-PCR were positive (cycle threshold (Ct) value of 18.6). The onset of the symptoms was November 18, 2023 (Day 1). No other positive cases were reported in the family.
Medical History: On Day 1, the patient presented with fever, myalgia, and severe arthralgia. On Day 3, laboratory tests for dengue revealed a positive NS1 ELISA and a non-detectable RT-PCR, while for Chikungunya RT-PCR was detectable, and IgM-ELISA was reactive. The coinfection was confirmed through Dengue NS1 antigen and Real-Time PCR for CHIKV . RT-PCR for DENV was negative.
Three days after the symptom’s onset, the patient sought medical attention, presenting with headache, myalgia, fever, arthralgia, and rash. Additionally, nausea and loss of appetite were reported, but no swelling was observed. The patient’s medical history included type 2 diabetes and arrhythmia, which made her part of a risk group for adverse outcomes. Furthermore, the initial blood count showed hemoconcentration in accordance with the upper reference limit for the age group (41 ± 6%) . Therefore, treatment with intravenous saline solution was immediately started, and she was closely monitored for signs of severe Dengue. Joint pain and myalgia were relieved with analgesics (dipyrone and paracetamol), without the use of anti-inflammatories. Twenty-four days after symptoms onset, the patient experienced cervical pain radiating to the right shoulder, along with pain and swelling in the feet, which lasted for 15 days; swelling of the right wrist was also noted. Two months after the initial presentation, the patient was still suffering from persistent myalgia.
Despite the hemoconcentration typical of Dengue, the blood count did not reveal thrombocytopenia. The white blood cell count was within normal limits but showed lymphopenia, which can be found in dengue and chikungunya infections. Liver enzymes were only slightly elevated, with AST levels higher than ALT levels, as commonly seen in dengue fever . No significant changes were observed in biochemical parameters, such as urea, creatinine, sodium, and potassium.
Previous studies demonstrated that elevation of aminotransferases can be attributed to the direct effect of the dengue virus on liver cells, as well as the immune response to the infection . Significantly elevated levels of AST and ALT are often associated with more severe dengue manifestations and can serve as a marker for the severity of the infection Treatment and Outcome: Over the following two weeks, the patient’s clinical condition gradually improved. Subsequently, she was discharged with instructions for adequate rest and scheduled for follow-up appointments to ensure continued recovery.