A healthy 44-year-old premenopausal woman without any cardiovascular risk factors was transferred to our hospital due to sudden chest pain. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-elevation in inferior leads (II, III and aVF) , and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia was captured on ECG monitor. Echocardiographic examination showed severe hypokinesis in the inferior segment of the ventricle. Taken together, she was diagnosed with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Emergent coronary angiography (CAG) revealed multiple SCADs in distal right coronary artery (RCA) , distal left anterior descending artery (LAD) and second diagonal branch (D2) . We decided to perform primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in the distal RCA because it showed 99% stenosis (Type 2 SCAD, Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) grade 2 flow) and the patient was hemodynamically unstable due to bradycardia. A second-generation DES (zotarolimus-eluting stent: 2.0 × 30 mm) was deployed in the distal RCA with the support of a temporary pacemaker. We added another second-generation DES (everolimus-eluting stent: 3.0 × 8 mm) in the proximal site of the first stent because persistent thrombus was observed even after repeated balloon dilatation. Finally, we achieved TIMI grade 3 flow in the RCA .
Six days after the first PCI, the patient complained of chest pain again and the ECG showed ST-elevation in lateral leads (I and aVL) . CAG showed a new appearance of aneurysmal protrusion in the mid LAD and a progression of the dissection to the proximal LAD . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging revealed intimal and medial tear in the coronary artery wall. The AFL was partially occluded by thrombus; however, a continuous blood flow signal was observed in the false lumen . Considering the risk of enlargement of the AFL and distribution of the dissection toward the proximal site of the LAD, we performed PCI to the mid LAD to seal the entry tear of the dissection using a second-generation DES (everolimus-eluting stent: 3.0 × 30 mm). The blood flow in the AFL immediately decreased just after stent deployment . Although CAG at 1 month after PCI still demonstrated contrast accumulation outside the DES , coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography at 3 months after PCI showed a decrease in contrast pooling in the false lumen . We changed dual anti-platelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/day + prasugrel 3.75 mg/day) to single anti-platelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/day) at 6 months after PCI. CAG at 1 year demonstrated disappearance of the AFL in the mid LAD . Moreover, coronary CT angiography revealed no contrast accumulation outside the DES and showed no stent restenosis at 2 years after PCI . Our case suggests that the treatment using a second-generation DES might be one of therapeutic options for sealing AFL in SCAD patients.