A 24-year-old, previously fit and well, male fitness instructor and football player presented to the emergency department complaining of pain in his groin and buttocks. Symptoms started 3 days before he presented to the hospital, and he had engaged in strenuous exercise and jogging for 7 hours the day before admission to the hospital. He thought initially that he had sprained his groin muscles while exercising and decided to defer coming to the hospital. There was no other significant past medical history of any illnesses, although the patient reported having had an extraction of a wisdom tooth 2 weeks prior to this presentation.
On examination in the emergency department, he was a fit-looking man who appeared very anxious. He was brought into the emergency department in a wheelchair. On initial assessment in the emergency department, he was pyrexial with a temperature of 38.6°C, blood pressure 127/77 mmHg, and a regular pulse of 73 beats per minute. On examination of his musculoskeletal system, he was unable to stand and required the support of two people. Examination of the lower limbs revealed painful restriction of hip flexion and extension, with a power of 5/5 in both hips and knees. There was no overlying erythema or tenderness over the hip joints. On neurological examination, sensations were intact to all modalities (intact light touch, pinprick, joint position and vibration sense) with a flexor plantar response. There were no cranial nerve palsies and the cerebellar examination did not reveal any ataxias or nystagmus. No abnormalities were detected on cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examination, apart from mild tenderness in the lower abdomen without guarding or rebound. Bowel sounds were present and genital examination was unremarkable with good anal tone. No tenderness was elicited on examination of the spine.
Initial investigations revealed a normal full blood count (haemoglobin 15.2 g/litre, white blood cell count 8.7 × 109/litre with a neutrophil count of 6.8 × 109/litre and platelets of 412 × 109/litre), normal urea, creatinine and electrolytes with the exception of raised C-reactive protein (CRP) at 142 mg/litre. He was admitted to the acute assessment ward with the possible differential diagnosis of acute myositis or pelvic and/or psoas abscess, and blood cultures were performed. An urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen and pelvis did not reveal any evidence of psoas or pelvic abscess and serum creatinine kinase levels were 40 U/litre. Other enzymes including lactate dehydrogenase, aldolase, aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase were all within normal limits.
On the second day of admission, he started having swinging pyrexia (body temperature spiking to 39°C and touching the baseline of 36.6°C every 6 hours) with rigors. At that time, his weakness and pain were severe enough to limit even turning and sitting up in bed. Repeat examination revealed severe tenderness to palpation over the symphysis pubis, more marked on the left. Initial sets of blood cultures revealed heavy growth of S. viridans. He was commenced on high doses of ceftriaxone (2 g three times a day) and gentamicin (80 mg once a day). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the pelvis suggested marrow oedema of the left pubic bone extending all the way up to the left sacro-iliac joint and soft tissue swelling of the pubic symphysis, changes highly suggestive of osteomyelitis of the left pubic ramus .
A bone scan showed increased uptake of contrast over the left pubic ramus and subsequent needle aspiration of the left pubic bone grew S. viridans on cultures. Further investigations to exclude any potential cause of immunodeficiency, including human immunodeficiency virus testing, were negative.
The patient gradually improved on intravenous antibiotics, started ambulating and became apyrexial after a week's course of antibiotics. The level of CRP came down to 50 mg/litre from an initial value of 142 mg/litre. He was later discharged from the hospital on 4 weeks of oral clindamycin. He was reviewed in the clinic 4 weeks after his discharge and showed complete clinical recovery. The CRP level had returned to normal (less than 5 mg/litre) and subsequent blood cultures were sterile.