A 65 year-old-female, resident of Ganjam district was admitted to MKCG Medical College and Hospital with complains of back pain and weakness since 1 year. She was of average socio-economic status. Significant past history includes infiltrative duct carcinoma of left breast not otherwise specified category, operated 3½ years back. The immunohistochemical profile of the tumor was positive for both ER and PR, membrane negativity for Her-2/neu.
On examination, she had tenderness at 1st and 2nd lumbar vertebral region. Left mastectomy scar is healthy. No right breast mass lesion and no palpable axillary lymphadenopathy detected. Other systemic examinations revealed no abnormality. Routine hematological and biochemical investigations were normal except moderate anemia (7.4 gm/dL), Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 30 mm in 1st hour. Peripheral smear showed leuco-erythroblastic blood picture. No hemoparasite was noted in the smear. Other significant investigation findings include multiple vertebral osteolytic lesions in the chest x-ray and mild hepatomegaly with multiple hypo-echoic lesions in ultrasonography (USG) of liver. Clinical impression was of metastatic lesion/multiple myeloma.
Bone marrow aspirate and cell block sections showed suppression of the three cell lineage (i.e. erythroid, myeloid, megakaryocyte) with presence of pleomorphic tumor cells in acinar pattern, sheets and three dimensional clusters suggestive of adenocarcinomatous deposits. Tumor cells were round to oval with hyperchromatic nuclei and moderate amount of cytoplasm with cytoplasmic vacoulations . A diagnosis of metastatic deposit in the bone marrow was made. Microfilariae of Wuchereria bancrofti were incidentally detected in aspirate smears, cell block and even in the wet mount of aspirate . Trephine biopsy impression was concordant with aspiration diagnosis. Immunohistochemical staining was done on trephine biopsy tissue for breast markers which showed that the tumor cells are negative for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR), but showed strong membrane positivity for Her-2/neu. Based on these findings the diagnosis of Metastatic breast carcinoma to bone with an incidental finding of Wuchereria bancrofti microfilariae was given.