A 66-year-old Caucasian male with chronic atrial fibrillation, aortic regurgitation, and hypertension presented to the emergency room with persisting fever, chills, fatigue and shortness of breath. Blood cultures were positive for Gram positive cocci in clusters (Staphylococcus lugdunensis), and he was started on appropriate antibiotics based on sensitivity results. Transesophageal 2D-ECHO revealed a mass on the aortic valve attached to the right coronary cusp causing prolapse of the cusp, findings highly suspicious for endocarditis. The patient subsequently underwent aortic root replacement with a Trifecta tissue valve and Gortex valsalva conduit. Intraoperatively, the patient received a loading dose of unfractionated heparin (40,000 Units) followed by 10,000 Units. The surgery was successful and the patient was started on routine post-operative antithrombotic prophylaxis with subcutaneous unfractionated heparin (5000 Units three times daily) starting on postoperative day (POD) 0. Following the expected early postoperative thrombocytopenia, the patient developed an unexpected further decline in the platelet count that began on POD 5, with further progression in thrombocytopenia resulting in an ultimate platelet count nadir of 16 × 109/L on POD 10 (see Fig. ). The patient had at least an intermediate 4Ts score for HIT based upon the timing and magnitude of platelet count fall and lack of alternative explanations for his thrombocytopenia. On POD 5, the heparin was stopped and argatroban started, with argatroban dosing adjusted based on routine laboratory values. An ELISA test for anti-multimolecular platelet factor 4 (PF4)/heparin antibodies was positive with a value of 1.131 optical density (OD) units (negative reference range 0.000–0.399) and confirmed with a strong positive C14-serotonin-release assay (SRA) [100% serotonin-release at low dose (0.1 IU/mL) of unfractionated heparin (UFH); and 0% at high-dose (100 IU/mL) UFH]. Interestingly, the patient’s serum also caused 100% serotonin-release at 0 IU/mL UFH (buffer control), which is a feature of autoimmune-like HIT antibodies that can explain thrombocytopenia that persists for several weeks despite stopping all heparin . Despite prompt initiation of argatroban anticoagulation, the patient subsequently developed bilateral lower extremity edema on POD 14. Doppler ultrasound of both lower extremities was positive for right and left lower extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT) , consistent with the known frequency of DVT in approximately 50% of patients with SRA-positive HIT .
The patient was continued on argatroban for 16 days with minimal improvement in platelet count . At this time, the patient insisted on being discharged. Current guidelines on the management of HIT were reviewed with patient and family. In addition, we also discussed the few reported case series on the successful use of DOACs in the management of HIT, stressing clearly the limitations of using this drug including but not limited to lack of prospective, randomized studies, risk of publication bias and underreporting of failure incidence. The patient and family verbally confirmed understanding of the risks of using DOACs and requested discharge on an oral anticoagulant. Following a multi-disciplinary discussions, the patient was discharged on apixaban 5 mg orally twice daily. His platelet count was 108 × 109/L when argatroban was discontinued and apixaban started immediately. This transitioning scheme is based on the half-life of argatroban which is 39–51 min in patients with normal hepatic function; of note, half-life may extend up to 181 min in patients with hepatic impairment, thus in such patients caution on appropriate transitioning protocol is recommended. Our patient was followed for >30 days with steady increase in platelet count, no new thrombosis (based on imaging, not shown) and no episodes of bleeding. The patient continues to follow with our clinic with no reported incidence of bleeding or thrombosis 3 months later.