A 30-year-old male presented to us with complaints of trauma to his right knee and instability during walking. Patient gave history of poliomyelitis in childhood of same leg, for which adequate physiotherapy and treatment was taken. Patient had an equinovarus deformity of the foot . Prior to the injury patient had complaints of mild weakness in the right lower limb but was able to walk full weight bearing on both lower limbs with the equinovarus deformity , without any deformity in the knee. On examination, lachmans and anterior drawer test was positive. There was no evidence of meniscal injury clinically. The girth of the right thigh was smaller by 5 cm compared to the same point on left thigh . The quadriceps power was 4+ based on modified MRC grading . There was no neurological abnormality of the right leg. MRI was done and was suggestive of complete ACL tear .
Initially, patient was counselled regarding the anticipation of complexity of ACL reconstruction in a polio affected limb and was started on conservative management with analgesics and physiotherapy. Patient presented again 2 weeks later with complaints of instability and demanded a stable knee. Quadriceps weakness due to polio affection coupled with loss of anterior restraint of the ACL would be the reason for this. Patient was planned for ACL reconstruction. It was decided not to use a hamstrings graft to avoid tissue morbidity in an already weak knee and also to avoid risk of any flexion deformity. We decided to use a Peroneus Longus graft in this case as the patient had been living with a varus foot deformity all his life and to avoid the complication of quadriceps-hamstrings imbalance. A peroneus longus graft has proved to be a reliable alternative with the advantages that it is easy to harvest, it is comparatively longer and thicker and its distal end is sutured to peroneus brevis preventing muscle retraction [, , ].
The patient was operated under spinal anaesthesia. Standard arthroscopic portals were made and diagnostic arthroscopic was done. Arthroscopy revealed normal synovium, normal menisci, and a complete ACL tear. The peroneus longus tendon was harvested through a 2 cm incision along the posterior border of the distal fibula . Tendon was sutured with ethibond no 2 and harvested with a tendon stripper.
Graft was prepared and reconstruction was done. Standard femoral and tibial tunnels were drilled and graft was railroaded through the femoral tunnel over endobutton and fixed on tibia using bioscrew.
The femoral intercondylar notch was found to be shallower than normal. Post fixation, graft was found to be stable, there was no impingement in extension and full flexion was possible. Anterior drawer test on table was negative. Cycling of the graft was done.
On postoperative day 1, patient was made to do knee slides on bed, patella mobilisation, ankle and toe movements, active knee extension to full with quadriceps and hamstrings strengthening exercises. Patient was kept on long knee brace for 3 weeks and was gradually progressed from partial to full weight bearing. At the end of 6 weeks patient was given a hinged knee brace and was full weight bearing with complete extension and 120° flexion. Anterior drawer test and lachmans test were negative .