A 13-month-old baby boy was presented to our hospital with a history of acute gastroenteritis and marked gross motor and speech developmental delay. He was the first child born to healthy, unrelated Sinhalese parents. The mother was 23 years old, and the father was 21 years old. The mother noted the child having abnormal movements involving the head and the upper limbs at 9 months of age, the description of which resembled generalized extensor spasms. There was clustering of similar events and sleep deprivation, which were compatible with seizures, from that age onward.
The initial generalized extensor spasms involving both upper limbs and the head, occurring as short-lasting clusters (one spasm would persist for about 1 to 2 seconds, with recurrence in 10 to 20 clustering events, each occurrence lasting for about 3 to 5 minutes), transformed by the age of 1 year and 2 months into spasms of a flexor type resembling infantile spasms. Subsequently, the child developed generalized tonic-clonic convulsions. Most of the time, the seizures were precipitated by a low-grade fever, leading to repeated hospital admissions. The focus for the recurrent fever was not identified.
The seizures could not be controlled with valproic acid (VPA) (30mg/kg body weight/day) alone for 1 month and in combination with carbamazepine (CBZ) (5mg/kg body weight/day) for 2 weeks. VPA administered together with clonazepam (CNZ) (0.5mg/kg body weight/day), after omission of CBZ, proved to be effective, and the child remained seizure-free for 4 months. There were no early side effects of the drugs noted at a follow-up examination.
A physical examination revealed that the child had marked hypotonia with characteristic facial appearance of deep-set eyes, a wide mouth with protruding tongue and a pointed nose resembling AS. He is fair in complexion, with a hypopigmented patch over the left anterior thigh. Characteristically, he keeps his hands upheld, and he exhibits abnormal, uncoordinated, jerky movements of the arms. He always tends be seated with a rounded back, suggestive of underlying scoliosis, and he has episodes of inappropriate laughter. His teeth had not yet erupted, and he had marked developmental delay affecting all components. When he presented to our hospital at the age of 13 months, all developmental parameters resembled those of a child between 7 and 8 months of age. Monosyllabic babbling had started at the age of 1 year. After 4 months of treatments, he showed marked improvement. There were no seizures. He was able to sit without support and able to keep his back straight. He was stable in standing position with support for a very short period (<5s). He had weight gain. The abnormalities observed on the first EEG tracing were not characteristic of AS. The sleep background was immature and comprised of blocks of diffuse, moderate-amplitude, polymorphic delta activities alternating with a delta-theta mixed background. No epileptiform discharges were seen. Repeat EEG scan done after 2 months of treatment revealed a normal sleep EEG scan with age-matched background with symmetric sleep spindles, as well as a few K complexes. Excess diffuse fast activity could likely be a CNZ-induced phenomenon.
Computed tomography of the brain showed prominent sulci with widened subarachnoid spaces bilaterally in the frontal region, and a few hypodense areas were seen in the frontal white matter, predominantly in the periventricular region and centrum semiovale. Furthermore, there was mild prominence in the ventricular system favoring early cerebral atrophy.
His karyotype at 500-band resolution was that of a normal male (46,XY). Microdeletion testing by multiplex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) using the SALSA® MLPA® P290-B2 Prenatal Deletions probemix (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) according to the manufacturer’s protocol showed the presence of a deletion involving all the probes for the 15q11.2 region.