A 19-year-old male was scheduled for RFA of symptomatic and recurrent AT , resistant to anti-arrhythmic therapy with a beta-blocker and flecainide. He was prenatally diagnosed with HLHS and underwent a stepwise surgical palliation with modified Norwood procedure, hemi-Fontan operation, and, finally, Fontan completion with the creation of a fenestrated IALT using a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) patch. The fenestration had a size of 4 mm. It was marked by four MCs, normally used for vessel closure .
The ablation procedure was performed under deep sedation with fentanyl and propofol. At the beginning of the procedure, the patient presented with ongoing clinical AT. The cannulation of the coronary sinus (CS) was not possible, because the CS orifice was located in the CA. Therefore, the 10-pole diagnostic catheter (DECANAV®, Biosense Webster) was placed at the lateral wall of the IALT to obtain the referent signal.
Due to the small diameter of the fenestration, the ablation catheter (THERMOCOOL SMARTTOUCH™ SF, Biosense Webster) could only be inserted into the CA. However, the position of the fenestration did not allow to reach reliable contact, especially in the areas around the tricuspid valve (TV). Insertion of the multi-polar mapping catheter (PENTARAY®, Biosense Webster) and steerable sheath (Agilis™, Abbott) was also not possible. The tip of a steerable introducer was repeatedly jammed by the edges of fenestration. Multiple attempts to dilate the fenestration using a 6 mm peripheric angioplasty balloon (Charger™, Boston Scientific) failed due to the rigidness of the edges of the fenestration caused by the MC. The inflated balloon remained in the characteristic dumbbell-shape despite the use of high pressures (up to 16 atm) . Only angioplasty with the ‘balloon-against-dilator’ technique was finally successful and allowed complete inflation of the balloon, dilation of the fenestration, and insertion of the steerable introducer into the atrium . For this, two J wires were inserted to the CA through the fenestration. The dilator of the steerable sheath was then positioned over the first J wire, ensuring its placement within the fenestration. Once in position, the balloon was inflated with moderate pressure, not exceeding a maximum of 12 atmospheres exerting pressure against the dilator. This resulted in a localized, asymmetrical rise in radial pressure and dilation of the orifice despite the mechanical resistance of the MCs.
Activation mapping of the AT (CARTO3 V7; Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, USA) revealed a counterclockwise re-entry around the TV. In our case, not only the right atrium (as typical in atrial flutter) but also the whole CA was included in the re-entry circuit. The zone of the slowest activation during the AT was located between the PTFE patch and the tricuspid annulus, corresponding anatomically to the cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI) (; , ). After linear radio-frequency application at the isthmus abolished the AT, no other AT was inducible . A CTI block was confirmed. One week later, the patient experienced a different AT (longer cycle length = 405 ms with 1 to 1 AV conduction and different P-wave morphology), which was successfully terminated by electrical cardioversion. Over the following 9 months, the patient remained free of arrhythmias.