A 24-year-old man was referred to our hospital with a productive cough accompanied by expectoration of purulent sputum, weight loss, and exertional polypnea. The patient was treated for tuberculosis but he subsequently developed fever and chest pain, 2 mo after being discharged from our hospital.
When the severity of the clinical symptoms increasingly progressed, the patient was readmitted to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
The patient had no significant medical history.
The patient denied smoking previously and had no past history of lung disease. His family history was unremarkable.
On physical examination, the patient was in poor general condition. The patient’s body mass index was around 20. Lung auscultation indicated decreased breath sounds in the right lower lung. Chest wall collapse was evident upon visual inspection.
Laboratory analysis evidenced that sputum smears for acid-fast bacilli, sputum culture, GeneXpert Mtuberculosis/RIF, and polymerase chain reaction were all positive for tuberculosis. Furthermore, multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae and Aspergillus fumigatus were isolated in the bacterial culture of the effusion and sputum. The blood markers were as follows: White blood count: 13.67 × 109/L (81.1% neutrophils and 5.6% lymphocytes); C-reactive protein: 89.54 mg/L; ESR: 34 mm/h; procalcitonin: 0.22 ng/mL. The patient's liver and kidney functions, electrolytes, myocardial enzymes, and coagulation were normal.
The chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral pulmonary infection with cavitary lesions . The right lung was completely compressed and atelectatic with severe air leakage; pleural thickening of the right upper lung indicated right lung damage . The coarctation of the right intercostal space is noted on the chest CT . Bronchoscopy at admission and 1 mo after the anti-tuberculosis treatment showed a 5 mm fistula of the right upper bronchus , along with erythema, erosion, and hyperplasia of the apical bronchus, and a small amount of necrotic material.