A 59-year-old woman was admitted for recurrent urinary tract infection (UTI). Past history revealed right hip prosthesis and hysterectomy for cervical cancer at age 56, followed by radiotherapy. An extensive stricture of the left ureter had been treated with ileal loop substitution in a General Surgery environment at age 58. The procedure was performed in a general surgeon setting instead of a urologist because the patient lives in a peripheral area with first level hospitals. Three months later, due to worsening of left hydronephrosis, the patient underwent pyeloplasty with placement of a 'stent' of unknown characteristics using a flank approach. Ten months after the second procedure, the patient was evaluated at our institution for recurrent UTI and fever, with irritative bladder symptoms (frequency and urge incontinence). Serum creatinine was 1 mg/dL; urine culture revealed >1 million E. coli CFU (Colony Forming Units) per mL.
As a second step a plain X-ray of the abdomen was performed , that showed presence of a stent-like radiopaque device on the left side, with its upper part projecting on the left kidney area and three short interruptions at its proximal third. Furthermore, a renal scintigraphy was performed, that revealed severely reduced (10%) left kidney function.
In order to get more detailed information about the morphology of the left urinary tract, CT urography was subsequently carried out using a 64-row CT scanner. Axial images, Maximum Intensity Projection and Volume Rendering (VR, Figure ) reconstructions showed instead a large tube with multiple bends and a radiopaque marker inside it, crossing through the entire collecting system of the left kidney; this latter was smaller than the contralateral one, due to chronic parenchymal failure.
The patient underwent left nephrectomy and removal of the ileal loop, containing a 32F partially encrusted Silastic drain with a radiopaque marker . The general surgery setting can, even partially, explain the use of a Silastic tube instead of a standard urological stent.
In our case, CT proved to be superior to plain X-ray due to its higher contrast resolution and its ability to display a body volume as a stack of cross-sectional images, rather than as a projective representation of the attenuation of all tissues crossed by a relatively wide X-ray beam [,]. Moreover, CT allowed to accurately distinguish the Silastic drain tube from its centrala radiopaque marker, while 2D and 3D reconstructions (and especially, VR) yielded an accurate depiction of the tube structure and course. In particular, MIP views were useful to show the metallic marker in its entirety (by extracting voxels with the highest intensity inside the slab), while VR were more suitable to display the relatively hypodense tube coating, owing to the VR capability to use the information from all voxels for generating a 3D view of the anatomy under investigation [-].