Intermittent mid-epigastric abdominal pain.
A 42-year-old female started having intermittent recurrent mid-epigastric abdominal pain episodes that resulted in multiple emergency department (ED) visits. Six months prior, she had presented to the ED with two days of intermittent epigastric pain and subjective fevers. At that time, she had no nausea or vomiting, her last bowel movement was the day prior to presentation, and she was passing flatus. On exam, she was hemodynamically stable with a benign physical exam. Her abdomen was soft, slightly distended, with moderate tenderness to palpation in the epigastric region, with no evidence of peritonitis. Her white blood cell count was 8.0 K/μL. She had a computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis (AP) without contrast demonstrating her prior bowel anastomosis was focally dilated, with abnormal surrounding inflammatory stranding, along with mesenteric swirling around the anastomosis which raised suspicion for possible obstruction due to internal hernia. She underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy where an adhesive band of omentum to the prior small bowel anastomosis was lysed. All bowel was viable.
Following that surgery, her epigastric pain recurred, along with some nausea and vomiting. She had Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) serum and stool antigen and antibody tests that were negative, and an abdominal radiograph demonstrated non-obstructive bowel gas pattern. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) demonstrated a few localized non-bleeding erosions in the gastric antrum, with no stigmata of recent bleeding. A CT AP with intravenous contrast given after premedication demonstrated no acute pathologies that could explain her ongoing abdominal pain. She was discharged after she started tolerating oral intake and her pain improved. At a postoperative clinic visit a week later, her pain had completely resolved, and she was tolerating a regular diet without issues.
Unfortunately, her symptoms returned months later and led to multiple ED visits. During these episodes, she had no nausea or vomiting and no particular precipitating factors. She had been having dark stools, which had resolved after stopping ibuprofen, and otherwise had normal stools and flatus. Her recurrent symptoms prompted a thorough outpatient work-up.
Her past history was notable for depression, anxiety, iron deficiency anemia, cystitis, infectious mononucleosis, H. pylori infection, an unprovoked pulmonary embolism for which she had previously been on warfarin for a year, and prior Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Five years prior, she had a laparoscopic small bowel resection with a stapled side-to-side anastomosis for Meckel’s diverticulum. She also had a history of left ovarian cyst removal and bilateral inguinal hernia repairs. Three years prior, she had a colonoscopy and EGD performed for bright red blood per rectum, heartburn, epigastric and lower abdominal pain, nausea, and bilious emesis. These studies demonstrated very small internal hemorrhoids and erosive gastropathy but were otherwise normal.
The patient had never smoked, had used methamphetamine previously but quit 13 years prior, and drank one glass of wine a week. Her family history was notable for diabetes and stroke in her parents. She was allergic to penicillins, iodinated contrast media, and fish-containing products.
Her vital signs during her ED visits were within normal limits. Her abdominal exam was unremarkable at office visits when she was not experiencing an abdominal pain episode, but during her symptomatic episodes, she had mid-epigastric tenderness to palpation with no rebound or guarding.
During each ED visit, she was noted to have mild leukocytosis (11.8-15.9 K/μL), with otherwise overall unremarkable laboratory findings.
During one ED visit, a CT AP demonstrated mild inflammation and surrounding stranding at the level of the prior anastomosis , along with small bowel fecalization concerning for possible infectious or inflammatory enteritis with nonspecific prominent mesenteric nodes.