A 68-year-old woman who presented with a 5-year history of typical left HFS was admitted to our hospital for neurosurgical treatment. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed the presence of neurovascular compression at the root exit zone (REZ) of the left facial nerve by the left anterior inferior cerebellar artery [ and ]. The patient underwent MVD through retro-sigmoid approach under park-bench position. During surgery, mastoid emissary vein was disconnected and hemostasis was achieved at the mastoid canal using bone wax as usual. After a retro-mastoid keyhole craniotomy, the affected nerve was decompressed with mobilization and dislocation of the offending artery by setting a piece of Teflon proximal to the REZ . Operative time was 2 h 20 min and there were no complications during and immediately after the surgery. Remission of the HFS was observed immediately after MVD.
Postoperative computed tomography (CT) scan on the next morning after surgery revealed no abnormal findings. Except for complain of headache, the postoperative course appeared uneventful. However, on the 3rd postoperative day, her conscious level deteriorated while asleep. Whereas she was resting sideways due to the pain of the wound for a while after the operation, her head position had been raised with a pillow at that time. CT scan revealed a subdural hematoma in the left cerebellopontine angle (CPA) with hydrocephalus . The patient was treated conservatively with close monitoring for further examination of the cause of this delayed hemorrhage. MR images also indicated an intracerebellar hemorrhage with perifocal edema [ and ]. Angiography did not reveal any underlying vascular malformation; however, we noticed that the left IJV was obstructed at the level of C1 by some structure [-], ipsilateral IJV stenosis was not evident on preoperative MR images . The three-dimensional CT (3D-CT) venogram reconstructed images revealed that this offending structure was an ESP that was 48 mm in length as measured . The former axial images of the 3DCT venogram also indicated that the IJV passed transversely across between the ESP and the rectus capitis lateralis muscle and was pinched between them . The ESP did not require any surgical treatment because the hematoma in the CPA and the hydrocephalus were resolved gradually under management with appropriate neck positioning. MR venography performed before discharge also revealed reduction of signal flow on ipsilateral transverse-sigmoid sinus by cervical antero-flexion compared with posterior-extension [ and ]. We concluded that this is an interesting case developing delayed intracranial hemorrhage after MVD for HFS, which was caused by ESP related IJV stenosis. Fortunately, the patient was discharged with no neurological deficits and the HFS was resolved over a 2-year follow-up examination period.