A 63-year-old woman who complained of pain and limited left hip movement for the previous 3 months was hospitalized in November 2017. In the early stages of the disease (August 2017), the patient experienced non-specific, intractable hip pain and limited movement without external trauma or injury. The pain was aggravated by exercise and was more severe at night, accompanied by claudication and difficulty turning over in bed. Radiography performed at a local county hospital showed a bone tumor in the left proximal femur; hence, the patient was referred to our hospital for treatment.
The patient had a history of grade 2 hypertension accompanied by deep venous thrombosis of the left lower extremity (intermuscular venous thrombosis of the left leg), bilateral carotid arteriosclerosis, and arteriosclerosis of both lower extremities.
Physical examination revealed swelling of the upper left thigh, with no palpable mass or tenderness in the inguinal area. Local tenderness and knocking pain were present on the outside of the left hip joint. Further examination showed a positive Patrick's sign and a negative Thomas’ sign. The active and passive movements of the hip joint were limited, especially external rotation, and the patient displayed normal muscle tension and strength.
Routine laboratory tests, including blood, urine, and biochemical tests, yielded normal results. Regarding hematological and oncological indexes, the neuron-specific enolase level was slightly elevated at 15.40 μg/ml, the cancer antigen 72–4 level was 26.83 U/ml, and the ferritin level had increased to 230.90 ng/ml, which was a high value but still within the normal range. After excluding other lesions, these laboratory results were considered related to a malignant tumor's invasion of the bone marrow.
On November 26, 2017, a plain radiograph showed an osteolytic lesion with cystic destruction in the left femur's intertrochanteric region, and the lesion's boundary was clear without periosteal reaction . Computed tomography (CT) showed that the tumor broke through the bone cortex and formed a significant soft tissue mass . MRI revealed that the intertrochanteric medullary cavity of the left femur was occupied by short T1 and long T2 signals . T1-weighted images showed that the tumor signal was similar to that of the muscle tissue, and the lesion included some parts of the femoral neck, trochanter, and subtrochanter. A whole-body bone scan showed that the intertrochanteric nuclides of the left femur were enriched and that bone salt metabolism had increased significantly; however, the bone salt metabolism of other parts of the body had not significantly increased . Preoperatively, a CT scan of the head, neck, abdomen, and pelvis and a gynecological B-mode ultrasound revealed no metastasis in the gastrointestinal tract or uterus, and no signs of recent cerebral infarctions were present.
After obtaining informed consent from the patient and her family, a puncture biopsy of the left intertrochanteric bone tumor was performed on December 5, 2017. The pathological evaluation demonstrated a left femoral intertrochanteric leiomyosarcoma.