A 30-year-old unmarried Moroccan Arab male was brought to the emergency within two hours of acute suicidal insecticide poisoning. He had ingested and self injected intravenously into his left forearm an unknown amount of an insecticide Synergy® (a mixture of chlorpyrifos 50% (CPF) and cypermethrin 5% (CM)).
He had previous history of active polysubstance abuse of benzodiazepines, alcohol, cannabis and recreational drugs used intravenously. His parents reported that he has habitually run away from home since his adolescence. He has also suffered from social isolation and religious delusions. The patient had never consulted a psychiatrist.
In the emergency room, vital signs revealed a pulse rate of 100 beats per minute, blood pressure of 170/100 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute and plenty of oral secretions. The patient was afebrile and had rhonchi all over his chest. Oxygen saturation was 80%, and Glasgow Coma Scale was 6/15. There were no fasciculations. The patient had also a miosis. He required ventilator support and he was admitted to the Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU).
He developed, in few hours, hypothermia (34°C), bradychardia (35 beats per minute) with generalized fasciculations, tremor, excessive salivation, bronchial secretions and bronchospasm. Physical examination revealed hyperemia extending from the proximal third of the forearm to the axillary region with severe edema in the antecubital fossa without indurations or necrosis. The capillary refill time was normal and the pulses were present. Urine was discolored to a reddish brown. Investigations at admission to MICU, showed hyperglycemia (2.42 g/L), rhabdomyolysis (level of creatine kinase in the blood was 1188 UI/L) and low bicarbonate levels (16 mEq/L). Renal and liver functions and serum levels of sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium were normal. Blood picture showed leukocytosis. Screening for benzodiazepine, antiepileptic drugs, amphetamines, ethanol, cocaine, exstasy, tetrahydrocannabinol, morphine and its derivatives was negative. Red blood cell cholinesterase and plasma cholinesterase were very low (<10%). The chest X-ray and electrocardiogram were normal.
OP and pyrethroid (PYR) mixture poisoning was assumed on the basis of the medical interview, the compound identification made based on the container brought by the patient’s relatives, cholinergic syndrome associated with pyrethroid effects, tremor and excessive salivation supported by low plasma and red cell cholinesterase levels.
He was treated with, intravenous (IV) fluids, atropine, phenobarbital, IV sodium bicarbonate and passive external rewarming. Atropine (2 mg) was given every 10 minutes for four hours, followed by infusion at the rate of 2.5 mg per hour, and the dose was adjusted as per his clinical response. The use of phenobarbital was empirical because an electroencephalogram to look for subclinical seizures was not available. The patient was not treated with oxime because this antidote was not available.
At day 3, the patient developed stroke with hypotension (80/50 mmHg) and tachycardia (143 beats per minute). Laboratory tests showed severe hyperglycemia (4.49 g/dL), hypokaliemia (2.4 mEq/L), glycosuria, ketonuria, and low bicarbonate levels (12 mEq/L). Arterial blood gas analysis revealed pH 6.99, PaCO2 73 mmHg, PaO2 195 mmHg (FiO2 70%), and HCO3ˉ 17.6 mEq/L, suggesting mixed acidosis. Cardiac enzymes and echocardiography were normal. Blood and urine were sterile. Procalcitonine was 1.90 ng/mL and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 2.70 mg/L. Amylasemia, lipasemia and glycosylated hemoglobin and abdominal ultrasound were normal. Treatment, including IV fluids, insulin infusion, parenteral potassium, sodium bicarbonate, adrenaline at the rate of 6 mg per hour and hydrocortisone-hemisuccinate was started. Treatment with atropine and supportive care was continued.
At day 5, he developed hyperthermia with chills. His chest X-ray was normal. The level of procalcitonin and CRP increased. Streptococcus pneumoniae was isolated from protected distal bronchial samples. Two bacteries, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Staphylococcus hominis were isolated from the blood. Empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and gentamicin was started and modified to imipenem once bacteriological results became available. The glucose levels were normal and needed no further insulin therapy, and the acidosis was resolved at day 5.
Treatment with adrenaline was stopped on day 6. The patient required ventilator support for 7 days and atropine for 10 days. The patient received 700 mg as the total dose of atropine. Edema and inflammation in the left upper limb regressed without requiring surgery. Red blood cell cholinesterase and plasma cholinesterase were still very low (<10%). A psychiatric consultation conducted during hospitalization revealed a suicide attempt in the context of psychosis in the patient. He was discharged after 13 days to a medical department to continue the antibiotic therapy, clinical monitoring and to start the prescribed antipsychotic drugs. The serum cholinesterase has been recovered four weeks after poisoning.