A 61-year-old man presented with gait disturbance that worsened over 2 weeks and memory disturbance since 6 months. He had a wide-based and slow gait. His score on the timed up and go test (TUG) was 14.5 s and 20 steps and that on the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) was 21. Computed tomography revealed ventriculomegaly (Evans index 0.45), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a cystic formation at the caudal side of the cerebellum, leading to a diagnosis of BPC [-]. Sagittal MRI results revealed a downward bulging third ventricle floor and membrane-like structure within the prepontine cistern . Cine phase-contrast MRI revealed a normal bidirectional flow at the level of the aqueduct canal but none at the prepontine cistern [ and g].
We performed ETV using a flexible neuroendoscope (Olympus VEF type V®; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The third ventricle floor was opened with a perforating forceps and widened with a Expansor® Balloon catheter SI (Fuji Systems Corporation, Tokyo, Japan). Basilar artery and the scarring in the prepontine cistern were observed through the stoma. After perforation of the prepotine scarring, we confirmed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow between the third ventricle and prepontine cistern. We also opened the scarring with perforating forceps under the critical observation of a flexible neuroendoscope [ and ]. Pulsatile movement of the third ventricular floor was more dynamic after opening the scarring compared with after ETV. During the operation, the partial lack of septum pellucidum and a very thin third ventricle floor were observed. There was no aqueduct stenosis.
Postoperative MRI indicated the opening of the floor of third ventricle and scar in the prepontine cistern. Cine phase-contrast MRI revealed CSF flow in the prepontine cistern . The patient’s postoperative course was good, and gait disturbance improved immediately. After 1 week postoperatively, the patient had a TUG sore of 9.1 s and 15 steps. At the end of 2 months, his memory disturbance gradually improved, and his MMSE score was 26. This patient keeps good condition even at 1 year after the operation.