A 36-year-old male who was currently incarcerated presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of syncope. The patient reported that the event occurred after he stood up from dinner. There were no witnesses, but the patient believes that he hit his head. He said he had a headache since the fall, and it had not responded to the acetaminophen that he received from the prison infirmary. He denied any tongue biting or loss of bowel or bladder control. The patient stated that he had felt dizzy and lightheaded over the prior few days, and that sensation continued in the ED. He also felt numb across his shoulders and had been nauseous since the fall.
He had a past medical history of seizures and bipolar disorder. His last seizure was several years prior and was described as “whole body shaking.” The patient reported compliance with his medications, which were fluoxetine, phenytoin, ranitidine, and valproic acid. He had no prior surgical history. His family history included diabetes in his grandmother. The patient drank alcohol socially and had used marijuana and abused prescription drugs in the past but had not used any substances recently.
On physical examination, he was awake, alert, and in no acute distress. He was afebrile (36.9° Celsius) with a heart rate of 84 beats per minute, a blood pressure of 116/72 millimeters of mercury, respiration 16 breaths per minutes, and oxygen saturation of 99% while breathing room air. He was 167.6 centimeters (cm) tall and weighed 63.5 kilograms (body mass index of 22.6 kg/m2), and was well nourished and well developed. There was a 2 cm × 2 cm hematoma and an overlying abrasion on his left forehead. Another abrasion on his upper lip was not actively bleeding. His external ears were normal without evidence of trauma. His nose was normal. His oropharynx was clear and moist. His pupils were 3 millimeters (mm) equal, round, and reactive to light and accommodation, and eyes were without scleral icterus. His neck was supple without tracheal deviation. He had normal range of motion of his neck and he had no cervical spinous process or paraspinal muscular tenderness. His heart was regular rate and rhythm without murmurs, rubs, or gallops. He had capillary refill of less than two seconds in all extremities. His lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally without wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. He had regular respiratory effort without accessory muscle use. His abdomen was soft with normal bowel sounds without tenderness, rebound, or guarding. There was no costovertebral tenderness. His extremities exhibited no edema, tenderness, or deformity, and had 2+ pulses throughout. He had no spinous process or paraspinal process tenderness in his thoracic or lumbar spine.
His cranial nerves (II–XII) were intact. He was found to have bilateral and direction-changing horizontal nystagmus that was provoked on lateral gaze. No vertical or torsional nystagmus was seen. He had 5/5 strength with normal muscle tone throughout his upper and lower extremities bilaterally. He had decreased sensation across his shoulders bilaterally, but the remainder of his sensation was intact. He had slow finger to nose with overshoot bilaterally. His ambulation was limited secondary to feeling unsteady. He was oriented to person, place and time, answered questions appropriately, and followed commands without difficulty.
Initial laboratory results are shown in . His electrocardiogram (ECG) is shown in . He had a chest radiograph . Computed tomography (CT) of his head and neck were performed (Image 3; full study is found in Supplemental Material 1). A diagnostic test was then performed, which confirmed the diagnosis.