A 49-year-old man with no medical history presented to our hospital with a 2-week history of the left low back pain. He reported a unilateral lower lumbar and buttock pain below the L5 spinous process that increased while sitting, particularly on a chair without a back rest. His physical examination revealed normal neurological findings, and tenderness on posterior iliac spine was reported. Moreover, provocation tests (Patrick’s test, Gaenslen’s test, and the SIJ shear test) indicated positive results on the left side. There were no specific findings in plain radiography of the lumbar spine and pelvis or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine. In addition, blood chemistry test findings were normal. From the physical examination, SIJ pain was strongly suspected. However, the SIJ block under fluoroscopic guidance was ineffective. We prescribed nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and observed the patient through follow-up. We performed MRI of the pelvis 2 weeks later. MRI of the left SIJ revealed low signal intensity on T-1 weighted images and high signal intensity on T-2 weighted images. It revealed a diffuse bone marrow edema in the left SIJ . Computed tomography scan of the pelvis was then performed for differential diagnoses of the lesion, however, neither tumors lesions nor fractures were detected. The treatment course was local rest and continued NSAIDs administration, and the pain resolved within 3 months. However, 2 months later, he was referred to our hospital again with right low back pain. The physical findings and examination were similar to the initial consultation. MRI revealed a diffuse bone marrow edema at the right SIJ; the left SIJ bone marrow edema had disappeared . The patient was administered the same treatment course of local rest and NSAIDs. After 5 months, his symptom disappeared, and the MRI revealed a disappearing bone marrow edema with normal findings . During the 2 years of follow-up, there has been no recurrence of illness. A diagnosis of RMO was made from the course and characteristics of this case.