A 3-year-old Caucasian boy originating from Northern Greece was admitted to our department in Hippokratio General Hospital of Thessaloniki with a history of dysphagia and repeated episodes of oral bleeding which had lasted for a period of six months. A physical examination revealed a reddish-blue, soft, painful and immobilized mass in the mid-dorsum area of the tongue extending to its base. There was no cervical lymph node enlargement. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 3.3×1.9×2.0 cm mass with new vessel generation. It was obstructing the entrance to his pharynx and was initially thought to be a hemangioma . A biopsy was performed under general anesthesia and histological examination showed a hemangioma of the tongue. He was treated conservatively with corticosteroids and interferon (IFN) 2A. A biopsy specimen was also sent to a hospital laboratory which specialized in vascular anomalies. Microscopic examination also showed a benign capillary hemangioma.
Despite the treatment, the mass had accreted excessively and six months later it was causing partial airway obstruction. Our patient was put in contact with another specialized center in pediatric tumors and he underwent a tracheostomy and wide excision of the mass at the same time. A second diagnosis of hemangioma was also made by this center. The tracheostomy was closed successfully 21 days later.
Carefully controlled biopsies were then performed and the subsequent histological examination showed ASPS of the tongue. Microscopically the tumor consisted of structured, irregular and rough clusters of cells . Most of the vascular channels were enclosed by thin connective tissue septa. The tumor cells were large and polygonal with small and rounded nuclei. The cytoplasm of the tumor cells contained periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive diastase-resistant material that was partly rod-shaped. This aspect has been observed in 80% of cases in other studies, and is helpful in differentiating this tumor from a rhabdomyoma. Rhabdomyomas also present PAS-positive cells, but the intracytoplasmatic glycogen granules disappear after pre-treatment with diastase .
According to a series of cases reported, adjuvant therapy may not be necessary if the small primary lingual ASPS can be completely resected and the patient does not experience clinical recurrence or metastasis . Therefore our patient was not treated with any post-operative chemotherapy as the removal of the tumor was considered to be an R0 ectomy (curative intent resection) and MRI, CT and scintigraphy of bones showed no local or distal metastasis. At three and a half years follow-up, our patient remained disease-free and asymptomatic .