A 54-year-old man visited a local clinic with complaints of fever, nausea, and vomiting. Laboratory studies revealed elevated serum aspartate aminotransferase of 42 IU/L, serum alanine transferase of 199 IU/L, serum γ-glutamyl transpeptidase of 602 IU/L, and serum lipase of 61 U/L. Endoscopy revealed a duodenal submucosal tumor. The patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation. He had a gastroduodenal ulcer and experienced occasional epigastric pain for the past 30 years. He received treatment for eradication of Helicobacter pylori at 43 years of age. Endoscopy at our hospital revealed stenosis of the duodenal bulb, which was suspected to be caused by a submucosal tumor and an active ulcer . In addition, bile excretion was only observed in a small opening near the ulcer . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed normal findings in the duodenum, but gas in the bile ducts (pneumobilia). Contrast duodenography showed duodenal stenosis and reflux of the bile with a bile duct deformity . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed severe angulation of the CBD (appearing as a hook-shaped configuration), which opened at a different site from the pancreatic duct . Endoscopic ultrasonography revealed hypoechoic lesion in the 2nd portion of the duodenum which was originating from the muscularis propria. It was difficult to distinguish inflammatory thickening from submucosal tumor. Endoscopic ultrasound fine-needle aspiration revealed inflammatory cells, and no evidence of neoplastic cells. Positron emission tomography CT showed [18F]-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in the 2nd portion of the duodenum (standard uptake value—MAX: 4.15), but the delayed phase showed a decrease in accumulation. Based on these test results, a suspected diagnosis of groove pancreatitis was made, but with the findings of duodenal stenosis and hook-shaped CBD, the possibility of biliary neoplasm complicating choledochoduodenal fistula was also entertained. There was the possibility of malignancy; and surgical management was considered the rational treatment for the symptomatic groove pancreatitis, so we decided to perform pancreaticoduodenectomy. The patient’s complaints were relieved, and the laboratory data improved after surgery. The resected specimen revealed the papilla of Vater located in the 2nd portion of the duodenum, and the CBD opened approximately 2 cm proximal to the papilla of Vater . Histologically, the CBD opening had no sphincter muscles . The duodenum proximal to the opening of the CBD was stenotic due to ulceration and fibrosis. The CBD and pancreatic duct were separate openings with epithelial cells . These findings correlated with the diagnosis of EOCBD into the duodenal bulb.