A 33-year-old married male patient with a body mass index of 28.6 noticed a palpable subcutaneous cord-like induration under the skin of the penis with a mild pain to the touch. When these complaints began, he was on day 14 of medical treatment for COVID-19 infection diagnosed by both “Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)” positivity and “low-Dose Computerized Chest Computerized Tomography” (ground glass appearance bilaterally) due to symptoms of high fever, cough, loss of smell and taste without any shortness of breath. His blood count was normal at the diagnosis time of COVID-19 with all parameters including neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio. D-dimer and Ferritin levels were also normal, while alanine transaminase and C-reactive protein levels were slightly elevated (66 IUL/L (Normal: 12–63) and 1.49 mg/dl. (Normal: < 0.5), respectively). His father and two uncles had undergone cardiac stent placement due to vascular pathology, but the patient had no known cardiovascular pathology.
According to the National Ministry of Health algorithms for COVID-19 treatment and after clinical assessment on family history, he was admitted to isolated home treatment with Favipiravir 2 × 1600 mg. (po) followed by a maintenance dose of 2 × 600 mg. for five days along with the prophylactic antithrombotic agent Rivaroxaban 15 mg. (po) once daily. On the 14th day of follow-up, the patient was scheduled for PCR and antibody test for COVID-19, and he was also admitted to urology clinics for his complaint described above. PMD is the initial clinical diagnosis.
Superficial Doppler ultrasonography revealed dorsal induration consistent with segmental thrombosis of the superficial dorsal vein, suggestive of penile Mondor’s disease .
The patient was immediately evaluated for thrombophilia for which tests complete blood count, prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), thrombodynamics test, thrombin time (TT) and reptilase time were done after consultation of haematology and cardiology. Lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, anti-β2 glycoprotein 1 antibody, activated protein C resistance, fibrinogen tests, factor V Leiden and prothrombin mutation, MTHFR A1298C mutation, ACE I/D variation and basal homocysteine levels were also evaluated.
The results showed that aPTT was slightly prolonged (36.6 min.-normal range: 21–36 min.) along with PT (15.1 s.-normal range:9.3–14.0 s.). The international normalized ratio (INR) was also increased to 1.3 (Normal = 0.8–1.25), while aPTT was decreased to %60.4 (Normal = 70–130). Genotyping revealed heterozygous variants of MTHFR A1298C and genotype ACE D/D. The other genetic tests were within normal limits.
The PCR test for COVID-19 was negative, and the total antibody for COVID-19 was detectable in the blood test. Low-dose computed tomography of the chest had normalized along with symptoms on the day of admission to urology.
Because of the risk of generalized thrombus associated with Covid-19, Rivaroxaban was replaced with an LMWH, enoxaparin 8000 IU/0.8 ml. administered subcutaneously and twice daily, which is also an appropriate treatment for PMD. On the third day of this medication, all of the patient’s coagulation measurements returned to normal (PT, activated PT and INR). PMD disappeared in the second week of Enoxaparin treatment.