A 32 years old primigravid woman was referred to our hospital in 2013 with a probable diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. She was at 12w of gestation according to her last menstrual period date. She had a 13 years history of primary infertility due to tubal factor. Her menstrual cycles were regular with normal hormonal profile. In her past medical history she had a laparoscopic left salpingectomy 4 years ago (because of left severe hydrosalpynx) and laparoscopic left ovarian cystectomy 3 years ago. Also, she had two cycles of IVF in 2010 and 2011 with negative outcomes.
Finally, the patient was candidate for ovulation induction and received GNRH antagonist. After the ovaries were punctured, total of 25 oocytes, 15 from left ovary and 10 from the right one were retrieved. Of 13 embryos, 4 four-celled embryos were transferred and 9 were freeze. Two weeks after ET, βhCG was negative. 3 weeks after ET, she had vaginal bleeding for 5 days with normal amount, but after this period, spotting for 30 days continued and then she had no bleeding for 35 days later. Also she had no coitus for 2 weeks before induction of ovulation, and during 8 weeks after ET (because of vaginal bleeding). So, she did a pregnancy test and βhCG level was 22,500 mIU/ml at day 90 after ET. The ultrasound study showed ectopic pregnancy in right adnexa, which was 13 weeks for gestational age with normal fetal heart rate; therefore she had been referred to our medical center for more evaluation and treatment.
At first visit, her general condition was good. She had no complaint of dizziness, shoulder pain, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting or abnormal vaginal bleeding. Vital signs were normal (with a blood pressure of 110/60mm Hg and pulse rate of 84/min). Her abdomen was nontender, nondistended, and without any obvious palpable masses. The pelvic examination revealed normal cervix without any motion tenderness, vaginal bleeding or discharge. Left adnexal region was normal while there was a tender mass about 11 weeks in right adnexal region undetectable from uterus. Hematocrit was 36%.
The abdominal ultrasound reported a gestational sac, an alive fetus with gestational age of about 13 weeks. The sac was located beside the fundus of uterus and extended to the right adnexa. A normal placenta was seen in right lateral pelvic wall. Some fluid was seen in the peritoneal cavity. The uterus had normal size and its cavity was empty. In Doppler evaluation, arcuate vessels were seen between the sac and uterus that was suggestive for an ectopic pregnancy. An abdomino- pelvic MRI with and without contrast was done for diagnostic confirmation. It showed a large mass (12×10 cm) containing fetus with normal heart beat in right adnexa in close contact with uterine fundus. Placenta was located on inferolateral surface of this mass. Uterus was large with thick endometrium; abdominal cavity was unremarkable . With impression of advanced ectopic pregnancy, laparotomy was performed. Pelvic exploration revealed a normal uterus. Left fallopian tube was not observed (because of the previous left salpingectomy).The left ovary was normal, while the right ovary was enlarged with oozing of blood from the surface of a 10×12 cm hemorrhagic mass .
Normal right tube was extended on the ovarian mass. Blood in the pouch of Douglas was observed. After releasing the omental adhesions, the mass was ruptured spontaneously and the sac and fetus were extracted , right salpango-ophorectomy was done but removal of the placenta (that was inserted in the inferior side of mass) caused to active bleeding that could not be controlled by stitches and foam gels; so the hemostasis was completed by inserting some long gases and a drain in posterior cul-de-sac. The estimated blood loss during the operation was about 2000 cc. The patient received 3 units of packed cells and referred to ICU.
After 2 days she underwent re-laparotomy for extracting the long gases. She was discharged 4 days after the last operation. βhCG levels were measured several times and finally it was normal at day 25 after operation. Pathologic evaluation confirmed a right ovarian gestation, demonstrating ovarian tissue with focuses of hemorrhage and chorionic villi which fulfilling the four Spiegelberg′s criteria .