A two-year-old girl has no history of easy lethargy, hypotonia, electrolyte imbalance, or hyperpigmented skin lesions. She presented to the emergency department with intermittent, crampy, progressive abdominal pain, accompanied by inconsolable crying. Milk, wheat, shellfish, peanuts, and fish were not consumed in the past month. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a mass lesion with a target sign in the right lower abdomen , which was immediately remitted by hydrostatic reduction. Despite successful reduction, the reappearance of abdominal pain on the next day confirmed recurrent intussusception in the left abdomen . Computed tomography scan was performed to exclude structural anomaly, revealing only bowel wall thickening and enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes . Despite successful reduction again, a third episode of intussusception over the left upper quadrant (LUQ) was found one week later . Concurrently, she presented with multiple palpable purpuras over lower limbs and arthralgia at the same time , compatible with clinical diagnosis of HSP. Laboratory data showed no proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, or coagulopathy. Consequently, a 10-day course of intravenous methylprednisolone was administered due to HSP. Two weeks after discharge, the fourth episode of intussusception over the LUQ, accompanied by a flare-up of purpura on the lower limbs, was observed . Intravenous steroids were re-administered. A small bowel series revealed no occult lead points. Given the unusual recurrence with diverse localization of intussusception, an infectious survey was conducted. No common respiratory virus infection was detected on the FilmArray Respiratory Panel. However, the stool antigen test eventually demonstrated H. pylori infection. As H. pylori infection might be associated with intussusception per se or contribute to HSP-aggravating intussusception, triple therapy comprising a proton pump inhibitor, amoxicillin and metronidazole was administered for 14 days. The negative H. pylori status was confirmed by stool antigen detection 2 months after therapy cessation. The complete resolution of HSP was also noted in the wake of H. pylori eradication. Notably, the patient’s mother and grandmother were also infected with H. pylori. Currently, at 4 years old, there has been no recurrence of intussusception.