An 84-year-old healthy man with no prior abdominal surgeries and whose past medical history included only atrial fibrillation and hypertension presented to the emergency department due to 3 days of diffuse abdominal pain and persistent emesis with inability to tolerate any liquids or solids. He denied any longstanding symptoms of weight loss, abdominal pain, or nausea. He was noted to have a lactate of 10.2 mmol/L, a leukocytosis to 21.3 K/uL, and a creatinine of 3.07 mg/dL. A CT showed significant distension of the stomach, duodenum, and proximal jejunum up to 4.8 cm with a transition point in the right upper quadrant, with bowel ischemia evidenced by duodenal pneumatosis intestinalis and portal venous gas The duodenojejunal flexure was abnormally located in the right upper quadrant, and the duodenum failed to pass under the superior mesenteric artery to the left upper quadrant . There was an abnormal superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and superior mesenteric vein (SMV) relationship , and the entire small bowel was in the right hemiabdomen , suggestive of malrotation. His CT was compared to one four years prior, performed when the patient presented with abdominal ecchymosis after a fall, and at the time malrotation was not reported yet was clearly present. The constellation of findings on the current CT was suspicious for a strangulated right paraduodenal hernia .
On exam, the patient’s abdomen was distended but soft with minimal diffuse tenderness. A nasogastric tube drained 3 L of dark bilious output, and the patient was taken emergently to the operating room for an exploratory laparotomy. There was a thick congenital band at the level of the proximal jejunum, with decompressed distal small bowel (Additional file : Fig. S1). The duodenojejunal flexure was located to the right of the spinal column. There was a paraduodenal space that did not contain any bowel but that was likely the location of a right paraduodenal internal hernia. There were several bands at the level of the duodenum that were divided, allowing the duodenum to be straightened out. While the small bowel was injected and edematous, it appeared viable. The cecum was found in the left lower quadrant and there was a palpable fecalith in the appendix. An appendectomy was performed. By the time the operation was concluded, the patient had been weaned off vasopressors, his lactate had improved to 2.2 mmol/L, and his creatinine had improved to 2.5 mg/dL. He had an uncomplicated post-operative course: his nasogastric tube was removed on post-operative day 4 and he was discharged home on post-operative day 6.