A 44-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of hypertension and preeclampsia who had taken oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) for 15 years, presented with intractable, colicky abdominal pain of two weeks duration. This abdominal pain worsened with oral intake. It was also associated with diarrhea and vomiting. The diarrhea was watery at times and was confirmed to be hemoccult positive. Her vomiting was non-bilious and was consistent with gastric contents, with a negative gastroccult test. No abnormal findings were found on physical examination except for stage III hypertension out of proportion to her risk factors and diffuse abdominal pain, which was the most prominent in the periumbilical area.
Routine laboratory work revealed leukocytosis (white blood count = 16.1) with a left shift (91% polymorphonuclear neutrophils), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 79, and a C-reactive protein level (CRP) of 100. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan completed in the emergency room revealed nonspecific colitis. It was thought that she had infectious colitis and so she was started on intravenous (IV) flagyl and IV ciprofloxacin. However, all microbial cultures were negative, including three cultures for clostridium difficile. A urinalysis (UA) revealed nephritic range proteinuria. At this point, there was a concern for vasculitis, hypothyroidism, and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The laboratory profile was negative for perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA), cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (C-ANCA), anti-saccharomyces antibody (ASCA), antinuclear antibody (ANA), celiac profile, lactate, carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA-125), and a thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). A colonoscopy was completed in order to rule out microscopic colitis and occult inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), but revealed a nonspecific finding of diffuse colonic lymphoid reactive hyperplasia. A small bowel series was negative for any inflammation and the possibility of IBD was negated. An indium scan, looking for occult infection, was also negative. A pan-CT scan with contrast looking for malignancy of the abdomen, pelvis, chest and head were all negative. A transvaginal ultrasound and pelvic examination ruled out an occult early ovarian cancer, endometrial or cervical cancer.
Although the patient was never hypotensive, nor had any hypercoagulable conditions in the past, the diagnosis of mesenteric ischemia was pursued based on her exposure to OCP. Her OCPs had been discontinued at the beginning of her hospitalization, which was more than a month prior to this point in the workup. A magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the abdomen revealed proximal superior mesenteric artery (SMA) stenosis which was confirmed by CT angiogram findings of severe proximal and distal SMA stenosis . The patient was taken to angiography which revealed near complete full length occlusion of the SMA and several branches including mild renal artery stenosis . The angiography findings were consistent with atypical fibromuscular dysplasia with a medial pattern. The suspicion was high given the lack of atherosclerotic lesions, absence of hyperlipidemia, negative vasculitis workup, and pattern of occlusions seen on angiography. The patient's severe SMA stenosis subsequently underwent suboptimal angioplasty, which warranted a 6 × 15 Palmaz Blue Angioplus stent . Her symptoms improved tremendously, in that her abdominal pain subsided and she had an improved tolerance to oral feeds.