A 19-year-old Hispanic male with history of insulin-dependent type II diabetes presented to the emergency department with sudden onset of painless vision loss in both eyes for 1 week associated with bilateral lower-extremity weakness, inability to walk, and urinary and bowel incontinence. There was no history of trauma or family history of autoimmune, neurological, or ophthalmological conditions. Surgical history included bilateral toe amputations for diabetic foot infections 3 months prior to presentation and bilateral cataract extraction with intraocular lens implant at age 15 years. The patient had history of multiple hospitalizations including intensive care unit admissions for poorly controlled diabetes. There was no known genetic history.
On exam, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200 bilaterally, significantly worse than his baseline vision of 20/20. Retinal screening from 3 months prior showed normal optic disc and vessels with few macular aneurysms and trace cotton wool spots . Pupillary exam, confrontational visual fields, ocular motility, and anterior segment exams were unremarkable. Dilated fundus examination revealed multiple peripapillary cotton wool spots and few flame hemorrhages without areas of neovascularization bilaterally . Compared with baseline spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) taken 3 months prior to presentation , OCT on presentation showed new significant areas of subretinal and intraretinal macular fluid bilaterally . Fluorescein angiography showed staining and areas of leakage from the retinal arterioles in a peripapillary distribution with multifocal filling defects and areas of capillary nonperfusion (not shown). Ophthalmic examination was consistent with Purtscher-like retinopathy.
The patient was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit for further workup, which revealed multi-organ complications of diabetes. He had bilateral diabetic foot ulcers with recurrent toe osteomyelitis. Electromyography revealed a sensorimotor neuropathy with axonal demyelination, consistent with diabetic amyotrophy. In addition, the patient was diagnosed with neurogenic bowel and bladder, requiring daily self-catheterization and a strict bowel regimen. Labs showed a blood glucose range between 200 and 450 and HbA1c level of 5.6%. There was no evidence of cord compression, demyelination, or infection on lumbar puncture and spinal imaging. Rheumatology evaluation including sensory motor antibody, paraneoplastic autoantibody panel, and ganglioside antibody was negative. Given his young age and multiple severe downstream complications of diabetes, genetic testing was recommended. Testing revealed a 1.9-Mb deletion on 17q12 chromosome on the hepatic nuclear factor-1β gene, and the patient and his family were referred for genetic counseling.
Repeat ophthalmic examination 1 month after presentation did not show any improvement in visual acuity or resolution of peripapillary cotton wool spots . OCT showed spontaneous improvement of the macular edema in the right eye but persistent intraretinal swelling in the left. The patient received a single intravitreal injection of antivascular endothelial growth factor (1.25 mg in 0.05 mL of bevacizumab) in the left eye (off-label usage) with no known complications. This led to near resolution of the retinal edema . However, visual acuity remained poor at 20/200 in the right eye and 20/400 in the left eye.