A previously healthy 60 year old Caucasian female with no significant past medical history was admitted to the neurology service for progressive lower extremity weakness and urinary incontinence. She endorsed fever fatigue and a 20 pound weight loss over the preceding 3 to 4 months. Initially, the patient was presumptively treated for Parkinson’s disease with carbidopa/levodopa but had no improvement in symptoms. The patient denied any preceding trauma or any family history of neurological or hematological disease. The patient’s exam demonstrated 3/5 strength in the hip flexors and 4/5 strength in the remainder exam, hyperreflexia in the bilateral upper and lower extremities, and an otherwise normal neurological exam. No lymphadenopathy or splenomegaly was noted. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spinal cord was consistent with cord edema from C2 to T1 without evidence of a compressive lesion. Spinal cord MRI demonstrated no acute abnormalities . Serum antinuclear and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were not detected. Examination of the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) demonstrated lymphocytosis . A comprehensive diagnostic investigation in the CSF and peripheral blood for bacterial, fungal, viral cultures and cryptococcal antigen did not reveal an infectious etiology. Oligoclonal banding in the CSF was not suggestive of multiple sclerosis. Additionally, flow cytometric analysis of the CSF (atraumatic and image-guided sample) and peripheral blood revealed a monoclonal B cell population that expressed CD19, dim CD20, dim surface light chain kappa, CD5, CD23, and lack of FMC7 expression. This immunophenotype was consistent with CLL. The complete peripheral blood cell count showed a lymphocyte count of 13400/uL, hemoglobin of 13 gr/dL, and platelet count of 362 000/uL. Lactate dehydrogenase level was 188 U/L. Staging imaging with CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not demonstrate splenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. As such, the case was identified as clinical Rai stage 0. The cytogenetics analysis by fluorescence in situ hybridization was negative for deletion of chromosomes 11, 13, 17 or aneuploidy for chromosome 12, the immunoglobulin variable region (IGVH) revealed a hypermutated status and the expression of CD38 was < 30% of the CLL cells by flow cytometric analysis. A multidisciplinary evaluation of this case suggested that this patient’s myriad of symptoms was the result of CLL with CNS involvement. The patient was started on rituximab 375 mg/m2 IV in combination with cyclophosphamide 250 mg/m2 IV on days 1–3 plus fludarabine 25 mg/m2 IV on days 1–3. After the first cycle of chemotherapy the patient exhibited improvement in the strength of the hip flexors with stable strength in the rest of her physical exam. No other new neurological abnormalities were noted at that time. She transferred to her hometown to establish care with a local oncologist. However, during the subsequent 8 weeks her performance status declined and the patient could not continue chemotherapy. She was eventually transitioned to comfort-based care in a hospice setting where her demise occurred.