We report the case of a 34 year-old man referred from the Department of Clinical Genetics of Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet (HUMS) located in Zaragoza, Spain, with motor axonal polyneuropathy with mild or uncertain sensory loss.
At 8 years of age, the patient exhibited elevated levels of total immunoglobin E (IgE, 560 UI/mL) that persisted over the years, with a peak of 2484 UI/mL. Allergies and intestinal parasite infection were ruled out. At age 23, the patient had developed a progressive peripheral neuropathy that involved the lower limbs.
Neurophysiological studies revealed the presence of severe muscle denervation and motor axonal neuropathy in the lower limbs, with very-dominant, bilateral, symmetric distal involvement. Sensory studies were normal in the upper limbs and demonstrated trivial alterations in the lower limbs. From the age of 14, the patient exhibited pes cavus and hammer toes with difficulty in running and bouncing, and foot and leg pain. Family history was unremarkable, except for his mother, who had tremors.
Upon suspicion of an inherited peripheral neuropathy (CMT type), next generation sequencing (NGS) of a panel of 34 CMT-associated genes was performed (Sistemas Genómicos, ASCIRES, Valencia, Spain) . None of the pathogenic variants linked to CMT was detected in the panel of genes analyzed, only a variant of unknown significance (VUS) in the KARS gene , according to American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants (Genetics in Medicine, 2015). This variant is not described in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) and Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD) databases and is identified with a recessive allele frequency of 0.1% in the dbSNP database. In addition, in silico studies do not show a clear splicing alteration secondary to the presence of this variant, which has been recently rated as benign by several authors in the ClinVar database. However, in view of the lack of correlation with the phenotype of the patient and the recessive nature of the disease with which the mutations of this gene are associated, even although the pathogenicity of this variant was confirmed, the symptoms of the patient can only be explained by the presence of another alteration.
New electroneurographic and electromyographic studies confirmed suspicion of axonal neuropathy and demonstrated severe motor neuropathy that only affected the lower limbs. In view that conduction velocities and distal latencies were normal, demyelinating neuropathy was ruled out. However, a neurogenic pattern with intense signs of denervation and loss of motor units was identified in the associated musculature. In sensory nerves, amplitudes were in the lower limit of normal.
NGS was complemented with clinical exome sequencing (ExoNIM® NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain). As a result, the heterozygous variant described in was identified. This variant is described in the ClinVar database based on evidence from a single case report (Variation ID: 548118) as a probably-pathogenic variant associated with axonal CMT type 2W (MIM#616625). In the same line, pathogenic missense variants associated with peripheral neuropathy are described in adjacent codons in the HGMD database. As an incidental finding, we identified a pathogenic variant of the MUTYH associated with autosomal recessive familial adenomatous polyposis . The segregation pattern of the HARS c.397G>T; p.(Val133Phe) and MUTYH c.1187G>A; p.(Gly396Asp) variants was analyzed in his parents by Sanger sequencing to investigate whether they were de novo or inherited variants .
The father was found to be a homozygous carrier of the MUT
YH c.1187G>A; p.(Gly396Asp) variant, which confirmed the paternal inheritance of this variant (NIMGenetics, Madrid, Spain). The mother, who exhibited electromyographic alterations, was a heterozygous carrier of the c.397G>T; p.(Val133Phe) variant, which confirmed the maternal inheritance of this variant (Cerba Internacional, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain). Unfortunately, the presence of these variants could not be assessed in other family members.
At present, the patient has a neurological foot, with hammer toes and calf atrophy, and describes fatigue and weakness in the lower limbs . The patient is currently on curcumin and diet therapy, with fasting periods. This treatment has been proven to increase the number and size of myelinated axons and improve motor performance in Tembler-J mice . In addition, the patient uses shoe pads and follows an individualized exercise program.