An 85-year-old man visited our department complaining of a rash that had appeared 2 days earlier and a fever that had developed on the day of his visit. His medical history included hypertension, aortic dissection (Stanford Type B), exertional angina, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). He had been prescribed the following medications, which had not changed in the previous 12 months, for his medical conditions: rosuvastatin, 2.5 mg/day; ethyl icosapentate, 1800 mg/day; valsartan, 80 mg/day; amlodipine, 5 mg/day; benidipine, 8 mg/day; bisoprolol, 2.5 mg/day; lansoprazole, 15 mg/day; clopidogrel, 75 mg/day (changed to a generic brand 1 week prior to hospital presentation); sarpogrelate, 200 mg/day; and tiotropium inhalation, 18 μg/day. Two days before presentation, the patient had also been prescribed fexofenadine (120 mg/day); however, this did not result in any improvement; instead, the rash spread from the patient’s neck and right upper arm to his entire body.
Upon presentation, the patient was conscious and lucid, and his vital signs were as follows: heart rate, 90 beats/min and regular; body temperature, 39.0 °C; blood pressure, 144/86 mmHg; respiratory rate, 24 breaths/min; and peripheral oxygen saturation, 95% on room air. Physical findings included mild conjunctiva hyperemia in both eyes, and erythema on the face, trunk, and limbs . The erythema was diagnosed as erythema exudativum multiforme by the dermatologist. There was no enanthema in the oral cavity and no desquamation. The superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. However, there was reddening and swelling of the right lateral malleolus. Laboratory investigation results were as follows : white blood cell count (WBC), 19,920/μL (neutrophils, 90.9%; lymph, 4.7%; and eosinophils, 0.4%); C-reactive protein (CRP), 22.4 mg/dL; procalcitonin, 2.09 ng/mL; creatine kinase (CK), 812 U/L; blood urea nitrogen, 22.1 mg/dL; and creatinine, 1.2 mg/dL. Blood (2 sets), urine, sputum, and right lateral malleolus wound cultures were negative. Head, chest, abdominal, and pelvic computed tomography scans, as well as abdominal and cardiac ultrasounds, were also performed to find the cause of the patient’s fever, but results of these investigations were unremarkable and did not identify a source for the patient’s fever.
After admission, we suspected that the patient’s rash was a drug eruption. The suspect drug clopidogrel was therefore switched to 100 mg/day aspirin, but the rash did not improve. Other possibilities were considered, including viral rash (herpes virus), malignant lymphoma, hemolytic streptococcal infection, and mycoplasma. However, these conditions were ruled out by various blood tests, as well as by the patient’s medical history. On day 2 in hospital, the patient developed transitory hypotension and elevated hepatic enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, 48 U/L; and alanine aminotransferase, 50 U/L) and lactate (3.3 mmol/L; standard value: 0.56–1.39). He also developed a wheeze on the same day, which we thought was due to worsening of his underlying COPD. As such, he was treated with oral prednisolone (30 mg) for 3 days. Though this resulted in temporary improvement of his fever and a decrease in his CRP level, these variables became elevated again from day 5, and on day 7, he had desquamation on all four limbs.
As no bacteria were detected from the patient’s blood culture upon admission, and based on his clinical course of fever, erythema exudativum multiforme, transitory hypotension, conjunctiva hyperemia, elevated CK, and desquamation, we suspected TSS. We therefore started treatment with vancomycin (1 g/day) and clindamycin (600 mg/day), after which his fever rapidly remitted, and his WBC and CRP improved. Four days after starting treatment with the antibiotics, the erythema on the patient’s trunk and the rash on his lower limbs disappeared. On day 20, the patient developed membranous desquamation predominantly on his fingertips, which is characteristic of TSS . Pitting edema on the dorsum of his hands and feet had also appeared around the same time as the desquamation (day 7), and the patient had painful wrist and ankle joints. Additional tests were conducted to find the cause of the edema and arthralgia, but were negative for rheumatoid factor. Anti-cyclic citrullinate protein antibodies were also found to be < 0.2. Further, serum matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3, 199.6 ng/mL; reference value, ≤123.8 ng/mL) and serum VEGF (191 pg/mL; reference value, ≤38.3 pg/mL) levels were elevated, and human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A2 was detected . A contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the patient’s painful right wrist indicated synovial hyperplasia presenting as a low intensity signal around the carpal bone, and a contrast enhancement effect was seen in the synovial membrane with gadolinium. Similar findings were seen in the metacarpophalangeal joints including the thumb and little finger, with a contrast effect seen in the synovial membrane that was suggestive of synovitis .
Based on these findings, this case satisfied all four diagnostic criteria for RS3PE syndrome as described by Olive et al. in 1997 : 1) pitting edema in the limbs, 2) acute onset, 3) patient aged 50 years or older, and 4) rheumatoid factor negativity. The patient also satisfied the auxiliary diagnostic items of elevated MMP-3 and serum VEGF levels , synovial imaging on contrast MRI (synovitis findings) , and HLA antigen positivity. He was therefore diagnosed with RS3PE syndrome, and treated with oral prednisolone (15 mg/day) from day 14. This resulted in rapid improvement of his symptoms, and he was discharged with independent performance of activities of daily living on day 31. The patient’s clinical course during hospitalization is shown in Fig. .
One month after starting treatment, the patient’s serum VEGF had normalized to 34.5 pg/mL. It is currently 1 year since disease onset, and though he has stopped taking prednisolone, there has been no recurrence of RS3PE syndrome.