In March 2016, a 71-year-old female of Caucasian origin was referred to Amiens-Picardie University Medical Center (Amiens, France) for gait impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a voluminous mass in the right temporal lobe, the features of which were strongly suggestive of GBM. The patient underwent subtotal resection. A histopathologic study of FFPE surgical samples submitted in toto revealed a dense proliferation of highly atypical tumor cells. Many atypical mitotic figures were observed. Angiogenesis had produced large glomeruloid vascular channels. These morphological features were highly subjective of GBM. The tumor cells were labelled by antibodies against GFAP and Olig2 but not by an antibody against isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1)-R132H. A diagnosis of IDH-WT glioblastoma was made, and the MGMT promoter was found to be unmethylated. Following our observation of an EGFR mutation, a complementary immunohistochemical study was performed in order to rule out a diagnosis of bronchopulmonary carcinoma: the tumor cells did not expresss polyclonal AE1/AE3 cytokeratin, CK7, NapsinA, TTF1 or P40. After the patient has provided her written, informed consent, she was enrolled in the Bi-GlAM study (designed to evaluate plasma DNA in GBM patients during their clinical follow-up).
The panel-based NGS mutational profile revealed several SNPs and one somatic mutation . The tumour did not present any IDH 1 (exon 4) or IDH 2 (exon 4) mutations, prompting a histomolecular diagnosis of IDH-WT glioblastoma. The c.2582 T > A substitution in the EGFR gene was of particular interest; it resulted in an amino acid change at position 861 from leucine (Leu, L) to glutamine (Gln, Q). Hence, a p.L861Q mutation (COSM6213) was unambiguously identified. The allele frequency was 17% (T = 0.8308 and A = 0.1692; Table ). However, this ratio was not consistent with the tissue’s tumor cell content, as evaluated by the pathologist (around 80%). When comparing the results for samples from the same run, we found that the number of reads for each EGFR exon was much higher in the patient’s tumour (Additional file : Table S2; by around 10-fold for exons 12 and 21, and 15-fold for exons 18, 19 and 20). This finding strongly suggested the occurrence of EGFR gene amplification, which was later confirmed by the aCGH experiments.
As shown in Fig. , the tumor presented a loss of chromosome 10 (mean log ratio: − 0.446) and a partial loss of the short arm of chromosome 9 (9p24.1-p21.2, mean log ratio: − 0.385) including the homozygous deletion of CDKN2A gene (arrow, mean log ratio: − 1.155) and a gain in chromosome 7 (mean log ratio: 0.376) including the amplification of EGFR gene (arrow, mean log ratio: 3.642). The combination of tri/polysomy of chromosome 7 and loss of heterozygosity of 10q are characteristic molecular features in GBM - especially when they are associated with EGFR amplification . Additional chromosomal aberrations could be observed, such as gain of chromosome 2 (mean log ratio: 0,367), gain of chromosome X (mean log ratio: 0.398), amplification of the MDM4 gene (1q32.1, mean log ratio: 3.681) and loss of the short arm of chromosome 14 (mean log ratio: − 0.416).
The NGS and aCGH data all confirmed the EGFR gene amplification, and suggested that the p.L861Q mutation was not present in all EGFR alleles (since the observed allele ratio was only 17% for the mutation).
The presence of this unusual mutation in a case of GBM was confirmed by ddPCR using a TaqMan assay to discriminate between the WT and p.L861Q alleles. As shown in Fig. , the mutation was detected in the FFPE DNA sample from the primary tumour with an allele frequency of 18% (8433 out of 46,948 droplets).
The first-line treatment comprised subtotal resection of the lesion (in March 2016), a combination of radiotherapy and TMZ, and then adjuvant TMZ . After four cycles of TMZ, however, disease progression (according to the Revised Assessment in Neuro-Oncology criteria, RANO ) was observed on MRI . Given the presence of the p.L861Q EGFR mutation (known to confer sensitivity to second generation TKIs [–]), the patient started a second-line course of off-label treatment with afatinib after the provision of fully informed consent. A radiological disease assessment after 1 month of afatinib treatment (40 mg/day) did not reveal any significant lesion growth (i.e. stable disease; Fig. ). The occurrence of asthenia prompted us to reduce the dose of afatinib to 30 mg/day. A month later, MRI revealed an increase in contrast enhancement (i.e. disease progression; Fig. ). We withdrew the TKI at this point, and initiated third-line treatment with bevacizumab and lomustine. The patient died in July, 2017.
In an attempt to monitor the tumour response and to detect recurrent disease during clinical surveillance, a specific ddPCR assay was used to assay circulating DNA from plasma samples for the L861Q-mutation. The plasma samples were collected before concomitant radiotherapy/TMZ, 1 month after radiotherapy, 1 month after the first cycle of TMZ, 1 month after the fourth cycle of TMZ, after 9 weeks of afatinib treatment, and after two cycles of lomustine with bevacizumab, and assayed for the presence of the p.L861Q mutation. The plasma DNA concentration for each sample is indicated in Fig. . However, the p.L861Q mutation was not detected at any of the monitoring time points.
Given that (i) EGFR alterations are the most frequent genomic defects in GBM, and (ii) a number of targeted therapies are on the market, we performed short-term cultures of neurosurgical tumour resections with the EGFR-targeting drugs cetuximab, erlotinib and afatinib. Each drug’s effect was evaluated as the percentage of Ki67-positive tumour cells in an immunochemical assay and a visual assessment. There were no statistically significant differences between the negative control on one hand and cetuximab (p = 0.45), afatinib (p = 0.6) and erlotinib (p = 0.37) on the other - suggesting that all three molecules would have been poorly active against the patient’s tumour.
We also used immunoblotting to assess expression levels of the markers ERK and phospho-ERK (pERK) in samples obtained by short-term culture. The pERK/ERK ratio (reflecting the activation of the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway) was calculated by densitometric analysis of the immunoblot . When compared with a negative control, neither cetuximab, afatinib nor erlotinib was associated with a statistically significant difference in the pERK/ERK ratio (p = 0.36, 0.99 and 0.59, respectively).