A 23-year-old French man of African origin, an elite football player, sustained a midshaft anterior cortex tibial stress fracture 2.5 years ago. Initially, he was treated with cast immobilization, no weight bearing for 3 months, ultrasound stimulation, and electromagnetic field therapy. The fracture did not heal; he had pain during gait, so he continued no weight bearing for 3 additional months. After that period, the fracture site still was not healed, so he underwent an operation performed by his team doctor. In this operation, the medullary canal of his tibia was reamed and an im nail was inserted.
Unfortunately, the fracture site did not consolidate again, even 18-months postoperatively, so he presented to our clinic for counseling. It was obvious from the X-ray that a nonunion of the fracture had occurred.
He did not smoke tobacco and he had a free medical history. When he presented to our clinic, the area at the fracture site was swollen and painful when palpated. The pain got worse when he attempted to walk with full weight bearing, so he had to use crutches. An examination of the peripheral nervous system of his lower extremities did not provide us with any pathologic findings. In addition, the laboratory examinations for possible endocrine or metabolic disorders were negative , so he was advised to have a reoperation to address this nonunion. The treatment options for such cases include nail exchange, drilling of the fracture site, bone grafting, or removal of the nail and internal fixation with a plate. We performed a tension band plate fixation, which is a technique already described for the treatment of anterior tibial stress fractures that failed non-operative treatment , with bone grafting and without removing the nail.
A longitudinal incision was made just lateral to the anterior tibial crest centered over the fracture site. The fascia over the tibialis anterior was divided, the muscle lifted off and the fracture site was visualized. The necrotic bone and callus at the fracture site was debrided with the use of an osteotome and a curette. Transverse drilling around the fracture site was done to promote healing and osteoblastic activity. Bone marrow from the ipsilateral iliac crest was inserted into the fracture site and a tension band plate was applied over the im nail.
We used a 6-hole, 4.5 mm locking compression plate. The plate was prebended and the screws were placed in a compression manner to achieve a tension band effect to the fracture site. A cortical screw was put first to the distal hole closest to the fracture site and then a cortical screw to the closest hole proximal to the fracture site to ensure compression of the fracture. Consequently, one unicortical locking screw was inserted proximally to the fracture site and the other two distally. With the use of locking and non-locking screws we minimized the pressure at the periosteum, which can damage blood supply to the poorly vascularized bone. The screws were angled in a different axis in order to bypass the nail .
Postoperatively, our patient was advised to wear an orthotic boot and to not bear weight for 6 weeks. Range of motion exercise involving knee and ankle and isometric exercises were initiated immediately postoperatively. After 6 weeks he progressed to weight bearing as tolerated. At 3 months postoperatively he was pain free and started light jogging, swimming, and plyometric and core stabilization exercises. At 6 months postoperatively the complete radiologic union of the fracture was evident . He was symptom free; he resumed at that time a full training program and he returned to play football 6 months postoperatively at his preinjury high competition level.