A 45 years old man presented in our out patient department with complaint of inability to extend middle finger of his left hand along with a mass growing over volar aspect of forearm for over 2 months . There was previous history of pain at wrist on finger movement which subsided gradually along with the decline in extension of middle finger. There was no associated history of fever, loss of weight or appetite, night sweats, malaise or fatigue. There was no history of trauma, pain in other joints of the body, morning stiffness of the back or hand joints, or continuous use of vibratory tools.
On physical examination a firm – hard mass around 2 * 2 cm was found over volar aspect of forearm just proximal to flexor retinaculam. It was non tender, non compressible, mobile at right angle to anatomical axis of forearm. Movement at wrist was normal with restriction of movement of middle finger in sagittal plane.
Laboratory findings showed all within normal limits except serum uric acid which was 8.6 mg/dl. And that brought a diagnosis of gouty tophi as among differentials. Findings on chest X-rays were normal. Right wrist joint X-ray showed no significant findings. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the mass was within the FDS which on axial T1 appeared as heterogenous isointense lesion while on coronal T2 STIR showed heterogenous mixed hypointense–hyperintense lesion. Clinical suspicion of Tubercular tenosynovitis, soft tissue neoplasm and tophaceous gout was made and subsequently surgical exploration was performed. The patient was operated under brachial block. An incision along the flexor crease, extending further proximally while maintaining the longitudinal orientation taken. On longitudinal slit of thickened tendon sheath chalky white liquid emanated. On futher exploration there was whitish chalky infiltration of tendon of FDS , synovial adhesion of other tendons along with median nerve embedded within hypertrophied synovium of flexor tendons. Since the mass was noted well proximal to flexor retinaculam that probably could be the reason for flexor contracture and sparing of median nerve. Patient underwent synovectomy and tenotomy of FDS to middle finger because of heavy intratendinous infiltration of the tophus along with destruction of the tendinous tissue. Histopathological evaluation of the chalky white substance showed fibroconnective tissue showing hyalinized areas with evidence of saponification surrounded by palisades of foreign body type giant cells and chronic inflammatory cells. Needle like crystals are also seen . All findings were consistent with the diagnosis of tophaceous gout. The postoperative course was uneventful with no remarkable functional deficit from the removal of the superficialis endon to the middle finger .