A 36-year-old Japanese man with no comorbidities was diagnosed with COVID-19 caused by E484K variant (R.1 lineage) on February 9, 2021 (The machine we used for the SARS-CoV-2 real-time RT-PCR testing was a Thermo Fisher Scientific QuantStudio5). He smoked one pack of cigarettes daily, drank socially, and worked in a call center. At that time, he presented to our outpatient department with fever ranging from 37.5 °C to 38 °C, headache, and sore throat. His height was 173 cm, his body weight was 71 kg, and his BMI was 23.7. His consciousness was clear, body temperature was 36.0 °C, blood pressure was 122/72 mmHg, pulse rate was 84/min, respiratory rate 18/min, and SpO2 was 98% (ambient air). Breath sounds were clear on chest auscultation without asymmetry and adventitious sound. No other physical findings were found. Blood tests showed mild increases in C-reactive protein (CRP) and ferritin. The white blood cell count was slightly increased, and the lymphocyte fraction was decreased. No increase was evident in lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and no abnormalities were seen in coagulation tests . X-ray and computed tomography of the chest showed no abnormalities. SARS-CoV-2 real-time RT-PCR testing yielded positive results for the E484K variant, and negative results for the N501Y variant (cycle threshold [Ct] value, 33). Symptoms were mild and resolved within 21 days with symptomatic treatment alone .
On May 24, 2021, he presented to another outpatient department with high fever and headache and was again diagnosed with alpha variant (B.1.1.7) based on SARS-CoV-2 real-time RT-PCR testing. While he had no recent travel history, the patient had eaten with friends on several occasions before this onset, suggesting a possible exposure. He was admitted to our hospital 1 day after symptom onset. His consciousness was clear, body temperature was 38.0 °C, blood pressure was 94/68 mmHg, pulse rate was 81/min, respiratory rate 16/min, and SpO2 was 98% (ambient air). Breath sounds were clear on chest auscultation without asymmetry and adventitious sound. No other physical findings were found. Physical examination on admission showed a body temperature of 38.0 °C, but otherwise normal results. Blood tests showed mild increases in CRP and ferritin. No increase was seen in white blood cell count, but the lymphocyte fraction was decreased. X-ray and computed tomography of the chest again showed no abnormalities. No abnormalities were seen in coagulation tests . SARS-CoV-2 real-time RT-PCR testing yielded positive results for the N501Y variant and negative results for the E484K variant (Ct value, 14). We diagnosed COVID-19 reinfection with a different SARS-CoV-2 variant (Alpha variant) because the Ct value was low, and the variants recognized differed. Although disease severity was mild, the patient exhibited persistent high-grade fevers (maximum temperature 38.2 °C) and was treated with methylprednisolone (mPSL; 80 mg/day on day 2 of hospitalization, 160 mg/day on day 3–8) and azithromycin for their anti-viral properties (500 mg/day from day 1). He did not receive antiviral treatment because he was deemed to not be high risk for progression to severe disease. Although high fever and headache improved with anti-inflammatory treatment, fever reappeared from day 7 of illness and CRP again increased. We considered the possibility of secondary infection first and exacerbation of inflammation by SARS-CoV2. He received ceftriaxone (2 g/day on day 8–12) and decreased the dose of mPSL (80 mg/day on day 9–10, 40 mg/day on day 11–13). We initially scheduled to have him receive azithromycin for about 7 days in anticipation of antiviral effects but continued in anticipation of anti-inflammatory cytokine effects and immunomodulatory effects. After that, fever improved immediately. He experienced tingling in the chest and difficulty breathing during hospitalization, but no shadows were apparent on chest X-rays. The patient was discharged on day 15 after admission . To date, no sequelae have been observed.