A 62-year-old man has a past medical history of low-grade/low-risk gastrointestinal stromal tumour (GIST)—a leiomyosarcoma—treated with excision and small bowel resection with appendectomy in 1999 (now in remission), right and left upper extremity lipomas treated with resection, right lobe thyroidectomy for follicular adenoma, benign prostatic hyperplasia. He presented to his primary care physician (PCP) complaining of a gradual onset of dyspnoea on exertion (DOE), lightheadedness, midsternal chest tightness, and chest pressure/heaviness. The patient denied any other symptoms, including constitutional and B-symptoms.
Given his DOE and chest pressure, his PCP ordered a nuclear exercise stress test and a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) to be performed as an outpatient, both on the same day. During the stress test, he exercised according to the Bruce protocol for 6 min and 33 s achieving a work level of 5.7 metabolic equivalents. His resting blood pressure was 138/90 mmHg and rose to 150/90 mmHg. His heart rate rose from 67 beats per min (b.p.m.) to 130 b.p.m. He developed DOE, diaphoresis and lost consciousness for approximately 10 s prior to receiving the radioactive tracer injection. He was resuscitated with intravenous fluids and blood glucose level was 100 mg/dL at that time. His stress electrocardiogram showed 0.5-mm ST depressions in the inferolateral leads with no evidence of ST elevations or ventricular arrhythmias. He was immediately admitted to the hospital under the care of our team for further evaluation. Bloodwork on admission only showed that he was thrombocytopenic with a platelet count of 40 000/µL. Physical exam only revealed a diastolic murmur.
His TTE revealed normal left ventricular function with no regional wall motion abnormalities, but there was a large mass in the left atrial (LA) side of the mitral valve, measuring 7.4 × 3.5 cm which was obstructing the transmitral flow during diastole as well as another non-mobile mass attached to the region of the fossa ovalis measuring 3.3 × 2.3 cm . There were no other abnormalities noted. Interestingly, the patient had a prior TTE in 2017 that did not show any clear intracardiac masses; however, it was noted that the intra-atrial septum is thickened on the LA side.
For further characterization of the mass, the patient underwent transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) that confirmed TTE reports with at least two large oblong multilobular mobile masses with heterogeneous echogenicity and hypoechoic areas (vacuolated portions) that are broad based and originate from LA septal wall and LA free wall; there was also a possible attachment to the pulmonary vein ( and ; Videos 1–3). At its greatest dimension on TOE, the mass measured 6.4 × 3.46 cm. To definitively rule out coronary artery disease (CAD) as a cause of his chest pressure and discomfort in the setting of syncope, the patient also had a coronary angiogram done that showed subtotal occlusion of the mid left anterior descending artery (LAD) with Grade 1 collaterals from the right coronary artery and no other obstructive CAD. The LAD lesion was left for medical therapy since it looked chronic with collaterals and less likely to explain his presentation. Also, with the newly discovered intracardiac mass, he may need surgical intervention which might be challenging while on dual antiplatelet therapy should a stent be placed. The patient was due to undergo a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) but due to his anxiety and claustrophobia, he could not tolerate the MRI despite multiple attempts with anti-anxiety medications.
The differential diagnosis for the cardiac mass at that time was atrial myxoma, primary cardiac lymphoma, primary cardiac sarcoma, and metastatic mass from another source. Given his isolated thrombocytopenia in the presence of a cardiac mass, cardiac lymphoma was under serious consideration. Resurgence of his GIST after being in remission for nearly 20 years was thought to be unlikely but was also considered along with a primary malignancy elsewhere in the body with metastasis to the heart.
He underwent cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass and excision of three LA masses; cryoablation; excision of mass within the inferior pulmonary vein orifice; repair of the atrial septum; inspection of the mitral valve; and LA tear repair. The tumour measured 8.6 cm in its greatest dimension, grossly . The pathology showed malignant spindle sarcoma with heterogeneous differentiation confirming intimal sarcoma with Ki-67 proliferation index 25%, Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study positive for MDM2 gene amplification and negative signal for SYT gene .
Given his anxiety and claustrophobia, he only underwent staging via computed tomography (CT) of chest, abdomen, and pelvis after surgical confirmation of malignancy and to limit the number of times he would endure the scans in discomfort. The CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed no residual cardiac mass, but numerous heterogeneously hypodense lesions within the liver and kidney were noted concerning for Stage IV disease. He subsequently underwent imaging-guided liver biopsy by the interventional radiology team to confirm metastasis; however, pathology of the liver lesion was inconclusive for malignancy. After significant discussion with his oncology team, he was to be started on adjuvant chemotherapy using combination approach of (doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and mesna) for four to six cycles. Despite the liver biopsy result, given the aggressive nature of the diagnosis and high suspicion of metastasis, he was planned to be treated as though he had metastatic disease since this would not alter his current chemotherapy regimen.
He tolerated his chemotherapy cycles well despite experiencing fatigue and lethargy. On his 3-month and 6-month staging scans, there was no evidence of active disease in the heart and the liver and kidney lesions significantly decreased in size only to further serve as evidence of metastasis and not as isolated cysts in those organs. With his excellent response to the treatment regimen, the oncology team is hopeful of a positive prognosis and will continue to monitor him to ensure there is no recurrence of disease in the chest and treat the metastatic lesions.