A 29-year-old male patient was admitted on April 2017 because of dysuria with frequency and urgency. The patient began quitting ketamine for one year after 3 years of ketamine inhalation (once weekly at first and then once every 2–3 days up to a maximum of approximately 10 g/day). Duplex ultrasonography of the urinary system showed bilateral hydronephrosis and hydroureters, a thick-walled bladder and a post-void residual volume of approximately 100 ml. Computed tomography (CT) showed moderate bilateral hydronephrosis and hydroureters as well as uneven bladder wall thickening with bladder diverticulum . A round, vague shadow approximately 2 cm in diameter near the bladder outlet was detected after the CT image had been analysed carefully, but it was hard to distinguish its origin. The patient agreed to cystoscopy under general anaesthesia. A spherical tumour with a diameter of approximately 2 cm was found to originate from the median lobe of the prostate, obstructing the prostatic urethra , which impeded further progress with cystoscopy. The enlarged median lobe of the prostate was removed with transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) completely and successfully . The bladder capacity was measured to be 200 ml (average of three measurements). Trabeculation and multiple bladder diverticula were visible on the rough mucosal surface of the bladder. On the right wall of the bladder, there was a significant amount of follicular neoplasm . Follicular lesions were resected completely. The pathology of the enlarged median lobe of the prostate demonstrated benign prostatic hyperplasia , and the pathology of the follicular lesions demonstrated chronic inflammation with denudation or loss of epithelium and marked inflammatory infiltration . During the one-year follow-up, the patient quit ketamine completely and did not report any complaints except mild frequency which did not trouble him much, and there were no voiding or sexual complaints. Additionally, hydronephrosis and hydroureter were alleviated.