A 68-year-old Japanese man with a history of distal partial gastrectomy for gastric cancer 10 years earlier was admitted for surgical treatment of intrathoracic esophageal cancer (T3, N2, M0, stage III). He underwent subtotal esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection and removal of the remnant stomach with the abdominal lymph nodes. The alimentary continuity was reconstructed with a pedicled jejunal limb through the antethoracic route. When we separated the diaphragm from the esophagus and removed xiphoid surgically to prevent a pedicled jejunal limb injury, the pericardium was opened. Anastomosis of the esophagus and jejunum was carried out instrumentally with a circular stapler. A postoperative enteral contrast examination showed smooth passage and no deformity of the reconstructed jejunum. The patient was discharged about 4 weeks postoperatively. About 6 months after the esophagectomy, the patient was readmitted to our hospital because of abdominal discomfort and vomiting. His vital signs were stable and unremarkable. He was thin, with a body mass index of 18.6 kg/m2. Physical examination revealed that the pedicled jejunum through the antethoracic space was markedly dilated and the abdomen was soft and flat . Laboratory data showed only leukocytosis with no other remarkable findings. A chest roentgenogram revealed an increased cardiothoracic ratio of 70%, and an enteral contrast study showed a bird’s beak deformity. The swallowed barium remained static in the reconstructed jejunum. Computed tomography of the thoracoabdominal region showed the reconstructed jejunum within the pericardium anterior to the heart . We diagnosed the patient with IPDH after esophagectomy and performed an emergency laparotomy. Upon opening the abdominal cavity, we found that the reconstructed jejunum had herniated into the pericardium through an approximately 4-cm-diameter diaphragmatic defect without a hernia sac . The herniation was easily reduced, and the congestion of the incarcerated jejunum resolved. There was no evidence of bowel ischemia. Primary closure of the diaphragmatic defect was accomplished using vertical mattress sutures with 1–0 silk . Because the diaphragm adhered to the pericardium around the diaphragmatic defect, we closed these together. Moreover, to reinforce the closure of the diaphragmatic defect, we used a graft harvested from the rectus abdominis posterior sheath. Interrupted sutures with 3–0 nylon were placed to fix the 8 × 6 cm graft of the rectus abdominis posterior sheath to the diaphragmatic defect, preventing recurrence of the hernia . Postoperatively, an upper gastrointestinal study confirmed free flow of contrast medium from the cervical esophagus into the intra-abdominal jejunum through the pedicled jejunum. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.