A 19-year-old male patient suffered from head pain due to an accidental fall on a motorcycle that occurred more than 10 days before going to the hospital, and underwent computed tomography (CT) examination; a mass was found in the left temporo-occipital fossa. He was admitted to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. His parents were healthy and no family members had a history of similar diseases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was recommended to understand the nature of the lesion, and the result showed that it has a high probability of being a meningioma (as shown in ). No obvious positive signs were found in physical examination, and all laboratory indexes were within the normal reference value range. Based on the established diagnosis of a left temporo-occipital fossa space-occupying lesion, the patient underwent surgical resection of the tumor under general anesthesia. During the operation, the left temporoparietal horseshoe-shaped skin flap was taken, and the scalp was incised in full thickness to expose the skull and then a bone flap with a size of about 6 cm × 6 cm was removed. After the bone flap was taken out, it was found that the dura of about 2 cm × 2 cm was invaded by the tumor and broke through, and the inner plate of the covering skull was not invaded by the tumor. The dura was cut along the edge of the tumor invading the dura, and the tumor was removed together. The tumor tissue was gray, with clear demarcation from the surrounding brain tissue, abundant blood supply, soft texture, and a size of about 4.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 4.0 cm. Postoperatively, the resected tumor tissue was sent for pathological examination, and the results showed that there were diffusely distributed round cells in the tumor (as shown in ). Immunohistochemical staining showed that tumor cells positively expressed CD99, Vimentin, Bcl-2, ki-67 (about 40%), weakly expressed CD56, SMA, and negatively expressed CD34, CgA, CK, Desmin, EMA, S100, etc. Ewing’s sarcoma breakpoint region 1 (EWSR1) gene rearrangement was identified by fluorescence in situ hybridization in a foreign hospital. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with intracranial extraosseous EWs/PNET. He did not undergo further radiotherapy and chemotherapy after the operation. At the 5th year after the operation, the patient was re-admitted to the hospital because of multiple bone pains throughout the body. 18F-FDG PET/CT was recommended to evaluate the patient’s systemic condition, and the results revealed multiple high radioactive uptake foci throughout the body (as shown in ). Biopsy of the lesion at the iliac bone revealed the same disease as he had previously suffered. He then received a vincristine–cyclophosphamide–doxorubicin chemotherapy regimen and palliative radiation targeting the lesions of the humerus, ilium, and acetabulum. Unfortunately, he passed away 3 months after starting maintenance therapy with chemoradiotherapy.