A 57-year-old woman was admitted to our emergency room for worsening dyspnoea. Her past medical history included salpingo-ovariectomy for an ovarian cystadenocarcinoma in 1996 (15 years negative oncological follow-up). Unfortunately, histological details of this tumour were unavailable.
At clinical examination the patient appeared sweaty, with low blood pressure and turgor of jugular veins (JVP: 12 cmH2O). Transthoracic echocardiography showed ubiquitous pericardial effusion (max 22 mm) with initial signs of hemodynamic instability; pericardiocentesis was thus performed with aspiration of 400 cc of hematic fluid. The cytological examination for malignant neoplastic cells was negative.
Laboratory findings revealed a normal blood cell count, negative autoimmunity, microbiological and oncologic screening with the exception of CA-125: 247 U/ml (related to pericardial effusion).
Chest-abdomen computed-tomography (CT) revealed a pericardial effusion at the right ventricle apex with focal areas of intense enhancement, compatible with ongoing bleeding. No liver, spleen, pancreas, adrenal and kidney lesions were observed.
Considering the echocardiographic stability of the pericardial effusion, in contrast with the CT findings, a cardiac magnetic-resonance (MR) was performed showing two contiguous oval formations, on the anterior pericardial recess, both 12 × 15 mm with fluid/suprafluid content, thin walls and intense contrast impregnation.
The diagnostic work-up was completed by a 18F-labelled 2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose Positron-Emission-Tomography/Computed Tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) and a focal area of radiotracer hyper-accumulation in the anterior pericardium recess (SUV max 12.6) was identified .
Diagnostic suspicion therefore shifted to a vascularized solid pericardial lesion, and the patient underwent pericardiectomy through a left sub-mammary mini-thoracotomy approach.
The surgical specimen was a piece of pericardium with a 4 × 2 cm polylobate mass, constituted by a solid greyish tissue and a necrotic yellowish nodular area . Histology revealed a malignant proliferation of pleomorphic spindle and epithelioid cells, some multinucleated, growing in solid nests and/or in a storiform pattern. The neoplasia showed atypical mitosis (3/10 mitotic index) and extensive necrotic areas (> 50% of the tumour surface) . At immunohistochemistry, neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for vimentin and smooth-muscle actin and, in multifocal areas, for cytokeratin7 . Table summarizes the immunohistochemical results. Despite some atypical aspects of the overall picture, histologic and immunophenotypic findings indicated the final diagnosis of poorly differentiated pleomorphic sarcomatoid carcinoma (pT1Nx M0).
Considering the radical nature of the surgery, the absence of further distant disease localizations, the low proliferative index and the lack of scientific evidence that an adjuvant medical treatment reduces the risk of disease recurrence, we started a programme of close clinical-instrumental surveillance.
Cardiac-MR and 18F-FDG-PET/CT performed during follow-up revealed no lesions either in the residual pericardium or in the cardiac chambers until June 2018 when the MR showed no relapse of cardiac disease but did reveal a new hepatic lesion. 18F-FDG-PET/CT excluded hepatic involvement but identified a focal area of radiotracer hyperaccumulation in the duodenum (SUV max: 14.4). In order to further characterize such lesion, an echoendoscopy was performed showing a 25 mm mass near Vater’s ampulla, infiltrating biliary and pancreatic tracts. Histological analysis indicated an infiltrating adenocarcinoma.
The patient underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy and histological examination confirmed the presence of moderately differentiated ampulla of Vater adenocarcinoma with polypoid extension in the biliary tract and in the duct of Wirsung; there was no involvement of the lymph nodes and the surgical margins were neoplasia-free (pT2N0M0, TNM stage IB).
The patient did not undergo chemotherapy treatment due to the disease staging but continued with close clinical and instrumental follow-up. Chest-abdomen-CT and cardiac-MR performed during follow-up did not show disease relapse either in the cardiac chambers and pericardium or in the duodenum.
Due to the very rare cardiac tumour histotype, a molecular characterization of the cardiac tumour (other tumours tissues were unavailable) was performed by FOUNDATIONONE®CDx, a commercially available Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)-based analysis of hundreds of cancer-related genes. Pericardial lesion analysis showed mutations in five genes: CD79A (R131fs*61), SETD2 (F1132fs*22), MLH1 (N168fs*4), MSH2 (F58Ilefs*27), TP53 (R175H), as well as a high tumour mutational burden and an intermediate microsatellite status. In the meantime, the patient was referred to our Cancer Genetics Clinic for genetic counselling because of the personal history of early onset multiple malignancies suggesting an inherited cancer predisposition. Extended pedigree collection showed a history of uterine cancer in the paternal grandmother and in two of her sisters, while two paternal cousins were reported to have developed colorectal cancer. Clinical cancer genetic testing (NGS-based 27-gene panel) detected the germline pathogenic variant c.171_172insATCCGGGTGA (p.F58Ilefs*27) of the MSH2 gene, which was diagnostic for LS7. This made it possible to implement a proper endoscopic surveillance programme for the patient and to offer predictive genetic testing to relatives. The daughter, who as a child had been treated for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia, was proven to carry the MSH2 variant as well. Targeted testing was then offered to other family members and demonstrated that the variant had been inherited from the father, who developed colorectal cancer shortly after the genetic diagnosis in the proband (at the age of 83), while was absent in the healthy 53-year-old proband’s sister. Among the clinically relevant mutations found in the tumour tissue, the MSH2 variant was the same as detected by germline testing, while the MLH1 and TP53 mutations were confirmed to be somatic by both the germline panel test and targeted Sanger sequencing.