An 8-years-old boy was admitted in our tertiary care hospital with painful swollen and stiff left knee joint for last 15 days. He sustained trivial injury and did not inform about the incident to his parents and carried his daily activities for 7 days after which he developed fever with painful swelling of the left knee. His anxious parents took the kid to local general practitioner who prescribed oral drugs for 3 days. The kid does not show a response to the oral drugs and the fever and swelling increases gradually.
Later the kid was brought to our center, on examination in the emergency room; the kid was febrile and anxious. His left knee examination shows swollen erythematous, warmth, and tender joint with fullness in suprapatellar region. Range of movements was painful and restricted. There was effusion in the joint which was clinically confirmed by positive patellar tap test. There was no evidence of any external injury to knee. Retrospective questioning following surgery he narrated an incident of thorn prick to his left knee while playing with his friends 15 days ago and he removed the broken twig of the thorn on the spot itself.
Routine blood examination was done, and the result was elevated total count (16.1×103), differential count (polymorphs - 73%, lymphocytes - 20%, and basophile - 07%). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was - 28 mm/h and C-reactive protein positive. Hemoglobin was - 10.3 g/dl. Plain radiography of the left knee joint shows no obvious bony injury except for soft tissue swelling . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left knee joint was advised which was reported as extensive synovitis with effusion and thickened suprapatellar plica and multiple enlarged inguinal and popliteal lymph nodes with larges measuring 1.5 cm × 1.0 cm.
The suspicion of septic arthritis was raised. Knee arthrocentesis was done under sterile precautions, seropurulent fluid was aspirated was sent for analysis and culture and sensitivity. The kid was put on intravenous antibiotics and planned for knee arthrotomy and debridement.
Under appropriate anesthesia after preparing, painting and draping the left knee, under tourniquet, through an anterior midline linear incision with medial parapatellar arthrotomy knee joint was opened. Seropurulent fluid was found, with extensive reactive synovitis. Near total synovectomy removing abnormal looking tissue was done specimen sent for histopathological examination. On everting the patella a black spot was noted on the articular surface on further tracing it was a foreign body appeared to be a piece of thorn and was removed. On retrospective inspection of the anterior surface of patella, an area of redness was seen appeared to be like a foreign body granuloma . The tract was curetted . No articular cartilage affection noticed. Through saline wash given and wound closed in layers over a negative suction draining tube. Intraoperative knee movements were found to be full.
The knee was immobilized in tube slab for 5 days and later started on continuous passive mobilization of knee according to pain tolerance. Culture and sensitivity were negative, histopathological report showed nonspecific synovitis. 1 week of intravenous antibiotics augmentin 30 mg/kg body weight/day (combination of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium) with metronidazole 30 mg/kg/day, the kid responded well and got discharged with oral antibiotics (augmentin 375 mg a combination of amoxicillin and clavulanate potassium) for next 4 weeks. Complete range of motion was achieved by 6 weeks. At the end of 1 year follow-up he is completely asymptomatic, performing all his normal routine activities with no residual deformity or recurrence of any infection.