A female patient 49-year-old, cook. First discreet skin changes, with increased compactness and hyperpigmentation of the right side of the face, were noticed about 4 years ago by the patient. Astringing skin sensation and periodic, weakly intensified pains in the right side of the face and head, treated as a migraine, accompanied the appearance of the changes. The patient did not go through any injuries and did not complain about other neurological aliments. The skin symptoms were disregarded by the patient and were treated as a variant of a regular condition (?!). Because of that the patient was not diagnosed or treated. Nobody from the patient's surroundings and the general practitioners noticed the progressing face asymmetry. The patient is not suffering from any other chronic diseases and does not take any medicine on a regular basis. The family history towards autoimmunological and neurological diseases was negative. In July 2008 the patient was admitted to our Clinic with suspected hemifacial atrophy ("en coup de sabre" scleroderma?).
Clinically, in admission to the hospital, strongly distinct face asymmetry could be observed. The right side of the face was clearly smaller. The mandible angle was lifted and smoothed. The lip redness on the affected side became thin and lifted. The cheek was sunken. The eyeball was situated deeper. The skin surrounding the changes was more coherent, thin and strongly seal-colored. There were linearly arranged, oval, sunken baldness focuses on the head's hairy skin, near the right temple. Skin surrounding these focuses was unchanged. The mucous and genitals membranes and nail plates were normal. The peripheral lymph glands – not enlarged .
In the performed laboratory tests (morphology with smear, fasting glucoses level, glycemia profile, AspAT, AlAT, bilirubin, GGTP, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, urea, uric acid, protein with electrophoresis, ASO, Latex-R, Waaler-Rose test, VDRL, general urinalysis with culture) no aberrations were found.
Antigens against Borrelia burgdorferi in IgM class with a 1,26 titre (positive, norm up to 1,1) were found in blood serum. IgG antibodied – negative. Penicillin test – positive.
Histopathological examination of the right cheek change revealed traits of fibrosis, collagen fibers thickening, skin edema and skin adnexa and vessels atrophy, without an inflammatory infiltration. Image examination – x-ray of the chest, upper part of the digestive tract, abdominal cavity USG were all normal. Capillaroscopy – within the norm.
Head CT performed in a spiral technique, in transverse section, in forehead and fibular reconstructions, before and after the intravenous administration of contrast medium revealed only a bone septum on the right side of the sphenoidal sinus and the mucous membrane thickening within its area. The encephalon image – normal. NMR of the head – without pathology. Electromyography (the muscles end the nerves of the face: the right and left roundabout muscle of the mouth, the right and left facial nerve) – in the right roundabout muscle of the mouth the small impoverishment of the effort record. Conducition in both facial nerves without pathology. With an indirect, immunofluorescent method on Hep2 cells, no ANA antigen antibodies were found. Mycological examination on skin changes was also negative. Laryngological, dental consultation have not shown any abnormalities.
Neurological examination confirmed one-sided headaches in patient's anamnesis, without any focal symptoms of CNS damages. Suggested performing head CT and NMR and EMG (results a.b.).
During the patient's stay at the Clinic, cefuroxym (Plixym) in a dose of 2 × 1,5 g iv for 10 days was applied, continuing the treatment with oral cefuroxym (Zinnat) 2 × 250 mg for 4 weeks. Emollients and low-energy laser was applied locally (15 procedures). The patient was sent to the Infectious Diseases Outpatient Clinic in order to have a Borrelia burgdorferi infection confirmed with the use of Western-blot method (positive). Currently, the patient is under supervision of Dermatological Outpatient Clinic in order to continue the treatment and a possible committal to plastic surgery treatment after the pathological process is over.