A 69-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology after being diagnosed with liver cancer during routine physical examination on March 20, 2021. He had suffered from chronic hepatitis B (HB) infection 23 years previously, and had received antiviral therapy for 1 year; however, the course and outcomes of the treatment were unclear. He reported no history of other underlying diseases or any significant family history. No remarkable positive signs were detected on physical examination (including abdominal tenderness and pain on percussion of the liver, among others). Laboratory findings showed an albumin concentration of 34.2 g/L; the levels of HB surface, e, and core antibodies were 155.89 mIU/ml, 4.20 PEI U/ml, and 7.60 PEI U/ml, respectively, and those of HB viral deoxyribonucleic acid were < 500 IU/mL. Among the tumor markers, the levels of protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II were slightly increased (165 mAU/mL), while those of alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 125, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were within the normal range. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of liver cirrhosis with a tumor in the right lobe of the liver that measured 86.0 mm × 75.0 mm × 71.0 mm and was considered to be malignant . No other abnormalities were found on examination and he did not complain of any aberrant symptoms. The patient had Child-Pugh class A liver function and an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status score of 0.
The patient was transferred to the Department of Intervention Therapy, as he did not consent to surgery. Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy of the tumor demonstrated a pathological diagnosis of hepatic malignancy in favor of a sarcoma or sarcomatoid carcinoma . Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) was performed under local anesthesia on March 30, following which the patient gradually developed dull pain on the right side of the waist and abdomen. A review of laboratory data two months later showed the albumin level to be low (at 23.3 g/L); the levels of protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II had reverted to normal (20 mAU/mL). However, enhanced CT showed enlargement of the tumor (in the right lobe of the liver), which now measured 123.0 mm × 90.0 mm × 89.0 mm . In view of the poor outcome with interventional therapy, the patient was referred to our department for evaluation.
After multi-disciplinary discussion, he was diagnosed with an unresectable hepatic malignancy; radical surgical resection was considered to be impossible due to indistinct intrahepatic tumor boundaries, severe liver cirrhosis, and the possibility of malignant invasion of the right diaphragm and kidney. The available therapeutic options included radiotherapy, chemotherapy, antiangiogenic therapy, and immune checkpoint inhibitors. After consideration of the available options, he finally received lenvatinib (at a dose of 8 mg once a day) in combination with intravenous camrelizumab (200 mg every 3 weeks). The dull pain started reducing after three months and adverse effects including gingival bleeding, hoarseness, joint pain, and cramps also began to appear gradually; however, they were mild and tolerable and required no specific treatment. After treatment with a TKI and anti-PD-1 antibody for 6 months, enhanced CT showed a reduction in the size of the liver tumor, which now measured 110.0 mm × 90.0 mm × 76.0 mm. In addition, the boundary between the tumor and the surrounding tissue, both inside and outside the liver, had become more distinct . Based on the modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors, the tumor response was evaluated as stable disease; the patient was therefore scheduled for tumor resection on January 7, 2022 after discontinuation of lenvatinib for approximately 15 days. Moderate to severe liver sclerosis was observed intraoperatively and the tumor was found to be located behind the posterior lobe of the liver (right side); the boundary between the tumor and diaphragm was indistinct and it encompassed the upper pole of the right kidney. The liver tumor was removed completely in addition to part of the right diaphragm and right perirenal fat sac that were attached to the tumor . The timeline of the course of treatment is shown in .
On gross pathological examination of the resected specimen, the lesion in the right liver measured 102 mm × 85 mm × 67 mm; the tissue from the right side of the diaphragm and that around the upper pole of the right kidney measured 77 mm × 36 mm × 20 mm; the sections of the tumor appeared grayish white, solid, and tough. Microscopically, the specimens showed a neoplasm in the liver tissue and alien spindle and epithelioid cells within the mass. A diffuse, patchy, invasive growth was seen that had destroyed the surrounding liver tissue; examination also showed vacuolated nuclei, visible eosinophilic nucleoli, interstitial hyaline changes, necrosis of tumor cells, rare instances of nuclear fission, and small foci of hyperplasia in the bile ducts . On immunohistochemistry, the spindle cells tested positive for cytokeratin (CK), CK19, integrase interactor 1, leukocyte common antigen, and β-catenin and Ki-67 positivity was observed in approximately 40% of cells ; however, they tested negative for cluster of differentiation (CD) 30, caudal type homeobox-2, carcinoembryonic antigen, CK7, CK20, isocitrate dehydrogenase-1, and tumor protein 53. The CD68 (+) cells that were found in the interstitium tested negative for mouse double minute 2 on fluorescence in situ hybridization. The tumor was finally diagnosed as SHC based on pathological examination. The patient was discharged after 12 days of surgery, without any postoperative complications. Combined treatment with lenvatinib and camrelizumab was restarted at 1 month after surgery and discontinued after maintenance therapy for 6 months. During follow-up, the patient underwent biochemical tests for evaluation of liver function and alpha-fetoprotein and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II levels; he also underwent ultrasonography and CT every 3–6 months. During the latest follow-up visit on April 10, 2023, his general condition was found to be good and there were no signs of recurrence.