A 39-month-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese boy from a poor socio-economic background presented to the pediatric ward with circulatory collapse. He did not have fever, history of infection, or other identifiable focus of sepsis. He was born to non-consanguineous parents at 38 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 2.5 kg and had an uncomplicated perinatal period. In early infancy he had problems of poor feeding, episodes of loose stools, and failure to thrive despite nutritional supplementation and had chronic constipation during the past 2 years. On further inquiry his mother described several episodes of unexplained drowsiness at times of minor infections which settled without interventions except for an episode 6 months previously which was associated with hypoglycemia that required a dextrose infusion.
Anthropometric measurements revealed: weight 6.9 kg (well below third percentile), height 76 cm (below third percentile), and occipitofrontal circumference 42 cm (below third percentile). He had dysmorphic features which included microcephaly, bitemporal narrowing, upward slanting eyes, epicanthal folds, partial ptosis, broad nasal bridge, low set posteriorly rotated ears, high arched palate, and short neck. Anterior fontanelle was still open. Marked hyperpigmentation was noted in his perioral, buccal, and palmar areas . His fingers and toes did not show any abnormalities and his genitalia were normal. He had tachycardia, low volume pulse, and his systolic blood pressure was recorded as 50 mmHg. There were no abdominal masses or genital abnormalities. Hypotonia with reduced power (4/5) was noted in all muscle groups. Tendon reflexes and examination of eyes were normal. A development assessment by examining his developmental milestones revealed global developmental delay with a developmental age between 15 and 18 months.
His blood glucose (30 mg/dL) and serum bicarbonate (20 mmol/L) levels were low and serum electrolytes revealed hyponatremia (sodium 120 mmol/L) with hyperkalemia (potassium 7.1 mmol/L). Serum osmolality was 275 mosm/L. Renal and liver function tests and serum calcium, magnesium, and phosphate levels were normal. Blood and urine cultures were sterile and C-reactive protein level was within normal range. Serum spot cortisol level on admission was 133 nmol/L (normal 120–626) and 17-hydroxy progesterone level was 1.171 ng/dL (reference 3–90) suggesting failure of initial steps of steroid hormone synthesis. Serum cholesterol was normal (153 mg/dL). His condition did not permit us to perform an ACTH stimulation test before commencement of treatment. Ultrasound scans of his abdomen and brain, echocardiography, and electroencephalography were normal. His karyotype was 46XY. Genetic studies and 7-dehydrocholesterol (7DHC) levels were not performed due to unavailability.
Acute adrenal crisis was diagnosed based on characteristic biochemical abnormalities and SLOS was considered as the possible etiology based on dysmorphic features. The child was resuscitated with two 0.9% sodium chloride 20 ml/kg fluid boluses and hypoglycemia was corrected using 10% dextrose 3 ml/kg bolus. This was followed by intravenous 5% dextrose in 0.9% sodium chloride fluid infusion. Intravenously administered hydrocortisone 50 mg single dose was followed by 12.5 mg dose every 6 hours for the next 24 hours and he was started on intravenously administered cefotaxime. He showed a marked response to hydrocortisone with normalization of hyponatremia and hyperkalemia which did not require other specific treatment. After 24 hours, orally administered hydrocortisone 10 mg/m2 per 24 hours in three divided doses and orally administered fludrocortisone 0.1 mg daily were commenced. His parents were asked to give foods high in cholesterol (for example, eggs). Follow-up was arranged in the pediatric clinic with monthly measurements of weight, height, blood pressure, and serum electrolyte levels.