A 57-year-old Chinese man who suffered from spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage following the rupture of a cerebral aneurysm underwent craniotomy evacuation of hematoma with general anesthesia and transoral intubation. No problems with swallowing or speaking were reported during the surgery. Unfortunately, the patient experienced dysarthria, dysphagia, and trouble with tongue movement after the surgery.
Thus, we performed a detailed neurological examination. In addition to the symptoms described above, we also found symptoms linked to cranial nerve injuries, such as a weakened pharyngeal reflex, tongue deviation toward the affected side, atrophy of tongue muscle, and so on. Further evaluations and imaging examinations were carried out. The rating of the functional oral intake scale (FOIS) was level 2 . Videofluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) showed that the contrast agent leaked into the vestibule of the larynx and entered the trachea through the glottis when the patient drank 3 ml of thin liquid . The rating of Rosenbek leakage/aspiration scale was level 8, which is the worst level. When the patient drank 3 ml of medium-thick semi-fluid liquid, effective swallowing was not initiated and the epiglottis valley had a large amount of residue. When examined through the electronic laryngoscope, we noticed paralysis of bilateral vocal folds . All these observations indicated that the vagus nerve and hypoglossal nerve had been injured. Therefore, we thought that there may be a lesion in or near the brainstem that led to nerve injury. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that there were no brainstem lesions , and that the symptoms that arose after surgery could not be explained by the left frontal lobe malacia and subdural hematoma . Owing to the inconformity of symptoms and radiographic results, we decided to analyze the rare case again. When we reviewed the clinical history, we noticed that the surgery was performed under general anesthesia and transoral intubation, so there may be a connection between transoral intubation and nerve injury. After consulting with the ear–nose–throat (ENT) and anesthesiology departments, we excluded arytenoid dislocation and violent intubation. Then we found that these symptoms are similar to those of Tapia’s syndrome, so we compared the characteristics of this case with diagnostic criteria of Tapia’s syndrome. First, in terms of clinical history, the majority of Tapia’s syndrome cases occur following the surgical intervention under general anesthesia and transoral intubation. Our patient went through craniotomy evacuation of hematoma with general anesthesia and transoral intubation before these symptoms arose. Second, symptoms of the patient included difficulties in tongue movement, unilateral tongue paralysis, and atrophy of the tongue, as well as hoarseness and dysphagia, which matches the described symptoms of Tapia’s syndrome. Third, the complete neurological examination showed that there are cranial nerve injuries and, based on the MRI results, we excluded lesions in the brainstem. Hence the symptoms are likely caused by peripheral nerve injuries. Thus, a diagnosis of Tapia’s syndrome was made.
We designed a detailed rehabilitation strategy for the patient immediately. In the previous studies of Tapia’s syndrome, only standard swallowing training was used as rehabilitation treatment, which proved to be effective but still means a lengthy recovery process. So we decided to include electroacupuncture as a measure in our treatment to observe the effect.
The patient received acupuncture treatment 30 minutes per day, six times per week for 52 days . Qi She brand disposable, sterile steel needles (0.25 × 40 mm; Wuxi Jiajian Medical Instrument Co. Ltd) were used. Based on our experience in treating similar diseases, we chose several acupoints to improve deglutition and speech function. These acupoints included the three-needle tongue (Shanglianquan, located in the depression between the lingual bone and the border of the lower jaw, 1 cun inferior to the midline of the jaw), and two other acupoints located at 0.8 cun bilateral to Shanglianquan (note that the width of the interphalangeal joint of the patient’s thumb is taken as 1 cun, approximately 25 mm), Dicang (ST 4, with the eyes looking straight forward, the point is vertically below the pupil, at the level of the angle of the mouth), Taixi (KI 3, in the depression between the tip of the medial malleolus and Achilles’ tendon), and Zhaohai (KI 6, in the depression below the tip of the medial malleolus). Electroacupuncture (EA) stimulation (EA parameters were set as follows: discontinuous wave with frequency 5 Hz, pulse width 1 ms, and intensity approximately 2 mA, until a slight jitter in the muscle is observed) was applied to two acupoints located at 0.8 cun bilateral to Shanglianquan (EX). No side effects such as bleeding or hematoma were observed during the entire treatment.
We observed gradual improvement in the patient’s deglutition and speech function throughout the treatment, and after 52 days of the treatment he had fully recovered: the patient could swallow and drink water normally without coughing and there was an improvement in his speech function. The FOIS rating after treatment was level 6, a significant improvement compared with the level 2 before treatment. As for VFSS, after 2 weeks of treatment, there was a small amount of leakage when the patient drank 3 ml of thin liquid . The rating of Rosenbek leakage/aspiration scale was level 4. After 52 days of treatment, the patient drank 3 ml of fluid without leakage or aspiration and the rating of Rosenbek leakage/aspiration scale was level 2. While the patient drank 10 ml of medium-thick semi-fluid liquid, there was less residue in the epiglottis valley, which could be cleared after repeated swallowing and coughing. No aspiration occurred during the entire process either. The bilateral vocal folds paralysis has been resolved so the vocal folds can close up, which means better swallow function and sound control . These evaluations and examinations illustrated that the patient’s swallowing function had basically recovered and the risk of silent aspiration was greatly reduced. Therefore, after 52 days of treatment, the patient’s nasal feeding tube was successfully removed.