A 74-year-old woman presented with intermittent headache and screening magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a suprasellar mass lesion with a flow void, which was confirmed with cerebral angiography as a 32 mm giant aneurysm at the supraclinoid segment of the right ICA [ and ]. The AchA and the posterior communicating artery (PCoA) arose from the same segment as the aneurysm across the ICA . The patient was treated with FD placement, where Pipeline Flex (4.75 mm × 25 mm, Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) was placed from the M1 portion of the middle cerebral artery to the ophthalmic segment of the ICA with rough aneurysmal packing with detachable coils, which significantly reduced intra-aneurysmal blood flow [ and ].
At the 6-month follow-up, the patient was neurologically intact and the aneurysm was stable in size. However, she presented with gait disturbance, cognitive dysfunction, and symptomatic seizure, 10 months after FD placement. Repeat MRI showed aneurysmal enlargement to 38 mm with remarkable perianeurysmal edema, together with hydrocephalus caused by obstruction of bilateral foramen of Monro [ and ]. Cerebral angiography showed residual blood flow at the aneurysmal neck with coil mass deformation . Because delayed growth and symptomatic change of the aneurysm were considered impending rupture, we planned parent artery occlusion strategy. Given complete ICA obliteration underneath the aneurysm was unavailable due to presence of AchA, flow alteration therapy using a high-flow extracranial-intracranial bypass and targeted endovascular proximal parent artery obliteration performed.
Operation was performed in the hybrid operating room where both surgery and flat-panel detector angiography (Siemens, Berlin, Germany) are available. Schematic imaging of our treatment strategy is shown in . Under general anesthesia, a 4 French (Fr) 90 cm guiding sheath was inserted into the right femoral artery. The external carotid artery-radial artery interposition graft-M2 portion of middle cerebral artery (EC-RA-M2) high-flow bypass was performed, as previously described [ and ].[,] Immediately after high-flow bypass completion, a tourniquet was placed at the cervical ICA to control anterograde blood flow and squeezed as appropriate. Endovascular parent artery occlusion was performed under retrograde blood flow provided by the high-flow bypass and proximal ICA clamping. First, a 4 mm × 21 mm Neuroform Atlas open-cell stent (Stryker, Fremont, USA) was deployed at the ophthalmic segment of the ICA so that the distal end of the stent was placed just proximal to the aneurysmal neck. Then, the microcatheter was advanced into the deployed stent and the ophthalmic segment of the ICA was tightly packed with 6 Target detachable coils (Stryker) without compromising the PCoA orifice . Initial coils were readily stabilized in the stent presumably because the stent strut worked as a scaffold and anchored the coils, contributing to shorter procedure time and prevention of distal coil migration. Postembolization common carotid angiography revealed complete proximal ICA occlusion, lack of contrast medium inflow into the aneurysm, and a patent high-flow bypass .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative MRI showed no ischemic complications. She underwent ventriculoperitoneal shunt with endoscopic septostomy 3 weeks after the aneurysm treatment . Her gait and memory abnormalities improved, suggesting resolution of the hydrocephalus, although spatial neglect and inattention partially remained as mass effects. She was discharged home after a 3-month cognitive rehabilitation training. She did not experience aneurysmal rupture for a year, and follow-up MRI at 6 months and 1 year revealed a stable aneurysmal size, with reduced perianeurysmal edema.