A 5-year-old boy was referred to the Amir Hospital, an academic medical center affiliated to Shiraz University
of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran, on 13 August 2018, due to pallor and prolonged fever. Initial lab testing revealed the white blood count (WBC) of 57,200
cells/µL, hemoglobin (Hb) level of 8.7 g/dl, platelet count of 7,000 cells/µL, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 15 mg/L, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
of 47 mm/h. Physical examination revealed cervical lymphadenopathy and mediastinal mass in the first chest radiograph.
Accordingly, he was subjected to bone marrow aspiration and biopsy on 15th August. The patient was diagnosed with T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); as a result, he underwent induction chemotherapy.
Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (2.5 mg/kg/dose of trimethoprim Q12 h/every other day) and ciprofloxacin prophylaxis (10 mg/kg/dose Q12 h)
were begun during induction-remission chemotherapy and neutropenic phase, respectively. On 3rd September, after 2 weeks of deep neutropenia
(absolute neutrophil count of < 500 cells/µL), he became febrile, while his total WBC count was 180 cells/µL. Sepsis workup was
performed, and intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam was started. The blood tests revealed an elevated level of ESR (54 mm/h) and CRP (70 mg/L).
Two days later, abdominal pain developed, and a thickened intestinal loop wall was detected in abdominopelvic sonography in favor of neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis).
Because of continuous fever despite broad- spectrum antibiotics and improvement of sonographic findings, spiral paranasal sinuses
and chest computed tomography (CT) scans were requested. Spiral chest CT revealed ground-glass opacity in the left lung .
Serum Galactomannan test (GM) became positive with an optical density (OD) index of 0.511 (Platelia™ Aspergillus
EIA, sera with an index of ≥ 0.50 considered to be positive for GM antigen). The diagnosis of probable pulmonary aspergillosis
was established based on the revised EORTC/MSG criteria . As a result, intravenous VCZ therapy was started from the 8th September (6 mg/kg, every 12 h for one day and then at a dose of 4 mg/kg) .
The patient developed erythroderma and macular rash within a few days of VCZ treatment. After
the gradual improvement of primary lesion, he developed generalized exfoliation in the face and trunk .
The possibility of VCZ toxicity raised, and VCZ dose adjustment (30% dose reduction) was achieved 5 days later.
The patient underwent routine VCZ therapeutic dose monitoring (TDM) . The VCZ C trough levels were much higher than the expected therapeutic range (VCZ therapeutic reference range: 1.0-5.5 mg/L [ , ]) a few days after the onset of treatment. These levels were estimated at 9.56 and 10.98 μg/mL on days 5 and 6, respectively.
The VCZ was withheld accordingly on day 8, resulting in the reduction of VCZ C trough levels to subtherapeutic concentration a
week later (0.59 and 0.59 μg/mL on 22th and 23th September, respectively).
On September 15th, the patient's clinical condition deteriorated by the sudden onset of respiratory distress and severe abdominal
distention, which necessitated pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) admission. Skin rash progressed in both extremity and trunk .
The laboratory test revealed the WBC of 2,200 cells/µL, platelet count of 31,000 cells/µL, ESR of 44 mm/h, CRP level of 146 mg/L, Hb level of 8.5 g/dL,
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 67 IU/L, and raised aspartate aminotransferase of 25 IU/L.
Spiral chest and abdominopelvic CT scans were repeated, which revealed collapse consolidation in the left lower lobe
and also severe splenic involvement in addition to severe pancolitis .
The patient was successfully weaned from mechanical ventilation on 5th October.
Liver biopsy was performed due to the detection of multiple hypoechoic lesions in the follow-up abdominal ultrasound examination .
Liver biopsy samples subjected to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) were positive for aspergillosis (for two different specimens).
The real-time PCR was performed as described previously . Aspergillus flavus was cultured on Sabouraud dextrose agar media (Merck, Germany) on the liver biopsy samples
(the mycological study was performed at Professor Alborzi Clinical Microbiology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences).
Genomic DNA analysis was performed on cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily C, polypeptide 19 (CYP2C19) enzyme to determine possible
allelic dysmorphism (e.g., poor metabolizer status of CYP2C19). This gene product contributes to the metabolism of a large number
of clinically relevant drugs and drug classes, such as antidepressants, benzodiazepines, mephenytoin, proton pump inhibitors,
and antiplatelet clopidogrel as a prodrug. The CYP2C19 gene haplotype primers were designed by Primer3 software (version 0.4.0).
The analysis of haplotype was performed by direct bi-directional sequencing on the ABI 3130XL sequencer. The "Chromas 2.6.6." Software
was used for data exploration. The analyzed amplicon was checked for rs12248560 (c.-806 C>T) at the promoter site, rs4986893
(c.636 G>A: cd212), and rs4244285 (c.681 G>A: cd227) polymorphisms (based on NM_000769.2] by bi-directional sequencing.
The result was suggestive of a homozygote CC, GG, and GG pattern, which was compatible with homozygote wild-type allele (Allele *1, normal metabolizer).
The patient received 4 months of caspofungin as a second antifungal choice to complete his treatment course. He was subjected to
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography on February 6, 2019. The results revealed no evidence of metabolically active
lesions throughout the body . The patient continued to be on close follow-up without any complaint at the time of
writing this report (i.e., almost 28 months after the appearance of the first dermatologic symptoms ).