The patient was a 16-year-old adolescent girl in 10th grade when she presented to the Emergency Department of Coimbra Pediatric Hospital (in 2013), accompanied by her father. She did not have any relevant medical history, but the death of her mother in 2010 (as a victim of breast cancer) was cited as the greatest trauma of her childhood, a circumstance that she was having difficulties in coping with.
On admission, she displayed disturbances of mood and sensory perception, concurrently with a bizarre gait abnormality. She was assessed within the neurology and pediatrics sectors, and organic pathological conditions were ruled out through analytical evaluations, electroencephalogram (EEG) and computed tomography (CT) scans. Observation within the child and adolescent psychiatry sector was then requested.
From the first observation, high levels of vegetative anxiety stood out, along with depressive mood, high levels of expressed emotion, thoughts dominated by intrusive images from the day of her mother’s funeral, changes in sensory perception (egosyntonic visual hallucinations) and behavior dominated by traits of perfectionism and obsessiveness. Her father mentioned that she was under a great deal of stress in the light of her upcoming school evaluations. No psychiatric family history was identified. A diagnosis of affective psychosis was considered, in accordance with the International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10), and she was medicated with a low dose of an antipsychotic drug.
After about 15 asymptomatic days, the patient presented again to the Child Psychiatry Service with allopsychic disorientation, psychomotor agitation, disorganized speech broken by irrational laughter that was inconsistent with the mood, disorganized thinking, abnormalities of thought control and content, and bizarre egosyntonic visual hallucinations. A drug test on urine that was requested proved benign. After emergency administration of an antipsychotic drug, followed by short hospitalization for reassessment, a new evaluation of the patient’s mental state was made. She was found to be cognizant, cooperative and focused. Contact was reserved and she showed hypomimia. Her emotions were consistent with mild depression and blunted affect. She did not continue to show abnormalities of thought and sensory perception. Her condition was relatively similar to her previous state and she had no memory of the episode. At this stage, a diagnosis of psychotic disorder with symptoms of schizophrenia was made, in accordance with ICD-10. It was concluded from the assessment that she should be monitored long-term. Her antipsychotic medication was then adjusted, accordingly.
The improvement seen in subsequent consultations was believed to be a response to medication. However, her father confided that the first day of medication coincided with attendance at a spiritual center. Her father was understandably wondering about what was having greater impact: the medication or the spiritual center. However, because they were committed to the therapeutic process, they suspended their visits to the spiritual center.
Over the course of the follow-up her father also confided having met a lady for whom he had nurtured special feelings, prior to the onset of the clinical picture. This matter was addressed in conversations with the patient, and she reported having distrusted and disliked this relationship, because she considered that it was disrespectful to her mother’s memory.
During the treatment process, she was helped to diversify her range of strategies, and to identify and verbalize her concerns, through more adaptive management and regulation of her emotions. Structured cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy was used for an intervention regarding her traits of perfectionism and obsessiveness. Long-term observation (for about two years) of this adolescent showed favorable progression, with gradual reduction of antipsychotic medication. The antidepressant therapy was maintained, accompanied by individual and family psychotherapy. While reducing the antipsychotic medication, use of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants was gradually started and this was maintained for about a year.
Recent evaluation of her mental state revealed that the patient is now a self-aware adolescent (19-year-old) who is cooperative and focused, with very faint levels of vegetative anxiety. She was euthymic and had syntonic behavior. No abnormalities of thought or sensory perception were identified. She displayed a more developed range of coping strategies, in particular regarding management of emotions relating to her mother. There remained traces of anxious, perfectionist and hypercritical behavior, but it had clearly improved. A diagnosis of conversion disorder was suggested, in accordance with ICD-10, which gained consistency over a long-term period of monitoring. The different mental state assessments conducted can be seen in .