A 36-year-old female was referred to the orthopedics clinic with a 12-month history of painless swelling of her right little finger. The swelling increased gradually and started to affect her hand. She had no medical illness, or any history of trauma or injury to the hand. The swelling was associated with fever and night sweats. Her history was remarkable for persistent cough, which was progressive, productive and associated with yellowish sputum. The patient reported no history of weight loss.
On examination, the patient had an erythematous, painless, swelling of the right fifth digit ( and ), with full painless range of motion relative to the other joints of her hand.
A provisional diagnosis was made of hand and finger infection, tubercular dactylitis, pyogenic infection, gouty arthritis, giant cell tumor of the tendon sheath, or fungal tenosynovitis.
Laboratory investigations showed the following: white blood cells 6.42 x 109/L (reference range, 3.5-10.5 x 109/L); hemoglobin 12.7 g/dL. (reference range, 12.115.1 g/dL); platelets 303 (reference range, 150-450 x 109/L). Acid-fast bacilli examination of sputum was negative, while a plain X-ray of the chest showed an ill-defined nodular opacity with a small effusion in the lower left lobe of the lung . A plain X-ray of the right hand showed decreased proximal interphalangeal joint space with periarticular erosions and subluxation that correlated with the patient’s symptoms of tuberculosis, suggestive of tuberculous arthritis ( and ). Magnetic resonance imaging of the hand was suggestive of osteomyelitis.
A histopathological examination was performed with written consent of the patient. Granulation tissue was obtained from the fifth digit, over the proximal phalanx, and it was sent for culture (bacterial and fungal) and acid-fast bacilli examination. A swab was obtained as well and sent for culture. The examination revealed chronic granulomatous inflammation that was consistent with osteomyelitis of the bone due to tuberculosis. Acid-fast bacilli however, were, not identified.
The patient was started on an anti-tuberculosis regimen comprising isoniazid 300 mg, rifampicin 450 mg and 40 mg of vitamin B6 for 18 months, and pyrazinamide 1.5 mg and ethambutol 800 mg for three months. Monthly follow-up and radiographic examinations revealed improvement of the patient under this treatment ( and ). She also achieved a good functional outcome without the need to use any type of splinting or support.