A 53 year-old man with type II diabetes mellitus was admitted to our Emergency Department with upper right quadrant abdominal pain. He was feverish, had experienced discomfort during three days, and showed hemodynamic instability. Physical examination revealed muscular defense of the upper abdomen.
Laboratory tests showed elevated white blood cell count (13500/mm3, 95% neutrophyls), prothrombin activity: 53%, C-reactive protein >90 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate: 97/mm3 and blood sugar of 298 mg/dl. Chest X-ray showed no pulmonary infiltrates. Ultrasonography showed multiple lithiasis and thickening of the gallbladder wall with hyperechogenic points suggestive of intramural gas. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of EC was made.
Emergency open cholecystectomy revealed hydropic gallbladder, length approximately 10 cm, with edematous, gangrenous walls, greater omentum adhered to the surface, microlithiasis, and purulent content. The rest of the abdominal cavity showed no macroscopic signs of purulence. Postoperatively, a picture of sepsis was detected requiring amines and treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam. At five days after intervention, the patient presented edema in both flanks and left thorax crepitation on palpation, associated with hemodynamic worsening.
Computed tomography of the chest and abdomen revealed a large pneumomediastinum, pneumoretroperitoneum, gas in subcutaneous tissue and two flank abscesses . During surgical intervention, cutaneous and subcutaneous necrosis was observed, with muscular involvement. Abscess drainage was performed by two parallel incisions of the skin at 2 cm and 4 cm from the costal margin, followed by dissection of the subcutaneous tissue and the fascia of each flank, directly over each abscess at the point of greatest fluctuation. In both blood and surgical wound exudate cultures, Escherichia coli was found. This was treated with ciprofloxacin and piperacillin-tazobactan".
After prolonged hospitalization, the patient finally recovered and was discharged. At one year of follow up, the patient was well and showed no signs of relapse.