A 60-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital on October 28th, 2016 with the symptoms of abdominal pain, distension, dark urine, cough, expectoration, chills and fever. The highest temperature was 39 °C before her admission. She had been taking iguratimod (25 mg twice per day) because of Sjoren’s syndrome (SS) for about 15 days prior to her admission. The patient didn’t have hepatobiliary disease and history of excessive alcohol intake, recent travel, blood transfusion. According to the physical examination, her vital signs were normal. Despite sever jaundice, she was conscious. There was no bleeding points or spider angioma or liver palm on her skin. Her abdomen was flat and soft, with no tenderness or rebounding tenderness. Additionally, her liver and spleen were untouched, without shifting dullness. Besides, no edema was seen in her entire body. Her blood test results were as follows: complete blood count: WBC 3.54 × 10^9/L, NE 61.00%, Hb 119 g/L, PLT 130 × 10^9/L, PT 22.9 s, APTT 60.2 s, PTA 78%. Abnormal liver tests: TBIL 263.62 umol/L, DBIL 211.34 umol/L, IBIL 52.28 umol/L, ALT 747 U/L, AST 986 U/L, gamma-GPT 256 U/L, ALP 184 U/L, TBA 205.85 umol/L, LDH 346 U/L. The serum IgG was 13.68 g/L, and the level of IgG4 was 298 μg/ml. The patient was negative for IgM anti-HA, anti-HCV, anti-HEV, HBsAg, anti-EBV-VCA IgM. The serologic markers of hepatitis B virus HBsAb, HBcAb, HBeAb were positive, but the quantification of hepatitis B virus was normal. The results of ANAs were as follows: ANA (positive, nuclear particle type 1:3200), anti-SS-A (60) antibody (positive), anti-SS-A (52) antibody (positive), anti- La/SS-B antibody (positive). The results of autoimmune hepatitis markers (AMA), ANCA, ACL, anti-O antibody, rheumatoid factor, thyroid function and T-SPOT test were also normal. And phlegm etiology detection, blood culture, G and GM tests were normal. The serum C3 and C4 were normal. The CRP and PCT were moderately elevated which the highest level of CRP and PCT was 10.87 mg/L and 1.780 ng/ml, respectively. The result of ECG was normal. Abdominal ultrasound scan showed cholecystitis and ascites. The chest computed tomography (CT) found that bilateral pleural effusion and pneumonia at the lower right on November 31th, 2016. After 1 week, the review of chest CT revealed that bilateral pleural effusion was absorbed a little compared with the last result, and pneumonia was still existed. Combined with the history of related medication, symptoms, signs and the relative auxiliary examination, the patient was diagnosed as likely to be suffering from DILI, Sjogren’s syndrome, pneumonia, and hypoproteinemia. However, considering the patient with Sjogren’s syndrome and the higher level of ANA, antoimmune liver injury couldn’t be ruled out. According to the International Autoimmune Hepatitis Group’s (IAIHG) AIH diagnostic scoring system, the patient was rated 6 points and the AIH could be ruled out basically. To confirm the diagnosis, liver biopsy was proposed, but the patient refused due to economic reasons.Taking into account of the long-term use of hormones in patient, the routine blood and inflammation index couldn’t reflect the severity of infection, and the patient was given the treatment such as controlling infection, liver-protecting, albumin replenishing and other supporting treatments. However, the symptoms such as jaundice, abdominal distension increased and fever still appeared intermittently, while cough and expectoration have been improved obviously. And review of the relevant indicators prompted that serum bilirubin level increased, transaminase and albumin level decreased and blood coagulation declined further. The above indicators suggested that abnormal liver function has reached to a higher level. The patient was given the treatment like infusion plasma to improve the function of blood coagulation. At the same time, the anti-infection therapeutic regimen was strengthened. On the 7th day of admission, we conducted a peritoneal puncture and checked the relevant indicators, and finally, the results suggest that the diagnosis of spontaneous peritonitis was ruled out. In order to clarify the cause and guide the next treatments, a multidisciplinary discussion was organized. Then the treatment was adjusted as follows: methylprednisolone was taking to control Sjogren’s syndrome, and we could use hormone via statics drop when the fever occurred again. About one month after given up taking iguratimod, the patient’s symptoms improved significantly, and the relevant indicators such as abnormal liver tests, blood coagulation function returned to normal basically . According to the updated RUCAM diagnostic scoring system, the patient was rated 9 points and was a suspected DILI. After discharged, the patient was re-adjudicated a one-month follow-up by the same reviewers and the diagnosis was confirmed.