A 54-year-old man noticed enlargement of the proximal aspect of the right clavicle. He made an appointment to undergo positron-emission tomography (PET)-based cancer screening 1 month later, which revealed a lesion with abnormal accumulation in the right clavicle. He was referred to our department for further examination. Plain X-ray revealed lytic change and ballooning of the proximal end of the right clavicle . Computed tomography (CT) showed an expanded medullary cavity and thinning of the cortex without periosteal reaction . No lung metastasis was demonstrated by thin-slice chest CT. The tumor was isointense on T1-weighted magnetic resonance images and showed a mixture of low- and high-intensity areas on T2-weighted images. However, the tumor did not extend to the surrounding soft tissues . Bone scintigraphy showed uptake of 99mTc-methylene diphosphonate in the proximal clavicle , and thallium-201 scintigraphy showed strong accumulation (normal/tumor ratio, 2.31), suggesting an abundant blood supply to the tumor . PET revealed strong accumulation of fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose (SUVmax, 6.0) in the proximal part of the right clavicle, but no other primary cancer or metastases were demonstrated in other sites of the body . All hematological tumor markers (CA19-9, CEA, AFP, NSE, IL-2R, urinary Bence-Jones protein, and serum M-protein) were negative.
Based on the characteristic roentgenographic and CT imaging findings with ballooning of the affected bone, the primary differential diagnosis was a GCT. However, we could not completely exclude malignancy because of the affected site, patient age, and degree of accumulation on PET. We thus performed an open biopsy of the tumor. Preoperative angiography was performed to prevent dissemination due to massive perioperative bleeding; however, large nutrient vessels requiring embolization were not demonstrated. Fragile, yellowish-brown tumor tissue was obtained by the biopsy . Pathologically, the tumor comprised mononuclear stromal cells and multinuclear giant cells . The stromal cells showed oval nuclei with fine, uniform chromatin, and nucleoli were frequently found . Many multinucleated giant cells resembling osteoclasts were surrounded by mononuclear cells . The case was pathologically diagnosed as a GCT of bone, and surgical treatment was planned.
Because this was determined to be a grade II tumor (cortical erosion, deformity, and expansion of bone) according to the Campanacci classification , curettage was considered initially. However, we chose resection to minimize the chance of recurrence because adhesion between the clavicle and major vessels was anticipated, which would make reoperation very difficult. Additionally, the clavicle does not necessarily require reconstruction after resection, and this patient was not engaged in physical work. An osteotomy was performed 8 cm from the proximal edge of the clavicle , and the sternoclavicular joint was then disarticulated . The tumor was resected en-bloc with half of the clavicle. It contained a thin, fragile cortex, but extension to the surrounding soft tissue was absent . The residual clavicular length was 7.5 cm on postoperative roentgenography , and no displacement of the resection edge of the clavicle was observed .
No shoulder disproportion was observed postoperatively . The range of motion of the right shoulder was normal , and the Japanese Orthopaedic Association shoulder score (JOA score) was 99 points. The patient was satisfied with the surgical outcome, and the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society score was 96 %. He returned to his original job as a land and house investigator without any signs of recurrence for 1 year after surgery.