A 49-year-old Chinese Han man presented with abdominal distension of ten years’ duration. He stated that he did not experience abdominal pain, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or other discomfort symptoms. A systemic examination was within normal limits but an abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen. Blood tests for tumor markers indicated increased ferritin (FERR; 2000 ug/ml; normal range, 15 to 200 ug/ml) and increased carbohydrate antigen 724 (CA724; 16.8 U/ml; normal range, 0 to 6 U/ml). A blood biochemistry test indicated decreased albumin (ALB; 24.8 g/L; normal range, over 40.5 g/L), decreased total protein (TP; 60.6 g/L; normal range, 65 to 85 g/L), decreased albumin to globulins ratio (A/G; 0.7; normal range, 1.2 to 2.4), decreased alanine aminotransferase (ALT; 7.9 U/L; normal range, 9 to 50 U/L), decreased aspartate aminotransferase (AST; 5.3 U/L; normal range, 15 to 40 U/L), decreased AST/ALT (0.7; normal range, 1 to 2), and decreased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 109 U/L; normal range, 135 to 226 U/L). Other routine laboratory tests were within normal range. He received an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan which indicated a cystic-solid mass in his abdominal-pelvic cavity measuring 27.6 × 14.2 cm, and multi-node shadows in his omentum and partial mesenterium . The diagnosis was an abdominal mass, the nature of which was still to be determined. He underwent exploratory laparotomy. During the surgery, a large mass was discovered which occupied the entire transverse colon zone. The boundary between the mass and surrounding tissue was unclear. After consultation, we decided to perform a lumpectomy. In order to avoid mass rupture, we adopted a blunt dissection method to handle it. Finally, the mass was resected completely without any leakage or rupture. After resection, the mass was roughly of round shape and measured 35 × 25 cm . Approximately 6000 ml of fluid was aspirated from the mass, some of which appeared to be gelatinous material. Moreover, a fist-sized calcified tissue region was discovered in the mass. Intraoperative rapid pathology indicated a low-grade mucinous neoplasm, which are closely related to the appendix, and thus we considered the appendix as the origin for this mass . Further exploration of his abdominal cavity did not reveal any additional lesions. Considering the size and the unclear boundary of the mass, the possibility of intra-abdominal metastasis was high. At that time, we decided that further treatment would depend on the final pathological outcome and thus a hemicolectomy was not performed. The final pathology report revealed a well-differentiated appendiceal mucinous adenocarcinoma with mucin infiltration into the soft tissue of the lump edge, and omentum tissue was infiltrated by mucinous nodules . After several days of postoperative treatment, he recovered well and without any abdominal pain, bloating, or diarrhea. After recovery, he agreed to four courses of intraperitoneal infusion chemotherapy. At 15 months after surgery, he is in good condition and is being followed up.