A 66-year-old man, ex-smokers since 2006 with no drug and inheritable genetic diseases history, was admitted to our hospital with fever (38,2 °C), non-productive cough, and dyspnoea started by 10-days, after a holiday cruise. The clinical parameters were: 95/min. heart rate, 135/90 mmHg blood arterial pressure and 87%O2 saturation. Respiratory rate was 35/min. breaths, vocal fremitus was diminished bilaterally, especially at the base of the lung, with dullness on percussion and rhonchi, wheezes and rubs at auscultation. The physical examination of the abdomen was negative. The laboratory findings revealed normal white blood cell (WBC) 5.80 K/aeL and high C-reactive protein (CRP) level, 8.20 mg/dL. Chest X-ray showed interstitial lung disease and nasopharyngeal swab-PCR was positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection. The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 pneumonia and he has been intubated because of respiratory distress. COVID-19 infection was treated in intensive care unit by hydroxychloroquine 200 mg., azithromycin 500 mg., tocilizumab 60 mg., methylprednisolone 70 mg. and enoxaparin 4.000 U.I. This therapeutic protocol led good clinical result, as shown by chest X-rays that reported a decrease of interstitial lung disease after 34-days of hospital stay. At 49th day of hospitalization patient complained right upper quadrant abdominal pain together with nausea, vomiting and mild corporeal temperature (38 °C). The physical examination revealed a tender abdomen with normal peristaltic bowel movements, no jaundice and a positive Murphy's sign. Blood tests showed mild leucocytosis, 11.90 K/aeL, with a shift to the left of neutrophils, 80.80%, and high CRP level, 6.60 mg/dL. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a severe gallbladder distension, pericholecystic fluid, marked gallbladder wall thickening, no gallstones were identified and the extrahepatic bile ducts were normal. The patient was diagnosed with acute acalculous cholecystitis and a multidisciplinary team including general surgery unit, interventional radiology unit, intensive care unit and infectious disease unit, had discussed the therapeutic choices for patient.
A percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) under ultrasound control of gallbladder, was performed as the first. A sample of bile was tested for SARS-CoV-2 RNA and it was negative. After 3-days there was no clinical improvement with persistent high WBC count, 13.50 K/aeL. The multidisciplinary team met and a laparoscopic surgical procedure was planned. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was made by the chief of general surgery helped by a consultant surgeon and it was performed through four ports. The gallbladder was gangrenous and a severe inflammation make the Calot's elements diﬃcult to identify. However, the cystic duct and the cystic artery were eventually identified and dissected. Therefore, cholecystectomy was finished. The operative time was 105 minutes. On the 3rd post-operative day nasopharyngeal swab-PCR became negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA and further nasopharyngeal swab-PCR performed after 48 hours and after 96 hours were negative too. The postoperative course was uneventful and it was well-tolerated by the patient, so he was discharged on the 9th postoperative day in satisfactory condition.