The patient was a 77 years old Azeri woman who presented with progressive jaundice, vague abdominal pain, and abdominal distention from 6 months ago. For the past month, the patient has been experiencing multiple episodes of severe consecutive coughing. Outpatient evaluations, including chest computed tomography (CT) scans and Spirometry, did not show any abnormalities. The patient denied a history of smoking, asthma, other chronic pulmonary diseases, recent respiratory tract infections, or taking new medication. Therefore, we started empiric treatment to relieve her coughs, which included omeprazole 40 mg once daily, inhaled budesonide 400 mcg per day, inhaled salbutamol 400 mcg per day, Brompheniramine 6 mg twice daily, and dextromethorphan 20 mg daily. In addition, the patient has had diabetes and hypertension for around 30 years. These conditions are treated with Metformin 500 mg twice daily and Lozartan-H 12.5 mg twice daily, respectively.
Laboratory data showed significantly elevated levels of direct bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase suggestive of cholestasis. Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were also mildly increased. Complete blood count (CBC) was normal, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP) levels were not increased. CA 19-9 was in the normal range. In Appendix 1 we present an overview of important laboratory results.
With suspicion of a mass causing obstructive jaundice, ultrasonography was performed. Ultrasonography showed a large cystic mass with peripheral calcification in the head of the pancreas leading to moderate dilation of extra and intrahepatic bile ducts. In the Doppler ultrasound exam, the mass had turbulent blood flow with yin and yang sign and was connected to the superior mesenteric artery, suggesting aneurysmal dilation or pseudoaneurysm of this artery or its branches. Also, the echogenicity of the liver was mildly heterogeneous, and its margin was not completely smooth, in favor of chronic parenchymal liver disease .
In the non-contrast CT that was done before the computed tomography angiography (CTA), there was a huge mass (14 × 10 × 9 cm) with peripheral discontinuous calcification near the head of the pancreas extending superiorly to the subhepatic region and inferiorly medial to the cecum and causing severe compression on D2 and D3 portion of the duodenum and the common bile duct (CBD). Moreover, marginal hyperdense crescent areas were present . After contrast injection in the arterial phase of CTA, the mass had a density like an aorta and originated superiorly from the posterior surface of the proximal portion of the SMA. The aneurysm was inferiorly connected to the tortuous atherosclerotic vessels around the head of the pancreas. These vessels superiorly originated from the gastroduodenal artery. All arterial branches supplying the bowel loops originated from own SMA, not from this aneurysm. These findings suggest that the huge aneurysm originated from the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery, which was connected to SMA on one side and to anterior and posterior pancreaticoduodenal arteries on the other .
There was mural thrombosis in the aneurysm, which was accompanied by a linear extension of intraluminal contrast through the mural thrombosis, indicating a thrombosis fissuration sign . Discontinuous calcification of the aneurysm's wall was present, and there were areas of focal bulging of the aneurysm's lumen to the surrounding mesenteric fat, associated with mild stranding and minimal fluid in these areas. Two smaller aneurysms (2.5 × 2.5 cm and 1.5 × 1.2 cm) were also seen adjacent to the superomedial margin of the huge aneurysm, originating from the posterior branch of the gastroduodenal artery (superior posterior pancreaticoduodenal artery) . A significant narrowing at the origin of the celiac trunk was noted due to diaphragmatic crura compression, indicating median arcuate ligament syndrome .
Although there was no obvious evidence of the aneurysm's rupture or extravasation of contrast but the presence of hyperdense crescent sign on non-contrast CT, thrombus fissuration sign on CTA, and areas of focal bulging of aneurysm's lumen associated with adjacent fat stranding were impending rupture signs of aneurysm which all of them necessitates the early treatment.
So, conventional angiography (CA) was done to evaluate the precise anatomy of aneurysms, confirm CTA findings, and to perform transarterial embolization (TAE), but CA was terminated early due to some reasons. First of all, it was impossible to interpret digital subtraction angiography (DSA) images due to blurring caused by the patient's coughing. More significantly, the patient experienced dizziness following a puncture of the femoral artery. When she became dizzy, her blood pressure was 90/60, and her heart rate was 100. Fortunately, with close observation, minimal hydration therapy (up to 200 cc of fluid), and leg elevation, her vital signs quickly returned to normal. Her hemodynamics had stabilized after three hours, and hemorrhagic shock was ruled out. Her symptoms were assumed to be the result of reflex syncope brought on by coughing and arterial puncture. After the patient's blood pressure and heart rate returned to normal, the angiographic procedure could be completed while she was under general anesthesia. However, we were leaning towards the surgical option due to the lack of patient and family consent for general anesthesia to perform supplementary angiography.
The massive size of the aneurysm (the largest diameter among previously reported cases) as well as the severe compression of the aneurysm on CBD causing chronic cholestasis leading to some degrees of chronic liver disease, were other reasons to do open surgery, which could theoretically resolve obstructive jaundice, and prevent the progression of chronic liver disease by resection of giant aneurysm and two other smaller aneurysms. Decompressing the celiac trunk from the diaphragmatic crura was also possible by the surgery plan.
Under general anesthesia, an anterior incision was made in the midline of the abdomen. The large aneurysm of the SMA branch had caused the elevation of the D3 and D4 parts of the duodenum. The duodenum was released, allowing access to the suprarenal and infrarenal aorta. The SMA artery was then exposed and released from the base of the transverse colon to a length of 5 cm. The distal portion of the SMA, beyond the replaced right hepatic branch (the first branch of the SMA), was explored and heparinized.
To preserve the blood supply to vital structures, such as the intestines, the anterior main branch of the SMA was meticulously preserved. However, the posterior branch of the SMA, from which the aneurysm sac originated, was clamped both proximally and distally to prevent further complications. Then, the aneurysm sac was carefully opened, resulting in the evacuation of multiple clots. In addition to the ligation of the proximal and distal ends of the aneurysm, the branches inside the aneurysm sac were also ligated to ensure complete hemostasis.
Following thorough washing and meticulous hemostasis, the huge aneurysm’s sac was covered. The same procedure was done for two smaller gastroduodenal arteries (GDA) branch aneurysms (posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery) after clamping of GDA (beyond the right gastroepiploic origin). Our concern about hepatic ischemia was resolved because of the presence of replaced right hepatic artery from SMA, which was preserved during surgery, and fortunately, no evidence of hepatic or biliary ischemia was seen after the surgery.
Finally, transection of MAL and peri-arterial tissue was performed, and decompression of the celiac axis was done. After the division of MAL, blood flow was restored in the proper hepatic artery by palpation. In the end, the abdominal wall was repaired, and the patient was transferred to the recovery room and then surgery ICU. The next day after surgery, the patient suffered a sudden drop in blood pressure and shock and unfortunately passed away. Pathology of resected aneurysms confirmed the presence of all three layers of the arterial wall and the absence of inflammatory infiltrates, fibrinoid necrosis, or evidence of vasculitis in the arterial wall . Unfortunately, the patient's family did not consent to an autopsy, but the most likely cause of death was hemorrhagic shock due to a blow out of a ligated artery in frail perivascular tissues.