A 58-year-old white woman, weighing 55 kg and with a body mass index of 23, was admitted to our hospital suffering from general weakness, coughing with purulent sputum, fever, and nausea. She presented in a stable general condition, except for schizophrenia with mild cognitive impairment. Prior to admission, she received clozapine (250 mg/day) for schizophrenia. She had no other relevant diagnoses and interventions in her past medical history. She lived in an assisted living facility and was employed in a protected workplace program. She was able to take care of herself and was able to perform daily tasks on her own (for example, grocery shopping). She has no direct relatives and was raised in a children’s home. On admission, she was awake with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15 and was temporal, local, and autopsychic oriented. She showed no neurological deficiency. She was hemodynamically stable with heart rate of 100 beats per minute (bpm), blood pressure of 99/70 mmHg, respiratory rate of 14/minute, and body temperature of 38.9 °C. She had signs of mild dyspnea, coughing, and wheezing at auscultation. Her abdomen was soft without tenderness on palpation. Bowel sounds were equally present. An influenza screening test was negative. Urinary and blood cultures showed no bacterial infection. Blood samples on admission showed an elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 39 mg/L, leukocytes of 9.9 g/L, and a lactate level of 2.1 mmol/L. Creatinine clearance, liver function, electrolytes, and counted blood cells were all within normal ranges. With a tobacco smoking history of 40 pack-years, she was now treated for exacerbated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and antibiotic therapy with intravenously administered amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (1.2 g three times a day). Prednisone (50 mg/day) was also started. Two days after admission, she suffered acute vomiting and presented a diffuse pressure-resistant and distended abdomen. Abdominal computed tomography showed a volvulus in the small intestine, 20 cm from the ileocecal valve, confirming the indication for emergency laparotomy .
After surgery, she arrived in the ICU under sedation with propofol (80 mg/hour) and fentanyl (0.05 mg/hour), decreased bowel sounds, and normal cardiopulmonary parameters. Initially, she received 0.5 mg haloperidol as prophylaxis for delirium. She was continuously administered noradrenaline (0.34 μg/kg per minute) to maintain circulation and Ringer’s acetate for volume support. We treated her respiratory infection with piperacillin/tazobactam (13.5 g/day). For volume support, she received 5000 ml Ringer’s acetate during the first 24 hours. Her urinary output was supported with furosemide (35 mg) over the first 24 hours. In addition, she received anticoagulation with dalteparin (5000 IU).
The initial period was uneventful. Although ventilator weaning was intended for our patient and sedation was reduced, she remained dependent on positive end-expiratory pressure and extubating was not possible. Under volume therapy and a positive fluid balance of 4 liters the next morning, noradrenaline could be partially reduced and maintained at 0.25 μg/kg per minute. Her first post-surgery blood check at 5 p.m. showed a CRP of 179 mg/L, leukocyte count of 17 × 109/L, hemoglobin at 81 g/L, creatinine at 118 μmol/L, and serum lactate at 1.5 mmol/L. She was slightly agitated and received a total 4.5 mg haloperidol over 24 hours for delirium treatment.
In the morning, we included her in a study and routinely measured her microcirculation. The microcirculatory measurement revealed an almost absent MCF . In addition, offline analysis showed an MFI of far below normal (2.6 is the accepted threshold) for all three recordings. Even in the recording with the most perfused vessels , less than 25% of the vessels were perfused (PPV).
Except for the altered microcirculation, circulatory and laboratory parameters showed no clear indication for a deterioration of the medical situation. Post-surgical CRP and leukocytes were expected to be high. Infrared blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) inconsistently showed low values between 50 and 90% by a fingertip detector. We initially interpreted this to be a malfunction due to a cold periphery.
Because of the normal hemodynamic measurements, we chose an expectant strategy and increased intravenous fluid administration. Arterial blood gas analysis showed only moderate rise of lactate levels from 1.5 to 3 mmol/L . A laboratory examination 80 minutes later indicated a rapid deterioration of the situation with a lactate level of 5.4 mmol/L and a decreased hemoglobin level of 59 g/L (36.6 mmol/L).
Transfusion of 2 units of packed cells was initiated, and an arterial blood gas sample was drawn after 30 minutes. Transthoracic ultrasound showed a hyperdynamic, underfilled left ventricle, and abdominal ultrasound gave no further information. She underwent an immediate surgical re-evaluation.
The laparotomy showed a dilated and visually ischemic descending colon down to the sigmoid. The previous ileocecal anastomosis was still intact and the ileum was vital. The entire colon was removed, and an ileostomy was implanted in her abdominal wall. A third look surgery a few days later showed an intact and vital remaining bowel. Postoperative microcirculation and blood samples returned to normal, and she recovered slowly without further complications from her severe condition. She could be discharged from our hospital 4 weeks after admission and returned to her domestic environment. In the follow-up consultation after 6 months at our hospital she refused a retrocession of the stoma. She managed the daily care of the ileostomy by herself and felt comfortable with it. Except for the permanent ileostomy, she did not have any residual symptoms from the incident and integrated herself in the daytime routine. No further consultation was planned.