A 54-year-old Chinese non-smoker female, who worked in a chicken processing factory, experienced intermittent right chest pain with occasional dry cough for 8 months with no apparent trigger. Although the patient’s sputum acid fast staining was negative, she was receiving empirical anti-tuberculosis therapy (2021.04.10) (the specific drug is unknown) in another hospital since her chest computed tomography (CT), dated April 2, 2021, suggested pulmonary tuberculosis. Further, the patient developed skin itching and systemic redness, prompting the anti-tuberculosis drugs to be changed (the specific drug is unknown), however, shortness of breath and shivering occurred following 3 days of medication, and the patient was eventually switched to isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and levofloxacin (HRE + Lfx) for tuberculosis therapy. Unfortunately, her symptoms and imaging manifestation did not improve, and the CT at Hechuan People’s Hospital on June 16, 2021, indicated a thick-walled cavity in the upper lobe of the right lung, with irregular morphology, uneven wall thickness, and mild soft tissue enhancement. On June 22nd, 2021, she was admitted to our department for further evaluation and treatment. During the investigation, the patient denied experiencing symptoms such as dyspnea, chest tightness, hot flashes, night sweats, hemoptysis, chills, or a high fever. No significant abnormality was observed in the physical examination, and auxiliary inspection results are demonstrated in Table . In particular, this patient had underwent the fungal culture of BALF and lung biopsy, but the results were all negative. The patient was initially diagnosed with bacteriologically negative pulmonary tuberculosis and continued with anti-tuberculosis therapy with HRE and Lfx. The BALF of the patient was sent to undergo mNGS analysis, and the mNGS result revealed that the patient suffered from S. apiospermum infection, and DNA sequencing reads were 426, followed by antifungal therapy with voriconazole (300 mg iv q12h d1; 200 mg q12h iv d2-d20). Chest enhanced CT suggested the possibility of lung cancer , and positron emission tomography/CT (PET-CT) indicated that peripheral lung adenocarcinoma was not excluded (SUVmax 2.8) . No significant improvement was observed in her imaging manifestation after the post-treatment review , and the possibility of fungal infection along with pulmonary neoplasms was not completely excluded. Then a CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy was performed, whose pathological report suggested fibroproliferation with chronic inflammatory cell infiltration . Although no evidence of pulmonary neoplasms was observed during the lung biopsy, a thoracoscopic right upper lobectomy and lymph node dissection were performed. During the surgery, no pleural effusion was observed, and the lesion was located in the upper lobe of the right lung, measuring about 3*3 cm, with complete excision of the diseased lobe. The postoperative pathological results revealed visible silver-stained and PAS-positive oval spores in the alveolar septum, bronchiole wall, and alveolar cavity, thus, indicating fungal infection. Lung biopsy tissue from the upper lobe of the right lung revealed metaplasia from alveolar to bronchial, along with partial bronchiectasis. In and around the cavity, there was a large amount of inflammatory cell infiltration and foam cell aggregation, accompanied by lymphoid tissue hyperplasia. Fiber hyperplasia was observed in some regions, and alveolar epithelial hyperplasia was also visible . The patient continued to consume voriconazole (200 mg po bid) for 2 months after surgery, and the diagnosis and treatment process are indicated in Fig. . Chest imaging was followed up at 1, 2, and 10 months after surgery, and no signs of recurrence were observed .