The medical examination of a 43-year-old man revealed calcification in the pancreatic head. He was referred to the Department of Gastroenterology for examination. No symptoms were evident, and his medical history was unremarkable. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a tumor (approximate size, 3 cm) with calcification in the pancreatic head. The pancreatic duct and parenchymal tissue were not observed on the caudal side of the portal vein. There were no liver metastases or enlargement of the surrounding lymph nodes. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans showed low signal intensity, while T2-weighted MRI scans showed a reasonably high signal intensity in the pancreatic head. Furthermore, T2-weighted MRI scans indicated a high signal intensity in the pancreatic body and tail. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed that the pancreatic ducts of the pancreatic body and tail were completely disrupted . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a low echoic mass with calcification, while contrast-enhanced harmonic EUS (CH-EUS) (Sonazoid, GE Healthcare, Oslo, Norway) revealed stark contrasts and hypovascularity in the tumor. EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) was performed. Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with a SPN.
Initially, we planned to perform a laparoscopic TP as intraoperative findings indicated that the tumor was present in the pancreatic head. Additionally, there was no pancreatic parenchyma in the pancreatic body, while that in the tail was completely replaced by adipose tissue. However, the shape of the pancreas could be identified. Based on these findings, a PD was performed on the left side of the portal vein . As we found that the tumor had invaded the portal vein, we switched to open surgery. The pancreatic duct was not reconstructed, as the main pancreatic duct could not be identified at the cut surface. Therefore, only a modified Blumgart-style pancreaticojejunostomy was performed to cover the cut end. The surgery lasted for 425 min, and the volume of blood loss was 500 mL. Histopathological findings indicated that the pancreatic tissue was replaced by adipose tissue, and only Langerhans islets were observed .
The patient was discharged on postoperative day 12 without complications. He is being followed-up 1.5 years after the surgery. His fasting blood sugar and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) levels according to the National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program (NGSP) reports were within the normal limits (HbA1c NGSP, preoperatively, 5.5%; 3 months postoperatively, 5.7%), indicating that endocrine function (insulin secretion ability) was preserved. He experienced diarrhea three times a day after the surgery; however, his nutritional status was maintained with oral administration of pancrelipase. His preoperative body weight and serum albumin levels were 87.6 kg and 4.6 g/dL, respectively, and by 3 months postoperatively, these were 81.4 kg and 4.6 g/dL, respectively.