A 60-year-old African-American woman with a medical history significant for diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension and hypercholesterolemia was evaluated in our hospital for a one-month history of periodic nausea and vomiting. Our patient reported episodes of emesis daily, consisting of ingested food without blood. She denied any abdominal pain, diarrhea, fever or chills, although on the day of admission some epigastric pain and discomfort were present. Her symptoms were progressively worsening.
The results of a physical examination were unremarkable. She was found to have a hypochromic microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 9.3 mg/dL) and leukocytosis at 15,900 cells/μL. Her chloride level was decreased at 74 mEq/L and bicarbonate level was elevated at 37 mEq/L. She also had azotemia with blood urea nitrogen of 88 mg/dL and creatinine of 3.7 mg/dL, all of which were new findings. The results of liver function tests, coagulation studies, and amylase and lipase tests were all within normal ranges.
Ultrasound (US) and computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed marked gastric distention and dilatation suggestive of gastric outlet obstruction, air in the biliary tree and an abscess in the gallbladder fossa area . The findings were inconclusive and the assumption at that point was a diagnosis of emphysematous cholecystitis with possible perforation of the gallbladder. A percutaneous drain was placed and it collected approximately 300 cm3 of brownish-black fluid. A fluid smear showed moderate yeast and many Gram-positive diphtheroid rods. Culture showed multiple organisms including: Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Torulopsis glabrata, α-hemolytic Streptococcus (not Enterococcus), and Clostridium perfringens. Blood culture results were negative but a urine culture grew yeast (not Candida) more than 100,000 cfu/cm3. Our patient was started on ampicillin, metronidazole, and fluconazole. Intravenous fluids were also initiated and the pre-renal azotemia improved and her creatinine level returned to 1.7 mg/dL.
After drain insertion, her aspartate transaminase (AST) became elevated to 393 IU/L and alanine transaminase (ALT) to 245 IU/L. A day later, our patient complained of chest and left arm pain as well as increased shortness of breath. An electrocardiogram showed ST segment elevation in the anterior leads consistent with myocardial infarction, and she was noted to be in pulmonary edema. Our Cardiology Department was consulted, and cardiac catheterization showed three vessel disease with left ventricular dysfunction. Balloon dilatation and stenting of the involved vessels was undertaken, with resolution of the symptoms.
After this incident, our patient underwent an upper gastrointestinal X-ray study with contrast, which suggested a gallbladder-duodenal fistula . A second drain was then placed to remove the rest of the fluid present in the presumed abscess area.
Our patient then experienced massive upper gastrointestinal bleeding necessitating immediate surgical intervention. An exploratory laparotomy was performed, which showed a tumor involving the gallbladder with invasion of adjacent structures, acute and chronic cholecystitis with cholelithiasis and choledochoduodenal fistula. The tumor was later confirmed to be an adenocarcinoma. Because of the extent of the disease, a partial cholecystectomy was performed with drainage of the duodenal stump, lysis of adhesions and loop gastrojejunostomy.
Our patient developed respiratory failure following surgery, was intubated, and placed on ventilatory support. After several days on mechanical ventilation, she was taken off ventilation at her family's request, and died.