The patient is a 57-year-old nulligravid female who presented to clinic with symptoms of urinary urgency incontinence. She had a past medical history of endometriosis, autoimmune hepatitis, cirrhosis, and denied any pertinent mental/psychological history or trauma. Her initial symptoms included urgency, voiding up to 5 times an hour, and nocturia up to five times per night. She had no previous vaginal surgeries. Baseline sexual function evaluation was completed at intake with the Female Sexual Function Index (FSFI) questionnaire where the arousal domain equaled 0.9 (range 0-6, with 6 indicating maximal arousal) . Pelvic examination was significant for vaginal atrophy but no notable clitoral or labial abnormalities were visualized. There were no signs of prolapse or pelvic floor musculature hypertonicity. She was asked to keep a voiding diary and then advised to attempt timed voiding upon its completion. She was also started on vaginal estrogen and a generic anticholinergic agent (oxybutynin 10 XL daily). After 4 weeks of treatment, she experienced significant worsening of anticholinergic side-effects and stopped the medication on her own. She was then started on a beta sympathomimetic (mirabegron 25mg daily). After 6 weeks of this therapy, she did not have any subjective improvement in her symptoms. The dose was increased to 50 mg daily and continued for an additional 4 weeks. Again, she did not have an adequate reduction in symptoms and was counseled on third tier treatment options. Ultimately the decision was made to proceed with SNM.
The sacral neuromodulator was implanted per manufacturer instructions after undergoing a peripheral nerve evaluation with >50% improvement in her urgency symptoms. At one-week follow-up, her incisional pain was minimal. She did not require oral analgesics and had reported marked improvement in urinary symptoms consistent with the test phase.
However, near the six-month follow-up appointment, she expressed concerns about persistent arousal symptoms in the vaginal area overall with new onset hypersensitivity localized to the clitoris. She did not have these symptoms prior to or immediately postimplant, but she reported gradual development of arousal symptoms postoperatively over the six-month period. She had not initiated the use of any new medications or therapies during the same time period.
Pelvic examination did not demonstrate engorgement of the clitoris, change from the intake examination, or evidence of hypertonic pelvic floor muscle dysfunction based on digital assessment. To manage her arousal, the four programs that were programmed into the system were alternated with cycling activated. Behavioral modifications were suggested including loose clothing. Upon no change in symptoms, device deactivation was performed. This resulted in no notable improvement of the manifest arousal symptoms. However, her urgency symptoms immediately recurred upon the deactivation. At this point, the plan was to trial a new set of programs to see if her arousal symptoms could be eliminated using different settings. The patient agreed to trial all four new programs, each over at least a 10-day period and assess which one was associated with fewer arousal symptoms. The programming was done at sensory levels. Alternation of pulse width and frequency was performed as well. The patient was instructed to complete a 4-week diary indicating arousal and bladder activity. At follow-up, she had trialed each program and continued to experience sexual arousal symptoms. Her symptoms were present even when the device was turned off and intensified when the machine was on. The symptoms were also present without any clitoral contact by undergarments. It was becoming so bothersome that it was difficult for her to stay asleep at night and creating anxiety. Complete testing of the neuromodulator unit was reperformed with normal values noted for impedance. Reprogramming of the unit with a new set of programs was performed again with subsensory levels used at this point. Additionally, she was offered sexual counseling but it was declined.
One year after placement, she elected for removal of the generator and lead. The generator and lead, intact with tip, were successfully removed with no complications. At the 6-week follow-up after explant, she had recurrence of urinary urgency symptoms with persistence of hyper-arousability. One year later, she continues to be sexually active with mild discomfort due to vaginal atrophy (as noted on the pain domain in the FSFI). She reports that the clitoris remains hypersensitive with persistence of the arousal symptoms, although moderately improved from prior to SNM. At the follow-up visits, no changes in medications or new medical diagnoses were reported when compared to prior visits. Furthermore, she denied any new stressors or change in her personal life regarding the relationship with her husband.