A 30-year-old Malagasy (African) woman, a trader, was admitted to the Emergency and Intensive Care Department of the University Hospital Center Professor ZAFISAONA Gabriel, Mahajanga, Madagascar on 19 May 2020 for probable toxidermia following an intramuscular injection of MTX for ectopic pregnancy. On 5 May 2020, the patient consulted for late menstruation (date of last menstrual period was 25 March 2020). The urine pregnancy test was positive. Pelvic ultrasound showed a gravid anteflexed uterus with a thickened endometrium and a right latero-uterine mass with an anechoic center (11.9 mm) consistent with an ectopic pregnancy of 5 weeks of amenorrhea. She was seen in a gynecological consultation on 7 May 2020. After explaining the diagnosis, the patient accepted medical treatment for the ectopic pregnancy with MTX. The patient received an unique intramuscular injection of MTX at a total dose of 75 mg (1 mg/kg) the same day. There was no immediate incident.
On 9 May 2020 (48 hours after the injection), the patient noticed the appearance of rashes in erythematous patches diffuse all over her body. The evolution was marked by the appearance of blisters and purplish spots. There was secondary onset of fever, nausea, fatigue, and yellowing of the eyes and skin. The appearance of oral ulcers, pain in the throat, and diarrhea in the context of deterioration in general condition motivated the consultation. On 15 May 2020 (eighth day after the injection), neutropenia was reported at 0.5 Giga per liter (G/L), hypercreatininemia at 12 µmol/L, hyponatremia at 132 mmol/L, hypokalemia (3.06 mmol/L), hypochloremia (97 mmol/L), and an increase in C-reactive protein to 152 mg/L. Hemoglobin, platelet, and transaminase levels were normal. After multidisciplinary consultation, the patient was hospitalized in the Emergency and Intensive Care Department on 19 May 2020 for probable toxidermia induced by MTX.
Note that the patient had no medical, familial, or psychosocial history. She had undergone an appendectomy in 2005, and there was no complication. She was known to be allergic to seafood and penicillin.
On initial examination on 19 May 2020, the patient complained of sialorrhea, odynophagia, and burning of the oral cavity. She was jaundiced, febrile (38.8 °C), dehydrated, and tired. Hemodynamic status was stable. Dermatological examination found nonpruritic phlyctenular maculopapular rashes and generalized purpuric purplish lesions extending to the face, associated with loss of substance exposing the hypodermis in the extremities . The patient presented with ulcerations of the lips and labial commissures. Intraoral examination found erosion of the oral and pharyngeal mucosa. Also, palpation of the right hypochondrium was painful. The assessment of 20 May 2020 found anemia (108 g/L), agranulocytosis at 0.1 G/L, and severe thrombocytopenia (32 G/L). There was an elevation of transaminases to 1.5 times normal, a prothrombin level of 78%, an increase in hyponatremia (131 mmol/L), hypokalemia (2.66 mmol/L), and hypochloremia (92 mmol/L). Serum creatinine was 59 µmol/L. Chest x-ray suggested interstitial lesions at the left pulmonary bases . Serum methotrexate level could not be measured because it is unavailable in Madagascar. The search for Plasmodium species by cytology was done systematically because Plasmodium falciparum, which causes severe and potentially fatal forms of malaria, is endemic in Madagascar. Neither Plasmodium falciparum nor any of the three other endemic Plasmodium species (Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium malariae, and Plasmodium ovale) were found. Serologies for viral hepatitis B and C were requested but were not honored. Acquired immunodeficiency virus serology was not requested due to lack of patient consent. The blood culture did not isolate any pathogen in the blood after 5 days of culture. A new pelvic examination done on 20 May 2020 confirmed the absence of a latero-uterine mass.
The patient benefited from intravenous rehydration, correction of electrolyte disturbances, mouthwashes with chlorhexidine, cutaneous application of fusidic acid 2%, oral loratadine, oral amphotericin B, alkaline drinks, oral erythromycin, intravenous dexamethasone, intravenous omeprazole, and fresh whole blood transfusion. Despite these treatments, the patient’s condition rapidly deteriorated and she presented with dyspnea (oxygen saturation 80%) on 21 May 2020. Subcutaneous filgrastim and intravenous folinic acid were prescribed, but the patient had died on 21 May 2020 (after 2 days of hospitalization) of multiple organ failure before these last treatments could be honored.