A 58 year old African-American female reported symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea. Physical examination including abdominal, vaginal, cervical and rectal exam were not contributory. She was found on computerized tomography scan of the abdomen/pelvis to have a 3.2 cm heterogeneous mass anterior to the coccyx, with central hypodensity and peripheral rim enhancement; the mass appeared separate from the posterior rectal wall. The pelvic organs were unremarkable, as no other abnormalities were identified on CT scan. Subsequent CT-guided biopsy and pathology was consistent with a neuroendocrine tumor. Colonoscopy was negative for primary tumor of the rectum. Transanal endoscopic ultrasound confirmed a heterogeneous and hypoechoic mass at 13 cm from the anal verge, clearly separate from the posterior rectal wall, with no discernible lymphadenopathy . The posterior vaginal wall was visualized and unremarkable. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy scan (SSRS) revealed uptake in the presacral mass compatible with neuroendocrine tumor, but no other sites of disease.
The patient had a history of imperforate anus, having lived with a colostomy up until ten years of age. At that time she underwent two coloanal pull through procedures through both an abdominal and transsacral approach with creation of a neoanus . Prior to our evaluation, her bowel function was described as having fecal continence with occasional loose stools and irregular bowel movements. Of note, she did not have any wheezing, flushing, pellagra, or other symptomatology to meet a constellation typical of the "carcinoid syndrome". Her abdominal pain resolved prior to any treatment for her presacral mass and was felt not related to her NET. Therefore, her NET was considered an incidental finding.
At operation, she underwent transsacral resection of the NET with partial removal of the sacrum and removal of the entire coccyx and mass . The surgery was complicated by the presence of scar tissue from previous coloanal pull through procedures. A vertical incision over the sacrum and coccyx was performed. The subcutaneous tissue was divided down to the sacral bone. The tumor appeared to extend in the presacral plane up to about the S4-5 level. Thus, the sacral bone was divided at the S4 level and then the presacral area was entered and dissection continued in this plane. Notably, the tumor was slightly adherent to perirectal fat, but not invading or emanating from the rectal wall. The tumor was dissected away without difficulty from the posterior rectal wall and neoanus.
Postoperatively, the patient did well and was discharged without complications. She had no new symptoms of incontinence, rectal, or back pain. Her bowel habits and loose stools remained at her pre-operative baseline. There was no evidence of recurrence of disease after 10 months of follow up.
The specimen consisted of a tumor mass with surrounding fibrous tissue. There was no evidence of lymphatic tissue in the specimen. Permanent sections revealed cytologically bland and monotonous cells arranged in cords or ribbons. Nuclei were round to oval, small, and occasionally featuring nucleoli. Mitotic rate was low, no necrosis or angioinvasion were noted. Characteristic "salt-and-pepper" neurosecretory granules were seen. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for synaptophysin, neuron specific enolase, chromogranin and cytokeratin. The tumor was negative for S-100 . A paraganglioma was ruled out since the cells did not exhibit a nesting cell growth pattern. The cells were not large and did not have abundant cytoplasm. Intracytoplasmic globules were not present. The cells were positive for cytokeratin, while paragangliomas are usually negative. Most characteristically, S-100 staining is positive and highlights the sustentacular cells between the solid-sheets of a paraganglioma. The resected tumor was negative for S-100.
All of these features confirmed this tumor to be a well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor according to the WHO classification.