A 53-year-old white Italian man initially presented to gastroenterologists with a 5-week history of dyspepsia, epigastric pain and a palpable mass in the left hypochrondrium. There was no history of anorexia, dysphagia, weight loss, change in bowel habit or gastrointestinal blood loss. His past medical history included early Alzheimer’s disease and discoid lupus.
Examination revealed a well circumscribed, mobile mass in the left hypochrondrium extending above the level of the ribs raising the possibility of an enlarged spleen. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy.
A blood film showed atypical myelomonocytic cells but a subsequent bone marrow aspiration was normal. All other routine blood tests were within normal limits. An abdominal ultrasound scan demonstrated a normal spleen and a separate gas-filled cyst in the left hypochondrium.
Over the next few weeks, the patient developed diarrhoea and lost 3 kg in weight. He reported that the mass appeared to be fluctuating in size.
An abdomen computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a large gas-filled structure measuring 11 cm × 12 cm, appearing to arise from the sigmoid colon, displacing the adjacent small and large bowel loops. The features were consistent with a giant sigmoid diverticulum.
He was referred to colorectal surgeons and a barium enema was performed to further assess the extent of the diverticular disease. This confirmed moderate sigmoid diverticulosis but did not demonstrate direct communication between the colon and the giant cyst . The diagnosis of GCD was discussed with the patient and definitive surgical management was advised. Initially, the patient was reluctant to have surgery, but over the next 6 months, he experienced two further episodes of acute abdominal pain necessitating hospital admission. Both episodes were similar in nature with pain as the predominant symptom; an abdominal X-ray (AXR) taken on admission demonstrated the gas-filled structure and in the absence of raised inflammatory markers, a normal white cell count and no fever, the diagnosis of enlarging GCD was made. Both episodes settled quickly with bowel rest and intravenous fluids. The patient then agreed to surgical intervention.
A laparoscopic-assisted sigmoid colectomy was performed 6 weeks later. Four 12 mm ports were inserted and pneumoperitoneum achieved. Three of the ports were positioned along the lateral edge of the right rectus abdominus muscle and triangulated to provide optimum access to the left colon. The fourth port was in the left iliac fossa. The large cystic structure was clearly visible in the left hypochondrium at the apex of a long mobile loop of sigmoid colon on the anti-mesenteric border . The remaining sigmoid colon had macroscopic evidence of mild diverticulosis. The diverticulum was attached to the lateral abdominal wall adjacent to the spleen by adhesions. These adhesions were divided laparoscopically by a combination of scissor diathermy and ultracision. The sigmoid colon was then fully mobilised from lateral to medial but no attempt was made to divide the mesenteric vessels intracorporeally in view of the fact this was benign disease and the sigmoid was long and tortuous. The mobilised sigmoid colon was externalised through a 7 cm incision in the left iliac fossa. A wound protector was used during extraction of the cyst and a decision was made not to decompress it before removal in order to keep possible contamination down to a minimum. The sigmoid colon was resected along with the diverticulum and a hand-sewn primary anastomosis was performed extracorporeally.
The patient made an excellent postoperative recovery and was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.
Macroscopic assessment of the segmental colonic resection confirmed the presence of diverticular disease with an associated giant cyst measuring 11 cm in maximal diameter. The wall of the cyst measured 0.6 to 1 cm in thickness. Microscopically, it did not contain any elements of bowel wall and instead was composed of reactive scar tissue with foreign body type giant cell reaction. The presence of plant material admixed with inflammatory debris was thought to be indicative of faecal matter and suggested a direct communication between the cyst and bowel lumen. However, this was not identified histologically. There was no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy. In accordance with the classification suggested by Steenvoorde et al. , the histological features were consistent with Type II GCD .