D.L.F., male, 19-year-old, presented a progressive proptosis in 2012, associated with occasional mild headache. On the same year, he sought medical consultation at an external service and after imaging investigation, a right supraorbital lesion was found. It was decided conservative management with imaging follow- up. Three years later, the patient joined a phosphoethanolamine clinical trial, which he left after approximately 1 year. At that time, he also presented with double vision. On February of 2018, the headache worsened, as well as the diplopia. Due to the worsening, he was referred to the Hospital das Clinicas at the University of Sao Paulo. In the neurological exam, he was alert and oriented; there was proptosis (Grade I) and downward deviation of the right eye. The external ocular movements, visual acuity, and campimetry were preserved, and there were no motor or sensorial impairments.
Head computed tomography (CT) showed a multiloculated expansive lesion on the right orbital roof, sized 3.3 × 4.0 × 2.8 cm (LL × AP × CC), with osteolytic characteristics. There was a bulging of the anterior cranial fossa and right frontal sinus superiorly. The superior orbital fissure and the optic nerve canal were preserved.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well- circumscribed multicystic lesion with peripheral hypointense capsule and mild internal septations with variable signal intensity at T1-weighted imaging (T1WI). On T2, the cystic cavities showed high signal intensity. There was the obliteration of the extra and intraconal fat tissue and inferior dislocation of the lachrymal gland and extraocular muscles. Cystic walls were enhanced after injection of gadolinium .
On March 7, he underwent a right frontal craniotomy for resection of the supraorbital lesion associated with high- speed drilling. Was made extended frontal pretemporal craniotomy, with wide orbital skull exposure. The main objective due to decompress optic nerve. All bone block was removed by drilling. Afterword’s the skull was reconstructed by methacrylate. The drilling was very tough. A solid bone makes it more difficult to remove. The postoperative follow- up was uneventful, with reduction of the proptosis . He was discharged on the 4th postoperative day. shows the pathology findings.