A 32-year-old Asian man presented with a 2-week history of numbness and muscle weakness in his legs, with no preceding infectious symptoms. At initial hospital admission, he complained of inability to walk independently and cervical pain. Guillain–Barré syndrome was initially suspected based on his cerebrospinal fluid examination, which revealed protein cell dissociation (polynuclear, 0/mm3; mononuclear, 4/mm3; normal range of total cells [<5.0/mm3]; protein 62 mg/dL, normal range [≤45 mg/dL]; glucose 59 mg/dL, normal range [45–80 mg/dL]). Several days later, he developed quadriplegia and gradual onset sensory disturbance. His respiratory condition worsened, with respiratory muscle paralysis causing respiratory failure. He was intubated and transferred to our hospital, where an enlarged spinal lesion (C7–T1) was identified on cervical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (high signal on T2WI and low signal on T1WI; Fig. A). The patient had an unremarkable medical history and no familial history of spinal tumors.
On admission to our service, physical examination revealed a respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min (on controlled mechanical ventilation), a heart rate of 50 b.p.m., normal hemodynamic parameters with a blood pressure of 113/67 mmHg without the use of catecholamine agonists, and a body temperature of 37.1°C. He remained under sedation and showed a loss of deep tendon reflexes. The blood test results were almost all within the normal ranges, except for Na (129 mEq/L) . The results of several antibody tests, including anti-aquaporin-4 antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, anti-nuclear antibody, proteinase 3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, were negative.
The patient was diagnosed with ARF caused by the spinal tumor. We undertook emergent decompression of C3–T2 and extended duraplasty of C6–T1 on day 3 of admission and also started steroid pulse therapy (prednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 days), which did not resolve his symptoms. A tumor incision biopsy with partial excision and a tracheostomy was carried out on day 10, as contrast cervical MRI showed an intraspinal tumor .
On day 13, after examination with computed tomography and MRI, the patient developed severe bradycardia (30–40 b.p.m.) and hypotension without a discernable pulse. In addition to hypoxemia, these could be induced either by septic shock, whose focus was unknown, or autonomic dysfunction related to postoperative morbidity and edema of the spinal cord. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was undertaken immediately, and normal heart rhythm was restored after 1 min. Subsequent blood tests revealed severe sepsis, with a procalcitonin level of 52 ng/mL (normal range, <0.5 ng/mL). We diagnosed septic shock secondary to severe infection; however, the focus was not identified on whole body imaging.
We switched from sulbactam/ampicillin for ventilation-associated pneumonia to meropenem and daptomycin for septic shock . He was also treated with steroids (hydrocortisone 200 mg per day for 3 days, with sequential tapering every 3 days) and i.v. immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg/day for 3 days).
The patient showed facial spasms and involuntary movement of the neck and right upper limb that same morning along with high fever (42.0°C). We adjusted his sedation as appropriate, as the spasm and involuntary limb movement were consistent with status epilepticus. We started treatment with recombinant thrombomodulin (380 U/kg/day for 2 days), as the disseminated intravascular coagulation score on day 14 was 5. His condition gradually improved, and we deescalated antibiotics considering the results of the sputum and blood culture on day 16. Nevertheless, the spasms and involuntary limb movement were consistent; no metastatic lesions were found on a follow-up MRI of the brain on day 25.
Histopathological examination showed diffuse invasion of glioma cells in the normal parenchyma, and histone H3-K27M mutations showed positive nuclear staining with the anti-H3-K27M antibody . Thus, the pathological diagnosis of the biopsied tumor was confirmed to be a World Health Organization grade IV glioma, “diffuse midline glioma H3 K27M-mutant” . We provided chemoradiotherapy under mechanical ventilation in the intensive care unit, which is the standard treatment for this tumor type. He received 50 Gy radiotherapy in 25 fractions on days 28–66, and was transferred to the general ward on day 35 and to another hospital for subacute care.