A 75-year-old woman, with a history of mild rheumatic MS, was taken to the emergency department (ED) for near-syncope followed by acute dyspnea. She had not been followed up for her MS for 20 years, and was not on any anticoagulant therapy. Shortly after admission to the ED the patient experienced rapid deterioration with haemodynamic instability resulting in cardiogenic shock with a cold and wet profile [SCAI (Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions) classification—stage C] and pulmonary oedema confirmed on chest X-ray. An ECG showed atrial fibrillation (AF) with rapid ventricular response. In accordance with the latest European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines for the management of atrial fibrillation (AF), given the haemodynamic instability, an immediate electrical cardioversion was performed in the ED with restoration of sinus rhythm. Arterial blood gas analysis showed severe metabolic acidosis (pH: 7.04) with a very high lactate (16 mg/dl) and marked hypoxemia (pO2: 50 mmHg). Due to the persistence of haemodynamic instability associated with severe pulmonary oedema despite intravenous diuretic administration, she was intubated and mechanically ventilated. Immediate infusion of norepinephrine (0.5 mcg/kg/min) and dobutamine (0.5 mcg/kg/min) was started. Urgent transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed in the ED, which revealed a severe reduction of left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF: 15%) due to a diffuse left ventricular hypokinesia. The right ventricle was normal sized with severely reduced systolic function, along with the presence of severe tricuspid regurgitation and high estimated pulmonary systolic pressure (50 mmHg). Mitral leaflets appeared severely calcified and thickened with reduced systolic motion and doming appearance during diastole . The mean gradient to the diastolic filling across mitral valve was initially 5 mmHg ( raising to 16 mmHg ( when inotropic drugs infusion was started. A clear picture of severe rheumatic MS was evident. The left atrium (LA) was severely dilated and a large rounded mass was immediately appreciable. 2D–3D trans-oesophageal echocardiography (TOE) confirmed the severe MS ( and ) and the severe biventricular systolic dysfunction. The left atrial mass appeared perfectly spherical (diameter of 40 mm × 40 mm) and double-walled, largely immobile and leaning to the lateral atrial wall with no clear signs of attachment. The imaging was not suggestive of atrial myxoma (. The external contour appeared very echo-dense with an external fibrous cap almost 4 mm thick and an internal thinner layer. The central core of the mass appeared friable. The final appearance was of a ‘truck tire’ ( and and ). The mass appeared to be a ball-valve thrombus. A dense echo-contrast filled the entire LA with a mobile clot inside the left atrial appendage (LAA) . 3D-TEE images were helpful in confirming the mass composition . The patient underwent contrast-enhanced chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) with iodine contrast to discriminate diagnosis between thrombus, left atrial myxoma, or primary malignant tumours as well as cardiac metastases from an extracardiac origin. CT confirmed the presence of the rounded mass contiguous to the lateral wall of the LA with no post-contrast perfusion confirming its avascular nature. Therefore, we excluded acute pulmonary embolism or systemic arterial embolization or extracardiac tumours ( Brain CT showed no signs of intracranial haemorrhage or recent ischaemia. The levels of troponin T (TnT) (peak level of 147 ng/mL with an upper reference limit, < 14 ng/mL) and N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) ( pg/mL with an upper reference limit, <20 pg/mL) were elevated. Patient continued to be monitored in the intensive care unit and systemic anticoagulation therapy with intravenous unfractioned heparin (UFH) was commenced according to the ESC guidelines for the management of AF. On day 2, because of persistence of cardiogenic shock (SCAI stage D), refractory to dobutamine and norepinephrine, epinephrine infusion (0,1 mcg/kg/min) was added. The case was discussed in Heart Team and considering the haemodynamic instability in the context of refractory cardiogenic shock with evidence of multi-organ failure, an emergency surgical procedure was deemed inappropriate. The feasibility of mechanical circulatory support such as VA-ECMO was considered and deemed not feasible due to the evidence of critical peripheral vascular disease on the CT scan prohibiting arterial vascular access. The patient developed cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation and immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed. Unfortunately, defibrillation was followed by irreversible pulseless electrical activity. Emergency TTE showed left atrial mass engaged into the mitral valve and totally obstructing the left ventricle inflow via a ball-valve effect, so-called ‘hole-in-one thrombus’, and the patient died shortly after this. The autopsy findings confirmed the presence of the mass entrapped into the mitral valve ( and histologic examination revealed its thrombotic nature. The mass section revealed its constitution of multiple layers (.