26-year-old male works as a farmer with a free past medical history, Presented to surgery clinic with a history of abdominal pain during the last 10 months duration. His pain started as a mild lower abdominal discomfort without GIT or urinary symptoms 10 months ago.
Recently in the last few weeks, the patient had increasing lower abdominal discomfort, mild pain, sense of fullness in the lower abdomen, described as (I'm having a ball in my abdomen), with a history of early satiation and tenesmus, frequency of urine, and history of weight loss and general weakness.
Abdominal examination revealed a distended lower abdomen, a sense of deep-seated mass on palpation with mild tenderness, and no muscular guarding or rigidity. Ultrasonography (USG) abdomen revealed a multiseptated cyst (15 cm × 10 cm) filling the central area of the pelvis and extending into the abdominal cavity suggestive of a hydatid cyst, no other cyst was revealed in the abdomen. An abdominal CT scan was done, which showed: a huge lobulated cystic lesion with multiple septations occupying the pelvis and reaching the lower part of the abdominal cavity .
The patient underwent surgery, Through a midline incision the abdomen was opened in layers formal exploration was done as possible the cyst was found deeply seated in the pelvis adherent to the upper portion of the rectum and mesocolon inferiorly, compressing on the posterior wall of the urinary bladder anteriorly, and partially adherent to the small bowel loops and omentum. The cyst has its major adherent area to the medial side of the upper part of the rectum and mesorectum with small feeding blood vessels originating from the medial side of the mesorectum, five abdominal pads soaked with hypertonic saline were placed around the cyst. The feeding blood vessels were ligated and were cut. The cyst was completely excised after its content was evacuated. Two abdominal drains were inserted in the pelvis and the abdomen was closed in layers .
Smooth postoperative course and the Patient was discharged albendazole was given for 4 weeks and the liver function test was checked. No findings associated with local or systemic hydatid disease were detected during the follow-up period.
E. granulosus specific DNA amplification test: DNA was extracted from the isolated hydatid cyst, and then E. granulosus specific DNA fragments were amplified using a polymerase chain reaction system that targeted (EgG1 Hae III) repeated sequence (3). For this purpose, 0.3 g of the inner cyst membrane tissue was extracted using Qiagen DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Germany), and the specific repeated sequence was amplified as it was previously described (3). depicts specific E. granulosus amplified DNA repeat bands (about 270 bp and 540 bp) from both the isolated cyst DNA as well as from 0.1 ng of E. granulosus genomic DNA.