We present the case of a 54-year-old patient with bacterial endocarditis who has been regularly visiting his cardiologist for follow-up on a mitral valve prolapse and mild to moderate mitral regurgitation (MR) for the last 11 years. Although the patient was not at high risk of developing IE and the 2009 ESC Guidelines on the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of infective endocarditis did not recommend antibiotic prophylaxis in the patient, he was advised by his cardiologist that he underwent antibiotic prophylaxis for invasive manipulations including dental procedures. The patient generally followed this advice, and at the time of his current admission, his past medical history was insignificant except for a posterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction treated with aspiration thrombectomy in 2011. In November 2019, the patient visited his dentist for a dental procedure. Antibiotic prophylaxis was not used. In January 2020, the patient visited his primary care physician due to complaints of fever up to 37.5°C and cough. Symptomatic treatment was initiated with a reduction in temperature to around 36.9–37.0°C. In February, the patient made another visit to his primary care physician due to low-grade fever, persistent cough, and malaise. He was referred to a pulmonologist and antibiotic therapy with cefuroxime 500 mg b.i.d. was commenced with an initial positive effect. Due to relapse of symptoms in March and April, another two oral antibiotic courses were prescribed with little effect. In May 2020, after testing negative for COVID-19 in both Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and rapid IgM/IgG tests, he was prescribed his fourth course of antibiotic therapy with clarithromycin SR 500 mg/day. In the 2 weeks leading to the date of admission, his fever rose to 38.5°C and his cough became especially pronounced in the supine position which led his pulmonologist to refer him for a cardiology consult.
The patient was admitted to the intensive cardiac care unit after his transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a previously non-existent structure on the posterior mitral valve leaflet (PMVL) with an increase in the severity of mitral regurgitation (see ). The patient did not report taking any medical therapy at the time of admission. His overall condition was satisfactory (see ); his blood pressure was 125/81 mmHg and his heart rate 74 b.p.m. A pansystolic murmur could be heard at the apex with radiation to the left axilla. Peripheral oedema was not present. He was afebrile at first, and later during the day of admission, he developed a temperature of 37.7°C.
Three sets of blood cultures were taken and empiric antibiotic therapy was started with vancomycin and gentamicin in addition to intravenous furosemide. Five days later, the blood cultures came back positive for Streptococcus viridans which was sensitive to vancomycin and ceftriaxone but resistant to gentamicin. The patient had two major and two minor criteria (definite IE) according to the 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of infective endocarditis. On account of the large size of the vegetation, it was decided to continue the antibiotic therapy with both vancomycin and ceftriaxone. By the end of the first week, his fever and cough had subsided completely. Due to the size of the vegetation (approximately 15 mm × 10 mm), severe mitral regurgitation and the high risk of embolization assessed through TTE, it was recommended the patient underwent surgical mitral valve replacement (MVR) (Class IIa recommendation). Nevertheless, the timing of surgery was decided to be elective (after completing a full antibiotic course), a decision based mainly on the positive therapeutic effect and the low risk of embolism (∼7%) at 4 weeks after admission as assessed by using a symptomatic embolism risk calculator.
After completing the 4-week antibiotic course, the patient’s overall condition had improved which was also noticeable in the laboratory tests (see ). The follow-up blood cultures, taken after normalization of PCT, did not show bacterial growth.
However, the surgical intervention was postponed for another 2 weeks due to a COVID-19 case in the department of cardiac surgery. While waiting for surgery the patient suffered a transient ischaemic attack (TIA) with a short-lasting episode of dizziness, blurred vision, and vomiting. Diffusion-weighted MRI did not detect cerebral ischaemia and concerns about a septic embolization were cast aside after TTE did not show any change in the morphology of the vegetation (see and and ).
Subsequently, in July 2020, the patient underwent a successful MVR surgery with St. Jude Medical (SJM) No. 35 mechanical valve (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA) via a standard approach. His pre-operative markers of inflammation including PCT were within reference ranges (see ).
At a 5-month follow-up in December 2020, the patient was feeling well with no signs of infection, had a normal functioning mechanical valve assessed by transthoracic echocardiography and a therapeutic international normalized ratio (INR).