A 7-year-old boy with Allan–Herndon–Dudley syndrome (a rare X-linked disorder of brain development caused by SLC16A2 gene mutations) and LGS (a progressive epilepsy syndrome that causes tonic and atypical absence seizures and intellectual disability) underwent treatment for intractable epilepsy. In keeping with this diagnoses, the patient has severe developmental delay and is wheelchair bound and non-verbal. At baseline, he has ∼10–15 seizures per day of different types, lasting <30 s. Several of these seizures have been observed and recorded, with concomitant ECGs showing sinus rhythm only. His medications included Nadolol, Valproic acid, Clobazam, Prevacid, and Flovent.
The child’s ECG at age 4 years and 8 months revealed a rate-corrected QT interval (QTc = QT/RR½) of 523 ms . Holter monitor at this time was essentially normal with low-average heart rate for age in keeping with his beta-blocker (Nadolol) therapy of 1.26 mg/kg/day. One month later, he had another ECG with a QTc of 493 ms. He was identified to have LQTS Type 1 (LQTS1) due to a KCNQ1 Leu273Phe mutation inherited from his mother. The mother’s mutation was identified using a clinical panel of long QT genes and demonstrated only this single mutation. The boy’s mutation was identified through a familial analysis assessing this single mutation only. The maternal grandfather is also known to have LQTS with QTc >500 ms.
This KCNQ1 mutation was originally reported in one of the original kindreds (K1777) identifying gene mutations underlying LQT1 syndrome, has been subsequently published in an additional seven long QT cohorts, is exceedingly rare in large ‘normal cohorts’ (ExAC, GnomAD) and has been functionally characterized as having typical features of long QT syndrome., It is reported as pathogenic in the ClinVar database and is a known gene mutation in the Human Gene Mutation Database. Thus, it meets the American College of Medical Genetics criteria as a pathogenic variant.
At age 5 years, the patient was started on a new antiepileptic, rufinamide, to improve seizure control. He was initially started on rufinamide 90 mg bid and after the fifth dose the ECG revealed a QTc of 455 ms. He was continued on rufinamide and it was titrated up to 180 mg bid × 3 days, then 280 mg bid × 3 days, then 320 mg bid × 3 days, and then continued on 400 mg bid (see timeline for dosages and corresponding measured corrected QT intervals). Corrected QT intervals were measured using a standard published technique, including during sinus arrhythmia. An ECG at 5 years and 9 months of age was normal, with a QTc at 430 ms. Holter was normal and repeat ECG was also normal with a QTc of 400 ms . The patient did not suffer from any side effects from rufinamide, and remains on therapy.