A 7-month-old male infant was referred to our tertiary-care hospital for evaluation of a one-month history of progressive painless abdominal distention. His prenatal and familial history was negative, and his personal medical history included a surgical correction of bilateral inguinal hernia and thalassemia minor diagnosis. He appeared well, and his growth and neurological development were appropriate for chronological age. Physical examination was normal except for a distended and tense abdomen, painless on deep palpation, with a positive fluid-thrill; there was no evidence of organomegaly or abdominal masses. There were no clinical, laboratory or imaging signs of portal hypertension or liver disease. Abdominal ultrasound examination (US) showed the presence of fluid in the Morison’s pouch, in the left upper abdominal quadrant, and Douglas space; the liquid appeared free in the abdomen in the absence of definite septation nor a multi-cystic appearance thus confirming the clinical impression of ascites. There were no abdominal masses or abdominal organ abnormalities. A comprehensive workup excluded hepatic, renal, cardiac, intestinal, pancreatic, inflammatory or infectious diseases, malignancy, and congenital metabolic diseases. The child had had in the past a mild pleuro-pericardic effusion during a febrile illness and a transient mild hyperkaliemia, evoking a possible stomatocytosis due to PIEZO1 mutation; the analysis of PIEZO1 gene was however found negative. As an interferon-gamma test (QuantiFERON®) was positive, peritoneal tuberculosis was suspected, but the chest x-ray and the Mantoux test of the patient and his parents were negative. Gram and acid-fast stain and culture of three gastric aspirates resulted negative. Furthermore, the repeated interferon gamma test was negative and atypical mycobacterial infections were also excluded. A MRI of the abdomen only confirmed an abundant collection of liquid in the abdomen, with centralization of the bowel loops and a normal aspect of all abdominal organs . Biochemical analysis of ascites revealed pale-yellow serous fluid with a normal value for the serum albumin-ascites gradient (gradient = 1.1). Triglycerides and total leukocytes counts were in the normal range (98% lymphocytes). At cytological examination, abdominal fluid appeared as a clear yellowish liquid that contained reactive lympho-monocytes, mesothelial cells, isolated foam cells and absence of malignant cells. Notably, the abdominal fluid rapidly re-accumulated just a few days after this first paracentesis. To promote a negative sodium balance and possibly reduce ascites production, symptomatic palliative diuretic management was started, by combining spironolactone (3 mg/Kg/daily) and furosemide (1 mg/Kg/daily). The child was then stable for a short time, but abdominal distension returned causing discomfort and breathing difficulty: multiple paracenteses were necessary during the following months. As repeated imaging and fluid analysis did not bring any new elements to orientate towards a precise diagnosis or treatment, a malformative pattern was also evoked and ruled out. Eighteen months after the onset of symptoms, in the absence of a positive diagnosis and of any improvement of the condition, and given the normality of all diagnostic tests, the initial diagnosis of ascites was reconsidered and pseudo-ascites was hypothesized. US and MRI studies were repeated but could not bring new elements, nor support the diagnosis of a PA . At that point, because the ascites was refractory to treatment with recurrent need for hospitalizations for paracentesis and associated with a poor quality of life, surgery was proposed. The plan was to proceed with a diagnostic laparoscopy to confirm the free ascites and the absence of any other precise condition, followed by the creation of a peritoneo-venous shunt if free and cryptogenic ascites was confirmed. Laparoscopy led to the identification of a benign giant cystic lymphangioma of the omentum, which was mobilized laparoscopically and radically resected through the umbilical site of the laparoscopy access. The cyst covered all abdominal organs but none was intimately involved and the resection was extended to an en-bloc resection of the great omentum . There was no free fluid in the abdomen. The resolution of symptoms was immediate, and there has been no recurrence of abdominal distention: the child is now doing fine one year after surgery. The anatomo-pathological study confirmed the surgical diagnosis.