A 13-year-old boy was admitted to the West China Second University Hospital with the chief complaint of recurrent painful skin lesions on both upper limbs, which had lasted more than 2 years before his referral (since he was 11 years old). The boy had recurrent painful purpura on both arms, but there seemed to be no relationship between the pain site and the ecchymosis site. The purpura often flared up suddenly at night or after going to the bathroom, where he was alone. A physical examination revealed remarkable linear, symmetric (meteor shower-like) purpura on both arms . He had once been diagnosed with an allergic rash, or Schönlein purpura, and given glucocorticoid and other anti-allergic treatment. Although the ecchymosis subsided, this type of skin lesion was easy to relapse. In the latest episode, ecchymosis on both upper limbs reappeared, with the same morphology and distribution, and with pain all over the body. He soon complained of blindness in his right eye, but his vision gradually recovered half a month later, after treatment with eye drops (timolol maleate and sodium hyaluronate). It is interesting to note that whether he was given naproxen or only placebo, his pain was quickly relieved. The patient’s history revealed that he was born prematurely, at a gestational age of approximately 32 weeks. He had congenital right blepharoptosis and once received an “umbilical hernia” operation in his infancy. Later, he was admitted to our hospital for scalding, which left him with unsightly scars over the trunk. His parents and 21-year-old sister are healthy and denied a positive family history. His father had worked abroad for many years and his mother was rarely present because of her work. Another point worth noting is that he showed maturity beyond his age while communicating.
The laboratory evaluation revealed that his normal white blood cell count, erythrocyte count, platelet count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, coagulation function, urinalysis, and hepatic and renal function were all normal. There were also no abnormal findings in humoral immunity (IgA, IgG, IgM, and IgE), cellular immunity (B cell, T cell, and NK cell), autoantibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anticardiolipin antibody, and rheumatoid factor. Chest radiographs showed a curvature of the upper thoracic scoliosis. Electroencephalogram, cerebrospinal fluid, and bone marrow examination also showed no abnormalities. A skin biopsy revealed reticular epidermis hyperkeratosis, moderate perivascular lymphocytes, and some neutrophil infiltration .
A multidisciplinary team was then arranged to discuss this difficult condition. After a discussion, the consultation suggested that as no clues of organic disease that could lead to purpura were found, DA caused by psychological factors should be considered. Based on the patient’s clinical history, physical examination, histopathology findings, and laboratory evaluation, the diagnosis of DA was finally made.
After discharge, we advised the patient’s parents to pay more attention to his psychological state and try their best to create a relaxing environment and provide company, which was the most important factor. During the 3-months follow-up, the patient returned to his normal life and study, without any further similar episodes.