The patient is a 29-year-old G3P2002 woman at 39-week and 1-day gestation, who was referred from a health center for management of fetal demise. She had attended 03 antenatal visits at the same health center wherein the fundal height was documented at each visit and routine care given. Except for occasional painful fetal kicks, she was otherwise well throughout the antenatal period. Three days prior to admission into our service, she experienced reduced fetal movements for which she consulted at the said health center and a diagnosis of fetal demise was made. On admission to our unit, she had stable vital parameters. There was no abdominal tenderness and an apparent fundal height of 32cm was measured, fetal parts were not easily palpable, and fetal heart tones were not perceived. There were no signs of per vaginal bleeding. Her cervix was long, posterior, firm, and closed. An emergency ultrasound scan was requested which confirmed fetal demise (gross cranial deformation was noted) but failed to diagnose an intra-abdominal location.
Cervical ripening was started with 50µg of misoprostol vaginally every 6 hours and after 4 applications; the cervix remained unchanged. A decision for operative delivery was made, indicating failed induction and in a bit to reduce the risk of disseminated intravascular coagulation. The intraoperative findings were a third-degree macerated female fetus floating freely in the peritoneal cavity, weighing 2650g with a tight cord round neck and with no amniotic sac . The uterus was about 14 weeks and the fallopian tubes and ovaries were normal. The placenta was implanted on the ascending colon and mesocolon. The placenta was left in place. No intraoperative complications were encountered. Postoperatively, she was placed on ampicillin, gentamycin, and metronidazole parenterally for five days. She also received 50mg of methotrexate every other day (04 doses) with 5mg of folinic acid each day proceeding the methotrexate. She was discharged on day 8 postoperation to continue follow-up as an outpatient with regular βHCG and ultrasound checks. Her recovery was uneventful with resorption of placenta 6 months later.