The patient was a 23-year-old male student with recurrent colicky migratory right iliac fossa pain of 3 days duration. Symptoms were not relieved with medical interventions at peripheral center before referral. He had a previous episode a month prior to this which was associated with several episodes of bilious vomiting, passage of watery stools and low-grade fever. He was ill looking, not pale, anicteric, warm to touch with a right axillary temperature of 37.3°C, tachycardic with pulse of 114beats/minute, tachypneic with respiratory rate of 28 cycles/minute and vesicular breath sounds. He had right iliac fossa tenderness with positive Rovsing’s sign, Obturator sign and Psoas’ sign and had a vague right iliac fossa mass with normal bowel sounds and no suprapubic tenderness. Abdominal ultrasound scan showed an appendiceal mass that measured 8 cm x 10 cm. His pack cell volume and serum electrolyte urea and creatinine were with normal limits. He received conservative management with intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole as well as analgesics. Forty-eight hours later, his vital signs had normalized and the mass had regressed. He was discharged on oral antibiotics after 6 days on admission. He consented to have interval appendicectomy 3 months later which was done under general anesthesia through a Lanz incision. Intraoperative findings were: a 12 cm long inflamed retrocecal appendix with fibrotic adhesions of the greater omentum to the tip of appendix. The ceacum, ileum and colon were grossly normal. There was no fluid collection. He was discharged 2 days after surgery in clinically satisfactory condition on oral antibiotics, analgesics and vitamin C.
Histology of the appendix showed transmural chronic fibrotic granulomatous inflammation around dead and viable schistosoma ova of both Schistosoma mansoni and Schistosoma hematobium [Figures and ]. He had stool microscopy done which did not show schistosoma ova. He was then treated with praziquantel 600 mg three times per day for 1 day. At follow-up clinic visit he had a 6 cm healed scar with good integrity and had no new complaints. Post-therapy stool microscopy was done and also showed no evidence of schistosoma ova.