A 59-year-old Peruvian female presented to the outpatient clinic with chronic abdominal pain and bloating. Medical history was relevant for obesity (Body Mass Index (BMI) 31 kg/m2), diverticular disease and irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Her familiar history was significant for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and hypertension. Previous hospitalizations were related to pelvic inflammatory disease and complicated diverticulitis. Her regular medications were fiber supplementation and simethicone.
The physical examination revealed mild abdominal tenderness in the left lower quadrant without associated fever or change in bowel habits. Abdominal imaging and routine laboratory exams were performed. The abdominal ultrasound revealed an enlarged uterus reported as uterine myomatosis. Due to the non-specific clinical features, unrevealing imaging and past medical history, an IBS flare was suspected and supportive medication was prescribed.
A week later, the patient presented to the gynecology outpatient clinic due to persistent symptoms. A transvaginal ultrasound found a mass near the left ovary. The differential diagnoses were ovarian and CRC. A virtual colonoscopy was ordered because extraluminal compression caused an incomplete colonoscopic evaluation. Thoracoabdominal Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and tumor markers (Cancer Antigen 125 (CA-125) and Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA)) were performed. The CEA was elevated tenfold its normal value and the MRI revealed a large 9 cm tumoral lesion. stenosing the sigmoid lumen with attachments to the left ovary and uterus , no thoracic metastatic lesions were found. Virtual colonoscopic evaluation was not contributory.
Surgical treatment was decided due to a high suspicion of neoplasia. A laparoscopic left hemicolectomy, hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed along with intraoperative ultrasound showing the absence of metastatic lesions in abdominal organs. Forty-eight lymphatic nodes were analyzed without neoplastic infiltration. No complications were reported in the procedure. A diagnosis of primary SCC of the colon was confirmed on histopathological and immunohistochemical analysis .
Immunohistochemistry showed overexpression of p16, p40 and ki67, subsequent Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) analysis for Human Papillomavirus (HPV) on tissue samples were performed, yielding a negative result. Genomic profiling demonstrated stable microsatellite status, mutations in Phosphatase and Tensin Homolog (PTEN), Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase (ALK), Fas cell surface death receptor (FAS) and Tumor Protein p53 (TP53). The stage of the neoplasia was T4b, N0, M0 (Stage IIc).
Three months after surgery, a PET-CT scan revealed two hypermetabolic nodules . Post-surgical inflammatory nodules versus neoplastic recurrence were considered, conservative management with adjuvant chemotherapy was indicated for 4 months with Carboplatin (300 mg) and Paclitaxel (300 mg).
After the first chemotherapeutic regimen, a CT-scan showed that the previous nodules had increased in size (3 × 3 cm), infiltrating the cecum and the right ureter. A right hemicolectomy and ureteral sectioning plus anastomosis was performed without complications. Histopathological analysis confirmed recurrence.
Adjuvant chemotherapy with Cisplatin (100 mg) and 5-fluorouracil (1200 mg) infusion for 6 months was administered. A PET-CT scan after the second chemotherapeutic regimen revealed a hypermetabolic nodular lesion . Neoplastic recurrence was likely, and a third surgery was performed to remove the mass. There were no postoperative complications. Histopathological analysis confirmed recurrence. Daily radiotherapy for 30 days was indicated. Currently, the patient is free of active disease.