A 61-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of severe left-dominant heart failure. Chest radiography showed an enlarged cardiac silhouette, a congested pulmonary hilum, and bilateral pleural effusion . This patient’s heart rhythm was atrial fibrillation, and the left ventricle was diffusely hypertrophic and hypokinetic. Coronary arteries were normal on coronary arteriogram. Heart failure was improved by administration of cardiotonic and diuretic drugs, and PA was suspected given the existence of severe hypokalemia (2.5 mEq/L), suppression of plasma renin activity (< 0.1 ng/ml/h) and elevated plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC, 1,410 pg/mL) . Computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a single left adrenal nodule (25 mm × 23 mm × 22 mm; Fig. C), but failed to detect any adrenal nodule on the right gland . However, adrenal vein sampling (AVS) indicated bilateral PA ; therefore, treatment with medication was begun. Initially, heart failure and serum potassium levels (4.2 mEq/L) were improved by administration of the combination of two MR antagonists (spironolactone 25 mg/day and eplerenone 100 mg/day), two diuretics (azosemide 60 mg/day and tolvaptan 7.5 mg/day), an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor (enalapril 5 mg/day), and a beta-adrenergic blocker (bisoprolol fumarate 10 mg/day). However, heart failure relapsed after 4 months of treatment. We hypothesized that excess aldosterone might be the source of hypertension and heart failure in this patient. In order to reduce the amount of aldosterone secretory tissue, a laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed for the left adrenal gland, which was observed to secrete more aldosterone than the right gland (6,950 and 2,130 pg/dL, respectively; Table ). This procedure was performed with an operation time of 2 h and 5 min and a bleeding volume of 20 mL. The resected adrenal tissue consisted of an encapsulated yellowish nodule. Histopathological examination revealed a benign adrenal adenoma without hyperplasia in the normal adrenal region, which was diagnosed as an aldosterone-producing adenoma.
Immediately after surgery, the patient’s heart failure was successfully controlled, despite the fact that the PAC remained elevated (293 pg/mL, Table ). The number of antihypertensive drugs was reduced to two, consisting of eplerenone 100 mg/day and bisoprolol fumarate 10 mg/day. Chest x-ray showed improvement of both pleural effusion and cardiac enlargement , and postoperative cardiac ultrasound demonstrated improvement of ventricular hypertrophy (preoperative left ventricular end-diastolic/systolic diameter (LVDd/Ds) 69.5/49.6 mm, postoperative LVDd/Ds 57.3/45.7 mm). Two years after surgery, although serum PRA was low (0.3 ng/ml/h) and PAC was high (249 pg/mL) and CT showed scattered small 1–2 mm hypo-absorptive lesions suggestive of microadenoma in the contralateral adrenal gland, heart failure has not relapsed. A summary of the treatment of this patient is provided in Fig. .
To elucidate the mechanism of drug resistance, quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) assays were performed on the resected tissue to detect the mRNA and protein expression (respectively) of steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1), a regulator of steroid synthesis in adrenal tissue . Tissue from unilateral PA cases with good responsivity to drug treatment were used as controls (n = 3). The preoperative PRA, PAC, and tumor length in the three control patients were,<0.1,<0.1,<0.1 ng/ml/h, 568, 670, 714 pg/mL, and 14, 25, 28 mm, respectively. RT-PCR and IHC showed that SF-1 mRNA and protein expression levels were significantly higher in this case than those in the controls (p < 0.01 by Mann-Whitney U test).