A 6-year-old Moroccan boy with asthma was admitted to our emergency department because of acute dyspnea and persistent dry cough. Two days prior to his admission, he had fever, cough, and wheezing. He was initially treated with oral antibiotics (azithromycin 10 mg/kg/day) and nebulized salbutamol at his pediatrician’s office. However, owing to the worsening of his condition and the appearance of cervical swelling, he was referred to our department. Since age 3 years, the child had been diagnosed with intermittent asthma, had been well-monitored, and had been placed on outpatient treatment. Viral triggers were common with this patient. His family had an average socioeconomic level. Their home was airy and sunny without any pets. There was not any exposure to smoke from tobacco. The child had no particular pathological history. He had never been hospitalized for a severe crisis. He had nonfrequent recurrent wheezing episodes that occurred three to four times per year and were treated with bronchodilators and oral steroids when necessary. There was no family history of atopy. According to the parents, the patient had no history of food allergy, trauma, choking episode, FB aspiration, or any recent viral infection triggers for an acute asthma exacerbation. His physical examination showed the following: respiratory distress with perioral cyanosis, tachypnea (respiratory rate, 46/min) and hypoxia (oxygen saturation, 84% in room air), bilateral wheezing, and a cervical swelling with crepitations on the neck. His temperature was 38.3 °C. His hemodynamic state was stable (pulse rate, 110 beats/minute; blood pressure, 100/60 mmHg). The patient was conscious. The result of his neurological examination was normal. A chest x-ray showed SCE, PM, bilateral hyperinflation, and absence of radio-opaque FB . The laboratory tests showed the following values: white blood cell count 17,000 cells/μl, hemoglobin 11.5 mg/dl, platelet count 220,000/μl, C-reactive protein 38 mg/L, urea 15 mg/dl, creatinine 0.8 mg/dl, and prothrombin time 100%. The boy was initially treated as having an acute asthma exacerbation complicated by PM and was administered oxygen, intravenous steroids (hydrocortisone 5 mg/kg/6 h), nebulized salbutamol, and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (100 mg/kg/day). The evolution was made worse by respiratory distress (increase of respiratory rate at 54/min, decrease of oxygen saturation at 78% in room air) and extension of swelling that progressed from the neck to the face and shoulders. Owing to insufficient clinical and radiographic improvement under the appropriate treatment, the possibility of a differential diagnosis, especially that of FB aspiration, was considered. Thus, a rigid bronchoscopy (size 5.0) was performed under general anesthesia on the second day, which showed the FB (pumpkin seed) located at the entry of the right main bronchus . After removal of the FB, a complete resolution of clinical signs was observed. The child was discharged to home the next day and was placed on outpatient treatment. Radiographic control after 10 days showed complete recovery. The evolution was normal after 2 years of follow-up with two asthma attacks treated on an outpatient basis with nebulized salbutamol.