A 31-year-old male with a 13-year history of RRMS, after fingolimod treatment for 1 month, was diagnosed with ME and retinal hemorrhages in his left eye at a regular ophthalmic examination. His past history revealed that the onset of MS was accompanied by a visual disorder. He presented with several gadolinium-enhanced active lesions in his brain, despite therapies of steroid pulse, plasma exchanges, immunoglobulin, and interferon-beta (−β). Although interferon-β was used for a period of 6 months, 6 years prior, it was discontinued because of allergic skin reactions. The symptoms had improved after undergoing a course of five plasma exchanges 5 years prior but the patient refused further treatment. Over several years, the patient had developed paralysis in his right upper limb, both lower limbs, and had severe urinary incontinence and constipation. His Expanded Disability Score Scale (EDSS) was 8.5. Anti-aquaporin-4 antibody tested negative. Laboratory studies, including bleeding and coagulation tests, were within normal limits. He had no history of hypertension (blood pressure approximately 90–105/50–75 mmHg), diabetes mellitus, or hematological diseases. When retinal hemorrhages were recognized, the hemoglobin level was 15.0 g/dL and the platelet count was 210,000/μL (within the normal range). The patient had no history of uveitis and pars planitis.
At the first ophthalmological examination before taking fingolimod, his corrected visual acuity was 20/600 OD and 20/400 OS, optic disc color was pale, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) showed a thinner retina (particularly in the nerve fiber layer) without ME in both eyes . This was regarded as the cause of decreased visual acuity. In all directions, the patient showed gaze-evoked nystagmus.
Four weeks after fingolimod treatment, his left eye revealed extensive flame-shaped retinal hemorrhages along retinal arteries and veins as well as cystic ME, as measured by SD-OCT . His visual acuity did not decrease considerably, with 20/600 OD and 20/500 OS. Most of the hemorrhages were found along both retinal arteries and veins beyond the mid-periphery involving all four quadrants of the retina. Deeper dot-blot hemorrhages, and a hemorrhage on the optic disc at the 12 to 1 o’clock position, were also recognized. The diameter and tortuosity of the retinal veins after the hemorrhages were the same as before the hemorrhages. Both eyes had no inflammatory signs in the anterior segment and vitreous, as assessed by slit lamp biomicroscopy examination. Fingolimod was discontinued. Because FAME remained for 13 weeks, topical treatment with 0.1 % betamethasone, four times daily, was started. FAME was resolved completely 4 weeks after starting topical steroid therapy; that was 17 weeks after the cessation of fingolimod. Retinal hemorrhages remained unchanged for 4 weeks after the cessation of fingolimod treatment, then started to decrease and disappeared completely at 24 weeks, indicating that the hemorrhages existed for 7 weeks longer than the FAME. During the treatments and follow-ups, neither retinal hemorrhages nor ME developed in the right eye. The patient’s visual acuity at the time of disappearance of retinal hemorrhages and FAME was 20/400 OD and 20/400 OS. Fluorescein angiography was not performed because the patient could not retain a sitting position.