A 21-year-old male metal company worker referred to the neurosurgery department with the complaints of chronic headache and generalized tonic-clonic seizures for 3 years, as well as weakness in the left upper and lower limbs, diplopia, and projectile vomiting for 1 month. There was no history of chronic fever, trauma, surgery, and any other major illnesses (e.g., diabetes or hypertension). The patient was prescribed with anti-tuberculosis drugs by a private medical practitioner a year earlier although no reports were suggestive of diagnosing tuberculosis.
On physical examination, the patient was afebrile, conscious, and well oriented. His vitals were normal with a pulse rate of 90/min, blood pressure of 110/80 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 18/min. The power was reduced in the left upper and lower limbs (grade 4/5). The pupils of both sides were of normal size and normally reacted to light. Other parameters in the physical examination were unremarkable. All hematological investigations were within the normal limits, except for white blood cell count (16,400 cells/µl) and polymorphonuclear leukocytosis (showing toxic granulations).
With regard to the complaints and physical examination, the patient was subjected to contrast-enhanced computer
tomography scan (CECT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The CECT showed multiple ring-enhancing lesions in the left frontal lobe.
The MRI demonstrated multiple heterogeneous focal lesions in the frontal cortex with marked perilesional edema causing mass effect and
compression of the left lateral ventricle with a rightward midline shift .
Imaging modalities and clinical presentation were both suggestive of left frontal cerebral abscess.
Therefore, the patient underwent left frontal craniotomy. Intraoperatively, three well-encapsulated abscesses were observed in the left frontal cerebral lobe just anterior to the coronal suture. Around 60 to 70-ml thick green colored exudate was aspirated from the abscess cavity, followed by complete excision and evacuation of the abscesses. The aspirated exudate was sent to the laboratory for examination. The patient was started on ceftriaxone (2 gm) and metronidazole (100 µl) intravenous injection, as well as an anticonvulsant (i.e., levetiracetam), till the culture reports were available.
The brain abscess exudate was received in the Department of Microbiology for microscopy and culture.
On Gram stain, Ziehl Neelsen stain (20%, 1% H2SO4), and KOH mount, few pus cells and septate hyphae bearing
chains of conidia were seen with no evidence of any bacteria ( and ). The laboratory personnel alerted the surgeons about the findings
with the advice of starting antifungal therapy.
The specimen was inoculated onto culture media for both bacterial and fungal isolation. For bacterial culture, blood agar and Mackonkey’s agar (HiMedia, Mumbai, India) were inoculated and incubated at 37°C for 48 h. Sabouraud’s dextrose agar (SDA) plain and SDA (HiMedia, Mumbai, India) with gentamicin and actidione were incubated for 14 days at 37°C and 25°C for fungal culture.
The blood agar and Mackonkey’s agar were sterile for bacterial growth after 48 h of inoculation.
However, the media were further incubated at 37°C for a week. On days 5 and 10, a 5-mm, olivaceous grey, suede, or velvety fungal
colony was observed on blood agar and SDA, respectively . A lactophenol cotton blue mount showed pale brown, septate hyphae
with many broken chains of single-celled, oval conidia. Presumptive identification of Cladophialophora was made based on this macroscopic
and microscopic morphology. In addition, slide culture and few physiological tests were employed to confirm the isolate. For urea hydrolysis,
Christensen’s urea agar (HiMedia, Mumbai, India) was incubated at 30°C for 10 days. Similarly, thermotolerance was assessed by incubating the fungal isolate at 40-42°C for 3 weeks.
The slide culture lactophenol cotton blue mount revealed hyphae with poorly differentiated conidiophores-bearing long, sparsely
branched chains of single-celled, oval conidia with acropetal arrangement . The urea hydrolysis was positive, and the
strain was thermotolerant and cycloheximide resistant. On the basis of the above features, the strain was identified as C. bantiana.
The strain was also confirmed based on the morphological characteristics in the Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
The focus of fungal infection in this patient could not be determined as blood, urine, tracheal secretions, and CSF cultures were negative. In addition, there was no evidence of any type of immunosuppression in the patient. Based on the laboratory reports, the patient was started on oral voriconazole (200 mg). His headache and seizures showed improvement; therefore, he was discharged with the continuation of antifungal and anticonvulsant agents. The patient has been on regular follow-up to date. His recovery has been uneventful, except for a few episodes of seizures. After 6 months, his MRI did not show any evidence of brain lesions.
Ethical considerations
The current study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Govind Ballabh Pant Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research (Ethics Committee code: 2019/09/05-03)