An 18-year-old, 63 kg otherwise healthy male was scheduled to undergo removal of hardware and placement of an intramedullary nail in his left tibia for a peri-implant tibial spiral fracture. The patient was seen in the preoperative area and the anesthetic options were discussed. After administering 2 mg of midazolam and 200 mcg of fentanyl (in divided doses) through the patient's IV in his left forearm, the patient was transported by gurney to the operating room and transferred to the operating room table. The patient's arms were placed palm up on padded arm boards, slightly abducted approximately 60 degrees from the main axis of his body. Both arms were secured to arm boards by means of two-inch "hook and loop" straps (similar to VELCRO®) affixed loosely over the patient's forearms. Standard anesthesia monitors were then placed (blood pressure cuff on the right arm) and after preoxygenation, the patient was induced by means of a rapid sequence intubation using lidocaine, succinylcholine, and propofol.
The patient underwent an uneventful surgical removal of hardware from his left tibia and placement of an intramedullary nail; the entire surgical procedure lasted 2 hours, 20 minutes. General anesthesia was maintained with desflurane (MAC varied from 4.8 – 7.1 throughout the case), dilaudid (3 mg in divided doses), and fentanyl (200 mcg were administered, in divided doses, throughout the remainder of the case). Seven mg vecuronuim were administered 10 minutes into the case after the patient's twitches returned from the succinylcholine, but no subsequent doses were given. Blood loss for the case was 600 cc and fluid replacement consisted of 2200 cc of lactated ringers solution. The patient maintained a blood pressure ranging from 99/35 (induction) up to 150/76 (emergence), but generally averaged about 120/65 throughout the case. Heart rate ranged from 60 bpm (induction) to 95 bpm (emergence), but averaged about 70 bpm throughout the case. The patient was warmed with an upper body Bair hugger® tied loosely around the patient's wrists, and the patient's temperature ranged from 36.0 to 36.6.
Just as the surgeons were casting the patient's left leg, while the patient was still intubated (but breathing spontaneously) and receiving a MAC (Minimum Alveolar Concentration) of 3.2 desflurane (per Respiratory Gas Monitor), the patient unexpectedly tried to sit upright, coming to about a 45 degree angle relative to the horizontal plane of the operating table. This sudden movement, with both arm straps still in place, caused both arms to be rotated and extended posteriorly (like a runner breaking through a finish line tape). The anesthetist gently returned the patient to a supine position, administered 150 mcg of fentanyl in divided doses, and then gently awakened the patient about 10 minutes later once the casting was complete and postoperative films were read. The patient was extubated uneventfully after suctioning, transferred to a gurney and taken to the Postoperative Care Unit (PACU). The patient remembered nothing about the surgery, or about trying to sit upright (and the patient would continue to deny any recollection of the surgery or his attempt to sit upright even several months after the surgery).
The immediate postoperative course was uneventful; however, about 20 minutes after arrival the PACU nurse noted that the patient was not moving his left arm. The anesthesia attending was called to the bedside and a quick exam of the patient revealed an inability to lift his left arm from across his lap, abduct his shoulder, or flex or suppinate his arm. Sensation was diminished throughout his left arm, but particularly absent over his forearm, the posterior portion of his hand, and his thumb, middle and index fingers. Both neurosurgery and the microsurgical hand service were consulted and an exam of the patient's left arm revealed the following: elbow flexion 0/5; shoulder abduction and rotation 0/5; supination 0/5; all other muscle groups 5/5; diminished sensation as above. The patient was diagnosed with a C5-6 brachial plexus injury.
As an inpatient, the patient's sensation and motor function improved slightly over the next 48 hours. Imaging studies were obtained on postoperative days two and three, to include 4 views of the left shoulder, 6 views of the cervical spine, and an MRI of the cervical spine and left brachial plexus. All studies revealed normal anatomy with no signs of injury. Both physical therapy and occupational therapy were consulted on postoperative day two, and the patient was instructed to perform range of motion exercises while at home. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 4.
On postoperative day 20 the patient reported minimal improvement in strength or sensation. Upon exam, the diminished sensation and muscle function noted at discharge appeared for the most part unchanged and atrophy was noted of the deltoid, supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles. On postoperative day 45, the patient reported significant improvement in motor function and sensation of his left arm near symmetric to his right arm. On postoperative day 84, the patient reported that his symptoms had all but completely resolved, and he had returned to racing motocross.