The patient is a 62-year-old Caucasian, shelterless male, height 180 cm, who was admitted after a series of five focal epileptic seizures with secondary generalization in four of them, presumably triggered by a non-specific infection. All seizures were witnessed and lasted <5 min each. His history was positive for severe chronic alcoholism over the years, retinal detachment at age 41 years, duodenal ulcers, and erysipelas. Chronic alcoholism resulted in liver cirrhosis, hepato-splenomegaly with consecutive thrombocytopenia, esophageal varicositas, chronic venous insufficiency, leg edema, and malnutrition.
A clinical neurologic exam on admission revealed a coma, conjugated gaze palsy to the right, mild right-sided hemiparesis, and positive pyramidal signs. After awakening, the patient presented with disorientation, confusion, confabulation, psychomotor restlessness, agitation, aggressiveness, hemianopsia to the right, aphasia, and hemineglect to the right. Psychomotor excitement was accompanied by aggressive tendencies and the unbreakable misjudgement of his situation and environment. MRI of the cerebrum revealed global atrophy, and a T2-/diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) hyperintense lesion in the left occipito-temporal area not confined to a vascular territory, which was slightly hypointense on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) being interpreted as a stroke-like lesion. This lesion persisted over the weeks . There was also a small T2-hyperinetense lesion in the left thalamus and the right parietal cortex. Magnetic resonance (MR)-spectroscopy, carried out nine weeks after admission, revealed an intra-lesional lactate-peak, but normal NAA/Cr-ratio. Electroencephalography two days after admission showed continuous spikes and sharp waves over the entire left hemisphere, with phase reversal T5 being interpreted as focal status epilepticus. The anti-seizure drug therapy included lorazepam and oxcarbazepine. Transthoracic echocardiography was non-informative.
Blood tests revealed a negative alcohol level, mild macrocytic anaemia, leucocytosis, thrombopenia, elevated creatine-kinase, and normal NH3 but reduced vitamin-B12 and thiamine levels . The virus panel was non-informative. Vitamin substitution, including for vitamin B1, B2, B6, and B12, was started. Due to the patient’s behavioural and cognitive alterations, neuro-psychological testing was not feasible during hospitalization.
Since the psychiatric abnormalities were not sufficiently manageable on the neurological department, the patient was transferred to the psychiatric department and scheduled for a nursery home.
At the last follow-up 16 years after the event, the patient had made a remarkable recovery and was living in a nursery home with a modified Rankin Scale (mRS) of 2.