A 28-year-old G3P2A1 woman with no significant past medical or surgical history was admitted on postpartum day 4 and presented with repeating hemoptysis and increasing dyspnea. She coughed up 10–20 mL fresh blood for 4 days and complained of dyspnea that increased on exertion and was relieved by rest after spontaneous vaginal delivery. Her pregnancy and delivery were uneventful, with a healthy female child at 38 weeks and 1 day. Her first pregnancy was miscarried at 2 months, and her second pregnancy went well and gave birth to a girl by vaginal delivery. The girl is 3 years old and doing well. Social and family history were unremarkable.
On examination, the patient was alert and oriented, with temperature 37.5 °C, heart rate 125, respiratory rate 28, and oxygen saturation 88% on room air. Physical examination was significant for tachycardia; otherwise, the patient presented with a regular rhythm, dullness to percussion, decreased tactile fremitus, and no breath sounds to the right side. The skin showed no sign of petechiae and ecchymosis. Laboratory tests revealed fibrinogen (FIB) 5.82 g/L, thrombin time (TT) 11.5 s, prethrombin time ratio (PTR) 0.86, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 26 s, prothrombin time (PT) 11 s, international normalized ratio (INR) of PT 0.88; D-dimer 620 μg/L; white blood cell count 11.2 × 109/L, Platelet count 223 × 109/L, Hemoglobin 88 g/L, Red blood cell count 4.05 × 1012/L; mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 78.8 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) 21.7 pg, and mean corpuscular-hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) 276.0 g/L. The absolute counts and percentages of other blood cells were within the normal ranges. Arterial blood gas analysis on 5 L nasal cannula showed pH 7.385; pO2 78 mmHg; pCO2 32.5 mmHg, HCO3 22 mmol/L; O2 saturation 95.8 %, PaO2/FiO2 ratio 190. The rest of the laboratory results, including the comprehensive metabolic panel, inflammation markers, and pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (pro-BNP), were all within normal limits. Autoimmune and vasculitis panels were negative. Complement levels and immunoglobin levels were all unremarkable. Chest radiographs suggested right lung atelectasis . Although D-dimer and FIB were mildly elevated, the patient never complained of any epistaxis or bleeding gums; combined with a normal platelet count and the absence of petechiae and ecchymosis, hemoptysis caused by coagulation dysfunction was not supported. CT was further performed to determine the causes of bleeding, revealing a 2.1 × 3.2 cm2 inhomogeneous tumorous lesion in the right superior mediastinum and a right main bronchus obstruction along with right upper lobe obstructive pneumonia and atelectasis of the right lung, particularly the right middle and lower lobes . No evidence of pulmonary embolism. Flexible bronchoscopy showed a tumorous protrusion blocking the right main bronchus with active hemorrhage . Malignancy was suspected. Although the cause of the bleeding was unclear, biopsy was not performed because the irritation produced by the biopsy procedure may have caused rupture of unidentified aneurysms or repeating, massive bleeding. Interventional angiography and bronchial artery embolization (BAE) were performed instead. The arteriogram revealed tortuosity, dilation and hypertrophy of the right bronchial arteries . Angiography showed aneurysms of the internal thoracic artery . The right bronchial arteries were embolized with 500 μm polyvinyl alcohol particles and gelatin sponges. The aneurysms of the internal thoracic artery were embolized with a metal coil . A stent was placed in the opening of the right internal thoracic portion of the right subclavian artery. The bleeding completely stopped after BAE. Bronchoscopy was performed again to remove residual materials . Pathology confirmed these were blood clots . The patient recovered soon after the procedure and received regular outpatient follow-up .