A 61-year-old male patient was transferred to our hospital on November 29, 2020, at 23:30 pm, with complaints of pain in both lower legs for 16 h. He had a medical history of hepatitis B, hepatitis B-decompensated cirrhosis, and liver cancer, along with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and tobacco use (2 packs of cigarettes per day). Moreover, he had a history of esophageal variceal ligation under endoscopic surgery 5 years earlier. He had consumed seafood (including turtle, hairtail, and shellfish) for lunch 3 days before admission.
The patient was in a normal state until the morning of the 3rd day after consuming seafood with his family when he developed pain in both lower legs on awakening. He could recall no traumatic events or any history of recreational marine exposure. He did not consider the pain as a concern and ingested 800 mg of ibuprofen and sprayed diclofenac sodium on his lower legs. He experienced worsening of pain and arrived at our hospital at night. Color ultrasound examination of the legs showed normal findings.
Initial physical examination revealed the following: clear consciousness; body temperature, 36.5 °C; respiration rate, 17 breaths per minute; blood pressure, 92/50 mmHg; and heart rate, 68 beats per minute. Reddish patches were observed on the right ankle.
The initial laboratory investigations revealed the following: white blood cell count, 6.1 × 109/L (94.3% neutrophils, 2.9% lymphocytes, and 2.8% monocytes); platelet count, 35 × 109/L; hematocrit, 28%; serum glucose, 8.73 mmol/L; alanine aminotransferase, 22.84 U/L; ceramic oxaloacetic transaminase, 34.3 U/L; total bilirubin, 32.7 µmol/L (direct bilirubin, 9.1 µmol/L; indirect bilirubin, 23.6 µmol/L), serum γ-glutamyltransferase, 101.4 µmol/L; prothrombin time, 18.8 s; partial thromboplastin time, 43.5 s; internationally standardized ratio, 1.64; d-dimer, 3.07 mg/L; serum urea nitrogen, 14.88 mmol/L; myoglobin, 672.2 ng/mL; creatine kinase, 210.2 U/L; C-reactive protein, 223.90 mg/L; blood sodium, 124 mmol/L; blood chlorine, 93.90 mmol/L; and serum potassium, 5.52 mmol/L. Hemoglobin, hematocrit, creatinine, and routine urine test results were normal.
Blood test results indicated thrombocytopenia, unclear infection status, coagulation dysfunction, hypoalbuminemia, electrolyte disturbance, and renal dysfunction. Blood culture was performed, and empirical antibiotic therapy was initiated. We used levofloxacin (600 mg, qd) intravenously.
Within 12 h of arriving to the hospital, the patient experienced swelling and severe pain. Creatine kinase increased to 14,141 U/L, and his white blood cell count decreased to 1.5 × 109/L. Color ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging of the legs revealed extensive swelling in the soft tissue of the lower legs, suggesting cellulitis and edema . Several tense bullae, erythematous plaques, color changes in both lower legs, and hemorrhagic bullae in the right ankle were observed . Subsequently, the patient continued to rapidly develop skin lesions, bullae, and vesicles even after 3 h , and he further complained of decreased strength and paresthesia of the legs. Urgent surgical debridement and decompression were performed. During the operation, fishy odor was detected in the calf muscles and plantar compartments. Some of the muscle and fascia tissues were necrotic, and light-yellow fluid exudate was noted; no abscess was formed. Biopsy of the muscle and fascia tissue of both lower legs revealed swollen muscle fibers, dissolved and necrotic sarcoplasm, considerable bacterial concentration in the muscle and the surrounding adipose tissue, infiltration of extensive acute and chronic inflammatory cells, and dilated blood vessels congested with vasculitis . The images were collected by cellSens image acquisition system of OLYBUS microscope BX51. The resolution of images is 1920 × 1440.
Postoperatively, the patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly, with the development of multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (circulation, disseminated intravascular coagulation, respiratory, liver, and kidney), and he was immediately admitted to the intensive care unit. Intravenous therapy with imipenem/cilastatin sodium (2 g, q8h), cefoperazone sodium/sulbactam sodium (3 g, q6h), and levofloxacin was initiated. Four days after admission, bacterial cultures from the blood, bullae fluid, and tissues (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry) were all positive for V. vulnificus. Susceptibility was determined with Vitek2 Compact according to the recommendations of Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute, M45, third edition. The cultured microbes revealed sensitivity to all tested antibiotics, including piperacillin, ceftazidime, cefoperazone, cefepime, imipenem, meropenem, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, doxycycline, and tigecycline.
Despite prompt appropriate antibiotic and surgical treatment, the skin lesions spread to the right thigh on the 2nd day after surgery . Amputation was required; however, considering the progressively deteriorating condition and his previously verbalized wishes, his family refused amputation. Despite vigorous treatment, the patient died 16 days after admission. Postmortem examination was not performed.