A 27-year-old female, non-smoker, presented with marginal gingival recession and gingival stillman’s cleft of the maxillary left incisor . Her chief complaint was the lost of left maxillary incisor and she wanted to have a denture. The patient was referred to the periodontal clinic for evaluation and treatment of the mucogingival defect. The lateral incisor presented as type I of Miller’s classification or Cairo RT1 with sufficient keratinized gingival in the apical area. Besides the gingival recession, there was also a stillman’s gingival cleft in the middle point of the gingival margin which could be classified into “complete white gingival cleft” . Moreover, a bony exostosis was noted apical to the gingival cleft. The lateral incisor exhibited proper position in the dentition with no mobility. The periapical radiograph did not suggest any interproximal alveolar bone resorption . The tooth had a hypersensitivity when checked by cold test. She complained of pain and bleeding when tooth brushing, although she was using bristled toothbrush. She was concerned with the asethetics of a progressive recession defect. She had a removable denture before but she felt uncomfortable and discarded it. She did not present any medical contraindication for periodontal surgery.
The treatment plan was aimed at complete root coverage and soft tissue augmentation. After signing a written consent, a non-surgical periodontal therapy, consisting of oral hygiene instruction, and supra and subgingival scaling was completed. She was also instructed about oral hygiene maintenance at home. According to the consensus , she was informed that the tooth had a favorable prognosis due to no significant interdental bone loss.
After local anesthesis was obtained, the gingival cleft was completely excised; Then a split-full-split partial thickness flap was prepared to expose the bony exostosis in the apical area and the bony exostosis was reduced away by the hand-piece , while the root surface was prepared by curette; The CTG was harvested from the keratinized gingiva of the hard palate and trimmed to 1.2–1.5 mm thick; the subepithelial CTG was placed on the root surface coronal to the cementoenamel junction (CEJ) 1–2 mm and stabilized to the periosteum by simple suture with 6-0 suture ; The partial flap was coronally advanced to cover the CTG and fixed with the papilla with 5-0 suture by sling suture . Antibiotics were administrated to the patient for 5 days, and she was asked to have chlorhexidine rinse for 2 weeks. The sutures were removed after 14 days, and until then she could brush the surgical area in a very gentle rolling method.
After 3 month, a removable prosthesis was given to her in the prosthetic clinic , because the patient didn’t accept a dental implant for financial reasons and surgical fear. When the patient came back at 1 year post-surgery in periodontal clinic, the free gingival margin was still stable as the post-surgery position, with a thicker biotype corresponding to the grafted area. She was satisfied with the gingiva and the aesthetics of the denture, but she complained about the swelling and bleeding around the incisors. Obviously there was a denture stomatitis . It was presumed that the patient was allergic to the acrylic of the denture, so after a discussion with the prosthodontics, a new denture with a casting palatal plate was re-designed .
The patient came back again 3 years post-operation. The gingival margin was still stable and the contour was also satisfactory . The denture stomatitis was resolved, did not recur and the surrounding gingiva presented with shallow probing depths and no bleeding on probing.