A 30-year-old man presented with a history of dyspnea for 2 months and edema of both lower extremities for 1 week without precipitating factors such as infection or alcohol abuse. The patient did not show improvement in the above symptoms after receiving standard-dose furosemide diuretic therapy. There was no history of seizure, previous use of medication, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, smoking or cardiac disease. He had no family history of a similar complaint.
Physical examination upon admission: temperature(T) 37.1 °C, pulse(P) 100 beats/min, respiration(R) 18 beats/min, blood pressure (BP) 145/95 mmHg, no wet rales in lungs, neat heart rate, 100 beats/min, A2 > P2, no murmur in the auscultation area of the valve. There were no apparently positive signs in abdomen. Mild edema of both lower extremities was found.
Laboratory examination: blood routine: WBC 12.60*109/L; blood biochemistry: GLU 7.5 mmol/L, CRE 103 μmol/L, UREA 5.94 mmol/L, normal liver function and electrolytes; no obvious abnormality in coagulation function; myocardial injury marker: cTnI 0.06 ng/mL, Myo 25.0 ng/mL, CK-MB 2.6 ng/mL; BNP: 957.94 pg/mL. His NT-pro-BNP was marked elevated at 4075 pg/mL. urine routine: protein 0.5 g/L; 24 h urine protein quantitation 0.15 g/24 h, 24 h urine sodium 304 mmol/24 h, protein quantitative determination of 189.3 mg/L, N-acetyl-β-D glycosaminidase 13U/L. Fasting venous blood glucose was 7.5 mmol/L, and glycated hemoglobin was 7.6%.
Electrocardiogram suggested sinus rhythm, left ventricular hypertrophy, and changed non-specific T wave. Doppler echocardiography showed left ventricular end-diastolic anteroposterior diameter: 48 mm, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter: 64 mm, right atrial diameter: 47 mm, right ventricular end-diastolic anteroposterior diameter: 32 mm, septal thickness: 9 mm, left ventricular posterior wall thickness: 9 mm. Mild mitral regurgitation and tricuspid regurgitation with left ventricular systolic dysfunction was observed (left ventricular ejection fraction, 25%).
Admission diagnosis was heart failure with possible dilated cardiomyopathy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was terminated, because the patient was pale and sweaty during the examination. Transradial coronary angiography (CAG) illustrated no abnormalities in LM, LAD, or LCX, 25% stenosis in the middle of RCA, 90% stenosis in the sharp margin, and superior coronary in the right coronary, thus diagnosing coronary atherosclerosis heart disease, single-vessel disease, right-handed dominant type. Left ventricular angiography revealed that the left ventricular total systolic function was reduced, and no abnormal wall motion was observed, LVEDP 20-25 mmHg, LVEF 28.5%.
Left ventricular endocardial myocardial biopsy through the same radial artery suggested that degenerative changes occurred in the cardiomyocytes, and extensively "worm-like" changes could be observed. (a large number of abnormal mitochondrial accumulation areas under electron microscopy). The enlargement and nuclear atypia could be observed in cardiomyocytes . Transmission electron microscopy showed that the myocardial cell structure was disordered with part of the interstitial infiltration, and a large number of abnormal mitochondrial accumulated, so the diagnosis of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy was considered. . After treatment with diuretic, ACEI, β-blocker, aldosterone receptor antagonists, dyspnea and lower extremity edema disappeared. With one-month follow-up after surgery, no obvious discomfort was complaint.
Daily oral medical therapy was administered strictly according to our instructions after discharge. The symptoms faded and did not recur. Two years follow-up after discharge demonstrated that NT-pro BNP was 65 pg/mL, and echocardiography showed normal ejection fraction .