A 56-year-old man presented to the emergency department with new onset hypoglycemia. He had a history of type 2 diabetes treated with metformin (2500 mg orally daily in divided doses), gliclazide modified release (90 mg orally daily), and a multiple daily injection insulin regimen (insulin glargine 18 units subcutaneously at night and insulin lispro 6 units subcutaneously with meals). He was adherent with all medications and had never developed hypoglycemia. Past medical history was notable for a bone marrow transplantation for myelofibrosis 8 months prior and long-term treatment with prednisone (5 mg orally daily), resulting in an immunocompromised state.
One week before presentation, he was evaluated in clinic for persistent cough. Findings on a Computed Tomography scan of the thorax were suspicious for fungal pneumonia, and he was empirically treated with voriconazole (200 mg orally twice daily). He was reassessed in clinic 6 days later reporting lethargy, visual disturbances, and hallucinations. Voriconazole intolerance was suspected, as visual disturbances and hallucinations are well described side effects , and his antifungal was switched to fluconazole (480 mg orally daily). Incidentally, after starting antifungal therapy, he had not required any short-acting insulin due to glucose readings of 54–72 mg/dL (3.0–4.0 mmol/L) (reference range 72–126 mg/dL; 4.0–7.0 mmol/L).
The day after initiating fluconazole, he presented to a follow-up appointment at 1800 h weak and tremulous. His capillary glucose was 31 mg/dL (1.7 mmol/L). He was given orange juice, felt better, and sent to the emergency department, where a repeat measurement at 2000 h was 34 mg/dL (1.9 mmol/L). He consumed more juice and a sandwich, his symptoms improved and subsequent hourly glucose measurements ranged between 68 and 106 mg/dL (3.8–5.9 mmol/L). At 0100 h his glucose was 106 mg/dL (5.9 mmol/L) and he fell asleep.
At 0430 h, he was woken for reassessment. He was confused, lethargic and glucose was 25 mg/dL (1.4 mmol/L). The recurrent nature of his hypoglycemia in the setting of recent azole antifungal co-prescription was concerning for gliclazide toxicity due to an adverse drug interaction.
He was treated with a 50 cc bolus of 50% dextrose followed by a 100 cc per hour infusion of 10% dextrose. In consultation with the regional poison centre, he was given octreotide 75 μg subcutaneously for suspected sulfonylurea toxicity and the intravenous dextrose was discontinued as his blood sugar normalized. One further dose of octreotide was administered 6-h later and his hypoglycemic episodes abated with no recurrence during hospitalization. His gliclazide was held and his medical records were updated to document this interaction.