A 4-month-old boy born from third-degree consanguineous parents was referred to Pediatric Casualty Ward of Modena’s Hospital for suspected critical episodes, resolved after intravenous administration of benzodiazepines. The episodes were characterized by clones of the right side of the body, chewing movements and eyes blinking; they first appeared a month after a vaccination followed by fever and occurred many times during the day (up to 10), with short duration and self-resolution. A decrement of feeding was also reported as well as loss of previously acquired neuromotor skills with worsening head control and poor reactivity.
The baby was born at 36 weeks of gestation with regular birth history except for transient hypoglycemia; Apgar score 10–10; anthropometric parameters were in the normal range (weight 2950 g, 61° centile; length 49 cm, 67° centile, head circumference 33 cm, 36° centile). The family history was normal.
The neurological examination showed marked axial hypotonus, poor eye contact, social interaction and weak sucking. Vital signs, routine blood exams and electrocardiogram were normal. The body percentiles at the evaluation showed a weight (7160 g) below the third percentile with length (70 cm) and head circumference (34 cm) between 10°-25° percentile.
The first electroencephalogram (EEG) video registration showed recurrent slow waves localized in right temporal hemispheres and asynchronous in the left temporo-occipital area, sometimes followed by suppression of background activity. During this registration, we tried administration of intravenous pyridoxine (100 mg) without electroclinical improvement. After the beginning of therapy with levetiracetam (57 mg/kg) we observed incomplete response with persistence of 1–2 daily seizures.
Brain Magnetic Resonance (MRI) was performed and showed thinned corpus callosum, white matter hyperintensity in T2 and hypo intensity in T1, total absence of myelination of the posterior arm of the internal capsule bilaterally . The diagnostic orientation was a hypomyelination leukoencephalopathy likely of genetic or metabolic origin.
Complete blood count, liver and renal function test, serum ammonia, and serum lactate were all normal. No alterations of plasma amino acids and urinary organic acids were found and the search for mutated sialotrasferrins was not indicative; metabolic investigations were also negative for oligosaccharidosis, mucopolysaccharidosis, neurotransmitter deficiency, B6 and pyridoxal-phosphate deficiency, primary hyperlactatemia, brain glucose transport deficiency and peroxisomal deficiency. Cardiac and abdominal ultrasound didn’t highlight abnormalities. CGH array did not document anomalies such as duplications or deletions.
During the following months the infant was hospitalized several times for the worsening of seizures, often triggered by infectious episodes. Several trials with phenytoin, phenobarbital e diazepam have been made, but the association of levetiracetam, clonazepam and ketogenic diet gave better results. ACTH has been administrated with only partial response.
In the following months the patient needed numerous hospitalizations for worsening of the epileptic seizures, treated with continuous infusion and boluses of intravenous midazolam. In this period in the epileptic seizures had a polymorphic aspect, we observed several complex partial seizures secondarily generalized with status epilepticus and need for intensive support. In the intercritical period we observed numerous episodes, characterized by clones of limbs, deviation of the eyes, drooling and masticatory movements lasting a few seconds with a frequency between five and ten episodes in an hour.
The clinical history was also characterized by frequent episodes of hypoglycemia during a ketogenic diet despite ketonemia values within the therapeutic limits (ketonemia between 2 and 5 mmol/L). The endocrine and metabolic tests performed were not indicative, immunodeficiency was excluded. The EEG evolution showed, at eight months of age, a marked worsening of the background activity with sub continuous presence of focal abnormalities like spike and slow high voltage waves, independent over the two hemispheres; we could observe recurrent electroclinical episodes characterized by theta-delta activity on the central temporal regions of the right hemisphere and, asynchronously, on the frontal and central regions of the left hemisphere ; in correspondence of these episodes the patient showed repetitive head movements, deviation of eyes towards left side, eyelids clones, nystagmus, uncoordinated diaphragm movements and right wrist writing movements with migrating clones from right to left side of the body in absence of hyper tone and clones or myoclonic events.
At ten month of life, the EEG with video-registration showed further worsening of underlying activity with electrical disorder and sub-continuous irritant activity of slow high voltage waves especially in in the right temporal zone .
The patient was hospitalized one last time at one year of life for sub-continuous epileptic episodes associated with bradycardia and desaturation that led to degeneration of general clinical conditions and then to death.
During the observation we repeated MRI that showed a marked reduction of white matter not only in the cerebral hemispheres but also in midbrain with almost complete involvement of the bulb. It was associated to important dilatation of the supra and sub tentorial ventricular system . The diagnostic suspect, based on clinic course and imaging, was VWMD, confirmed post-mortem by clinic exome. The analysis revealed a variant in homozygosity (p.Val308Met) of EIF2B2 gene. This mutation is pathognomonic of VWMD and the parents were carriers in heterozygosity. Furthermore, post mortem results were obtained from the investigations on the respiratory chains which documented the reduction of the activity of complexes I and IV on muscle. Exome analysis revealed no mutations in nuclear genes associated with mitochondrial diseases.