A patient who is a 44-year-old woman with no other comorbidities or drug use except a history of low-frequency episodic migraine (< 1 day/month) had a mild COVID-19 infection at the beginning of August 2021. The patient's symptoms related to COVID-19 were headache, fatigue, cough, and shortness of breath at the time of her visit to the outpatient clinic of another hospital. The COVID-19 diagnosis was confirmed with a positive RT-PCR assay test. A computerized lung tomography was taken to rule out pneumonia. The patient recovered from COVID-19 at home without a need for hospitalization. The patient's headache was characterized as a frontally located pressure-like feeling with mild intensity. But after 15 days, the patient's pain intensity due to headache increased and was associated with nausea but without vomiting. The pain was pulsatile, bilateral, and severe photophobia; eventually, phonophobia was added. The patient reported that this headache was different from her previous migraine attacks because its intensity was higher, and after 25 days, she was unable to carry out routine daily activities due to this headache. She started taking 2,000 mg of paracetamol and 150 mg of diclofenac sodium without any pain relief daily. The patient's pain was present as soon as she woke up, and she reported it got worse when lying. She took sick leave from work and was diagnosed at another hospital. Brain MRI and fundus examination were done to rule out secondary causes of headache and came out with normal results. The neurologist prescribed 32 mg of methylprednisolone and 500 mg of acetazolamide to be taken daily in the outpatient clinic.
The patient first visited our headache outpatient clinic at the end of September 2021 to discuss persistent headaches. Her severe daily headache persisted, although she was taking several medications as well as methylprednisolone. At the time of evaluation, she used 600 mg of paracetamol, 150 mg of diclofenac sodium, and 500 mg of chlorzoxazone daily. At that time, the methylprednisolone dose gradually decreased up to 8 mg because of non-responsiveness. She also exhibited fatigue, insomnia, and loss of memory. Her neurological examination was normal, and repeated fundus examination did not detect papilledema. Her previous MRI was checked, and secondary causes of headaches were ruled out. According to the visual analog scale, she reported that her headache was 10 out of 10 and needed immediate pain relief. Loading dose (240 mg) of subcutaneous galcanezumab, calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor (CGRP) monoclonal antibody (mAb), was prescribed. During follow-up, her headaches abruptly decreased in both intensity and frequency within 2 days with the CGRP mAb treatment. She reported that her headache decreased to a scale of 2-3 out of 10. During the follow-up, the intensity of her headaches increased gradually to 5 out of 10 in 3 weeks. As a result, the second dose (120 mg) was prescribed, and the intensity of headaches decreased to 1–2 out of 10 within 2 days again. Monthly, 120 mg of CGRP mAb treatment was planned during follow-up. She was headache-free when last seen after the fourth month's dose of galcanezumab.