A 47-year-old Korean woman presented to the Daegu Catholic University Hospital in Korea with a nodule revealed by screening breast ultrasonography in her left breast. On the physical examination, there was no palpable mass or nipple discharge in both breasts. There was no clinical evidence of regional lymphadenopathy. She had no family history of breast or ovarian cancers. She was a non-smoker but had left upper lobectomy of lung because of a pulmonary adenocarcinoma 3 years ago. The pathologic diagnosis was 3.5 cm-sized adenocarcinoma with micropapillary component, and the pathologic stage of lung cancer was T2aN0M0, stage IB.
Mammography revealed only a focal asymmetry in left upper breast and benign calcifications in both breasts . Ultrasonography revealed two irregular shaped and microlobulated hypoechoic small masses in left upper breast, which was categorized according to Breast Imaging Report and Data System (BI-RADS) as BI-RADS 4C . The patient underwent ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy. Initial histologic findings revealed proliferation of micropapillae of anaplastic cells in the clear spaces which were consistent with invasive micropapillary carcinoma of the breast . Magnetic resonance imaging of the breast showed no significantly enhancing lesion in both breast. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed probable benign sub-pleural nodule in right lower lobe but no tumor recurrence or nodal metastasis of lung cancer. On a position emission tomography-CT image there was no evidence of tumor recurrence of lung cancer or distant metastasis.
Clinically, primary breast cancer was suspected, and the patient underwent lumpectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy using radio-isotope and indigocarmine dye. Gross examination of the specimen revealed an irregular shaped whitish fibronodular lesion, measuring 1.3 × 1 cm in size . The specimen was fixed in 10% formalin, and paraffin sections were prepared. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained paraffin sections of the lumpectomy specimen revealed extensive micropapillary components . Microscopic examination of the sections from the specimen showed small clusters of cells within clear stromal spaces resembling dilated vascular channels with a desmoplastic reaction. There were no ductal components and carcinoma in situ lesions. There were lymphovascular invasion and some microscopic multiple tumor foci, but resection margins were free from tumor. The tumor cells showed triple negative immunoreactivity for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and HER2/neu. The immunohistochemical staining for gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15) and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) was negative, but, that for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), cytokeratin-7 (CK-7) and Napsin A was positive . There was no axillary lymph node metastasis. Based on the histology and the immunohistochemical staining patterns, this breast tumor was supposed to be a metastatic adenocarcinoma from pulmonary malignancy.
We reviewed the histopathologic findings of the lung cancer removed 3 years ago and compared them with the findings of the breast tumor. H&E-stained paraffin sections of the lung cancer revealed diffuse infiltration of malignant epithelioid cells showing solid and micropapillary patterns, which resemble the findings of the breast tumor. Also, the lung cancer had the same immunoprofiles as the breast tumor.
We analyzed the mutation of EGFR gene in the breast tumor and the original pulmonary adenocarcinoma specimen. Once informed consent had been obtained, genomic DNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tumor specimens using QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Polymerase chain reaction and mutational analyses of the genes were performed. Exon 18, 19, 20 and 21 of the EGFR gene were analyzed by direct sequencing. DNA sequencing was performed on the pretreated PCR product using an automated direct sequence analyzer (ABI PRISM 3100 Genetic Analyzer; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The mutationl analysis revealed same heterozygote mutation in both of the specimens. There was a 9-bp deletion in exon 19, namely, c.2239_2247del9, which resulted in a deletion of three amino acids, namely p.L747_E749del .
From the above results, the patient was diagnosed solitary breast metastasis from pulmonary adenocarcinoma with micropapillary component. Since the mutation test for EGFR was positive, the patient has been taking Gefitinib, being disease-free at 23 month after the diagnosis of the breast metastasis.