An 81-year-old Japanese male visited our hospital with chief complaints of a palpable mass and dull pain in the left upper quadrant, loss of appetite, and weight loss of 5 kg within two months. He started noticing the mass in the left upper quadrant and the other symptoms in late July 2017. He was admitted to our hospital for detailed examinations and treatment in August 2017.
He had high blood pressure and chronic kidney disease. He had a clear sensorium. His body temperature was 36.7 °C. He showed no yellowing of the bulbar conjunctiva, palpebral conjunctival pallor, or abnormal findings in the skin and intraoral mucosa. There was a palpable elastic, soft mass in the left upper quadrant. Although he felt a dull pain in that area, there was no obvious tenderness. There were no palpable superficial lymph nodes nor abnormalities in the extremities. His laboratory findings on admission are shown in Table .
Because the results of biochemical tests indicated renal damage, plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed. An irregular tumor of approximately 130 mm × 120 mm × 80 mm in size was observed in the left upper quadrant, which corresponds to the transverse colon. No intestinal distention was observed on the oral side of the tumor. Moreover, the tumor was in close contact with the pancreatic body and tail, and the gastric corpus greater curvature, suggesting invasion into nearby organs. Also, mildly enlarged lymph nodes were observed at the periphery of the tumor .
The total colonoscopy (TCS) performed six days after his first visit revealed a tumor with a circumferential ulcer covered with a thick slough in the splenic flexure of the transverse colon. Moreover, the marked thickening and inflammatory changes of the surrounding mucosa made it difficult for the endoscope to pass through, although the lesion had not yet developed into an intestinal obstruction . Histopathological analysis of several specimens of the tumor was performed, but the findings at that time were only erosion of the mucosa with moderate inflammatory cell infiltration and regenerative changes in the mucosal epithelium. Although a definitive diagnosis was not yet made at that time, we recommended an exploratory laparotomy because of intestinal stenosis. However, he requested a second opinion. While undergoing tests to obtain a second opinion from another hospital, he became aware that the palpable mass decreased in size. Furthermore, a follow-up CT performed after he obtained a second opinion (36 days after the first CT) showed that the tumor had regressed spontaneously and the swelling of small lymph nodes around the tumor had disappeared . Therefore, TCS was reperformed 41 days after his first visit to our hospital. The tumor had decreased in size and the inflammatory changes in the surrounding mucosa tended to improve; however, tightening of the surrounding mucosa due to scarring and the continuous narrowing of the intestine over a length of approximately 30 mm were observed . Histopathological analysis of a biopsy specimen of the periphery of the tumor showed widespread erosion of the mucosa and the formation of granulation tissue with marked infiltration of inflammatory cells consisting of small lymphocytes, plasma cells, histiocytes, and medium-size atypical nucleated cells in the mucosal tissue. Some of the B-lymphocyte antigen CD20-positive B cells (CD20-positive B cells) identified by immunohistochemical analysis were also found to be positive for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNA (EBER)-1 by in situ hybridization (ISH), suggesting the high possibility of EBV − positive mucocutaneous ulcer (EBV-MCU) . Forty-eight days after his first visit, while he was being prepared exploratory laparotomy, he started to suffer from constipation and intermittent abdominal pain. Because plain abdominal CT revealed intestinal distention on the oral side of the narrowed area in the transverse colon, the patient was diagnosed as having intestinal obstruction and underwent decompression by transanal ileus tube insertion . Therefore, although the definitive diagnosis was not yet confirmed histopathologically, transverse colon segmental resection was performed with the patient’s fully informed consent. The resected specimen showed an ulcer of 35 mm × 25 mm in size with narrowing of the intestine . The histopathological analysis of the specimen revealed marked inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis in all layers of the colon wall. Most of the infiltrating cells were lymphocytes and plasma cells. Also, Hodgkin and Reed–Sternberg (HRS)-like multinucleated large B cells were found scattered . A large proportion of CD20-positive B cells identified by immunohistochemical analysis were also found to be positive for EBER-1 by ISH, similarly to the postoperative immunohistochemistry test. No apparent clonal growth of lymphocytes was shown by the flow cytometry of the resected specimen. No dividing cells were identified by G-banding differential staining. Taking these findings together, he was finally diagnosed as having EBV-MCU. No recurrence was observed 20 months after the surgery.