A 49-year-old man with progressive vision loss in the right eye for one year was admitted to our hospital.
The patient had been diagnosed with uveitis of the right eye three years previously and was treated with hormone eye drops and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory eye drops in several hospitals.
The patient had no systemic diseases.
There was no remarkable family history.
The visual acuity was counting fingers/40 cm in the right eye and 1.0 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye. The clinical manifestations of the patient’s right eye were mild conjunctival hyperemia, scattered stellate KPs on the corneal endothelium, normal depth anterior chamber, 2+ cellular reaction in the aqueous humor, diffuse iris depigmentation , absence of synechia, Koeppe nodules , opalescent lens, and vitreous opacity. No obvious abnormalities were observed in the anterior segment of the left eye .
Laboratory tests were normal, including red and white blood cell counts, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, anti-streptolysin O titer, rheumatoid factor, and antinuclear antibody. Rubella immunoglobulin G (IgG) detected in the aqueous humor of the affected eye was 14.24 IU/mL, which was higher than the normal value.
B-ultrasound revealed vitreous opacity in the affected right eye . Ultrasound biomicroscopy showed a shallow anterior chamber, lens opacification, and expansion . During gonioscopy, fresh bleeding was noted at the anterior chamber angle of the affected eye . Slit-lamp examination revealed a hammered silver appearance of the central corneal endothelium in the affected eye . Specular microscopy showed a wide-band dark area in the affected eye , whereas the fellow eye showed a completely normal endothelial morphology . The endothelial cell density of the affected eye was 2158 cells/mm2, and the coefficient of variation was 46%, whereas the endothelial cell density of the fellow eye was 2836 cells/mm2, and the coefficient of variation was 25%. IVCM revealed irregular corneal endothelial protuberances and dark bodies of various sizes in the affected eye . The corneal endothelial cells around the lesion were enlarged, and the corneal endothelium was evaluated before cataract extraction.