A 36-year-old female, suffering from SLE since 10 years with effects on her central nervous system, developed diabetes mellitus (DM) 9 years ago, triggered by her long-term steroid therapy for SLE. She was undergoing steroid treatment (6 mg/day) for SLE at a different hospital. She was 158 cm tall and weighed 91.6 kg. Her body mass index was 36.7, indicating 3° higher obesity. To manage DM, she was treated with metformin, and her HbA1c was controlled at 7.4%. Serum immuno-reactive insulin (IRI) and C-peptide immunoreactivity (CPR) levels were 13.8 μU/ml and 2.5 ng/ml, respectively. Both the markers were in normal range. Total cholesterol (T-chol), triglyceride (TG), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels were 191 mg/dL, 86 mg/dL, 41 mg/dL, and 126 mg/dL, respectively. Her dyslipidemia was controlled by administering atorvastatin. She had no hypertension as a complication of obesity. She was also treated with paroxetine hydrochloride hydrate, mianserin hydrochloride, and sodium valproate for steroid-induced depression. She could not work and depended on welfare services. To improve her obesity and DM, physicians suggested that she should undergo bariatric surgery in our hospital. She understood bariatric surgery well, and the symptoms of SLE were well controlled and stable, and she had no symptoms of central nervous system lupus. Anti-DNA and anti-Sm antibody levels were > 2.0 IU/ml and 2.5 U/ml, respectively. Both the SLE markers were in normal range. CH50, C3, and C4 levels were 53.8 U/ml, 144 mg/dL, and 26 mg/. All the SLE markers were in normal range, and SLE activity was well controlled as per laboratory data. She was given a diet instruction by her previous doctor but was unable to lose weight. Her obesity was considered to include an element of secondary obesity due to steroids. However, there were several studies reporting that patients with SLE who were obese were able to reduce their steroid dose along with reduction in their weight after bariatric surgery. Therefore, this case was judged to be an indication for bariatric surgery. Preoperative weight loss techniques were demonstrated at our outpatient clinic. She was treated with Mazindol and given diet instruction by a dietitian. She was able to lose 7 kg while continuing nutritional guidance for approximately 5 months. She was admitted in our hospital a week before the surgery, and her blood glucose was controlled. Thereafter, she underwent LSG, which lasted for 185 min, with a minimal blood loss and without complications. For the perioperative steroid cover, 200 mg of hydrocortisone sodium succinate was administered immediately before the surgery, and the maintenance dose (6 mg/day) was resumed on the first postoperative day. She was discharged on the eighth postoperative day without complications. Her blood glucose level stabilized immediately after the surgery; hence, her antidiabetic medication was stopped. After being discharged, she experienced gradual weight loss. After a year, she weighed 54.4 kg, losing approximately 37 kg, compared with her weight during the initial examination; additionally, rebound effects were not manifested . Body fat mass was also markedly reduced 1 year after the surgery compared with her preoperative status; meanwhile, her skeletal muscle mass was maintained . Furthermore, SLE condition was stable, and her steroid requirement was reduced to 4 mg/day . After surgery, her blood glucose level had settled down; thus, her DM drug therapy was halted. Her DM improved up to 5.7% of HbA1c 1 year after the surgery . Her dyslipidemia was well controlled by atorvastatin. T-chol, TG, HDL-C, and LDL-C levels were 165 mg/dL, 43 mg/dL, 48 mg/dL, and 104 mg/dL, respectively. For her steroid-induced depression, paroxetine hydrochloride hydrate and mianserin hydrochloride were reduced by half, and sodium valproate medication was terminated 9 months after surgery. Through weight loss, she could begin to work and be part of the society again.