This paper presents the case of a 57-year-old woman with a history of intense frontal headaches which worsened in the decubitus position over the past 6 months. Her medical history included hypertriglyceridemia and prediabetes. There were no neurological deficits on physical examination. The preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large nodular lesion with homogeneous enhancement attached to the falx cerebri at the right frontal lobe region, strongly suggesting a diagnosis of meningioma .
The objective of the surgery was a “grade zero” total tumor removal aiming to cure the disease. The senior author (CES) operated on the patient by applying the principles of meningioma surgery represented by the acronym FEBAIR. The case presented here is a 1st-time surgery with preserved anatomical structures enabling total removal.
A frontal parasagittal approach with complete and direct exposure of the lesion was chosen for this case. The concept of grade zero resection includes not only the complete removal of the tumor and the coagulation of its dural attachment but also the removal of an additional 2–3 cm of the falx cerebri anterior and posteriorly from this attachment and inferiorly from the superior sagittal sinus.[-] Therefore, exposure is fundamental to this objective.
The frontal craniotomy was performed superiorly from the superior temporal line to avoid the dissection of the temporal muscle, superior to the frontal sinus, and laterally from the superior sagittal sinus to reduce the risk of injury.
After the craniotomy, the dura-mater was opened in a flap manner, with its base turned to the midline, lateral to the superior sagittal sinus. The dissection was, then, performed using the arachnoid plane, separating the lesion from the right frontal lobe, and preserving the adjacent frontal drainage veins. Then, debulking of the medial portion of the lesion was performed close to its attachment at the falx cerebri, using biopsy forceps and a bipolar cautery device. This initial maneuver permitted access to the tumoral implantation on the right side of the falx cerebri.
Next, a coagulation of the tumoral implants was performed and the tumor attached to the right side of the falx was removed, devascularizing the lesion. The dissection was then resumed through the arachnoid plane, completely liberating the tumor from the right frontal lobe and allowing its en bloc removal, thus achieving a Simpson grade II resection . Subsequently, coagulation of the falx was performed approximately 2 cm anteriorly and posteriorly from the tumoral implant. The removal of the falx was then performed, preserving the inferior sagittal sinus as well as the superior sagittal sinus, thus completing the total resection with safe margins from the dural implant, and allowing a grade zero resection .[,-]
The reconstruction was performed through a primary suture of the dural flap, maintaining external protection with Gelfoam. Then, the bone flap from the frontal craniotomy was repositioned and fixed with mini titanium plaques – enabling an excellent esthetic result for the cranioplasty.
A postoperative MRI conducted 30 days after the procedure showed total resection of the tumor with vascular preservation and preservation of the right frontal association fascicules in the tractography sequence . The patient was released from the hospital 4 days after the surgery with complete resolution of the preoperative symptoms. She returned to her normal professional activities 21 days after the surgical procedure, maintaining regular postoperative follow-up .
The anatomopathological study examined the meningothelial meningioma; confirming that the tumor resection was performed with a safe margin as evidenced by the absence of a tumoral implant in the dura mater sample. The cytogenetic study reviewed abnormal cellular lineage, presenting the depletion of the short arm of chromosome 18 and the depletion of the long arm of chromosome 22 . Cytogenetic abnormalities are related to potentially more aggressive biological behavior, corroborating the importance of a grade zero resection.