The patient was a 34-year-old pregnant woman who had diplopia since approximately 14 weeks of gestation, and she visited another hospital at 30 weeks of gestation because of repeated lightheadedness and loss of consciousness starting at approximately 26 weeks of gestation. She was referred to our department because head MRI revealed an intracranial neoplastic lesion. At the time of the visit, left gaze disorder and gait disturbance were observed. Her visual acuity and visual field were normal, but her right eye did not turn inward during left gaze, which was thought to be caused by impairment of the right medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF syndrome). Head MRI revealed neoplastic lesions in two areas, with one lesion spanning from the septum pellucidum to the right anterior horn and the other spanning from the pons to the dorsal medulla oblongata, as well as cystic changes in some areas and hydrocephalus . We strongly suspected primary central nervous system lymphoma based on the imaging findings, such as homogeneous tumor contrast on contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images and strong diffusion restriction on diffusion-weighted images. She was transferred to our department after cesarean section at approximately 34 weeks of gestation. The results of blood tests were as follows: sIL-2R, 431.0 U/mL; HCG-β, 0.2 ng/mL; and AFP, 85.1 ng/mL. Although AFP levels were elevated, the data were obtained 8 days after cesarean section, and thus, it was considered a physiological event. We decided to perform a partial tumor resection rather than a biopsy to confirm the pathological diagnosis as well as to improve the hydrocephalus. Using a transcortical approach, the tumor near the right anterior horn and the tumor in the septum pellucidum were partially removed, and the right and left lateral ventricles were connected. In addition, the tumor near the foramen of Monro was also removed to improve hydrocephalus. Postoperatively, the hydrocephalus was resolved and the gait disturbance improved. Pathological analysis revealed dense proliferation of tumor cells with pale to moderately acidic sporocytes, a swollen nucleus with well-defined nucleoli, and a large infiltrate of small lymphocytes in the background. The lesions were immunohistochemically positive for c-kit, D2-40, and SALLA4, and a pathological diagnosis of germinoma was made . The intraoperative spinal fluid cytology was class V in Papanicolaou classification. Three courses of ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide (chemotherapy) combined with whole-brain irradiation (25.2 Gy in 14 fractions) led to complete elimination of the lesions and improvement of the MLF syndrome 3 weeks after the start of chemotherapy. After 18 months of follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence. We have compiled a timeline chart of the patient’s progress before and after surgery, which is shown in .