This is the case of a 77-year-old Caucasian man who presented to our Accident and Emergency department after he was discovered collapsed and surrounded by coffee-ground vomit . Over the last 6 weeks, there had been a history of generalised malaise, anorexia, rapid weight loss, as well as epigastric pain and vomiting following meals (treated in general practice with ranitidine 150mg, once daily). There was no significant past medical history aside from long-standing, well-controlled, hypertension (atenolol 50mg and losartan 50mg, both once daily). No abnormalities were found on examination, including melena. A computed tomography scan (head) demonstrated a concomitant chronic subdural haematoma with midline shift of unknown cause. Initial differential diagnoses included a gastric malignancy, myelodysplasia and an upper gastrointestinal bleed.
On admission, he was Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 14, temperature was 36.7°C, heart rate was 110 beats/minute, arterial blood pressure 152/50mmHg, with respiratory rate of 23 and a blood oxygen saturation of 99% self-ventilating on 21% oxygen. An initial arterial blood gas revealed a lactate of 18mmol/L, bicarbonate of 11mmol/L and a base excess of −19 (pH 7.27): a LA. His delta ratio was 1.9:1 consistent with a pure LA in which the delta ratio averages 1.6:1. This result and a rapid physiological decline prompted admission to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU).
His initial blood film demonstrated features of myelodysplastic syndrome (dysplasia, thrombocytopenia, occasional blast cells); white cell count 25.48×109/L, neutrophils 9.98, lymphocytes 2.4, and monocytes 7.58. Antibiotics were given as per the local protocol for neutropenic sepsis: Tazocin® (piperacillin-tazobactam) and gentamicin. While sepsis was not entirely discounted, blood cultures were negative and a chest radiograph revealed no abnormalities. After 6 hours of ICU admission, continuous veno-venous haemofiltration was instituted for the first 60 hours of admission. A bone marrow aspirate was compatible with CMML but suggested no acute transformation to AML. Despite initial reservations to ascribe the cause of the LA to the haematological malignancy, emergency chemotherapy (doxorubicin, 50mg, intravenous, once) was instituted, alongside rasburicase and empiric intravenous Pabrinex® (vitamins thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, ascorbic acid and nicotinamide) therapy. His lactic acid peaked at 21mmol/L 1 hour after (15:00 hours) and had plateaued at a nadir of approximately 4mmol/L by 20:00 hours the next day . Thiamine levels were retrospectively reported as 458nmol/L. Initial results suggested no liver or renal dysfunction: creatinine (123mmol/L) and urea (22.5mmol/L), alanine transaminase (20U/L), aspartate transaminase (91U/L) and albumin (47g/L).
On day seven, he was transferred to haematology awaiting leukocyte and platelet counts to recover. After 11 days, the decision was made to surgically evacuate his subdural haematoma to give the best chance for a neurological recovery (GCS fluctuated, with a baseline of nine). Post-surgery, he showed minimal improvement in our Neurological ICU. The decision was made, with the family, to withdraw care on day 21.