A 90-year-old Caucasian female presented to the eye casualty with a 2-day history of headaches, nausea, and a painful, red left eye with reduced vision.
Past ocular history included stable primary open angle glaucoma, right-eye cataract surgery and bilateral age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The left eye was known to have a disciform scar, amblyopia, and hand movements vision. Her medical history included atrial fibrillation, chronic congestive heart failure, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, chronic kidney disease stage 3, and a previous cerebral vascular accident. She was on oral warfarin, furosemide, ramipril, and simvastatin.
At presentation, the corrected Snellen visual acuity was 6/15 in the right and hand movements in the left eye. The right eye was pseudophakic and had moderate dry AMD. The IOP in the left eye was 55 mm Hg, the ocular surface was deeply inflamed, the cornea oedematous, and the pupil fixed and mid-dilated.
Nevertheless, the anterior chamber (AC) was moderately deep on van Herick's test (grade 3), showing a red hue secondary to haemolysed red blood cells . The angles and fundus could not be appropriately assessed due to the oedematous cornea and dense cataract.
The international normalised ratio (INR) was 7.7, while all other haematological and biochemical tests were within normal limits. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) of the left anterior segment showed normal AC depth and open angles but the ocular ultrasound of the posterior segment revealed a diffuse suprachoroidal and vitreous haemorrhage . The patient was admitted and required intravenous acetazolamide, topical ocular hypotensive medications, dexamethasone 0.1%, cyclopentolate 1%, and oral glycerol to achieve a IOP of less than 21 mm Hg. Warfarin was omitted and the patient was given 5 mg of oral vitamin K which reduced the INR to 1.9. Warfarin was then re-started and the INR kept within the low therapeutic range.
Despite good IOP and INR control, van Herick's grade progressed from 3 to 0 between the third and the sixth day of her hospital stay. Angle closure was confirmed on repeated ocular UBM . Considering the pathophysiology of the angle closure and the visual prognosis, YAG laser peripheral iridotomy was not performed.
A vitreo-retinal opinion was sought, but drainage of the haemorrhage was not considered appropriate due to the risk of recurrent haemorrhage and poor prognosis.
Two months following the acute event, the left eye was comfortable, the corneal oedema had largely resolved, the AC was quiet and returned to its normal depth. Gonioscopy showed open angles and a reddish-brown pigment on the trabecular meshwork. The IOP was well-controlled without any ocular hypotensive agents. Despite the poor visual outcome, the patient was pleased that the left eye returned to be comfortable.