We report a 54-year-old Portuguese woman, healthy, with no know pathological history as diabetes or vasculitis, who presented to our trauma section with skin discoloration in the distal third of her right middle finger after a traumatic penetrating injury with a sewing needle . There were no signs of infection at the first observation. On the third day post-trauma, her skin turned dark purple with a hemorrhagic patch . By the 10th day post-trauma, the erythematic area had decreased, but most of the darkly colored skin had progressively turned black with deep necrosis ulcers . The application of a cold compress during this period of time on a private clinic apparently aggravated the symptoms.
She returned to our Hospital and was hospitalized. She was administered an intravenous injection of Hydrocortisone 100 mg stat, enoxaparin 40 units subcutaneously every 24 h and Antibiotic (Amoxicillin/Clavulanic acid) for 8 days, taking into account the high probability of secondary infection associated with tissue necrosis. During admission, the signs and symptoms improved gradually. She was discharged with regular visits for follow up.
Other cutaneous and systemic examinations were normal. There was no regional or generalized lymphadenopathy. A skin biopsy was performed and showed necrotic changes caused by ischemia.
A complete blood count, including bleeding and clotting time, and urine examinations were normal. Her chest X-ray, echocardiogram, blood urea, serum creatinine, liver function tests and creatine kinase, were normal. The results of her Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and human immuno- deficiency virus (HIV)-1 and HIV-2 tests were negative.
She was treated with sucessive surgical debridements, sterile dressings three times a week , and analgesics ( and ). The ulcer healed completely within 18 weeks with scarring. . In terms of function, the patient maintains slight distal paresthesias, with sequelae joint stiffness, especially in the distal interphalangeal region. Skin graft or reconstructive surgery were not necessary.