The patient was a 73-year-old man who visited the emergency care centre on three occasions in three weeks with intermittent epigastric and lower thoracic pain accompanied by nausea and vomiting.
At the first two presentations, no clear leads were found in anamnesis, physical examination or exploratory additional examinations. No abnormalities were found on point-of-care ultrasound of the abdominal wall or abdomen. Additionally, no anomaly of the PEG-J catheter was found. There were no signs of myocardial ischaemia, as indicated by a normal electrocardiogram (ECG) and troponins. Gastroscopy showed candida oesophagitis, for which fluconazole was prescribed. Due to chronic constipation, laxatives were also started. During the last presentation, the stool pattern had improved, and defecation was daily and of normal consistency.
The patient had a history of myocardial infarction, chronic idiopathic constipation and Parkinson’s disease. PEG-J (AbbVie PEG 15 Fr; J extension 9 Fr) was placed 1.5 years ago for the administration of Parkinson medication (levodopa/carbidopa).
The patient has no personal and family history.
On physical examination, the patient was damp and sweaty, with normal vitals: Heart rate (67/min), blood pressure (141/80 mmHg) and temperature (36.6 °C). Auscultation of the heart and lungs showed a regular heart rhythm without murmur and clear lung sounds. During abdominal examination, sparse, normal-sounding peristalsis was heard. Palpation gave severe pressure pain in the upper left abdomen and in the epigastrio, without rebound pain. No rigidity or guarding was observed. The insertion of the PEG catheter appeared normal without redness, bleeding or hard subcutaneous swelling. PEG-J was open and well situated against the abdominal wall and easy to submerge and reapply.
The laboratory examinations showed (normal values in parentheses) mildly elevated C-reactive protein of 39 mg/L (< 5), normal lipase of 14 U/L (< 60) and a stable troponin-T of 16 ng/L compared to three days prior (< 14). Renal and liver function were normal. Remarkably, an elevated creatine kinase of 366 U/L (< 200) and a mildly elevated lactate of 2.2 mmol/L (0.5-1.6) were detected. The ECG showed a sinus rhythm of 68/min, with no ST-T abnormalities.
In the differential diagnosis of peptic/duodenal ulcer disease, cholecystitis, perforation, constipation due to bowel mobility problems in Parkinson’s disease, intestinal ischaemia and a complication of PEG-J were considered. Due to these considerations, abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans were performed with intravenous contrast in the arterial and portal venous phases , which showed intussusception at the duodenojejunal junction. There was no evident leadpoint for intussusception, and the intestinal loops proximal to intussusception were not dilated.