A 61-year-old male with a history of melanoma metastatic to the chest wall and lungs presents to the emergency department with a three-day history of malaise, nausea, vomiting, polyuria, decreased PO intake, and dizziness. He has no other history of chronic diseases. He was recently started on nivolumab and ipilimumab, a combination of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 immunotherapy. After the third dose, he developed a generalized maculopapular rash, a known side effect of his immunotherapy regimen, for which he was started on high-dose prednisone three days prior to presentation. The patient reports antecedent fatigue and nausea that profoundly worsened after starting high-dose prednisone. On presentation, he appeared in distress. He was tachycardic with a heart rate of 126 beats per minute, tachypneic with a respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 90/50 mmHg. His oral mucosa was dry. His labs revealed potassium 9.5 mmol/L, sodium 127 mmol/L, bicarbonate <10 mmol/L, blood glucose 1211 mg/dL, anion gap >31 mmol, arterial blood pH 7.14, beta-hydroxybutyrate 13.7 mmol/L, lactic acid 2.4 mmol/L, serum creatinine 4.55, positive urine ketones, urine glucose >1000 mg/dL, and serum lipase 414 IU/L. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for management of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). He has no prior history of diabetes. He was managed with IV hydration and insulin drip and later transitioned to subcutaneous insulin after the anion gap closed. He required daily insulin adjustments, and it was hard to achieve optimal glycemic control. During his hospitalization, workup revealed a hemoglobin A1C of 6.9%. His serum C-peptide was undetectable <0.1 ng/ml. Glutamic acid decarboxylase autoantibodies (GADA) and zinc transporter 8 autoantibodies (ZnT8A) analyzed by ELISA, insulin autoantibodies (IAA) analyzed by radioimmunoassay, islet antigen 2 autoantibodies (IA-2A) analyzed by radiobinding assay, and islet cell antibodies (ICA) analyzed by immunofluorescence assay were all negative. To date, the patient is on subcutaneous basal-bolus insulin regimen with glargine and lispro, respectively. Our patient did not carry the high-risk HLA haplotype of FD identified in Japanese populations.