Since birth, a six-year-old girl was referred to our tertiary care center with a large central chest wall defect. She was a full-term normal delivery with no other congenital malformations. The defect was noticed at birth and became more evident as she grew up. In addition to cosmetic concern on coughing, there was bulging under the skin and visible cardiac pulsation. On examination, there was a large gap (7cm) in the midline of the chest with sternal adages well apart, moving independently. : A &B. Necessary blood investigations liver and renal panel were normal. Chest x-ray showed that the sternum body had not ossified, and the medial ends of the sternum were far away from the midline The lung fields were clear. CT of thorax with the 3-D scan of the thorax showed a large sternal cleft : C & D. They already had an opinion from the surgeon of another institute who explained the defect would be covered by bilateral pectoralis major muscle flaps and bone graft. Parents were concerned about the cosmoses of their girl. A family meeting was arranged to discuss the reconstruction of the defect, and our surgical technique and material to be used for reconstruction were explained, and they consented to the procedure and photographs. Patient was placed in a supine position under general anesthesia. She received prophylaxis antibiotic, cephalosporin. A midline incision was made from the sternal notch to the xiphoid process. Sternal edges were exposed by raising the bilateral muscle flaps, and pericardium and pleura were preserved and dissected free of sternal edges. A The defect was measured, and the MMS plate was made and molded according to the defect's shape and neosternal notch was created. Holes were drilled in the sternal edges and correspondingly in the MMS plate. Wires (5 mm) were passed through the bone, and the MMS plate was fixed by twisting the wires, and the prolene mesh was sutured with 2–0 prolene to the surrounding tissues. : B & C. The anterior chest wall wound was closed by approximating the soft tissues and pectoralis major muscles. The skin was closed without the use of a myocutaneous flap.
The patient was extubated on the table and transferred to a high dependency unit for overnight observation. The patient had an uneventful post-operative recovery and was discharged home for follow up in outpatient clinic. The wound was nicely healed without any residual defect. : D.
Operative steps are shown in illustrated drawings : A, B & C.