A 70-year-old Caucasian man with a history of right hemi-colectomy one year earlier (due to adenocarcinoma of the right colon) was admitted to our hospital with abdominal pain and unexplained weight loss. His laboratory values, X-rays, and computed tomography (CT) were not indicative of any distinctive pathology. Therefore, the general surgeons decided to proceed with an exploratory laparotomy, based on the patient's recent hemi-colectomy and the high clinical suspicion of a metachronous metastatic insult of the pancreas.
A metastatic tumor was identified in the uncinate process of the pancreas. During the dissection and preparation, the SMV involvement was identified on its anterior surface superiorly to the confluence of the middle colic vein at the level of the transverse mesocolon. No involvement of the superior mesenteric artery was identified. When it was decided that the tumor could be resected with a sufficient macroscopic margin, a duodenopancreatectomy was performed. Sufficient resection with healthy margins was documented by intra-operative histology. The tumor adhered only to the SMV, with the latter caudally divided at the point where the SMV emerged.
Accordingly, a right mid-thigh incision was performed, and an adequate SFV segment up to the junction with the profunda femoris vein was harvested. The duration from the vein preparation and harvest to skin closure was 15 to 20 minutes. During the venous reconstruction, a solution of 5000 U of heparin was delivered locally through the SMV. No valvulotomy was performed. The pancreatic head resection was immediately followed by the construction of a proximal anastomosis between a non-reversed SFV segment 3 cm to 4 cm in length and the central stump of the SMV in an end-to-end fashion . The peripheral anastomosis was created in a similar fashion. The duration of the creation of each anastomosis was 10 minutes. Intra-operatively, the patency of the reconstruction was confirmed by a continuous wave Doppler signal. The operation was completed with the creation of pancreatojejunostomy and a new ileotransversostomy.
The patient's post-operative instructions included the administration of a prophylactic dose of low-molecular-weight heparin, limb elevation, and application of compression stockings (class II). During the immediate post-operative and follow-up phase (six months), only mild edema of the leg was marked. The SFV inter-position graft showed good patency on color duplex ultrasonography.