A 62-year-old male patient presented to our department with a gallbladder tumor detected on abdominal ultrasound during an annual medical checkup. The serum carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 was elevated (125.8 U/mL; normal range, ≤ 37 U/mL). Multi-phase enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a gallbladder tumor with a maximum diameter of 34 mm, located at the peritoneal side of the gallbladder body . CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the tumor invaded the RHA, pancreatic head, hepatic flexure of the colon, and first portion of the duodenum, with suspicions of slight liver invasion. Furthermore, CT revealed variants of hepatic arteries, such as the accessory right hepatic artery (aRHA) arising from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA), replaced left hepatic artery (rLHA) arising from the left gastric artery, and middle hepatic artery (MHA) and RHA originating from the proper hepatic artery. rLHA, MHA, RHA, and aRHA supplied segments 2/3, 4, 5/7/8, and 6, respectively. The RHA and aRHA were encased by the tumor. There was no evidence of distant metastasis and bile duct dilation. We performed endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and collected bile for 3 days by endoscopic nasobiliary drainage for cytologic examination of malignancy, which proved to be class III (intermediate) . We performed endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration of the tumor, revealing class III on cytologic examination. Although definitive evidence of malignancy was not obtained, we clinically diagnosed the gallbladder carcinoma as cT4 cN0 cM0 cStage IVA according to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) Classification 8th edition.
We considered the necessity of induction chemotherapy in the present case, which invaded the neighboring organs, with the aim of downstaging. We administered a gemcitabine and cisplatin plus S-1 (GCS) regimen, which proved to provide a longer survival period than the gemcitabine and cisplatin regimen for patients with advanced biliary tract cancer in a phase III trial . As a GCS regimen, the patient received gemcitabine and cisplatin administered intravenously at doses of 1000 mg/m2 and 25 mg/m2, respectively, on day 1, and oral S-1 was administered daily at a dose of 80 mg/m2 on days 1–7 every 2 weeks for a maximum of 12 cycles. The serum CA19-9 was temporarily elevated to 199.3 U/mL after two cycles and then reduced within the normal range of 28.3 U/mL. After 12 cycles, multi-phase enhanced CT revealed that the tumor diameter reduced from 34 to 27 mm (79% shrinkage rate), and no metastasis was detected. The patient did not experience more than grade 2 adverse effects, as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events, version 5.0. Therefore, we planned to conduct conversion surgery.
Given the necessity of combined aRHA and RHA resection for R0 resection, postoperative liver ischemia was considered. Thus, we performed preoperative arterial embolization by an interventional radiologist using angiography. First, we embolized the aRHA using a coil and ensured no ischemic area in the right lobe of the liver by selective angiography of the RHA . Then, we temporally occluded the RHA using a micro balloon catheter and simultaneously achieved selective angiography of the MHA and LHA to assure the collateral arteries from the left lobe to the right lobe of the liver . The collateral arteries were confirmed using cone-beam CT angiography . Finally, we embolized the RHA using a coil and confirmed the collateral arteries again by angiography of the celiac axis . After hepatic arterial embolization, elevated serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase were not observed. On day 7 after embolization, multi-phase enhanced CT showed that the blood flow of the intrahepatic artery in the whole liver was preserved. Moreover, CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm on the right femoral artery related to site of puncture. As the size of pseudoaneurysm was 2.6 cm in diameter and relatively small, we performed ultrasound-guided compression repair, and pseudoaneurysm disappeared and did not recur. Figure shows a schematic of the vessel anatomy after arterial embolization.
Three weeks after embolization, we performed minor HPD and a modified Child’s method reconstruction with combined resection of the RHA, aRHA, and hepatic flexure of the colon. The operation time was 566 min, and the estimated amount of operative hemorrhage was 690 mL with no blood transfusion. We confirmed the blood flow of the artery, portal vein, and hepatic vein in the bilateral lobe of the liver using Doppler abdominal ultrasound during the operation and on postoperative days (POD) 1 and 2. On POD 8, multi-phase abdominal CT revealed intraabdominal fluid around the anastomosis of the pancreas and jejunum, and we performed abdominal ultrasound-guided drainage of the fluid collection which was considered owing to postoperative pancreatic fistula. In addition, the patient did not experience any other postoperative complications and was discharged on POD 24. The pathological findings were as follows: advanced gallbladder cancer ypT4 (invasion of the duodenum, pancreas, and hepatic flexure of the colon) ypN0 ycM0 ypStage IVA in the 8th edition of the UICC Classification. After discharge, we administered S-1 as an adjuvant chemotherapy for 24 weeks. There was no evidence of recurrence on CT, 9 months after surgery .