A 45-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital in February 2021, who presented with acid reflux in the past one month followed by more than a one-year history of abdominal discomfort after eating. She had normal menstruation without a history of hypertension, coronary heart disease, diabetes, or other diseases. There was no family history of illness. Suspected to be a gastrointestinal stromal tumor by the local hospital due to a vast mass occupying her abdomen through abdominal computed tomography (CT), she was recommended to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment.
Vital signs on presentation were blood pressure=120/60 mmHg, heart rate=82 beats/min, and respiratory rate=20 times/min. On examination, the left abdominal mass was palpable with poor activity and unclear border. In addition, there is no tenderness and rebound pain in the abdomen. Moreover, all laboratory tests including blood routine, liver function, coagulation function, biochemistry even tumor markers did not show significant abnormalities.
However, after finishing the gastroscopy, she felt sudden pain and discomfort under the xiphoid accompanied by sweating, chest tightness, and shortness of breath that night. On examination, her heart rate was 110–127 beats/min, and respiratory rate was 20–24 times/min, and her blood pressure fluctuated from 117–179/78–91 mmHg (the maximum blood pressure was 179/91 mmHg), with blood oxygen was 90%–100% and her both lungs had no obvious rales on auscultation.
A series of emergent measures were taken immediately. Subsequently, laboratory tests revealed a significant increase in biomedical markers of myocardial injury, including type B natriuretic peptide pro-N-terminal (6980.00 ng/L, normal range 0–125 ng/L), cardiac troponin (15.60 μg/L, normal range 0–0.03 μg/L), myoglobin(291.7 μg/L, normal range 0–106 μg/L), alanine transaminase (177.00 U/L, normal range 13–14 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (1015.00 U/L, normal range120–246 U/L), creatine kinase (933.20 U/L, normal range 40–200 U/L), and creatine kinase isoenzyme (147.70 U/L, normal range 0–25 U/L). The inﬂammatory markers were much higher than normal, such as the level of white blood cell count [22.62 × 109/L, normal range (4–10) × 109/L], and neutrophil ratio (90.60%, normal range 40%–75%). Then, we asked the cardiologist for urgent consultation, and he considered differential diagnoses, including acute myocardial infarction and acute heart failure. Due to the rapid heart rate and the progressive decline in blood oxygen, the patient was transferred to ICU for further monitoring and treatment.
The echocardiography in ICU showed moderate systolic dysfunction with the left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%. However, the coronary angiography did not see any sign of myocardial infarction. Furthermore, the thoracic CT showed considerable exudative lesions in both lungs. Meanwhile, abdominal CT revealed that a vast space-occupying lesion was located in her left middle and upper abdomen and its blood supply mainly came from the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA). The imaging suggested that this may be paraganglioma, but it should differentiate from the mesenchymal malignant tumor such as liposarcoma and fibrosarcoma. Until then, we did not realize the possibility of paraganglioma.
Later, the laboratory test associated with paraganglioma was arranged. The result revealed a signiﬁcant increase in both urine catecholamine and Plasma catecholamine (, ICU 1st time). Consequently, the diagnosis was considered to be paraganglioma.
With her physical condition markedly improved, she was transferred to our gastrointestinal surgery department for further treatment. However, she was pale, sweaty, and coughed up pink sputum due to constipation the next day. Worse, she felt dyspneic as her degree of blood oxygen saturation decreased gradually. It was considered to be the result of the recurrence of acute left heart failure caused by the catecholamine crisis (, ICU 2nd time), so she was transferred to ICU again for advanced life support.
Since then, we recognized that the paraganglioma was easily stimulated to release catecholamines which could raise blood pressure and lead to acute heart failure. Imaginably, the next catecholamine crisis may be life-threatening. So, if the condition was permitted, we recommended that the surgery should be performed as early as possible, though the surgery was also a kind of stimulating factor.
After more than 1 month of anti-heart failure therapy and preparation, the surgery was performed under general anesthesia in April 2021. During the operation, we found that peritoneal giant mass with a volume of 17.0 cm × 13.1 cm × 10.7 cm was closely related to the peripheral blood vessels and organs . Especially, the tumor had a common blood supply to the left half colon . Together with the left hemicolon, the mass was separated carefully and removed entirely from the surrounding tissue .
The catecholamine in both her urine and plasma returned to normal basically after surgery . She developed the lymphatic leak latterly and was discharged from the hospital on the 23rd after surgery with good condition.
Histological examination showed that the tumor measuring 17.0 cm × 13.1 cm × 10.7 cm, with an intact capsule had localized necrosis. It had invaded the mesentery of the colon as well as para-tumor lymph nodes. Immunohistochemistry showed CD56 (+), CgA (+), Syn (+), CK (−), CD34 (+), SMA (−), CD10 (−), EMA (−), HMB45 (−), Inhibin-α (−), MelanA (−), NF (−), S-100 (−), and the Ki-67 index was 15% . Based on morphology, immunohistochemistry, and clinical presentation, the tumor was finally confirmed as paraganglioma. The patient received genetic testing and no pathogenic genes were found.