A 31-year-old man with no significant medical history was in his usual state of health when he received his first dose of the BNT162b2 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. Three weeks later, he received his second dose of the vaccine. One day after the second injection, he noticed general fatigue and fever, which remained for several days. The patient also developed headaches, nausea, and diarrhea over the next several days. Four days after the vaccine injection, he emergently visited a nearby hospital with these symptoms. On presentation, the pulse rate was 70/minute, blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, and the body mass index was 19.4 kg/m2. There were no definite symptoms of postural hypotension. Physical examination revealed slight disorientation, but was other unremarkable and there were no neurological findings. The initial laboratory test revealed hyponatremia and hypoglycemia , and low plasma ACTH and serum cortisol levels at 08:00 AM (ACTH < 1.5 pg/ml, reference range 8.7–61.5 pg/ml; cortisol 1.6 μg/dl, reference range 7.07–19.6 μg/dl at 06:00–10:00 AM), suggesting secondary adrenocortical deficiency. The cerebrospinal fluid examination was unremarkable and subsequent blood cultures were negative. Whole-body CT images including the brain showed no definite abnormality. The patient was diagnosed as having an adrenal crisis. Hydrocortisone (HC) was immediately replaced and his symptoms including slight disorientation recovered within several days. The dose of HC replacement was started from 200 mg/day, and it was gradually reduced to 15 mg/day in around two weeks. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to investigate the pituitary gland revealed moderate atrophy of the anterior pituitary gland as compared with images taken two years previously, when there had been suspicion of cerebellar arteriovenous malformation . The high intensity of the posterior pituitary gland by the T1-weighted image was preserved . One week after the HC initiation, the patient was no longer symptomatic. The replacement with HC (15 mg/day) was continued.
One month later, the patient was admitted to our tertiary hospital for further endocrinological examinations. Physical examination was unremarkable. A basal endocrinological test revealed low plasma ACTH (6.9 pg/ml) and cortisol (1.6 μg/dl) levels , which confirmed the results from the previous hospital. To further investigate the pituitary function, CRH (100 μg), TRH (200 μg), GnRH (100 μg) and GHRP-2 (100 μg) load tests were performed in the previously described manner [–] to confirm normality of not only basal, but also responsive secretion of pituitary hormones other than ACTH . The adrenal response was markedly abnormal; the low baseline cortisol level of 0.2 μg/dl stayed at the same level at all the time points up to 120 min. The baseline ACTH level was also low at 6.1 pg/ml and remained low for up to 120 min, indicating secondary adrenal insufficiency . On the other hand, TSH, LH/FSH and GH showed normal reactions after TRH, GnRH and GHRP-2 load, respectively . MRI images with gadolinium-enhancement revealed an atrophic pituitary gland, as had been shown in plain MRI images in the previous hospital, but no remarkable enhanced lesion . Together, the pituitary endocrine test with other laboratory tests revealed isolated ACTH insufficiency. Paraneoplastic mechanisms have been shown to be a cause of IAD , so chest and abdominal CT scans were performed; there were no malignant lesions including thymoma. Increased basal TSH and normal free T3 and T4 levels suggested subclinical hypothyroidism . Thyroid sonography was normal and thyroid autoimmune antibodies were within the normal range . Three months after initiation of HC replacement, there has been no recurrence of symptoms with adrenocortical insufficiency or involvement of other pituitary functions. As for hypothyroidism, although the etiology was unknown, continuous evaluation was planned if it was transient or persistent at the regular outpatient clinic.