A 29-year-old Japanese woman, with a history of cholecystitis at the age of 15 years and no relevant family history, presented to a hospital complaining of upper abdominal pain, which began to worsen one month ago.
The patient’s vital signs were stable. Physical examination revealed slight upper abdominal tenderness, without jaundice, and a positive Murphy’s sign and Blumberg’s sign.
Blood analysis revealed elevated levels of aspartate aminotransaminase, 309 IU/L (normal, 8–40 IU/L); alanine aminophosphatase, 511 IU/L (normal, 5–35 IU/L); γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, 614 IU/L (normal, 7–50 IU/L); alkaline phosphatase, 822 IU/L (normal, 100–340 IU/L); and carcinoembryonic antigen, 79.7 ng/mL (normal, 0–4.9 ng/mL). All other laboratory data were within normal limits. The levels of hepatobiliary enzymes and tumor markers were elevated, which implied that the patient might have developed cholangitis due to a cholangial carcinoma.
Abdominal dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) showed dilatation of the common bile duct and the bilateral intrahepatic bile ducts (which was diagnosed as Todani type IV-A) and a tumor in the middle portion of the common bile duct . Endoscopic ultrasonography and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed a tumor in the cystic dilated common bile duct ; additionally, one centimeter of the common channel continued from the duodenal papilla , and no evidence of choledocholithiasis was observed. Considering all factors, since cholangial carcinoma was highly suspected, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography and peroral cholangioscopy were not performed to prevent pancreatitis.
The patient was suspected of having distal cholangiocarcinoma (cT2N0M0 cStageIB) associated with CBDD and underwent pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with modified Child reconstruction. Intraoperative observation of the abdominal cavity did not reveal any feature of tumor dissemination or liver metastasis. The surgery was performed as scheduled.
The final diagnosis was large-cell NEC (pT3aN1M0 pStageIIB), and the resection margin was negative. Macroscopic findings showed a 50-mm sessile irregular lesion protruding into the markedly dilated lower common bile duct . Pathological findings showed solid proliferation of large, atypical cells accompanied by an adenocarcinomatous component (less than 5 %); i.e. the transition area of these component , and large tumor cells with irregular-shaped hyperchromatic nuclei . Metastasis was detected in one of the 31 lymph nodes tested. Immunohistochemical studies revealed that the large, atypical cells were positive for AE1/AE3, E-cadherin, CD56, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin. The Ki-67 labeling index was over 90 % in the solid component .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the 14th postoperative day. This was a case of an advanced NEC, and she was scheduled to receive adjuvant chemotherapy to prevent recurrence. However, the standard regimen of adjuvant chemotherapy for neuroendocrine cholangiocarcinoma has not yet been established; therefore, we selected a mixed regimen of cisplatin and irinotecan according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines for small cell carcinomas of the lung. The patient received cisplatin at a dose of 60 mg/m2 on the 1st day and irinotecan at 60 mg/m2 on the 1st, 8th, and 15th days. This regimen was repeated every 4 weeks for four cycles as adjuvant chemotherapy. She has been recurrence-free for over 16 months.