A 24-year-old African woman, who had had XP since childhood, was admitted to our hospital for a femoral neck fracture after a fall on the stairs. Surgical fixation was indicated. A preoperative evaluation could not determine the genetic type of her XP. She had minor cutaneous forms on her face and on her hands, and had no history of tumor surgery. A neurological examination showed a minor decline in intelligence quotient (IQ), and an end tremor of the extremities associated with ataxic gait. She was calm, cooperative and oriented in time and space, with preserved muscle strength and deep tendon reflexes with no anomalies. A preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan did not show any sign of brain abnormalities. Her cardiovascular and pulmonary evaluation and biological test results were normal. The patient was premedicated with oral hydroxizine (50mg the day before and 50mg the morning of surgery). In the operating room, we initiated standard monitoring including pulse oximetry (SpO2), precordial cardioscopy, and noninvasive blood pressure (NIBP). A 16G peripheral venous catheter was secured and 1g cefazolin was administered. The patient was placed in a sitting position for the spinal anesthesia, and an injection of hyperbaric bupivacaine (12.5mg) and fentanyl (25μg) was given using a 25G Tuohy needle after checking the flow of cerebrospinal fluid. However, the motor and sensory blocks were insufficient. The patient’s Bromage score was 4 and her reaction to pinprick was significant. We converted to a general anesthesia induced by propofol 150mg, fentanyl 250μg, and cisatracurium 8mg and maintained by 2% sevoflurane with a 50% oxygen 50% air mixture. The procedure lasted 80 minutes without incident. The patient’s NIBP reading was between 136 and 92 as maxima, 81 and 56mm Hg as minima, her heart rate was 85 to 105 beats/minute and her SpO2 was between 98 and 100%. Postoperative analgesia was assured by paracetamol (1g), nefopam (20mg) and parecoxib (40mg). In the postoperative recovery room, the patient remained intubated and ventilated. Her unexplained nonawakening after about one hour induced us to monitor her postoperative residual curarization and to administer neostigmine. Her motor response was satisfactory. However, she did not wake up nor return to spontaneous ventilation after two hours, which induced us to perform a biological assessment (sodium, urea, glucose) that showed no abnormalities. After three hours, we noticed signs of awakening and spontaneous breathing. Her tidal volume was satisfactory. The patient became agitated, with abnormal movements that persisted despite the extubation, optimization of analgesia and a psychological reassurance. On examination, signs of pyramidal irritation appeared, such as sharpened reflexes, and the Babinski reflex was present, which necessitated transferring the patient to the MRI room for a scan; the images did not show any lesions that could explain these symptoms. Her agitation did reduce but other neurological disorders persisted for more than three postoperative days, with the appearance of memory disorders like false recognition and confusion in time and space. They were attributed to a neurological worsening of XP. Postoperative follow-up was recommended by neurologists. After three months, she is still presenting with confusion and cognitive decline, with memory disorders, ataxia and spasticity.