A 47-year-old man was admitted to our hospital in September 2011 with complaints of intermittent episodes of mild to moderate headache in the right occipital region without nausea or vomiting for two weeks. The neurological examination was normal. The past history revealed hypertension for five years, which was well controlled using oral antihypertensive drugs, and there were no associated systemic complications, such as increased intracranial pressure, intracranial infection or hypercalcaemia.
Normal skull X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scans revealed an irregular, calcified, intracranial lesion measuring approximately 4.4 × 4.0 × 2.5 cm in the right occipital region, and the lesion was separated from the lamina interna cranii by a narrow cleft .
Magnetic resonance (MR) examination was performed using a 1.5-T imager. T1- and T2-weighted images were obtained before and after administration of gadopentetate dimeglumine. A blur nodule was delineated in the right transverse sinus and cerebellar tentorium, protruding into the posterior cranial fossa and compressing the right cerebellar hemisphere. The lesion showed mixed low and equal signal intensity on T1-weighted images, and mixed low and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images. The lesion displayed irregular linear contrast enhancement only in its dural periphery. A magnetic resonance venogram (MRV) revealed that there was no detectable venous flow in the right transverse sinus and the right sigmoid sinus .
Normal levels of parathormone, serum calcium and phosphorus excluded diagnoses of hypercalcaemia and hypoparathyroidism.
The decision to remove the mass was made based on the suspicion that the mass could be a calcified meningioma. The patient underwent a right occipital craniotomy. There was no adhesion between the skull flap and the dura. A bone-hard, poorly vascularised, pink mass was found, originating from the right transverse sinus and the neighbouring convex dura of the cerebellar hemisphere, as well as the cerebellar tentorium, and tightly adherent to the adjacent cerebellar tissues. Although the MRV images revealed a total occlusion of right transverse sinus, there was still some venous bleeding on the proximal and distal ends of the transverse sinus across the mass, which were first ligated using silk sutures and then cut. After careful dissection around the mass, it was removed totally en bloc with minimal blood loss . The skull flap was replaced.
Pathological examination revealed fibrous connective tissue with hyaline degeneration, calcification, and ossification, as well as hyperblastosis of the neighbouring cerebellar glial tissue , with no indication of neoplasia, inflammation or thrombosis of the transverse sinus.
The clinical course after surgery was uneventful. No neurological deficit developed. Following discharge, the patient followed up regularly. His preoperative right occipital headache subsided completely.
The latest follow-up radiological images were obtained 17 months postoperatively, and these images showed that the right occipital intracranial mass had disappeared .
The cause of the calcification and ossification of the transverse sinus and neighbouring dura in the present case is not clear. The presence of a calcified meningioma was suspected preoperatively, but the pathologic examination provided no indication of neoplasia or inflammation. Additionally, it did not support calcification of the transverse sinus thrombosis, which characteristically would be located within the sinus . The probable cause might have been physiological degeneration, as the pathologic examination of the mass only revealed degenerative alterations, including the fibrous connective tissue with hyaline degeneration, calcification and ossification. Hyperblastosis of the neighbouring cerebellar glial tissue might have been caused by a response induced by the long-term compression of the mass. As there was total occlusion of right transverse sinus and the patient did not exhibit increased intracranial pressure, the degenerative course should have been long-term enough for the compensation of intracranial venous drainage via the collateral circulation. The identification of the calcified intracranial mass was in fact incidental to the examination pertaining to the patient’s intermittent episodes of mild to moderate headache in the right occipital region, as his headache had only persisted for two weeks. Degenerative calcification and ossification cannot develop in such a short period. The cause of the postoperative disappearance of his headache might have been partially psychological because he no longer had any anxiety regarding the intracranial mass. Nevertheless, if the diagnosis of degenerative calcification and ossification could be considered preoperatively, conservative observation might have been an option. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first description of a case of massive degenerative calcification and ossification originating from the transverse sinus and the neighbouring dura mimicking meningioma.