A 61-year-old man with stage IVB pulmonary adenocarcinoma for more than 2 years was admitted to our hospital due to sudden onset of impaired consciousness, left hemiplegia, left facial nerve paralysis, and dysarthria. Vital signs were as follows: temperature 36.9°C, pulse 74 beats/min, blood pressure 160/104 mmHg, and SpO2 98%. He had a history of diabetes but no history of hypertension or atrial fibrillation. Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging revealed many small acute brain infarctions in both hemispheres . The patient's symptoms were consistent with Trousseau syndrome secondary to lung cancer. His mental status had been otherwise normal. He had no history of mental disorders and he had never had cognitive problems. With the introduction of anticoagulation therapy (days 0–10, heparin 23,000 U/day; day 11 onwards, edoxaban tosylate hydrate 60 mg/day), his neurological symptoms recovered. Several days after hospital admission, neurological deficits had resolved, except for mild left arm paralysis and left facial nerve paralysis.
However, delirium occurred after Trousseau syndrome 1 day after hospital admission. Blood test was unremarkable. His daily medications included loxoprofen (180 mg/day, oral), lansoprazole (15 mg/day, oral), and suvorexant (15 mg/day, oral), which were less likely to induce delirium. Moreover, the last pembrolizumab (anti-programmed cell death 1 antibody [anti PD-1]) was given 4 months ago and the possibility of psychiatric disorders including delirium associated with anti PD-1 is reported to be 1.91% and is the lowest in immune checkpoint inhibitors. We therefore diagnosed that this case was delirium due to Trousseau syndrome and delirium due to other causes was deniable.
Psychiatric symptoms such as insomnia, agitation, and restlessness gradually progressed to the extent that the patient moved around his room restlessly at night without sleeping. He could not stay still, restlessly sitting and standing beside his bed. He often got confused and admitted the existence of visual hallucination. We first selected an intravenous drip of haloperidol or risperidone liquid because the patient admitted difficulty in swallowing after Trousseau syndrome, and effects such as sedation and antihallucination were expected. Haloperidol (days 2–6, up to 10 mg/day, intravenous), risperidone liquid (days 6–12, up to 1.5 mg/day, oral), and chlorpromazine (days 11–17, up to 37.5 mg/day, oral) were used to manage his psychiatric symptoms . Before administration, it was explained to the patient and his family that these were off-label prescriptions and there were possible side effects. After the initiation, hallucination and agitation were gradually lessened. However, inattention, altered sleep/wake cycle, altered level of consciousness, and symptom fluctuation persisted. The patient complained of unbearable insomnia for more than 2 weeks. In addition, extrapyramidal side effects such as sialorrhea and bradykinesia were observed. Moreover, chlorpromazine was intolerable because of drowsiness and urinary retention.
We then tried perospirone (days 17 onwards, 8 mg/day, oral) but this was not effective either and insomnia persisted. The Intensive Care Delirium Screening Checklist (ICDSC) score at that time remained 4, indicating the existence of delirium, and hospital discharge remained impossible. We maintained the use of perospirone at this point because we began to consider the combined use of perospirone and another medication other than antipsychotics.
After the failure of the antipsychotics, we tried memantine to alleviate his psychiatric symptoms. We considered that was worth trying because memantine has different mechanisms of action from antipsychotics and it has no drug interactions with anticancer agents, which is favorable in terms of not hindering cancer treatment. Before use, we fully explained to the patient and his family that this was an off-label prescription and also explained the clinical effects and possible side effects. After the use of memantine (days 19 onwards, 5 mg/day, oral) with perospirone, the patient's psychiatric symptoms lessened. He could sleep for 4–5 h at night for the first time after admission. He could rest in his room at night and restlessness gradually resolved. Moreover, daytime sleepiness was not observed. Memantine was tolerated with no apparent side effects. With psychiatric improvement, he was able to return home after 26 days of hospitalization . Pembrolizumab was restarted regularly as previously planned, with the aid of his family and his home-visiting physician.