A 46-year-old male was at work climbing down a ladder when his foot twisted and fell sustaining a deformity in his ankle and foot. The patient was transferred subsequently to our emergency department, where he developed significant swelling and pain in the left ankle and foot. He denied any significant sensory or motor deficit. After a primary workup, he was found to have a displaced talar neck and body fracture with subtalar dislocation consistent with a Hawkins type 2 injury confirmed on radiographs and CT scan. Moreover, an associated medial malleolus fracture was found as well. Two stages were planned to approach this complex injury. He was taken swiftly to the operating room and placed under general anesthesia with muscle relaxation whereby urgent reduction of the subtalar joint was done as a first stage to decompress the soft tissues and alleviate the neurovascular structures. Four days later, once the soft-tissue envelope was deemed permissive for surgery, we proceeded with the second stage i.e. definitive open reduction and internal fixation.
We started the case by doing a medial approach overlying the medial malleolus and between the tibialis anterior and posterior. The talar neck fracture was identified and it was reaching the body of the talus. There was a medial malleolus non-displaced fracture and using that plane a medial malleolar osteotomy was obtained by virtue of the fracture for better access to the talar neck and body. A concomitant lateral approach going from the distal fibula along the fourth metatarsal was done. The extensor Digitorum brevis muscle was reflected, and the talus fracture was also identified from the lateral side.
Open reduction was done successfully despite the dorsal and lateral comminution. Two 3.5 headless compression screws were secured from the lateral and the medial side and then a lateral buttress plate was applied along the talar neck and the lateral process. Five locking screws were secured in the plate.
Fluoroscopic images were taken in the AP lateral, oblique as well as in the Canale projection which showed good reduction and fixation. The medial malleolus was reduced and fixed with 2 × 4.5 mm cannulated screws. Irrigation was done followed by bone grafting of the dorsal lateral defect using allograft followed by closure in layers of 2–0 VICRYL for the deep dermis and 4–0 nylon for the skin. A sterile dressing was applied followed by a posterior splint. The patient tolerated the procedure well.
He returned to the office 2-week post-operative whereby his sutures were removed, his wound healed well. His splint was exchanged with a cast for another 4 weeks. At 6-week post-operative X-rays were taken showing gradual anatomic healing of the fracture with no signs of avascular necrosis, the cast was exchanged with a fracture boot. At 12 weeks, there was further healing on radiography, patient was then allowed to proceed with physical therapy focused on gradual weight bearing and flexibility/strengthening exercises.