A 51-year-old Scottish man was admitted to our hospital with fever, substernal chest pain, and dyspnea after flu symptoms 10 days prior. He had no recent history of esophagogastroduodenoscopy manipulation, cardiac surgery, or chest trauma. Physical examination findings were as follows: blood pressure, 128/90 mmHg; high-grade fever, 38.8 °C; heart rate, 117 beats/min; and oxygen saturation, 94% on ambient air. Jugular vein distention, diminished breath sounds from the left lower lung, and mild bilateral leg edema were noted. The rest of the physical examination, including the oral cavity and mucocutaneous examination, was unremarkable.
Laboratory test results revealed leukocytosis (13,100/μL) with neutrophilia of 82.6% and elevated levels of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (235 pg/mL; normal, <125 pg/mL) and liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase, 43 U/L; normal, 13–30 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 90 U/L; normal, 7–23 U/L). Inflammatory marker levels were also elevated: C-reactive protein (CRP), 20.31 mg/dL (normal, <0.3 mg/dL); erythrocyte sedimentation rate, >110 mm/h (normal, 3–15 mm/h); procalcitonin, 0.09 ng/mL (normal, <0.05 ng/mL); and pro-inflammatory cytokine-related interleukin-6 (IL-6), 157 pg/mL (normal, <7.0 pg/mL). Screening for thyroid and autoimmune diseases and Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection yielded negative results. In addition, the serological screening tests for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human T-cell leukemia virus type 1, and human immunodeficiency viruses (types 1 and 2) were negative .
Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, widespread T-wave flattening, and PR-segment depression. Reciprocal PR elevation was noted in lead aVR suggestive of pericarditis (A). Chest radiography revealed cardiomegaly and left-sided pleural effusion without pulmonary congestion (B). Echocardiography showed moderate circumferential pericardial effusion, a plethoric inferior vena cava, and marked diastolic ventricular septal shift but no signs of cardiac tamponade, suggesting high right-sided pressures with constrictive physiology (C and D, and in the Data Supplement).
Unenhanced chest computed tomography (CT) revealed mediastinal enlargement, pericardial effusion, and bilateral pleural effusions. CT also showed elevated attenuation values for the pericardial and pleural effusions suggestive of an infectious etiology (A). Detailed ECG-gated cardiac computed tomography (CCT) revealed mediastinal enlargement associated with superior mediastinal fat stranding and periaortic enlarged lymph nodes strongly suggestive of acute mediastinitis (B). A late iodine enhancement (LIE) image showed prominent enhancement of the entire pericardium and epicardium without pericardial calcification, suggesting acute pericardial inflammation (C). Accordingly, the patient was presumptively diagnosed with acute descending mediastinitis, pleuritis, and pericarditis. Empirical antimicrobial treatment with intravenous ceftriaxone (1 g/12 h) and clindamycin (300 mg/6 h) was initiated. A thorough examination of the specific cause of acute mediastinitis was performed (head and neck CT, esophagogastroduodenoscopy) and all findings were normal; therefore, we excluded acute descending mediastinitis from the differential diagnosis.
The constellation of increased serological inflammation, thickened pericardial inflammation, and constrictive physiology was highly suggestive of TCP. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging further characterized the pericardial inflammation (A–C, and in the Data Supplement). The cine mode showed moderate pericardial effusion and abnormal diastolic ventricular septal bounce with thickening of the entire pericardium showing high signal intensity on fat-suppressed T2-weighted images (T2WI). A late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) image showed moderate enhancement in the pericardium consistent with acute pericarditis. LGE also revealed myocardial involvement beneath the epicardium in the lateral wall suggestive of coexisting myocarditis. Hemodynamics in cardiac catheterization confirmed the characteristic findings of a constrictive physiology (A and B).
Subsequent oral anti-inflammatory treatment with ibuprofen (200 mg 3 times daily) and colchicine (0.5 mg orally 2 times daily) was initiated. A vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist (tolvaptan 7.5 mg/day), loop diuretics (azosemide 30 mg/day), and a mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (spironolactone 50 mg/day) were added to ameliorate the systemic congestion. All pleural fluid and repeated blood cultures were negative. Pleural fluid cytology was negative for malignancy, and the antimicrobials were stopped. Thereafter, the patient’s condition improved steadily and he was discharged on day 7 after admission.
One week later, positron emission tomography CT showed marked improvement in the pericardial and pleural effusions yet residual slightly hypermetabolic activity in the pericardium and left pleura ( in the Data Supplement). On day 21, antibody titer blood tests for CVA4 revealed an 8-fold increase, from 64 to 512, but no significant changes were detected for the other viruses, suggesting an acute CVA4 monoinfection . Therefore, we diagnosed the patient with acute pericarditis and inflammation spreading to the surrounding tissues caused by CVA4. Follow-up CMR imaging performed on day 30 showed further exacerbation of the myocardial lesions, somewhat stronger enhancement of the pericardial LGE, and residual constrictive physiology despite resolution of the pericardial effusion (D–F). However, the patient's clinical condition remained improved with good biochemical responses (CRP, 2.27 mg/dL; IL-6, 50 pg/mL) and normalized hepatic dysfunction, suggesting that they could reflect an inflammatory response due to CVA4 infection and systemic congestion due to right-sided heart failure, respectively. Therefore, the anti-inflammatory treatment was continued whereas the anti-heart failure treatment was discontinued.
Finally, CMR performed on day 60 showed significant improvement in the myocardial lesions and complete recovery of the pericardial structure and function (G–I, and in the Data Supplement). Additionally, CT and CCT confirmed the complete resolution of all abnormal findings observed on admission (D–F). Similarly, the chest X-ray, ECG, and echocardiography findings were normal (, and in the Data Supplement). This resulted in the final diagnosis of TCP caused by CVA4 infection and associated mediastinitis, myocarditis, and pleuritis.
One month later, the medication was discontinued. The patient remained clinically stable without recurrence of constrictive physiology during the 1-year follow-up period. The timeline comprising diagnostics, treatment, and disease status is shown in .