A 1-month-old Chinese baby girl presented to our emergency department with vomiting and high-grade fever, which had occurred for 3 days. The fever was not associated with rigors and chills. She presented with a history of intermittent projectile and bilious vomiting after breastfeeding. Vomiting occurred approximately five times each day, at a volume of 10mL at each instance. A general physical examination revealed a temperature of 39 °C, pulse rate of 100/minute, and respiratory rate of 30/minute. On abdominal examination, no abdominal distention, regional tenderness, or rebound was observed, and no masses or viscera could be palpated. Bowel sounds were audible, and other physical examination results were normal. An upper GI contrast study in another hospital showed incomplete duodenal obstruction . However, to clarify the cause of intestinal obstruction, she subsequently underwent ultrasonographic examination after hospitalization. Ultrasonography showed continuous opening of the pylorus and significant dilatation of her duodenum; her upper jejunum in the left abdomen was approximately 4cm in diameter, and we observed frequent reverse peristalsis. An intraluminal membrane was visible in the dilated distal jejunum site , and the “billow” in the proximal jejunum could be seen to intermittently move in and out of a pinhole in the mucosal diaphragm. The distal intestine was deflated, and there was an absence of gas; by ultrasonography, a diagnosis of congenital membranous jejunal stenosis was considered. Furthermore, an ultrasound showed a cystic structure sized 2.0 × 1.5cm in the greater curvature in the left hypochondrium . It was firmly attached at the gastric wall, and the cyst walls consisted of an inner echogenic rim and an outer echogenic rim area. The central area was hypoechoic. A gastric duplication cyst was considered the most likely diagnosis, and a laparotomy was planned after initial stabilization. During surgery, jejunal stenosis situated approximately 15cm from the ligament of Treitz and a diaphragm with a pinhole in the intestinal cavity was found and resected. In addition, surgical excision of the cyst located on the greater curvature of the stomach was performed. A histopathological examination revealed that both sides of the resected intestinal membrane were covered with intestinal mucosa and the structure of the gastric mucosa and smooth muscles in the wall of the cyst, confirming the diagnosis of membranous jejunal stenosis and gastric duplication cyst . Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and she was discharged on the ninth day following surgery. She recovered well with no bilious vomiting at the 1-year follow-up.