A 10-year-old Han Chinese girl was admitted to our cardiovascular department with significant left eye vision changes that had abruptly occurred 10 days prior. The changes were characterized by blurred vision, black spots, or shadows in the vision, with each episode lasting several days with spontaneous resolution. The patient reported poor eyesight history, heat intolerance, and fatigue following activity. No relevant family history was reported.
On admission, fundus examination and fluorescein fundus angiography characterized hypertensive ocular funduscopic abnormalities (Additional file : Fig. S1). Further examinations were performed. Supine aldosterone assay was 54.3 (< 23.6) ng/dL, renin supine assay was 497.3 (2.8–39.9) uIU/mL, urine vanillylmandelic acid was 28.99 (0–13.60) mg/24 hours. Abdominal ultrasonography, contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan, and computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed space-occupying lesions with the possibility of malignant pheochromocytoma accompanied with lung metastasis . Cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone, thyroid function, tumor biomarkers (carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, ferritin, neuron-specific enolase), autoantibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies showed no obvious abnormal indicators. Echocardiography and electrocardiogram findings were normal.
Given the patient’s clinical manifestations, physical examination, laboratory tests, and imaging changes, preliminary diagnosis of pheochromocytoma was made. After the medication for hypertension (ɑ-blockers and calcium channel blockers), the right retroperitoneal mass, a portion of the right adrenal gland, and the suspected lesion in the middle lobe of the lung were surgically removed. Pathological results of the tumor and the lesion in the middle lobe of the lung were shown in Figs. and , respectively. During the operation, infiltration of the tumor into part of the diaphragm and adrenal gland was observed. Pheochromocytoma of the Adrenal Gland Scaled Score (PASS) was used to differentiate benign (PASS < 4) from malignant (PASS ≥ 4) histologically, and this patient’s PASS score was at least 8 because of invasion [capsular (score = 1), periadrenal tissue (score = 2)], large nests or diffuse growth (score = 2), high cellularity (score = 2), and profound nuclear pleomorphism (score = 1) . Consequently, malignant pheochromocytoma was verified. Finally, genetic testing revealed that succinate dehydrogenase complex iron sulfur subunit B (SDHB) heterozygous frameshift mutation in the exon 3/8 (c.237del, p.Lys80ArgfsTer8) was the possible pathogenic mutation sites related to tumor genetic susceptibility.
The urine vanillylmandelic acid, both aldosterone and renin in the supine position, had normalized after surgery, and the postoperative period before discharge was stable with obvious improvement of vision and significant decrease of blood pressure (Additional file : Fig. S2). Following discharge, the patient was completely asymptomatic, and abdominal ultrasound showed no obvious abnormality in the first week and the first month. During the latest follow-up at 3 months post-treatment, abdominal ultrasound showed right retroperitoneal parenchymal nodule with small calcified foci and blood supply. Given the high risk of recurrence both pathologically and genetically, an unplanned surgery to remove the possible recurring tissue was recommended. Thus far, the patient remains in good condition with no evidence of hypertension and great improvement in vision.
A timeline concisely showing the medical progress and management of this case is shown in Fig. 4 .