A 47-year-old female patient consulted our outpatient clinic with blurred vision in her left eye, immediately after undergoing IFUS assisted-facelifting (irradiation dose unknown). She reported that a beautician treated her using IFUS to reduce eyelid laxity seven days prior. The patient was not aware of any difference in the duration or intensity of the IFUS procedure between her left and right eyes. However, as a protective eye shield was not used, she became aware of a decrease in vision in her left eye following the procedure. Aside from myopia, she had an unremarkable medical and ocular history. There was no history of ocular trauma, diabetes, corticosteroid use, or other systemic diseases or drug use. She had an uncorrected distance visual acuity of 20/20 in her right eye and 20/1000 in her left eye. There were no abnormalities in the patient’s conjunctiva, cornea, and iris. Her light reflexes were intact, while her intraocular pressure values were normal. For her left eye, seven drop-like dense opacities, aligned horizontally, and three lens opacities, extending vertically, anterior to her posterior capsule, were noted . The patient’s posterior subcapsular cataract (PSC) had a rosette shape; therefore, it was identified as a rosette cataract . While a Swept-Source Anterior Segment optical coherence tomography (SS-ASOCT) showed drop-like opacities in the patient’s lens and PSC , her posterior capsule was not ruptured . Fundus photographs were not taken due to severe posterior capsule opacity. The macular optical coherence tomography showed no abnormalities (see Additional file ). In contrast, no lens opacities were noted in her right eye .
One month after the first visit, the patient returned to the hospital to undergo cataract surgery of her left eye to achieve improved vision. Lens examination of her left eye at that time showed no drop opacity changes, while a slight improvement in her posterior capsule opacity was seen . However, the corrected distance visual acuity of her left eye was 20/630; therefore, phacoemulsification cataract surgery with implantation of monofocal intraocular lens (IOL) was performed. Given that the patient’s lens was not hard, ultrasonic phacoemulsification was not conducted; irrigation and aspiration were performed instead. The drop-like dense lens opacities were aspirated while pulling the chopper without damaging the patient’s posterior capsule as they were harder than the surrounding lens fibers. The IOL was implanted in the lens capsule bag . On the seventh postoperative day, the corrected visual acuity of the patient’s left eye improved to 20/20, while SS-ASOCT showed no deviation or tilt in the position of the IOL .