A 32-year-old woman with one previous cesarean section developed post-molar GTN. She complained of cessation of menstruation for 68 days and irregular vaginal bleeding for 10 days. The uterine size was equivalent to 12 weeks gestation, and the beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) level was 265,954 IU/L. The patient underwent initial uterine evacuation and the diagnosis of partial hydatidiform mole was confirmed by histopathological examination. Repeat uterine evacuation was performed 1 week later, and the third uterine evacuation was performed 3 weeks later because of the increase in β-hCG level. One month later, she was referred to our hospital as a case of post-molar GTN with β-hCG levels showing an increase of ≥ 10% on each of the 3 successive measurements made over a period of 2 weeks, from 13 to 2017 to 27 Feb 2017 . The patient had no other symptoms, such as irregular vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain, cough, hemoptysis, or headache. There was no visible lesion in the lower genital tract. The β-hCG level was 15,094 IU/L. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and transvaginal sonography (TVS) showed the uterine lesion located in the anterior cesarean scar. The size of the uterine lesion was 2.8 cm. The chest CT was normal. A diagnosis of low-risk GTN was established.
We used EP (etoposide, cisplatin) every 3 weeks because the patient was allergic to methotrexate and dactinomycin was not available at our hospital. The hCG returned to normal level after three courses of chemotherapy. The 5th cycle of chemotherapy was interrupted because of persistent hepatic toxicity and damage of ovarian reserve function . However, the uterine lesion persisted (size of the residual uterine lesion: 2.0 cm) . Therefore, ultrasound-guided HIFU treatment was performed using a Focused Ultrasound Tumor Therapeutic System (Model-JC200, Chongqing Haifu Medical Technology Co. Ltd., Chongqing, China). The patient was positioned prone on the HIFU table, with the anterior abdominal wall in contact with degassed water. A degassed water balloon was placed between the abdominal wall and the transducer to compress and push the bowel away from the acoustic pathway. Point sonication was used, and power was set between 300 and 400 watts. The sonication time was 320 s and the energy delivered was 122,000 J. During the HIFU treatment, a significant gray-scale change was observed. Color Doppler ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) was performed to evaluate the effectiveness of ablation. Color Doppler ultrasonography showed disappearance of the vascular signal and CEUS showed no perfusion in the uterine scar lesion . One month after HIFU treatment, the uterine lesion was found to have reduced to 1.0 cm in diameter. The liver function had returned to normal along with improvement in the ovarian reserve function . Her menstrual cycle resumed 48 days after HIFU. At 4-month follow-up after HIFU, the uterine lesion was found to have completely disappeared . Hysteroscopy showed absence of lesion in the cesarean scar and no signs of intrauterine adhesion. The patient showed no signs of recurrence as of follow-up conducted at 58 months after HIFU.