A 54-year-old, right-handed gentleman presented with a 2-year history of progressive bitemporal hemianopsia, more severe on the left. Visual acuity was 20/25-2 in both eyes, with eccentric fixation. There was no relative afferent papillary defect. The remainder of the neurological examination was within normal limits. The patient was otherwise healthy, a nonsmoker, and on no medications. There was no history of vascular disease or vascular risk factors.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed a well-defined enhancing mass in the sella turcica and suprasellar cistern measuring 2.6 × 2.7 cm, with an enhancing dural tail extending along the planum sphenoidale. The pituitary gland and infundibulum were displaced posteriorly. The optic chiasm was significantly displaced superiorly and draped over the superior aspect of the mass. Furthermore, the anterior communicating artery, bilateral A1 segments, and bilateral A2 segments were superiorly displaced. Imaging characteristics were most consistent with a tuberculum sella meningioma .
Endocrinological investigations did not reveal any signs of pituitary insufficiency. Taking into account the progressive visual changes, the patient elected to undergo endoscopic transsphenoidal resection. The patient was given 2 g cefazolin (Ancef) 30 minutes prior to the surgery. The surgical approach to sella was performed by an otolaryngologist in conjunction with a neurosurgeon. A posterior nasal septectomy was performed to allow binasal access. The face of the sphenoid and intersphenoidal septations were removed and an accessory approach through the superior 1/3 of the clivus was also created to maximize access and to facilitate mobilization of the pituitary gland during the case. The tumor was removed by a combination of suction and gentle traction. A gross total resection was achieved. The A1, A2, anterior communicating arteries, optic chiasm, and pituitary stalk were visualized and preserved during the surgery. Intraoperative CSF leak was repaired in a layered fashion consisting of gelfoam, fat, and fascia graft with a dura matrix overlay. A vascularized nasoseptal flap, fashioned at the beginning of the case, was positioned over the repair. Lastly, gelfoam soaked with tranexamic acid and fibrin glue (Tisseel) was laid down into the nasal cavity supported by an inflated Foley catheter. A lumbar drain was inserted postoperatively and discontinued 5 days later. Pathology confirmed the diagnosis of a grade I meningioma, meningothelial subtype.
The patient's vision and endocrinological status remained stable. Approximately 10 days post surgery, the patient developed a CSF leak and a lumbar drain was reinserted. The patient was brought back to the operating room for repair of the CSF leak. The nasoseptal flap was found to be necrosed up to the proximal arterial supply with surrounding purulent material, which was sent for microbiology and pathology. The flap geometry had not been twisted or under undue tension to account for the necrosis. The repair site was taken down to the dura, which appeared infected from the nasal flap. A muscle graft from the left thigh was then transposed intracranially into the dural defect and dura matrix layered above, followed by a new vascularized inferior turbinate flap secured in place with gelfoam and fibrin glue (Tisseel). A Foley catheter maintained gentle pressure at the repair site and was deflated on postoperative day 1. Microbiological culture from the septal flap was positive for Haemophilus influenzae. Pathology confirmed necrotic tissue of the septal flap with prominent acute inflammation and bacterial aggregates. CSF sent from the lumbar drain had a glucose count of 2.7 mmol/L, protein 977 mg/L, and a nucleated cell count 708 × 106/L.
Within a day of the repair, the patient developed an abrupt severe headache and increasing confusion without obvious evidence of meningismus. MRI of the head revealed extensive leptomeningeal enhancement, surrounding the optic nerves and chiasm, into the Sylvian fissures and encasing the infundibulum . Diffusion-weighted MRI revealed bilateral caudate head infarcts, more extensive on the right with involvement of the adjacent capsular white matter and right anterior inferior lentiform nucleus infarct . MR angiography revealed constricted left and right A1 segments, Sylvian M1 segments, and the basilar artery . The A2 branches were well seen. There was no evidence of subarachnoid hemorrhage, abscess, or thrombosis.
The patient was diagnosed with bacterial meningitis and was treated with vancomycin and ceftriaxone to cover for H. influenzae and coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. The lumbar drain was discontinued on day 5. Six days after the first repair, the patient underwent a second CSF leak repair due to experiencing rhinorrhea when in a dependent position. Similar to the previous repair, the intranasal turbinate flap was completely necrosed; however, the rest of the repair remained virtually intact. Adjustment of the muscle graft stopped the leak. Tisseel and Gelfoam were again used to overlay the wound.
The patient was discharged home without any obvious neurological deficits related to the bilateral caudate infarcts. During interview with the family, the only changes noted were a subtle change in personality, impaired short-term memory, and the observation that the patient infrequently initiated speech. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient had no evidence of pituitary insufficiency and improved visual fields.