A 41-year-old man visited our hospital complaining of lower abdominal pain and fever for 2 weeks. He did not have a remarkable medical history. The detailed family history was unknown, because he and his parents were not close to their relatives. He had no siblings or children, and what they knew for sure was that his parents and grandparents had no history of cancer. Laboratory findings revealed mild inflammation; WBC was 8,940/μL, and CRP level was 1.08 mg/dL. He also had mild anemia with his hemoglobin level at 11.1 g/dL. The levels of the tumor markers, CEA and CA19-9 were within the normal range; moreover, sIL-2R levels were normal. The computed tomography (CT) scan showed two wall-thickening lesions in the rectum and sigmoid colon, with the latter invading the small intestine and abdominal wall . Lymph nodes were swollen in the sigmoid mesocolon and at the roots of the inferior mesenteric artery, which had sac-like degeneration inside . A colonoscopy revealed a circular type 3 lesion in the sigmoid colon and a semicircular type 2 lesion in the rectum . The biopsy result of rectum lesion was moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma; and the biopsy of the sigmoid colon lesion showed that round cells with swollen nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm proliferated separately with each other. We suspected that the sigmoid colon lesion was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. A positron emission tomography (PET)-CT scan showed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in the sigmoid colon lesion, rectal lesion, and swollen lymph nodes; however, no distant metastases were demonstrated . We preoperatively diagnosed the case as rectal and sigmoid colon cancer with lymph node metastases without distant metastases. Sigmoidectomy, low anterior resection, and lymph node dissection were performed. The sigmoid colon cancer invaded into the small intestine, abdominal wall, and vas deferens, which were resected together. The tumor and sigmoid mesocolon were markedly swollen and occupied the pelvic entrance; moreover, the sigmoid mesocolon was strongly adhered to the retroperitoneum due to inflammation. White nodules that were present in the sigmoid mesocolon were removed; we suspected that these might be involved in peritoneal dissemination. The excised specimens are shown in Fig. .
Histopathological findings revealed that the rectal cancer was a typical moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. However, the sigmoid colon cancer had different features including tumor cells with polymorphic nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm. These cells had poor connectivity with each other. These characteristics are called rhabdoid features, because the morphology of these cells is similar to that of rhabdomyosarcoma tumor cells . Immunohistochemical examination showed that the tumor cells were positive for both epithelial (cytokeratin AE1/AE3) and mesenchymal cell markers (vimentin). However, these cells were negative for INI1, which is normally expressed in the nucleus of cells . Therefore, the sigmoid colon cancer was diagnosed as an INI1-negative undifferentiated carcinoma with rhabdoid features. Moreover, CDX2, which is a marker of colonocytes differentiation, was negative ; and Ki67, which shows proliferative ability, was as high as 40%. The white nodules on the sigmoid mesocolon were diagnosed as peritoneal dissemination, and the multiple lymph nodes were also diagnosed as metastatic. The final diagnosis was sigmoid colon cancer; pT4b (small intestine, abdominal wall) N2b M1c pStage IVC (peritoneal dissemination), and rectal cancer; pT3(SS) N0.
On day 4 after surgery, the patient continued to experience high fever of ≥ 38 °C. To examine the presence of lesions that could be causing the fever, an abdominal CT scan was performed, which revealed cystic lesions in liver segments S1 and S7 . These lesions were absent in the PET-CT scan performed 14 days before surgery. These lesions grew rapidly 11 days after surgery, as confirmed by CT ; therefore, we suspected that the lesions were liver abscesses or metastases. A fine needle aspiration cytology revealed undifferentiated carcinoma cells compatible with metastatic lesions from the undifferentiated carcinoma with rhabdoid features from the sigmoid colon. Chemotherapy, comprising modified FOLFOX6 (oxaliplatin and an infusion of 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin (5FU/LV)) plus bevacizumab, was administered on postoperative day 22. However, after the second course, CT showed that the number and size of the liver metastases had progressed by postoperative day 47 . The molecular analysis indicated that the sigmoid colon cancer was KRAS and NRAS-wild, BRAFV600E-mutant, and microsatellite stable (MSS). The chemotherapy regimen was then changed to FOLFOXIRI (irinotecan, oxaliplatin, and an infusion of 5FU/LV) plus bevacizumab; however, the general condition of the patient rapidly deteriorated, and he died on postoperative day 60.