A 4-year-old boy presented with diphallia . Initial physical examination revealed two completely developed penise with urine flow from both urethras and two anal dimples with anal atresia. Meconium flow from right urethra was observed upon closer examination. There was one testis on each side of the scrotum. On his first day of life, laparotomy was performed that showed duplicated rectum, colon, cecum, and appendix and duplication of 5 cm of terminal ileum. Ileostomy was performed from the proximal region of the duplicated bowel. Doppler ultrasonography (USG) showed two completely developed penises, two cavernous bodies, one spongious body, and normal vascular supply to each penis. Abdominal USG and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed one kidney and one ureter on each side and two bladders. Right urethra was catheterized, and cystography revealed a large rectovesical fistula between the right colon and the right bladder . Second cystography was performed via left urethra and showed no abnormalities . MRI revealed two prostatic glands. Conventional urodynamic study was performed during the patient’s first year of life. Capacity of right half bladder was 50 mL and capacity of left side was 40 mL, while the normal expected bladder capacity is 63-70 mL. Compliances of half bladders were 8 and 7 cm H2O/mL, respectively.
Abdominoperineal pull-through was performed in patient’s first month of life. One of the right colons was removed after closing its fistula.
When the patient was 4 years old, cystoscopy through each urethra, right total penectomy, and right-to-left end-to-side urethral-urethrostomy were performed . Cystourethroscopic examination revealed that both urethras, bladder necks, and bladders were normal. Because the left penis was closer to the midline, it was decided to perform right penectomy. After the dissection and excision of the two cavernous bodies, anterior urethra was dissected and removed. At this level, end-to-side urethra-urethrostomy was performed. Postoperative follow-up of 18 months was uneventful and without dilation of the upper urinary tract or any urinary tract infection . On observation, the patient’s voiding was normal. Informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient.