Our patient is a 60-year-old female with severe emphysema who underwent a double-lung transplant in 2008, donated from a 64-year-old female with a 25-pack-year smoking history, stopping in 1982. The explanted lungs showed signs of severe emphysema but no malignant features. Post-transplant imaging demonstrated a mild to moderate degree of emphysema in the donor lungs. The patient received triple-drug immunosuppression with cyclosporine A, azathioprine, and prednisone and remained well until 2014, when she developed post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD), requiring chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin/vincristine/prednisone-rituximab and discontinuation of azathioprine. While her PTLD is currently in remission, she subsequently developed chronic lung allograft dysfunction (CLAD) in 2015, with a marked decline in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) from the post-transplant baseline of 3.1 L to 0.9 L. Her FEV1 has been stable at 0.9 L since 2015.
In 2016, the patient presented with a solitary right upper lobe pulmonary nodule on routine computed tomography (CT) scan. Following serial growth (12 mm) on CT, the lung nodule was biopsied, revealing primary lung adenocarcinoma. The pathologic sample was negative for both the ALK fusion oncogene and EGFR mutation. Staging whole-body positron-emission tomography-computerized tomography (PET-CT) scan and magnetic resonance (MR) scan of the brain did not reveal any evidence of distant metastases.
The patient was not a surgical candidate due to her poor pulmonary function (FEV1 = 0.9 L, FEV1/forced vital capacity [FVC] = 39%). She consented to undergo SABR. 4D-CT simulation was performed with vacuum cushion immobilization and the gross tumour volume (GTV) was contoured on the end-inspiratory and end-expiratory phases. No margin for microscopic disease extension was used. An internal target volume (ITV) was generated by merging the end-inspiratory and end-expiratory GTVs and a margin of 0.5 cm around the ITV was used to generate the planning target volume (PTV). Free-breathing treatment delivery was chosen due to minimal tumour respiratory motion. A risk-adapted schedule of 60 Gy in 8 fractions (biologically effective dose = 105 Gy10) was delivered every other day via a flattening filter-free volumetric modulated arc therapy technique using two 225-degree 6MV arcs on a linear accelerator. The dose was prescribed to the 80% isodose line, which encompassed 97.5% of the planning target volume. Planning was performed on Pinnacle version 9.10 with heterogeneity correction, using published dose constraints for normal tissues . The mean lung dose was 3.3 Gy, and the volume of lung receiving ≥ 20 Gy or more (V20) was 4.3%. She completed radiotherapy in February 2017. Figure shows selected images from the patient’s radiotherapy plan.
Two months following completion of SABR, the patient was admitted to a community hospital with dyspnea, hypoxia, tachypnea and increased production of yellow sputum. She was afebrile, with no leukocytosis. A CT pulmonary angiogram did not demonstrate pulmonary embolism, though bilateral inflammatory opacities were suspicious for an infectious etiology. There was no evidence of an inflammatory process geometrically associated with the radiotherapy field suspicious for radiation pneumonitis. Sputum cultures did not identify a causative organism, though the patient was started on antibiotics empirically prior to obtaining a sputum sample and a viral cause was also possible. After discussion with the Respirology and Radiation Oncology services, she was started on cefuroxime and prednisone 50 mg daily to cover all potential etiologies. Her respiratory function returned to baseline and she was discharged after 12 days of admission with a tapering schedule of prednisone. A follow-up CT 1 month later showed resolution of the bilateral opacities.
Since discharge, our patient’s pulmonary function and subjective dyspnea have returned to pre-treatment levels and remained stable. Her most recent FEV1 was 0.9 L, with FEV1/FVC of 37% in March of 2018. Surveillance CTs at regular intervals demonstrated good local control, and post-treatment fibrotic pulmonary changes that are common following SABR . To date, the radiographic fibrotic changes do not harbor adverse features that would be suggestive of recurrence and/or warrant PET-CT scan or repeat biopsy. The patient is alive and well as of May 2018.