A 48-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with suffering from severe CC of the right eye , ocular movement disorder, and ptosis. The patient had no particularly medical, family, and psycho-social history. The patient complained of dryness and hyperemia in his right eye for 2 weeks prior to admission, and CC developed 1 week prior to admission. He was referred to our hospital, since these symptoms did not improve despite administration of eye drops. His consciousness level was clear and neurological examinations revealed no abnormalities except for the symptoms of the right eye. Laboratory evaluations including hormonal tests did not detect any abnormalities. The basal levels of anterior and posterior pituitary hormones were within the normal range with no increase or decrease, and no symptoms of diabetes insipidus or electrolyte abnormalities were observed. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging revealed a 2-cm sellar mass lesion with cyst formation . The mass extended to the suprasellar region and invaded the right CS, and appeared as iso-intensity on T1-weighted and T2-weighted MR imaging, with heterogeneous enhancement after contrast medium administration. The cystic lesion appeared as low intensity on T1-weighted MR imaging, high intensity on T2-weighted MR imaging, without enhancement after contrast medium administration. MR angiography did not reveal CCF, aneurysms, or other abnormal findings. Computed tomography (CT) provided no findings suggesting either acute or old hemorrhage in the mass . Axial T2-weighted MR imaging demonstrated dilation of the superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) , so we thought the pituitary tumor had infiltrated the CS resulting in increased pressure within the CS, causing perfusion disorder of the SOV. The patient underwent emergent endoscopic transsphenoidal surgery, and the pituitary tumor was almost totally resected. The mass was soft and easy to curette. The fluid inside the cyst did not demonstrate high pressure, and was almost clear liquid with a slight yellowish tinge. No typical evidence of old hemorrhage suggesting pituitary apoplexy was recognized intraoperatively. Pathological examination demonstrated a typical adenoma pattern of diffuse sheets consisting of eosinophilic PitNET cells, and these findings were consistent with PitNET. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were very weakly positive for growth hormone, negative for adrenocorticotropic hormone, thyroid stimulating hormone, and follicle stimulating hormone. The MIB-1 labeling index was < 1%.
CC of the right eye had remarkably improved 1 week after the surgery . As the CC improved, the symptoms of right oculomotor nerve palsy, especially impaired adduction of the eye, became more prominent. Therefore, prednisolone was prescribed starting at 60 mg/day and finishing by tapering every 4 days (total glucocorticoid treatment period was 28 days). The oculomotor nerve palsies were particularly improved after the glucocorticoid treatment . The patient’s condition continued to improve and he was discharged from our hospital without hormone replacement therapy . There were no hormonal deficits in the evaluation immediately after surgery and 3 months after surgery, and no symptoms of diabetes insipidus were observed. MR imaging 3 months after the surgery demonstrated no recurrence of the tumor and dilation of the SOV had disappeared .