A 56-year-old female presented to the emergency room (ER) with a chief complaint of pain in the right flank area (VAS 4) since one week ago, that worsened one day before hospital admission. The patient underwent DJ stent insertion one year ago and was lost to follow-up, because the patient did not experience complaints with the condition before the pain appeared The patient had hypertension and diabetes mellitus as comorbidities. The patient had a history of previous operations including left nephrectomy, right PCNL, and right right DJ stent placement because of residual stones after right PCNL. Left nephrectomy was performed because the patient's left renal had lost its functional capability.
On physical examination, the vital signs were unremarkable. Right renal percussive pain was positive. Pre operative laboratory evaluation showed normal kidney function(1 ng/mL). A non-contrast CT scan revealed hydronephrosis grade 4 and multiple stones in the right kidney with a size of 2.2 × 2.8 × 3 cm (806 HU) and an encrustation of the proximal tip of the right DJ stent . Complete blood count and renal function were within normal limits. Microscopic stone analysis indicated that the components of the stone were calcium oxalate and uric acid.
The patient then underwent DJ stent removal using the ECIRS technique under general anesthesia. ECIRS was performed by one operator while the other performed URS and removed the DJ stent. An estimated 150 mL of blood were lost during the 45-minute surgery. The patient was set in the supine Valdivia position . The second operator performed a cystoscopy, obtained a DJ stent image from the right ureter, and then performed a right ureteroscopy to evaluate the right ureter. No stones were found in the right ureter. URS was performed until reaching the right renal pyelum, and there was an encrustation of the proximal tip of the right DJ stent. The procedure was followed by a rigid URS to insert contrast (Urografin), a retrograde pyelogram, and then a puncture to dilate the nephroscope access with C-ARM guiding (dilated fluoroscopy) . Simultaneously, the first operator performed laser lithotripsy with a Holmium laser (LUMENIS, Germany) . The stone at the proximal tip was crushed, and the stent was pulled out. The next procedure was the installation of wire, followed by the insertion of the ureteral access sheath with a guiding C-arm and confirmation with fluoroscopy. The flexible ureteroscope was then inserted through the ureteral access sheath, and the stone was visualized. In this procedure, the nephroscope points to the upper pole, while the URS points to the middle pole and pyelum. The ureter was observed in good condition, without any strictures or damage. There is no encrustation on the mid-distal DJ stent . After removal of the intrarenal stone, the stent was completely removed with a stone grasper. A new DJ stent was inserted into the ureter, and an ECIRS approach was used to ensure the correct positioning of the DJ stent. The surgery completed in 45 min. A follow-up evaluation using a C-arm found no residual stone. After the operation, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the fourth postoperative day with no complications. Two weeks after surgery, DJ stent was removed. The patient was classified as Class 1 by the Clavien-Dindo classification which means that there were mild complications that could be treated without surgery. Urine production showed no abnormalities. Post operative renal function was also normal 0.6 ng/ mL. A x-ray kidney, ureters bladder (KUB) examination after nephrostomy release revealed no residual stone . One-month follow-up after surgery showed that the right lower back pain had disappeared.