A 59-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for pains in her right hypochondrium for four months, with rectal bleeding of average abundance for the last 15 days with a weight loss of 8 kg over four months. Abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the right hypochondrium, there was no palpable mass. The digital rectal examination found stool with blood. The rest of the physical examination was normal. Abdominal ultrasound showed a fusiform gallbladder with cholesterolic polyps. The thoracic and abdominopelvic computerized tomography (CT) scan found an irregular thickening, with infiltration of surrounding fat and mesenteric lymphadenopathy, and suspicious parietal thickening of the gallbladder. No metastasis was revealed. .
Eso-gastro-duodenal fibroscopy was normal and the colonoscopy found a circumferential sigmoid mass at 25–35 cm from the anal verge. The pathologic result of the biopsy of the sigmoid mass showed a well-differentiated infiltrating adenocarcinoma. Faced with a suspicious gallbladder, with a sigmoid colon adenocarcinoma with and the absence of metastasis, surgery was decided and a laparotomy was performed, the intraoperative exploration found a mass of the gallbladder fundus with multiple peri-hilar lymphadenopathies with an infracentimetric metastasis of the segment V of the liver, as well as a stenosing sigmoid tumor .
A radical cholecystectomy with lymphadenectomy, and a sigmoid colectomy with a manual end-to-end colorectal anastomosis .
The postoperative follow-up was without incident and the patient was discharged from the hospital on day 7. The pathologic results were as follows:
For the gallbladder: a large cell high-grade carcinoma neuroendocrine carcinoma (G3) invading the liver with a positive expression of chromogranin A, Synaptophysin, and CD56. Ki67 was around 80%; Lymph node metastases (8 N+/8 N).
For the sigmoid colon: a well-differentiated, infiltrating adenocarcinoma with lymph node metastases (2 N+/28 N). The tumor was classified as pT3N1b (AJCC 2019).