A 36-year-old woman presented to a local hospital with a history of neck pain. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a tumor arising from the anterior elements of the C1 and C2 vertebrae. Cervical spine fusion and mass reduction surgery were performed. The resected specimen showed diffuse proliferation of plasma cells and was diagnosed as “plasmacytoma” at that time. Additional radiotherapy was performed, but the patient later dropped out from the treatment course.
Sixteen years later, at the age of 52 years, the patient returned complaining of dysarthria. CT and MRI showed a similar but much larger mass at the same location, and recurrence of the tumor was diagnosed . The mass compressed the spinal cord and was thought to be responsible for the dysarthria. The patient was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. Quantitative serum Ig analysis showed an increased level of IgG (2096 mg/dl; reference range 870–1700 mg/dl) and normal levels of IgM (203 mg/dl; reference range 46–260 mg/dl) and IgA (293 mg/dl; reference range 110–410 mg/dl). A serum Ig-free light chain study revealed increased levels of both free kappa light chain (61.5 mg/l; reference range 2.42–18.92 mg/l) and free lambda light chain (88.1 mg/l; reference range 4.44–26.18 mg/l) (kappa/lambda: 0.70).
Excisional biopsy of the tumor was performed. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated a distinct population of abnormal plasma cells which were positive for CD56 (96%), CD38 (70%), CD45 (9%), and CD19 (1%). Approximately 96% of these tumor cells co-expressed cytoplasmic kappa and lambda light chain based on a CD38-positive gate strategy . Histologically, the specimen showed diffuse proliferation of plasmacytoid tumor cells with pale paranuclear area and dense chromatin, and immunohistochemistry showed that these tumor cells were strongly and diffusely positive for CD138 and MUM1, and negative for CD3, CD20, and CD56. Immunohistochemistry for IgL demonstrated co-expression of kappa and lambda light chain . Additionally, we demonstrated in situ hybridization (ISH) targeting IgL mRNA using FFPE specimen, and ISH also revealed that tumor cells co-expressed kappa and lambda light chain . Bone marrow biopsy showed no evidence of plasmacytes showing dual expression or deviation of kappa and lambda light chain, and additional CT and MRI revealed no skeletal abnormality except for the primary lesion, and absence of end-organ damage attributable to a proliferative plasma cell disorder.
We reviewed the previous specimen and performed additional IgL immunohistochemistry. The sample revealed a histological pattern similar to that of the later sample as well as co-expression of kappa and lambda light chain (Additional file : Fig. S1).
Taking these findings together, the tumor was diagnosed as SPB with dual expression of the kappa and lambda light chains. After diagnosis, the patient underwent nine courses of VRD (bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone) therapy, which reduced the size of the lesion. Two years after diagnosis, the lesions have not increased in size, and bone marrow examinations have shown no progression to PCM.