An 89-year-old Japanese man without dementia presented with a fever of 38 °C and weakness in right leg since 5 days. His symptoms showed no improvement; and therefore, he was admitted to our hospital. The patient reported no interaction with marine mammals (e.g. going to the aquarium, a household pet), no history of previous infection caused by them, and no event of eating raw fish.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension, glaucoma, and organized chronic subdural hematoma (CSH), which was treated with craterization at the age of 80-years. He had been prescribed the following medication: valsartan, 80 mg/day; valproic acid, 800 mg/day; magnesium oxide, 750 mg/day; pantosin, 3.0 g/day; and triazolam, 0.25 mg/day.
At the time of admission, the patient was conscious and lucid, and his vital signs were as follows: heart rate, 79 beats/min and regular; body temperature, 38.0 °C blood pressure, 157/86 mmHg; respiratory rate, 16 breaths/min; peripheral oxygen saturation, 95% in room air. Physical test results showed paralysis of extraocular muscle at downward and left gaze, ataxia, and low manual muscle test (MMT) score of the right side. No meningeal irritation signs (jolt accentuation, neck stiffness, Kernig’s sign, and Brudzinski’s sign) were observed at the time of admission. Two sets of blood culture on day 2 were sterile, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) could not be obtained during admission despite all efforts. Head computed tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were unremarkable, except for the presence of organized CSH. Based on these findings and consultation with the neurologist, we suspected that the patient had Miller Fisher syndrome. However, the anti-ganglioside antibody test result was negative.
After admission, the fever and neurological symptoms of the patient improved without treatment. He was discharged from the hospital and he stayed overnight at his home from day 21 to 22; he did not come into contact with saltwater or marine mammals and did not eat raw fish during his stay at home. He returned to the hospital on day 22 and presented with a fever of 38.8 °C and left hemiplegia with unconsciousness. Laboratory investigation results on day 24 were as follows : white blood cell (WBC) count, 8610/μL (neutrophils, 84.8%; lymphocytes, 9.3%; and monocytes, 5.8%); and C-reactive protein (CRP), 19.42 mg/dL. Neurological findings on day 25 included positive meningeal irritation signs (Jolt accentuation and neck stiffness), ocular motility disorder in all directions, left cranial nerve disorder, low MMT score of left upper and lower limb, and extrapyramidal disorder. CSF examination results on the same day were as follows: initial pressure, 27 cmH2O; number of cells, 69/μL (number of monocytes, 13/μL; and number of apocytes 56/μL); protein, 168 mg/dL; and glucose level, 39 mg/dL (blood glucose level, 122 mg/dL). A phase-contrast MRI of the patient’s head indicated a contrast enhancement effect in his right meninges and cerebral edema in the frontal and parietal lobes, and blood culture reports showed the presence of spirillums. These results suggested bacteremia and meningitis. Taking into consideration the pharmacodynamics of antibiotics in CSF, we prescribed the patient with meropenem (2 g every 8 h) from day 24. The symptoms and laboratory findings improved after starting the treatment .
Blood culture results on day 22 showed the presence of gram-negative spirillums belonging to the genus Campylobacter; however, the species of the bacteria was not confirmed. 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the bacteria obtained from the blood culture identified the bacterial strain as Campylobacter insulaenigrae. The number of cells (monocytes and apocytes) and glucose levels in CSF samples were a clear indicator of bacterial meningitis; however, the culture and genetic analyses showed that the CSF samples were sterile. We changed the treatment from meropenem to ampicillin (2 g every 4 h) from day 32, based on the result of the drug sensitivity test using the disk method and discontinued the treatment on day 53 (total duration 29 days); we observed that the day-to-day activity level of the patient reached levels similar to that before contracting bacteremia.