A 19-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history was referred to the ophthalmologist for decreased vision in the left eye to counting fingers, headaches, and a sharp pain in the left orbit and ear. At fundoscopy we found papillary edema, which was found to be caused by compression of the left optic nerve attributed to a large mucocele originating from the sphenoid sinus . Emergency marsupialization of the mucocele was achieved through endoscopic sphenoidotomy and restored the vision to 20/25 . However, 2 weeks later, his vision decreased to 20/50. A more extensive, bilateral decompressing sphenoidotomy with biopsies was performed. The histopathology showed a fibrosing lymphoplasmacellular infiltration with an IgG4/IgG ratio of 0.33 and was therefore suggestive of IgG4-RD, but the criteria for a definitive diagnosis were not met . Dexamethasone 0.5 mg 3 times a day was commenced and vision improved to 20/32. Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after 2 months demonstrated new multicystic lesions, this time expanding to the complete anterior skull base. Additional endoscopic decompressing surgery was performed, complicated by a small cerebrospinal fluid leak that was sealed using absorbable hemostat and fibrin sealant . The postoperative MRI still showed mass effect on the orbit, including the optic nerve . After 3 months, the patient reported a decrease in smell and loss of vision to counting fingers, and findings on MRI showed a mass effect on the frontal lobes. Additional extensive endoscopic decompressing surgery with new biopsies was performed, again complicated by a cerebrospinal fluid leak sealed by allogeneic fascia lata, absorbable hemostat, and fibrin sealant (Supplementary ). Histopathology now confirmed the diagnosis of IgG4-RD with extravasated mucus and extensive chronic inflammation. Results from 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography did not show localizations in other parts of the body. After 3 months, the patient was started on prednisone 65 mg/d because of an increase of the lesion on MRI and vision reduced to only light perception. Rituximab was commenced after tapering of prednisone when the exophthalmos increased. After 4 months of rituximab treatment the patient reported a complete loss of vision in the left eye, likely caused by an increased mass effect on the optic nerve. An extensive combined craniofacial-endoscopic surgery was planned, which included a bifrontal and left pretemporal trepanation made to remove the cysts while preserving most of the dura (Supplementary ). After the cranial resection, an endoscopic dissection toward the caudal part of the left orbital apex was performed and multiple cystic lesions with yellow-brownish fluid were opened. A defect of the anterior skull base was reconstructed with allogeneic fascia lata, a galea flap, free abdominal fat, and fibrin sealant. Last, the bone flap was fixated. Histopathology showed only features of a mucocele. No residual multicystic mass was identified on follow-up MRI . The patient will receive intravenous methylprednisolone monthly for the next 6 months to prevent further complications, such as compression of the contralateral optic nerve.