A 59 year old male, presented to Sri Jayawardenapura hospital in February 2017 with a history of progressive impairment of speech, unsteady gait and reduced intake of food over a week. He had had an altered level of behavior for 1 day and a generalized seizure lasting for less than 5 minutes where he was admitted to the local hospital. He denies any limb weakness, difficulty in swallowing, loss of sensation, urinary or bowel incontinence.
There was no history of vomiting, headache, photophobia or fever. He had no past history of chronic kidney disease, gastric or intestinal surgery or chronic diarrhoea. Apart from haematinics which were prescribed to him for iron deficiency anemia due to hemorrhoids, he was not on any regular medication.
His brother was affected with an adult onset seizure disorder and had had cerebral calcification. He was a retired lecturer, with a good family support and reasonable economic background. He was a non smoker and did not consume alcohol.
On general examination he was obese with a body mass index of 28 kgm2. Mild pallor was noted but he was afebrile and there were no bradymetarcapals or metartasals. Neurological examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14/15. Neck stiffness and Kernig’s sign were absent. Muscle power of grade four was noted in all limbs. Muscle tone was slightly high in all the limbs. Chovstek & Trousseau’s signs were positive. Abdominal, Cardiovascular and respiratory examination was unremarkable. The following figure shows the timeline of history of the patient.
The above table shows the summary of investigations of the patient. Diagnostic evaluation revealed severe hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia and elevated serum intact PTH level. Serum magnesium was marginally low and 25-hydroxyvitamin D was in insufficient range. His electro cardiogram showed T inversions in lead V1 to V3 and the QT interval was normal. His Chest x- ray was normal and hand x-ray revealed osteopenia but no soft tissue calcifications or bradymetarcarpals.
The below figures represent the imaging findings of our patients. Figure shows the Non contrast CT scan of the brain revealing extensive cerebral calcifications in cerebral cortex and cerebellar hemispheres and Fig. shows the Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain revealing bilateral basal ganglia thalamic and dentate ganglia calcification.
The patient was managed with a multidisciplinary approach involving internist, neurologist and endocrinologist. Since there was an obvious precipitating factor for the seizure anti epileptic therapy was considered unnecessary and attention was focused on correcting metabolic derangements which precipitated seizures. Patient’s severe symptomatic hypocalcaemia was initially corrected with intravenous 10% calcium gluconate 10 ml over 10 min followed by an infusion of 50 mg elemental calcium per hour for 24 h. Later oral supplements were given as 1200 mg of elemental Calcium in 3 divided doses. He was also replaced with parenteral magnesium sulphate 2 g over 20 min for the coexisting contributory hypomagnesaemia. Patient was commenced on 1αcholecalceferol 0.25 μ g three times a day and gradually increased to 1 μ g three times a day over few days along with calcium and magnesium supplements.
Patient’s clinical state was monitored 4 hourly and biochemical parameters were monitored daily. Patient did not have further seizures and tetany. Chovsteck’s and Trousseau’s signs and confusion resolved. He did not have any further episodes of altered behavior. Slowness of speech continued for about 2 weeks which later gradually improved. Serum ionized calcium levels gradually improved from 0.5 to 0.93 mmol/l. Inorganic phosphate levels reduced from 9.5 mg/dl to 5.3 mg/dl, intact PTH reduced from 76.3 pg/ml to 67.7 pg/ml. Serum magnesium levels improved from 1.4 mg/dl to 1.9 mg/dl. With the resolution of tetany CPK levels reduced from 1294 U/L to 574 U/L. These changes occurred over 1 week.
Upon both clinical and biochemical response patient was discharged with calcium carbonate 1 g three times a day, elemental magnesium 100 mg three times a day as magnesium carbonate and 1αcholecalceferol 1 μg three times a day. The therapeutic challenge faced during follow up was to maintain a low normal calcium level to prevent nephrocalcinosis.