A 68-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with general malaise and fatigue. She was known to have type II diabetes mellitus controlled with insulin and metformin. In addition to that, she was on an oral beta blocker (metoprolol 50 mg a day) and self-administered a regular dose of aspirin (81 mg a day). The complaint started a week before admission when she discontinued the insulin and decided to begin with herbal treatment instead, which is teucrium polium. The patient used to soak the plant in hot water and drink three large cups daily for a week. Subsequently, she had general fatigue, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, polydipsia, polyuria, breathlessness, and no defecation for 2 days. The family confirmed that the patient did not have any heart conditions before.
On physical examination, vital signs were taken: (blood pressure: 190/50, heart rate: 34/min, O2 saturation: 97%, Respiratory rate: 19/min), besides dry mucus membranes and grade II pitting oedema that were noticed.
Investigations started with laboratory tests (shown in Tables –). Diabetic ketoacidosis was clear, according to Glucose, ketone, and arterial blood gases. The increase in white blood cells besides the urinalysis guided us to urinary tract infection (UTI). The elevation of aspartate aminotransferase, alanine transaminase, creatinine, and urea was evidence of liver and kidney injury. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed complete heart block , while echocardiogram revealed severe cardiac hypokinesia with ejection fraction of 55%, Grade 2 mitral valve regurgitation, aortic valve regurgitation, and an inferior vena cava of 17 mm. The final diagnosis was diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), complete heart block, acute liver and kidney damage, and UTI.
The patient was admitted to the ICU and treated for the DKA with an insulin pump, and an antibiotic treatment for UTI, in addition to a dopamine pump and atropine. After 24 h, the anion gap returned to normal, the blood pressure was 120/60, but her heart rate was still 34/min. On day 3, a temporary pacemaker was placed with no effect on the heart to be mentioned. On day 5, alanine transaminase and aspartate aminotransferase dropped to 117 and 46, respectively, but creatinine and urea rose to 2 and 90 in that order. Afterward, she had a 1-min sudden cardiac arrest and syncope that resulted in aspiration pneumonia, so metronidazole was added to the treatment, and an improvement in heart rate was noticed, which reached 73 beats per min . On day 9, liver enzymes and kidney damage improved, and the lab values were as follows: aspartate aminotransferase: 62 IU/l, alanine transaminase: 17 IU/l, Cr: 1.0 mg/dl, Urea: 77 mg/dl, Glucose: 160. The patient was discharged to insert a permanent pacemaker. After that, we have heard from the family that she passed away, and we could not know any information about the cause of death.