A 60-year-old woman with no relevant past medical history, including alcohol or family history, was admitted to our department because of progressive gait instability. Two weeks before admission, the patient reported difficulties in writing. On admission, she presented with a 5-day history of unsteadiness of gait and inadequate coordination of her extremities, along with truncal instability.
The findings on admission were as follows: height, 154 cm; body weight, 50 kg; body temperature, 36.2 °C; blood pressure, 125/85 mmHg; and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation, 98% (room air). On examination, her cognition was normal, spontaneous nystagmus was absent, and smooth-pursuit eye movements were normal. Manual muscle testing was performed bilaterally, and a score of 5/5 was noted for the upper and lower extremities. Although walking without aid was possible, she showed dysmetria of all four limbs, trunk, and gait ataxia.
Routine biochemistry and hematological test results were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head did not show any signal change in the brain parenchyma. In particular, no abnormalities were observed in the brainstem or cerebellum. The CSF was clear, with a cell count of 30 cells/μL (76% mononuclear cells, 24% polymorphonuclear cells), glucose concentration of 84 mg/dL (124 mg/dL blood glucose), protein concentration of 82 mg/dL, and positive oligoclonal bands. No evidence of malignant cells was seen on CSF cytology. Consecutive serum and CSF analyses did not indicate active infections (herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, Epstein–Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus) and systemic autoimmune causes. Further biochemical examination revealed normal levels of vitamins B1 and B12.
We suspected PNS and tested for neuronal autoantibodies. The patient tested strongly positive for the anti-Yo antibody in the blood but negative for other antineuronal antibodies (Hu, Ri, Tr, CV2, amphiphysin, recoverin, SOX1, titin, zic4, and GAD65). All neuronal autoantibodies were confirmed on immunoblotting with recombinant proteins.
With the PCD diagnosis, intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) was administered for 3 days, followed by seven sessions of plasma exchange. However, the patient’s neurological symptoms deteriorated, with progressive staggering vertigo, nausea, nystagmus in all directions of gaze, dysarthria, dysphagia, and especially severe truncal ataxia, disabling her walk.
At the same time, thoracic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) and an enhanced abdominal MRI to identify the primary tumor were unremarkable.
Next, we performed fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) at another hospital to identify the primary tumor because we could not perform it in our hospital. The FDG-PET showed abnormal hot spots in the left neck. CT with contrast enhancement showed a tumor associated with the left submandibular gland, showing contrast effects along the periphery and an increase in lymph nodes with calcification .
After otorhinolaryngology consultation, the patient underwent total left submandibular gland resection, including the tumor, and modified neck dissection for the ipsilateral metastatic lymph nodes. Histopathology showed tumor cells with large round nuclei and tubular and cribriform structures with comedo necrosis. Immunohistochemistry revealed that these cells were positive for human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and focally positive for androgen receptor (AR) . Histological and immunohistochemical analyses revealed salivary duct carcinoma (SDC). We diagnosed PCD with anti-Yo antibodies and an associated SDC with reference to the diagnostic criteria .
Tumor resection was initiated, which halted the disease progression and improved the vertigo, nausea, and nystagmus. The patient received intravenous methylprednisolone 1000 mg/day for 3 consecutive days, followed by 10 sessions of plasma exchange during the following months. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was administered for 5 additional days, and cyclophosphamide therapy was performed. However, this treatment did not alleviate the symptoms in all four limbs, trunk, and gait ataxia, even though the anti-Yo titers reduced following treatment. The patient was transferred to another hospital 4 months after admission because there was no improvement in her neurological symptoms; she is still in the hospital and left bedridden.