A 60-year-old man with chronic and complex sacrococcygeal pilonidal disease (SPD) was referred to our outpatient department for evaluation and management. The SPD had manifested 7 years prior to this admission. The patient reported several episodes of pilonidal abscess formation, which had resolved with either spontaneous drainage and discharge or topical incision. His past medical history was unremarkable. The patient was morbidly obese (body mass index (BMI) 49), but his nutritional status was good. Clinical examination revealed chronic SPD with complex fistulas that had formed through chronic inflammation. He underwent wide surgical excision of the pilonidal sinus, including all fistulas, and histopathological examination of the specimen revealed chronic inflammation. The surgical trauma was left to heal by secondary intention, but even 6 months later, the healing process was poor, with seropurulent discharge detected . Subsequently, colonoscopy and a percutaneous fistulography were performed, revealing an anal canal-pilonidal fistula. He underwent a more radical surgical resection , with a prophylactic loop colostomy to protect the wound. To facilitate healing, the wound was closed using the vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) technique (V.A.C; KCI International, San Antonio, TX) . However, the healing made slow progress. Multiple biopsies were then taken from the surgical site, which revealed the development of SCC .
A new colonoscopy was scheduled, and biopsies of the anal canal were obtained. These confirmed the development of SCC. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed SCC partial invasion of the coccyx and sacrum. The inguinal lymph nodes were clinically impalpable, and imaging confirmed that they were normal. We decided that an aggressive surgical approach was warranted and performed abdominoperineal resection, followed by resection of the invaded traumatic area, complete removal of the coccyx, and partial resection of the sacrum. Perforator-based flaps were used to reconstruct the defected area. The localization of perforators around the sacrum was established preoperatively by a handheld Doppler ultrasound scanner. The pedicle was secured; the rest of the flap was raised; and once the flap perfusion was satisfactory, it was carefully lifted from the donor bed and rotated around this pedicle into the recipient defect. The donor defect was closed primarily.
Histological examination revealed moderately to poorly differentiated SCC. The cells were medium to large, with moderately pleomorphic nuclei. There was focal keratinization, and the tumor exhibited a predominantly solid and focally trabecular pattern of growth. The neoplastic cells infiltrated the large bowel wall, dermis, bone, and skeletal muscle .
The patient was treated with adjuvant radiation therapy postoperatively. No adjuvant chemotherapy was offered. Despite the aggressive surgical intervention, the prognosis was poor. Recurrence was found in the sacrum and para-aorta lymph nodes 9 months after the radical surgery, and the patient died of a respiratory infection soon after this.