A healthy 64 year old lady received a LifeScan (privately funded whole body CT scan) for her birthday which revealed an incidental mass in the right iliac fossa (RIF). This was investigated further with a colonoscopy which revealed small benign polyps only. Initially a putative diagnosis of GastroIntestinal Stromal Tumour (GIST) was considered and the patient referred to our NHS Colorectal outpatient clinic.
Clinically, the lady was well with no weight loss, anaemia, change in bowel habit or loss of appetite. She complained of RIF discomfort but admitted that this had only manifested since her CT scan. She was extremely anxious about her condition and the underlying diagnosis. On examination, a non-tender 8 cm mass was palpable in the RIF and a routine blood screen was entirely normal. The case was discussed at the Lower Gastrointestinal Multidisciplinary Team (MDT) meeting and it was agreed that a repeat CT scan with contrast should be performed. The scan demonstrated a 6 × 5 cm heterogeneous mass in the RIF adjacent to the peritoneal wall . No other abnormality was evident but a normal appendix could not be identified. These findings were discussed again at the MDT meeting and a differential diagnosis of mucinous tumour or chronic mucocele of the appendix was suggested.
The possible diagnoses were discussed with the patient and after consideration of the risks and benefits, she agreed to surgery by a laparoscopic approach. At laparoscopy a 6 × 4 × 3.5 cm extraperitoneal ovoid nodule was found on the abdominal wall in the RIF. In light of the unusual appearances, the procedure was converted to laparotomy but no intra-peritoneal pathology was noted. The lesion was excised and sent for histological examination. Macroscopically, it had a solid cut surface with tan, brown and cream areas and contained a 1.2 cm cyst. Microscopically, it was composed of hypocellular and hypercellular areas. The hypocellular areas were oedematous and myxoid, containing chronic inflammatory cells and spindle cells which were haphazardly arranged, aggregating in areas to form small focal palisades. The spindle cells showed hyperchromatic and irregular nuclei although no mitotic figures were seen . There were several foci of stromal hyalinisation and sclerosis, with numerous ectatic blood vessels. Immunohistochemistry showed that the spindle cells were strongly positive for S100 protein and a final diagnosis of benign ancient schwannoma was made. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well and was discharged 2 days after surgery. She is now asymptomatic.