A 21-year-old man came to the Department of Gastroenterology of our hospital for "having upper gastrointestinal pain with dysphagia after mistakenly consuming an enzyme-based detergent 6 mo ago". The patient developed burning sensation and pain in the the oral, throat, and chest behind the sternum and under the xiphoid process after taking an enzyme-based detergent by mistake on May 5, 2020. The pain score was 8 (total score: 10). Contrast enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) showed infectious lesions in both lungs. Anti-infection treatment was given and the patient was discharged after improvement. On May 25, 2020, the patient had difficulty in swallowing and vomited after eating fluid food. Upper gastrointestinal imaging (UGI) showed that he had CES and pharyngeal fistula , but the patient decided to return to the local hospital for treatment. Gastroscopy was performed in the First Hospital of Lanzhou University on June 1, 2020, which showed that the esophagus was narrow 19 cm away from the incisors, and the endoscope could not pass through. Esophageal scar hyperplasia was noticeable, and it was brittle and prone to bleeding. A gastric tube was placed for enteral nutrition. At 6 mo, the patient's weight had decreased by 15 kg. Finally, the patient came to our hospital for further treatment (November 23, 2021). On admission, continuous enteral nutrition was given since the patient complained of dysphagia and vomiting immediately after eating. He had persistent pain behind the sternum and under the xiphoid process. The pain score was 4 (total score: 10). The patient had shortness of breath, accompanied by cough and expectoration. The sputum was yellow and purulent, which was semisolid and difficult to expectorate.
The patient mistakenly consumed an enzyme-based detergent 6 mo ago.
The patient was healthy in the past.
There was no remarkable personal and family history.
The Kubota water swallow test suggested that the patient had grade 5 swallowing function. The trachea was in midline, the breathing sounds in both lungs were not clear, and moist rales could be heard in the left lung. Bowel sounds at a frequency of 3-5 times/min could be heard.
The results are all shown in Table .
The UGI and endoscopy results are shown in the figures.