A 47-year-old female presented to the orthopedic clinic for the evaluation of a bump over her left sternoclavicular joint that had been present for four 4 months. On initial presentation, there was no pain in the area, and she denied pain with range of motion. She reported an increase in the size of the lesion over the 4 months since first noticing it. She denied any trauma to the area. She had no history of fevers, weight loss, or smoking. She denied any family history of cancer or any personal history of masses in any other location.
Radiographs demonstrated a lytic lesion of the medial aspect of the left clavicle that was difficult to delineate as it was overlying the mediastinum. She had a computed tomography (CT) scan of the left clavicle without contrast that demonstrated a lytic lesion of the medial metaphysis and epiphysis of the left clavicle which extended to and invaded through the cortex . There was a small area with periosteal reaction.
The aggressive nature of the lesion on CT scan was concerning for neoplasm and we recommended that the patient get an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast to further evaluate the lesion. The MRI confirmed an erosive, lytic lesion of the left medial clavicle with surrounding edema . At this point, based on the imaging and our evaluation of the patient, the differential included osteomyelitis, eosinophilic granuloma, metastasis from another primary neoplasm, multiple myeloma, and lymphoma.
Basic laboratories were also obtained at this time. The C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) were slightly elevated at 1.28 mg/L (normal 0.0-–0.5 mg/L) and 24 mm/hr (normal 0-–15 mm/hr). The white blood cell count (WBC) was within normal limits.
Given the uncertainty of the diagnosis with imaging and laboratories alone, it was recommended, and the patient agreed to proceed with a biopsy of the lesion. The biopsy was sent for culture and for evaluation by the pathologist.
The biopsy showed fibrous tissue with acute and chronic inflammation with skeletal muscle present. There were predominantly lymphocytes with scattered plasma cells and aggregates of neutrophils forming abscesses involving the bone. This was consistent with acute and chronic osteomyelitis . Given the presence of histiocytic cells, scattered eosinophils, and the density of lymphoid infiltrate, neoplastic and non-neoplastic processes also needed to be considered in the differential pending special studies. Final diagnosis from pathology showed acute and chronic inflammatory infiltrate with no significant lymphoid immunophenotypic abnormalities detected. There was no evidence of lymphoma, plasma cell neoplasm, or metastatic carcinoma. An irrigation and debridement with partial medial clavicle excision were then recommended and performed. The pathology from this procedure again showed acute and chronic inflammation with multi-nucleated cells. Cultures had no growth at five 5 days and intravenous (IV) daptomycin was continued.
Two and a half months after initial presentation, though the patient had some resolution of swelling with intravenous (IV) daptomycin, she developed a sinus tract at the site of the biopsy. An irrigation and debridement with partial medial clavicle excision were then recommended and performed. The pathology from this procedure again showed acute and chronic inflammation with multi-nucleated cells. Cultures had no growth at five 5 days and IV daptomycin was continued.
The patient presented for follow-up 3 ½ Three and a half months after her initial presentation and she indicated she was starting to have left knee pain near the proximal end of her left fibula . Radiographs of the left knee demonstrated an osteolytic lesion in the fibular head with a distinct, well-marginated border, and without sclerosis . This new lesion, with negative cultures up to this point, raised the suspicion for CRMO. The patient was sent for a bone scan. The antibiotics were discontinued, and she was started on naproxen 500 mg twice a day.
The bone scan demonstrated persistent uptake in the left medial clavicle and positive three-phase uptake at the left fibular head and the right clavicle suggestive of chronic osteomyelitis . Naproxen was continued for the patient, and she was referred to rheumatology for further treatment with the diagnosis of CRMO.
The initial tests from the mycobacterium culture were negative at the time of biopsy. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for Mycobacterium species eventually was positive for MAC. Despite this development, the patient’s symptoms had resolved while on naproxen at six 6 months follow-up. Given her improvement and normal laboratories, the decision was made not to restart antibiotics and the patient was instructed to continue follow-up with rheumatology with orthopedic follow-up as needed.