The patient is a 77-year-old male, with known cases of Rheumatoid Arthritis, Bronchial Asthma, and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary disease. He presented to our clinic with a history of low back pain radiating to left lower extremity for several years. The pain was gradually increasing in severity, aggravated by walking up hill and relieved partially by pain medications associated with neurological claudications. There was no history of bowel bladder dysfunction or other cauda equina symptoms. The main complaint was pain that affected his daily living activities. Back examination revealed no obvious deformity with scar in the lumber area from previous surgery. No tenderness or hotness was appreciated. Flexion of 70 degree and extension of 20 degrees was achievable. The Adams forward bending test negative. A straight leg rise test was positive at 40 degrees hip flexion. Distal neurovascular exam was normal apart from decreased power on the left lower limb (4/5). The patient presented 2 years before the current presentation with a similar history of pain. An MRI at that time showed L4-L5 broad based central and right paracentral disc herniation with sever critical canal stenosis with foraminal narrowing related to disc hight loss and multilevel degenerative disc disease. For which he underwent L4-L5 lumber laminectomy and decompression. Post-operative period was unremarkable and patient discharged home. Pre-operative X-rays during this presentation showing significant instability and degenerative scoliosis is demonstrated in . MRI entire spine showed multilevel degenerative disc disease with L1-L2 and L2-L3 dorsal complex of disc protrusion and osteophytes, L3-L4 interval progression with secondary spinal stenosis, L4-L5 reduced spinal stenosis compared to previous images . Underwent XLIF technique at L3-L4, L4-L5 and then 2nd stage with posterior L3-L5 fusion with pedicle screws with standard surgical steps without any complications . Four days post-operatively; the patient demonstrated lateral flank bruises and discoloration with dropping hemoglobin from 12 to 84 g/L during follow-up complete blood count and left groin pain and numbness. An abdominal CT scan was obtained, showing large left-sided retroperitoneal hematoma measuring about 8.3 × 8.5 × 17 cm in AP, transverse, and craniocaudal diameter respectively, inseparable from the left iliopsoas muscle . Moreover, post-operatively the patient was on heparin 5,000 units subcutaneously twice a day and his coagulation profile pre-operatively was normal, post-operatively was slightly disturbed with INR 1.3, PT 15.9 and PTT 38.5. Patient was not known to have any coagulopathy but he was on aspirin preoperatively, which was supposedly stopped 7 days before surgery, but the patient did not. General surgery and medical teams were involved, transfusion of 4 units of Packed Red Blood Cells (PRBC), 6 units of Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP) and 2 units of platelets done for the patient. Patient was stable afterwards, and was on close observation. Conservative management was undertaken, with follow-up CT scan showing no progression. Patient was discharged few days later in stable condition with symptoms and signs of femoral nerve palsy; follow-up CT scans revealed resolution of the hematoma . Outpatient follow-up 4 months later revealed complete resolution of the palsy.