A 50-year-old male was admitted to the hospital due to abdominal distension and poor appetite. Laboratory examination results show that hemoglobin of 62 g/L, albumin of 32.2 g/L and the stool routine occult blood test was weakly positive. In order to further clarify the cause, the patient was examined by gastrointestinal endoscopy. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed that the whole gastric mucosa was nodular hyperplasia, protuberance, densely distributed, and clustered locally, mainly in the fundus of the stomach. Massive hyperplasia lesions were removed at the endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) of gastric body lesions for examination. A mass of nodular hyperplasia was found in the fundus of the stomach, and the structure of the top gland was lost. Two biopsies were taken. A large diverticulum can be seen in the descending colon, with smooth mucosa, and no bleeding, erosion, ulcer or other lesions are found. A pedunculated polyp of 1.0*2.0 cm in size can be seen in the sigmoid colon. The surface mucosa was congestive and edematous with erosion. A snare device was used to snare, and high-frequency electric resection was performed. The other colonic and rectal mucosa were smooth, with clear vascular texture and no obvious abnormalities. – show the patient’s condition under a gastroscope. Pathological findings suggest the following: 1. (gastric fundus biopsy) mucosa high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia; 2. (gastric biopsy) juvenile polyps ; 3. (sigmoid colon biopsy) Low-grade tubular adenoma with clean margins. Immunohistochemical results showed CK8/18 (+), Ki-67 (+50%), P53 (-, mutant), and HP (–).
According to the pathological results, JPS was suspected, so we suggested that the patient and his brother should carry out gene testing to determine whether there is gene mutation. Gene testing of the patient and his brother showed that the SMAD4: c.266_269del pathogenic variant was present in exon 3 of the SMAD4 gene . It is a frameshift mutation caused by the deletion of base 266-269, resulting in the change of glycine at position 89 to valine (SMAD4: p.G89Vfs*4). This pathogenic variant will lead to early termination of translation, encoding truncated protein products and inactivating SMAD protein complexes, thus affecting the TGF-β signaling pathway.
In combination with clinical pathology and genetic testing, the patient was diagnosed with gastric juvenile polyposis syndrome with SMAD4 gene pathogenic variant. It is recommended that the patient undergo preventive total gastrectomy. Because cystoscopy indicates bladder tumor recurrence, bladder tumor resection should be performed first. The patient was advised to follow up with gastroscopy and to undergo surgery in a timely manner.
Past history: The patient had undergone “partial cystectomy+cystectomy+left ureteroplasty+left ureteral stenting tube placement” due to “uroepithelial papillary tumor”, and “laparoscopic right hemicolectomy” due to “well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the right colon”. Family history: One brother of the patient died of colon cancer and the other brother suffered from colon polyps.