A 26-year-old woman was admitted to our outpatient clinic with the complaints of low back and right hip pain which had been present for 3 years. She reported to have early morning stiffness for about 40 min. The anamnesis revealed that she had taken a daily dose of 40 mg ISO for acne vulgaris for 8 months 3 years before, and then the drug was discontinued upon the recommendation of a dermatology doctor. When she presented to our outpatient clinic with the complaint of hip and back pain, she was no longer receiving ISO.
The patient mentioned that she started to experience pain at the fourth months of ISO use, and she had no previous history of low back or buttock pain before this treatment. The pain in her back and right buttock sometimes also radiated to the thighs. Her back pain increased with rest and decreased with activity. She also had no history of infection that could cause reactive arthritis, psoriasis, uveitis, conjunctivitis or peripheral arthritis inconsistent with ankylosing spondylitis, enteropathic arthropathies and psoriatic arthropathy. She had no family history of axial spondyloarthropathy. On the physical examination, the range of lumbar flexion was limited and painful. It was found that the results of sacroiliac compression test and flexion-abduction-external rotation (FABER) test were positive for the right side. There was no peripheral arthritis or enthesopathy finding. The examination of other systems was unremarkable. In the blood test, HLA-B27 and anti-nuclear antibody were negative. C-reactive protein was 4.1 mg/L (normal range 0–5) and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 6 mm/hour. Other rheumatologic tests and cell blood count were unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed the presence of bilateral chronic sacroiliitis . Cortical irregularity, erosions and subchondral changes were observed on the iliac surfaces adjacent to the joint bilaterally, especially the right side. There were oily changes in the opposite bone surfaces, more prominent at the right sacroiliac joint. No bone marrow edema was detected at the sacroiliac parts of the joints, consistent with chronic sacroiliitis. The patient was started on a daily dose of 120 mg acemetacin. At one-month follow-up, low back and hip pain was relieved and morning stiffness was decreased to 20 min. A home-based exercise program was added to the medical treatment. The patient was symptom-free after six months.