A 6-year-old Caucasian female from central Pennsylvania with a self-reported English heritage presented to her primary care physician complaining of fatigue, icterus, dark urine and intermittent abdominal pain associated with nausea and vomiting. Physical exam showed a normally developing child whose weight was 24.1 kg, height 113.5 cm, temperature 36°C, blood pressure 123/68 mmHg and pulse 109. She had mild abdominal tenderness and splenomegaly. The patient’s past medical history was negative for any major diseases, her immunizations were up to date and her birth history was normal with no record of neonatal jaundice. Her father and paternal uncle were known to have anemia, and her paternal grandmother and aunt both had splenectomies when they were young. The patient was referred to a pediatric hematologist for further examination.
Laboratory testing ordered by her pediatric hematologist demonstrated anemia (Hgb 10.9 g/dL), mild macrocytosis (94.3 fL) and significant reticulocytosis (391,200 cells/μL or 10.16%). Capillary zone electrophoresis (CE) demonstrated migration of several peaks: one of which was an unknown hemoglobin variant (image not available). A CE chromatogram performed at a later date after transfusion is included to show the migration pattern of our patient’s hemoglobin variant, which eluted slightly earlier than HbA.
Our patient’s blood sample was then sent to a national reference laboratory for further characterization. Using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for hemoglobin , several hemoglobin types were demonstrated. One of the hemoglobin forms, and unknown variant (34.6% of total), eluted slightly earlier than HbA (61.2%). Alkaline gel electrophoresis was also utilized to demonstrate the migration of the unknown hemoglobin variant, which migrated slightly more anodally than HbA .
With an unknown variant present, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) sequence analysis of the patient’s hemoglobin genes was performed at the same national reference laboratory, which determined that this unknown variant was Hemoglobin Shepherds Bush. Once diagnosed, our patient’s father and paternal uncle tested positive for the same mutation.
After diagnosis, our patient was vaccinated against encapsulated bacteria and followed yearly to monitor her splenomegaly. At age 9, she presented to her pediatrician with a 5-day course of upper respiratory symptoms and fever. She was tachycardic, and laboratory tests revealed anemia (Hgb 6.0 g/dL), a reticulocyte percentage of 0.26% and a low platelet count (110,000 /μL). Because of these abnormal findings, she was admitted to a pediatric hematologist who found her to be positive for IgG and IgM titers for anti-parvovirus antibody. This acute infection accounted for the patient’s upper respiratory symptoms, fever and anemia. She was transfused with 1 unit of packed red blood cells to correct her anemia and was discharged after clinical symptom improvement.
At age 10, she presented to us with visible jaundice and an enlarging spleen demonstrated on ultrasound. Although no history of gallstones, she appeared to be at significant risk for cholelithiasis based on her chronic hemolytic anemia caused by Hb Shepherds Bush. Our patient was therefore treated with laparoscopic splenectomy and cholecystectomy. Pathologic review of her gallbladder revealed evidence of chronic cholecystitis. After uneventful recovery from surgery, she was discharged home and continues to do well.