A 56-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with an incidental left renal mass found during evaluation for hypertension. Her height was 167 cm, and weight was 52 kg. Blood pressure was 166/102 mmHg, and heart rate was 116 bpm. She had a history of uncontrolled hypertension with amlodipine 10 mg once daily. She had a slight headache. On physical examination, there was significant ascites.
There were no abnormal results on general blood chemistry testing and blood counts. Serum catecholamine three fraction levels were high: adrenaline 148 (normal 0–100) pg/mL; noradrenaline 902 (normal 100–450) pg/mL; and dopamine 28 (normal 0–20) pg/mL. On 24-h urine collection, adrenaline was 13.6 (normal 3.4–26.9) μg/day, noradrenaline was 250.6 (normal 48.6–168.4) μg/day, and dopamine was 1146 (normal 365–961.5) μg/day.
CT showed a 11.5 × 8.6 cm tumor in the upper to middle pole of the left kidney, with a liquid component in the center .
123I-MIBG scintigraphy was performed and showed increased 123I-MIBG intake in the tumor .
On MRI, a capsule was detected on the kidney tumor with hypo- to iso-intensity on T2-weighted images. The diffusion activity was reduced in the tumor.
A 16.1 × 13.8 cm ovarian tumor was also observed. For the ovarian tumor, although a fibroma or fibrothecoma was first suspected based on the MRI images, metastasis of the left RCC could not be completely excluded.
The pre-surgical diagnosis was a catecholamine-producing tumor of the left kidney; considering the ascites and ovarian tumor, a high malignant potential tumor was suspected.
With the diagnosis of a catecholamine-producing left kidney tumor, an alpha-blocker, doxazosin mesilate, was started at 4 mg/day. The dose of doxazosin mesilate was increased to 16 mg/day in 2 weeks. The hypertension was not controlled by the alpha-blocker alone. Doxazosin mesilate 24 mg + amlodipine 10 mg + bisoprolol fumarate 2.5 mg were given to control hypertension.
During the clinical course, PA was diagnosed. Serum renin activity was 0.5 ng/mL/h, aldosterone concentration was 243 pg/mL, and the renin/aldosterone ratio was 486. A captopril test was positive. No nodule was detected in either adrenal gland. Naturally, localization was necessary, but an angiographic contrast agent could not be used due to the suspicion of a catecholamine-producing tumor. Thus, we decided to perform surgery for the left kidney tumor first, before localization of the PA.
Laparoscopic radical left nephrectomy was performed. Operative time was 2 h 46 min. The removed left kidney weighed 420 g. Serous ascites of 3000 mL was present, and the ascites cytology was class II. Intraoperative blood pressure fluctuation due to manipulation of the tumor was not observed.
Microscopic findings showed that the tumor consisted of a tubular or sheet-like growth pattern of cuboidal to low columnar cells with deeply eosinophilic cytoplasm . Centrally located nuclei were uniformly round with prominent nucleoli. Arrangement of tumor cells in well-defined solid nests separated by a loose hypocellular fibrous stroma, which is characteristic of renal oncocytoma was not observed. Involvement of perirenal fat was identified. The tumor showed positivity along the luminal sides for colloidal iron stain. Immunohistochemically, tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for CK7, c-kit, and E-cadherin, focally positive for vimentin, EMA, CD10, c-kit, and RCC, but were negative for AMACR, Chromogranin A and synaptophysin . Ultrastructure study showed numerous mitochondria with tubulocystic cristae in the cytoplasm of tumor cells .
The tumor was diagnosed as a chromophobe RCC oncocytic variant.
Catecholamine levels decreased postoperatively to normal limits. Blood pressure was controlled with Nifedipine 20 mg and eplerenone 50 mg.
One month after surgery, an urgent right ovariectomy was performed due to ovarian torsion. On pathological examination, the diagnosis was a right ovarian fibroma. Meigs’ syndrome was diagnosed, and the ascites was found to be related to the ovarian fibroma.