A 30-year-old black sub-Saharan African woman, G1P0, at 42 weeks of gestation with an uneventful past history was admitted to our maternity unit for labour-like pains of six hours duration. She had a good pregnancy follow-up with no pregnancy pathology.
Clinical findings were not ill-looking, normal vital signs, a waist circumference of 162 cm, a weight of 124 Kg, a height of 1.61 m, a BMI of 47.7 kg/m2 with marked abdominal panniculus extending to the pubic area (grade III panniculus). Fetal heart rates were normal during uterine contractions and she had a clinically adequate pelvis. On vaginal examination, the cervix was dilated at 2 cm, membranes were intact, and the fetus was in the cephalic presentation. We concluded on a latent phase of labour in a central morbidly obese post-term primiparous woman. Twelve hours later, the fetus presented with severe bradycardia during uterine contractions which warranted the indication of an emergency C-section for acute fetal distress.
After obtaining the patient’s informed written consent, an anesthetic assessment graded her ASA III and an emergency C-section was performed under general anesthesia and orotracheal intubation. Antibiotic prophylaxis with ceftriaxone 2 g intravenous was started 30 min before surgical incision. The initial surgical access was a Pfannestiel incision secondarily extended with a median sub-umbilical incision due to difficulties in surgical access and dissections. A life vigorous crying male newborn weighing 4000 g was extracted, followed by placenta delivery, hysterorarrphy and skin closure. Antibiotic prophylaxis was continued in the post-operative period. On post-operative day five, suppuration was noticed at the operative wound. This was first managed by daily wound dressings and de-escalation to a second broad-spectrum antibiotic in conformity with microbiologic susceptibility test results of the wound suppuration. Due to the persistence of the purulent discharge on day 26 post-operation, stitches were removed, revealing a deep incisional SSI with areas of necrosis . Progressive debridement associated with dressings was done for two weeks. Once the wound became clean and had granulated , the surgical team staffed for a secondary wound closure versus an abdominoplasty. Given the risk of failure due to wound maceration maintained by central obesity (current waist circumference at 152 cm) with a large panniculus extending to the pubis, an abdominoplasty, more precisely a panniculectomy was indicated, followed by nutritional and dietary management.
The patient was re-operated on day 26 following the initial C-section under epidural anesthesia. The surgical procedure performed was as follows (see Fig. ): (i) tracing the incision’s lower and upper margins (see Fig. .A). The lower margin was located 8 cm above the commissure of the vulva and extended laterally and superiorly towards the antero-superior iliac spines; removing the initial Pfannestiel incision. The upper margin was an arciform lower umbilicus line with lower concavity, from one antero-superior iliac spine to the other. After checking on bimanual palpation that the suture would be tension-free, a modification of the upper limit was made; (ii) following marking of the incision, the second stage was the incision proper, which was done on the tracing aforementioned, giving an orange quarter incision; (iii) the next step was subcutaneous dissection of the aponeurotic fascia of the broad muscles of the abdominal wall, followed by resection of the sub-umbilical cutaneous-adipose plane. Then succeeded the detachment of the upper flap with rigorous hemostasis ensured, tension-free lowering of the flap down to the lower supra-pubic bank; (iv) finally, an approximation of the banks of the flap and skin suturing was done in three planes (deep adipose tissues, subcutaneous tissues and skin), then two lateral parietal suction drains were placed.
An Enhanced Recovery After Surgery protocol was initiated. The post-operative course was uneventful on analgesics, antibiotics and venous thromboembolic disease prophylaxis. The drains were removed on post-operative day 5 and the patient was discharged seven days after the panniculectomy. A seroma was observed on post-operative day 8 and resolved completely a few days later after simple wound dressings. The appearance of the scar as well as that of the sub-umbilical skin was satisfactory on post-operative day 90 . The patient had psychologist and nutritionist consults. A low-caloric diet was prescribed to prevent similar complications during future pregnancies and/or surgeries.