A 51-year-old Chinese male presenting with slowly progressing severe lower limb edema and foaming urine for over 5 months was admitted to Xiangya Hospital. The patient was diagnosed with S. japonicum infection in 2000 due to Schistosomiasis eggs found in his feces. The patient had no personal or family history of renal disease. Physical examination at current hospital admission revealed severe edema of the lower extremities. Laboratory tests revealed creatinine, 92 µmol/l; glomerular filtration rate, 98.59 ml/min; white blood cell count, 18.13 × 109/l; eosinophil count, 10.09 × 109/l; albumin, 27.50 g/l; triglycerides, 1.65 mmol/l; total cholesterol, 9.98 mmol/l; 24 h proteinuria, 2388.44 mg/24 h. Autoantibody detection and serologic test results were negative for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV, but positive for Schistosoma antibody. Anti-nuclear antibodies include anti-Sm, anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-RNP, and anti-dsDNA antibodies were negative. Serum complement levels were normal. Abdominal B type ultrasonography revealed splenomegaly, diffuse lesion in the liver parenchyma; left kidney, 103 × 54 mm; and right kidney, 97 × 43 mm. Anti-phospholipase A2 receptor antibodies were detected at 48.13 RU/ml. Light microscopy examination for renal biopsy sample revealed diffuse moderate to severe mesangial hypercellularity, extensive thickening with some spikes of the basement membrane, interstitial infiltration of lymphocytes, and fibrosis . A foreign body around an elliptical structure in the renal proximal tubule was noted, consistent with the findings of a suspended S. japonicum egg . Immunohistochemically, the glomeruli were positive for S. japonicum antigens (tested by polyclonal antibodies derived from the sera of mice infected with S. japonicum) . Immunofluorescence showed granular deposits of lgG, lgM, lgA, C3, C1q, kappa, and lambda in the glomerular capillary loop. The final pathologic diagnosis was stage III membranous nephropathy . The treatment of the patient was started with oral glucocorticoid (prednisone, 25 mg/day), praziquantel (60 mg/kg), an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI, 0.15 g/day) and ZhiLing capsula (0.75 g, thrice daily) with supportive therapy (salt-free diet, Etamsylate, vitamin K1). After 7 days of treatment, the patient was discharged from hospital. The patient was put on continuous oral ACEI (0.15 g/day) and Compound α-Ketoacid Tablets (2.52 g, thrice daily) at home for 5 months, the edema in both lower limbs disappeared within 2 weeks, but the renal function declined progressively and proteinuria persisted after 5 months of therapy .