Due to severe aortic stenosis, a 55-year-old man underwent aortic valve replacement with cardiopulmonary bypass under hypothermia and general anesthesia. Postoperatively, weaning was difficult; therefore, a ventricular assist device ECMO was employed. However, the patient had recurrent VT/VF due to the ventricular premature, considering an electrical storm. Deep sedation and antiarrhythmic treatment with Amiodarone and Esmolol were ineffective. After administering local anesthesia, we obtained venous access from the left subclavian vein. A bedside floating electrode was then inserted into the right ventricle and right ventricular high-septal pacing (HSP) was displayed on the electrocardiogram (ECG). A frequency of 110 per min failed to achieve overdrive suppression for the ventricular premature with episodes of the electrical storm . A frequency of 120 per min was found to be effective; however, echocardiography revealed reduced ventricular wall motion with significantly low invasive arterial blood pressure. Meanwhile, an intermittent pacemaker malfunction occurred, inducing subsequent attacks of VT/VF. After discussion, it was decided that active lead implantation should be performed into the right atrial appendage with the EnSite 3D system, along with ventricular active electrode implantation if necessary. Briefly, an Inquiry (Abbott, USA) electrophysiology catheter was introduced through the left subclavian vein and was used to reconstruct the right atrium, tricuspid annulus, right ventricle, and superior vena cava (SVC). His-bundle area and the right appendage mapping were also performed.
The pacing electrode (Medtronic, 5076-52) was inserted into the right atrium (RA) via the left subclavian vein, and its tail was connected to the EnSite 3D system using an alligator cable. Under the guidance system, showing the 3D tracking catheter and lead movement in the vein and cardiac chamber models, we adjusted the lead to the central part of the RA. Subsequently, a J-type atrial Stylet was inserted, and the head end of the atrial active electrode was sent to the right atrial appendage (RAA). High-amplitude A waves are displayed as a result. The electrode was then proceeded forward, and the Stylet was removed. Tests were conducted for the sensing, pacing threshold, current of injury (COI), and impedance. It was found that 1:1 atrioventricular conduction was achieved under atrial pacing with a frequency of 110 per min .
Considering that the atrioventricular nodal conduction was sufficient for VT suppression, AAI pacing at 110 per minute was performed. The lead was fixed and connected to the temporary pacemaker. Under atrial pacing at 110 per min, the invasive blood pressure and cardiac ejection fraction (EF) on ultrasound were significantly improved compared to those under ventricular pacing.