A 27-year-old man who has been doing bodybuilding for 5 years has been referred to our hospital after he was diagnosed with an aortic dissection. The patient’s story began a month before the diagnosis when he reviewed several nutritionists and bodybuilding specialists for his complaint, which is the growth of his entire body muscles, except those in the legs, which remain atrophied despite focused exercises and good nutrition . The patient does not have any medication history, similar family history, or hereditary or genetic diseases.
Two days before the diagnosis, the patient visited a doctor, and during a careful examination of the lower extremities, the femoral pulse was present but very weak, and the systemic pressure was 220/100, so that he was referred directly to the hospital.
After admission to the hospital, his vital signs revealed a temperature of 36.7°C, blood pressure of 160/90, pulse of 96 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and pulse oximetry of 96% on room air. A vascular exam revealed the femoral pulse was very weak and slightly weaker than the radial pulse. There was a grade 2/6 systolic murmur over the left sternal border without radiation. There was no significant lower limb edema. The remainder of the examination was within normal limits.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), was performed and revealed cardiomegaly, moderate pulmonary pension, decreased left ventricular systolic function, and an ejection fraction (EF) of 64%, no vegetation, intraluminal masses, thrombi, or pericardial fluid were noted .
An ECG displayed normal sinus rhythm with left ventricular hypertrophy. Laboratory testing showed unremarkable complete blood cell count and comprehensive metabolic panel.
A chest radiograph revealed vascular redistribution in keeping without pulmonary edema, and an ECG showed signs of left ventricle hypertrophy . A computed tomography angiography was performed and confirmed the diagnosis of COA .
Then, the patient underwent the surgery. After the incision of the chest wall, opening of the parietal pleura, and isolation of several collateral arteries, the area of stenosis has been expanded with a patch of Dacron . This operation was performed by a cardiac surgeon with 10 years of experience in this specialty At the University Cardiac Surgery Center in Damascus. The patient was cooperative since the surgery was decided, and was informed of all procedures and complications.
After the surgery, he committed to drug treatment and followed up with his doctor until discharge from the hospital. The patient was monitored after surgery for 7 days in the hospital and was discharged after his condition stabilized and blood pressure returned to normal values on chlorothiazide. The patient returned to the hospital after a month for checkup and his blood pressure was under control.