The patient is a 40-year-old Chinese man presented to the pneumology department clinic with a complaint of acute neck tendonitis with dyspnea.
On Friday, October 28, 2022, at 21:00, he developed neck pain and limited movement without obvious cause and inducement. Not taking them seriously, the patient thought the symptoms were due to overwork and rested in bed. At 2:00 on October 29, 2022, he felt that the above symptoms had significantly aggravated. Slight dyspnea appeared, which was tolerable, but he could not sleep all night. Until 7:00 am on October 29, 2022, the symptoms continued to worsen, with obvious dyspnea and dysphagia. At 7:30 am, an emergency cervical magnetic resonance examination was performed, and the preliminary diagnosis was “acute longus cervicalis tendinitis.” Immediately, he took a nimesulide dispersible tablet orally. Twenty-four hours later, his symptoms gradually improved; however, his swallowing function was still very poor, and he could only consume a small amount of liquid food. He continued to take nimesulide dispersible tablets for further treatment. After 48 h, all the above symptoms significantly improved, and the swallowing function returned to nearly normal state. Now, he takes postprednisolne acetate tablets, 20 mg qd, and nimesulide dispersible tablets, 20 mg bid.
The patient had no previous history of infectious diseases, trauma, or bad habits (such as smoking or drinking).
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumours.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.6 ℃; blood pressure, 120/78 mmHg; heart rate, 85 beats per min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. There was no obvious redness and swelling in the neck. Annual physical examinations (including various laboratory tests and imaging examinations) indicated that the patient was healthy.
White blood cell: 10.78 × 109/L, neutrophils: 7.27 × 109/L. C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rates were normal.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination of the cervical region revealed T2-weighted localized slit-like areas in the prevertebral region, located at the level of cervical 1 to cervical 4, with long T2 changes . Computed tomography (CT) of the cervical spine showed no significant calcification .