An Asian 39-year-old female was admitted to the Second Hospital of Hebei Medical University in January 2022 due to two episodes of palpitations in the past 2 months. During the physical examination on admission, her resting heart rate was 71 beats per minute, her blood pressure was 117/64 mm Hg, and an apex beat was identified on the right side of the chest with no murmur. We completed the 12-lead electrocardiogram, chest-X ray, echocardiography, and blood examinations to evaluate the patient’s condition. A twelve-lead EGM with standard lead placement showed inverted P-QRS-T complex waves in lead I and an inverted P-QRS in lead aVL. Notably, the P-QRS-T complex in lead aVR and aVL appear reversed compared to their usual relationship. Likewise, the morphology of the P-QRS-T complex of lead II and III were also reversed. The EGM shows an RS morphology in V1, a reversed R wave from V2 to V6, a shortened P-R interval, and a characteristic “delta” wave (a wide and initially slurred QRS complex) in precordial leads . We completed a 12-lead EGM with reversed lead placement and right precordial leads V3R-V6R. From our results, the EGM showed a positive P-QRS complex in lead I. The morphology of the P-QRS-T complex of lead aVR and aVL, lead II, and III were reversed, as presented in . Furthermore, the R wave amplitude increased gradually, and the S wave decreased gradually in the precordial leads .
The posteroanterior (PA) view chest X-ray shows shadows of the heart and aortic arch in the right hemithorax along with gas in the fundus of the stomach on the right side .
Echocardiography showed a normal size of each heart cavity and normal biventricular functions with an ejection fraction of 76.2%. No regional wall motion abnormalities and septal defects were detected. Furthermore, laboratory examinations showed no abnormalities.
Based on the above clinical manifestations and examinations, we diagnosed the patient with Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome combined with dextrocardia. The following operation strategy of RFCA was performed successfully under local anesthesia.