Patient 1, an 8 years and 4 months old female, originally presented to clinic secondary to medial ankle pain when running at school causing her to limp. Her mother noted bowing to the bilateral lower extremity for a few years before this, but it had not yet caused the patient limitations or pain. At this time, she was 118.5 cm (3rd percentile; 50th percentile for an ~6.5-year-old) in height and 23.6 kg (22nd percentile). Patient 1 was the first-born child through spontaneous vaginal delivery at 36 weeks with no complications. She was diagnosed with jaundice at the time of birth but required no intervention and this spontaneously resolved. Growth parameters at birth, per parental recall, were a weight of 2.38 kg (10–25th percentile) and a length of 43 cm (3–10th percentile). She met all developmental milestones appropriately throughout childhood.
Physical examination at the time of clinic presentation demonstrated symmetric facies with no blue discoloration of her sclerae. She had no asymmetry nor abnormality to hair, teeth, or nails. Upper extremities were symmetric and proportional to head and torso. She was short in stature with gross genu varum alignment through the bilateral lower extremities and her lower segment appeared disproportionate to her upper segment. She maintained full range-of-motion (ROM) through bilateral hips, knees, and ankles and was non-tender to palpation throughout.
Radiographs demonstrated bilateral metaphyseal irregularities and asymmetry within the distal femoral physes and proximal tibia physes. Asymmetric focal bulbous appearance of the medial proximal tibial physes compared to the lateral aspect was present bilaterally . Bilateral distal tibia demonstrated physeal cupping with asymmetric irregularities both medially and laterally . Long-leg standing films were obtained and demonstrated a mechanical axis propagating through the medial compartment bilaterally, right greater than left. Measurement of the patient’s alignment demonstrated a mechanical lateral distal femoral angle (mLDFA) of 87.6° and 89°, medial proximal tibial angle (MPTA) of 85.7° and 81.4°, and lateral distal tibial angle (LDTA) of 91.8° and 93.7° to the right and left lower extremities, respectively.
The patient was advised to begin at-home therapy exercises including stretching and strengthening and was sent for laboratory evaluation of Vitamin D, Calcium, Magnesium, and Phosphorus. Each of these laboratory results were within normal limits.
The patient re-presented at age 9 years and 11 months with significant progression of genu varum and increased pain at the ankles bilaterally. She described intermittent pain in the medial knees as well. At that time, she was 124 cm (1st percentile; 50th percentile for an ~7.5 years old) in height and 30 kg (35th percentile) in weight. Gross evaluation of the limbs demonstrated marked progression of her varus deformity. Repeat radiographs demonstrated persistent metaphyseal changes and progression of her mechanical axis to a location medial to the medial compartment of the knees bilaterally . Alignment radiographs demonstrated mLDFA of 92.8° and 90.6°, MPTA of 80.8° and 76.8°, and MDTA of 94.5° and 96.7° to the right and left lower extremities, respectively. Discussion was had with the patient and her family, and ultimately, the patient underwent bilateral lateral distal femoral and proximal tibial physeal tethering. She tolerated the procedure well with no complications.
Subsequently, this patient was evaluated by genetics and a skeletal dysplasia panel was performed at a commercial laboratory. This panel performed sequencing and deletion duplication analysis on 109 genes and identified a pathogenic variant in MMP13 [NM002427.3], c.619T > G (p.Trp207Gly) and a variant of uncertain significance (VUS) in MMP13, and c.539G > C (p.Gly180Ala). Due to the proximity of these changes, the laboratory was able to determine these variants that were in trans.
At her most recent clinic visit, the patient is 16 months status post tethering procedure and doing well. Gross varus deformity persists; however, pain in the ankles and knees has improved. Repeat radiographs demonstrate minimal change in mechanical axis – now passing through the very medial aspect of the medial compartment bilaterally . Focal angular measurements have improved in the proximal tibia bilaterally but continue to progress in both the distal femur and distal tibia. Alignment radiographs demonstrate mLDFA of 97° and 93.1°, MPTA of 87.1° and 82.5°, and MDTA of 101.3° and 92.7° to the right and left lower extremities, respectively.