A 44-year-old woman; not known to have any medical illness presented with a long complicated ophthalmic history. The past history of the patient refers back to 12 years ago. At that time, the patient underwent bilateral cosmetic artificial iris (BrightOcular) implantation in another country. Three years later, the patient started to develop bilateral progressive vision loss in both eyes (more in the right eye) accompanied with redness, pain, tearing and photophobia. At that time, the best corrected visual acuity was 6/40 in the right eye and 6/6 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 60 mm Hg in the right eye and 38 mm Hg in the left eye on maximum medical therapy. Right eye exam showed moderate ciliary injection along with moderate diffuse stromal edema. Left eye exam showed moderate ciliary injection with mild diffuse stromal corneal edema. The light-blue iris prostheses were in situ in both eyes without visible iris tissue except for some black-colored peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS) more in the right eye. The lens showed cataractous changes more in the right eye. Gonioscopy revealed no visible angle structures 360° and the prosthesis plate was tucked in the angle recess with high and wide diffuse PAS scattered over the angles in both eyes. The optic nerve head exam showed a cup-to-disc ratio of 0.8 in the right eye and 0.5 in the left eye. The retinal exam was within normal limits.
A glaucoma drainage device (Ahmed Glaucoma Valve) for the right eye and micropulse diode laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation were performed successfully. The IOP, thereafter, was maintained in low to mid-teens. One month later, she underwent bilateral iris prosthesis removal and to our surprise total iris atrophy was found in both eyes . Three months later, phacoemulsification with implantation of iris-diaphragm intraocular lens was performed in her right eye. The right cornea continued to deteriorate despite adequate IOP control and hypertonic saline eye drops. Accordingly, the patient underwent keratoplasty twice (Descemet stripping automated endothelial keratoplasty and penetrating keratoplasty) for the right eye and both ended up with rejection and eventually failed opaque graft. Subsequently, a decision to proceed with Boston keratoprosthesis (type 1) implantation was made. Pros and cons as well as all concerns and potential complications were addressed.
Evaluation before the surgery revealed a visual acuity of counting fingers at 1 m distance in the right eye and 6/12 in the left eye. IOP was 9 mm Hg in the right eye and 12 mm Hg in the left eye. The right eye exam revealed a decompensated opaque graft and the iris-diaphragm intraocular lens in place. The left eye exam showed complete aniridia with cataractous lens. The anterior vitreous face was clear in both eyes. The posterior segment examination of the right eye was not possible as a result of the opaque graft, however; the B-scan was unremarkable. The posterior segment exam of the left eye revealed unremarkable retina and a cup-to-disc ration of 0.5.
Boston Type 1 keratoprosthesis for the right eye was performed under general anesthesia. The keratoprosthesis complex was sutured in place with 16 interrupted 10-0 nylon sutures (Video 1, ). The surgery and postoperative course were uneventful.
On the very last follow-up visit (5 months after the surgery), the patient was doing very well with an uncorrected vision of 6/9, IOP was digitally fine and the keratoprosthesis was secured in place.