A 47-year-old man had referred to our center complaining of gradual vision loss. During history taking, it became evident that the patient had mistakenly took Closantel syrup instead of stomach medicine Alum-Mag. The volume of consumed syrup was measured about 20 cc. Each milliliter of the syrup contains 50 mg of Closantel 5% (1000 mg closantel/15.87 mg/kg). Patient’s weight was 53-Kg. The patient remarked that 4 hours after taking Closantel, he was transferred to the district hospital due to dizziness and nausea. His stomach had been flushed out immediately after hospital arrival. He had been hospitalized for 3 days. He was then referred to our clinic due to the progressive vision loss.
His visual acuity was 20/200 for both eyes at the time of arrival to our clinic and intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg and 16 mmHg in the right and left eye respectively (measured using Goldman applantation tonometer). There was no pathologic sign during slit lamp examination and refractive error of the patient was not significant. In fundus examination, mild optic disc swelling was observed in both eyes 250 mg. Methylprednisolone acetate was injected intravenously once on the 5th day after taking Closantel. His Vision was reducing gradually so low that he could hardly detect hand motion (HM) at 0.5 m on the 14th day after taking Closantel. ERG test was requested. ERG test performed according to electrophysiological standards. The six basic ERGs defined by the ISCEV Standard. The full-field electroretinogram (ERG) is an electrophysiologic test that shows retinal function in the light and dark phases. The full-field ERG results of this patient showed remarkable decline of all ERG steps compared to normal . ERG records compared with those of a normal person of the same age which obtained with the same instrument. A significant decline in b-wave amplitude and a significant increase in implicit time were seen under scotopic condition (Scotopic 0.01 ERG GF). Remarkable decline in the amplitude of the flicker ERG under photopic condition was also found (Photopic 3.0 Flicker 30 Hz ERG GF). Systemic examination and brain imaging did not show any specific results. Patient’s medical history was negative for other ocular and systemic diseases. Later, his vision surprisingly improved gradually and his visual acuity was 20/20 and fully restored on the 28th day after the incident. Again, an ERG test was requested. Scotopic and photopic ERG test were significantly improved, but not within the normal range. As shown in Figs. and , b-wave amplitude and latency under scotopic condition and oscillatory potential under photopic condition were getting better but they were still different from normal ERG recording. Afterwards the patient was asymptomatic. After 3 years, we examined him again. His visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes and his Full-field ERG showed remarkable improvement under both scotopic and photopic conditions and was as the same normal individual. ERG recordings of the patient and ERG recordings of the same age normal individual under scotopic and photopic conditions are shown in Figs. and in the order of recording time. We requested visual field test. Since the patient was illiterate, his cooperation was so weak, and his Humphrey Visual Field was unreliable. However, his confrontation visual field was normal. There were no suspicious signs in the retina during indirect ophthalmoscopy and his fundus was normal. Fundus examination was normal . During the follow-up, the macular OCT images were taken that was normal .