A 36-year-old white man presented in April 2017 with a 2-week history of bilateral cruralgia. Following a diagnosis in December 2014 of a right temporoparietal grade III oligodendroglioma with IDH1 mutation and 1p/19q codeletion, he underwent emergency surgical cerebral decompression for a comatose state secondary to brain herniation, with incomplete resection due to massive cerebral edema. A second surgical resection 1 month later remained incomplete, with residual in-depth disease. He was treated with cranial RT with concomitant temozolomide chemotherapy. Identical chemotherapy treatment was continued from March to December 2015 (standard protocol for high-grade gliomas), receiving six series of treatment that ended 11 months after the second surgery . In January 2016, a cranioplasty was carried out to treat infected craniotomy bone flaps. He was monitored for the following 9 months with regular MRI scans. In August 2016, that is 20 months after surgical resection, a local tumor recurred and was treated with a third subtotal resection. Second-line procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine (PCV) chemotherapy was initiated following surgery, 4 months before the current presentation.
A physical examination revealed motor deficits of the lower limbs in addition to pre-existing left-sided hemiparesis and a swollen left supraclavicular lymph node. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple osteoblastic bone lesions scattered throughout his spine, his pelvis and to a lesser extent his ribs, but no lymph adenopathy was identified . A positon emission tomography (PET)-CT scan confirmed the presence of the lesions identified in the CT scan and revealed further bone lesions in his pelvis (the right ischium, the pubic area, the left acetabulum, the left part of the sacrum, and the right and left iliac wing), in his sternum with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 4.8, in his right (SUVmax = 5.2) and left humerus (SUVmax = 4.3), and in his right scapula (SUVmax = 4.8). No soft tissue lesions (Virchow’s node included) were found, confirming the exclusive involvement of bones . The analysis of lymph acquired through fine-needle aspiration of his left supraclavicular lymph node excluded lymph node metastasis. A brain MRI showed local disease progression with an increase in the volume of the right temporoparietal tumor, which had spread to the left temporal region and the superior sagittal sinus. Cytological and biochemical analysis of cerebrospinal fluid excluded carcinomatosis meningitis. Immunohistochemical analyses were carried out on a bone marrow sample from his left iliac crest. A tumoral proliferation of ovoid cells was observed in the medullary cavity. Cells were hyperchromic, had pale cytoplasm and irregular nuclei, and mitosis was occurring: this morphological aspect perfectly reflected the diagnostic for the initial anaplastic oligodendroglioma brain tumor. Immunostaining was positive for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and the mutated form of IDH1, and therefore excluded any diagnosis other than oligodendroglioma metastasis . The second-line PCV chemotherapy, initiated following the third subtotal resection 4 months before the current presentation, was continued with two additional cycles in the absence of a real therapeutic alternative and at our patient’s request. It was stopped due to the worsening of his clinical status with positional vertigo, nausea, vomiting, and headache compatible with carcinomatous meningitis, followed by status epilepticus and lethargy; he died after 4 months after the diagnosis of metastases.