A 73-year-old woman with no prior medical history, presented with a hard mass (diameter = 46 mm) in the adipose tissue of the right inguinal area which was confirmed by CT scan (Nov 2009). A month later, this mass was surgically excised and the histology examination showed a poorly differentiated small cell carcinoma, with histopathologic features of a Merkel cell carcinoma. CT scans revealed a sizable lesion with imaging features of a submerged goiter, invasive to the upper mediastinum (diameter = 66 mm) with no enlarged mediastinal or axillary lymph nodes (Figures : large mass in the right lobe of thyroid grand invasive to the upper mediastinum). At the time no further diagnostic evaluation of the submerged goiter took place.
Afterwards, the patient was admitted to our department for further clinical evaluation and treatment. Serum NSE and chromogranin values were 21,8 ng/ml (< 16,3 ng/ml) and 7,6 ng/ml (< 5,6 ng/ml) respectively. Initially, the patient received chemotherapy with the regimen cisplatin 75 mg/m2 day1 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 day1-3 (6 cycles every 3 weeks) following by locoregional radiotherapy at the bed of the excised lesion (total dose 45 Gy). Both of these treatments were well tolerated. Three months later (Jan 2011) serum NSE and chromogranin values were within normal limits and the subsequent CT scans revealed stable disease. During the next 10 months the patient was asymptomatic, serum markers values were normal and CT scans findings were still stable.
However, in November 2011 follow up NSE and chromogranin values raised to 26 ng/ml and 9,2 ng/ml respectively. In addition to that, CT scans revealed an enlargement of the submerged goiter which was invasive to the upper mediastinum, displacing trachea to the left, still without enlarged mediastinal or axillary lymph nodes again. Moreover, an ultrasound of the thyroid gland confirmed a significant increase of the size of the submerged right lobe. The patient became symptomatic, mainly experiencing respiratory inconvenience. Surgical excision of the right lobe of the thyroid gland was decided and performed without any complications.
The histopathology examination showed infiltration of the thyroid gland by a neuroendocrine carcinoma with characteristics compatible with Merkel cell carcinoma. The tumor consisted of uniform, small to medium sized cells with a round nucleus, finely dispersed chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli and scant cytoplasm (Figure : hematoxylin-eosin-staining H-E showing both thyroid follicles in the down left part and tumor cells in the upper right part, original magnification ×100). There were numerous mitoses and areas with necrosis. The tumor was characterized of positive immunohistochemical reaction for antibodies to cytokeratin CAM 5.2, cytokeratin 20 CK20 (Figure : immunoperoxidase staining for CK20 showing positive tumor cells, original magnification ×400), neurofilaments NF (Figure : immunoperoxidase staining for NF showing positive tumor cells, original magnification ×400) and neuroendocrine markers chromogranin, synaptophysin and CD56. Immunohistochemical reaction for antibodies to TTF-1 was negative.
After the surgery the patient was asymptomatic. The serum NSE and chromogranin values were within normal limits and the subsequent CT scans were normal without any evidence of remaining disease. Consequently, despite the aggressive nature of this metastatic neoplasm, the patient remained in complete remission following a multidisciplinary approach for a long period of time.