A 92-year-old woman with non-valvular atrial fibrillation on 110 mg twice a day of dabigatran (Pradaxar®) came to the emergency room after suffering a fall from her own height. In addition to her current condition, she had a history of asymptomatic hyperuricaemia, systemic arterial hypertension, and hypothyroidism. As she fell, she hit the ciliary region of the skull but did not suffer from convulsions, loss of consciousness or abnormalities in speech or movements. During the initial assessment, the patient was awake and speaking fluidly. Her blood pressure was 140/100 mmHg, and her heart rate was 90 b.p.m., with atrial fibrillation, jugular engorgement, and peripheral oedema. She had no signs of lateralization, and swelling in the region of trauma. Her clinical condition suddenly deteriorated, starting with hemiparesis, and a drop in Glasgow score from 15 to 11 within minutes. Her CHA2-DS2-VASC score was 4 [hypertension (1), age ≥75 years old (2), and female gender (1)], and her HAS-BLED score was 4 [hypertension (1), abnormal renal function (1), age ≥65 years-old (1), and drugs or alcohol (1)].
Blood tests on admission showed slightly altered kidney function [creatinine clearance 27 mL/min (reference value 88–128), prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time (PT) times, and 850 ng/mL of dabigatran (expected range 52–275)] . Computed tomography (CT) of the head showed a large right-sided subdural haematoma, with mass effect and displacement of the median line (11 mm) inducing uncal and subfalcine herniation . A diagnosis of traumatic acute subdural haematoma was made which required emergency surgical decompression.
The patient’s last dose of dabigatran had been taken 9 h prior to admission so it was decided to administer idarucizumab (Praxbind®), 5 g as a single intravenous bolus. Seven minutes after administration of idarucizumab blood tests showed significant reduction in aPTT and PT times, and dabigatran plasma levels were <15 ng/mL . The patient underwent decompressive craniotomy after the administration of idarucizumab; the surgery was performed without complications, and a 160 mL haematoma was drained. The drug was well tolerated with no haemorrhagic or procoagulatory complications. Her post-operative course was uncomplicated, and 24 h after surgery, the patient was in a clear recovery, conscious, without motor deficit, breathing on her own and starting oral fluids .
A follow-up CT after surgery showed complete resolution of the subdural haematoma, with no signs of displacement or herniation . To reduce the risk of stroke (the patient had high-risk value of Caprini score), anticoagulant therapy with dabigatran was suspended. At follow-up 2 weeks post-surgery, the patient was neurologically intact with no residual deficits.