A 33-year-old Saudi female, G8P4+3, presented to our hospital after 6 weeks of amenorrhea (last menstrual period 6 weeks ago), complaining of nausea, severe abdominal pain, and minimal vaginal spotting for the past two days. Her history was significant for two miscarriages, PID, and an ectopic right tubal pregnancy, managed by laparoscopic partial right salpingectomy. Aside from that, she had regular menstrual history. She was admitted for management.
On admission, the patient was vitally stable and afebrile. On physical examination, mild tenderness was observed below the umbilicus, extending to the right iliac fossa. Bimanual vaginal examination revealed positive cervical and right adnexal tenderness. Laboratory investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 11.8 g/dL and a leukocyte count of 8.5 × 109/L. Her serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) level was 250 IU/L. 2D transvaginal ultrasound showed homogenous endometrium with a thickness of 5 mm, with no evidence of a yolk sac or gestational sac in the uterine cavity, normal ovaries, and evidence of a subseptate uterus that we were unaware of previously. In the right adnexa, superior to the right ovary, a heterogeneous vascular mass of size 4x3x2.5 cm was identified. A moderate amount of free fluid was seen in the left adnexa and the pouch of Douglas.
A mini-laparotomy incision was made, based on the provisional diagnosis of a ruptured tubal pregnancy. A nodular lesion was found, measuring 4x3x2.5 cm, invading the infracolic omentum, superior to the right adnexa. Fallopian tubes and ovaries were intact bilaterally, no uterine-peritoneal fistula was seen, and there were no adhesions between the nodular lesion and the uterus or adnexa, thereby meeting the diagnosis of primary omental pregnancy . Additionally, there was no indication of adnexal origin. The mass was removed via partial omentectomy. About 300 cc of free clotted blood was evacuated from the pouch of Douglas.
Histopathology (, ) revealed chorionic villi admixed with blood clots and fibro-adipose tissue, confirming primary omental pregnancy. The postoperative period was unremarkable. The patient was followed up for five years after the procedure to avoid future complications; during this time, she had one normal vaginal delivery, followed by an abortion at a gestational age of 8 weeks. The patient has been using contraception for the last two years.