A 31-year-old white woman with a past medical history of menorrhagia, anemia, and recurrent calcium nephrolithiasis presented for preoperative evaluation prior to ureterolithotomy. She described a daily pattern of eating continually from a cup of ice chips accompanied by multiple spoons of salt directly out of a salt shaker. These cravings had been present for many years, were bothersome to her, and interfered with her daily life. She noticed an acute worsening of these symptoms following delivery of her last child. She described 5 days of heavy bleeding during her menstrual cycle. She denied chalk, clay, or dirt cravings. She denied lightheadedness, syncope or near syncope, or melena.
On physical examination, her temperature was 36.7 °C, blood pressure was 119/70 mmHg, heart rate was 88 beats per minute, respirations were 20 per minute, and oxygen saturation was 100% on room air. Her body mass index (BMI) was 26.3 kg/m2. She was a well-nourished, well-developed woman. A physical examination was negative for stomatitis, glossitis, or pallor. An abdominal examination was negative for splenomegaly. Mentation was appropriate. Mood and affect were normal. Initial laboratory findings including hematology and iron studies are shown in Table . Previous stone analysis is shown in Table .
History, physical, and laboratory data were consistent with pica secondary to iron deficiency anemia. The differential diagnosis for her iron deficiency anemia included principally menorrhagia but consideration was also paid to possible occult gastrointestinal blood loss due to occult peptic ulcer disease, inflammatory bowel disease, parasitosis, malabsorption, or celiac disease. She had no history of diarrhea or abnormal constipation patterns. She had no history of weight loss, abdominal cramping, or pain. She described no international travel and had no history of exposure to untreated well-water. She had no history of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) use.
She was prescribed ferrous sulfate 325 mg administered orally three times a day with meals. She was hospitalized 3 months later for pain related to recurrent kidney stones. At that time, she reported that she had not been the taking the orally administered iron supplementation which had been prescribed. Her anemia worsened, as seen in Table .
She was telephoned to follow-up on her current symptoms. She was unable to tolerate the orally administered iron due to symptoms of nausea and dyspepsia. She stated that her pica symptoms continued to be constant throughout the day. She was advised to return to our clinic for further evaluation and to discuss alternative iron supplementation. She has continued to have intermittent adherence to follow-up for her anemia with her primary care physician, limiting further workup and treatment.