A 26-year-old Caucasian woman with Fitzpatrick skin type II presented with facial acne vulgaris. She had a slim build, no evidence of hirsutism, and no significant past medical or family history. Multiple inflammatory lesions (37 in total), predominantly papules, were present bilaterally, consistent with severe (grade 4) acne on the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA) scale for acne severity . There was evidence of baseline atrophic boxcar scarring. Previous treatment for her acne consisted of a course of topical Duac (benzoyl peroxide and clindamycin) and microdermabrasion, both of which had limited effect. Retinoid therapy was contraindicated due to her family planning considerations.
Three treatments in total of combination non-ablative laser therapy were applied; each session was held 2 to 3 weeks apart. We used a combination of treatment with high fluence potassium titanyl phosphate (KTP) and neodymium-doped: yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser.
KTP laser settings of 532 nm, high fluence 20 J/cm2, 20 millisecond pulse width, 1 mm2 spot size, and 2 Hz pulse rate were used superficially, targeting the oxyhemoglobin within the pilosebaceous unit. Nd:YAG laser settings of 1064 nm, 150 to 250 J/cm2, 55 to 75 millisecond pulse width, and 1 mm2 spot size were used to eradicate the base of a hair follicle on a deeper level of the dermis along with any des-oxyhemoglobin resulting from the more superficial treatment. No topical sensitizer was used. Polarized visual magnification with a 5× headset magnification was used to assist with identification of lesions. External sclera shields were applied to our patient during treatment.
The procedure was painless. On each occasion following treatment, erythema of the treated area was apparent for approximately 3 days but subsided uneventfully with no blistering. There were no late complications. A 73% reduction in total inflammatory lesions (from 37 to 10) was evident on completion of the three applications when our patient was reviewed 6 months after the initial treatment . This represented a reduction in acne severity from severe (grade 4) to mild (grade 2) on the IGA scale. Photos were taken with iPhone 5 camera 8MP with illumination via a Lifemax High Vision light without flash. Atrophic boxcar scarring, which was evident prior to the treatment, remained. She reported that she was very satisfied with the outcome of the treatment.