A 22-year-old Caucasian man, with a known family history of MEN1 in his father and sister, was found to have a pathogenic mutation of MEN1 and first presented to our center for biochemical and radiological screening. He reported severe insomnia, weight gain despite loss of appetite, nausea without vomiting, abdominal pain, and longstanding diarrhea up to 7–8 times per day. He also reported heat intolerance, anxiety and depression. His past medical history was notable for recurrent nephrolithiasis since age 14, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and remote history of heart palpitations. Elevated serum levels of calcium (10.6 mg/dL) and parathyroid hormone (64 pg/mL) indicated primary hyperparathyroidism. Parathyroid sestamibi scan was negative. Brain MRI showed no pituitary masses. Surveillance chest and abdominal CT imaging revealed a 3 mm nodule in the upper lobe of the right lung with benign features and a 2.2 cm pancreatic tail lesion with ill-defined enhancement concerning for pNET . Fasting pancreatic polypeptide was elevated at 574 pg/mL (normal range 56–480 pg/mL). Serum levels of the following were all within normal limits: insulin c-peptide 0.9 ng/mL (0.8–3.5 ng/mL), glucagon 56 pg/mL (8–57 pg/mL), gastrin <15 pg/mL, VIP <50 pg/mL, and interestingly, chromogranin A (CgA) 74 ng/mL (25–140 ng/mL). The patient was referred to tertiary academic medical center for operative evaluation by surgical oncology (author CC). A preoperative Ga68-DOTATATE PET/CT whole-body scan showed a pancreatic tail lesion measuring 2.1 × 1.2 cm and a pancreatic body lesion of 1.5 × 1.1 cm (, C). Importantly, the latter was not detected on prior CT imaging. The increased sensitivity of Ga68-DOTATATE PET/CT allowed detection of this additional tumor . Based on tumor locations, the patient was deemed a good surgical candidate for a laparoscopic radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy (RAMP).
Exploratory laparoscopy revealed no evidence of metastatic disease. The pancreas was exposed, and intra-operative ultrasound used to confirm location of the two tumors within the body and tail previously identified radiographically. A laparoscopic RAMPs was performed to ensure negative margins. A reinforced stapler was used to divide the pancreas approximately 2 cm from the identified tumor at the level of the pancreatic neck. A regional lymph node dissection was done. Estimated blood loss was 50 cm3. Postoperative recovery was relatively uneventful outside of a low output biochemical leak, as defined by ISGPS (International Study Group in Pancreatic Surgery) , with drain amylase of 6366 U/L on post-operative day (POD) 3. He was discharged home with the drain in place on POD 3, which was removed on POD 12 after an interventional radiology tube study confirmed no fistula or collection. At 2 week follow-up, the patient had recovered well and reported complete resolution of his diarrhea that has persisted out to latest 6 month follow-up.
The final pathology report revealed five well-differentiated grade 2 NETs ranging from 0.1 to 1.7 cm with 3 mitotic figures/10 high-power fields and Ki-67 index of 3–5% based on semi-quantitative immunohistochemical stain . Margins were negative. Twelve lymph nodes were examined; none showed evidence of tumor. AJCC Pathologic Stage was determined to be pT1(m)N0. Tumors stained positive for Synaptophysin , Chromogranin , and PanCK. Additional staining confirmed strong positive staining for PP .