A 70-year-old, Spanish-speaking female with a two-month history of newly diagnosed Parkinson’s disease, anxiety, and complex partial seizures, who was recently started on valproic acid, presented to our ED in the company of her daughter for evaluation of increasing seizure episodes and confusion in the prior 24 hours. The patient denied any infectious symptoms, headache, or back pain. Her daughter noted that the patient had been high functioning, serving as the primary caregiver for her own mother until two months earlier, when she abruptly developed progressive short-term memory deficits, decreased appetite, insomnia, severe paranoia, hallucinations, and episodes of stiffening and jerking movements of the face and arms that had worsened, despite initiation of valproic acid. Her past medical history was significant for polyps on her last colonoscopy. Her surgical, social, and family histories were negative for neurological diseases besides the aforementioned recent diagnoses.
On examination, her vital signs were unremarkable. Despite her confusion, she was alert and oriented with clear speech in Spanish when questioned, but she did not participate in history taking. Her pupils were normal. The patient’s right face tensed for approximately 10 seconds followed by mild confusion, but she could follow commands appropriately afterward without an obvious postictal period. No other focal neurological deficits were appreciated on neurological exam.
Her basic metabolic panel was significant for mild hyponatremia (133 millimoles per liter [mmol/L] (reference range 136–145 mmol/L). Her complete blood count was within normal limits. Despite abnormal urinalysis, her urine cultures were negative for growth. Her cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein (280.4 milligrams per deciliter [mg/dL] (reference range 15–60 mg/dL) and CSF red blood cell count (260,000/ microliter, normal = 0) were moderately elevated but more likely attributed to a traumatic lumbar puncture. Her CSF Gram stain was negative.
Non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple abnormalities. Her CT was significant for scattered calcifications in the right caudate, right insular region, and right frontal lobe, which were reported as non-specific findings, possibly representing calcified emboli. Her MRI, which was obtained inpatient, demonstrated right amygdala and anterior temporal lobe edema and hyperintense thickening on the fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence .
Once autoimmune encephalitis was suspected, serum specimens were sent and resulted positive in less than one month. The inpatient encephalopathy, autoimmune evaluation, and spinal fluid 2 assay confirmed the anti-LGI-1 antibody in her CSF. This finding, along with hyponatremia, faciobrachial dystonic seizures, and hyperintense limbic thickening on MRI were all consistent with LGI-1 antibody encephalitis. The patient began immunotherapy treatment with rituximab and a prednisone taper. On follow-up, she has reportedly demonstrated a robust response with near-resolution of symptoms. The presence of occult malignancy is under investigation at this time, with a chest radiograph without evidence of malignancy, and a pending colonoscopy.