A 19-year-old previously healthy male presented to our clinic in November 2006 for incidental finding of decreased vision of the right eye (OD) on a routine examination. He had no prior ophthalmic or familial history. At the first visit, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.22 logMAR (-6.50 + 7.50 × 0) OD and 0 logMAR (-1.25 + 0.25 × 135) in the left eye (OS). The intraocular pressure was 14 mm Hg in both eyes (OU). Slit-lamp examination and fundoscopy were within normal limits OU. Corneal tomography (Orbscan, Baush and Lomb) OD showed a crab claw like appearance inferiorly with inferior decentration of the thinnest corneal point (456 μm) and a Kmax of 48.4 D . Corneal tomography OS, however, showed a perfectly regular cornea with a thinnest pachymetry of 531 μm, a centered thinnest point and a Kmax of 41.3 D . Patient admitted to unilateral right eye rubbing. He was counseled to avoid sleeping with pressure on his eyes and to strictly stop eye rubbing. Biomechanical analysis using Ocular Response Analyzer (ORA, Reichert) confirmed the presumptive diagnosis, showing keratoconic changes in the right eye and normal findings in the left eye .
The patient was diagnosed with a unilateral right keratoconus and was given eyeglasses to improve his right eye visual acuity as a first step. Artificial tears and anti-allergic eyedrops (Ketotifen 0.25 mg/ml) were also prescribed as permanent treatment. No further intervention was made at the time and the patient came back to clinic for annual follow ups over the years. During the 14 years of follow up we had with this patient, his refraction and visual acuity, as well as his topographies , tomographies (last Pentacam images OU showing keratoconic changes OD and normal anterior and posterior elevations OS in Figs. and ) and biomechanical properties remained stable OU . To further add evidence on normal posterior float of the left eye over the years, we have also included pictures of the Belin-Ambrosio enhanced ectasia report of both eyes that are strictly normal in the left eye . Notably, biomechanical values on ORA including corneal hysteresis (CH) and corneal resistance factor (CRF) remained stable in both the keratoconic right eye and the normal left eye . Also, we proved stability of the left normal eye over time using the SCORE Analyzer software which showed no signs of early forme keratoconus in the left eye . Facing this stability over the years, no treatment was needed so far. We thus maintained our presumptive primary diagnosis of non-progressive true unilateral right keratoconus.