A 45-year-old man had an injury caused by a rusty object leading to the infection of osteomyelitis of the left tibia at 10-year-old in 1983. He received therapy in June 1983 and recovered fully. Prior to 1998, there were no symptoms, but the patient complained that dermatophytosis on the left foot heel had occurred around 1998. Interestingly, since then, when the symptom of dermatophytosis worsened, an adjacent skin wound of the left tibia had appeared. The wound was painful, red, swollen and had pruritus. Prior to 2012, the patient only received irregular treatment at the community clinics and had not been suffering from localized pain, swelling and heat on the surgical sites for nearly 3 years. In May 2012, the left heel dermatophytosis worsened dramatically, as the surgical site of the left tibia presented with marked pain, swelling and heating for about 10 days, which prompted his hospital admission on May 17, 2012.
After admission, there were no other complications or comorbidities. The body mass index (BMI) was 18.0, the vital signs were T 36.8 °C, P 80/min, R 20/min, and BP 95/62 mmHg (12.67/8.27 kPa). The initial physical examination indicated that there was a 3.0 cm × 3.0 cm subcutaneous fluctuation in the anteromedial diaphysis of the left tibia, and the local skin temperature was high. A peripheral blood test showed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 42 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) 16 mg/L, and WBC 5.79/mm3 with 64.5% granulocytes. Plain radiography scans, computed tomography scans (CT) and emission computed tomography scans (ECT) were all performed . All three scans revealed active bone infection and reactive ectopic bone formation. A 3D visualization and analysis software Amira (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was employed , which showed there was a sequestrum in the medullary cavity and adjacent reactive bone formation. Further ECT scans indicated that the localized area of uptake had increased .
During admission, the patient received surgical debridement and vacuum sealing drainage (VSD) three times (May 21st, 28th and Jun 4th, 2012). For the first operation, the histopathological specimen of infected bone and soft tissues were collected from the wound of upper anteromedial diaphysis for Gram staining and H&E staining . The bacterial cultures were positive for Corynebacterium and a methicillin-susceptible strain if S. aureus resistant to penicillin, erythrocin, amoxicillin, clarithromycin, tetracycline, and roxithromycin. Prior to these results of the antibiotic susceptibility test by the medical lab, the patient received empirical combinations of antimicrobial therapy sequentially with ceftizoxime (30 days) and piperacillin zobartan (35 days), which was the right combinations that were confirmed by the bacterial culture and antibiotic susceptibility test. Sealing of the drainage at different times occurred over a period of 12 days. Additionally, on 13th day of the admission, he received potassium permanganate tablets for dermatophytosis that lasted 3 days. Postoperative re-examination X-rays were performed on May 21, 2012 and Jun 18, 2012 respectively.
After discharge on Jun 29, 2012, the surgical sites of the left low limb recovered well. Besides his normal activities, the patient could play badminton nearly five times a week during the following 3 years. However, the patient complained of recurrent fungal infection of the left heel in 2015, with associated pathology in the left anteromedial tibia that presented as itching, redness, swelling, heat and pain. The patient noticed there was a positive correlation between the two sceneries, which was that when the foot fungal infection worsened, the osteomyelitis lesion became aggravated as indicated above. These symptoms recurred intermittently lasting about 3 more years.
The patient came for a follow-up in April 2018. Other than the two surgical scars, the appearance of the left low limb was not observed to be significantly abnormal . Radiological examinations and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the left low limb were also performed. The MRA 3-D reconstruction showed that abundant vasculature formed around the lesions and debridement site, and suggested the blood supply was well established . Additionally, the skin lesions on the left heel are visible, and a smear was sampled for fungal culture (Fg. I). The immune globulins of peripheral blood were examined for IgG (13.63 g/L), IgA (1.45 g/L), and IgM (0.83 g/L), which were in their normal ranges, respectively.