A 30-year-old woman was transferred to the emergency department from another hospital. The patient underwent aortic valve replacement and mitral valvuloplasty to treat moderate aortic regurgitation and mitral regurgitation three months ago. She presented with chest tightness and dyspnea for one week and echocardiography revealed prosthetic valve detachment, severe perivalvular leakage and moderate mitral regurgitation with posterior eccentric jet . Her medical history included recurrent oral ulcers and cutaneous lesions. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of Behcet’s disease was considered. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 74 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 29.3 mg/L. The patient’s condition was suspected as being in the active phase, so methylprednisolone therapy (40 mg/day) and thalidomide (immunomodulators, 50 mg/day) were initiated. Through 10 days drug therapy, ESR decreased to 39 mm/h and CRP to 6.04 mg/L.
During surgery, a median sternotomy was performed. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established with femoral arterial and central bicaval cannulation. Myocardial protection was achieved using cold antegrade and retrograde crystalloid cardioplegia. After opening the ascending aorta, the aortic wall was thickened, and the valve detachment accounted for approximately half of the annulus . The prosthetic valve was removed and there was a 1 cm-long tear in the aorto-mitral IFB . The aortic root and surrounding tissues were fragile. The thickened aortic root was resected and the coronary buttons were constructed with a 0.5 to 0.8 cm diameter cuff of aortic wall and mobilized over a short length to facilitate reimplantation. We reconstructed the left ventricular outflow tract and the aortic annulus using a tailored single bovine pericardial patch and repaired the mitral-aortic IFB . The valved conduit was implanted in the aortic annulus with a belt-like Teflon felt interrupted mattress sutured outside. Then, the coronary buttons were reimplanted to the valved conduit without tension. Finally, the distal end of the valved conduit was anastomosed to the distal ascending aorta. Postoperative glucocorticoid and thalidomide therapy were continued. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was discharged on the 10th day after the surgery. Histologic examinations of the aortic walls indicated disruption of medial elastic membrane, myxoid degeneration and lymphocyte infiltration.