A 56-year-old woman (Caucasian, married, two children) without preexisting conditions, who had previously performed moderate endurance runs about 2-3 times per week according to her relatives, suffered from acute cardiac arrest at home. Prior to cardiac arrest she had complained of pain in her calf after a long-distance flight. The first rhythm detected by the emergency service crew was pulseless electrical activity. During pre-clinic cardiopulmonary resuscitation, systemic lysis therapy (tenecteplase, 100 mg) was initiated under suspicion of pulmonary embolism. After the return of spontaneous circulation, the patient was transferred to an emergency department. At arrival at the resuscitation area, the patient presented with hemodynamic shock (mean arterial pressure, MAP of 92 mmHg, heart rate 133 beats/minute, epinephrine dosage of 5.5 µg/kg/minute, norepinephrine dosage of 4.5 µg/kg/minute), was intubated, mechanically ventilated and was unresponsive (Glasgow Coma Scale score of 3) without further sedation (the patient had received 15 mg midazolam, 0.5 mg fentanyl during the initial resuscitation). The first computed tomography (CT) scan did not reveal a pulmonary embolism. The treating team assumed that a pulmonary embolism, which was completely lysed, was the most likely explanation for the cardiac arrest based on the typical clinical presentation, case history and good response to lysis therapy. Shortly thereafter, the hemodynamic situation deteriorated again with requirement for massive doses of catecholamines, a pronounced drop in hemoglobin levels and the need for massive transfusion. The CT scan showed a hemoperitoneum due to a traumatic rupture of the liver after resuscitation. An emergency laparotomy was performed, the liver was sutured and the abdomen was packed. During surgery, a prolonged, massive transfusion of packed red blood cells, fresh-frozen plasma and thrombocyte concentrates was necessary. Further, coagulation factors including fibrinogen, antithrombin (AT) and four-factor prothrombin complex concentrate (4F-PCC) were administered .
On the following day, the patient developed an abdominal compartment syndrome with the onset of acute liver failure and the need for a re-laparotomy. She also developed progressive lung failure with highly elevated parameters of mechanical ventilation and poor oxygenation. Therefore, she was transferred to our ECMO center, where veno-venous (V-V) ECMO was implemented.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed severe right-heart stress (severe right ventricular dilatation, RV/LV > 2, decreased septal wall motion, severe tricuspid regurgitation, volume depletion of left ventricle) and beginning right-heart failure. Consequently, V-V ECMO was extended to venous-venoarterial (V-VA) cannulation with a 23 French, 38-cm-long drainage cannula (right femoral vein), 19 French 50-cm-long, venous return cannula (left femoral vein) and 15 French, 15-cm-long arterial return cannula (left femoral artery), that is, with a continuous cardiopulmonary bypass flow. Anticoagulation with an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) above 60 seconds was performed with unfractionated heparin. Further, echocardiography revealed two pronounced, hyperdense thrombotic structures located directly at both leaflets of the mitral valve. The thrombus located at the anterior leaflet measured 0.9 × 1.0 cm and caused an obstruction of the LVOT during systole .
Vmax in the LVOT was 3.52 m/second (Pmax of 50 mmHg) . Also, a moderate mitral insufficiency with a vena contracta of 0.6 cm was found . Of note, both the thrombus and the tip of the anterior mitral leaflet (AMVL, which was enclosed by the thrombus) obstructed the LVOT in a dynamic fashion (Additional file : Video S3), which was aggravated during systole and may be comparable to the SAM phenomenon in its hemodynamic consequence. Furthermore, the mitral insufficiency was an indirect indicator of a SAM-like pathology if considered with respect to the systolic motion of the thrombus and the tip of the AMVL.
Clinically, the patient remained highly unstable, demanding high dosages of catecholamines despite V-VA ECMO support. A new ultima ratio CT scan to rule out other causes of hemodynamic instability showed a previously undescribed central, right pulmonary embolism with almost complete obstruction of the right upper pulmonary artery, as well as numerous small thrombi in several left and right lung segments. In this situation with thromboembolic obstruction of both LVOT and pulmonary arteries, another systemic lysis treatment (alteplase, 30 mg) was initiated as ultima ratio therapy. Echocardiography performed shortly after lysis revealed no remaining mitral thrombi and an unobstructed, free LVOT. In parallel, the catecholamine dosages were decreased substantially, but the patient could not be weaned completely at any point.
Nevertheless, the patient developed progressive acute liver failure with increasing lactic acidosis and high demand for glucose substitution, pulmonary failure without improvement in oxygenation or decarboxylation (ECMO gas flow could not be reduced) and renal failure. Finally, the patient died from severe multiple-organ failure despite V-VA ECMO therapy. Postmortem examination revealed the disseminated formation of intravascular thrombi, for instance in the vena femoralis, pulmonary arteries, vena porta hepatis and vena lienalis.