The first visit of the 9-year-old boy in the pediatric section was planned for clarification of his short stature. When he came back for his next appointment, he presented with a mass within the right breast in the retromammilary region . After several diagnostic procedures , he was sent to the gynecological section for further investigations. He described the mass has been growing for about 1 year. There was no pain and no mammillary secretion. The boy suffered from social isolation caused by teasing. His medical history showed an orchidopexy on the right side. Family history was negative for breast malignancies and positive for constitutional delay of growth and puberty. No allergies, no soy intake, no external use of lavender or tea tree oil were known. The patient did not take any medication.
Primary examination was performed by the pediatricians. Physical examination showed a healthy, short-stature boy; his height was 128 cm (−2, 13 SDS), and weight 28.2 kg (−1, 23 SDS), with a body mass index of 17.2 (53 percentile), Tanner pubertal stage 1, testicle volume 2 mL on both sides. Bone age was retarded with a delay of 4 years. IGF-1 was in normal range. Genetic testing revealed a normal karyotype 46 XY with no further signs of chromosomal or genetic disorder. There was no indication for a secondary growth disorder after several diagnostic tests including growth hormone stimulation tests. Hence, a constitutional delay of growth and puberty was diagnosed.
Palpation of the right breast showed a significant swelling compared to the left breast. Breast tissue was enlarged on the right side, Tanner stage III . There was no lymph node palpable in the axillary region and no signs of lymphadenopathy. The right nipple-areola complex was normally developed, without galactorrhea or nipple discharge. There were neither skin changes nor indications for inflammation. Table shows the blood parameters which were tested. There was no indication for endocrine disorder or malignancy. Ultrasound of the testicles and of the abdomen was normal. Ultrasound of the right breast revealed glandular tissue (ACR I). Ultrasound of the left breast revealed less glandular tissue (ACR I). Axillary lymph nodes were normal. Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI of the breast was performed for exclusion of underlying malignancy due to the increase in size over 1 year and for planning the extent of operative procedure. Examination showed asymmetrical gynecomastia in favor of the right breast with a size of 4.9 × 2.6 × 4.2 cm (BI-RADS 2 both sides) .
The young patient appeared shy, refused to participate in school sports because he was teased in swimming lessons. He was found to be in depressed mood with feeling of social isolation due to concerns about his feminine appearance. The patient and his parents expressed the strong wish for surgery. Watch and wait as alternative possibility was rejected. After detailed information and consideration of possible risks, a surgery was performed through the incision along the inferior margin of the areola. Resected tissue measured 6.6 cm in the greatest extent and weighed 37 g. Histopathological examination showed intermediate phase gynecomastia with increased glandular elements and moderate epithelial hyperplasia of ductal structures without atypia, preserved the myoepithelial cell layer in the staining for p63 and the so-called checkerboard staining pattern for CK5/6 . Recovery after surgery was fast without peri- or postoperative complications. The first postoperative follow-up visit at 14 days after surgery showed a promising result. At 6-month follow-up visit, major improvement was observed in the physical and mental condition, with no evidence of recurrence .