A 60-year-old male with a past medical history of cataracts, hypertension, and
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus presented to the ED with a chief complaint of
left eye blurred vision. He was 10 weeks postoperative from a left eye cataract
extraction surgery. Three weeks prior to his ED presentation, he had noticed a vague
left eye ache associated with redness and worsening blurry vision. He denied fever,
photophobia, and eye discharge.
The patient initially presented to an ophthalmologist for evaluation of his symptoms.
Five days prior to his ED visit a fluid sample was collected from the anterior
chamber of his left eye. Retinal imaging revealed mild macular edema and mild
vitritis. Intravitreal ceftazidime and vancomycin were administered with an initial
concern for endophthalmitis, and he was prescribed ofloxacin drops. He returned for
follow-up the next day endorsing mild improvement of his left eye pain, and he was
additionally started on prednisone drops. Three days later he returned for another
follow-up appointment with progressive vision loss, and he received intravitreal
amphotericin B. Despite this treatment, he re-presented to the clinic the following
day with progressively worsening vision. Ophthalmologic exam revealed worsening
inflammation and new hypopyon. With this progression of symptoms, he was instructed
to present to the ED for further ophthalmologic evaluation and admission.
Vital signs on presentation to the ED were a temperature of 97.1° Fahrenheit,
blood pressure 170/88 millimeters mercury, heart rate of 70 beats per minute, a
respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 99%
on room air. Physical exam was notable for left eye conjunctival injection and
chemosis, Pupils were equally round and reactive bilaterally, extraocular movements
were intact and performed without additional discomfort, and intraocular pressures
were within normal limits. Visual acuity was 20/25 on the right and 20/70 on the
left.
Point-of-care ultrasound of his left eye revealed a mobile, hyperechoic spherical
mass with an anechoic center in the posterior chamber. The mass was approximately
0.5 centimeters in diameter. Additional intraocular ultrasound views revealed
multiple hypoechoic structures stemming from the lateral aspects of the mass. No
clear anchoring was seen to the retina, no retinal detachment was seen, nor was
there any dilation of the optic nerve.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for continued workup and management where
blood cultures, aqueous cultures, and cultures of tubular angle mass aspirate were
negative. The patient was ultimately discharged with a presumptive diagnosis of
fungal endophthalmitis based on his acute clinical deterioration after initiation of
steroids and lack of bacterial culture growth. Two weeks after discharge he was
improving but still had some blurry vision and was taken back to the operating room
for another vitreous washout and intraocular antifungals. His cultures from this
operation were also negative, bacterial, viral, and fungal. Two weeks after this
washout his visual acuity returned to 20/25 in his left eye, and he reported
resolution of the pain, blurry vision, and floaters in his visual field.