An obese, 69-year-old man with hypertension and diabetes mellitus suddenly complained of back pain. He was diagnosed with acute aortic dissection (Stanford type B) at another hospital by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) and was transferred to our hospital by ambulance.
CECT showed a Stanford type B aortic dissection starting just distally to the left subclavian artery and extending to the renal artery. The pressurized false lumen encroached on the true lumen of the aorta, and the abdominal aorta was compressed by the false lumen . Since he continued to have lower limb ischemia during medical therapy, right axillary-right femoral bypass was performed. His lower limb ischemia and general status improved, and he was discharged from our hospital.
Eight months after the onset of acute aortic dissection, he developed lower limb pain after walking 50 m. The dorsalis pedis artery was palpable at rest bilaterally, but it was not palpable after a short walk. CECT showed occlusion of the axillary-femoral bypass, but the true and false lumen findings were the same as eight months earlier . Since the blood pressure was low at the time of CT, there was no change. However, when the blood pressure was high at the time of body movement, the true lumen collapsed due to compression by the increased false lumen pressure in the aorta.
TEVAR was performed for entry closure under general anesthesia. The optimal proximal landing zone for the TEVAR graft was 2 cm from the entry. Left internal carotid artery-left subclavian artery bypass with a Gelsoft graft (diameter 8 mm, Vaskutek Ltd, Inchinnan, UK) was performed first. Since the aortic diameter was different, a 28 mm × 100 mm Conformable TAG (W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc., Newark, DE, USA) was deployed to the descending aorta. Then, a 37 mm × 100 mm Conformable TAG was deployed just distal to the left internal carotid artery to seal the entry. Postoperatively, intermittent claudication disappeared, and he could walk more than 500 m. His lower limb ischemia was improved by TEVAR. Seven days after the operation, CT showed improved blood flow in the true lumen .
He was discharged on the 11th postoperative day, and he is doing well one year after the operation.