A 68-year-old white man with an insignificant past medical history (including sexual history) was referred to our tertiary care academic center with symptoms of acute tonsillitis, clinically not responding to antibiotic treatment with oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid. Following a 2-day course of moderate fever (38 °C) and sore throat with highly elevated infection parameters of C-reactive protein 280 mg/l, white blood cell count (WBC) 4.8 G/L, and platelets 106 G/L, he was hospitalized for intravenous antibiotic treatement. An initial physical examination at admission was unremarkable. Due to a progressive elevation in his inflammatory markers along with clinical deterioration and progressive tonsillar inflammation, a left-sided tonsillectomy was performed 48 hours after his hospital admission. During his postoperative course, fulminant acute liver failure (ALF) was observed and he was transferred to our intensive care unit (ICU) for further investigations and supportive intensive care treatment.
At ICU admission, laboratory analyses revealed leukopenia (1.8 G/l) with pan-lymphopenia and marked elevation of indices of liver dysfunction . Toxic, vascular/ischemic, autoimmune, or metabolic liver disease was considered unlikely following anamnesis and respective laboratory tests (please also refer to Table ). In addition to laboratory signs of ALF, the patient soon developed acute kidney injury/failure: risk, injury, failure, loss of kidney function, and end-stage kidney disease (RIFLE) category “F”. An emergency abdominal ultrasound revealed moderate hepatic steatosis, and computed tomography imaging revealed inhomogeneous hepatic steatosis, ascites and moderate splenomegaly. A retropharyngeal abscess was ruled out. Infective tonsillitis-induced septic shock with progressive multiple organ failure was suspected and the initial antibiotic treatment using amoxicillin-clavulanic acid was changed to ciprofloxacin, Cubicin (daptomycin) and metronidazole. During the further course of the disease, supportive medical treatment included high-dose acetylcysteine, vitamin K and lactulose. However, further worsening of liver function tests was noted and a decision for a transjugular liver biopsy was established 48 hours following his ICU admission. Initial histologic findings revealed diffuse hepatic necrosis compatible with viral hepatitis ; empirical antiviral treatment using ganciclovir (500 mg single-shot, followed by 450 mg twice a day) was commenced in order to cover cytomegalovirus (CMV) and herpes simplex virus (HSV). In addition, initial results showed seropositivity for HSV-2 immunoglobulin G (IgG), Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) IgG and CMV IgG. Serological testing for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and for hepatitis B and hepatitis C revealed negative results. Final histological results of his liver then demonstrated significant HSV-1 and HSV-2 immunopositivity. In combination with strongly elevated HSV-2 serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR) levels (106 to 107 HSV-2 copies/ml) a formal diagnosis of HSV-2-positive hepatitis was established and treatment with ganciclovir was changed to acyclovir. The antibiotic therapy was stopped at this point in time. Due to strong HSV-positivity of hepatic tissue, tonsillar histologies were re-evaluated for HSV and marked respective immunopositivity was noted . Thus, clinical and histological data strongly suggested primary HSV-2 tonsillitis.
Along with the development of fulminant ALF, the major clinical concern was progressive multiple organ failure. Despite initial “rescue”-steroid dosing, high doses of norepinephrine (peak dose of 0.3 μg/kg/minute) were required and progressive capillary leak was observed. Following a consecutive 48-hour trial of noninvasive ventilation, the patient required invasive mechanical ventilation as a consequence of progressive muscular exhaustion. He subsequently developed anuric acute renal failure and renal replacement therapy with intermittent hemodialysis was initiated. Due to deranged coagulation in which his platelet count was 56 G/l, prothrombin time was 38 %, and international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.82, with recurrent bleeding at the tonsillectomy site and progressive disseminated intravascular coagulation, an operative revision with ligation of tonsillar arteries was deemed necessary. High urgency liver transplantation was discussed as a therapeutic option but was refrained from due to persisting uncontrolled infection/multiple organ failure with an expected badverse outcome.
During his course at the ICU, repeated drainage of ascites was necessary. Aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) and alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) serum levels peaked at day 3 (ASAT 6126U/l, ALAT 3377U/l), and elevated serum ammonia (123 μmol/l), alkaline phosphatase levels (520 U/l), and total bilirubin levels were noted . His serum factor V levels were 24 % at their lowest (following prior infusion of fresh frozen plasma). Continuous norepinephrine application was required for the ensuing 7 weeks due to severe vasoplegic shock and capillary leak. Extensive sepsis-induced generalized edema was noted and cardiogenic failure was ruled out by repeated echocardiography. As weaning from mechanical ventilation was complicated by capillary leakage and consecutive volume overload, a dilative tracheostomy was performed at day 12. In the ensuing days, anuria persisted and continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration was performed. Repeated cultures of urine, blood, sputum and stool specimens all revealed insignificant microbiological results.
Over the ensuing days, a repeated generalized rash with herpetic vesicles under continued high-dose acyclovir treatment (initial dose of 2700 mg/day followed by 1500 mg/day for approximately 30 days with respective adjustment to renal function) was noted . In the light of a persevering course of HSV-2-induced multiple organ failure and continued high titers of “viral load” (that is 105 to 106 copies of HSV-2 per ml at days 14 and 21), geno-typization of the HSV-2 virus for acyclovir resistance was performed which revealed negative results. The patients’ condition finally stabilized after 33 days of treatment. However, due to persisting lymphopenia and in view of the overall clinical severity, a prophylactic treatment with acyclovir (400 mg defined daily dose) was continued.
After approximately 1 month of intensive care treatment, an overall stabilization of his condition was noted. Norepinephrine was tapered and weaning from the ventilator was advanced. A diagnosis of ICU-acquired weakness was established and rehabilitative measures were initiated.