A 49-year-old Caucasian female with RRMS, who had been on fingolimod therapy for the past 5.5 years, presented with cephalgia, fever, confusion, coughing and generalized weakness. Prior to fingolimod, the patient had received therapies with interferons, natalizumab, mitoxantrone and rituximab which had all been discontinued due to persistent disease activity. Physical examination revealed mild temporal disorientation without new focal neurologic deficits or nuchal rigidity. Laboratory evaluation showed a normal total white cell count but a persistent absolute lymphopenia of as low as 0.09 × 1000/μl (normal range: 1.26–3.35 × 1000/μl). Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound yielded no signs of abnormalities. Multiple supra- and infratentorial non-gadolinium enhancing T2w lesions consistent with the diagnosis of MS were seen on MRI. There were no lesions suggestive of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. Due to suspected meningoencephalitis blood cultures and a lumbar puncture were performed. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a lympho-monocytic pleocytosis of 54/μl (see Fig. b), elevated protein levels of 146 mg/dl and normal glucose and lactate levels. Microscopically, no pathogens were detectable. Intracranial pressure (ICP) was not elevated. The patient was diagnosed with meningoencephalitis of unclear aetiology and we started an empiric antibiotic regimen with ceftriaxone, ampicillin and acyclovir. Fingolimod therapy was stopped. CSF-PCR results for herpes and JC virus were negative and the patient remained clinically stable. Four days after admission we detected yeast-like formations in a gram stain of an aerobic blood culture bottle whereas the CSF cultures showed no signs of growth. Due to the unusual staining the suspicion of Cryptococcus infection was raised. A lateral flow immunoassay (IMMY™) for cryptococcal antigen on the original CSF sample showed a positive antigen titre of 1:160. Sub-culture of the positive blood culture and CSF cultures demonstrated growth of Cryptococcus neoformans. As a result, 4 days after admission cryptococcal meningoencephalitis was diagnosed. Antimycotic susceptibility testing was conducted by microdilution. The German National Reference Centre for Invasive Fungal Infections verified the results and identified the species Cryptococcus neoformans var. grubii (serotype A) . Antimycotic treatment with intravenous liposomal amphotericin B and oral fluconazole was begun. On subsequent interrogation we elicited that the patient owned a birdhouse, which she cleaned regularly. Since the pulmonary tract is the common portal of entry for Cryptococcus and due to the initial respiratory symptoms, we performed a chest CT scan that revealed pulmonary lesions compatible with cryptococcosis . As cryptococcus infections usually occur in severely immunocompromised individuals and since previously only 8 cases in fingolimod-treated MS patients had been reported, we performed an extensive immunological workup. Immune cell sub-analysis revealed a reduced CD4+ T helper cell count of 77/μl (normal range: 490–1640/μl) and a decreased CD8+ T suppressor cell count of 52/μl (normal range: 170–880/μl), which were to be expected in patients on fingolimod therapy. Further analysis revealed a normal total IgG level of 817 mg/dl (normal range: 700–1600 mg/dl). The levels of the IgG subclasses IgG1 (550 mg/dl), IgG3 (16.1 mg/dl) and IgG4 (12.2 mg/dl) also were within normal parameters. However, we found an IgG2 deficiency of 108 mg/dl (normal range: 169–786 mg/dl). Within 1 week of antifungal treatment the initial symptoms subsided and the CSF cell count and protein levels decreased significantly. Due to rising serum liver enzymes fluconazole was replaced by flucytosine after which liver enzymes normalized. The patient was discharged symptom-free on fluconazole monotherapy. Within an observation period of 6 months no relapse of her MS occurred after fingolimod cessation. Follow-up CSF analysis showed no abnormalities, liver enzyme levels were normal, and the absolute peripheral blood lymphocyte count had increased to 480/μl.