A 78-year-old Asian woman presented to our outpatient department with chief complaints of coughing and fever. Her cough had persisted for several weeks, and her fever had developed on the previous day. The patient’s medical history included asthma and sinusitis. Although her sinusitis had been treated several years prior, she had not received treatment before hospitalization. The patient’s surgical history included knee joint replacement and two spinal fusion surgeries; the second spinal fusion had been performed 3 months before the current consultation.
Physical examination revealed hypoxemia, and auscultation revealed bilateral chest crackles with no sign of heart failure. Bilateral pleural effusion was detected on a chest radiograph . The patient developed yellowing of her fingernails and toenails following hospitalization . This finding, combined with the patient’s pleural effusion and sinusitis, led to suspicion for YNS. Bilateral dorsum pedis lymphedema was confirmed during hospitalization. Blood analysis revealed a slight increase in inflammation. However, the patient’s test results for rheumatoid factor and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody were negative. Her thyroid parameters and levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor were normal. Her sputum culture and interferon-γ release assay results were negative. The result of her bacterial culture of pleural effusion was negative. Computed tomography failed to confirm the presence of a malignant tumor. A chest radiograph obtained prior to the second spinal fusion procedure showed no pleural effusion. However, pleural effusion appeared 1 month after the second surgery. On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with YNS due to titanium exposure.
After diagnosis, vitamin E was administered for more than 1 year. After a half-year of vitamin E administration, improvement in the thickness of the nails on the patient’s hands was observed , but no effect was seen for the pleural effusion. Pleural effusion also failed to respond to pleurodesis. Pleural effusion drainage was therefore performed regularly. Currently, the patient visits our clinic every 1–2 months and undergoes chest radiography. Pleural drainage is performed if there is an increase in pleural fluid.