A 28-year-old female presented to a pulmonologist for evaluation of a GGN, which was found in the posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe. The patient had no history of fever, weight loss, shortness of breath, chest pain or other chest complaints. In fact, a GGN with the size of 6 × 4 mm was detected 2 years ago. The size of the GGN increased gradually in the follow-up chest CTs , and surgical resection of the nodule was recommended by the department of thoracic surgery. The patient underwent CT-guided percutaneous pneumocentesis for positioning 1 day prior to surgery at our radiology department, and had opted for local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine after CT localization . The procedures were as follows: the CT-guided percutaneous puncture was carried out using the introducer needle (Argon Medical Devices Inc., Athens, TX 75751, USA), which preloaded with the microcoil (Cook incorporated, Bloomington, IN 47,404, USA). When the needle tip reached (but not touching) the edge of the nodule , a 5-mm-long microcoil was pushed out into the lung, allowing it to mark the location of the nodule. The needle was then retracted into the pleural space and pulled out until the proximal end of the microcoil was deployed at the edge of the lung. The CT scan was subsequently performed to ensure the right position of the microcoil , which showed one end of the coil anchored along the nodule and the other in the pleural space. No obvious pneumothorax or hematoma was demonstrated. The patient had no apparent clinical manifestations, such as pain, hemoptysis, chest distress, or shortness of breath, and was monitored for heart rate, blood pressure and blood oxygen for the ensuing 4 h.
At 10 h after localization, the patient complained of worsening chest pain while breathing and speaking, accompanied by chest distress, shortness of breath and cold sweats. The hemoglobin level of the patient was lower than 125 g/L, and an emergency chest CT scan revealed a right-sided massive hydropneumothorax. A cord shadow could be seen at the right pleural apex , which indicated ruptured pleural adhesions and a possible active bleeding point. Closed thoracic drainage therapy was then immediately performed, which led to the draining of incoagulable blood. The patient showed clinical signs of hemorrhagic shock such as pallor, cold extremities, low blood pressure, and soon became unconscious. Laboratory tests described significantly decreased hemoglobin level (87 g/L). Therefore, the resuscitation protocol for handling hypovolemic shock was performed to correct hypovolemia followed by rapid fluid infusion, blood transfusion and emergent thoracoscopic exploration.
During the thoracoscopic exploration, no obvious bleeding was found at the localization puncture site. However, an aberrant vessel fractured and bleeding was discovered at the right pleural apex , which accompanied by blood clots and bloody fluid in the chest. We then performed electrocoagulation hemostasis for the fractured aberrant vessel. The GGN in the right lower lobe was then removed thoroughly by wedge resection based on the location of the microcoil. The excised nodule of approximately 0.5 cm in diameter showed ambiguous borders, and the biopsy demonstrated microinvasive adenocarcinoma . The patient recovered swiftly and was discharged from hospital 2 days after operation. The follow-up chest CT after 3 months showed surgical scars in the lower lobe of the right lung, and little effusion left in the right thoracic cavity. Laboratory tests indicated a hemoglobin level of 115 g/L.