A 40 year old woman was admitted to the obstetrics ward during the 25th week of gestation to adjust her anticoagulation regimen. She was gravida 2, with one previous miscarriage and had a metallic mitral valve prosthesis as a result of a childhood episode of rheumatic fever. Except for her cardiac disease, which was under control, she led a normal life and was employed as a social worker. This woman discovered that she was pregnant in the first trimester of gestation, and without consulting her physician, stopped using her anticoagulants. She was late in initiating antenatal care and consequently her referral to a specialized antenatal clinic was also delayed. When she was in the 25th week of gestation, she reached the third level of care and was admitted to the obstetrics ward where she was prescribed 10,000 units of unfractionated heparin twice a day. During her third night in the hospital, after receiving subcutaneous heparin for almost 72 hours (at that time the dose had been increased to 12,000 units twice a day), she developed headache, nausea, vomiting and mental confusion. At that time, physical examination revealed a stiff neck, but no focal neurological deficits were noted. The patient's pupils showed isocoria and were reactive to light, and she had a Glasgow coma score of 11. During this initial phase of hospitalization, her blood pressure and pulse remained within the normal range. APTT (Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time) was 57 seconds. A computerized tomography scan displayed an intraparenchymatous haematoma with bloody obliteration of the ventricles. The patient underwent neurosurgical drainage of this lesion and was admitted to the obstetrical intensive care unit, where postoperative care and ventilatory support was continued. During the following hours, her neurological status deteriorated progressively and on the following day, the patient appeared to have gone into a non-reactive coma with no sign of brainstem activity. Maternal brain death was confirmed by a transcranial Doppler scan of the cerebral arteries. At that time, foetal weight was estimated at 660 g according to ultrasound evaluation. After the diagnosis of brain death, the situation was explained to the woman's family, who informed the medical team that the deceased woman had legally registered her desire to posthumously donate her organs. In view of the deceased woman's wishes and the status of the foetus, a conservative approach was adopted by the medical team, and the necessary measures to prolong maternal homeostasis were implemented.
We assumed that brain death would have resulted in a condition of panhypopituitarism caused by loss of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis function. Accordingly, enteral replacement of thyroid hormone and cortisol (prednisone) was carried out. The patient also developed a persistent state of hyperglycemia that was treated with continuous intravenous insulin. Diabetes Insipidus was treated with enteric desmopressin (DDAVP), and diuresis and serum sodium were used to titrate the dose of DDAVP.
The patient developed mild hypotension, which was initially treated with crystalloid and colloid replacement to maintain central venous pressure between 14 and 18 centimetres of water, plus low doses of norepinephrine. A moderate but persistent bradycardia was initially treated with dopamine and later with low doses of epinephrine. Pressure-limited mechanical ventilation was used to manage mild respiratory alkalosis (CO2 = 32 mmHg) and an arterial oxygen saturation greater than 94%.
Basal energy expenditure (BEE) was calculated using the Harris-Benedict formula (BEE = 655 + [9.6 × weight(kg)] + [1.8 × height(cm)] - [4.7 × age(yr)]), multiplied by 1.25 (stress factor for pregnancy), adding 300 Kcal for a single foetus and deducting 15% from the BEE to compensate for the reduction in metabolism associated with the state of brain death . Enteral nutrition was used to provide the total daily calorie requirement.
Hypothermia was a major feature during this period and was treated with passive heating using an air heater and blankets to maintain temperature > 36°C. After ten days of somatic support, the patient developed ventilation-associated pneumonia, which was treated with ceftriaxone, and a tracheotomy was performed to facilitate bronchial hygiene and mechanical ventilation.
Foetal well-being was thoroughly evaluated by electronic foetal heart rate monitoring, foetal Doppler velocimetry and biophysical profile. Betamethasone was used to accelerate foetal lung maturity. During a total of twenty-five days of prolongation, the maternal organism remained mostly stable. Nevertheless, in the last week of prolongation progressive oligohydramnios was detected in the foetus and a Doppler test revealed centralization (brain sparring). Foetal status helped in reaching the decision to perform a Caesarean section at that moment. It is possible that, even at the low doses used, the vasoconstrictors may have contributed to the functional placental insufficiency by constricting the uterine vessels, resulting in placental hypoperfusion. A male infant was born weighting 815 g, with an Apgar score of 9 and 10 in the first and fifth minutes, respectively. Following delivery, the premature newborn was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit. He required no mechanical ventilation and had no major complications. Some hours after delivery, the maternal organs were removed for donation. The baby was discharged from hospital weighing 1850 g at 40 days of life. Re-evaluation of the infant during a follow-up visit at 90 days of life revealed normal development and no detectable sequelae.