A 70-year-old male was admitted to the hospital in December 2020 due to “dyspnea for 10 days.” The patient had exertional dyspnea 10 days ago, which was progressively worsening with paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and bilateral lower extremity edema. Cardiac MRI showed myocardium with edema in the inferior wall of basal left ventricular, middle and anterior of apex, together with multiple patchy delayed enhancement areas in the anterior wall of basal left ventricular, septal and inferior wall, leading to suspicion of non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, and subacute myocarditis (as shown in ). The patient’s weight gained nearly 7 kg in a month. He had a history of diabetes and smoking, but no family history of neuromuscular or heart disease. As shown in the timeline, the patient initially presented with back pain and was found with an elevation of creatine kinase (CK) without any myalgia or muscle weakness 1 year after the initial presentation; meanwhile, thyroid function test, anti-thyroid antibodies, and myositis antibody spectrum were normal, and no statin medication history. MRI of the thigh showed MR changes in bilateral hip and thigh muscles, with fat infiltration and mild edema. The patient was performed coronary angiography, which showed triple-vessel disease (distal left anterior descending artery 80% stenosis, distal right coronary artery 60–70% stenosis, and distal left circumflex artery 80% stenosis), and implanted one stent in the left circumflex artery (LCX). The patient’s back pain was slightly relieved after interventional therapy, but the CK continuously increased (as shown in ), creatine kinase isoenzyme (CK-MB) and cardiac troponin I (cTNI) fluctuated at a low level, and cardiac troponin T (cTNT) values were normal. A neurologist suspected myopathy and suggested an electromyography and muscle biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. The autoantibody and myositis antibody spectrum showed ANA 1:100 (H + S), anti-Scl-70 antibody (+), and anti-JO-1 antibody (+).
Stable vitals, abdomen skin was thickened and wrinkled, stale rash on the back, bilateral loins and tibia of both lower limb, rough breathing sounds in lungs and low breath sound in the right lung, normal regular heart rhythm and normal heart sounds, bilateral lower extremity edema, interphalangeal joint of right ring finger tenderness and limited movement, and tight and stiff skin of both hands. No mask face or mouth rays.
Normal blood routine examination, abnormal liver function (alanine transaminase 53 IU/L, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 1,02 IU/L, and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 94 IU/L), normal renal function for his age (creatinine 95.30 μmol/L, estimated glomerular filtration rate 69.324 ml/min/1.73 m2), and elevated cardiac biomarkers (CK-MB 23.1 ng/ml, cTNI 0.089 ng/ml, and BNP 679.00 pg/ml). CK 2,413 IU/L, lactic dehydrogenase 430 IU/L, high sensitivity CRP 4.22 mg/L; no proteinuria; urine α1-microglobulin 16.90 mg/L; 24 h urine protein: 0.04 g/24 h (1,100 ml); immunoglobulin G (IgG) 6.25 g/L, IgM 0.17 g/L; protein electrophoresis of serum and urine (−); serum immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) (−), urine IFE: monoclonal light chains IgG κ (+); serum total light chain: κ 502.00 mg/dl (598–1,329 mg/dl), λ 474.00 mg/dl (280–665 mg/dl), κ/λ = 1.06; autoantibody and myositis antibody spectrum: ANA 1:100 (H + S), anti-Scl-70 antibody (+), the others were negative; ECG: first-degree AVB, PR interval 245 ms; TTE: symmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy (ventricular septum 15 mm, left ventricular posterior wall 13 mm, and right ventricular free wall 6 mm), left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 58.7%, E/A 2.2, and E/E′ 21.1. The hand X-ray showed degeneration; the ventilation-perfusion scan showed no pulmonary embolism; 99mTc-PYP (99mTc-PYP) scintigraphy was negative; and TTR gene sequencing of the blood did not identify any mutation.
Cardiac fiber hypertrophy, deposition of lipofuscin in cytoplasm, perinuclear hyalinosis, and contraction band necrosis were observed; and amyloid deposition (Congo red staining showed the characteristic apple-green birefringence under polarized light) with positive light chain κ in subendocardium. No signs of myocarditis were observed (as shown in ).
Mycopathological changes, a few atrophy, and regenerated muscle fibers were observed. There was a few positive expression of MHC-1 in muscle fibers and the deposition of membranous complement in non-necrotic muscle fibers in the perifascicular area, which was consistent with the characteristics of myopathy pathological changes. A small number of cytochrome oxidase (COX)-negative muscle fibers were observed, considered as aging changes. No pathological changes of typical muscular dystrophy and neurogenic skeletal muscle were found (as shown in ).
No obvious morphological abnormality was observed in all lines of cells. More plasma cells were scattered or infiltrated in the interstitium (CD138++, κ++, λ–, VS38c++, and MUC1–) and accounting for about 25%. Hyperplasia of myeloid plasma cells with light chain restriction expression and mild myelofibrosis, which considered to be a plasma cell disorder (as shown in ).
Cardiac amyloidosis and myopathy due to primary AL amyloidosis. Chemotherapy with bortezomib + cyclophosphamide + dexamethasone (BCD) regimen was then initiated in other hospitals.