A 35-year-old male was admitted because of a 7-day history of fever with chills. He was a truck driver and worked in southern Taiwan. He recalled a history of visiting his father, who bred hundreds of goats, about 3 weeks prior admission, but the patient denied direct contact with or close proximity to the goats.
Upon admission, the patient's body temperature was 39.7°C, his heart rate was 88 beats/min, and his blood pressure was 140/70 mmHg. No abnormality was revealed by physical examination. The laboratory examinations revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 10,450/mm3 (neutrophils, 76%; lymphocytes, 16%; monocytes, 5%), a hemoglobin level of 12.7 g/dl, a platelet count of 324,000/mm3, an alanine aminotransferase (ALT) level of 145 U/L (reference range, 0-44 U/L), an aspartate aminotransferase (AST) level of 76 U/L (reference range, 0-38 U/L), a total bilirubin level of 0.9 mg/dl (reference, 0-1.3 mg/dl), and a serum creatinine level of 1.1 mg/dl. No abnormality was found by chest x-ray or urine analysis. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed hepatosplenomegaly, a moderately fatty liver, and a thickened gallbladder wall. Acute Q fever was highly suspected clinically, and oral doxycycline, 100 mg every 12 hours, was administered empirically. However, the fever persisted despite 4 days of treatment of doxycycline; thus, intravenous levofloxacin, 500 mg per day, was added starting at day 5. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple periaortic reactive lymph nodes, mesentery infiltration, and hepatomegaly. Neither mediastinal lymph nodes nor pulmonary lesion was found by chest CT. No focus of inflammation was found by Gallium inflammation scan. Oral prednisolone at a dosing schedule of 40 mg daily, 20 mg daily, and then 10 mg daily for 2 days each was administered from days 7 to 12. The first blood specimen collected on day 1 was sent to the Taiwan CDC for Q fever testing, and the results of the antibody assay and the polymerase chain reaction for C. burnetii were all reported to be negative on day 8.
No bacterial growth was found by blood and urine cultures. The results of the serum HBsAg, anti-HBc IgM, anti-HAV IgM, anti-HCV, anti-nuclear antibody, IgM antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus and Cytomegalovirus, anti-HIV, and VDRL tests were all negative. The thyroid function, serum cortisol level, and tumor markers including PSA, AFP, CEA, and Ca-199 were all within normal limits. Other antibiotics including azithromycin and ceftriaxones were administered later due to persistent fever. Because of the refractory spiking fever, hepatomegaly, elevated liver enzymes, and no identified infection source or pathogen, a sono-guided fine-needle liver biopsy was performed on day-13 . The pathological finding revealed granulomatous inflammation of the liver without the characteristic "doughnut granulomas" of Q fever. Neither acid-fast microorganisms nor fungus was found. No mycobacterium, fungus, or other bacterium was isolated from the tissue culture. Because tuberculosis (TB) is an endemic disease in southern Taiwan and is a common cause of granulomatous hepatitis, a therapeutic trial of four combined anti-TB drugs was added starting at day 15. Steroid therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone, 20 mg every 12 hours, was added 2 days later. On day 19, however, the Q fever analysis of serum collected on day 12 (19th day from disease onset) revealed anti-phase II IgM = 1:1600 and anti-phase II IgG = 1:6400 . At this time, the anti-TB drugs were suspended. The fever subsided, and the steroid was shifted to oral prednisolone and was tapered gradually. The patient was discharged on day 26 with prednisolone, 10 mg daily for 3 days. The patient was followed, and no evidence of development of chronic Q fever infective endocarditis was found by Q fever serological tests and echocardiography .
Among the 11 tested cytokines, only IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10 were detectable from disease onset to the 18-month follow-up. The levels of IL-2, IL-8, and IL-10 were elevated initially and decreased gradually, but the IL-6 level remained low . The initial elevated PCT level also decreased with time .
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the E-Da Hospital (EMRP-097-117). Signed informed consent was obtained from the patient before clinical observation and blood collection.
Indirect immunofluorescence antibody assays (IFA) were performed for serologic assessment of specific antibodies against C. burnetii using commercially available kits (Focus Diagnostics Q Fever IFA IgG and IgM assay).
The serum was separated from the blood within 2 hours after collection and was stored at -80°C until analysis. Eleven cytokines were tested simultaneously, including interferon-γ (INF-γ), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12 p70, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and TNF-β using a multiplex cytokine kit (Human Th1/Th2 11plex FlowCytomix Multiplex [BMS810FF], Bender MedSystems™) and a BD FACSCalibur™ flow cytometer (Becton, Dickinson and Company) in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. All assays were performed in duplicate.
Measurement of the serum PCT concentration was performed using VIDAS® B·R·A·H·M·S PCT tests.