A 35-year-old man, consulted for a declining of visual acuity. He had a 2-months history of blurred vision in his left eye without pain or redness. The man's corrected visual acuity was 3/10 in the right eye and hand motion in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 13 mmHg in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination showed no anterior segment abnormality beside a bilateral incipient cortical cataract. Funduscopy of the right eye showed an epiretinal membrane that slightly pulls on the retina associated with macular folds, and a normal optic disc. Funduscopy of the left eye revealed a stellate maculopathy with loss of foveolar depression and a normal optic disc. .
The earlyphase of fluorescein angiography showed no abnormalities nor in the choroidal filling nor in the retinal vessels. An optic disc swelling was confirmed in the left eye by observing fluorescein diffusion from the disc, especially along the vascular axes and indistinct borders in the late phase. .
Optical coherence tomography showed in the right eye an epimacular membrane with thickening of the retinal pigment epithelium and in the left eye, a retinal serous detachment with thickening of the retinal pigment epithelium and a few exudates of the IS/OS junction layer. .
The general clinical examination was unremarkable. The results of laboratory investigations did not reveal any inflammatory syndrome, blood count electrolytes, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were normal. Serologies for cat scratch disease (ELISA for Bartonella hanslae), syphilis (VDRL and fluorescent treponemal antibody-absorption tests), and toxoplasmosis (serologic testing for anti Toxoplasma IgG and IgM), were negative. Tests for tuberculosis including chest radiography gave negative results too. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was requested but no intracranial lesions were found. The diagnosis of idiopathic Leber's stellate neuroretinitis was retained. Therapy with methylprednisolone at 10mg/kg/D for 3 days in a row and an oral relay was started with a progressive degression over 2 weeks. The visual acuity, 3 weeks after the corticosteroid treatment, improved to 2/10. The prognosis in this case was good. Indeed, after 1 year, the visual acuity remained the same with a clear regression of the stellar maculopathy and the optic disc oedema.