A previously healthy 40-years-old woman underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis. Intraoperative cholangiography was not performed. After clipping gallbladder hilum structures and during removal of the gallbladder, a severe bleeding at the liver hilum motivated the conversion to open surgery. Many sutures were placed across the parenchyma at the site of the right portal vein entrance into the liver and in the gallbladder bed for bleeding control. Finally, the gallbladder was completely removed and biliary injury was undiagnosed. On the first postoperative day (POD) the patient developed elevation of liver function test and with presumption of right bile duct injury decision was made to transfer the patient to a tertiary center.
On intensive care unit admission (48 hours after onset of injury), she presented signs of shock (arterial pressure 80/60 mm Hg, heart rate 130/minute, anuria and dyspnea). Within hours, she rapidly deteriorated with encephalopathy, persistent hypotension needing noreprinefrin and progressive organ dysfunction including acute renal failure requiring hemodialysis and mechanical ventilation. Blood laboratory revealed elevated liver function test (AST: 12.167 IU/L; ALT: 3.838 IU/L and alkaline phosphatase: 354 IU/L), metabolic acidosis (serum lactate: 6 mmol/L) and a marked systemic inflammatory response syndrome (APACHE II score: 25 points). Impaired liver function was reflected by cholestasis (Total bilirubin: 20 mg/dL and direct bilirubin: 12 mg/dL) and reduction of coagulation activity parameters (prothrombin time: 18% and international normalized ratio: 4.5). An abdominal ultrasound revealed a heterogeneous right liver without dilatation of intra and extra-hepatic bile ducts. A computed tomography without contrast confirmed absence of intra-abdominal fluid collection. As a combined iatrogenic vascular and biliary injury of the right liver pedicle was suspected and with the intention to determine the precise extent of the vascular injury, an angiography was performed documenting an occlusion of right hepatic artery and right portal vein. Based on these findings and in the clinical context of a patient with liver gangrene, severe coagulopathy and progressive secondary multi-organ failure, she was immediately included in the emergency status of the waiting list for liver transplantation.
Four days after the onset of the liver injury, a cadaveric organ became available. At the time of transplantation, she was hemodinamically stable without signs of systemic infection that contraindicate liver transplantation. She had spontaneous epistaxis needing nasal packing and diffuses bleeding at each site of venous puncture. The preoperative laboratory blood test showed impairment of coagulation activity parameters (prothrombin time: <10% and international normalized ratio: 5.5) and transplantation was performed with continuous intra-operative hemodialysis. At laparotomy, a wound infection was detected. The macroscopic aspect of the right liver was gangrenous with the presence of severe cholestasis . Meticulous exploration of the pedicle demonstrated ligature and division of the right hepatic artery. The common bile duct was divided and resected up to the bifurcation. Necrotic liver parenchyma was identified in the area of the hemostatic sutures. The liver transplantation was performed using the standard technique with preservation of the native vena cava (Piggy-back technique) without intra-operative complications. The macroscopic aspect of the right liver parenchyma demonstrated infarction with hemorrhage and cholestasis . Basiliximab and corticoids were used for initial immunosuppression regimen. The patient recovered satisfactorily with good function of the liver graft and mechanical ventilation was removed on POD 4. But on POD 7 she developed bilateral pneumonia and severe gastrointestinal bleeding of unknown origin. Finally, she died on POD 24 due to bilateral necrotizing pneumonia secondary to multiresistent Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection with functioning liver graft.