An 81-year-old female patient, Mrs. NM, presented to casualty with a 3-year history of melaena, haematemesis and lethargy. Previous medical history recorded 8 uneventful deliveries and multiple tooth extractions which were not associated with excessive bleeding. There was also no family history of pathological bleeding. On clinical examination, the patient had signs of cardiac failure but was haemodynamically stable. She had diffuse cutaneous ecchymoses and significant pallor. There was no clinical evidence of haemarthrosis. There was no organomegaly or lymphadenopathy and the neurological system was grossly intact. Laboratory testing revealed a severe normocytic, normochromic anaemia. Her renal function was normal. Her albumin was mildly reduced but liver enzyme levels were not elevated. Coagulation testing revealed a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time and a mildly prolonged prothrombin time which both corrected on mixing studies (data not shown). The Factor VIII levels and von Willebrand Factor antigen and activity (Ristocetin co-factor) levels were markedly reduced. Platelet aggregation studies showed a markedly reduced response to all platelet agonists including high dose ristocetin. Platelet function analyser studies demonstrated prolonged closure to both collagen/epinephrine and collagen/ADP .
Gastroscopy revealed mild duodenal angiodysplasia with active bleeding. The patient received multiple blood and coagulation factor transfusions, anti-fibrinolytic agents and proton-pump inhibitors to control the bleeding. Monthly cycles of intravenous immunoglobulin (Polygam) of 40 g daily for 3 days were commenced and 3 cycles were administered. This regimen resulted in a clinical response with cessation of the bleeding and partial transient recovery of the vWF and Factor VIII levels . Ristocetin response on platelet aggregometry demonstrated partial improvement. Following clinical stabilization, the patient was discharged to outpatient follow-up and subsequently relocated to a rural treatment facility.