A 77-year-old Caucasian male patient was admitted to the emergency department by ambulance with abdominal pain, haematuria, and a reduced volume of urine lasting for three days. The patient’s history revealed that he normally urinated 5 or 6 times a day but that he had been able to urinate once a day for the last 3 days and that the amount of urine was reduced, he came to hospital for the first time with this complaint. The patient reported that he had used clarithromycin 500 mg tablet two times a day one week ago because of acute pneumonia. The patient used the following medications: inhaler (ß2- mimetic), Coraspin® 100 mg and warfarin for coronary artery disease (CAD), arrhythmia, hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). He had no recent medical history of surgery, bladder cancer or trauma. Upon his physical examination, the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15. The patient was oriented, cooperative and alert. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure was 148/88, respiratory rate was 20, oxygen saturation obtained from the finger was 94% on room air, pulse was 92, and temperature was 36.6 °C. He had local bruises on his arms and legs. The abdominal findings were as follows: he had suprapubic tenderness to deep palpation in the bilateral lower quadrants. Double vascular access (wide lumen) was established, and a bladder Foley catheter was inserted. His urine output was reduced, there was a total of 50 ml of residual urine in the bladder, and gross haematuria was observed. We thought that the patient may have developed a urinary tract infection and acute renal failure as a result. Free fluid was detected in retrovesical space in FAST USG. To elucidate the ethology of acute renal failure, a urinary system ultrasound was requested, and retrograde cystography and abdominal computed tomography were performed to determine whether there was intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal injury to the bladder as well as fluid in the retrovesical area. Posterior-anterior chest X-ray and abdominal X-ray were requested for the patient. There were no major findings of free-air or perforation with direct radiography; therefore, cystography was performed with the use of a retrovesical opaque medium . From the imaging, it was thought that there was blood accumulation due to bladder rupture to the intraperitoneal region. The laboratory results showed that his haemoglobin (Hb) was 13.9 g/dL, haematocrit (Ht) was 39.6%, platelet count (PLT) was 220 10^3/L, blood urine nitrogen (BUN) was 34.5 mg/dL, creatinine was 0.90 mg/dL, eGFR was 82 mL/min/1.7 m^2, prothrombin time (PT) was > 180 s, INR was > 12 and that the patient had gross haematuria. We thought that the use of clarithromycin in combination with warfarin heightened the effect of warfarin, resulting in an intra-bladder haemorrhage and subsequent risk for bladder rupture. These results were associated with warfarin overdose, and the patient was treated with a slow IV infusion of 10 mg vitamin K for 30 min. The patient was evaluated by urology and radiology specialists, and a haematoma was seen in his bladder with USG. Therefore, abdominal CT was performed to determine whether the rupture was intraperitoneal or extraperitoneal. According to the results of abdominal CT, spontaneous bladder rupture secondary to warfarin overdose was observed . A slow IV infusion of 60 mL prothrombin complex concentrate (PPC) was administered to the patient over 45 min, and he was scheduled to undergo surgery with a preliminary diagnosis of bladder rupture after microscopic haematuria. The patient’s INR level was measured again after 1 h, and the result was 1.4. The patient was transferred for surgery. During the surgery, organized haematoma in the bladder and a perforation area of 2–3 cm in the posterior wall of the bladder were detected. A catheter was placed, and the bladder mucosa and muscle were closed separately with a primary repair performed by an urologist. After the bladder repair, there were no unanticipated events, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. The urine output of the patient was 530 ml on the first postoperative day, 950 ml on the second postoperative day and 1600 ml on the third postoperative day. On the 8th day of his postoperative stay, an abdominal CT was performed again for quality control, and the results showed no complications . The patient’s complaints improved. Therefore, the patient was transferred to the ward. The patient was hospitalized for a total of 8 days. During this period of follow-up, his anticoagulant level was adjusted, and the patient was discharged and made a full recovery.