In July 2007, a 67-year-old man with an age-related cataract in his left eye underwent uneventful phacoemulsification with implantation of an Akreos Adapt posterior chamber intraocular lens (Bausch & Lomb, Rochester, NY, USA) in the capsular bag under Healon GV (Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL, USA). Phacoemulsification was performed through a temporal clear corneal incision, and there were no postoperative complications. One month after the operation, his uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/30 with −0.5 D SPH = −1.25 D CYL × 60′. Three years after surgery, his UCVA was 20/20 with −0.75 D SPH = −1.00 D CYL × 70′. The anterior chamber was deep and the IOL was well-positioned within the capsular bag.
In December 2011, the patient presented with decreased visual acuity of 20/100 with −2.75 D SPH = −2.25 D CYL × 70′, and his intraocular pressure (IOP) was 9.0 mmHg. Slit lamp biomicroscopic examination revealed a circumferential occlusion between the margin of the anterior capsule opening and the anterior surface of the peripheral IOL optic. There was a pool of turbid, milky-white fluid between the forward-displaced IOL and the posterior capsule. The posterior capsule was vaulted posteriorly, yet there was no PCO . No cell or flare was observed in the anterior chamber, and no abnormalities were observed in the cornea, vitreous body, or retina. Capsular block syndrome was diagnosed, and posterior capsulotomy was scheduled to remove the substance. However, the Nd:YAG laser aiming beam could not be focused on the posterior capsule because of the intense opacity of the contents in the hyperdistended capsular bag. Alternatively, anterior capsulotomy was performed beyond the 6-o’clock edge of the IOL with an Nd:YAG laser . A turbid fluid with minute white cells was emptied from the capsular bag anteriorly into the anterior chamber, and the distended capsule was restored . One week after the procedure, the patient’s UCVA improved to 20/30 with −1.00 D SPH = −1.50 D CYL × 70′, and his IOP was 7.0 mmHg.
Ten months after anterior capsulotomy, the patient returned with decreased visual acuity. His uncorrected visual acuity was 20/50 with −3.5 D SPH = −2.75 D CYL × 20′, and his IOP was 9.0 mmHg. Posterior capsular distension was observed with clear fluid in the bag. Elschnig’s pearl-type PCO and fibrosis along the entire capsule opening with clogging of the anterior capsulotomy opening were present. The patient was diagnosed with recurrent fibrotic capsular block syndrome, and Nd:YAG posterior capsulotomy was performed immediately. Posterior capsular opacity and fluid were emptied from the capsular bag posteriorly into the vitreous after the procedure, and the distended capsule was restored . One week after the operation, his UCVA improved to 20/30 with −0.75 D SPH = −1.75 D CYL × 68′, and his IOP was 10.0 mmHg.