A 29-year-old man has been experiencing numbness in his left leg for a year. As the numbness progressed to the left side of the abdomen, he underwent gadolinium (Gd)-enhanced head magnetic resonance (MR) imaging at a local medical facility. The examination revealed an enhanced lesion in the medulla oblongata, and the patient was subsequently referred to our hospital. There was no significant medical history or family history, and except for the left-sided numbness, no neurological abnormalities were observed. Head computed tomography (CT) showed a hypodense lesion in the central area with hyperdense areas protruding from the medulla oblongata to the surrounding tissues . Head MR imaging demonstrated a high-intensity round lesion on T2-weighted images (WI) and a circumscribed Gd enhancement surrounding the caudal low-intensity area on T1WI . A low-grade glial tumor, such as pilocytic astrocytoma, was suspected and tumor resection with duroplasty was planned.
The tumor located on the dorsal side of the medulla oblongata, presumably corresponding to the nucleus gracilis, was visible through the pia mater as a brown mass . During the tumor resection after cutting the pia mater, the tumor was fragile and grayish-white in color. The border between the tumor and normal brain tissue was well-defined . An intraoperative pathological diagnosis (IOD) using a frozen section was obtained, and a diagnosis of suspected germinoma was made. Therefore, the surgery was completed with a biopsy only.
As for pathological findings , the tumor showed proliferation of atypical cells with relatively large nuclei and pale cytoplasm. Lymphocytic infiltration was observed. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for placental alkaline phosphatase and c-kit. The human chorionic gonadotropin beta (hCG-β) test was weakly positive, whereas the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) test was negative. The diagnosis of germinoma was confirmed.
Since germinoma was not suspected before surgery, blood tests were conducted to measure AFP, hCG, and hCG-β levels on the day after surgery. The results showed an AFP of 2.0 ng/ml, HCG <0.5 mIU/mL, and HCG-β <0.28 ng/ mL. Post-operative MR imaging showed no complications, and the right-side numbness remained unchanged. The patient was discharged home with a Karnofsky performance status (KPS) score of 90. Subsequently, chemotherapy using carboplatin and etoposide was initiated. After completing two cycles of chemotherapy, the contrast-enhanced lesion mostly disappeared, confirming its significant effectiveness. Therefore, radiation therapy with a total dose of 30.6 Gy in 17 fractions to all the ventricles was performed concurrently with the third cycle of chemotherapy. Post-treatment Gd-contrasted MR imaging showed no evidence of the enhanced lesion and no tumor dissemination. The patient was in good condition (KPS = 90) except for mild dysesthesia in the left extremities 6 months after the biopsy.