A 32-year-old man presented with three-day history of decreased visual acuity, redness, pain and photophobia of the right eye. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting finger 3 m in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. Relative afferent pupilary defect was absent. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits. In slit lamp biomicroscopy of the right eye, conjunctival injection and 3+ cell and 2+ flare in anterior chamber was found. Lids, cornea and lens were normal. Fundus examination revealed vitritis, media haziness, and a round, fluffy, white retinochoroiditis patch, about one-disc diameter in size, in the foveal area associated with edema and retinal vasculitis. Left eye examination was normal. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of ocular toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis in the active phase. The clinical suspicion of toxoplasmosis was confirmed by positive serology tests of anti-toxoplasma IgG and IgM antibodies. Foveal involvement was documented with optical coherence tomography (OCT). At first, OCT images showed foveal retinal thickening and edema and in enhanced-depth imaging (EDI-OCT) choroidal thickening was obvious. Because of the proximity of the lesion to the fovea, treatment was initiated immediately with intravitreal injection of dexamethasone (0.4 mg/0.1 mL) and clindamycin (1.0 mg/0.1 mL) in the right eye. It was followed by oral azithromycin (250 mg/day) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160 mg/800 mg twice daily), topical betamethasone (every 4 hours) and homatropine (twice a day) for up to 6 weeks. Oral prednisolone (50 mg/day) was added to the above regimen from the fourth day of treatment.
One week after starting the treatment, retinal and choroidal thickening subsided and cavitary retinal changes attributable to retinal destruction developed in EDI-OCT. When comparing the follow up OCT raster scans at the same level, we noticed that fovea was reorganized gradually and foveal retinal layers integrity which had been lost, returned progressively . After 6 weeks of treatment, vitritis was resolved and edema around the lesion resorbed completely . Simultaneously with these anatomical changes, the right eye vision improved significantly to 20 /25.