A 49-year-old woman with no family history of cardiovascular disease and no cardiovascular risk factors was admitted to the Emergency Department of our hospital with persistence of high-grade fever (up to 39.0°C), dyspnoea and sub-sternal oppressive chest pain, which worsened during inspiration and improved by sitting up and leaning forward. Her medical history reported a previous diagnosis of hyperthyroidism three months before hospitalization but no medical treatment was started.
On admission, general examination was unremarkable. Blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, and pulse rate was 110 beats per min. Her body temperature was 37.8°C. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia with 1st degree atrioventricular (AV) block, right bundle branch block (RBBB), and left anterior fascicular block (LAFB) . Bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a normal left ventricular (LV) size with severely impaired cardiac function (LV ejection fraction ∼20%) and diffuse global hypokinesia. Right ventricular systolic function was mildly impaired with a tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 13 mm and circular pericardial effusion (see , ). Emergency coronary angiography documented non-obstructive coronary artery disease.
The patient was admitted to the coronary care unit, in stable general conditions; no oxygenation disorder was observed. Laboratory tests showed high sensitivity cardiac Troponin T peak at 3202 pg/mL and a significant hypothyroidism (TSH 30 µIU/mL, FT3 3.26 pmol/L, FT4 11.3 pmol/L). Levothyroxine replacement therapy was started (25 µg). Results of viral assays (Herpes Virus, Epstein–Barr virus, Parvovirus, Cytomegalovirus, and Coxsackie) were negative, and the rheumatologic panel demonstrated the presence of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and anti-DNA antibodies.
On Day 2, the patient developed pulmonary oedema with hypoxemic respiratory failure, requiring loop diuretics and mechanical ventilation; she quickly deteriorated into cardiogenic shock characterized by hypotension and clinical (cold sweated extremities, oliguria, mental confusion, dizziness) and biochemical (metabolic acidosis and elevated serum lactate) manifestations of hypoperfusion. An inotropic support was initiated. She developed a 3rd degree AV block. Despite supportive measures, her clinical status continued to deteriorate. Therefore, the patient was transferred to the cardiogenic shock referral care centre.
Inotropic support with epinephrine (0.05 mg/kg/min) and dobutamine (5 mg/kg/min) was started, and levosimendan (0.1 mg/kg/min) was administered with a significant progressive improvement in cardiac function. On Day 3, endomyocardial biopsy was performed: histology showed intense mononuclear inflammatory interstitial pattern with diffused cardiomyocyte damage. On immunohistochemistry, most inflammatory cells were CD3+ T lymphocytes and CD68+ macrophages . A diagnosis of severe, active, lymphocytic myocarditis was formulated. The search for viral genomes on sampled tissue and blood was negative. The patient received systemic loop diuretics and high-dose boluses of methylprednisolone (1 g/day during 72 h) under suspicion of AM virus negative. She presented a favourable clinical course, restoring haemodynamic stability. After the gradual weaning of inotropic support, on Day 4, extubation was planned. On Day 8, TTE revealed a normal LV size with mildly impaired cardiac function (LV ejection function 45%) and diffuse global hypokinesia.
The patient was transferred to the intermediate care unit (ICU) on Day 10. Laboratory tests demonstrated TSH 7,08 µIU/mL, FT3 2,59 pmol/L, FT4 14,9 pmol/L, antibodies against thyroid peroxidase 32 IU/mL (normal value < 60 IU/mL), and thyroglobulin 1803 IU/mL (normal value < 115 IU/mL). Electrocardiogram, performed on Day 10, reported an improvement in conduction abnormalities, marked by the resolution of 1st degree AV block and LAFB with the occurrence of the left posterior fascicular block and partial improvement of RBBB along with the normalization of LV systolic function (see , ). Electrocardiogram monitoring revealed non-sustained VA. Cardiac magnetic resonance with gadolinium contrast, including T1 and T2 mapping and T2-STIR sequences, was performed on Day 12 using a 1.5 T scanner ( and ) (see , ). Corticosteroid (prednisone 1 mg/kg daily) therapy was administered for 4 weeks, followed by 0.33 mg/kg for 5 months. Additionally, azathioprine 2 mg/day was initiated as a maintenance agent. During hospitalization in ICU, she remained asymptomatic and on Day 35, she was transferred to a rehabilitation centre.