An 11-year-old spayed female domestic shorthair cat was referred with a 2-month
history of ptyalism, progressive hyporexia and weight loss. Ptyalism was
intermittent and had no association with feeding. Empirical treatment with cefovecin
(8 mg/kg SC once [Convenia; Zoetis]), meloxicam (0.3 mg/kg PO q24h [Metacam;
Boehringer Ingelheim]) and famotidine (1 mg/kg PO q24h [Famotidine; Teva]) was not
beneficial. On presentation the cat was bright and responsive, weighed 2.5 kg (body
condition score 2/9) and had lost 500 g weight over the previous month. Physical
examination revealed a mild generalised muscle atrophy. Oral and thyroid
examination, thoracic auscultation and abdominal palpation were normal. A 6%
dehydration was estimated based on a mild loss of skin elasticity.
Gastrointestinal disease was suspected. Complete blood count and serum biochemistry
identified mild erythrocytosis (haematocrit 0.55 l/l; reference interval [RI] 0.24–
0.45 l/l) and elevated creatine kinase (384 IU/l; RI 70–180 IU/l). In-house testing
for feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukaemia virus were negative. A
gastrointestinal panel revealed mild hypercobalaminaemia and hypofolataemia . Ammonia was
measured to rule out hepatic encephalopathy as a cause of the ptyalism and was
within the RI.
The owner was offered a CT of the head and thorax of the cat to better assess for
possible hidden dental/oral disease, and assess the oesophagus, respectively,
followed by abdominal ultrasound and an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy to
investigate oesophageal and gastrointestinal disease. Abdominal ultrasound was
chosen over CT to better assess the gastrointestinal wall layering. The owner
initially declined the thoracic CT owing to financial concerns, given the absence of
respiratory signs and because the oesophagus would be assessed during endoscopy.
CT study of the head (Brivo CT385; GE Medical Systems) with contrast medium
(Iopamidol, Niopam, 300 mg/ml; Bracco) and abdominal ultrasound showed no
significant abnormalities. The upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (GIF-N230 flexible
video-endoscope; Olympus Medical System) was suggestive of stenosis in the distal
third of the oesophagus with a focal area of ulceration in the mucosal surface. The
stomach and duodenum appeared macroscopically normal.
Given the suspicion of oesophageal stenosis, thoracic radiographs were obtained
. They showed
a large soft tissue opacity mass lesion in the caudodorsal thorax. Cranial to the
mass the oesophagus was moderately distended with gas, but tapered abruptly at the
level of the carina in the cranial margin of the mass. These findings were
compatible either with a parietal oesophageal mass or other caudodorsal thoracic
mass, caudal mediastinum or pulmonary in origin, causing dorsal compression of the
oesophagus. At least three small (<3.5 mm) pulmonary nodules were detected in the
cranioventral lung lobes. The gastrointestinal tract was distended with gas due to
previous endoscopy and there was contrast medium in the urinary tract due to the
previous CT.
To further investigate the origin of the mass, an iodine oesophagram was performed
using an oesophageal tube. Cranial to the mass, the oesophageal lumen was distended
with diluted contrast medium (Iopamidol, Niopam, 300 mg/ml; Bracco). At the level of
the mass, the lumen was slightly narrowed but patent. On the lateral views, the mass
was seen surrounding the oesophageal lumen dorsally and ventrally . The dorsoventral
view confirmed that the mass was in the midline, but it was not possible to clearly
define if the origin was oesophageal or paraoesophageal .
CT of the thorax was performed. The mediastinum was markedly widened by a
well-defined, homogeneously attenuating parietal oesophageal mass extending from the
level of thoracic vertebrae 7–13. In the cranial mediastinum, the lumen of the
oesophagus was mildly to moderately distended with contrast medium. Dorsal to the
heart base, a 1.5 cm length narrowing of the oesophageal lumen was detected. Caudal
to it, the lumen of the oesophagus was narrow and ventrally displaced. Deviation and
compression of the mainstem bronchi, owing to mass effect, and atelectasis of the
lung adjacent to the mass were identified. Multiple round, well-defined,
homogenously attenuating soft tissue nodules of various sizes were scattered
throughout the lung parenchyma, some of them coalescing . There were areas of peribronchial
alveolar infiltrate on both sides of the mass, involving the left cranial and caudal
lung lobes, and the right middle and caudal lung lobes, resulting in decreased lung
volume.
Given the severity of clinical signs, diagnostic imaging findings and perceived
guarded prognosis, the owner elected for euthanasia. On post-mortem examination the
distal third of the oesophagus was severely enlarged due to the presence of a
circumferential mass. This mass was firm and white, with evidence of mucosal
ulceration .
Several nodular lesions measuring up to 5 mm were detected in the pulmonary
parenchyma, with multifocal and random distribution . Similar lesions were detected
bilaterally in the kidneys and in the pancreas, with mild enlargement of the
pancreatic lymph nodes (,).
Histopathological examination of the aforementioned organs revealed the presence of a
population of round cells arranged in densely cellular sheets exhibiting distinct
cell borders, and a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm with one oval,
prominent, vesicular nucleus, which was frequently indented. Anisokaryosis and
anisocytosis were moderate to severe. There were three mitoses per high-power field.
High numbers of neutrophils and small lymphocytes were frequently associated with
proliferating round cells. Immunohistochemical investigation was performed and the
round cells showed strong expression for CD18 (FE3.9F2; UC Davis), Iba-1
(polyclonal; Wako) and vimentin (monoclonal; Dako), and were negative for
chromogranin A (polyclonal; Dako), CD20 (monoclonal; Dako), CD3 (monoclonal; Dako),
cytokeratin (monoclonal; Dako) and synaptophysin (polyclonal; Dako) .
Selected formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue samples were submitted for
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Ultrastructural morphology was suboptimal
owing to the formalin fixation and paraffin embedding; however, diagnostic features
were recognised. Atypical histiocytic cells in multiple locations revealed evidence
of intracytoplasmic electron-dense bilaminar structures characterised with an
internal zipper-like pattern of striations consistent with BGs of LC origin.
Occasionally, terminal bulbous structures were observed (tennis racquet morphology)
. These
findings were consistent with a final diagnosis of disseminated LCH.