Speech impediment and auditory hallucination, accompanied by tinnitus and headache for 3 d.
A 58-year-old female presented with sudden cognitive dysfunction, auditory hallucinations, nonsensical behavior, inability to communicate normally with others, and complaints of headache and tinnitus. The patient had no fever, seizures, or consciousness disturbance.
The patient had a history of bilateral hearing loss.
The patient had no history of mental retardation or cognitive decline up to the time of her acute illness. Moreover, the patient denied a family history of neuromuscular disease, encephalitis, or mitochondrial disease.
On admission, the patient's height was 158 cm, and her weight was 45 kg. On physical examination, her body temperature was 36.5 °C and a history of previous infection and fever were denied. Chest auscultation revealed normal respiratory sounds and a normal heart rate with no murmur. The patient’s neurological examination, limited by the above symptoms, was otherwise normal.
Routine laboratory studies, including blood glucose, hepatic and renal function, coagulation testing, glycosylated hemoglobin, autoantibodies, autoantibody spectrum associated with anti-cardiolipin antibodies, thyroid function, homocysteine, serum tumor markers, human immunodeficiency virus antibody test and syphilis spirochete hemagglutination test, were all unremarkable. The patient’s serum white cell count was 14.38 × 109/L, and her C-reactive protein level was 7 mg/L. It is worth noting that her arterial blood lactate level was 4.7 mmol/L.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high-intensity lesions in the bitemporal lobe on T2-weighted images , fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, and diffusion-weighted images (DWI) . The parts of the lesions involving the cortex appeared hyperintense on DWI and hypointense on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps , features consistent with cytotoxic edema. Follow-up brain MRI obtained on Day 27 showed an extensive reduction in FLAIR/DWI signals in the left temporal lobe , without an apparent reduction in T2 signals.
The electroencephalogram only indicated a slight increase in fast waves.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy also revealed a prominent doublet and elevated lactate peak with reduced N-acetyl-aspartate levels . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed a white cell count of 4/μL and a protein level of 0.668 g/L with a CSF pressure of 140 mmH2O.