A 43-year-old man with a history of moderate hypertension and hypercholesterolemia consulted his physician for non-specific retrosternal pain. The first diagnostic tests ruled out myocardial ischemia. Due to the persistence of the symptoms, the patient underwent endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract which revealed the presence of gastric adenocarcinoma in the antrum and corpus. The patient underwent a laparotomy. However, the direct infiltration of the tumor into the pancreatic head and the presence of small metastatic nodules in the omentum did not allow for a surgical resection.
At the first examination by the medical oncologist the patient complained of moderate pain in the epigastric region with dorsal irradiation and dyspepsia. Codeine and acetaminophen were prescribed for symptom control. To complete tumor staging, a contrast-enhanced spiral computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was carried out which showed the presence of three pathological lymph-nodes. The lymph nodes had diameters larger than 10 mm and were located in the lesser curvature of the stomach, in the peripancreatic region, and in the mediastinum. Three pulmonary nodules that were smaller than 10 mm were also observed. A very small amount of ascites was present in the abdomen, but neither hepatic nor lytic bone lesions were detected. A representative bone window scan of the pelvis is shown in Figure . The results of hematological and biochemical tests were normal with the exception of serum alkaline phosphatase, which was 2.5 times the upper limit of normal.
After a frank discussion of the benefits and the morbidity of chemotherapy, the patient agreed to enroll in a controlled phase II trial and was treated with pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 and oxaliplatin 120 mg/m2, both repeated every 3 weeks. The first tumor re-evaluation was carried out 6 weeks after the beginning of the treatment, before the administration of the third cycle of chemotherapy. The three lymph-nodes, which were defined as target lesions, showed a 43% decrease in the sum of the longest diameters, classifying the response as partial. The pulmonary nodules, which were defined as non-target lesions, were no longer visible. The bone-window scans, however, revealed osteoblastic metastases in almost all vertebral bodies and in the pelvis, as shown in Figure .
From the clinical point of view, the treatment was beneficial to the patient because it led to a significant reduction in the use of analgesics; moreover, the CA 19.9 level decreased from 222 U/ml to 66 U/ml.
We reasoned that the observed bone lesions were due to the strong osteoblastic response of preexisting bone metastases not visible on the baseline CT scan. In agreement with the patient, treatment was continued for two additional cycles. At the second tumor re-evaluation 6 weeks later, the target lesions were in confirmed partial response, and the bone metastases remained stable and no new blastic lesions appeared.
After the fifth chemotherapy cycle, the patient decided to go off the protocol because of intolerable side effects, particularly a pharyngeal disesthesia induced by oxaliplatin.
Two months later, the first follow-up CT showed new lymph-nodes in the mediastinum and in the mesentery, while the patient's performance status had deteriorated due to persistent vomiting. He was then referred to palliative care.