A 37-year-old man presented to the emergency department after sudden cardio-pulmonary arrest while outdoors.
Return of spontaneous circulation was achieved due to bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 2 electric shocks from an automated external defibrillator.
His medical history was only significant for gastric mucosal erosions diagnosed 9 years prior to admission. The patient had chronic abdominal pain and occasional reflux symptoms despite continued treatment with proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).
He had never consumed alcohol or smoked cigarettes. He had no known food or drug allergies. He had also never experienced syncope or palpitations in the past.
Body temperature of 36.2 degrees Celsius, blood pressure of 139/111 mmHg, sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 130 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 32 times/min were noted upon arrival. The patient’s eyes were open but he could not speak (Glasgow Coma Scale: E4V1M4). Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable.
Laboratory values were significant for leukocytosis, mild increase in liver enzymes and creatinine, lactic acidosis (pH of 7.118 and lactate of 8.1 mmol/L on arterial blood gas analysis), and a severely elevated D-dimer of over 100 mcg/mL. Electrolytes were within their normal ranges. Rapid improvement was observed on serial follow-up examinations.
Computed tomography (CT) with contrast at admission revealed an incidental 8 cm mass in the lesser omentum . The mass appeared to result from the fusion of 3 similar solid tumors, of which 1 contained a non-enhancing, low-density area suggestive of necrosis or hematoma.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) incidentally revealed a red, 7 mm submucosal tumor with central depression, which was biopsied . Prominent gastric folds and shallow duodenal ulcers were also noted despite prolonged intravenous PPI treatment during admission . No signs of gastroesophageal reflux disease or duodenal submucosal tumors were observed. Endoscopic ultrasound revealed 3 clearly delineated, hyperechoic masses with uniform texture, of which 1 had a hypoechoic center . No pancreatic tumors were noted. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration was performed. Pathology of both the gastric and lesser omentum specimens stained positive for chromogranin A and synapto-physin and were diagnosed as grade 2 NENs.