A 59-year-old diabetic male was referred to our emergency room following left-sided weakness, hemifacial paresis, difficulty speaking, and drowsiness from one night before (National Institute of Health Stroke Score (NIHSS) at admission = 10). There was no history of recent head trauma. Family history of premature stroke or thrombotic events was also negative. The patient was a non-smoker, albeit an opiate user. The initial physical exam showed an elderly, confused male who could not answer the questions or follow commands cooperatively. Vitals were as follow: T = 37.4 °C, BP = 150/90 mmHG, HR = 73 bpm (beats per minute), RR = 16/minute, and O2 saturation in the room air = 97%. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. On initial physical examination, no signs of pallor, jaundice, petechiae, or organomegaly were evident. Except for left facial paresis, cranial nerves examination was normal. Motor examination revealed left hemiparesis, with a force of 3/5 in the left upper extremity and 4/5 in the left lower extremity. The grimace to pinprick was reduced on the left side. The plantar reflex showed upward movement in the left side (Babinski sign).
The patient underwent a brain CT scan with suspicion of IS. Of note, since the patient's symptoms had been initiated more than 24 h ago, he was not eligible to receive intravenous thrombolysis (IVT) or thrombectomy . The first brain CT scan showed an acute stroke in the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory, including the right parietotemporal lobe infarct . The patient's level of consciousness deteriorated over the next 24 h, necessitating further evaluation; the second brain CT scan revealed evidence of new ischemic lesions in the left MCA territory, including the left frontal lobe . Progressive thrombocytopenia was found in the patient (initial platelet count: 77* reduced to 21*). Although the patient was not anemic at first (initial Hgb: 15 g/dL), evidence of hemolytic anemia gradually emerged, including a reticulocyte percentage of 2.6%, reduced Hgb (from 15 g/dL to 11.8 g/dL on day 6), indirect hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin 1.9 mg/dL increased up to 4.4 mg/dL, and indirect bilirubin 1.1 mg/dL increased up to 3.1 mg/dL), and elevated LDH (1148 U/L). Additionally, acute phase reactants, including ESR, CRP, ferritin, fibrinogen, and D-dimer, were also elevated. Troponin, coagulation tests, liver function tests, lipid profile, and electrolytes were normal. Peripheral blood smear (PBS) showed occasional schistocytes. Direct and indirect Coombs tests were negative. TTP diagnosis was highly suspected based on the patient’s clinical manifestations and progressive thrombocytopenia. Therefore further evaluation was performed, indicating an ADAMTS-13 activity level of 0.3 IU/mL (our laboratory cut-off for a positive value was < 0.4 IU/mL) and ADAMTS-13 inhibition screen of 18 U/mL (our laboratory cut-off for a positive value was > 15 U/mL), confirming the diagnosis of iTTP. Other Serologic evaluations (antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double strands DNA antibody (anti-dsDNA Ab), perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (P-ANCA), cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (C-ANCA), rheumatoid factor (RF), complement 3 (C3), complement 4 (C4), anticardiolipin IgM and IgG antibodies, antiphospholipid IgM and IgG antibodies, and anti–Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A and B autoantibodies (SSA and SSB) were within normal limits. HIV, hepatitis B virus, and hepatitis C virus serology were also nonreactive .
Although the cardioembolic source of stroke was suspected due to the bihemispheric infarcts, ECG Holter monitoring, trans-thoracic, and trans-esophageal echocardiography revealed no signs of arrhythmia, clot, or vegetation, and the ejection fraction (EF) was 50–55%. Brain MRI on day 8 demonstrated evidence in favor of subacute infarctions with restriction and mild hemorrhagic transformation in the right parietotemporal, left frontal lobe, and left centrum semiovale . There was no evidence of venous thrombosis or vascular lesions on magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV). Since malignant bone marrow infiltration is one of the main differential diagnoses in a patient with MAHA and thrombocytopenia , hematology was consulted. They asked for a bone marrow aspiration and biopsy (day 8), which showed normocellular marrow with increased erythroid series. Informed consent was obtained, and the patient underwent therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) on day 8 with iTTP diagnosis. Consequently, the patient’s level of consciousness improved so that he was completely alert and responsive 9 days after TPE (day 17 hospitalization). The platelet count also gradually increased from 21* up to 91* a week after TPE initiation, although it again started to decrease. Hence, pulse IV methylprednisolone therapy was added on day 17 of hospitalization for 3 days, followed by oral prednisolone (1 mg/kg). Rituximab (750 mg/m2) was also initiated on day 30 of hospitalization. The patient's clinical condition, as well as the MAHA, gradually improved (NIHSS at discharge = 3), and the PLT count reached 189* at discharge (48 days of hospitalization, including 17 days at the stroke care unit (SCU), 5 days at the neurology ward, and 26 days at the hematology ward). During the follow-up, the neurological symptoms progressively improved, and he did not experience further relapses or report adverse effects. (modified Rankin Scale = 1, 75 days after discharge). The patient’s timeline is shown in Table .