The patient was a 79-year-old Japanese male with alcoholic liver cirrhosis who suffered 9-year history of choledocholithiasis (CL). He had neither any noticeable family history nor psychosocial history. Nine-year previously, the patient underwent endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage (ERBD) using plastic stent tube for CL. Surgery was recommended to the patient at that time. But the patient refused the recommendation. Thereafter, despite repeated episodes of cholangitis and/or abdominal pain due to failed ERBD, the patient refused the offer of not only surgery but also exchanging ERBD tube until when symptoms due to CL became unbearable and thus the patient hoped to receive surgery. Findings of preoperative abdominal contrast-enhancement computed tomography (CE-CT) were as follows. Several gallstones existed in the gallbladder and common bile duct (CBD). Maximum CBD stone was 3 cm in diameter. Furthermore, probably because ERBD stent tube was unexchanged more than 9 years, distal end of the ERBD tube penetrated through the duodenum to the cecum . In addition, a mural PVT extending from the superior mesenteric vein to the portal trunk was observed . However, patency of the portal venous systems was well maintained. Moreover, Child-Pugh classification was A and model for end-stage liver disease score was 9. Thus, the patient was considered endurable to major abdominal surgery. Therefore, open cholecystectomy and choledochotomy was performed. At the surgery, small cecostomy was opened and subsequently closed after removal of the ERBD stent tube through the cecostomy.
Early postoperative course was uneventful until postoperative day (POD)7 when hospital discharge was planned. On POD7, however, the patient complained of abdominal distension due to moderate ascites, which was not observed in the preoperative period. CE-CT was taken on POD7 in search for the cause of the abrupt abdominal distention due to the ascites. The CE-CT revealed the exacerbation of the PVT. The distal end of the PVT was located markedly farer from the confluence of the superior mesenteric vein and the splenic vein. Moreover, the proximal end of the PVT was extended beyond the bifurcation of the right and left portal veins . Furthermore, the exacerbated PVT caused 90% stenosis of portal vein trunk, suggesting that the exacerbation of the PVT deteriorated portal hypertension, leading to the increased abdominal distension due to the development of ascites. Serum value of d-dimer at that time was elevated to 29.4 μg/mL on POD7 although the preoperative value was 3.3 μg/mL. We recommended the extension of hospital admission for receiving anticoagulant treatment with LMWH injection followed by oral warfarin, which was recommended as the first-line treatment in the current treatment guideline of PVT [–]. However, the patient strongly hoped to be discharged on POD7 because the patient felt that his general condition was well recovered except for abdominal distension. Thus, the patient was discharged from hospital on POD7. The day next to discharge (POD8), we initiated edoxaban therapy (30 mg once a day) after our institutional review board approved the use of DOAC as an initial treatment. Thereafter, the patient received weekly outpatient clinic follow-up. At the first outpatient visit after discharge (POD14), abdominal distension due to ascites was improved and his serum d-dimer dramatically decreased to 7.8 μg/mL. Twenty days after initiating edoxaban (POD28), serum d-dimer was recovered to 3.2 μg/mL, which was equivalent to the preoperative level. In addition, CE-CT taken on POD28 showed that PVT was markedly shrunk and patency of the portal vein trunk remarkably improved . In addition, ascites was eradicated. Thereafter, the patient received monthly outpatient clinic follow-up. Six months after surgery, the PVT was further improved. Because the PVT was not completely eradicated and mild elevation of his serum d-dimer sustained, edoxaban has been continued to date. However, the patient has been doing well 4 years after surgery without any adverse events of edoxaban, including minor and/or major bleeding complications.