A 61-year-old woman developed hematuria and underwent cystoscopy revealing a large tumor in the posterolateral bladder wall. Biopsy revealed poorly differentiated muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma. Immunohistochemical stains were positive for CK-7 and GATA-3, and negative for CK-20. She underwent two cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin before treatment was discontinued due to severe neutropenia. She then elected for external beam radiation for 9 weeks without concurrent chemotherapy. PET-CT scan imaging showed a good response without any identified residual or recurrent bladder masses or lymphadenopathy. Six months later a residual tumor in the bladder was noted on cystoscopy. CT abdomen and pelvis showed a recurrent mass in the bladder with likely invasion into the vaginal cuff, an enlarged para-aortic nodule, and two peritoneal nodules. Surgery was not recommended, and she began second-line chemotherapy with pemetrexed. Shortly after one cycle, her performance status declined, she developed rectal bleeding, and was admitted to the hospital. Diagnostic workup with colonoscopy revealed angioectasias in the colon that were treated with argon plasma coagulation. Areas of erythematous, friable mucosa were noted, so she was diagnosed with radiation proctitis. She was evaluated by gastroenterology, treated supportively with sucralfate and mesalamine enemas, and discharged from the hospital. At her clinic follow up, pemetrexed was discontinued in favor of a clinical trial evaluating pembrolizumab in bladder cancer. Of note, she had a history of hepatitis C virus infection, which was previously cured with the combination of ledipasvir and sofosbuvir. Prior to starting pembrolizumab, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing confirmed an undetectable viral load. Her Child­Pugh score was 6 (Class A). She was started on pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 weeks.
Prior to starting immunotherapy, she had no significant ascites on clinical exam or CT scans. Three weeks after starting anti-PD-1 therapy, she developed abdominal discomfort and early satiety, and was found to have large-volume ascites on clinical exam. She underwent diagnostic and palliative paracentesis, with 4500 ml of ascitic fluid drained. She had a marked improvement in her discomfort. The acities was considered a Grade 2 toxicity, which was not considered to be drug-related at the time. Cytology was performed and no malignant cells were identified in the fluid. The initial paracentesis fluid showed a serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) > 1.5, total protein of 1.2 g/dL, and WBCs of 231/μL including 45% lymphocytes. Cytology only showed reactive cellular changes and inflammation. Over the next 6 weeks, she underwent 3 more diagnostic and palliative paracenteses and subsequent cytological analyses also showed inflammatory changes with no malignant cells. She never developed fever or leukocytosis. Liver function tests remained stable throughout this time period. After 3 cycles of therapy, her CT imaging showed a partial response per RECIST v1.1 with a 49% reduction in the size of her target lesions .
Given the high percentage of lymphocytes in the peritoneal fluid, further characterization was performed by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). This analysis revealed that CD8+ lymphocytes comprised 53% of the CD45+CD3+ cells . The majority of CD8+ lymphocytes were PD-1+ (78%). Class II MHC (HLA-DR) and CD40 ligand (CD154) were expressed on 43% and 20% of CD8+ lymphocytes, respectively. All three markers were increased in comparison to a normal donor PBMC control, suggesting a locally high number of antigen-experienced, activated T cells. FoxP3+CD25+ Tregs were also detected as 17% of the CD45+CD3+CD4+ compartment. We also interrogated the fluid for the presences of cytokines using a multiplex cytokine assay for 38 analytes. The most significantly elevated factors were IL-6 and IL-15, which were measured more than 3-fold above healthy donor peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) sample controls .
Ultimately, the patient developed worsening symptoms and was hospitalized due to radiation proctitis and also a pulmonary infection. Despite the response anti-PD-1 therapy on imaging, her quality of life declined given these various comorbid conditions. She ultimately elected to discontinue all therapy and enrolled in hospice.