A 30-year-old man visited to our hospital with symptom of chest discomfort. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a tumor in the right atrium. Biopsy specimens from the tumor revealed angiosarcoma. The tumor was surgically excised and the right atrium was subsequently reconstructed. After surgery, chemoradiotherapy with paclitaxel/carboplatin and radiotherapy (50.4Gy/28Fr) were indicated as adjuvant treatment. Computed tomography (CT) performed 3 years after completion of chemoradiotherapy revealed recurrence of angiosarcoma with enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes, liver metastasis, and tumor embolism. Because the tumor embolism was observed to have traveled from the left brachiocephalic vein to the superior vena cava, a power-injectable Groshong silicone TIVAP (Bard Power Port, Bard Access system Inc., Salt Lake City, UT) was implanted via the right femoral vein by an ultrasound-guided procedure with “Out-of-plane” puncture. The right femoral vein was punctured percutaneously about 5 cm distal to the inguinal ligament. The TIVAP septum was placed in a subcutaneous pocket at the proximal anterior thigh . The patient’s palliative chemotherapy regimen comprised weekly paclitaxel (80 mg/m2 intravenously on days 1, 8, and 15, every 28 days). Seven months after initiating this regimen, CT revealed a catheter fracture. The fractured catheter migrated through the hepatic vein to the left pulmonary artery and it was retrieved by an interventional radiologist without any symptoms of catheter fracture. Upon removal of the TIVAP septum, saline was injected; back flow from the TIVAP septum was slightly bloody. When contrast-enhanced sodium was injected at the TIVAP septum, contrast could be seen flowing in the femoral vein . The catheter fracture had occurred vertically at 4 cm from the connector, which was circumferentially aligned. The fractured catheter’s edges were found to be rounded and polished and the fracture’s cross-section was found to be dull with an elliptical shape on TIVAP septum removal .