A 53-year-old African-American woman was referred to our pulmonary clinic because of uncontrolled asthma and frequent respiratory infections. Our patient reported frequent asthmatic attacks and symptoms requiring excessive use of rescue inhalers. She also described symptoms consistent with gastroesophageal reflux disorder (GERD) and rhinitis. She had never been a cigarette smoker and her past medical history included hypertension and beta thalassemia. She was also told that she had a congenital vascular abnormality.
Her physical development was normal and there was no family history of congenital cardiovascular disease.
Her asthma treatment regimen included ipratropium bromide and an albuterol inhaler as needed.
At the initial evaluation, our patient was awake and alert, in no acute distress. She was afebrile and her vital signs were stable. Her physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds with mild rhonchi in her right lower lung zone. There were no clinical signs of edema, cyanosis or clubbing of fingers. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Except for mild anemia, routine hematological and biochemical profiles were within the normal ranges. An allergy skin test was positive for dust mites, cats and multiple grasses. Inhaled corticosteroids and long acting beta-agonists were added as well as proton pump inhibitors, nasal steroids and anti-histamines. Environmental control was also emphasized to our patient.
On subsequent visits, our patient reported improvement in her GERD and rhinitis symptoms but her asthma control was still not optimal.
A plain chest radiograph showed a loss of volume of her right lung and an increased density in her right lower lung zone, with displacement of the mediastinum to the right . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of her thorax was performed and revealed absence of the right pulmonary artery with displacement of her heart and mediastinum to the right, and volume loss associated with increased interstitial markings involving her right lung. There was no significant bronchiectasis .
A pulmonary function test showed a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) to forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio of 83%; FEV1 of 1.43 L (65% of predicted), FVC of 1.72 L (64% of predicted), total lung capacity of 67% of predicted and a diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide of 75% of predicted. After a bronchodilator challenge, FVC increased to 2.7 L (102% of predicted) which is consistent with a significant response.