A 38-year-old Persian Iranian woman was admitted to our hospital to be evaluated for abdominal pain and diarrhea. Overall, she had been well until five months before her presentation. Thereafter she noticed a vague, constant pain over her abdomen. At the time of her admission to another hospital, the work-up culminated in a laparatomy. Her right ovary contained a hemorrhagic cyst that was resected. It was a benign ovarian cyst. She was then discharged. However, her abdominal pain persisted. A few days later she noticed frequent bowel movements with large amounts of watery stool each time. Occasionally, a sense of flushing also bothered her. The diarrhea persisted for more than two weeks without any change in spite of fasting or changes in food intake. She also experienced anorexia and weight loss. She underwent a through work-up at another hospital. Computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen was performed, which revealed thickening of the ascending bowel wall . Thereafter she was referred to our hospital to undergo further follow-up to rule out carcinoid syndrome.
She was a young woman concerned about her disease. Except for diarrhea and abdominal pain, she did not complain about fever, fecal incontinence or extra-intestinal manifestations. Her physical examination revealed pale conjunctivae and an enlarged spleen suggested by a dull percussion note on Traube's semilunar space. There were also several groups of slightly enlarged cervical and inguinal lymph nodes that were soft, mobile and non-tender.
She had no family history of inflammatory bowel disease or celiac disease. On the basis of the results of stool analyses and microbiologic studies, her condition was diagnosed as non-inflammatory diarrhea.
Since she had a CA-125 level to a high of 138 U/l (normal, up to 37 U/l), histological reexamination of tissues removed during her prior surgery was performed. The result was the same as the previous finding. The elevated level of CA-125 was attributed to a benign ovarian cystic disorder. Routine blood studies identified normochromic normocytic anemia, lymphopenia (hemoglobin level, 11.0 g/dl; lymphocyte count, 960/μl) and hypoalbuminemia (2.8 g/dl). There was no elevation in her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (25 mm/hour) or C-reactive protein level. Her blood chemistry showed no sign of electrolyte, hepatic or other metabolic disturbances. Neither nutritional deficiency nor blood loss was identified as the contributing factor to her anemia. Her serum ferritin level was 379 ng/ml (reference interval, 18 n g/ml to 341 ng/ml). An examination of a blood smear verified the presence of lymphocytopenia. Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed an ovarian cyst in the left ovary measuring 3 cm × 5 cm in addition to a slightly enlarged spleen; otherwise, the findings were normal.
The most frequent cause of non-inflammatory chronic diarrhea among Iranians is celiac disease (CD) . However, serologic biomarkers and endoscopic and histologic surveys of the duodenum were both inconsistent with CD. Biopsy specimens of the normal-appearing distal colon were taken. Her histological diagnosis inveighed against the presence of microscopic colitis. Her thyroid function tests were normal, too. The presence of diarrhea, abdominal pain and occasional flushing mandated screening for peptide hormones. Neuroendocrine tumors such as carcinoids might be considered. However, the results of the hormone assay disproved the existence of such tumors.
On the basis of our patient's medical symptoms, the differential diagnosis included SLE, intestinal lymphoma, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and post-mucosal lymphatic obstruction. CT of her abdomen was performed with both oral and IV contrast agents to rule out structural or occult inflammatory intestinal disorders.
A bone marrow biopsy was evaluated but yielded no evidence of lymphoma. HIV antibody and SLE serologic biomarkers were checked. The results of the studies were pending at the time that she was discharged with instructions to return the following week.
After one week, she returned to our hospital complaining of new-onset painful lesions on her scalp. Her diarrhea and vague generalized abdominal pain persisted. She was admitted to our hospital for the second time.
There were several discrete erythematous plaques over her scalp containing circumscribed areas of alopecia. The lesions were similar to those seen in patients with discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE) or lichen planus. A skin biopsy confirmed the histologic diagnosis of DLE.
The results of HIV and fluorescence anti-nuclear antibody tests were negative, but anti-SSA/Ro antibody was detected in the blood in low titer. Her anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody level was strongly positive at 5 IU/ml (> 1.1 was considered positive).
Peripheral eosinophilia was also present. Her eosinophil count was 780/μl, and her total white blood cell count was 4,610/μl. There was no evidence of parasitic infection on the basis of repeated examination of stool samples and serology tests to detect strongyloidosis, toxocariasis, trichinellosis, liver flukes and so on. She reported no history of allergic disorders or intake of over-the-counter drugs.
CT of her abdomen demonstrated only bowel wall thickening; otherwise, the findings were normal. The results were consistent with an inflammatory bowel disorder such as Crohn's disease. The radiologist believed that intestinal lymphoma would be an alternative diagnosis. However, the clinical diagnosis rendered was lupus enteritis. Because of the discrepancies between the clinical and radiological diagnoses, she underwent total colonoscopy for the second time. Multiple biopsy specimens were also obtained from the ileum. The histologic findings were consistent with eosinophilic enteritis . The other possibilities, such as lymphoma, intestinal lymphangiectasia, vasculitis and inflammatory bowel disease, were excluded.
During her hospital stay, she developed proteinuria to a high of 4,800 mg/day. She was diagnosed with SLE because her symptoms met the criteria for lymphocytopenia, proteinuria, DLE and positive anti-dsDNA antibodies. A kidney biopsy was performed. The results of a histopathological study showed class V lupus nephritis. Considering the involvement of two significant organs (renal and gastrointestinal), she was treated by bolus therapy with three daily pulses of methylprednisolone at a dose of 1,000 mg/day followed by 0.5 mg/kg/day prednisolone. A few days later she no longer experienced diarrhea or abdominal pain. In this way, we reached the final diagnosis of eosinophilic enteritis in the context of SLE that caused the patient to develop anorexia, abdominal pain and diarrhea.