A 58-year-old Swiss woman presented to our hospital with a history of ascending numbness in both legs evolving over the preceding 12 months. Three weeks before initial evaluation, she had developed rapid, painless worsening of her symptoms. Her main complaints were motor weakness and loss of fine motor skills. Sicca syndrome and Raynaud’s phenomenon had been present for more than 10 years. The patient denied having joint pain. Clinical examination revealed distally accentuated, symmetric, flaccid tetraparesis with areflexia accompanied by hypesthesia up to the knees and elbows for all sensory qualities. After administration of intravenous methylprednisolone for suspected inflammatory polyneuropathy, the patient had her first generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Despite the administration of levetiracetam, another two generalized seizures occurred 24 h later, after which the patient showed psychomotor slowing, right-sided hemianopia, and central paresis of the right arm.
The initial electroencephalogram (EEG) after the first seizure showed slowing of both occipital lobes with temporal acceleration. This finding was more pronounced on the left side and over the right hemisphere. Electrophysiological studies revealed a severe axonal sensorimotor proximal symmetric polyneuropathy with sensory proximal symmetric accelerated defiance.
Laboratory testing demonstrated rheumatoid factor, an antinuclear antibody titer of > 1:1280, and antibodies to SSA/Ro and SSB/La together with hypocomplementemia. Type II cryoglobulins were detectable (cryocrit of 5.4%). Antibodies against double-stranded DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) were absent. Saxon and Schirmer tests confirmed severely decreased tear and saliva production. Biopsy of labial minor salivary glands showed periductal lymphocytic infiltration with a focus score > 1. On the basis of the positive anti-SSA as well as the salivary gland biopsy having a focus score > 1 and a Schirmer test < 5 mm in 5 min, the 2017 ACR-EULAR classification criteria for pSS were formally fulfilled. Because there was prominent hypergammaglobulinemia with markedly elevated light chains, a bone marrow biopsy was performed, which showed < 10% plasma cells. Flow cytometry demonstrated expansion of clonal plasma cells with restricted kappa light chains.
Primary lumbar puncture showed hypergammaglobulinemia with markedly increased light chains. Repeat lumbar punctures during the disease course confirmed monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) of the immunoglobulin M kappa type.
Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain performed after the first seizure showed multiple, bihemispheric, confluent white matter hyperintensities (WMHs) with contrast enhancement . The parotid gland on both sides and the left submandibular gland were diffusely enlarged with multiple small cystic areas and tiny contrast-enhancing nodules . MRI was performed 3 days after the first imaging because of rapid clinical worsening, which demonstrated a fulminant disease progression . Consequently, a biopsy of one of the enhancing lesions in the right frontal lobe was done. The right frontal dura and slightly thickened right pia mater were also biopsied and sent for pathological and microbiological testing. The histopathological results were noncontributory and did not suggest a specific pattern or definitive diagnosis. The possibility of microglial activation was discussed. There was no evidence of CNS vasculitis; infection with cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, JC virus (human polyomavirus 2, formerly John Cunningham virus), or Toxoplasma gondii; or lymphoma infiltrates.
pSS was suspected in light of the patient’s sicca syndrome and results of laboratory testing. The labial minor salivary gland biopsy showed no evidence of another underlying rheumatological disorder such as systemic lupus erythematosus. The fulminant worsening of symptoms led us to consider an additional lymphoma in the course of long-standing SS as a differential diagnosis. However, progression of the CNS lesions under administration of steroids as well as the results of the bone marrow biopsy argued against this diagnosis. No evidence for an immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related disease was found in the biopsy of the salivary glands, and results of serological testing for hepatitis C were negative. Results of the bone marrow biopsy and flow cytometry were interpreted as MGUS.
After the patient had her third seizure, five sessions of plasma exchange were conducted over 8 days. After the second generalized seizure and until plasmapheresis, the patient showed reduced vigilance and psychomotor slowing. Thereafter, cyclophosphamide was administered monthly, along with oral steroids. Plasmapheresis led to a rapid improvement of the patient’s condition. After the seventh cycle of cyclophosphamide therapy, the patient was able to walk unaided for up to 1 h and carry out everyday activities independently. Steroids were gradually tapered. MRI performed after the second cycle of cyclophosphamide demonstrated complete resolution of the contrast-enhancing WMHs . Six months after initial presentation, cryoglobulins were no longer detectable. Treatment was changed to rituximab given every 6 months. Furthermore, intermittent depressive mood led to a switch of the antiepileptic therapy from levetiracetam to lamotrigine after 6 weeks. The patient is still taking lamotrigine and is seizure-free. Under therapy with lamotrigine, the patient had normal EEGs with normal basic activity and no typical epilepsy signals.
The patient recovered quickly and was able to resume everyday life within 3 months after leaving the hospital. The patient is currently doing well with no signs of relapse 1.5 years after initial presentation and has returned to work.