A 38-year-old African American female with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department as a referral for evaluation in May 2020 owing to a large bladder mass found incidentally on imaging at an outside hospital. At the time of presentation, her only symptoms were recurrent urinary tract infections, of which she reported 4–5 occurrences in the last year, intermittent spotting on toilet paper, and occasional stress urinary incontinence. We repeated a computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis at our institution and identified the mass occupying much of the posterior bladder wall with suspicious but indeterminate invasion of the uterus and cervix. Additionally, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis was found with the left ureter more dilated than the right. Subsequently, the patient underwent cystoscopy with bilateral stent placement and a biopsy sample was taken of the bladder lesion as well as a lesion of the left labia. Pathology results returned for both showing findings consistent with condyloma acuminatum as well as low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion of the cervix. The patient then proceeded with a transurethral resection (TUR) of the mass. A second TUR with excision of the left labial mass was planned owing to the remaining tumor burden and concern that there may be an underlying malignancy. This attempt, however, was aborted owing to diffuse transformation now involving the urethra. After careful consideration and discussion, it was determined that bladder salvage was not feasible, and the best course of action would be bladder removal. She then underwent a radical cystectomy with the creation of a neobladder and self-catheterizable stoma and a hysterectomy in early September 2020, with biopsy samples taken intraoperatively. Final pathology results returned showing atypical condyloma proliferation of the urinary bladder wall and squamous cell carcinoma of the urinary bladder, urethra, and anterior vagina. Staging of the malignancy was determined to be IIIA (pT4a, pN0, cM0) and grade 1 owing to microscopic residual tumor margins of the urethra, as the condyloma was found to extend beyond the urethral meatus. Considering the staging reflected positive margins, adjuvant chemotherapy was carefully considered. She then began chemo and radiation in November 2020 and completed it in February 2021. Today, she is managed with close monitoring by surveillance imaging with urology and medical and radiation oncology with no recurrence of disease demonstrated on imaging.