A 62-year-old Japanese woman with no prior medical or family history presented to the palliative care department of our hospital with pain and bloating of the upper abdominal region in December 2020.
She was diagnosed with G2 rectal NET at an endoscopic clinic in December 2018. A biopsy of the rectum at that time revealed small regular cells with oval nuclei and eosinophilic granular cytoplasm, arranged in organoid and trabecular patterns . The cells were positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, as well as CD56 staining. Ki-67 labeling index was 4.9% . Serum neuron specific enolase (NSE), a highly specific tumor marker for NEN, was also high. These results supported the initial diagnosis.
An endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) procedure was attempted at the same clinic the following month but without success. Multiple liver tumors, initially thought to be metastases, were discovered during a CT scan conducted the same month, and subsequently the patient was referred to the medical oncology department of a university hospital.
Additional liver biopsy conducted in February 2019 revealed cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in trabecular and rosette patterns . The cells were also positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56 staining. Ki-67 labeling index was 10.1% . These findings were consistent with the initial diagnosis that the liver tumors were metastases of the original rectal tumor.
From March 2019, the patient underwent several rounds of outpatient chemotherapy with the mTOR inhibitor everolimus. The results were favorable—a clinical evaluation of stable disease (SD) was made. From April 2020, the somatostatin analog lanreotide was added; however, shortly afterwards, the patient was hospitalized for unfavorable side effects. Postdischarge, everolimus therapy was reinitiated but was terminated 5 months later again due to unfavorable side effects. The patient and her family declined further chemotherapy, and was referred to our hospital for palliative care.
An enhanced CT scan made in November 2020 (1 month prior to referral to our hospital) revealed a 7–8 cm lesion in the cavity of the lesser pelvis, which was deemed the site of the primary NET . However, the lesion could not be differentiated from a large uterine fibroid, which was also previously diagnosed, and therefore the actual size of the primary NET was inconclusive. Multiple tumors of varying enhancement levels, the largest of which measured 12 × 9 cm2, were found in the liver and thought to be metastases. No ascites was present .
Blood tests conducted during the patient’s early visit at our outpatient clinic revealed impaired liver function, possibly due to the liver metastases, as indicated by elevated aspartate transaminase (AST) and alanine transaminase (ALT) levels. Elevated lactate dehydrogenase(LDH) and creatine kinase (CK) levels suggested active proliferation and replacement of tumor cells. C-reactive protein (CRP) and white blood cell (WBC) levels were also high, which indicated inflammation due to the tumors .
As the patient had a performance status of 0 during her initial visit, best supportive care (BSC) was provided at the outpatient clinic, without hospitalization. Her chief complaints were pain and bloating of the upper abdominal region due to the liver metastases, and therefore pain control with fentanyl tape and oral oxycodone was initiated. She also complained of appetite loss as well as general malaise, and oral dexamethasone was also prescribed. The patient was followed at regular intervals at the outpatient clinic for the subsequent 17 months.
On 23 May 2022, the patient complained of increased abdominal pain, and was hospitalized. At the time, her performance status was 3. A plain CT scan revealed additional bone metastases, as well as a high level of peritoneal effusion. However, the liver metastases showed decreasing sizes . Even though she presented without fever, a diagnosis of suspected peritoneal carcinomatosis was made.
As the patient could not take oral opioids due to increased abdominal pain and bloating, she was switched to a course of continuous subcutaneous oxycodone infusion. Vital signs were stable during the next 2 days, and the patient reported limited pain. However, on the morning of 26 May 2022, the level of consciousness of the patient suddenly declined. While blood pressure levels and heart rates were stable, on physical examination the patient’s upper extremities were pale and cool, indicating unfavorable blood circulation levels. The patient’s family did not wish for further medical intervention, and at about 4 p.m. the same day, the patient died peacefully.
Several questions were raised regarding the clinical presentation of this patient. First, what was the pathological mechanism that underlies the multiple distant metastases from a single rectal NET in this patient? Second, was the diagnosis of suspected peritoneal carcinomatosis correct during the patient’s final hospitalization? Finally, the clinical progression during the last few days of this patient was relatively rapid, and differential diagnoses of hepatic failure from the multiple liver metastases, tumor embolism, as well as pharmacology-induced coma, could be made. Histologically, were there any of such findings in this patient?
To answer these questions, we requested an autopsy of the patient’s body. Both verbal and written consent were provided by the patient’s next-of-kin.
After legal pronunciation of death, the patient’s body was removed of any intubations and other medical devices, cleaned, and sent to the pathology department in the morning of 27 May 2022. The autopsy began roughly 18 hours after the patient’s death. The autopsy was conducted by two board-certified clinical pathologists and two assistants.
A gross examination of the patient’s body was first conducted. The patient’s body was then dissected and relevant organs, tissues, and body fluids were removed, weighed and measured, and preserved in formaldehyde solution for further inspection. According to the wishes of the patient’s family, no incisions were made on and around the facial region. All incision lines were then sewn and the body returned to the patient’s family for funeral purposes.
Photographs of the macroscopic appearances of the relevant organs and tissues were taken. The organs and tissues were further dissected and biopsy slides for microscopic examination were made.
Unless otherwise stated, all biopsy slides were stained in hematoxylin–eosin solution.
There was a single 18 × 16 × 15 mm3 tumor with a black mucosal appearance at the Ra region of the rectum, thought to be the primary tumor. On dissection, the tumor had a white solid appearance . Histologically, cells with deeply-stained chromatin were arranged in trabeculae with central scarring . Immunohistochemically, the cells were positive for chromogranin A, but were negative for synaptophysin. Cell mitosis was limited, and the Ki-67 labeling index was 2% .
At the subserosal layer of the rectum, tumor invasion and multiple intravenous tumor embolisms were found. Perineural invasion was also present . There was, however, no evidence of lymph vessel invasion.
The liver weighed 5100 g, nearly four times that of a normal human being. Multiple milky-colored solid nodules with a capsular appearance, the largest of which measured 80 mm, could be observed on the cut-surface . Microscopically, the nodules were composed of cells arranged in trabeculae and rosettes, similar to that of the primary tumor . The level of necrosis was high, and findings of fibrotic walls could also be seen. Ki-67 labeling index was 4% .
On the other hand, there was no histological evidence of portal vein inflammation or fibrosis in the nontumor regions of the liver; however, narrowing of the hepatic cell cords and collapsing of hepatic cells could be observed as chronic congestion . Cholestasis was unremarkable.
The pancreas weighed 87 g. Multiple metastatic nodules could be observed, the largest of which measured 6.9 × 6.8 mm2 at the pancreatic tail, with hemorrhagic manifestations present microscopically .
Metastatic nodules could also be observed at the thyroid gland , both adrenal glands , as well as the vertebrae. The largest vertebrae metastasis measured 25 mm and had a solid appearance . Histologically, Ki-67 labeling index was around 2%, and there was relatively little trabecular fracture due to the bone metastases .
Multiple bilirubin stones, measuring 1–3 mm in diameter, were present in the gallbladder and common bile duct. Findings of chronic cholecystitis could also be made.
No tumor was demonstrated in the ascites.
The S2 region of the left lung lobe corresponding to the B2aiβ segment of the bronchial branch consisted of a 17 × 14 × 14 mm3 nodule with a ground-glass-like reticular appearance, which was first thought to be a primary lepidic type lung adenocarcinoma . Histologically, disappearance of type II epithelial cells and reduction of elastic fibers were observed, suggesting tissue infarction rather than malignancy .
There were multiple uterine leiomyomas, the largest of which measured 50 mm, corresponding to the observations made radiologically .