A 23-year-old man presented to our hospital emergency department due to sudden onset loss of consciousness (LOC) followed by abnormal body movement in the form of generalized tonic-clonic type, witnessed by friend 30 min before the initial evaluation. He had no other past medical or surgical history. He had no family history of diabetes; coagulopathy or family history of any neurological disease or cancer and no known psychosocial comorbidities. He was not taking any medication for any illness at the time of the onset of LOC. Social history was significant for smoking two cigarettes a day for 5 years. On examination, he had a Glasgow Coma Scale of 5 (eye-opening -2, verbal response - 1, motor response -2). Cranial nerves II–XII were grossly intact, yet horizontal gaze was noted to be mildly abnormal. Pupils were dilated, equal, round and mildly reactive to light. Deep tendon reflexes (DTRs) 2+/4+ in upper and lower extremities bilaterally and plantar reflex were B/L upgoing. The heart was found to be in sinus bradycardia. No heart murmur was noted, and blood pressure was 160/90 mm of hg.
The patient was intubated and put on mechanical ventilation. A plain CT scan revealed basal ganglia bleeding as manifested in hyperdense lesions. The bleed extended into the third ventricles, aqueduct and fourth ventricles Figures –. The patient was shifted to the neurosurgical ICU and decongestants in the form of frusemide and 20% mannitol were given. Intravenous Antibiotics and IV Levetiracetam were also given. He was continued on ventilatory support, and subsequently tracheostomized on day 6. Nasogastric feed was also started gradually. His motor score gradually improved to localized response to pain. (M5) by the fourth day of injury. Supportive care was given. A subsequent scan after 3 days showed that the haemorrhage was resolving. All blood and radiological parameters including the coagulation profile were within normal limits. The patient was improving but because of his poor financial condition, patient party took the patient home against the medical advice.