A 65-year-old female patient with a history of diabetes and severe obesity (BMI 42.1) underwent open reduction and internal fixation of a proximal humerus fracture using five straight K-wires. In the following, a 1-month repeat X-ray showed 3 K-wires had started to migrate toward the thoracic cavity. In the third month, the patient presented to the emergency department with exertional dyspnea of progressive onset. Clinical examination revealed mild lower limb edema without other signs of right or left heart failure, except for dyspnea. The ECG showed atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response at a rate of 150 beats per minute. The patient was hemodynamically stable (blood pressure: 110/75). At the transthoracic exam, the K-wire appeared intra-pericardial, associated with a circumferential pericardial effusion, a collapse of the right atrium, and a dilated inferior vena cava. The chest computed tomography (CT) confirmed the intra-pericardial migration of one of the K-wires . However, the measurement of the fluid density favored a reactive, non-hemorrhagic effusion.
The pin appeared laterally positioned toward the left of the mediastinum. Its most superficial point measured 50 mm from the skin surface.
Upon presentation of cardiac tamponade, urgent surgical intervention was warranted. Subsequently, a comprehensive multidisciplinary discussion involving the anesthesiologist, cardiothoracic surgeon, and cardiologist was undertaken to establish the optimal surgical approach. Given the patient's specific characteristics of obesity and diabetes, a meticulously planned minimally invasive strategy was chosen, involving a short anterolateral thoracotomy with a primary focus on addressing the wire while deliberately avoiding the need for a median sternotomy. However, it was collectively agreed that in the event of sudden hemodynamic deterioration, myocardial injury, or uncontrolled bleeding, an emergency sternotomy would be swiftly performed to address the critical situation. Therefore, a dedicated team of cardiac perfusionists, as well as a cardiopulmonary bypass machine, was available. The two Scarpas underwent surgical cleansing and were placed within the sterile field.
Thus, the patient was positioned supine with the left arm at 90° and a bolster under the left flank. Due to the lack of reliable anatomical landmarks given the patient's body size, we utilized 2-plane orthogonal fluoroscopy (Siemens Cios Alpha device) to guide the skin incision (Additional file : Video S1). The initial step involved conducting an anteroposterior fluoroscopy to locate the position in a horizontal plane. This enabled us to make the incision centered on the pin, consisting in short left, 10 cm, anterior thoracotomy beneath the mammary fold. The initial step involved opening the left pleural cavity in the 6th intercostal space, resulting in the evacuation of 300 cc of reactive fluid. The dissection continued toward the anterior surface of the pericardium in the anterior mediastinum. With the assistance of fluoroscopy used in a lateral plane, the wire was quickly located. We proceeded with the opening of the pericardium, allowing for the evacuation of 250 cc of citrine fluid, and the wire was extracted (Additional file : Video S2, Fig. ). No myocardial injury was found. The postoperative course was simple, allowing the removal of the pericardial and pleural drains on day 2. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day.