We present a 62-year-old gentleman, a known case of type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and poorly controlled hypertension for more than 20 years. Also, he is obese with a body mass index of 36 kg/m2 and has fatty liver disease. He is following up with nephrology for grade 3 chronic kidney disease, with baseline creatinine between 150 and 180 µmol/L, with eGFR 30–40 mL/min/1.73 m2. His cause of chronic kidney disease is assumed to be longstanding diabetes (kidney biopsy not done). Physical examination was unremarkable apart from hepatomegaly due to fatty liver disease. The patient was referred to the hematology clinic due to persistent leukocytosis. He was asymptomatic.
His complete blood count showed WBCs: 20.6 × 109/L, hemoglobin: 15.5 gm/dL, platelets: 280 × 109/L, absolute neutrophil count: 11.5 × 109/L (56%), lymphocytes: 4.7 × 109/L (23%), eosinophils: 0.6× 109/L (3%), basophils: 1.85 × 109/L (9%). A peripheral smear was done which showed neutrophil leukocytosis with a mild shift to the left, leucoerythroblastic picture, basophilia, mild eosinophilia, and few circulating blasts. The recommendation was to rule out myeloproliferative disorders including CML.
Abdomen ultrasound showed mild hepatomegaly secondary to fatty liver disease and no splenomegaly. Further investigations were done which demonstrated no evidence of the V617F missense mutation within the JAK2 gene and no evidence of an insertion/deletion mutation within exon 9 of the CALR gene, however positive for an e13a2 BCR::ABL1 gene fusion by single-step RT-PCR. Interphase FISH analysis was reported at diagnosis to show an abnormal signal pattern involving a BCR::ABL1 rearrangement and the presence of t(9;22) Philadelphia chromosome translocation consistent with a diagnosis of CML. He also underwent a bone marrow biopsy which further confirmed it. The karyotype did not show any additional chromosomal abnormalities. The EUTOS long-term survival (ELTS) score was 1.31 which corresponds to low risk.
The decision was made by the primary hematologist to start him on imatinib 400 mg daily in February 2021. Follow-up laboratories showed that he achieved a complete homological response, complete cytogenetic response, and deep molecular response (BCR::ABL1 value of ≤0.01% IS), and his kidney function remained stable. However, the main adverse effect was an interval increase in weight due to fluid retention, with clinical complaints of periorbital puffiness, lower limbs swelling, and significant shortness of breath which limit his daily activities. He was started on regular oral doses of furosemide by his nephrologist without significant improvement. Considering the patient’s medical history, which includes diabetes, dyslipidemia, uncontrolled hypertension, and stage 3 kidney disease, and in view of how other TKIs like nilotinib, dasatinib, and ponatinib might worsen these preexisting conditions, as an alternative, asciminib at a dose of 40 mg twice daily (BID) was offered. The patient was counseled that there is no evidence that shifting to asciminib will protect his kidney since it is a new medicine and there is no study to prove or disprove; however, he agreed to start asciminib with close monitoring of kidney function which remains stable with maintaining deep molecular response .