A 22-year-old female with a past medical history of cerebral palsy and prior spinal fusion for scoliotic deformity with Harrington rod constructs from T1 to pelvis presented to the office with baclofen withdrawal symptoms secondary to a nonfunctional intrathecal baclofen catheter as diagnosed on pump interrogation. She also had signs concerning for an infection of her lumbar catheter site at the incision. She had an intrathecal baclofen pump initially placed for medically refractory spasticity and had undergone three prior revisions. Although tentatively scheduled to undergo a baclofen pump revision with an associated 5–7-h surgery that involved drilling through the Harrington rods to replace the intrathecal catheter, the patient went into moderate to severe baclofen withdrawal, prompting her to present to the emergency department with symptoms of worsening spasticity, tachycardia, and tachypnea with altered mental status. She was intubated and placed on a propofol drip for autonomic dysfunction syndrome and baclofen withdrawal.
Given her history of multiple pump failures and the added complexity of pump revision through a fusion mass, her small body mass, likely lumbar incision infection and autonomic instability, it was decided, she was risky candidate to go through a long surgery for a new lumbar catheter replacement, as detailed above. Oral baclofen was provided, but due to the high dose required by the patient, it was insufficient. Given the limitations of her anatomy and the infection concern, as well as the failure of oral baclofen to control her potentially lethal baclofen withdrawal, it was decided to proceed with placement of the catheter into the prepontine space in an effort to reduce the risk of it failing.
The patient was placed supine with her head turned to the left on a horseshoe head holder. An endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) entry point was planned using the Stealth neuronavigation station. We used a C-shaped skin incision followed by an oval burr hole craniotomy with an acorn drill bit. The old baclofen pump was removed from the abdominal subfascial pocket and a new Medtronic Ascenda 8781 proximal catheter was tunneled from inferiorly to superiorly from the abdomen to this cranial incision.
The dura was opened with bipolar cautery and an 11-blade scalpel, using further electrocautery to cauterize the dura and the pia. On a single pass, we placed the 16-gauge sheath with the aid of neuronavigation to enter the right lateral ventricle. We then passed the MINOP Neuroendoscopy System into the right lateral ventricle through the sheath.
The endoscope was navigated into the third ventricle and an ETV was performed with forceps through the port [ and ]. A second pial opening was created slightly anterior to our initial pial opening and the distal baclofen pump catheter was then inserted into this opening and was advanced parallel to the MINOP. We visualized the entry into the right lateral ventricle. Using the endoscopic forceps and movement of the MINOP, we were able to guide the baclofen catheter into the third ventricle and then advanced it into the prepontine cistern under direct visualization [ and ].
We removed the MINOP making sure not to back out the catheter and removed the sheath. The intraventricular catheter was cut and measured to the appropriate length and the straight connector was used to connect the proximal and intracranial portions of the catheter. A dog-bone plate and screws were placed on the skull and a 2–0 silk tie secured the straight connector and the catheters. We filled a new 40 cc pump sterilely with 500 mcg/mL of intrathecal baclofen and it was programed to start at 100.1 mcg/day (compared to her preoperative dose of 998.9 mcg/day. The incisions were irrigated thoroughly with antibiotic irrigation and closed. The patient was then taken back to the intensive care unit intubated.
Placement in the prepontine cistern was confirmed by a postoperative computed tomography head. By the time, the dose was increased to 200 mcg/day, the patient was extubated, as she no longer showed signs of autonomic dysfunction and the spasticity in her upper extremities was significantly reduced.
By postoperative day 5, the patient was at a dose of 400.28 mcg/day and was discharged home with minimal upper and lower extremity spasticity (modified Ashworth scores of 1 in uppers and 3 in lowers compared to 4 throughout preoperatively).