We present the case of a 36-year-old male with no pathological history of interest. In June 2016 the patient was admitted to the outpatient clinic with swallowing difficulties of 3 days of evolution. The plain chest radiography with a water soluble contrast swallow did not revealed any pathological lesions and PPI therapy (Pantoprazol 2x20mg/day, 12 weeks) in combination with six food elimination diet (milk products, eggs, wheat, soy, peanut/tree nuts, and fish/shellfish) was administered. Despite the treatment, the patient's swallowing complaints persisted, but the young male was noncompliant for follow-up.
One year later, the patient presented to the emergency department with swallowing complaints and EFBI. Plain chest radiography with a water soluble contrast swallow revealed a 9 cm long stricture and food bolus impaction in the middle third of the esophagus . In order to evacuate the foreign body from the esophagus gastroscopy was executed. Gastroscopy examination described the food bolus impaction at 25 cm from dental arch and specific macroscopic image of eosinophilic esophagitis .
Subcutaneous emphysema was detected while removing the foreign body. Due to high risk of complications, a thoracic computer tomography was made confirming the suspicion of pneumomediastinum .
A new upper GI endoscopy described esophageal perforation . Thereby, despite the attempts to close the esophageal perforation with 3 clips, the patient’s general condition declined and was urgently transferred to our surgical department with the diagnosis of esophageal perforation.
On admission, the physical examination shows a febrile patient (38.2°C) with continuous chest pain, that increases with motion, no emphysema, auscultatory bilateral soft rough breathing sounds on a hemodynamically stable patient (blood pressure 140/90mmHg, arterial pulse 85bpm, oxygen saturation 98%). Blood tests showed increased inflammatory markers, including mild eosinophilia, which sustained EoE. Plain chest radiography with a water soluble contrast swallow was performed in order to confirm the diagnosis of esophageal perforation .
After preoperative intensive care unit (ICU) evaluation and preparation, transhiatal esophagectomy (THE) and cervical esophagostomy were performed with pyloromyotomy and feeding jejunostomy. The diagnosis of eosinophilic esophagitis was confirmed by histologic examination ( and ).
In the postoperative period, we focused on patient nutritional support, imagistic control ( and ) and blood tests survey, as follows. Considering that the maintenance of a good nutritional status of the patient is a crucial step, he received the nutritional support according to existing protocols [, ]. On postoperative day 1 a control contrast study was done in order to confirm the correct position of the jejunostomy tube, then 500 ml of tea (dextrose solution) and 500 ml of Nutrison Advanced Peptisorb (ingredients: 85% short chain peptides from hydrolysed whey protein, 15% free amino acids for optimal residue, low fat content with 47% of fat content from medium chain triglycerides, fiber free) were administrated at a rate of 20ml/h. On postoperative day 2, 1000 ml of tea and 1000 ml of Nutrison Advanced Peptisorb at a rate of 20ml/h were administered by continuous infusion via automated pump and on next postoperative days the rate increased to 10–15ml every 8–10 hours up to the target rate of 80ml/h. Since the patient didn’t present abdominal discomfort, he received Nutrison Advanced Peptisorb at a rate of 80mL/h without dilution.
The patient was discharged 10 days after with normal analytical and clinical parameters and correct feeding via the jejunostomy.
Over the following period, the patient developed hypoalbuminemia due to poor enteral nutrition which was corrected in order to withstand the planned esophageal reconstruction operation.
In January 2018 cervical esophagogastrostomy (gastric pull-up) was performed to re-establish continuity of gastrointestinal tract. The postoperative period was uneventful.
On postoperative day 7, anastomotic integrity was confirmed with contrast imaging study and the patient received clear fluids (oral administration) on postoperative day 8.
Enteral tube feeding was decreased and the diet was changed to full fluid consistency and was discontinued before the patient’s discharge.
The patient was discharged after 12 days in a good general condition, physiological parameters, and showing a correct oral tolerance. After 1 year of follow-up, the patient maintains correct oral nutrition with no episodes of swallowing disorders, dysphagia, EFBI or malabsorption syndrome.