A 58-year-old male with a 14-year history of diabetes mellitus (DM) type 2, alcohol abuse, and well-controlled HIV on ART (CD4+ cell count 963, viral load undetectable) presented to our outpatient otology clinic 3 months after an episode of sudden left SNHL, new-onset tinnitus, and balance issues without overt vertigo or facial nerve weakness. Vestibular testing was consistent with an uncompensated left peripheral vestibular weakness. MRI demonstrated mild enhancement of the facial and cochleovestibular nerves within the CPA and internal auditory canal (IAC) as well as remote right cerebellar infarct . The presumptive diagnosis of labyrinthitis was made but, given the patient’s comorbid DM and delayed presentation, he elected to forego corticosteroid treatment and was referred to vestibular therapy.
Two months later, the patient presented to his infectious disease doctor with new-onset left-sided facial weakness, and worsening ataxia and disequilibrium. Neurology was consulted and the patient was treated for presumed Bell’s palsy with systemic corticosteroids and antivirals as well as thiamine in the setting of chronic alcohol use. Over the next month, he developed dysfunction of the left corneal blink reflex, decreased visual acuity, diplopia, and worsening ataxia, and presented to the emergency department for further evaluation. Repeat MRI with contrast demonstrated a new 3.6 cm lesion of the left CPA/IAC with surrounding vasogenic edema , not present on the MRI 3 months prior. Despite its location in the posterior fossa and IAC, the mass did not enlarge at the porus acusticus and was centered within the middle cerebellar peduncle, without the brainstem compression characteristic of extra-axial CPA masses such as large vestibular schwannomas. Further work-up for malignant or metastatic process was obtained; MRI of the spine demonstrated an enhancing cervical spinal cord lesion at C5–C6 suspicious for leptomeningeal disease. Flow cytometry and cytology from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) demonstrated a CD10-positive monotypic B-cell population. He was diagnosed with primary central nervous system (CNS) large B-cell lymphoma and started on rituximab and high-dose methotrexate.