A 39-year-old Ethiopian-American woman presented with a history of severe EDS since childhood. She recalled falling asleep in class, during conversations, and walking with her mother holding hands. She reported fragmented, unrefreshing sleep and occasional hallucinations on awakenings. Although a diagnosis of narcolepsy was not made in Ethiopia, where she spent her childhood, dextroamphetamine was prescribed. She relocated to the United States but interrupted her college education due to EDS, sleep fragmentation, and depression. She occasionally experienced loss of muscle control triggered by laughter, primarily in her hands, and experienced episodes of automatic behavior, mostly while driving. Daytime naps were refreshing. Her past medical history was significant for attention deficit disorder treated with dextroamphetamine 10mg, which partly improved her EDS. She denied head trauma, snoring, witnessed apneas, restless legs symptoms, or any other complaints. Family and social histories were unexceptional.
The patient appeared healthy with normal vitals and physical exam. She weighed 87.5kg, measured 157.5cm, and BMI was 35.3kg/m2. Laboratory analysis including urine toxicology and TSH were normal. She scored 24/24 on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS). An overnight PSG followed by Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT) was conducted an American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM) accredited facility in Rockville, Maryland, United States. This demonstrated normal architecture without pathology . The mean sleep latency (MSL) for five naps was 1.3 minutes with sleeponset rapid eye movement (REM) periods (SOREMPs) in all five nap periods . HLA-typing and a CSF hypocretin level were not performed due to her classic presentation and reported cataplectic symptoms. She was diagnosed with N1. Dextroamphetamine was discontinued, and modafinil 200mg was prescribed . She noted significant improvements in morning sleepiness but had residual afternoon sleepiness, which resolved with an additional modafinil 100mg. On followup, she reported significantly improved quality of life and daytime alertness.