An 83-year-old Japanese woman with a history of hypertension and dyslipidaemia underwent on-pump CABG for angina pectoris with multi-vessel coronary artery disease. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) performed preoperatively and 1 month postoperatively revealed normal wall motion of the left ventricle and the presence of MAC, with no other abnormal findings . However, follow-up TTE performed 5 months after CABG revealed a mobile nodular mass (5.0 × 8.2 mm) in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) . Considering the risks of non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis or thrombus, the patient was prescribed apixaban 5 mg/day in addition to the aspirin 100 mg/day that she was taking for known ischaemic heart disease. A further 1 month later, the mass had enlarged to 5.0 × 13.0 mm , and the patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation.
Physical examination on admission showed a Levine 2/6 systolic murmur at the left sternal border, a regular heart rhythm of 61 b.p.m., and blood pressure of 117/71 mmHg. No remarkable symptoms were observed. The results of the laboratory study were as follows: white blood cell count 4200/μL, C-reactive protein 0.04 mg/dL, serum creatinine 0.63 mg/dL, haemoglobin A1c 6.0% (42 mmol/mol), and brain natriuretic peptide 317 pg/mL. Blood tests including thrombotic and autoimmunological parameters were unremarkable, and blood cultures were negative. Electrocardiography and chest radiography revealed no abnormalities. TTE showed no significant valvular dysfunction or wall-motion asynergy in the left ventricle, though a mobile cardiac mass was observed in the LVOT. Transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a pedunculated high-echoic mass that was adhered to the posterior commissure of the mitral valve and was dynamically swinging towards the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve in the systolic phase (Video 1).
Contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed MAC along almost the entire posterior leaflet of the mitral valve and a low-density string-shaped structure at the same site as the mass shown on TTE . There were no space-occupying lesions suggestive of metastatic cardiac tumours in the thoracoabdominal CT. Cardiac cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a low-signal intensity structure between the non-coronary cusp of the aortic valve and the posterior commissure of the mitral valve .
As the mass had grown rapidly in less than 6 months, surgical resection was performed to prevent systemic embolism. The pedunculated mass was vulnerable and was resected successfully . On gross examination of the resected mass before formalin fixation, it was yellowish in colour and measured 13.0 × 5.0 mm . The histological specimen which was stained with haematoxylin and eosin consisted mainly of fibrin, including calcification and hemosiderin deposition . There were no malignant findings and no bacterial mass detected. Characteristic histologic findings lead to a diagnosis of cardiac CAT. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course during her hospital stay and had no evidence of recurrence for 1 year after discharge.