A 25-year-old Thai woman (gravida 3, para 3) had her third uneventful vaginal delivery followed by TS by modified Pomeroy technique on the following day. She experienced a persistent low-grade fever and abdominal pain that began in the third post-partum week and deteriorated over time. Her medical history was unremarkable. She denied any history of intravenous drug abuse, smoking, alcohol intake, or abdominal trauma. She reported being monogamous. Her partner was healthy and denied any history of sexually transmitted infections. Her previous obstetric history was unremarkable at 8 years and 5 years prior to this delivery. The vaginal delivery of her third baby took place 2 hours after a spontaneous rupture of membranes and progressed uneventfully. Post-partum TS was performed by request without any remarkable findings. She recovered well and was discharged with her baby from the hospital 3 days later.
With a persistent and progressive fever for 1 week, she was admitted to the hospital. On admission, she looked very sick. A physical examination showed a high-grade fever (39°C), tachycardia (pulse rate of 112 beats per minute), tachypnea (respiratory rate of 26 per minute), and a blood pressure of 110/60mmHg. An abdominal examination showed a small transverse subumbilical incision scar (from the TS) without any signs of wound infection. A 16-week, pregnancy-sized, non-mobile pelvic mass was found on the left side of her pelvis. The mass and other areas of her pelvis and abdomen were tender, suggesting peritonitis. A pelvic examination revealed a large amount of purulent vaginal discharge, a marked degree of pain elicited upon cervical excitation, a bulging cul-de-sac, and the tender pelvic mass as described in the abdominal examination findings. The results of the rest of the physical examination were unremarkable.
Ultrasonograms showed a uterus of 10.1×6.2×5.1cm in size and a smooth thin endometrial lining. A multiloculated mass of 6.2×8.2×10.9cm in size was seen over the left adnexal region. The right adnexal region was unremarkable. Approximately 50mL of free fluid was noted in the cul-de-sac. Laboratory testing revealed a hematocrit level of 32.2%, a white blood cell count of 33,170/mm3 (90.2% were polymorphonuclear neutrophils), and a platelet count of 422,000/mm3. Levels of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were 6.2 and 0.5mg/dL, respectively. Blood electrolytes were as follows: sodium 138mmol/L, potassium 3.4mmol/L, chloride 106mmol/L, and bicarbonate 22mmol/L. A slightly prolonged coagulogram was found: a prothrombin time of 15.3 (10 to 13) seconds and a partial thromboplastin time of 34.7 (21 to 30) seconds. The results of a liver function test were normal. The results of a cervical swab and blood culture were negative.
The clinical diagnosis was a ruptured TOA. After counseling for a diagnosis and a plan for an urgent exploratory laparotomy, intravenous clindamycin 2700mg per day and gentamicin 240mg per day were initiated. Fluid resuscitation and preparation of blood components were executed.
The operative findings showed 50mL of bloody purulent intraperitoneal fluid. A left tubo-ovarian complex of 7×7cm in size was seen. The mass contained 30mL of malodorous pus and had a 2cm rupture site on its posterior surface . The rupture site was walled off by a 30cm loop of severely inflamed ileum . The two free ends of proximal and distal parts of the left fallopian tubes were evidenced without residual pieces of chromic catgut used for the sterilization. The uterus was markedly inflamed. The right adnexal region appeared grossly normal.
A total hysterectomy with left salpingo-oophorectomy, ileal resection with end-to-end anastomosis, abdominal toileting, and Penrose drain placement were performed. The operation took 4 hours, and the estimated blood loss was 2000mL. A Gram stain of pus from the abdominal cavity demonstrated numerous polymorphonuclear cells and numerous coccoid pleomorphic Gram-negative rods. An abdominal fluid culture revealed no growth, whereas the pus culture showed Fusobacterium necrophorum. The organism was identified as F. necrophorum subsp. funduliforme by microscopic examination, biochemical characteristics, and 16S ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) sequencing. The isolate was designated as SIRD333. The 658 base-pair fragment of SIRD333 16S rDNA was submitted to GenBank (accession number JX103157). The surgical pathology showed chronic endometritis, TOA, and ileitis.
Our patient recovered well after the operation and had further treatment with intravenous antibiotics (clindamycin and gentamicin) until being clinically stable for 48 hours (4 days of intravenous antibiotics in total). She was discharged on the 10th post-operative day. She continued oral antibiotics (clindamycin) for six more weeks. She was clinically well during all of her follow-up visits.