Patient information: Female, 51 years old
Chief complaint: Eye congestion, foreign body sensation
Past history: No remarkable past medical history
Smoking history and alcohol history: None
Occupational history: Meat cutting (duck parts). Worked since July 1, 2009.
Present illness: Stinging eyes and foreign body sensation had occurred from mid-December, 2012; eye congestion had also occurred frequently. Symptoms became worse in the presence of bright light. Ocular symptoms mostly occurred later in the working day and after work. Skin exfoliation and redness was observed around the eyes and on the face.
Physical examination: Mild hyperemic conjunctiva (+), erythematous diffuse patches (+), facial reddish papule (+), pruritic and stinging sense (+).
Laboratory findings: A peripheral blood examination revealed the following: hemoglobin level 11.9 g/dL, hematocrit 35.9 %, white blood cell count 4,500/mm3, and platelet count 180,000/mm3. According to an immunoassay, IgA was 214.0 mg/dL, IgE was 58.80 IU/ml. All these lab findings were within the normal range.
Pulmonary function test findings: A pulmonary function test revealed the following: functional vital capacity (FVC) was 3.68 L (115.4 %), forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 3.00 L (124.5 %), the ratio of FEV1 to FVC was 81.52 % (108.8 %). All findings were within the normal range.
Medical imaging findings: There were no significant findings upon plain chest radiography.
Ophthalmology findings: Visual acuity was 0.1 in the right eye and 0.08 in the left. Maintained anterior chamber or anterior chamber cells were not observed in either eye. Intra ocular pressure was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left. Schirmer`s test result was 20 mm in the right eye and 18 mm in the left. Diffuse corneal damage was observed . On the basis of these results, keratoepitheliopathy was diagnosed.
At the time of medical examination by interview, 26 out of a total of 41 workers (64 %) were complaining of ocular symptoms (stinging eye, teardrops, etc.). Moreover, skin symptoms (skin exfoliation, redness) were found in 4 workers (9 %) upon physical examination. Ocular symptoms mostly occurred immediately after finishing work or after going home, and skin symptoms around the eyes often occurred in workers. None of the workers had an abnormal complete blood cell count, and all Ig A and Ig E tests were normal. In addition, plain chest radiography and pulmonary function tests showed no abnormal findings in any of the workers. An ophthalmic examination yielded normal conjunctival findings in all workers; however, 26 out of 41 workers (63.4 %) were diagnosed with keratoepitheliopathy . That is, all of the workers who had complained of the symptoms were diagnosed with keratoepitheliopathy.