A 65 year old lady presented with a progressive swelling in right side of abdomen for 8 months. She had vague right sided abdominal discomfort and heaviness for the past 12 years. There was no history of jaundice, vomiting or abdominal distension. Her bowel and bladder habits were unremarkable. Her past medical history, menstrual history was also unremarkable. On examination she was anicteric, vitals stable and with a Karnofsky performance scale of 80. Her BMI was 21. There was fullness of right side abdomen on inspection and further examination revealed a non-tender, firm lump of approximately 20 × 8 cms extending from right hypochondrium to right iliac fossa, whose upper and lower margins were not palpable. There was slight side to side mobility. Liver was not enlarged, but the lump was contiguous with the liver, no nodules were palpable on the liver surface and no sign of ascites was found.
Ultrasonogram of abdomen revealed a massively distended gall bladder with multiple gall stones, largest of size 4 cm and circumferentially irregularly thickened wall. Computerized Tomography of the abdomen (performed 2 months before in another institution) showed a hugely distended gall bladder of size 23 × 8 cm with markedly thickened walls with multiple neovascularization along the neck of gall bladder suggestive of neoplastic etiology. There were maintained fat planes between the gall bladder with liver, duodenum, ascending colon, and portal vein. Liver was normal and there was no evidence of metastatic deposits. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography at our institution revealed heterogeneously enhancing irregular polypoidal circumferential mural thickening noted in the region of body and neck of gall bladder measuring 2.5 cms in maximum thickness, appearing hypointense on T1 WI and hyperintense on T2 WI . Multiple calculi (average diameter—3.5 cm) were noted in the gall bladder lumen. Her laboratory parameters including liver function tests were within normal range. Serum Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19.9) was 11 units/mL (normal 0–37 units/mL).
As the radiological features were indicative of malignancy, patient was planned for radical cholecystectomy. At the initial diagnostic laparoscopy, no metastatic deposits seen on liver, peritoneum, omentum and no free fluid was found in the peritoneal cavity. It was followed by open radical cholecystectomy with wedge resection of liver and regional lymphadenectomy. Intra operatively a GB of size 24 × 9cm was noted . It was a surprise to find such a giant malignant GB with preserved planes. There were no grossly enlarged lymph nodes. The specimen was cut open and the irregularly thickened wall upto 2 cm, especially of the body and fundus was found with multiple large gall stones. Post-operative period was uneventful and patient was discharged on post-operative day 5. Histopathological examination confirmed well differentiated adenocarcinoma of gall bladder involving the muscular layer and peri-muscular tissue on the peritoneal side without serosal involvement [Stage II (T2a N0 M0)] and having a maximum wall thickness of 2.5 cm. The entire thickened wall was cancerous. Cystic duct stump margin and all other resected margins were free of tumor. All 9 lymph nodes isolated were free of tumor deposits. Patient family did not opt for further consultation with medical oncologist. Patient was healthy and disease free up to 18 months of follow up.