A 76-year-old lady with a 7-year history of symptomatic paroxysmal AF underwent a percutaneous AF ablation (PVI). Her background includes hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The procedure was performed using the 28 mm second-generation cryo-balloon (Medtronic Arctic Front, USA) under local anaesthesia and conscious sedation. Right femoral venous access was uncomplicated and obtained under ultrasound guidance. A FlexCath sheath (Medtronic, USA) and HeartSpan transseptal needle (Merit, USA) was used for a single uncomplicated transseptal puncture (under the guidance of fluoroscopy, pressure monitoring, contrast flow into the left atrium, and aspiration of arterial blood). Pulmonary venography revealed standard left and right PV anatomy and cryo-ablation was performed to each PV sequentially with PVI confirmed using the Achieve™ mapping catheter (Medtronic, USA). The temperature and freeze time were as follows: left upper PV (−43°C for 180 s), left lower PV (−49°C for 180 s), right lower PV (−48°C for 180 s), and right upper PV (−47°C for 180 s). Atropine 600 mcg IV was administered prior to commencing freezing as per our routine clinical practice to reduce the incidence of peri-procedural vagal events. The patient experienced transient drops in blood pressure (80/50 mmHg with no change in sinus rate) during each PV freeze, which responded well to intravenous (IV) fluids; she went into sustained AF during the right lower PV freeze (heart rate remained stable at 80 − 100 b.p.m. in sustained AF). The electrical isolation of all four PVs was confirmed with the Achieve™ mapping catheter at the end.
Intra- and post-procedure transthoracic echocardiography did not demonstrate any pericardial effusion; phrenic nerve stimulation (using diaphragm compound motor action potential and manual palpitation) was performed during isolation of the right-sided PVs and was fine throughout. Immediately post-ablation (after all catheters were withdrawn from the left atrium) the patient developed profound recurrent hypotension (systolic blood pressure 50 mmHg) which responded transiently to IV fluids. Her physical examination was unremarkable and her femoral access site appeared fine with no clinical evidence of haematoma. The patient then developed further recurrent profound hypotension responding initially to IV fluids but was associated with the reduced conscious level and metabolic acidosis (pH 7.2). The patient was given IV adrenaline (100 mcg) to maintain a systolic blood pressure >100 mmHg. She received 6 L IV fluids (including 1 unit of packed red cells), protamine 50 mg IV, and 2500 units of prothrombin complex concentrate (Octaplex) to treat a presumed acute bleeding event.
She was urgently transferred to our coronary care unit (at a different hospital site) and spontaneously reverted to sinus rhythm. An emergency computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast was performed which excluded any bleeding source, oesophageal injury, pulmonary embolism, and acute PV occlusion. An acute Addisonian crisis was also excluded.
She developed a further hypotensive episode (systolic blood pressure 50 mmHg) which responded once again to IV fluids. Her electrocardiogram at that time revealed sinus bradycardia with junctional escape rhythm at a rate of 30 b.p.m. an intermittent pauses . She was given an IV bolus of Atropine 600 mcg and was commenced onto an isoprenaline infusion. She stabilized following this and the isoprenaline infusion was stopped the following day. She was discharged home at Day 3 post-AF ablation after remaining well. She was followed up in the clinic 1 month later and continued to remain well and in sinus rhythm.