A 30-year-old female presented with a 5-week history of a painful rapidly-growing mass over the proximal phalanx of the right ring finger . The patient also complained of numbness along the distribution of the radial digital nerve of the finger. There was no history of trauma. Examination showed a firm tender mass measuring 3.5 × 2 cm with an overlying skin erythema. The patient was unable to fully extend or flex the finger because of pain. There was also a flexion contracture of the proximal interphalangeal joint. Static two-point discrimination on the radial side of the ring finger was 10 mm. Plain x-rays showed no bony abnormalities or calcifications. Magnetic resonance imaging showed an iso-intense (similar to intensity of muscle) lesion on T1-weighted images . T2-weighted images showed high intensity in the center of the lesion and low intensity at the periphery of the lesion .
Surgical excision was done under general anesthesia. The mass infiltrated the entire flexor sheath over the proximal phalanx as well as the checkrein ligament of the proximal interphalangeal joint. The common digital artery of the 3rd web space was obliterated by the tumor. The radial digital nerve of the ring finger was stretched and attenuated . Total excision was done and this required excision of the flexor sheath over the proximal phalanx (including the entire A2 pulley), the checkrein ligament and the common digital artery. The digital nerve was preserved (, ).
Histology showed the classic 3 histological zones of myositis ossificans: a central cellular / fibroblastic zone, an intermediate zone of osteoid (immature bone) and an outer zone of mature bone . The patient was followed up for one year after surgery with no evidence of recurrence. At final follow up, there was full flexion of the digit, but the proximal interphalangeal joint had an extension lag of 30o . Upon palpation, bowstringing of the flexor tendon was felt over the proximal phalanx. The static two-point discrimination on the radial side of the ring finger improved to 6 mm.