A 68-year-old Italian man was admitted to our unit complaining of macrohematuria, rectorrhagia, and rectal tenesmus for about 2 months. No personal or family history of colorectal or urothelial cancer was evidenced. A physical examination revealed pain in the hypogastrium and the right iliac fossa. Laboratory tests showed an increased carcinoembryonic antigen level of 6.46ng/mL (normal range, 0 to 5ng/mL) and increased tissue polypeptide antigen (105U/L; normal range, 0 to 75U/L).
A colonoscopy showed the presence of a rectal lesion at 11cm from the anal margin, which was ulcerated, easily bled, and narrowed the colic lumen. Multiple biopsies were performed and a diagnosis of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma was made.
Abdominal ultrasonography (US) performed subsequently to stage the rectal cancer showed the presence of two round nodules, measuring 33mm and 30mm, at the anterior aspect of the iliopsoas muscle. Moreover, US revealed a budding lesion (maximum diameter, 24.9mm) affecting the bladder. The patient underwent transurethral cystoscopy and a biopsy of the lesion in the right retrotrigonal region; the diagnosis was grade II urothelial carcinoma.
Furthermore, the patient underwent a total body computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed the rectal tumor and the two abdominal nodules detected previously by US. These nodules were interpreted as swollen lymph nodes, probably of neoplastic origin.
The patient underwent an open anterior rectal resection with a termino-terminal anastomosis and a loco-regional lymphadenectomy. An enlarged appendix and a voluminous whitish soft-tissue lesion requiring an appendicectomy were detected perioperatively. The patient also underwent transurethral resection of the bladder lesion. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 11 days after surgery.
The histological examination of the specimens confirmed the presence of an ulcerated rectal adenocarcinoma, moderately differentiated and completely infiltrating the rectal wall, but not the perirectal fatty tissue . No neoplastic invasion was detected in any of the 27 lymph nodes removed (T3, N0, M0; TNM Stage IIa). Furthermore, it was evidenced that the nodular lesions in the appendix detected preoperatively by imaging were due to accumulation of mucus in the appendiceal lumen caused by a lesion composed of mucus-secreting pseudostratified epithelium, with hyperchromic nuclei and rare pseudo-papillae, diagnosed as a cystadenoma . Finally, a grade 2 urothelial carcinoma infiltrating the subepithelial connective tissue of the bladder was observed . In all cases the resection margins were free of neoplastic invasion.
For mutation analysis, genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was isolated from tumor tissue samples, using standard methods. Tumor tissues were estimated to contain at least 70% neoplastic cells by light microscopy. The complete coding sequences and intron–exon boundaries of the KRAS exons 2 to 3, BRAF exon 15, and the PIK3CA exons 9 to 20 were screened for mutations by direct sequencing, using an automated fluorescence-based cycle sequencer (ABIPRISM3100, Applied Biosystems, Foster City, United States of America). Primer sequences were as reported in the Genome DataBase.
No mutation was detected in both the KRAS and BRAF genes. For PIK3CA mutations, screening revealed that all three samples analyzed carried a variant (p.S553fs*7 in exon 9) which has been firstly reported as associated with the CRC (catabolite repression control) gene, although it has been previously described in association with an hematopoietic neoplastic disease . Figure shows the nucleotide sequences for the somatic mutation identified in the PIK3CA gene in our patient. The PIK3CA sequence variation identified was not present in normal adjacent tissues, indicating that these variants are tumor specific and somatically acquired mutations.