A 68-year-old man who had hypertension for 14 years was transferred to our facility for the management of nephrotic syndrome with proteinuria at 16.3 g/gCre . On admission, he was conscious, and his lower extremities were edematous. His serum creatinine, urea nitrogen and albumin were 0.85 mg/dL, 8 mg/dL and 2.8 g/dL, respectively. To investigate his pathophysiology, a renal biopsy was performed. It revealed that his nephrotic syndrome was caused by stage II MN . Immunohistochemistry showed that the kidney specimen was negative for THSD7A . We shared the diagnosis and therapeutic strategy with him. Based on his agreement, subsequent corticosteroid therapy successfully suppressed his proteinuria to 0.6 g/gCre within 6 months. Every outpatient care visit, he had good adherence to the medication. During the course of corticosteroid therapy, he did not experience any unanticipated event, including abnormal glucose tolerance and exacerbation of hypertension. The remission of proteinuria led to the termination of corticosteroid therapy. At age 69, recurrence of proteinuria (up to 4.9 g/gCre) was observed; however, we hesitated to administer corticosteroid because of unstable angina. At 71 years of age, abdominal ultrasonography revealed a urinary bladder tumor 5 mm in diameter. However, he did not want to undergo further examinations at that time. At 72 years of age, his proteinuria increased up to 12.9 g/gCre. Therefore, we resumed corticosteroid therapy, but remission was not achieved. We performed another renal biopsy, which showed that the patient had MN whose stage has progressed from II to III . Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the kidney sections were positive for THSD7A in the second biopsy, but not in the first biopsy , while PLA2R1 staining levels were negative for both the first and second biopsies. (Supplemental Figure ). Because the size of the bladder tumor had increased to 10 mm in diameter, we resected the tumor. Pathological findings indicated that the tumor diagnosis was THSD7A -positive bladder cancer . Serum levels of anti-PLA2R1 and anti-THSD7A antibodies were not measured in this case due to lack of stored serum samples. Although proteinuria temporally increased after the surgery, the proteinuria level decreased to 0.3 g/gCre within 12 months following the tumor resection.