A 52 year-old Caucasian woman presented with right-sided abdominal pain (upper quadrant pain), ascites and jaundice. She had been experiencing the abdominal pain for one year.
An MRI revealed a tumor mass located in the liver, extrahepatic bile ducts and gallbladder. Tests done at the time of admission revealed raised levels of serum amylase (490-600 IU/L), abnormal liver function (Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase 372 IU/L; Alkaline phosphatase 1309 IU/L) and a total bilirubin of 1.90 mg/dl. With a clinical diagnosis of obstructive jaundice, our patient underwent imaging studies. The primary clinical diagnosis was liver tumor. A partial hepatectomy and cholecystectomy were performed.
Part of the liver measured 16 × 13 × 8 cm and the gallbladder 9.5 × 3.5 cm. The tumor was located in the wall of the gallbladder infiltrating the liver. The nodular mass measured 6 cm at its greatest axis, was found in the wall of the gallbladder involving the liver, and was a grey-white to yellow color. Thirteen lymph nodes diameters of 0.3 cm to 1 cm were found.
Specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, and paraffin embedded sections were prepared. The sections were processed for conventional histopathological examination as well as for immunohistochemistry using a standard avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex technique. Negative and positive controls were included for each batch of slides tested.
The tumor was composed of round to fusiform cells with round to ovoid hyperchromatic nuclei, arranged in sheets, nests, cords, and festoons. There were rosette-like structures and tubules present, extensive necrosis, as well as basophilic staining of the vessels. Mitotic figures were frequent.
Carcinoma cells were Grimelius positive. In addition, tumor cells immunoexpressed epithelial markers such as CK, CK7, CK19 +/-, and endocrine markers such as NSE (1+), chromogranin A (1+); while C-KIT was negative, ER negative, PR negative, Alfa fetoprotein negative, CEA negative, Ki67 positive (low <5%), Vimentin negative and synaptophysin negative.
The histopathological diagnosis was a GEP-NET tumor. Our patient is undergoing targeted therapy, including: Gleevec (Novartis) .