A 35-year-old male farm-worker presented to the emergency room with alleged history of horse bite to the right forearm about 2 hours prior to presenting to us. He was bitten by his horse when he was feeding it. He had recently bought the horse for renting it for marriages and other social and religious functions. On examination, there was deformity of the forearm with multiple puncture wounds, deep abrasions and small lacerations on the distal-third of the forearm. ( and )
Sensations and motor functions in the hand were grossly normal. Copious irrigation with normal saline was done for the wounds. He was given 0.5 ml tetanus toxoid and 500 IU Tetglob® (human Tetanus Immunoglobulin BP), and received post-exposure rabies prophylaxis with Vaxirab™ (Purified Duck Embryo Vaccine for Rabies IP). Prophylactic antibiotic therapy with intravenous penicillin, gentamicin, cloxacillin and metronidazole was commenced. Radiographs revealed fracture of radius and ulna in the mid-shaft region .
He was taken to the operating room (OR) where careful debridement of the wounds was done under loupe-magnification. The crushed wound margins were excised. The forearm muscles on both flexor and extensor aspects appeared churned and partly crushed. The devitalised portions of these muscles were excised. The fractured bone ends were curetted. The ulna was stabilised with an intra-medullary Talwalkar square nail (INOR, Mumbai, India). Skin edges were approximated with loose sutures. The same antibiotics were continued in the post-operative period. He had no episode of fever and there were no features of wound infection. Seventy-two hours later, he was taken to the OR for re-debridement. There were no features of infection. The nail in ulna was removed and conversion osteosynthesis using dynamic compression plate and screws for radius and ulna was done .
He was changed to oral cephalexin and ciprofloxacin on day 6 which were given till suture removal. He had an uneventful recovery and was discharged from the hospital on the 10th day from injury. He returned for suture removal at 2 weeks’ time. The plaster splint was removed at one-month follow-up ( and ).
The horse had no features of rabies. The patient, however, sold the horse as he was too scared to keep it. At three-months, the fractures had healed radiographically in anatomic alignment .
At two-year follow-up, he is doing well, is pain free and has a normal range of motion compared to the contralateral side. He is able to use his hand for all routine work and has returned to his work in the farm. The patient gave the informed consent for publication of this study.