A 68-year-old female presented with a severe low back pain and bilateral thigh pain due to L1 vertebral fracture. She had a history of left total hip arthroplasty, and systemic scleroderma which was complicated by interstitial lung disease. She was diagnosed with systemic scleroderma 20 years prior, and her recent dosage of oral steroid was 3 mg per day. Although she initially underwent bracing and daily administered parathyroid hormone for 7 months, her symptoms had progressively deteriorated. Her radiographs showed non-union at L1, kyphotic deformity of the thoracolumbar spine, and sagittal imbalance (a–e). Her lateral whole-spine radiograph showed; lumbar lordosis (Th12-S1) was 16°, local kyphosis (Th10-L2) was 37°, and sagittal vertical axis was 12.5 cm. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine showed a collapsed L1 vertebral body, and the posterior bone fragment compressing the spinal cord with bending motion (a,b). Her computed tomography (CT) myelogram showed an intravertebral vacuum cleft sign and destructive change of the L1 vertebral body (c). Her fingers and toes were cold due to Raynaud’s phenomenon of systemic scleroderma (a,b), and pressure sores were observed around the prominent L1 spinous process (c). Anterior spinal fusion with thoracotomy should be avoided to minimize postoperative pulmonary dysfunction due to interstitial lung disease. Given her condition, a vertebroplasty with posterior spinal fusion was performed using PPS at UIV and LIV combined with sublaminar polyethylene taping and in-situ fusion using a computer-assisted rod contouring system (Bendini®; NuVasive, Inc., San Diego, CA) (a–i). The operation time was 203 min with an estimated blood loss of 276 ml. The patients tolerated the procedure well with no major complications. Her symptoms markedly improved; her back pain was reduced to 1/10 in NRS and she denied any thigh pain. She could walk long distances without a T-cane 1-year postoperatively. Local kyphosis and sagittal imbalance were markedly restored; lumbar lordosis was 33°, local kyphosis was 14°, and sagittal vertical axis was 6.8 cm on her postoperative radiograph (a–d). Her postoperative CT showed good bony union without screw loosening or screw pull-out 1-year postoperatively (e). Although the scoliotic curve remained, she did not complain of related symptoms.
This case report follows the Surgical Case Report (SCARE) Guidelines 2018 .
The patient was placed in a prone position, and a midline incision was made to allow a vertebroplasty at L1, insertions of pedicle screws at Th12, L1, and L2, placement of sublaminar polyethylene taping (Nesplon; Alfresa, Inc., Osaka, Japan) at Th12 and L2, and resection of prominent L1 spinous process for bone graft. A vertebroplasty was performed using hydroxyapatite (HA stick; Pentax, Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Laminectomy was not required, because the posterior bone fragment did not compress the spinal cord with stabilization, and laminae were important for the posterior fusion bed. Jamshidi needles were placed through the lumbodorsal fascia at Th11 (UIV) and L3 (LIV) under fluoroscopic guidance. One-shot imaging was used rather than continuous fluoroscopy to reduce radiation exposure . A percutaneous guide wire (S-wire) was used to prevent the anterior migration of the guide wires . The PPSs were placed at Th11 and L3 after tapping the pedicle holes through the guide wires (a). After the placement of pedicle screws, each location for the screw heads were registered by the Bendini® Digitizer (b). The Bendini® software enabled us to estimate the rod lengths and to identify the ideal rod contours (c–f). A rod was placed into the multi-axial rod bender (g) and was bent according to the instructions of the Bendini® software. The computer-assisted pre-bent rod was easily placed at both the PPS and pedicle screws, and the set screws were also smoothly tightened without screw pull-out. Sublaminar polyethylene tapes were tightened to the rods (h). After ample irrigation, local bone graft and β-tricalcium phosphate (Cerarebone; NGK Spark Plug Co., Ltd., Aichi, Japan) were placed on the decorticated lamina and facet joints. Her surgical wound healed well without any wound dehiscence (i).
We register our surgical technique at . The Unique Identifying Number from the Research Registry of this study is researchregistry5677.