A 48-year-old stout woman farmer presented to our hospital because of 1 day history of weakness of left limb and barylalia on May 20, 2018. She had a history of rhinosinusitis, chronic bronchitis, and hypertension. She had no history of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events and had no use of tobacco and alcohol. Her parents were not close relatives and she had a healthy daughter. Her mother died suddenly many years ago without definite cause. Her father and siblings are healthy and live far away in Yunnan province, the Southwest China. Her vital signs at entry included respiratory rate at 19 per min, heart rate at 79 per min, blood pressure at 130/79 mmHg, and body temperature at 36.7 °C. The physical examination showed motor aphasia, left central facial and lingual palsy as well as the left limb weakness. The National Institute of Health stroke scale was four. There were dry lung rales on both sides. Heart sounds were more pronounced at the right sternal border. The computed tomography scan of brain at emergency excluded the hemorrhage. A probable diagnosis of cerebral infarction was made.
Her electrocardiogram showed inverted “P” waves in L1 and AVL on left-sided chest leads . Computed tomography scan of the chest revealed bronchiectasis changes, and the cardiac shadow and apex on the right side, and aortic arch, situs inversus . The cardiac ultrasound showed heart inversus. Further laboratory test showed normal blood routine test, C reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and seronegative for anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-CCP antibody, rheumatoid factor, anti-HIV and anti-Syphilis antibodies. The levels of cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein, and high-density lipoprotein are normal, 4.58 mmol/L, 2.67 mmol/L and 1.13 mmol/L, respectively. The magnetic resonance imaging of brain showed acute cerebral infarction in the right basal ganglia region, semi-oval center, insular lobe, frontal parietal lobe and sinusitis as well as old ischemic area in the left coronal areas and left semi-oval central area . In addition, magnetic resonance angiography of brain revealed severe stenosis at the bilateral terminal portion of the internal carotid arteries, while the bilateral middle cerebral arteries and anterior cerebral arteries almost disappeared. A further digital subtraction angiography showed inversion of the aortic arch, and bilateral internal carotid arteries are occluded at the ophthalmic segment.
The whole genome sequencing and bioinformatics analysis showed a homozygotic nonsense mutation c.9286C > T (p.Arg3096Ter) at Exon 55 in the dynein, axonemal, heavy chain (DNAH) 5 gene , and heterozygotic missense mutation c.73G > A (p.Ala25Thr) at Exon 1, c.5702A > C (p.Glu1901Ala) at Exon 33 in the DNAH11 gene . Finally, a diagnosis of cerebral infarction, MMS and Kartagener syndrome was made.
She was treated with aspirin, rosuvastatin, intravenous injection of vinpocetine and other supportive treatment. She rejected further evaluation of brain perfusion because of financial reasons. Ten days later, her symptoms improved with the National Institute of Health stroke scale of two and then she was discharged. A follow-up at 18 months after onset showed no sequelae of cerebral infarction, modified Rankin Scale was 0.