A 39-years-old Caucasian woman with a three-year history of recurrent swellings of both pinnae presented to our hospital's ENT department. Two weeks before presenting to the hospital, she suffered acute exacerbations that led to the obstruction of her left external auditory meatus. The swelling was painless and her main problem was diminished hearing as a result of the sudden occlusion of her external auditory canal. Although no positive family history could be found, the patient's personal medical history revealed that she suffered from generalized eczema and asthma during childhood. Her hearing was also impaired and she used hearing aids between the ages of one and 16 years.
Her clinical records revealed that she first presented to a dermatologist due to intertrigal dermatitis when she was only 26 days old. By the time she was four months old, her whole body was covered with inflammation. She developed asthma at the age of four years and was diagnosed to have an eczema-asthma syndrome (ichthyosis and eczema). At the age of 11, she developed polyarthritis that affected her large and small joints. Rheumatoid arthritis was ruled out after due investigations, but she continued to receive treatment for seronegative polyarthritis.
When the patient was 14 years old she presented to ENT with nasal obstruction and a large septal perforation. An audiogram examination showed that the patient had a bilateral conductive loss of hearing with an average of 35 decibels of air-bone gap across the 0.5, 1, 2 and 4KHz speech frequencies . Tympanograms were peaked and showed a normal pressure range. Ossicular chain malformation was suspected and so her right ear was explored. A fixed stapes was discovered and a partial stapedectomy was carried out, which restored her normal hearing .
Ten years later, she was offered surgical stapedectomy to improve hearing in her left ear but the patient declined this, as she was content with the normal hearing in one ear. The patient has maintained normal hearing in her right ear until she was 39-years-old .
A clinical examination of the patient revealed that she had thick, dry, scaly skin and scalp. Serous discharge from the skin folds and the scalp was also discovered. There was also a marked generalized telangiectasia . Both auricles of the patient were chronically inflamed with the loss of normal contours but her earlobes bore no such inflammation . A cystic swelling measuring about 3 × 4 cm in diameter filled the patient's left concha, which obstructed the external meatus. Her tympanic membranes were not visible. The patient had rhinolalia and her nose had a large septal perforation of both the cartilaginous and bony nasal septum . The lateral walls of the nasal cavity were crusty and both middle and superior turbinates were atrophic and unidentifiable.
Biochemical analysis and microbiological study of aspirate from the cystic swelling were unremarkable. Full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, urea, and electrolyte were all normal. Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA), antinuclear antibodies, smooth muscles antibodies, and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) and treponema palladium haemagglutination (TPHA) tests for syphilis were all negative. Rheumatoid arthritis screen and autoantibody screen were also negative. Biopsies of the patient's left auricular cartilage, nasal septal cartilage and the lateral walls of the nose revealed a chronic non-specific inflammation.
Based on her clinical features at presentation and her medical history, a clinical diagnosis of relapsing polychondritis was made, the patient having exhibited the following features: 1) recurrent bilateral auricular chondritis; 2) non-erosive seronegative polyarthritis; 3) chondritis of nasal cartilage; and 4) cutaneous inflammation. She was subsequently started on treatment. Seven years later, the activity of the patient's disease is under control although there is a significant irreversible damage to the affected organs. She was initially treated with high dose prednisolone and cyclophosphamide and is now on maintenance doses of prednisolone and azathioprine.