A 51 year-old Nigerian African male presented December 2007 with a 1-year history of recurrent pedal and abdominal swelling (he had been treated with diuretics intermittently by his General Practitioner). There was also a 6-month history of progressive dyspnoea on exertion with associated orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea. There was no history of chest pain, palpitations nor syncope. He also had fever, progressive weight loss and malaise which started with onset of illness. The patient was not a known hypertensive, diabetic nor asthmatic. There was no history of alcohol ingestion, neither was there any history of cigarette smoking.
Physical examination revealed pitting pedal oedema up to the knees, hepatomegaly of 3 cm below the right costal margin with a liver span of 15 cm and moderate ascites. On cardiovascular system examination, the blood pressure was 100/80 mmHg, the apex beat was diffuse and first and second heart sounds which were distant were heard.
The haemoglobin was 13.8 gm/dl and the white blood cell count was 6.0 × 109/L with lymphocyte count of 55% and neutrophil count of 42%. Total and direct bilirubin levels were elevated at 70.3 μmol/L and 48.1 μmol/L (normal: ≤ 17.1 μmol/L and ≤ 4.3 μmol/L respectively). Aspartate Transaminase, Alanine Transaminase, Alkaline Phosphatase were all elevated at 289 iu/L, 93 iu/L and 68 iu/L respectively (normal being:<37 iu/L, <40 iu/L and 9–35 iu/L respectively). Hepatitis B surface antigen was not detectable while antibody against Hepatitis C virus was detected. An abdominal ultrasound scan showed that the liver was mildly enlarged with a coarse echo pattern.
Transthoracic Echocardiography showed a large echo-dense mass in the right atrium prolapsing through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. It measured 5.3 cm by 4.2 cm.
Our patient discharged himself against medical advice when the nature of illness and treatment modalities were explained to him. Unfortunately, he died about one hour after getting home from the hospital while trying to stand up from the sitting position. No post mortem examination was performed.