A 35-year-old woman visited our hospital because of epigastric pain. Laboratory data showed white blood cell count of 5.83 × 103/μL, eosinophils 3.8%. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a 15 mm SMT with changes in the folds, such as enlargement and convergence, located in the greater curvature of the lower gastric body . The mucosa was partially erosive, and the tumor was elastic and hard. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) findings revealed no regions that could be identified as a tumor at either 12 MHz or 20 MHz, and the layered structure was maintained. CT showed a localized nonenhanced nodule 15 mm in size at the same site . Thus, gastric SMT was suspected, but undifferentiated cancer could not be excluded. Biopsy was performed several times, and deep biopsy was also performed, but no malignant findings were observed. We planned to carry out total biopsy after obtaining informed consent because malignant disease could not be excluded.
We performed laparoscopic partial gastrectomy via LECS. The port arrangement was shifted to the foot side relative to the port arrangement in conventional gastrectomy because of severe gastroptosis. Five ports (one 12-mm, one 5-mm, and three 2-mm ports) were placed. The tumor location was confirmed in the greater curvature of the lower gastric body by endoscopy. The omentum around the tumor was minimally removed. A mucosal incision was made around the tumor with an adequate margin. The most anal side of the mucosal incision was endoscopically perforated. The rest of the specimen was circumferentially resected using laparoscopic coagulating shears . The specimen was stored in a plastic bag and orally extracted. The defect in the stomach wall was closed with continuous full-layer suturing using barbed sutures (3-0 V-LOCTM 180, Medtronic plc, Dublin, Ireland).
The patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day without complications. At the 6-month postoperative checkup, she had no complaints, such as bloating, pyrosis, and burp.
Histopathological examination showed a yellowish white SMT 8 × 8 × 5 mm in size with an unclear boundary, and necrosed insects were found at the core of the tumor. There was marked eosinophilic infiltration around the area. The final diagnosis was gastric granuloma caused by parasitic infection .