A 54-year-old Caucasian woman had a positive family history for hypertension and negative family history for malignancy, with hypertension controlled by enalapril and atenolol and open angle glaucoma controlled by latanoprost eye drops. She was diagnosed with immunoglobulin G kappa multiple myeloma and started bortezomib as a first line therapy for multiple myeloma. She received bortezomib as a single agent (1.3 mg/m2; total dose of 2 mg) via intravenous push once weekly for multiple myeloma. The treatment regimen was given in a non standard way without concomitant dexamethazone. She received Cycle 1 Day one, Cycle 1 Day eight, Cycle 1 Day 15 and developed isolated unilateral partially reversible left sided oculomotor nerve palsy on Cycle 1 Day 21.
The developed isolated unilateral partially reversible left sided oculomotor nerve palsy was graded as II according to National Cancer Institute's Common Toxicity Criteria Version 2.0, as there was partial weakness of levator palpebrae muscle power resulting in mild partial ptosis of the left eye and persistent impairment of the third nerve mediated extraocular muscle movement. This resulted in complete loss of medial movement 'adduction' of left eye, divergent squint and partially defective upward 'elevation' and downward 'depression' movement of the left eye. The objective weakness is mild, interfering with function, but not interfering with activities of daily living.
Management of this adverse drug event was by withdrawal of the drug bortezomib by omitting Cycle 1 week four (Day 22) of bortezomib and replacing it with an intravenous infusion of dexamethazone (8 mg) once daily for four days on Cycle 1 Day 22, Cycle 1 Day 23, Cycle 1 Day 24 and Cycle 1 Day 25. On Cycle 1 Day 27 good partial improvement of the oculomotor nerve palsy was noted and therefore Cycle 2 Day one of bortezomib was given. On Cycle 2 Day three there was strong reappearance of most of the signs of left sided oculomotor nerve palsy and despite reintroducing a dexamethazone 8 mg intravenous infusion once daily for four days on Cycle 2 Day four, Cycle 2 Day five, Cycle 2 Day six and Cycle 2 Day seven to ameliorate the signs of oculomotor nerve palsy, yet the response noted was not as striking as before and the improvement was nil leaving our patient with residual oculomotor nerve palsy. Eventually bortezomib was discontinued and our patient shifted to melphalan-lenalidomide combination therapy.