A 33-year-old woman with the dizziness as a chief complain. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) found a sellar lesion with a diameter of 18 mm invading into the bilateral cavernous sinus . The physician suspected it to be a pituitary adenoma. A normal pituitary gland was seen on top of the tumor. The posterior gland was found superoposterior to the tumor. Despite the tumor’s lack of impingement to the optic apparatus, she was recommended to have regular visits but were lost to follow-up later. Six years later, she noticed bilateral visual disturbance and visited the clinic. MRI showed an extensive growth of the tumor.
On admission to Kagoshima University Hospital, the patient had clear consciousness. Her vision was 0.3 in the right and 0.7 on the left. Bitemporal hemianopia was found on perimetry. Her serum sodium (Na) level was 127 meq/L. MRI showed a large tumor with a maximal diameter of 56 mm, involving the sellar, suprasellar, retroclival, and bilateral cavernous sinus regions and strongly compressing the optic nerve and optic chiasm . The tumor was slightly hypointense on T1-weighted MRI and hyperintense on T2-weighted MRI compared to white matter. The bilateral internal carotid arteries were completely encased. A postgadolinium scan showed a heterogeneous enhancement. The relatively well- enhanced thick bundle suggested that the pituitary gland was located in the upper left part of the tumor. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the tumor was slightly hyperdense . Neither bleeding nor calcification was seen. The sellar floor was remarkably thickened.
The assessments of the anterior pituitary hormonal function showed hyperprolactinemia (53.9 ng/mL) and growth hormone deficiency, but the other four hormonal axes showed normal secretory functions. There was no manifestation of diabetes insipidus.
Decompression surgery of the optic chiasm was conducted through an endoscopic transsphenoidal approach. The removal of the thickened sella and thinned fibrous tissue presumed to be a remnant of the dura mater revealed the tumor, which was basically fibrous and easy to bleed. Tumor removal was continued until the suprasellar arachnoid membrane and tough tissue consistent with a pituitary gland appeared, leaving the tumor in the cavernous sinuses. Postoperative MRI demonstrated the sufficient decompression of the optic chiasm and an intact pituitary gland . Postoperatively, a significant improvement of visual field deficit and normalization of vision (1.2 in both) was noted. The anterior pituitary function did not worsen. The blood prolactin level normalized (11.2 ng/mL).
Pathologically, the tumor was composed of a proliferation of round to oval neoplastic cells with scant to moderate cytoplasm and chromatin-rich short rod-like nuclei against a background of intercellular neuropil-like fibrillary matrix . Cellular pleomorphism was mild. There were a few ganglion cells accompanied by elongated cells. These cells were partly packed, showing a lobular arrangement separated by a fibrovascular stroma . The neoplastic cells and fibrillary matrix were immunohistochemically positive for neuronal markers, including synaptophysin , neurofilament protein , neuron-specific enolase, and NeuN chromogranin A . The neoplastic cells were also positive for arginine vasopressin (AVP) . The S-100 protein and vimentin were positive, mainly in spindle cells surrounding the fibrovascular stroma. They were negative for any anterior pituitary hormones, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), or thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1). These pathologic findings were suggestive of sellar neuroblastoma. The MIB-1 index was 6%.
A postoperative whole-body CT scan revealed a right ovarian cyst, which was later pathologically proven to be a simple cyst; otherwise, no other abnormalities were found. She underwent 50-Gy of intensity-modulated radiation therapy to the residual tumor due to hospital’s standard operating procedure, which has controlled its growth for the 3 years . The serum Na levels remained low postoperatively at 126–130 meq/L, which did not cause any disturbance in consciousness. She was diagnosed with the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion [SIADH]) at 12 months after surgery. The laboratory results were as follows: serum Na: 130 meq/L, osmolarity: 259 osmo/kg, AVP: 18 pg/mL, urinary Na: 96 meq/L, and urinary osmolarity: 507 osmo/kg. The patient had no hypoadrenocorticism, kidney dysfunction, and cardiac failure. She is currently working in a factory without neurological impairment or hormonal replacement.