A 42-year-old male was assaulted by four persons, and remembers that some of them jumped on his left knee. He was not sure about the exact mechanism of injury, as he stated that he was under the influence of alcohol. The patient presented with swelling of his thigh and inability to weight bear on the left leg. There was bruising and a palpable depression of the left quadriceps tendon. The patient was able to extend the knee, but not against gravity, with an extensor lag of 30°.
The patient reported that, 27 years before the present injury, he had been involved in a road traffic accident sustaining ipsilateral femur and comminuted patellar fractures. The femur underwent intramedullary nailing. The patella was removed, and primary repair of the extensor mechanism was performed. Six years later, the intramedullary femoral nail was removed. In the patient's past medical history, there were no other significant problems to note, and there was no history of quinolones intake. The patient had been generally fit and well.
Plain radiographs of the knee showed a depression in the soft tissue shadow anterior to the distal femur, extraosseus calcification along the tendon, and absence of the patella . Other imaging investigations were not performed, as the clinical signs were classical.
We elected to perform a primary quadriceps repair within 24 hours of the injury. A midline incision was made over the previous scar. A complete quadriceps rupture was noted approximately 3 cm proximal to the patellectomy site with a 2.5 cm gap . The previous extensor mechanism repair site was well healed. The medial and lateral retinaculums were intact. An end to end repair was performed using continuous, locked heavy absorbable sutures (size 1 Maxon-Monofilament polygyconate synthetic suture, United States Surgical, USA) in multiple layers . The ragged margins of the tendon were excised and sent for histopathological examination. This showed disorganisation of collagen fibrils and increased ground substance (mucin like material), lymphocyte infiltration, neovascularisation and fibrins at the rupture site. These findings were consistent with chronic hypoxic tendon degeneration following patellectomy , on which superadded changes from the rupture were found .
The repair was protected with a knee brace for 6 weeks. During that period, the patient was allowed partial weight bearing mobilisation with one crutch during the initial 6 weeks, and advised to wean it off gradually over a period of 2–3 weeks time . He was encouraged to put full weight bearing at the time of weaning the crutch. The knee brace was removed after 12 weeks. We advised him to refrain from work for 12 weeks. Post-operative recovery was complicated by a superficial infection which settled with 2 weeks of oral antibiotics. We encouraged the patient to start straight leg raise exercises with the knee brace, and gravity assisted passive knee bending from the 4th week. Physiotherapist started closed chain exercises at 8 weeks; and open chain exercises at 12 weeks, and were increased in intensity and duration at 24 weeks of surgery.
At 7 months from the injury, there was no extension lag, with a range of active knee flexion from 0° to 100°. Further flexion was restricted by tightness, mild discomfort and pain. The isometric extensor strength of the knee extensors was measured . The mean of three measurements was taken, and compared to the normal side. The knee extensor strength was (771 N) 44% less when compared to contralateral normal quadriceps strength (1386 N).
The overall functional outcome was measured using the International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) knee score. This was 121.6 before injury and 51.8 after surgery. A score of 100 is interpreted to mean no limitation with activities of daily living or sports activities and the absence of symptoms. The patient is unable to play football, run and jog, but he is able to speed walk, and has returned to his pre-operative work (which was reliant on his ability to drive) 6 months after this injury.