A 67-year-old Caucasian man presented to our referral center in January 2018 with a history of recurrent MFS of the neck. One year earlier, the patient had undergone inappropriate surgery, without preoperative core-needle biopsy, with microscopic positive surgical margins (R1 resection), in a non-referral center. The histological examination diagnosed a pleomorphic sarcoma, showing 30% of tumor cells positive for Ki-67. No postoperative treatments were provided.
At our first medical examination, a stiff, immobile, and painless 5-cm mass was observed on the left posterior neck. Neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 50 × 20 mm mass with initial invasion of the left paravertebral muscle . A positron-emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan did not reveal distant metastasis. A pathological re-examination of the histological specimen was performed, and a pathological reclassification as MFS was made.
The case was discussed in our multidisciplinary tumor board (MTB), where the decision was made for preoperative RT, with a total dose of 50 Gy (fractionated into 200 centigray/daily).
Post-RT MRI performed 1 month later showed a partial radiological response to treatment, with a mass measuring 22 × 15 mm .
In June 2018, a wide surgical resection including the left trapezium muscle, superficial portion of the neck splenius muscle, and levator scapulae muscle was performed with a planned macroscopic margin of a minimum of 3 cm. The defect was reconstructed by a contralateral trapezius myocutaneous flap. The size of the excised specimen was 17 cm × 11 cm × 4 cm .
Postoperative histological examination was negative for viable tumor cells, showing only a fibro-productive process with chronic inflammation and regressive aspects. The patient had a complete response to preoperative RT. After MTB discussion, no further adjuvant treatments were provided.
After surgery, the patient showed a mild reduction in free movement of the neck in all directions and movement of the shoulder (abduction: 30°; elevation: 30°; minimal possibility of intra- and extra-rotation); muscle strength evaluation was negatively influenced by pain (numeric rating scale > 5). He had a mild disability involving some daily activities such as dressing, hygiene, rising, and carrying.
The patient had a regular postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 4, without systemic or local complications.
No relapse occurred in the 24-month postoperative follow-up, and complete recovery of performance in activities of daily living was observed.