The patient is a 30-year-old female who presented with discomfort and pain in the right flank area. A lump was discovered during physical examination specifically located between the liver and right kidney in the abdomen. The patient had no personal or family history of chronic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, or coronary heart disease. Additionally, there was no history of renal masses, renal cell carcinoma, angiomyolipomas, tuberous sclerosis, or any similar conditions in the patient or her family. The physical examination revealed a negative Murphy’s sign for the gallbladder, and the spleen was not palpable. There were no apparent signs of edema in both lower limbs, and the nervous system appeared normal.
The abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, which included both plain and contrast enhancement, identified a cystic density lesion measuring 63 mm × 39 mm in the right kidney, which was classified as Bosniak III type. On January 12th, 2023, the patient underwent a right partial nephrectomy. The treatment route followed by the patient is summarized in .
The border of the cyst was still clear, and it protruded outward locally . Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the urology department for further diagnosis and treatment. Upon admission, the patient was diagnosed with a “right renal occupying lesion”. A gray-yellow-gray-white cystic tissue measuring approximately 6.0 cm × 4.5 cm × 2.8 cm was submitted for histopathological and Immunohistochemical examination. Histopathologically, the sliced specimen revealed a multilocular cyst with some cysts containing thrombus-like material. The cyst wall measured approximately 0.2cm-0.3cm in thickness . Immunohistochemically, the epithelial cells lining the cyst wall showed diffuse expressed of AE1/AE3 and PAX-8 , suggesting that the cysts may have resulted from cystic dilatation of collecting ducts that invaginated into the tumor. The compact subepithelial cellular stroma exhibited strong and diffuse nuclear labeling for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and cytoplasmic labeling for CD10. However, labeling for ER and PR was patchy in the smooth muscle-like cells. Additionally, HMB45 and Melan A , markers of melanocytic differentiation, were most intense and concentrated in the subepithelial cells, while HMB45 showed patchy labeling in the exterior muscle-predominant AML component. Meanwhile, SMA and Desmin were specifically labeled in smooth muscle-like cells. S-100 protein did not label any of the three components of the tumor, except for patchy labeling of subepithelial cells. The tumor exhibited a low proliferative index, with Ki67 labeling less than 1% of neoplastic cells. Furthermore, CA IX, CD117 (c-kit), CD34 (endothelial markers), and inhibin-a did not label any of the three components of the tumor. Based on all these findings, we diagnosed the predominantly cystic tumor as AMLEC, accompanied by vascular smooth muscle lipoma and an epidermal cyst.
Simultaneously, the patient’s tumor biospecimen and circulating tumor DNA in plasma (ctDNA) nearby the tumor were sent to Geneseeq Technology Inc. for NGS analysis. The NGS test covered approximately 1.53 Mb base pairs, including exons of 437 genes, fusion-related introns, variable splicing regions, and specific microsatellite (MS) loci. The test results provided information on point mutations, small fragment insertion and deletion mutations, gene fusion and copy number variations, microsatellite (MS) analysis results, and tumor mutation burden (TMB) information within the coverage range.
In the AMLEC tumor sample, a low TMB of 1.0 mutation per megabase (Mb) was observed, and no germline mutations were found when compared with ctDNA. Mutations were identified in a total of 20 genes, as detailed in , with additional information available in . Notably, no mutations were identified in four mismatch repair-related genes: MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. Additionally, the analysis revealed 10 polymorphic mutations associated with drug metabolism enzymes. Specifically, a nonsense mutation of c.2157T>A was detected in the 20th exon of the TSC2 gene. This mutation resulted in the substitution of the 719th amino acid from tyrosine to a stop codon, leading to premature termination of protein synthesis and the production of a truncated protein. The presence of mutations in these 20 genes suggests enrichment in pathways related to platinum drug resistance, PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, and nucleotide excision repair. These findings provide potential implications for targeted therapies and insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the development and progression of AMLEC .