A 28-year-old Chinese man had consumed a large amount of barbecued food and alcohol 7 days before admission to our hospital. He had felt abdominal pain after waking the next day, mainly in the upper abdomen. The position of the pain could not be described, and he gradually felt better without special treatment. He had had fever, abdominal pain, and pharyngeal pain 3 days before hospitalization, with his highest temperature reaching 41 °C. Our patient’s temperature then dropped after anti-infection treatment at his local clinic. One day before admission, his abdominal pain and fever reoccurred, mainly in the lower xiphoid process and upper abdomen. The abdominal pain, which was intermittent lacerating pain accompanied by back pain, was persistent and could not be relieved. He had nausea and vomiting, and the vomitus was the stomach contents. Our patient was then transferred to our hospital, and a physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38 °C, heart rate of 100 beats per minute, mild tenderness in the upper abdomen, mainly in the lower xiphoid process and left abdomen, no rebound pain, negative Murphy’s sign, and no pain on percussion in the liver and kidney areas. Laboratory data are shown in Table . A CT scan without contrast showed an irregular soft tissue mass near the pancreatic head in the retroperitoneal space. The lesion was uneven in the interior and surrounded by a blurred fat gap. There were multiple spots of high density with clear margins in the upper right of the lesion. Contrast-enhanced CT scans showed multilocular changes of the lesion, uneven enhancement of the cystic wall, slight enhancement of the adjacent duodenal wall, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes around the cyst wall. Gastroscopy revealed that the antral mucosa was rough and red and white in color with scattered patchy erythema. There was a deep fistula, about 0.3 cm in size, in the anterior wall of the duodenal bulb that was exuding white pus, and congestion and edema of the surrounding mucosa. A small amount of tissue around the fistula was removed, and pathological examination showed the tissue contained fibrous exudate and many neutrophils . Subsequently, with the consent of our patient’s family members, an endoscopic anastomosis clip system (OTSC) of the duodenal fistula was successfully performed. After the operation, an enteral nutrition tube was inserted, and nasal feeding provided. Empiric anti-infection, acid-inhibiting, stomach- protecting, and symptomatic supportive treatments were given. Our patient’s body temperature gradually returned to normal and fluctuated within the normal range. No abdominal pain, abdominal distension, nausea, or vomiting reoccurred, and urine and stool were normal after a prescribed diet. Our patient was observed to reach a stable condition. One week and 1 month after treatment, abdominal CT was reviewed and showed the volume of the lesion had gradually reduced and the edge was clear; however, there was no substantial change in the multiple high-density shadow spots on the upper right of the lesion.