A 39-year-old woman presented for evaluation of difficulty swallowing and epigastric pain. Her medical and familial histories were unremarkable. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a smooth elevated lesion located 19 to 24 cm from the incisor teeth . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a large tumor mass of low echogenicity in the esophageal wall. The tumor mass originated in the muscle layer, and we performed a boring biopsy of the tumor mass. However, we were unable to obtain a tissue specimen from the tumor.
A chest enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a tumor mass (39 × 28 × 56 mm) at the upper thoracic esophagus with internal heterogeneity. No metastasis to the lymph nodes or other organs was seen on the CT scan . FDG-PET CT showed a hypermetabolic appearance matching the tumor mass. The maximum standardized uptake value (max SUV) was 5.5 .
Magnetic resonance imaging of the chest revealed that the boundary of the tumor was clear and smooth. The mass exhibited isointensity or low intensity compared with the muscles on T1-weighted images and high intensity on T2-weighted images. There was no invasion into the surrounding tissue.
We performed endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy (EUS-FNAB) with the patient under general anesthesia. Because the specimen was small, we were unable to establish a definitive diagnosis. We suspected an esophageal schwannoma, leiomyoma, or gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST).
The patient underwent surgery because of her difficulty swallowing and our suspicion of malignant potential. We performed thoracoscopic surgery with the patient under general anesthesia and single-lung ventilation.
First, we attempted enucleation of the tumor. However, the mass was larger than 5 cm, and enucleation was difficult without creating an extensive defect of the esophageal wall. Therefore, subtotal esophagectomy was performed with thoracoscopic assistance.
The resected specimen measured 55 × 45 × 24 mm. The cut surface was solid milky white . Histopathological examination revealed spindle-shaped cells in a fasciculated and disarrayed architecture in the proper muscle layer. Immunohistochemical studies showed S100 protein expression and the absence of CD34 and c-kit protein expression. Nuclear division was inconspicuous, and the MIB-1 labeling index was <10 %. Finally, we diagnosed the tumor as a benign schwannoma. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she had no evidence of recurrence at the time of this writing.