A 13-year-old girl of South-East Asian ethnicity was referred to the vitreoretinal service at Sydney Eye Hospital for possible surgical management of a left bullous ERD involving the macula (with the eye in the primary position whilst upright). She had initially presented 5 months earlier with vision loss from a right bullous ERD involving the macula and a left limited inferior ERD. After extensive ocular and systemic workup, she was diagnosed with incomplete Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome . Despite treatment with high-dose intravenous corticosteroid, azathioprine and cyclosporin, her condition worsened with total ERD in the right eye and inferior ERD in the left. She underwent right conventional vitrectomy for total non-resolving ERD under the care of another surgeon, though no breaks were identified at the time of surgery: silicone oil was used as the vitreous substitute. Her vision postoperatively was right 20/200, and despite the subsequent addition of adalimumab, her left ERD progressed to involve the macula with a reduction in visual acuity from 20/20 to 20/63. Given the progress of the right eye, a decision was made to drain the left ERD surgically. Institutional approval was not required for this intervention, which was conducted after gaining the informed and unanimous consent of the patient and her parents.
As no breaks were identified on careful preoperative examination, an external drainage approach was planned. The case commenced with a 360-degree peritomy; the four rectus muscles were isolated in turn and slung with 4–0 silk sutures to gain external control of the eye (video). An inferotemporal paracentesis was created with a 15-degree blade: a 25G port was then introduced into the anterior chamber via a modified Seldinger technique , in which a port is slid over the top of a trocar placed within the paracentesis wound (video). An infusion line and cannula were inserted into the port and switched on (video). A trans-pars plana port was subsequently placed 4 mm posterior to the corneoscleral limbus superonasally and a chandelier used to provide intraocular illumination (video). The peripheral ocular fundus was carefully inspected under widefield view with a ReSite viewing system (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany) using a cryotherapy probe to indent the peripheral retina: no retinal breaks were present. An external drainage and depression device (“EDD”, Vortex Surgical, MO, USA), which features an extendable guarded 28G drainage needle, was connected to a 1 mL syringe and then used to indent the peripheral retina under direct visualisation. Once the resulting indent was observed in the inferior mid-peripheral retina (video), the intraocular pressure was increased to 60 mmHg to facilitate collapse of the choroidal vascular bed (and to promote hemostasis in the event of choroidal/sub-retinal hemorrhage) and the drainage needle was then extended bevel-side down. Subretinal fluid was slowly drained actively by an assistant: 1.2 mL was drained in total which was sent for laboratory analysis, including microscopy, culture, sensitivity (negative) and cytopathology (no abnormal cells identified). The needle was removed from the eye prior to the retina coming into contact with the drainage needle (video). The intraocular pressure was lowered to 35 mmHg, and the superonasal port was then removed and the site closed with 8–0 vicryl and the limbal infusion cannula with port was removed. The paracentesis wound was hydrated and self-sealed using balanced salt solution on a Rycroft cannula. The conjunctiva was closed with interrupted 8–0 vicryl sutures.
The patient’s retina was flat and attached on day one. She was maintained on adalimumab and her retina remained flat and attached at 6 months, with an improvement in visual acuity to 20/40 .