Ten months prior to the most recent presentation, a 68-year-old woman with pulmonary tuberculosis diagnosed during childhood, diabetes mellitus, and a heavy smoking habit presented to our hospital with a high fever (39.0°C) and sore throat. Physical examination revealed pharyngeal redness and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the neck. Detailed examinations revealed acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) of French-American-British subtype M0. Pre-treatment computed tomography (CT) revealed enlarged cervical and mediastinal lymph nodes that were suggestive of extramedullary involvement, and a PAU-like lesion in the distal aortic arch . She received remission induction therapy with cytarabine and idarubicin and was discharged. However, just before discharge, CT revealed that while the enlarged lymph nodes seemed to have shrunken, the aortic lesion appeared to have eroded deeper into the aortic wall .
Eight months prior, the patient was hospitalized again for consolidation therapy with high-dose cytarabine. At admission, unenhanced CT revealed that the aortic lesion had begun to form a convex surface against the outside, thereby developing into SAA . Six months prior, she was hospitalized for a third time for cord blood stem cell transplantation. Pre-transplant CT revealed further SAA enlargement ; however, no symptoms associated with the aortic lesion were observed during the clinical course.
Four months ago, she completed a series of AML treatments. After discharge, few inflammatory markers were noted occasionally, but no symptoms were associated with them, and they did not worsen . Furthermore, multidisciplinary team review for therapeutic interventions for SAA was postponed because of severely diminished physical strength.
At the most recent presentation, the patient complained of headache and lumbar pain lasting for 1 week. Disorientation and nuchal rigidity were observed immediately after admission; therefore, a lumbar puncture was performed. Chest CT revealed miliary nodules throughout the lung fields , and SAA had enlarged to 12.8 × 12.1 × 11.0 mm . On day 6 of hospitalization, the patient experienced sudden cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA); therefore, cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated, and 10 min later, she showed return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC). CT after ROSC revealed a Stanford type A AAD with a patent false lumen from the aortic root to the infrarenal abdominal aorta. Additionally, cardiac tamponade was considered to be the cause of CPA due to the accumulation of a large amount of bloody pericardial fluid ( and , Videos 1 and 2). Thereafter, spontaneous circulation was maintained without invasive approaches such as pericardial drainage. Although SAA grew rapidly, previous CT findings revealed no PAU-associated complications such as intramural haematoma, peri-aortic tissue involvement, or haemorrhage. Additionally, based on the CT findings, we could not determine whether SAA was the ‘entry’ point of AAD.
AAD was treated conservatively because her family denied emergency surgery. On the day of CPA, cerebrospinal fluid samples confirmed tuberculosis, and anti-tuberculosis treatment was initiated. During the anti-tuberculosis treatment, the patient never regained consciousness due to severe hypoxic encephalopathy. Thereafter, she was transferred to another hospital and died of unknown causes approximately 2 years after AAD onset.