The patient was a 33-year-old Iranian/Persian woman with a history of bilateral multifocal papillary thyroid carcinoma and left-sided cervical lymphadenopathy. She underwent a total thyroidectomy and treated with iodine 131 at a dose of 150 ml 3 years ago. Subsequently, she gradually was developed weakness, lethargy, facial swelling (moon face), and abdominal obesity. The patient's weight was increased from 70 to 113 kg over 3 years, and nutrition counseling did not control her weight gain. The patient was referred to Shahid Beheshti Hospital in Kashan, Iran. She was completed a consent form. The patient did not have a family history of thyroid disease or a malignancy. She was living in Kashan and was not an addict or a smoker. The patient was taking Levothyroxine (100 μg daily), Sertraline (100 mg bidaily), Propranolol (20 mg bidaily), and Respridone (1 mg bidaily). The patient did not have a history of steroid use. The patient experienced irregular menstrual cycles with intervals of 90 days and the duration of each cycle equal to 4 days. She had low-volume bleeding, and over time, the intervals between her menstrual cycles were increased. Eventually, the menstrual cycle was interrupted, and the patient was developed secondary amenorrhea. She was experienced mood swings, depression, and aggression during this period that did not improve despite treatment. Her blood pressure was 150/50, and her Body mass index (BMI) was 42. Hirsutism was observed on her face, breast, and around the navel. Purple striae on the abdomen, dryness all over the skin, multiple ecchymoses on the leg (easy bruising), a and muscle strength of 4/5 on both lower limbs were evident.
Firstly, laboratory tests, including Thyroid-stimulating Hormone (TSH), Follicle-stimulating Hormone (FSH), Luteinizing Hormone (LH), Prolactin, Estradiol, urine-free cortisol (24 hours), and overnight dexamethasone were requested for the patient . The screening tests of Cushing's syndrome were positive; therefore, the low-dose dexamethasone test was performed to confirm the diagnosis. The patient was treated for two days with 0.5 mg dexamethasone every 6 hours, and the cortisol level (8 AM) was above 50 nmol/L .
The cortisol level was 463 nmol/L; therefore, Cushing's syndrome was proposed for the patient. The ACTH level was measured to differentiate Cushing's syndrome from Cushing's disease. It was below 5 pg/ml, and the disease was considered as ACTH-independent Cushing's syndrome. An adrenal mass was observed in a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the adrenal gland . The patient underwent laparoscopic right adrenalectomy and was removed a mass with 3.5 cm in diameter and weighing 18 g. Pathologic evaluation was suggested the benign adrenal adenoma. The mass was a fatty tissue without necrosis and hemorrhage. During 6 days after surgery, the patient was treated with an injection of 100 mg daily hydrocortisone. She was treated with oral prednisolone (5 mg daily) after discharge.
After 4 months, most of the symptoms of Cushing's syndrome, including weight gain, menstrual irregularities, hirsutism, and abdominal striae were partially cured. The patient's blood pressure, electrolytes, and TSH levels were normal, while she was receiving prednisolone and levothyroxine 100 micrograms per day. No mass was observed on a CT scan of the patient's abdomen after three months; therefore, the surgery was successful.