A 60-year-old south-Asian male, with past medical history of poorly controlled blood pressure (BP) under an angiotensin II receptor antagonist (sartan), presented to the emergency department complaining of retrosternal chest pain that appeared the previous day. Vital parameters were relevant for elevated BP (left arm 178/108 mmHg, right arm 172/100 mmHg). Physical examination was remarkable for a 3/6 systolic murmur with point maximum at the third left lower sternal border. No radial-radial (RR) or radio-femoral (RF) delay was found. The dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial artery pulses were palpable bilaterally. Bilateral upper limb and thigh BP measurement did not show any discrepancies and the patient did not report any claudication. The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a complete right bundle branch block and left anterior hemiblock, as well as negative T-waves from V4 to V6 suggestive of ischaemia (, Figure A). High-sensitive cardiac Troponin T was elevated at 495 ng/L (normal value: <14 ng/L). As an acute coronary syndrome (ACS) was evident, the patient underwent urgent coronary angiogram through a right femoral artery access. The exam revealed an occlusion of the obtuse marginal artery (, Videos S1 and S2). Due to the small calibre of the vessel and the absence of functional repercussion in the ventriculography, a strategy of conservative management was chosen.
Furthermore, the descending thoracic aorta (DA) was noted to be tortuous when advancing the guidewire . Aortography confirmed this finding and additionally showed a dilated ascending aorta (AA) with an abnormal aortic valve opening (, Videos S3 and S4). A thoracic computed tomography (CT) angiogram performed subsequently ruled out an aortic dissection and confirmed the presence of a ‘kinking’ of the DA distal to the subclavian artery, with a <50% of narrowing relative to the diameter of the aorta at the diaphragm level . The diameter of the AA was measured at 40 mm. The patient was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit.
A transthoracic echocardiography performed on the following day showed a concentric left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) without any wall motion abnormalities (, Videos S5 and S6). The aortic valve was severely calcified with mild stenosis and mild regurgitation. The diameter of the AA was measured at 40 mm as well. A transoesophageal echocardiography performed later confirmed a Type I L-R BAV (raphe between the left and right coronary sinus) according to the Sievers classification, with a planimetric opening area of 1.8 cm2 (, Video S7). The narrowest diameter of the DA was measured at 11 mm as in the CT (, Video S8). As the angle between the proximal and distal part of the DA was too acute, no Doppler gradients were measurable.
The patient could be discharged a week following admission under dual antiplatelet therapy, statin, low-dose sartan, and low-dose beta-blocker, with optimal BP control (at discharge: left arm 132/78 mmHg, right arm 128/70 mmHg) under this regimen.