A 26-year-old male was referred to the department of interventional radiology for sclerotherapy of an aggravating large facial AVM. He was treated with endovascular sclerotherapy in four sessions over 2 years. His initial computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a huge AVM involving the left side of his face, jaw, tongue, neck, and left ear . His first external carotid artery (ECA) angiography revealed a very large AVM type IIIb , according to the Cho classification (Cho et al. ).
The procedure was performed in an angio-interventional suite under general anesthesia. Despite four sessions of sclerotherapy through transarterial approach and direct puncture, the AVM peak velocity was still high and some nidus was aggravated. We planned a transvenous approach to decrease the velocity of AVM and increase the efficacy of the sclerotherapy treatment. Access to the arterial and venous system was achieved by ultrasound-guided puncture of the right common femoral artery and right common femoral vein, respectively, using a micropuncture set (Cook Medical, Bloomington, Indiana). According to ECA angiography, we found the major drainage vein, a branch of the internal jugular vein. Then, the major drainage vein was catheterized using a 6-French Envoy guiding catheter (Cordis, Florida, USA) and 5-French headhunter catheter (Cook Medical, Bloomington, Indiana). Using this system, a micro-occlusion balloon (Optimo PB, Tokai medical products, Japan) was coaxially advanced, and venography using the microballoon catheter after inflation showed slower venous flow. Then we planned to use 1 mL of a 1:2 mixture of glue and iodized oil. Upon injection of the glue, inadvertent glue reflux occurred. We had no choice but to wait for the polymerization of the glue to prevent migration to the systemic flow. After a few seconds, we deflated the microballoon and tried to pull it out. However, it was stuck to the vessel wall due to the glue cast . We forcefully pulled it out again. Unfortunately, its shaft broke in the guiding catheter, and the stuck microballoon was still not separated. We filled the inner lumen of the guiding catheter with glue after flushing it with dextrose 5% and waited for polymerization to fixate the broken microballoon catheter inside the guiding catheter . Then we pulled out the guiding catheter. Fortunately, the stuck microballoon was separated , and two broken pieces of microballoon catheter were removed though femoral vein short sheath.