A 63-year-old male presented by ambulance with 3 months of dysphagia with solid and liquid food, 7 days of right lower rib cage pleuritic chest pain, and 5 days of constipation associated with nausea, vomiting, poor oral intake, and generalized weakness.
The patient has a history of moderately differentiated mid-esophageal invasive squamous cell carcinoma diagnosed nine months prior to admission, and received chemo- and radiation therapy for 7 weeks; patient refused surgery. Follow-up positron emission tomography-computed tomography and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with biopsy 5 months prior to admission were negative for esophageal cancer.
His chronic medical problems included essential hypertension, mixed hyperlipidemia, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and right pre-auricular stage II (T2, N0, M0) skin basal cell carcinoma treated with radiation therapy 2 years prior to admission, currently in remission. He had a personal history of tobacco use and quit 9 months prior to admission. Home medications included atorvastatin, fenofibrate, morphine sulfate ER, oxycodone/acetaminophen, and docusate sodium.
The serum calcium was 9.4 mg/dL at the time of diagnosis of esophageal cancer 9 months prior to admission, and was between 9.1 and 10.4 mg/dL until this admission. The serum laboratory results on admission are listed in . The corrected calcium for albumin was 17.1 + 0.8 (4–3.7) = 17.3 mg/dL. In the setting of low PTH and high PTHrP, his hypercalcemia was consistent with hypercalcemia of malignancy.
The patient was treated with IV hydration with 0.9% sodium chloride, zoledronic acid 4 mg IV once, and calcitonin salmon 400 units subcutaneous q12h for 3 days. Serial serum calcium on admission day 1 was 13.5 mg/dL; day 2, 12.5 mg/dL; day 3, 11.7 mg/dL; day 4, 10.4 mg/dL, and day 5, 10.2 mg/dL.
For further workup of hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia, 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] was measured and found to be 15 ng/mL (ref., ≥30 ng/mL). Calcitriol was tested and found to be 138 pg/mL (ref., 18–72 pg/mL). Because calcitriol was elevated, vitamin D supplementation was not pursued given the concern for inducing persistent hypercalcemia, despite the low 25(OH)D.
During investigation of the etiology of hypercalcemia of malignancy, CT chest with contrast revealed a large right pleural effusion, and multiple pleural and ipsilateral diaphragmatic coalescent soft tissue masses, which were new compared to the prior CT chest examinations. MRI brain with IV contrast revealed nonspecific white matter abnormalities and no brain metastasis. CT neck soft tissue and abdomen and pelvis with contrast revealed no esophageal mass or thickening; there was mild hepatic steatosis but no hepatic, pancreatic, or adrenal metastasis, and no lymphadenopathy. A double contrast barium swallow test was performed and showed the esophagus was normal in course, motility, and caliber without constricting lesions. A repeat EGD with biopsy showed a mid-esophageal ulcer with reactive squamous mucosa and no carcinoma. These findings were consistent with post-radiation esophagitis with a shallow esophageal ulcer and no in-situ esophageal carcinoma recurrence. The patient was started on a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and modified dysphagia diet, resulting in improvement in symptoms.
An ultrasound-guided thoracentesis was performed for his right pleural effusion and pleural mass, and 1,750 mL of serous fluid was drained. Chemistry study showed an exudative effusion by Light's criteria; cytology revealed reactive mesothelial cells, acute and chronic inflammatory cell and histiocytes, and no malignant cells. One month later, a video-assisted thoracoscopy with pleural biopsy was performed. The pathology revealed poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma with immunostains positive for AE1/AE3, p40, p63, and MOC 31, and negative for calretinin, TTF1, and CK7. Taken together, the patient was diagnosed with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma with right pleural metastasis. An indwelling pleural catheter was inserted for recurrent right pleural effusions requiring weekly drainage.
Upon discharge, patient followed up with oncology via telemedicine and home visiting nurse for hospice care. Due to the poor prognosis, no feeding tube was inserted. Three months later patient passed away peacefully at home.
This work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria .