The patient gave her written consent to the anonymous description and publication of her case report.
We present the case of an 84-year-old Caucasian woman suffering from a progressive impression fracture of the 11th thoracic vertebral body and severe pain of the left flank of several weeks’ duration. Prior to the patient’s current hospitalization, as reported here, a decompression and stabilization of the lumbar and thoracic spine had been performed 2 months before in a different neurosurgical clinic. In view of the clinical results and continuing severe pain, an extension of the preexisting spinal fusion from the 4th lumbar vertebral body to the second sacral vertebral body, including a cage implantation, was recommended.
The patient presented multiple preexisting conditions, including high blood pressure, diabetes mellitus, diabetic polyneuropathy, moderate valvular aortic stenosis, and restless legs syndrome. Further, the patient introduced herself as a member of the community of JWs. For this reason, she was transferred to the local department of anesthesiology to discuss blood-saving techniques as well as the risks accompanying the procedure, as she was not willing to receive any form of blood transfusion.
After the patient’s decision to undergo spinal fusion surgery, an interdisciplinary plan based on the three pillars of PBM was made to provide maximum security for the patient’s outcome.
Prior to surgery, the patient signed an informed consent document and was asked to decide which types of blood products would be compatible with her beliefs (Additional file : Table S1). Initially, the patient’s hemoglobin (Hb) level was 11.5 g/dl, which could be raised to 12.6 g/dl for the day of surgery by substituting iron-II-glycin-sulfate (100 mg/d).
Additionally, blood sampling was reduced to a minimum, and the surgical procedure was thoroughly and interdisciplinarily planned. Alongside with cell savage techniques, anesthetic management focused on the third pillar of PBM, aiming for cardiopulmonary optimization by using a machine learning monitoring tool and a hemodynamic goal-directed therapy (GDT) protocol. The Hypotension Prediction Index (HPI) was established by Edwards Lifesciences (Irvine, California, USA) and is certified in the United States and Europe for hemodynamic monitoring. It aims to predict phases of intraoperative hypotension (IOH, defined as MAP < 65 mmHg for at least one minute) up to 15 min before their onset. The scale ranges from 0 to 100%, indicating the likelihood of and remaining time to pending IOH . Our hypothesis was that unnecessary volume expansion could be avoided by using the HPI-based GDT because additional fluids would only be given when the patient would be volume responsive and simultaneously be at risk for IOH. This approach should therefore prevent unnecessary hemodilution.
The patient received a standard induction of anesthesia using sufentanil (0.52 μg/kg), propofol (1.67 mg/kg), and cis-Atracurium (0.21 mg/kg). The maintenance of anesthesia was performed as total intravenous anesthesia using propofol (6–12 mg/kg/h) as continuous infusion and sufentanil (0.1–0.3 μg/kg) as intermittent bolus injection. The total duration of surgery was 425 min. To compensate for blood loss, a mechanical autotransfusion system (CellSaver®, Haemonetics Corporation, Boston, USA) was used during the whole course of surgery.
For hemodynamic management, an HPI-based GDT-algorithm was used . Since unnecessary hemodilution, also in GDT-treated patients, would lead to an unfavorable outcome, especially in the presented patient, we chose a more fluid-restrictive GDT [, ]. First, before the induction of anesthesia, the baseline cardiac index (CI) as well as the stroke volume were determined by implementing an arterial line in the awake patient. If HPI was raised over 70%, hemodynamic intervention was performed according to the algorithm. More specifically, if stroke volume variation (SVV) increased over 14%, a colloid bolus injection using 100 ml of gelatin infusion (Gelafundine®, B. Braun Germany) was applied over 5 min. If HPI did not decrease, the injection was repeated until HPI declined < 80% or SVV < 14%, whichever occurred first. If HPI persistently leveled > 80% despite a successful fluid challenge (defined as SVV < 14%), CI was raised when it was below the baseline value with dobutamine (5 μg/kg/min, half dose if heart rate was raised > 100 bpm). If still no reduction of HPI could be achieved after successful fluid challenge and CI optimization, noradrenaline or theodrenaline/cafedrine (Akrinor®) was used to maintain a MAP > 70 mmHg.
By adhering to the GDT algorithm, a sufficient hemodynamic stability was achieved throughout the surgery. The patient received a total of 2500 ml colloid infusion, maximum rates of 0.13 µg/kg/min of noradrenaline, 0.5 ml of theodrenaline/cafedrine, and no further cardiac support medication. The patient never showed signs of low pH or negative BE despite a blood loss of 2.4 L . It was possible to reinfuse 1007 ml of the patient’s own blood that was saved by the autotransfusion system. To prevent hypofibrinolytic bleeding, tranexamic acid was infused intraoperatively, starting with a bolus of 20 mg/kg/h for 1 hour and continuing with an infusion of 4 mg/kg/h for the remaining time of surgery. Once bleeding started to intensify, point-of-care thrombelastography (ROTEM®, TEM Innovations, Munich, Germany) was used to detect coagulatory alterations, which resulted in the substitution of 3 g fibrinogen.
Upon admission to the neurosurgical intensive care unit, initial hemoglobin leveled at 5.6 g/dl and hematocrit at 0.15%, respectively, with a total measurement of erythrocytes at 1.8 tera/L. Even with anemia being present, the patient did not show elevated lactate levels, tachycardia, or arrhythmia. Coagulatory analysis showed a prothrombin time of 49%, an international normalized ratio of 1.5, and antithrombin III of 40% (of normal range). The patient immediately received 3000 International Units (I.U.) of prothrombin complex concentrate and 4000 I.U. on the first postoperative day. Further, 2000 I.U. of AT-III as well as 800 ml of 20% albumin, 100 mg of iron-III-hydroxide-Infusion, and 20,000 I.U. of erythropoietin (EPO) were substituted within the first hours after surgery and again on the first, second, and tenth days after surgery. Initially, a higher dosage (0.208 µg/kg/h) of norepinephrine was needed, but this could be reduced within 4 hours after the patient’s volume status was balanced.