In 1991, our patient, a 34-year-old Caucasian male, received his first renal transplant. He did well until 1994 when he had a successfully treated Banff IA rejection associated with non-compliance. After a long course of progressive chronic allograft dysfunction, he returned to dialysis in 1999. His maximal and pre-transplant panel of reactive antibodies was 44% Class I and 80% Class II HLA by screening flow beads (One Lambda, Canoga Park, USA). In addition, analysis of his serum 4 months before his second transplant demonstrated antibodies to HLA-DQ5 that would be present on his second transplant. In July 2005, a kidney from a teenage deceased donor was allocated to our patient because he was thought to have a zero antigen mismatch by conventional serologic assay. The T cell antihuman globulin (AHG) crossmatch and flow T cell crossmatch were negative. The B-cell flow crossmatch was weakly positive, with the molecules of equivalent soluble fluorochrome (MESF) difference of 2308. The threshold for a positive crossmatch was determined by performing a control study with 21 sera from non-sensitized male donors and was fixed at two times the mean plus a standard deviation. Flow cytometry median channel values were converted to MESF using Quantum™ FITC MESF (Low level premix)(QCAL) beads from Bangs Labs (Fishers, IN, USA). The flow crossmatch positive cutoff for our assay was 2254 for the T cell and 2169 for the B cell pronase crossmatch.
Figure shows the large amounts of serum anti-donor DQ5 antibodies immediately before transplantation and smaller amounts after transplantation. These antibodies were measured using antigen-specific beads from One Lambda and a Luminex analyzer (Austin, TX, USA).
After the transplant, our patient received rabbit anti-human thymocyte globulin, prednisolone, mycophenolic acid and tacrolimus. He was not treated with plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulin. He had excellent initial function and was discharged with a serum creatinine of 1.3 mg/dl. He had no episodes of rejection. His latest serum creatinine 2 years after his second transplant was 1.0 mg/dl.
Table shows the HLA typing for the recipient, as well as for the first and second donor kidneys. The second donor and the recipient were a zero mismatch at HLA Class I A, B and C; they had two allele mismatches at DR and DQ. Note that the first and second transplants shared the Class II HLA DQ 7 antigens.