A 60-year-old man was admitted to our hospital complaining of persistent upper abdominal pain associated with anorexia. The patient had a medical history of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia and systemic hypertension. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed large tumors in the liver and the pancreas. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) demonstrated an enhanced low-density area with a thin capsule and a tumor 110 × 90 mm in size in the right hemi-liver . CECT also revealed an enhanced mass of 70 × 56 mm in the tail of the pancreas, which seemed to directly infiltrate into the spleen .
The disease was diagnosed as a pancreatic tumor with a hepatic metastasis, or vice versa, while the latter was considered more uncommon than the former. Both the liver and pancreas were available as target organs for tumor biopsy, and the liver was chosen in this case. Two liver specimens were obtained using an 18-gauge needle under US guidance. Histological examinations by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining revealed that small-sized atypical cells with large nuclei had densely proliferated to form an acinar appearance . The tumor cells and their nuclei were consistent in size and acinar-like arrangement. Microscopic appearances were consistent with pACC, when immunostaining with trypsin was performed, and the cytoplasm was heterogeneously positive with trypsin as shown in Fig. b, which supported the diagnosis of hepatic metastasis of pACC. Tumor markers in the blood before chemotherapy were as follows; alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) 56.5 ng/ml [normal level: < 10 ng/ml], protein induced by vitamin K absence-II (PIVKA-II) 25 mAU/ml [normal level: < 40 mAU/ml], carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 2.3ng/ml [normal level: < 5.0 ng/ml], cancer antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) 34 U/ml [normal level: < 37 U/ml], duke pancreatic monoclonal antigen type 2 (DUPAN-2) 75 U/ml [normal level: < 150 U/mL], s-pancreas antigen-1 (SPAN-1) 27 U/ml [normal level: < 30 U/ml], neuron specific enolase (NSE) 23.6 ng/ml [normal level: < 16.3 ng/ml], and elastase 14,600 ng/dl [normal level: < 300 ng/dl]. AFP, NSE and elastase were higher than the normal range.
Although both tumors in the liver and the pancreatic tail to the spleen could be removed concurrently, the surgical procedure was regarded as having certain comorbidity risks if they were removed simultaneously. Additionally, favorable results were not highly anticipated without a waiting period to observe the biological behavior of the tumor. For these reasons, chemotherapy was planned prior to the resections of the liver and the pancreas instead of upfront surgery, and the modified FOLFIRINOX regimen was selected. After three courses of modified FOLFIRINOX, the tumors were markedly decreased in size: the hepatic tumor had shrunk to 47 × 45 mm (43% of the original area); and the pancreatic tumor had shrunk to 40 × 36 mm (57%), as shown in Fig. a, b, respectively. It was determined through CECT that the patient had a partial response according to version 1.1 of the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. No newly developed tumors were identified, and the infiltration to the splenic hilum appeared negative after three courses of chemotherapy. Elevated tumor markers were all normalized before the surgery: AFP to 4.1 ng/ml, NSE to 1.7 ng/ml, and elastase to 175 ng/dl. The surgical procedure planned before chemotherapy was indicated in the patient.
Three weeks prior to resection, percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization of the right portal branch was performed to increase the safety of the surgical procedures. The estimated future remnant liver volume was increased from 45 to 55%. The patient underwent extended right hemi-hepatectomy including the middle hepatic vein followed by distal pancreato-splenectomy. To resect the left prerenal fascia and left adrenal gland with safety margins, we performed posterior radical antegrade modular pancreatosplenectomy with lymph node dissection. The operating time was 6 h and 15 min, and the operative blood loss was 417 ml. No blood transfusion was necessary during the procedure.
As shown in Fig. a, b, the resected specimen of the liver revealed a 45 × 25 mm-sized white-colored tumor with a thin capsule in the liver. In the tail of the pancreas, a 15 mm-sized tumor was identified, which was surrounded by consistently scarred tissues adjacent to the splenic hilum that showed unclear boundaries.
Histological examination revealed that the majority of the liver tumor was replaced with fibrous scarred tissues, and tumor cells seemed no longer viable in the scarred area . The residual tumor cells seemed degenerative, and small-sized atypical cells with large nuclei formed cell clusters sporadically. Acinar-like arrangements and structures that were characteristic in the preoperative liver biopsy had disappeared. The histological appearance of the pancreatic tumor was composed of similar tumor cells to those of the liver tumor, while acinar-like structures were more frequently observed in the pancreatic tumor than in the liver tumor . According to the Evans grade, the efficacy of the chemotherapy was grade 3 for both hepatic and pancreatic specimens. As for the histological diagnosis, microscopic findings were consistent with those of pACC, with none having lymph node metastases. Immunostaining with trypsin revealed dense positivity in the cytoplasm . However, synaptophysin and chromogranin A were negative. These results supported the initial diagnosis of a hepatic metastasis of pACC. Not only shrinkage in size, but also histological degenerative changes demonstrated the excellent effects of FOLFIRINOX prior to surgery.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 14. The patient was prescribed S-1 administration for 6 months as adjuvant chemotherapy. More than 3 years after the surgery, the patient is doing well without any recurrent tumors in the liver or in the local region.