A 53-year-old woman had initially consulted a neurologist for treatment of somnolence and gait disturbances that had progressed for a period of one month. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a high signal lesion in the brain stem. Her past history of uveitis and concurrent anterior chamber uveitis lead to a diagnosis of neuro-Behçet's disease. She received corticosteroid pulse therapy with 1 g of methylprednisolone (mPSL) per day for consecutive 3 days. Since the first mPSL pulse therapy resulted in a minor improvement of the neurological symptoms, two additional courses of mPSL pulse therapy were administered, which resulted in only a partial response. In addition, the cerebral lesions had remained and the signal changes of the brain stem lesion had progressed afterward. Since her consciousness level worsened at 4 months after diagnosis, she was admitted to our hospital.
On admission, her neurological Glasgow coma score was E3 V3 M5. The light reaction of the bilateral eyes was attenuated and dysarthria was observed. The limb manual muscle test was grade 3 to 4 with increased tendon reflex and positive Babinski signs bilaterally. At that time, a number of swollen lymph nodes were palpable in the right inguinal region. Laboratory testing showed that serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) levels were highly elevated to 5,512 U/mL (normal range, 135–483 U/mL). Cranial MRI showed diffuse T2 high signal areas in the cerebellum, brainstem, and peri-lateral ventricle. However, contrast-enhanced MRI detected no contrast lesion. Positron emission tomography with 2-deoxy-2-[fluorine-18]fluoro-D-glucose integrated with computed tomography (18F-FDG-PET) revealed abnormal accumulation in the left cervix, mediastinum, pelvis, and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes . A biopsy of the lymph nodes in the left inguinal region suggested a diagnosis of malignant lymphoma or peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified . There was no evidence of lymphoma cell infiltration of the intramedullary and cerebrospinal fluid. Ophthalmological findings confirmed the presence of acute uveitis in the anterior chamber. Right post-corneal kelatic precipitation and anterior chamber flares were also observed. Rubeosis iridis was not observed, thus diabetic retinopathy and age-related macular degeneration were excluded.
We diagnosed her PCNSL manifesting as LC with inguinal LN lesions. Histological diagnosis was peripheral T cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified, based on a biopsy of the left inguinal LNs. Although PCNSL was diagnosed, a brain biopsy was not performed. Four courses of high-dose methotrexate (3.5 g/m2) therapy were administered, which resulted in temporary recovery of consciousness, but no improvement to the other neurological findings. Although cerebral micro-bleeds were repeatedly observed in the center of LC lesions during chemotherapy, no neurosurgical intervention was required. All nodal lesions were ancillary in tentative regression. The brain lesion was difficult to evaluate by MRI because of remaining degenerative signals and no clear lesions were found. Serum IL-2R (normal range: 121–613 U/mL) was constitutively decreased from 8,520 U/mL before chemotherapy to 740 U/mL after chemotherapy. Hence, the initial treatment was terminated. Two months later, the consciousness disturbances and progressed and cranial MRI detected recurrent lesions in the brain. The patient refused human leukocyte antigen evaluation and eventually died from LC.