A 69-year-old man presented with an asymptomatic gastric submucosal tumor (SMT) that was detected by screening upper gastrointestinal endoscopy at another hospital. Contrast-enhanced chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a mass on the gastric wall and a tumor in the right lung. Thoracoscopic partial resection of the right lung was first performed for diagnosis and treatment of the lung tumor, and the resected specimen was pathologically suspected as being a metastatic lung tumor from thyroid papillary carcinoma. He was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment for thyroid cancer and the gastric SMT. Evaluation of the gastric SMT by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy at our hospital revealed a flat protrusion without surface ulceration on the posterior wall of the middle third of the stomach . Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT demonstrated a well-enhanced solid mass at the greater curvature of the stomach, measuring 22 × 18 mm . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) showed a hypoechoic mass, 22 mm in diameter, arising from the muscularis propria layer . Endoscopic ultrasonography-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) identified spindle cell nests with inflammation of the stomach. Immunohistochemically, the spindle cells were partially positive for alpha smooth muscle actin (ASMA) and desmin, but negative for c-kit, CD34, discovered on GIST-1 (DOG1) and S-100. Although he was diagnosed as having a gastrointestinal tumor of the stomach, the preoperative histological diagnosis was inconclusive. At the same time, contrast-enhanced neck CT showed a nodule-aggregating lesion with calcification in the right lobe of the thyroid grand, and enlarged regional lymph nodes. He was diagnosed with papillary thyroid carcinoma and cervical lymph node metastasis by neck ultrasonography-guided biopsy. Thus, we planned to first perform surgery for the thyroid malignancy, followed by partial gastric resection. Histopathological evaluation of the resected specimen obtained by total thyroidectomy with radical cervical lymph node resection, performed by the department of head and neck surgery at our hospital, confirmed the diagnosis. Subsequently, we performed gastric wedge resection of the gastric SMT by laparoscopic–endoscopic cooperative surgery. Macroscopic evaluation of the gastric tumor showed a circular tumor, measuring 35 × 25 × 15 mm, with a whitish cut surface. The tumor invaded the muscular layer of the gastric wall, and the surgical margin was negative . Microscopic examination revealed well-circumscribed, spindle-shaped tumor cells, consisting of fibroblasts, myofibroblasts and eosinophils, accompanied by myxoid changes and collagen fibers mainly in the stroma, and identified in the gastric wall from the lamina propria to the intrinsic muscularis . There was no atypia, necrosis, nuclear fission, or calcification. On immunohistochemical evaluation, the spindle cells showed positive immunoreactivity for ASMA and partial positivity for calponin, but negativity for anaplastic lymphoma kinase-1 (ALK-1), S-100, desmin D33, c-kit, CD34, DOG1, CD56, and β-catenin, while the IgG4/IgG ratio was 10–20% and Ki-67 labeling index was 10–20% . The final diagnosis was consistent with an IMT originating from the stomach. The patient was uneventfully discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 7, and no recurrence of IMT was observed on CT at 29 months after surgery.