A 6-year-old white boy presented to our A&E department after a fall on his extended right arm from a height of 1 m. An initial examination revealed a severely displaced right elbow without penetration of the skin. A physical examination was hindered by his anxiety and pain. However, according to Liverpool Upper-limb Fracture Assessment, his neurovascular examination was reported as unremarkable. Palpable radial and ulnar pulses as well as no sensorimotor deficit were obtained. Radiographs in two planes showed a posterolaterally displaced supracondylar fracture of his humerus classified as Gartland type III . Surgical efforts under general anesthesia were initiated immediately. An initial attempt of closed reduction was unsuccessful. Hence, open reduction and internal fixation using four K-wires were performed immediately . No intraoperative complications were reported. On postoperative examination, arterial pulses were palpable in elbow extension with unaffected capillary filling. His arm was immobilized in a long-arm cast with elbow flexion of 90°. Reevaluation of his arterial pulses after immobilization was not documented.
Ten hours after surgery, he complained of acute pain in his right forearm. A physical examination revealed a coldness of his right forearm with poor capillary filling and absent arterial pulses while immobilized in the long-arm cast with elbow flexed to 90°. The cast was removed and Doppler ultrasound revealed that there was no pulse while his elbow was in flexion and faint pulses with his elbow in extension. The immediately performed revision surgery (transverse arteriotomy and exploration with a Fogarty catheter) revealed no arterial thrombosis. After extending the surgical approach a kinking of his brachial artery caused by an entrapment of the tunica externa in the reduced fracture was observed . It was released with microsurgical arteriolysis . Immediately, his radial and ulnar pulses were palpable with good capillary filling.
Postoperative immobilization was achieved using a long-arm cast with the elbow at 90° flexion for 6 weeks. Implant removal at 6 weeks was followed by intensive physical therapy to increase the range of motion (ROM). At the final follow-up examination at 3 months, the subjective elbow function had fully recovered. He had positive palpable pulses, a warm forearm with good capillary filling and, according to Flynn’s criteria [, ], an excellent recovery of elbow function as compared to the healthy contralateral side with 100 % ROM in extension/flexion 10-0-150°, pronation/supination 90-0-90°, and no loss of carrying angle were observed. Figure gives an overview of the case.