A 71 year-old Caucasian lady was referred to our hospital with a one week history of diarrhoea, vomiting, epigastric pain and pyrexia. She was obese with a BMI of 38.3 but no significant past medical history. She had been to Australia a month prior but was clinically well during her stay there. Blood inflammatory markers revealed a normal white cell count but a raised C-reactive protein (CRP) of 54 mg/l. Liver function tests were unremarkable apart from a raised serum alanine transaminase (ALT) of 70 U/l. Stool and blood cultures were negative. Clostridium difficile toxin was not detected. She was treated supportively for infective gastroenteritis and her symptoms resolved spontaneously after 3 days. She was subsequently discharged and an outpatient abdominal ultrasound was arranged to investigate the cause of the mildly raised ALT.
A week later, she was developed severe upper abdominal pain, rigors and pyrexia of 39°C and was readmitted to hospital. The abdominal ultrasound showed a thickened and inflamed gall bladder with no calculi seen. Inflammatory markers on this admission showed an elevated white cell count of 11 × 109/l, and an increased CRP of 72 mg/l. Liver function tests continued to be unremarkable apart from ALT which remained elevated at 80 U/l. Abdominal and chest X-rays were unremarkable. Arterial blood gases were normal. She was diagnosed with acalculous cholecystitis and treated with intravenous broad spectrum cephalosporins. Unfortunately her condition did not improve and she subsequently developed diarrhoea and bleeding per rectum.
Further investigations were then carried out including a flexible sigmoidoscopy which was unremarkable apart from diverticular disease in the sigmoid colon. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed moderate small bowel dilatation and some enhancement of the bowel wall, which raised the possibility of bowel ischaemia. Thrombosis of the proximal superior mesenteric vein was also noted.
An exploratory laparotomy was then performed and a 17 cm segment of the jejunum was found to be ischaemic and gangrenous. The affected section of small bowel was resected followed by an end to end anastomosis. Histology of the resected specimen confirmed full thickness infarction of the small bowel associated with thrombi in the mesenteric vessels, the overall appearance of which was consistent with acute mesenteric ischaemia. There were several thrombi within the mesenteric vessels, raising the possibility of embolic aetiology.