A 65-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a complaint of nausea and vomiting and reported no bowel movement or passing of flatus for 5 days. Upon further questioning, he recalled that he fell from a tractor while working in his farm 2 months earlier and sustained blunt trauma to his abdomen for which his initial evaluation revealed no serious injury except some bruises.
On physical examination, the patient was alert and responsive, his vital signs were stable, and dry mucous membranes were noted. Abdominal examination revealed distended abdomen, increased bowel sounds, and generalized tenderness without rebound tenderness, guarding, or any other significant findings. Fluid resuscitation and nasogastric (NG) tube insertion were initiated for a patient with a suspected diagnosis of intestinal obstruction. His initial lab tests on admission were normal except a mild increase in amylase level .
The patient underwent an upright abdominal X-ray and chest X-ray. On the abdominal X-ray, multiple air-fluid levels were observed . Both chest and abdominal X-rays revealed the niveau formation of the small intestine on the right side above the liver and right hemidiaphragm . Abdominal sonography reported the presence of dilated intestinal loops. Further evaluation with CT scan confirmed the presence of a few small intestinal loops behind the liver and also in the chest through a rupture in the right hemidiaphragm .
The patient opted for the surgery and exploratory laparotomy was performed. Some small intestine loops had gone behind the liver and through 4 cm rupture in the posterior aspect of the diaphragm into the chest. Displaced intestinal loops were relocated and no sign of ischemia or necrosis was observed. Afterward, the ruptured portion of the diaphragm was closed with Prolene 1 suture by using continuous suturing technique. No other complications were found.
The patient had no postoperative complications and he was symptom-free within 2 days. The patient was discharged after 4 days.