An 89-year-old gentleman with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department (ED) of a district general hospital with atraumatic right hip pain and inability to weight-bear. The patient had a long history of right hip osteoarthritis causing pain and functional limitation, for which he had been referred by his general practitioner to the orthopaedic team for consideration of total hip replacement three years previous. However, the pain experienced during the week preceding ED presentation was much more severe in character. Of note, he had been seen by his general practitioner in the week preceding ED attendance with intense right hip pain on weight-bearing and passive movement and had been referred to the elderly care team with a view to optimising pain management.
Plain film radiography obtained in the emergency department demonstrated a lytic lesion within the right femoral neck, intertrochanteric region, and proximal femoral metaphysis with evidence of cortical breach and progressive sunburst periosteal reaction.
The patient was admitted for further investigation and assessment. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis confirmed a bony lesion affecting both the right acetabulum and proximal femur with pathological intertrochanteric fracture and abnormal surrounding soft tissue. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were felt to be consistent with that of a primary bone tumor; tumoral necrosis was evident, and thigh muscles demonstrated oedema to the knee level. No lymphadenopathy was seen. Nuclear medicine scanning demonstrated avid uptake in the right acetabulum and proximal femur with cortical breakthrough and marked extension to the surrounding thigh compartments but no uptake suggestive of distant disease. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was not performed preoperatively.
Histological analysis of needle core biopsies obtained via a direct lateral approach under ultrasound guidance of the right femur was undertaken; the findings of which were in keeping with that of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Sections through the cores demonstrated tissue infiltration by large round blue cells staining positively for leukocyte common antigen, CD20, BCL2, and BCL6 and negatively for CD10, CD3, CD5, and cyclin-D1. The Ki67 proliferation index was high at approximately 80%. Interface fluorescent in situ hybridisation detected a BCL2 translocation but no BCL-6 or c-myc translocations.
This gentleman was transferred to Northern Ireland's Regional Trauma Centre where he underwent proximal femoral replacement with acetabular reconstruction, owing to the presence of pathological fracture as visualised on CT. Pathological analysis of the operative specimen demonstrated a tumor present within the medullary cavity with cortical, periosteal, and soft tissue involvements. The osseous resection margin was clear; however, the soft tissue resection margin was involved laterally. Histological analysis confirmed DLBCL of germinal centre phenotype staining positive for CD20, BCL6, and BCL2 and negative for CD3, CD5, CD10, MUM-1, cyclin-D1, C-MC, and TdT. The proliferation index was again high with MIB-1 of over 90%.
The patient received postoperative care in the intensive care unit where he required inotropic support ahead of ward transfer. FDG-PET undertaken two weeks postprocedure demonstrated high FDG uptake at the surgical site, but metabolically active disease at other sites was not seen.
He was discussed at the haematological multidisciplinary meeting postoperatively, and the diagnosis diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), NOS (M9680/3), was agreed. He was deemed stage IEA due to the involvement of contiguous bones. The patient embarked upon six cycles of R-Mini-CHOP (a regimen of rituximab with decreased dose cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone ), a regimen which is in widespread use within the unit amongst those greater than 80 years of age.
Throughout his R-Mini-CHOP treatment, the gentleman was able to fully weight-bear and made excellent progress with the rehabilitation team. Radiographically, implant alignment was satisfactory, and there was no evidence of prosthetic loosening. The patient subsequently declined radiotherapy treatment. Repeat FDG-PET was conducted five months following diagnosis; no further disease was demonstrated.