A 38-year-old woman was referred for evaluation of a low ALP level of 27 U/L (reference, 31-125 U/L) and a 5-year history of diffuse joint pain. Before her referral to endocrinology, she had a normal parathyroid hormone level of 41.30 pg/mL (reference, 14-64 pg/mL) with a calcium level of 9.9 mg/dL (reference, 8.6-10.2 mg/dL) . She reported a history of hypermobility in childhood, and previous medical records confirmed a medical history of Gilbert syndrome, vitamin D deficiency, thyroid nodules, essential tremor, and visual impairment. Of note, she underwent transsphenoidal resection of a pituitary cyst in 2004. She weighed 173 pounds, and her height was 5 feet and 6 inches.
The family medical history was remarkable for multiple family members with signs and symptoms of both HPP and EDS. Specifically, both of the patient’s daughters had flat feet, pes planus, and joint hypermobility. Her youngest daughter also exhibited joint pain and bowing of the legs. Similar to our patient, both of her daughters exhibited age-appropriate growth. Neither the patient nor her daughters experienced any motor or cognitive delay in development. Her daughters have not undergone genetic testing at this time but plan to test when they are older. Her mother shares similar characteristics of shoulder and knee hypermobility. Her sister and nephew are currently undergoing evaluation for a different subtype of EDS after having resulted in a confirmed ZNF423 sequence variation suggestive of this heritable disease. Additionally, her father and sister both have a history of low ALP levels with her sister’s most recent ALP level of 28 U/L.
On referral to endocrinology, she noted a history of joint hypermobility, diffuse joint pain, hyperextensible skin, pes planus, limb bowing, piezogenic papules on the medial aspects of her bilateral heels and muscle hypotonia of the lower extremities . She also reported a history of multiple finger and toe fractures and kidney stones. Based on her history and physical examination findings, repeat laboratory work, and a dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scan was ordered with a follow-up appointment in 1 month.
During her follow-up appointment, her dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry showed a bone density within expected range for her age with an anteroposterior spine (L1-L4) z-score of +1.5, left femoral neck z-score of +0.5, right femoral neck z-score of +0.2, total left hip z-score of +1.0, right total hip z-score of +1.4, and trabecular bone score of 1.503. Her 10-year major osteoporotic fracture risk was 1.7% . Repeat laboratory results indicated a low ALP level of 23 U/L and high vitamin B6 level of 24.4 ng/mL (reference, 2.1-21.7 ng/mL). Given her history of hypermobility, chronic diffuse joint pain, and laboratory results of low ALP and high vitamin B6 levels, the patient underwent genetic testing for both EDS and HPP, which was performed via saliva swab (PreventionGenetics). The results revealed a heterozygous sequence variation of the B4GALT7 gene and absence of the ALPL gene sequence variation.