A 28-year-old female, non-smoker and non-alcohol drinker, was transferred from a hospital to our institution’s emergency department by an ambulance for severe, acute abdominal pain. The pain was diffuse and progressively worsening over the past few days. It was associated with nausea and one episode of non-bilious, non-bloody emesis. She denied changes in her bowel movements, fever and chills.
The patient’s past medical, surgical and family history were non-contributory, except for a history of episodic, recurrent, vague abdominal pain that occurred every few months over the past few years prior to presentation and was responsive to analgesics. The patient was not taking medications nor using illicit drugs.
On physical examination, the patient was in acute distress, screaming in pain. She had a heart rate (HR) of 126 beats per minute (bpm) and a blood pressure of 107/85. Her abdomen was diffusely tender to palpation, tense and distended.
The patient’s blood work was pertinent for metabolic and lactic acidosis: pH 7.29, bicarbonate 15 mEq L−1, and lactic acid 3.69 mmol L−1. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen and pelvis was done at a peripheral hospital 3 h prior to presentation and was reviewed by our team. It showed right-to-left inversion of superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and vein, as well as swirling intestines, consistent with malrotation and midgut volvulus . Due to the patient’s unstable condition, we forfeited further investigations, based our judgement on the CT imaging done at the previous hospital and brought in by the patient, and rushed her for operative exploration after obtaining the patient’s consent.
Under general anesthesia, exploratory laparotomy was done by an attending general surgeon and a chief resident with 5 years of specialized training. It revealed bluish discoloration of the small bowels with areas that were significantly dark . The mesentery was twisted, resulting in secondary ischemia . The bowels and mesentery were untwined, which caused the intestines to resume their healthy color and peristalsis. However, a length of about 40 cm remained borderline-ischemic, marked with punctate hemorrhage, yet peristaltic with positive Doppler signal. Thus, we preferred to have a second look in 24 h.
Meanwhile, the veins along the ascending and transverse mesocolon were noted to be tortuous. We avoided ligating these tortuous veins in case they were serving as an alternate drainage for the small bowel, which instead would cause congestion and worsening of small bowel ischemia. Ladd's bands were then excised, and the abdomen was closed with Bogota bag after irrigating it with warm water.
Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit (SICU), where she received vasopressors and antibiotics. Her laboratory workup showed leukocytosis (WBC 11600, 85%) and persistent metabolic and lactic acidosis (HCO3− 14, lactic acid 4.7 mmol L−1). Six hours postoperatively, the patient developed decreased urinary output, worsening abdominal exam and exacerbated lactic acidosis (lactic acid 7.13 mmol L−1). Tissue reperfusion injury or necrosis of the borderline segment of the small intestines were suspected, therefore, the patient underwent emergent re-exploration.
Intraoperatively, the small intestine that showed borderline viability in the first surgery, looked viable, except for a 20 cm stretch whose viability was still questionable. The majority of the bowel resumed Its viable color, peristalsis and had palpable mesenteric pulses . Another laparotomy was planned in 48 h.
Over the next 48 h, the patient was hemodynamically stable, and her laboratory workup normalized. In the last laparotomy, all the bowels were viable without signs of persistent ischemia. Ladd procedure was completed; small bowel mesentery was further broadened; its serosa was fixed to the retroperitoneum and the appendix was removed. The abdominal wall edges could not be fully approximated; thus, the defect was closed using 30 × 30 cm Vicryl mesh. Finally, an abdominal binder was applied postoperatively. The remaining hospital stay was noneventful; the patient was discharged home 5 days later.
The patient was initially followed-up clinically every few weeks, then every 6 months for a total of 18 months. Patient has been doing well, tolerating diet and gaining weight. She has developed, however, a small, reducible midline incisional hernia with minimal discomfort, despite adhering to the abdominal binder and avoiding heavy lifting for 6 months as we recommended. Nevertheless, the patient has been satisfied with the outcome.