A 32-year-old active man was referred to our clinic complaining of persistent (4 months duration) numbness of the right lower limb, without any low back pain. The patient had no history of medical problems including symptoms of back pain. The only event, possibly related to the present complaints, was an adductors injury 15 years previously, suffered while playing basketball. The large swelling, which developed at that time, was treated by a few days of bed rest. Since then the patient had been athletically active and he was in training for at least 4 days per week.
The numbness was becoming worse after prolonged sitting and the patient mentioned a feeling of relief while standing or even walking. Training did not affect the intensity of the symptoms.
The Lasegue's sign was positive (in 25° of right hip flexion) and there was a sensory deficit on the dorsal surface of the right foot, to the first interdigital space. Motor weakness or reflex disturbance did not occur and the lumbar spine had a free and painless range of motion. In addition, examination of the hip, pelvis and spine did not indicate any pathology.
Plain anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the lumbar and pelvic areas revealed a normal lumbar spine but also a sizeable global bony mass just below the ischial tuberosity, in contact with a smaller mass. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging scans revealed two heterotopic bone masses within the muscles. Electromyography findings revealed deep peroneal nerve dysfunction accompanied with pathological measurement of f-wave latency. A whole body technetium bone scan was normal.
An operation for nerve exploration and heterotopic bone removal was planned. A posterolateral approach of the right hip was performed. During the procedure, the joint capsule was preserved intact. The sciatic nerve was found to be bluish, distorted and compressed in an hourglass fashion around the larger (4 cm in diameter) heterotopic bony mass. Another smaller bony mass of 4 cm diameter was found behind the nerve. Each mass was enclosed in a fibrous capsule, which, in the case of the larger mass, could not be easily removed because of the presence of strong fibrous bands connected to the sciatic nerve.
Both heterotopic bone masses were dissected and removed. The sciatic nerve was left bluish, lying in a waved manner within the local muscles. Histopathological examination reported the presence of mature bone tissue.
Weight bearing started during the second postoperative day. Symptoms decreased during the third postoperative month and the deep peroneal sensory dysfunction was fully recovered 1 month later. This recovery was documented clinically and by electromyography. The patient received biphosphonates (disodium etidronate, three times daily) for 6 months to avert the recurrence of heterotopic bone formation.