A 77-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital because of “diarrhea and urine having fecal material for 7 years”.
Seven years before presentation, the patient experienced diarrhea and frequent and urgent urination, accompanied by urine having fecal material with no obvious cause. He was admitted to the local hospital. Colonoscopy showed a fistula 15 cm away from the anus, and a colovesical fistula was considered. Surgical treatment was suggested, but the patient refused surgery because the symptoms did not significantly affect his quality of life at that time. Recently, the patient came to our hospital due to worsening of the symptoms of frequent and urgent urination. The patient did not receive any other trauma or treatment during the period between refusing the surgery and its acceptance.
The patient had hypertension and diabetes for many years but had no history of trauma or surgery.
There was no specific family history.
The patient had some mild tenderness in the lower abdomen. Percussion of the abdomen revealed dull percussion sounds.
Routine blood test: White blood cell (WBC) 7.9 × 109/L, hemoglobin (HBG) 127 g/L; Stool routine test (-); Urine routine test: WBC (+++), red blood cell 945/H, WBC 1277/HP.
Colonoscopy: A fistula approximately 1.5 cm in size could be seen involving the sigmoid colon 20 cm from the anus. The endoscope could pass through the fistula, and the bladder mucosa could be seen. Another fistula with a size of approximately 1.2 cm could be seen 15 cm away from the anus. This suggested multiple colovesical fistulas . Cystoscopy showed a high turbidity of the urine in the bladder, with a large amount of feces visible, and the wall of the bladder was edematous. A fistula could be seen in the lateral wall of the bladder. Both ureteral orifices were fissured, but the flow of urine was clearly visible . Abdominal pelvic computed tomography (CT) showed that the appendix was not clearly visible. The distal sigmoid colon-cecum, right posterior to the top wall of the bladder-sigmoid colon, and middle sigmoid colon-cecal wall contained adhesions, and fistulas could be seen among these structures. A gas density shadow could be seen in the bladder. The involved intestinal wall and bladder wall were thickened, and a contrast-enhanced CT scan showed enhancements . In view of the previous consideration of a possible colovesical fistula and the complexity of the patient's condition, we considered a CT examination directly rather than a plain film or ultrasound. Plain films, ultrasound, fistulography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were not performed later because the CT scan provided comprehensive information.