An 81-year-old man was presented with the right arm paresis. He had a medical history of pulmonary tuberculosis when he was in junior high school. His recent medical history included a 6-month course of immunosuppressants, and steroids prescribed for ulcerative colitis, and he was taking steroids until 2 weeks before coming hospital. In addition, for the past 3 months, he has been taking four antituberculosis drugs (isoniazid 300 mg, ethambutol hydrochloride 750 mg, pyrazinamide 1.2 g, and rifampicin 450 mg) for relapse of latent pulmonary tuberculosis. During the same time, cervical lymph node biopsy revealed papillary thyroid cancer (Stage IIB, cervical lymph node metastasis), and surgical treatment was considered.
Symptoms were difficulty in writing and weakness in his right-hand grip, and when it became difficult to raise his right upper limb, he presented to the hospital.
On admission, his height was 171 cm, weight was 62.8 kg, blood pressure was 161/89 mmHg, body temperature was 36.5°C, and oxygen saturation was 98% (room air). His consciousness was clear, and neurologic findings revealed right mouth ptosis, dysarthria, and right upper limb paresis (manual muscle test [MMT] Grade 4/5). Blood test results were leukocytes 3010/μL, hemoglobin 9.8 g/dL, platelets 183,000/μL, aspartate aminotransferase 29 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 20 U/L, blood urea nitrogen 17 mg/dL, serum creatinine 1.15 mg/dL, C-reactive protein 1.37 mg/dL, D-dimer 2.3 μg/m, carbohydrate antigen 19–9 51.3 U/mL (normal, <37.0 U/mL), cancer antigen 125 63.2 U/mL (normal, <35.0 U/mL), HIV antibody 0.05 S/CO(<1.00 S/CO), and HIV antigen/antibody 0.17 S/CO (<1.00 S/CO). The tuberculosis DNA-loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) test and sputum mycobacteria smear were positive. Cerebrospinal fluid test results were glucose 68 mg/dL, total protein 43.7 mg/dL, and cells 4/μL; cerebrospinal fluid culture was negative.
Chest radiography showed patchy shadows and the previous tuberculosis with calcification in the lower right lung lobe; however, no obvious exacerbation was observed after the start of antituberculosis drug . Head computed tomography showed a low-density lesion in the left precentral gyrus . The lesions showed high intensity on a diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), low intensity on T1-weighted image (T1WI), and high intensity on T2-weighted image (T2WI); also, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image showed an area of high intensity around the lesions [-], and T1W-MRI with administration of gadolinium showed two ring-enhanced lesions that was major axis of 15 mm and continuous with the dura mater [ and ]. No cranial bone lesions were found on either CT or MRI.
Because the patient had a cancer and was taking immunosuppressive drugs and steroids, metastatic dural tumor and bacterial brain abscess were suspected, and surgery was considered for diagnosis and treatment. However, because the tuberculosis DNA-LAMP test and sputum acid-fast bacillus smear were positive, the risk of spreading tuberculosis infection during the perioperative period was considered, so conservative treatment was selected using antibiotic administration to address the first diagnosis considered, bacterial brain abscess.
Seventeen days after the start of the antibiotic, the right arm paralysis worsened to MMT 1/5, and the imaging findings showed no improvement for the contrast-enhanced lesions or peritumoral edema. At this point, the sputum acid-fast bacillus culture taken at admission was confirmed as negative, so the risk of perioperative infection spread was judged to be low, and craniotomy was performed on the hospital day 18.
When the dura mater just above the contrast lesion was incised, the lesion was easy to peel off from dura, but there was a finding that part of the dura was infiltrated. The boundary with the normal brain was unclear and the adhesion was strong, making it difficult to peel the tumor off the brain. When the contents of the cyst were punctured and aspirated, a liquid suspected to be white turbid pus was collected . The area that pathologically diagnosed dural infiltration was resected and periosteum was used to repair the dura mater. Pathologic findings showed granulomatous tissue with inflammatory cell infiltration, mainly composed of neutrophils and lymphocytes, and necrotic foci were observed in some areas . Granuloma formation and inflammatory cell infiltration were also observed in the dura mater . Bacteria were not detected in the culture test, and a positive image was observed by Ziehl–Neelsen staining . Therefore, the diagnosis was determined to be tuberculous brain abscess.
The paralysis of the right upper arm gradually improved postoperatively and recovered to MMT 5/5 at postoperative week 2. Head T1WI MRI with gadolinium showed no residual enhanced lesion, and FLAIR showed reduction of the peritumoral high-intensity lesion . The four antituberculosis drugs were started preoperatively and were continued. Pyrazinamide, ethambutol hydrochloride, isoniazid, and rifampicin were administered for 2, 6, 12, and 12 months, respectively. The patient was discharged on the hospital day 35. Since then, no recurrence has been observed with steroid after 1 year without antituberculosis drugs.