A 39-year-old woman without any history of trauma or breast disease presented at Hospital Fêmina with a progressive painful swelling of the right breast that she had first noted one month earlier. Upon physical examination, she presented several signs of severe infection such as high fever, chills, unstable mental state and lethargy. Breast examination revealed a large painful mass involving both lower quadrants of the right breast. Laboratory tests showed anemia (hemoglobin 8.5 g/dl) and a high white blood cell count (12,000/mm) with a marked left shift. A mammogram demonstrated an irregular abnormality measuring 2.5 × 3.3 × 2.6 cm in the right breast, which was classified as BIRADS 5 . Breast ultrasound showed a 3.5 cm irregular mass containing a fluid accumulation . An ultrasound-guided core biopsy was then performed, and this revealed atypical ductal hyperplasia with accentuated pleomorphism.
After admission to the hospital, the patient suffered rapid deterioration of her general clinical condition. Within 24 hours, she showed overt signs of sepsis, despite the use of systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics. Since no other source of infection was identified, she was subjected to an urgent exploration of the right breast. During the procedure, a large mass extending from the lower mammary quadrants up to the retro-areolar region was identified. The appearance of the lesion was atypical, with imprecise limits and a large central cavity containing necrotic material. A biopsy of the capsule of this lesion was obtained. After surgical debridement of this material, the patient started to present improvements in all the inflammatory signs and symptoms.
Histopathological analysis on the surgical biopsy revealed an undifferentiated carcinoma with extensive areas of necrosis. Additionally, immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated high expression of cytokeratin (34bE12) within the tissues, which was compatible with a diagnosis of epidermoid carcinoma of the breast. The breast tumor profile was negative for estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors and HER2/neu overexpression.
In view of the pathological findings, the patient underwent modified radical mastectomy with resection of the residual lesion in the right breast three weeks after the first surgery. Histopathological analysis on the surgical specimen demonstrated a poorly differentiated epidermoid carcinoma, which did not involve the breast skin . No metastases were detected in the 13 axillary lymph nodes that were resected. After postoperative recovery, the patient was referred for complementary radiotherapy to the chest wall. She did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy. She remains free of disease two years after the definitive surgical treatment.