A 37 year old male and current smoker (1 pack per day) with a history of prostate rhabdomyosarcoma at age 2 treated with partial resection and high dose external beam radiation presented to the emergency department (ED) with fever, groin pain and abdominal distension. His history was notable for numerous complications including bilateral osteonecrosis of the hip, lifelong complete urinary incontinence, a dense rectal stricture causing chronic colonic dilation and critical lower extremity ischemia due to bilateral iliofemoral disease. He had undergone 45 procedures to address these complications. He was initially managed conservatively for intestinal obstruction secondary to a rectal stricture. Rectal dilation was performed. Subsequently, he developed MSSA (methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus) bacteremia and an abscess was noted in his left thigh (adductor region). The abscess was drained under ultrasound guidance by the interventional radiology team, and the drain was removed after a week. A month later, he presented to the ED with fluid draining from the former site of the IR drain. The fluid was found to be urine, with creatinine of 30.9 mg/dL. A Foley catheter was placed, and retrograde urethrogram (RUG) showed a urethrocutaneous fistula from the bulbar urethra to the left thigh . Cystoscopy and subsequent biopsy of the fistula revealed no malignancy. Given the need of serial rectal dilations for his chronically dilated large bowel, the patient was formally recommended a permanent colostomy, but he declined. He was discharged with catheter in place and the fistula site dry.
As definitive treatment for the fistula, an ileal conduit urinary diversion with partial cystectomy was done. The patient was discharged postoperatively on day 12, with fistula dry and scant discharge per urethra. Two months after this surgery, the patient developed a cold lower limb for which he underwent a successful axillary-femoral artery graft thrombectomy. The next month, he also underwent a major hip joint reconstruction. 8 weeks later, he developed fever and chills followed by passage of feces per urethra. The next week, he developed fecal drainage from the left thigh as well. A RUG was performed and revealed a rectourethral fistula . To treat this rectourethral fistula an end colostomy with distal mucus fistula was performed. Drainage from the urethra and thigh fistula persisted despite the surgery. Proctoscopy showed a tight rectal stricture at 8 cm. Colonic irrigation through a red rubber tube, passed through the distal mucus limb of his colostomy was done with the aim of clearing out the stool in his distal colon from his thigh fistula.
The cutaneous fistula remained dry for several weeks. Leakage per rectum remained minimal. He then reported passage of sutures per urethra and discharge of straw-colored peritoneal fluid from both the urethra and thigh fistulae. As a temporary measure, he underwent intraoperative cystoscopic identification of the fistula site and urethral bulking therapy using a dextranomer and hyaluronic acid (Deflux®, Salix Pharmaceuticals, Raleigh) applied to the fistula site. Debridement of the left groin fistula tract, and negative pressure wound therapy placement to control drainage from the peritoneo-urethral fistula was also done. Postoperatively, the drainage from the thigh and urethra persisted, so he underwent takedown of the previous descending colostomy and mucus fistula, descending colectomy and proctectomy, creation of a new permanent colostomy and simple cystectomy. As drainage still persisted after this, his urethra was closed perineally proximal to the fistula, and the defect was reinforced with a pedicled rectus femoris muscular flap. His incisions have healed well, and he no longer has drainage 5 months after surgery.