A 61-year-old man, who was diagnosed with HCCA after an endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage for obstructive jaundice, was referred to our hospital. Laboratory tests showed that the patient’s total bilirubin, aspartate transaminase, alanine aminotransferase levels were 1.2 mg/dl, 56 U/L, and 161 U/L, respectively. Levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) were 3.3 ng/mL and 40.4 U/mL, respectively. Percutaneous transhepatic bile duct drainage for the left branch of intrahepatic bile duct and cholangiography showed that biliary tract was obstructed at the hilum . Imaging study indicates that the tumor was classified as type IIIB HCCA according to the Bismuth-Corlette classification system (data not shown) . The patient received an extended left hemi-hepatectomy and caudate lobectomy with lymphadenectomy and extrahepatic bile duct resection . Proximal margin of the right hepatic duct and distal margin of the common bile duct were negative for malignancy. A reconstruction was performed with Roux-en-Y retro-colic hepaticojejunostomy. The pathological findings revealed moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . There were no lymph node metastasis and vascular invasion. The pathological tumor staging was stage II, T2aN0M0, according to the UICC/AJCC seventh edition staging system . After the operation, he recovered and was discharged without any complications.
Thirty-eight months after the operation, CEA and CA19-9 levels had elevated, and peritoneal dissemination was detected by enhanced CT and positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) . The patient received chemotherapy with tegafur-gimeracil-oteracil-potassium (S-1) and gemcitabine (GEM). Chemotherapy controlled the recurrence of peritoneal dissemination of HCCA well over 50 months. Since he had grade 3 appetite loss, the amount of chemotherapy gradually decreased and he decided to take only S-1 70 months after the initial chemotherapy. Therefore, tumor markers gradually increased, and bowel obstruction occurred 117 months after the initial surgery . Since the recurrent tumor was localized and obstruction needs surgical approach, the patient received the resection of the transverse colon with peritoneal dissemination. Two localized tumor nodules were resected individually. These tumors were diagnosed pathologically as metastasis of well-differentiated HCCA since immunohistochemical staining revealed that the disseminated tumors were CK7 positive and CK20 negative . In addition, abundant CD8+ T cells were found in the tumors . After the resection of the metastases, CEA and CA19-9 dropped to almost normal levels . The patient was discharged without any complications and has been free from recurrent disease for 6 months.