In January 2018, a 75-year-old man with medical history of chronic hepatitis C, hypertension, hyperuricemia, and chronic kidney disease, that is, nephrosclerosis, was admitted to our institution. He received direct-acting antiviral agent therapy for HCV infection and achieved a sustained virological response in March 2016. In October 2016, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed a small dysplastic nodule in segment 8 of the liver. After 1 year, in October 2017, a right adrenal gland tumor appeared, and the lesion showed rapid growth with an IVC tumor thrombus. In January 2018, he was referred to our hospital. Laboratory values were almost normal except for a mild anemia (hemoglobin 11.0 g/dl) and elevated levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) (56.8 ng/ml; L3% 52.3%) and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II (PIVKA-II) (1228 mAU/ml); however, carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 levels were normal. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 9.9%, the Child-Pugh score was 5 (grade A), and the degree of liver damage was class A. Triple-phase CT of the abdomen revealed an approximately 1.5-cm irregularly shaped mass lesion in the segment 8 of the liver and a right adrenal gland tumor (3.0 cm in size) having IVC tumor thrombus . A contrast-enhanced ultrasonography indicated a defect on the Kupffer phase in segment 8 . A gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid magnetic resonance imaging also showed a defect on the hepatobiliary phase at around the liver tumor and high intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging at around the right adrenal tumor . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography (FDG-PET) revealed abnormal accumulation (maximum standard uptake value 5.6) in the adrenal tumor but no abnormal accumulation in the liver . Then, he was diagnosed with an HCC (staged as cT1N0M0; cStage I) and a right adrenal carcinoma with IVC thrombus (staged as cT4N0M0; cStage IV). At this time, we suspected double cancers. Therefore, the patient underwent partial hepatectomy for the tumor in segment 8, right adrenalectomy, and IVC tumor thrombectomy. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 8.
However, follow-up FDG-PET at 3 months after the surgery showed multiple recurrences (left adrenal gland, left supraclavicular lymph node, sacral bone, and left femur). Then, intrahepatic multiple recurrences, multiple pulmonary metastases, and peritoneal dissemination emerged. Both AFP and PIVKA-II levels have rapidly increased. The patient died of cancer 8 months after the operation despite of molecularly targeted therapy using lenvatinib (Eisai Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan).
The resected specimens are shown in Fig. a (liver) and Fig. b (right adrenal gland with IVC thrombus). Macroscopic pathological finding of the resected liver tumor specimens showed a multinodular shape . The formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimen block was cut into 2.5-μm-thick sections, which were mounted on glass slides for hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Histopathological evaluation by HE staining revealed that the liver tumor was a moderately differentiated carcinoma with round nuclei and eosinophilic cuboidal cytoplasm and showed a trabecular or pseudoglandular pattern, so we diagnosed the liver tumor as HCC . We found it difficult to clearly confirm positive findings of the vascular structure, so we made a histological diagnosis that there was no vascular infiltration. On the adrenal tumor, tumor cells also form trabecular or pseudoglandular architectures resembling those in the HCC . IHC findings of the HCC and adrenal tumor are shown in Fig. (a–e represent those of the HCC and f–j those of the adrenal tumor). HCC and adrenal tumor are both diffusely positive for Glypican-3 (GPC3) . AFP is partially expressed in the HCC and only focally in the adrenal tumor . Vimentin was negative for the HCC and adrenal tumor , and Melan-A was also negative for the HCC . Slight positivity of Melan-A is observed in the adrenal tumor, but the intensity of staining was clearly weak compared with those in normal adrenal glands . CD133, one of the stem cell markers, was positive for both HCC and adrenal tumor cells .
Furthermore, to determine the identity of the metastatic cancer, each tumor sample was analyzed by exome sequencing. Genomic DNA of both tumor tissues and normal liver tissue were extracted from available fresh-frozen tissues. All fresh-frozen tissues had been immediately frozen after resection and stored at − 80 °C until DNA extraction. We extracted genomic DNA from 5-mm frozen tissue cubes using a DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The isolated DNA concentration was adjusted to 10–20 ng/μL with Tris-EDTA buffer and stored at − 20 °C until analysis. We obtained amplicon sequences using next-generation sequencing (NGS) (Illumina Miseq sequencer [Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA]) following the preparation of sequence capture kit with custom modification (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). After exome data analyses for representative HCC-related genes such as TERT, CTNNB1, TP53, and ARID2, TP53 mutation (exon3: c.G351 T: p.R117S) was found in both HCC cells and adrenal tumor cells. Conversely, no significant mutations in other genes were observed.
These pathological findings and sequencing results suggested that the adrenal tumor might be an adrenal metastasis of HCC.