A 24-year-old woman who was a known case of Ebstein’s anomaly referred to our clinic for better evaluation and management. She complained from exacerbation of dyspnea and cyanosis since two months ago. At the first visit, oxygen saturation (SO2) was 88% in upper and lower extremities and S3 and systolic ejection murmur was heard in heart auscultation. Central cyanosis and clubbing were evident. Mild cardiomegaly with increased pulmonary vascular marking was seen in chest X-ray (CXR) (A). Right axis deviation (RAD), incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB), and first-degree atrioventricular block (AVB) were electrocardiographic (EKG) findings (B).
The EKG showed situs solitus, normal continuity of inferior vena cava (IVC) to right atrium (RA), D-loop ventricle, normal left ventricle (LV) size with mild systolic dysfunction (45%), abnormal septal motion, severe anatomical right ventricle (RV) enlargement with moderate systolic dysfunction, apical displacement of tricuspid valve (TV) leaflet (5.5 cm) with tethered and sail-like appearance of anterior TV leaflet suggestive of Ebstein anomaly resulting atrialization of RV and moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR), functional to anatomical RV ratio of about 40%, normally related great artery, moderate sized atrial septal defect (ASD) with right to left shunt, and PLSVC. In contrast echocardiography via left hand, we observed contrast agent in the LA immediately after injection and respectively via right hand, RA and then LA visualized after injection.
With regard to inconsistency of symptoms and echocardiography findings, congenital computed tomography (CT) angiography was performed and showed PLSVC without bridging vein that connected to LA , right superior vena cava (RSVC), IVC, coronary sinus (CS) connected to RA, and unroofed CS .
These finding were confirmed with congenital catheterization. .
Due to the special anatomy in this patient and the high volume of the right-to-left shunt and the fact that the patient's symptoms could not be controlled by medical treatment, the surgical method was considered for her.
In the surgical procedure chosen for the patient, first the ASD was repaired and then the PLSVC was cut from the LA side and the left Glenn shunt was inserted on the same side to divert the draining of PLSVC to the left pulmonary artery. In this technique, SVC is disconnected from the heart and anastomosis to pulmonary artery unsaturated blood that comes from head and neck via SVC and directly drains to pulmonary artery and then lungs. By choosing this method for the patient, we diverted the poor oxygen blood in PLSVC that came from the head and neck to the left atrium directly to the left pulmonary artery and then to the lung, and this, along with closing the atrial septal defect, eliminated the patient's cyanosis and improved functional class.
On a follow up visit one month after surgery, the patient's dyspnea and cyanosis improved and SO2 was increased to 93%.