A 59-year-old Caucasian man with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus accessed the emergency department reporting sharp stabbing pain to the right hemithorax, worsened by inbreathing and supine position, and aggravating exertional dyspnoea. The symptoms occurred about 5 days after the second dose of the BNT162b2 (Comirnaty) vaccine. Medical history was negative for SARS-CoV2 infection.
Physical examination was significant for muffled heart sounds, pulsus paradoxus, and decreased breath sounds at the lung bases. Electrocardiogram was not significant, showing only non-specific ST-T wave changes.
Blood tests showed increased inflammatory markers (C reactive protein (CRP) 120 mg/L; normal range between 0.3 mg/L and 10 mg/L). Two cardiac troponin assessments (at 0 h and 3 h) were within normal limits. Two nasopharyngeal swabs for SARS-CoV2 (at 0 h and 24 h) were negative. Chest X-ray showed mild bilateral pleural effusion and no radiological signs of pneumonia. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiography was normal.
Due to the characteristics of the pain, acute pericarditis was suspected and an echocardiography was performed, with findings suggestive of ECP. In particular, the exam showed mild circumferential pericardial effusion (0.8 cm max in front of the right ventricle) with fibrinous stranding and pericardial thickening and annulus reversus . Respirophasic septal shift ( and Video 1), septal bounce , inspiratory decrease in mitral E velocity > 25%, and reduced E wave deceleration time were also present, while cardiac chambers collapse was absent. Finally, the inferior vena cava plethora with prominent flow reversal in expiration was detected .
Therefore, the patient was admitted to the cardiology ward and therapy with two 0.5 mg colchicine doses a day (1 mg daily) and three 600 mg ibuprofen doses a day (1800 mg daily) were started, with progressive reduction of inflammatory markers (CRP at time of discharge 16 mg/L) and complete resolution of the symptoms.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed pericardial thickening and oedema , with intense late gadolinium enhancement of the pericardial layers ; a very mild pericardial effusion was detected (Video 2). Cine images showed septal bounce (Video 2) and inspiratory flattening of the inter-ventricular septum (Video 3), indicating ventricular interdependence and pericardial constriction.
No clear aetiology of the pericarditis was identified. In particular, viral tests for HIV, hepatitis C virus (HCV), Coxsackie, citomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) were negative for acute infections. Autoimmune diseases were ruled out, due to the absence of other suggestive symptoms and/or autoantibodies (ANA, ENA, and anti-dsDNA tested negative). Tuberculosis as well was deemed unlikely, since interferon gamma (INF-gamma) release assay was negative and radiological signs of pulmonary involvement were absent. Asbestosis was excluded, since there was no work-related exposure to asbestos or suggestive findings at chest CT scan. On the basis of the close temporal relation with the second shot of BNT162b2 vaccine, we hypothesized that the pericarditis might have been an adverse reaction to the drug, with a sub-acute evolution.
At 1-week follow-up the patient was completely asymptomatic, but CRP was still mildly elevated (18 mg/L) and control echocardiogram showed a reduction in the pericardial effusion, but persistence of constrictive physiology. Therefore, the patient was started on prednisone 25 mg daily and will be followed up closely in the next months for a possible therapeutical upgrade with IL1 receptor antagonists.