The patient was a 78-year-old Japanese man who had noticed edema in both legs three years earlier. The edema had worsened over the 12 months preceding his admission to our hospital, and he had developed malaise and anorexia. He was referred to our hospital one week after a blood test revealed high urea nitrogen (32.9 mg/dL) and serum creatinine (sCr) (2.91 mg/dL). On admission, blood pressure was 151/89 mmHg and heart rate was 83 beats/min with normal heart function. Pitting edema was observed in both legs. No other abnormalities were observed, including of the skin. Urinalysis showed proteinuria of 6.11 g/gCr and hematuria with glomerular hematuria and various types of urinary cast . The sCr level worsened to 4.25 mg/dL, indicating rapidly progressive renal dysfunction. Serum C reactive protein was 7.57 mg/dL. Immunological laboratory tests showed a low level of serum C3 and high levels of anti-nuclear Ab (80 titer), anti-dsDNA Ab (220 IU/mL), MPO ANCA (9.7 U/mL), and anti-GBM Ab (208.0 U/mL) . These data suggested a diagnosis of rapidly progressive renal dysfunction due to the concurrence of SLE, ANCA-AV, and anti-GBM-GN. Chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) (supplemental Fig. a and b) revealed only ascites, which was possibly related to the rapidly progressing renal dysfunction.
A renal biopsy was performed to investigate the cause of renal dysfunction. Light microscopic findings showed 23 cellular crescents, 8 fibrocellular crescents, 2 fibrous crescents, and 8 with global sclerosis in a total of 58 glomeruli . The GBM in glomeruli with preserved structure was thickened, and spikes and stippling were observed . Interstitial cell infiltration with edema and fibrosis were also observed. Immunofluorescence showed IgG deposits at the capillaries, mainly in a linear pattern, and a partially granular pattern at the outer side of the GBM. C3, and C1q also showed granular patterning at the capillaries. IgG subclass staining revealed that IgG1, IgG2, and IgG3 were linearly positive, whereas IgG4 was granularly positive at the capillaries . Electron microscopy revealed obvious subepithelial electron-dense deposits (EDD) and a small amount of irregular mesangial EDD was also observed. The above results suggested a diagnosis of crescentic GN and membranous nephropathy due to lupus nephritis, ANCA-AV, and anti-GBM-GN.
M class phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) antibodies in serum was negative. Immunohistochemical staining for PLA2R was also negative (data not shown). In addition, MPO staining was negative in the glomeruli (supplemental Fig. 2a). To identify the antigens of MN and further clarify the pathogenesis of this disease, the glomeruli were extracted by laser microdissection and MS analysis was performed. Both EXT1 and EXT2 were detected , but PLA2R and MPO were not detected in MS. Further confirming MS findings, IHC for EXT1 and EXT2 staining were positive in the glomerular capillary wall (supplemental Fig. 2b and c).
A steroid pulse of methylprednisolone 500 mg/day was administered for three days followed by 40 mg of oral prednisone. A total of seven plasmaphereses were performed from day 4 after admission; however, the patient’s renal function did not recover and maintenance hemodialysis was required from day 33 after admission.