A 20-year-old female student presented on the 12th of October 2016 to the Aristide Le Dantec Hospital. She presented with persistent fever and night sweats lasting for more than 1 year in a context of anorexia and weight loss. One week before she was hospitalized, it was noted a clinical picture of severe headache with exacerbation of the persistent fever accompanied by chills and profuse sweats.
In her previous medical history, she was treated for autoimmune hemolytic anaemia by long-term corticosteroid therapy using prednisone at 5 mg per day. On examination the axillary temperature was 38.5 °C and blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. Physical examination showed adenopathy measuring 2 cm on her left infraclavicular part . The swelling was firm and painless, mobile and without fistulation. The rest of the examination was normal. Suspected malaria in the basis of clinical signs was confirmed by presence of trophozoite of P. falciparum on thick and thin smear with parasite density estimated at 52,300 parasites/μl . The patient was then treated using artesunate/amodiaquine combination. She had her medical conditions improved 72 h after initial treatment but febricula still remained at 37.8 °C. Parasitaemia was cleared by day 3 after treatment.
Laboratory tests showed microcytic and hypochromic anaemia 6.1 g/dl haemoglobin (Normal: 12–16), thrombocytopaenia 72,000/mm3 (Normal: 150–400), ferritin > 2000 μg/l (Normal: 20–150), WBC 9400/mm3 (Normal: 4000–10,000). Biological inflammatory syndrome was observed as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (102 mm in the first hour) and C-reactive protein (96 mg/l) were elevated. Uraemia, creatininaemia and phosphorus and calcium were normal. HIV serological test was negative.
Chest X-ray showed reticular and nodular opacities disseminated throughout the lung fields . The ultrasound of the sternoclavicular joint revealed regional fluid collection. Chest CT-scan showed small nodules in the parenchymal lungs windows resulting in tree-in-bud sign. Pre and retrosternal collections throughout the joint were observed in the mediastinal window. Bone window showed irregular bone surfaces on the sternoclavicular joint as a result of erosion process suggesting an arthritis.
Joint puncture collected purulent fluid. Microscopic examination after Ziehl–Nielsen staining of the fluid revealed acid-fast bacilli with count of 10 AFB per high-power field. Subsequently, Mycobacterium tuberculosis was isolated in Löwenstein–Jensen (LJ) solid medium where growth was detected after 3 weeks of incubation.
Tuberculosis arthritis of the sternoclavicular joint was decided and antitubercular therapy was initiated on November 15, 2016. Four first line antitubercular drugs treatment were given according to following schema: 2 months of rifampicin + isoniazid + ethambutol + pyrazinamide followed by 4 months of rifampicin + isoniazid.
After 2 months post therapy the patient’s symptoms completely disappeared with complete resolution of the lesion. CT scan showed complete healing of the lesion after 9 months of treatment .