A 40-year-old man presented with an intermittent dull right lower back pain over the past three months.
The patient had experienced intermittent dull right lower backache with frequent urination and urgency 3 months prior to presentation. Therefore, he sought medical attention at a local hospital. A urological computed tomography (CT) was performed, and the scan revealed a right upper ureteral stone and a low-density mass in the right pelvic space. Due to uncertainty about the right pelvic mass, local doctors referred the patient to our department for concomitant surgical resection of the right upper ureteral stone and ipsilateral pelvic mass.
The patient claimed that he was in good health, denied having any history of basic diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease; infectious diseases such as hepatitis and tuberculosis; trauma and surgery; and drug and food allergy.
The patient was born and raised in the original place; had no history of contact with schistosomiasis water, infectious diseases, bad habits such as smoking and alcohol consumption, contact with toxic and radioactive substances, sexually transmitted diseases; and had no family history of hereditary diseases. His wife and children were healthy.
No tenderness or pain on percussion was observed in either of the renal region. The entire abdomen was soft with no palpable mass. No abnormalities were observed in the external genitalia. A digital rectal examination revealed no obvious findings.
Dry chemistry urinalysis revealed 108 leukocytes/μL and 173 red blood cells/μL. Repeat urine cultures were sterile. No significant abnormalities were observed in routine biochemical and hematological tests.
Chest radiography and electrocardiographic findings were normal. CT urography (CTU) showed a 2-cm right upper ureteral calculus with ipsilateral hydronephrosis, which was eventually found to be the main cause of the symptoms . Simultaneously, a well-demarcated 5-cm homogeneous oval solid mass was observed in the right pelvic space without manifestations of any infiltration in the bladder, ureter, rectum, or other surrounding tissues . In the arterial phase, branches of the internal iliac vessels were found in the anterior, medial, and posterior parts of the mass, and the boundary between the posterior part of the mass and the piriformis muscle was blurred . In the excretion phase, the collection system above the stone was obviously dilated, and the ureter beneath the stone was still obviously dilated compared with the contralateral ureter; however, no obvious contrast agent was excreted . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy were not performed.