A healthy, and active 33-year-old male with no metabolic abnormalities presented to the clinic with persistent knee and tibial pain 4 months post-initial suprapatellar IMN of his left tibia at an outside facility for a distal tibial shaft fracture. The patient was noted to have little callus formation with a persistent fracture line and was diagnosed with a delayed union 5 months post-fracture fixation. He required revision surgery with exchange nailing, using an infrapatellar approach. Despite fracture healing, the patient was noted to have persistent knee pain with clunking on extension. A decision was made to have an arthroscopic evaluation performed. The patient was noted to have full-thickness articular cartilage loss in the central aspect of the femoral trochlea.
As time passed by, 5 months after the revision surgery and 10 months after the initial procedure, the patient continued to report substantial pain and limited range of knee motion. He was referred for a post-operative course of physical therapy, but despite the physiotherapy, the patient continued with complaints of constant pain with popping, crepitus, and quadriceps weakness due to pain. A patellofemoral brace was prescribed to the patient in an attempt to improve patellofemoral symptoms. Three months after wearing the brace, the patient continued to report unchanged symptoms.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was ordered, which demonstrated diffuse thinning of the trochlear articular cartilage. The patient underwent a knee arthroscopy with hardware removal, debridement, and cartilage harvesting for implantation. The cartilage lesion was evaluated, and it was noted to be 1.5 cm x 2 cm (, ). Various treatment options for cartilage restoration were considered. Due to the undulating topography of the trochlea with normal appearing subchondral bone, autologous chondrocyte implantation (ACI) was selected. Fresh osteochondral allograft (OCA) was considered; however, due to the specific shape of the trochlea, locating a fresh OCA of similar shape would have been logistically challenging, and given the young age of the patient, the preference fell on the cell-based therapy. Cartilage was harvested from the notch area in the amount of approximately 200 mg of healthy tissue and shipped to the lab (Vericel, Cambridge, Massachusetts, US). The active ingredients of ACI (Carticel; Vericel, Cambridge, Massachusetts) are autologous cultured chondrocytes propagated in cell culture. Each carticel vial of autologous cultured chondrocytes contains approximately 12 million cells per vial. Carticel use in combination with collagen membrane is considered the 2nd generation of ACI. For the 2nd generation ACI, a type I/III bilayer collagen membrane (Bio-Gide; Geistlich Pharma) was used that resorbs entirely within a few months of implantation. First, the defect template was placed on the collagen membrane and cut to size, after which membrane was placed into the defect, secured with 6-0 Vicryl sutures and fibrin glue, and injected with autologous chondrocytes. The length of time between the biopsy and the implantation of ACI may vary depending on many factors, including the quality and number of cells obtained from the biopsy. On average, this will take 6 weeks; however, cells can be held in storage until a convenient date for surgery is agreed upon between the patient and the surgeon. Seven months later, an autologous chondrocyte implant procedure was performed once authorization was obtained due to ongoing knee pain. (, ).
At a 2.5-year follow-up, the patient reported significant improvement in the knee symptoms, which allowed him to return to weightlifting, including squatting with weights. Therefore, no additional investigation was necessary.