In 2015, a 60 years old male patient presented to the hospital with complaints of pain and swelling in right hip region and inability to bear weight on right lower limb for 15 days. Patient had history of motor vehicle accident and sustained injury to the right hip region. He had not taken any treatment previously and presented to us for the 1st time. On clinical examination, right lower limb was adducted and internally rotated. Movements at right hip joint were painful and restricted. Swelling was present in right gluteal region and vascular sign of Narath was positive. Distal neurovascular structures were intact. Radiograph of right hip revealed posterior dislocation and femoral head fracture with a large intra-articular fragment. There was disruption of posterior acetabular wall with a displaced acetabular fragment posterosuperiorly. The ilioischial and iliopectineal lines were intact as was the obturator ring. The femoral neck was also intact .
Pre-reduction non-contrast computed tomography scan was performed for further evaluation. Images were reconstructed in bone window and volume rendered images were also obtained. The study confirmed the findings of radiography and revealed right posterior hip dislocation with femoral head fracture confined to the part of head caudal to Fovea Centralis. There was a coexisting isolated acetabular posterior wall fracture. Hence, the lesion was classified as Pipkin type IV .
Reduction of hip dislocation was attempted in emergency room but found to be unstable. Patient was kept on skeletal traction for 24–48 h and subsequently planned for open reduction and internal fixation. Kocher-Langenbeck approach was used which allowed direct visualization of the dorso-cranial part of acetabulum. Femoral head fracture was fixed using Herbert screw and recon plate and spring hook plates were used to fix acetabular fracture fragment and to stabilize the reduction .
Post-operative period was uneventful. Hip joint was kept in abduction and slight external rotation for optimal healing while allowing controlled flexion and extension. Hip muscles strengthening exercises were started slowly and gradually as tolerated by the patient. Bony union was noted 12 weeks postoperatively and after 14 weeks patient was able to sit and squat easily.
In follow-up, patient was evaluated clinically and radiologically. There were no signs of avascular necrosis and arthritis after 5 years of follow-up. Patient had rewarding outcomes in the form of adequate range of motion and painless ambulation .