A 42-year-old female presented to the hospital with dyspnea, leg edema, ascites, orthopnea, and palpitations that she had been experiencing for three days. She had a history of frequent readmissions due to RHF, despite optimal medical therapy. She was diagnosed with CTEPH 5 months ago by computed tomography pulmonary artery (CTPA). Her CTPA revealed the presence of peripheral subsegmental thrombus in parts of the apical anterior upper lobes bilaterally and the right anterior-posterobasal lower lobes. Physical examination showed oxygen saturation of 90%, blood pressure of 96/69 mmHg, an attenuated second heart sound, a pansystolic murmur of grade 3/6 on the lower left sternal border, abdominal ascites, and bilateral leg edema. Electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm, right atrial enlargement, and right bundle branch block. Laboratory results were within normal limits. The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, right atrial enlargement, and right ventricle hypertrophy. Echocardiography showed severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR) with a high probability of PH, paradoxical septal wall motion, the interatrial septum bulging to the left side, decreased right ventricle contractility with tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 16 mm, and no patent foramen ovale (PFO) . Thus, the patient was diagnosed with RHF due to CTEPH. She received sildenafil 3 × 40 mg, warfarin 1 × 3 mg, candesartan 1 × 4 mg, and spironolactone 1 × 25 mg.
The surgical procedure could not be done because the patient refused to undergo the procedure, and pulmonary thromboendarterectomy is rarely performed in our country. Thus, it was decided that the patient would undergo an atrial septostomy with an IAS stent. Prior to the procedure, the patient underwent right heart catheterization revealed right atrial (RA) pressure of 20 mmHg and left atrial (LA) pressure of 9 mmHg, obtained through left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) measurements as a surrogate of LA pressure. Cardiac output before the procedure was obtained using the direct method of Fick’s formula and resulted in 2.7 L/min. A Mullin catheter was inserted through the right femoral vein, and an atrial septostomy was done using a Brockenbrough needle. Before placing the stent, graded dilatation was carried out using a 4 × 40 mm thysak balloon. After this procedure, the oxygen saturation dropped to 85%. A vascular stent, the Omnilink Elite, measuring 8 mm by 39 mm by 135 cm, was placed at the IAS . After the procedure, right heart catheterization was repeated, which revealed RA pressure of 28 mmHg and LA pressure of 10 mmHg, obtained from measurements taken through an atrial septostomy. LVEDP after the procedure was 12 mmHg. Cardiac output after the procedure was obtained using the direct method of Fick’s formula and was 3.5 L/min. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography evaluation revealed a good stent position that IAS was in the middle third of the stent to avoid stent dislodgement, with a right-to-left shunt across the stent . Peripheral saturation after the procedure was 79%.
In the cardiovascular care unit, the patient received optimal heart failure therapy with an inotropic, diuretic, and vasodilator. The patient was eventually discharged with improved RHF signs and symptoms. Before being discharged, she underwent a 6-min walking test, and walked 120 m, compared to 50 m before the procedure, when she could not walk more than 50 m and spent more time in bed. Four months after the procedure, the patient was in good condition, with a peripheral saturation of 82%, and could perform physical activities without any limitations with a Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire (MLHFQ) score of 22.