A 56-year-old female came in outpatient with chief complaints of low back pain radiating to both but-tocks, burning sensations to both lower limbs. She had a claudication distance of <100 m. She also complained of weakness in both feet and difficulty to put footwear. Her back VAS was 7 and leg VAS was 8. Her ODI was 74. She gave a history of constitutional symptoms such as loss of weight and appetite. Trial of conservative management was given at multiple hospitals.
Clinical examination revealed bilateral SLR test positive at 30°. Her neurological examination showed grade 3 weakness in both toe and ankle dorsiflexors. Sensations across the bilateral L4 and L5 derma-tomes were reduced by 50%.
Her white blood cell count was 11,000, ESR was 10, and CRP was 45. Radiologically, lumbar spine X-ray revealed pars discal osteopenia with decreased disc space between L5 and S1.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed signal intensity changes suggestive of patchy marrow edema present over the L2 to S1 vertebra up to the upper two-third of the sacral ala, mid por-tion of sacrum, and right iliac bone with associated epidural, pre- and paravertebral soft-tissue exten-sion along bilateral psoas muscles suggestive of infective etiology rather than neoplastic.
While a nuclear positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed an increase in radiotracer concentration involving L2-L5 vertebra, S1 vertebra, right Sacroiliac region, and right ilium, which favored a metastatic etiology rather than infection, leading to a diagnostic dilemma.
In view of persistent neurological deficit, pain, a team discussion with oncologists, infectious disease specialists, and orthopedic spine team, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed signal the final decision was made to do a surgical decompression and biopsy from the affected areas. Surgery was performed in the form of laminectomy and decompression by posterior approach and tissue was collected from the right sacral ala. As the pre-operative and intraoperative findings did not favor instability, no instrumented fusion was planned. Histopathological report showed negative metastasis. Microbiology was negative. The patient improved during post-operative period in terms of pain and mobility. VAS scores improved to 4. After 3 months’ post-surgery, the patient came back to the clinic with chief complaints of burning sensations in legs and inability to walk and stand for long with discharging sinuses over the back with the similar neurologi-cal profile.
X-ray revealed diffuse osteopenia with patchy sclerosis and degenerative changes with lami-nectomy defects.
Contrast MRI (, , ) showed patchy areas of marrow signal abnormality L1, L2, L4, and L5 vertebra and adjoining endplates of L5, S1, and S2 segments. Ring enhancing lesions at L2, L3 levels. Enhancing hyperintense signals in posterior paraspinal muscles at L1-L2. Tiny enhancing lesions on the right ilium. PET scan (, , ) shows lytic areas over L2 to L5 vertebrae and sacral ala and ilium possibility of infective etiology more likely atypical Kochs/brucella/Fungal or any unusual bacterial infection. A progressively increasing in ESR and CRP directed toward an infective etiology. Tests for brucellosis were negative .
The patient underwent repeat surgery in the form of revision decompression. Intraoperatively, there was a thick and hard epidural tissue engulfing the cord and the nerve roots. This unhealthy granulation tissue was carefully removed and sent for analysis. Histopathology (, ) revealed clumps of basophilic filamentous bacteria in a vaguely rosette-like configuration surrounded by acute inflam-matory cells, characteristic of actinomycosis.
The patient was started on intravenous penicillin G for 4 weeks and followed by oral penicillin for 2 weeks. Wound completely healed by primary intention by 2 weeks. The patient ambulated unassisted with back VAS of 2. Leg VAS reduced to 1.
After 6 weeks, ODI was 16, X Rays showed reduced osteopenia, and MRI showed a signifi-cant reduction in marrow signal abnormalities in lumbar and sacral areas (, , ).
At 6 months, we reviewed the patient again. He had complaints of back pain, but the examination did not reveal any positive findings.
At 12 months, the patient was asymptomatic.