A 25-year-old Japanese male complained of uncontrollable watery diarrhea over 10 times a day and abdominal pain since 5 years ago. Abdominal pain was mild lower abdominal pain relieving after defecation. There was no convincing aggravating factor for the abdominal pain. He had never had any health problems in the past. There was no particular social, environmental, or family history. His occupation was civil servant. He had never smoked and had drunk socially. Medical examination at the first visit revealed blood pressure of 120/72 mmHg, pulse rate, of 72 times/minutes (regular), and body temperature of 36.2 °C. There were no obvious abdominal and neurological findings, including abdominal tenderness.
He had received esophagogastroduodenoscopy, colonoscopy, and capsule endoscopy in addition to urine and blood examinations, and abdominal imaging such as abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). However, no abnormal findings had been detected, and he was diagnosed with diarrhea-dominant irritable bowel syndrome (D-IBS) based on the Rome IV criteria. He then received oral medicines including loperamide (1.0 mg/day) for 1 month, albumin tannate (3.0 g/day) for 1 month, or ramosetron hydrochloride (5 μg/day) for 1 month without improvement of his abdominal symptoms prior to his first visit to our department.
He had been introduced to our department because of uncontrollable D-IBS for a long time. Laboratory testing including TSH was normal . Whole-body computed tomography reveled no abnormality . To rule out collagenous colitis, infectious diseases, and celiac disease, colonoscopy including terminal ileum, random biopsies, and culture test of intestinal juice were performed and no macroscopic, pathological abnormality such as collagen band or possible disease-causing bacteria was observed . After careful medical history-taking, we understood that he had been experienced periodic fever since 10 years ago. Fever is characterized by recurrent (approximately once a month) and self-limited (a couple of days) fever. Figure shows the time course of clinical characteristics. Blood examination on the day of fever revealed high white blood cell (WBC) count (20,400/μL), C-reactive protein (CRP) (1.79 mg/dL), and amyloid A protein (169 mg/dL) without anemia. However, during the interval between febrile attacks, his body temperature was normal and the laboratory data of inflammatory reaction were at normal levels. These clinical characteristics suggested a suspicion of familial Mediterranean fever (FMF), although we did not confirm that diarrhea and abdominal pain were associated with FMF. After 12 months since the start of colchicine administration at 0.5 mg/day, the patient has been free of fever. As shown in Fig. , not only periodic fever but also abdominal symptoms such as severe diarrhea improved completely after colchicine administration. All exons of the MEFV gene in the patient were sequenced, and no mutation was identified. Based on these findings, we concluded a diagnosis of FMF according to the criteria in Japan in spite of the lack of gene mutation, and that abdominal symptoms may be related to the disease.