A 24-year-old Japanese woman who fell from a height of 10 m was taken to the emergency room. She was very thin, 150 cm tall, weighed 29.9 kg, and had a low BMI of 13.3 kg/m2. She was also taking oral contraceptives and denied any medical history, including thrombosis.
Initial full-body enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed thoracolumbar burst, sternal, multiple rib, and sacral fractures, and bilateral pneumothorax. It also revealed distal dilatation of the LRV, suggesting blood flow stagnation, called beak sign; however, no thrombus was found . Laboratory findings on admission were as follows: leukocytes 16,900/μL, hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL, platelets 214,000/μL, activated partial thromboplastin time 21.7 s, prothrombin time (international normalized ratio) 1.07, fibrinogen 246.0 mg/dL, and D-dimer 52.0 μg/dL. Urinalysis revealed the presence of urine protein 2+ and occult blood 3+. Antithrombin III, protein C, protein S, and antiphospholipid antibody levels were normal.
The patient had a burst fracture of the thoracolumbar vertebrae and had to rest on a bed in a supine position until spinal fusion. Five days after admission, D-dimer level elevated from 52.0 to 82.5 μg/dL, and enhanced CT was performed again to detect the presence of a thrombus preoperatively. Computed tomography revealed a solitary LRV thrombus that was not noted on the prior CT ; there were no physical complaints, such as left flank pain. Furthermore, the angle between the SMA and abdominal aorta in the sagittal section narrowed to 25° , which is usually greater than 35°, revealing NCS with beak sign . Furthermore, there was no occupying lesion around the LRV. Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with trauma-associated solitary LRV thrombosis with NCS.
An inferior vena cava filter was implanted preoperatively. Spinal fusion was performed on day 9 postadmission, and edoxaban was given for anticoagulation; the postoperative course was uneventful. On day 33 postadmission, ultrasonography revealed LRV thrombus shrinkage. The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 36 postadmission, but anticoagulation therapy was continued for 3 months.