A 7-year-old male patient was born at term following a complicated pregnancy with placental inefficiency and intrauterine growth restriction. He was delivered via cesarean section, with a birth weight of 1400 g; thus, he was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit for 26 days, during which he did not need supplemental oxygen. The family history was unremarkable. He has three healthy siblings, no history of miscarriages or deaths at young ages, and the parents are nonconsanguineous.
During early childhood, the patient had repeated hospitalizations for fever events due to tonsillitis, acute otitis media, and pneumonia every 2–3 months, as well as cervical lymphadenopathy. He suffered from a fever without focus for 20 days that was recorded at 39°C axillary; he was treated with antibiotics and antipyretics without significant improvement. Later on, he developed bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy associated with hypoactivity, poor feeding, night sweating, intermittent abdominal pain and abdominal distention, and epistaxis during fever, so he was admitted to the pediatric department.
Physical examination revealed a weight of 18 kg (10th percentile), distinct facial features (small eyes, mild hypertelorism, short philtrum, low set ears), high pitch sound, intellectual disability, and bilateral neck swelling measuring 5 cm in diameter. The computed tomography scan was done and showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the neck and upper mediastinum. The abdominal ultrasonography showed a homogenous spleen enlarged to 12 cm and a homogenous liver measuring 11.6 cm at the mid-clavicular line.
The blood surface showed microcytic hypochromic anemia with anisopoikilocytosis, neutrophils with left shift, and no blasts.
The patient underwent cervical lymph node excision and biopsy that was compatible with HNL (KFD).
Histology sections showed lymph node effacement and involvement by irregularly shaped, pale areas composed of histiocytes, plasmacytoid dendritic cells, eosinophilic granular material, and abundant karyorrhectic debris (nuclear dust) surrounding a central zone of necrosis. Karyorrhectic areas extend beyond the nodal capsule. Regions between pale areas exhibit a mottled/starry sky appearance. Histiocytes include phagocytic cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and crescent-shaped nuclei (crescentic histiocytes) and nonphagocytic cells with twisted or reniform nuclei .
The infectious workup was negative for blood culture, CMV serology, EBV serology, acid-fast stain, and PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The immunological analysis showed low levels of immunoglobulin (Ig)G, IgM, and IgA. The flow cytometry showed the absence of B-cell (CD19 and CD20) and an increase in T-cells (CD3 and CD8) (see Table ). The antinuclear antibody (ANA) test was negative.
The result of the bone marrow biopsy showed hypercellular for age, with bone marrow showing megakaryocytic hyperplasia with occasional atypical forms and bone marrow neutrophilia and eosinophilia. There are no granulomas or other signs of lymphoma, so the morphologic findings are most likely reactive.
The patient was referred for genetic testing that revealed a mutation in the PIK3R1 gene, and the diagnosis of APDS 2 was made. The patient started on immunoglobulin replacement and sirolimus. The recommendation was to continue on his medication; if there is no response, he will be referred for bone marrow transplantation after checking PIK3R1 in his sister.