A 42-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of gradually worsening hoarseness without pain, dyspnoea or dysphagia. He had no history of alcohol or tobacco use. Flexible laryngoscopy in January 2016 showed a reddish, smooth and submucosal mass with protrusion medially in the anterior third of the right vocal cord, and glottic closure was incomplete posteriorly with normal mobility . Given the well-circumscribed and relatively benign appearance, the lesion was initially suspected to be vocal cord cyst. Then the patient was planned to undergo surgery with suspension laryngoscope. Unexpectedly, the tumor was found to be fleshy, crisp and easily bleeding without invading anterior commissure. Therefore, a frozen pathology was sent during the operation, and indicated malignancy . However, the definitive pathologic diagnosis could not be made in the operation. Besides, the scope of the lesion and the lymph nodes of the neck was not defined, due for the lack of preoperative computed tomography (CT) / the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Therefore, the combined therapy regimen (surgery, chemotherapy or radiotherapy) cannot be formulated. Ultimately, we performed a cordectomy with the visible lesion for the patient. The final diagnose was embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma (ERMS) with immunohistochemical staining positivity for myogenin, smooth muscle actin (EMA), desmin and myoD1 . In order to develop further therapeutic regime, the MRI was performed, and showed an asymmetric swelling of the right vocal cord with no lymphadenopathy being detected in the neck . After evaluation of the tumor size, grade, and lymph node involvement, we recommended extended resection or combined chemoradiotherapy, and the patient chose the latter. He underwent three cycles of induction chemotherapy with TDF regimen (paclitaxel, cisplatin and fluorouracil) at 3-week intervals. In addition, he received a mean radiation dose of 70 Gray (Gy) to the laryngeal area. After treatment, the larynx presented with smooth appearance and good mobility of vocal cord.
The patient was followed up as scheduled with no recurrence . One year later, he lost follow-up until the presence of dyspnea 18 months after the last treatment. Flexible laryngoscopy , MRI imaging and CT imaging showed a submucosal mass of the right vocal cord. Intraoperative findings showed that the tan mass originated from the right vocal cord, invaded the anterior commissure and bulged into right perilaryngeal soft tissues without involving the laryngeal cartilage. Therefore, a vertical hemilaryngectomy and a right selective neck dissection was performed. No tumor cells were detected along the surgical margin and in the lymph nodes of the neck. Histological examination of the whole specimen postoperatively confirmed the diagnosis of ERMS. The tumor was clinically staged as T3N0M0 (stage III) glottic ERMS. Then the experiment of anticancer drug sensitivity of this tumor to eight chemotherapeutic regimens was determined in vitro, revealing that DCF regimen (docetaxel, cisplatin and fluorouracil) was the most efficient . Finally, the patient underwent DCF regimen at 3-week intervals without radiotherapy. Until the last check-up 18 months after chemotherapy, the patient did not display clinical or radiological signs of local recurrence and metastases .