A 19-year-old man without medical history experienced severe dyspnoea and was admitted to hospital as an emergency. The patient negated angina pectoris. Initial blood pressure was high (240/110 mmHg), an ECG showed no relevant abnormalities, but cardiac biomarkers troponin T and NT-proBNP were elevated (27-fold (372 ng/L), and 26-fold (2225 pg/mL) of the upper normal limit (UNL), respectively). Transthoracic echocardiography showed impaired left ventricular function with basal hypokinesia. Treatment with Nebivolol and Candesartan was initiated. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at day 3 showed no evidence of acute myocarditis. The left ventricular function had recovered at that time. Coronary angiography showed no evidence of coronary heart disease, thus excluding myocardial infarction as the reason for troponin T elevation and basal left ventricular hypokinesia. Endocarditis was excluded by transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography and repeated blood cultures. Normal blood levels of catecholamines and metanephrines excluded pheochromocytoma. The cardiac biomarkers decreased over follow-up .
After the acute phase, the patient complained about vertigo. The neurological examination showed upbeat nystagmus, hyperreflexia of the lower limbs, as well as unsteady gait. On specific demand, the patient reported that he had experienced paraesthesia of the entire left side of the body and as well in the right arm and leg since 5 days before admission to the hospital. Brain and spinal MRI were performed, showing supra- and infratentorial, as well as spinal T2-hyperintense lesions . One prominent lesion was found in the pontomedullary area, showing Gadolinium-enhancement and a high signal in diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed a lymphocytic pleocytosis (13 leucocytes per μL), and CSF specific oligoclonal IgG bands. Screening of potential other autoimmune or infectious diseases was negative. Serum neurofilament (sNfL) levels (measured using single-molecule array technology) were elevated while troponin T levels were still over the UNL . Serum-Aquaporin-4- and -MOG-antibodies were negative. Evoked potential latencies showed lesions in the somatosensory pathway of the left leg as well as in the visual pathway of the right eye. The patient was diagnosed with MS according to current criteria and treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day for 5 days) was initiated. During the hospital stay, the patient fully recovered and showed no focal signs at the time of discharge. A disease-modifying treatment with Teriflunomide (14 mg/day) was initiated. In follow-up examinations, 5 months later, the patient showed no abnormalities in the stress-ECG and echocardiography. Furthermore, the patient reported no events suspicious of a relapse in the first 6 months of follow-up.