A 17-year-old young girl presented at the Dermatology outpatient department with a complaint of multiple black pigmented lesions on her chin and lips persisting for the past 5 months. The lesions developed after she applied cyanoacrylate as a home remedy to reduce her double chin problem. She had been concerned about her double chin and came across a video on social media suggesting the use of cyanoacrylate for double chin reduction. Fascinated by the possibilities presented by this unconventional approach, she chose to experiment with it firsthand. It was left on chin for 3 days and when she eventually removed it, she first noticed a red lesion on her chin that extended to involve both lips. Involved area was swollen, tender and pruritic. After 2 weeks of application, it changed to blackish discoloration that persisted for the past 5 months and caused her significant distress. She then applied herbal medicine but the lesion did not improve. She has no significant medical history, prior skin conditions or pigmentation abnormalities. Being an active social media user, she frequently relies on such platforms for beauty tips and advice. There is no known family history of skin disorders or pigmentation abnormalities.
Physical examination revealed multiple, black hyperpigmented macules of variable size, limited to area of chin and lips. The skin surrounding the lesions showed signs of mild irritation without significant inflammation or scarring . Based on the patient’s clinical history and physical examination findings, the development of multiple pigmented lesions on the chin and lips are likely post-inflammatory outcomes after chemical irritation with cyanoacrylate. However, to confirm the diagnosis, biopsy of one of the lesions was performed that revealed multiple clumps of variable sized brown pigments in dermis with aggregates of macrophages engulfing the pigment . These findings were consistent with post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation.
She was advised to discontinue use of cyanoacrylate or any other potentially harmful substances. She was prescribed topical depigmenting agent (hydroquinone 4%) and was educated about the risks and dangers associated with unconventional methods found on social media platforms for beauty purposes and to seek professional guidance for any health problems. Psychosocial support and counselling were provided to address her distress and concerns regarding her appearance. On follow-up after 6 months, there is gradual improvement of lesion with minimal residual pigmentation that is subsiding with its natural course.