We report on a 15 year old adolescent girl that presented with a 10 day history of fever, aphthous putrid ulcers on the back of her throat and left upper quadrant abdominal pain radiating to the ipsilateral shoulder. Laboratory investigations revealed: white blood cell count (WBC) 14.8 × 109/L (78.4% neutrophils, 12.7% lymphocytes), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 56 mm/hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) 101 mg/L. Abdominal ultrasound showed multiple an-/hypoechoic lesions in the spleen with lack of perfusion in duplex sonography . In abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) the splenic lesions showed a hypointense signal on the T1- and T2-weighted images without contrast enhancement; however, there was a diffusion restriction on the diffusion weighted (DW) images . There was also localized contrast enhancement and restricted diffusion of the duodenal wall. The following endoscopic examination could not demonstrate any abnormalities within the duodenum. Histologic examination revealed mild chronic gastritis and duodenitis. An ultrasound study of the thyroid showed an inhomogeneous parenchyma with hypoechoic areas; thyroid function test showed normal peripheral hormone levels, but thyroid peroxidase-autoantibodies were elevated thus being suggestive for autoimmune thyreoiditis.
Serologic studies for acute infection with Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex-virus, Human immunodeficiency virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Yersinia enterica/pseudotuberculosis, Treponema pallidum, Coxiella burnetii, Brucella spp., Bartonella henselae, Franciscella tularensis, and Echinococcus, as well as blood cultures were negative. A throat swab from the aphthous lesions showed normal resident flora. Urine analysis, chest X-ray and echocardiography as well as Mantoux test and interferon-gamma release assay were negative.
On admission the patient was started on ceftriaxone and clindamycine leading to no clinical improvement except cessation of fever but CRP even rose (129 mg/L). Therefore, antibiotics were switched to meropenem and metronidazole after 4 days. Under this regimen she physically improved, the pharyngeal aphthae healed and inflammatory parameters decreased (WBC 10.98 × 109/L, CRP 26.5 mg/L) so that she could be discharged after 9 days continuing antibiotic treatment with doxycycline. In the follow up examination 24 days after initial presentation the splenic lesions increased in number and in size . Moreover the inflammatory parameters had risen again (WBC 14.19 × 109/L, CRP 175 mg/L). Subsequently, a computed tomography-guided needle biopsy was performed. The patient was restarted on meropenem and metronidazole. Using this therapy the CRP decreased and the white blood cell count normalized again (WBC 9.86 × 109/L, CRP 75.8 mg/L) within 9 days.
Microscopic analysis of the abscess aspirate showed mainly granulocytes and cell detritus, but no bacteria, fungi or parasites. Repeated blood cultures as well as cultures and 18S and 16S RNA PCR from the splenic biopsy were negative. To exclude concomitant inflammatory bowel disease the patient underwent colonoscopy. On macroscopic evaluation the ileum and colon appeared normal, histologic evaluation of the biopsies taken showed mild chronic inflammation, but no characteristic signs of an inflammatory bowel disease. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) and anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA) were negative. An immunosuppressive therapy with prednisone 2 mg/kg was started while at first continuing with metronidazole. After initiation of the immunosuppressive treatment the splenic lesions decreased in size for the first time and were no longer detectable after 6 weeks . The CRP normalized completely. The glucocorticoid dose was then slowly tapered and stopped after 11 weeks. During follow up of 1 year she still is in clinical and radiological remission. Autoimmune thyreoidits was still subclinical by that time.