A 39 years old female patient was admitted with a diagnosis of prolapsed intervertebral disc L4-L5 with radiculopathy left lower limb. The patient was taken up for routine microdiscectomy after pre anesthetic checkup. After doing the laminotomy, while the discectomy was being carried out with help of disc biting forceps anesthetists noticed a sudden drop in blood pressure of the patient. Even after checking the wires and cuff when the readings did not improved, it was decided to pack the wound and turn the patient supine. As there was no excessive pulsatile bleeding into the surgical field, major blood vessel injury was not contemplated. The surgical and the anesthetic team assumed it to be a severe drug allergic reaction. However an urgent ultrasound of abdomen was called for, which revealed frank collection in the abdomen. Blood was aspirated in abdominal tap and general surgeon was called in for suspecting it to be a major blood vessels injury. Urgent laparotomy was done and a 1 cm rent was identified in the antero-lateral and postero-medial wall of the inferior vena cava at the level of junction of common iliac vessels . The torn vessel was compressed manually to minimize the blood loss till a vascular surgeon arrived. Hemodynamic status of the patient was maintained by giving massive blood transfusion. The vascular surgeon repaired the antero-lateral rent but the postero-medial defect on the under surface could not be repaired. At this time the vascular surgeon decided to isolate the tear by ligatures and do an end to end anastomosis of common iliac vessels with the gonadal vessels to maintain the circulation . The patient was kept in ICU for observation for next 5 days. Over all she received 20 units of whole blood and 35 units of fresh frozen plasma. Abdominal drain was removed on day 5 when the 24-hour collection was less than 100ml. The ultrasound of the abdomen on the subsequent day revealed minimal collection. The patient was maintaining her vitals well however she developed swelling in her left calf and thigh 10 days post surgery for which she was given compression stockings. The patient was discharged in a stable condition from hospital 14 days post surgery after all stitch removal. Her radicular pain had disappeared post surgery.