A two-year-old Vietnamese female child had fever and cough 20 days before admission to our hospital. She visited a local hospital and was diagnosed with pneumonia. She was treated with meropenem and vancomycin for 15 days. Despite treatment, she developed increased fever (40 °C), persistent cough and general malaise. Her respiratory condition deteriorated and she was transferred to our hospital. Prior to hospitalization, she had been healthy and had developed normally. She had no immunodeficiency and no history of contact with anyone suffering from TB.
Physical examination on admission showed a child with a weight of 10 kg, body temperature of 38.5 °C, blood pressure of 79/41 mmHg, and a heart rate of 157 beats/min. Her weight was reduced from 11 kg (25th percentile) to 10 kg (10th percentile) over the past month alone. Immediately after admission, tracheal intubation was performed because of severe dyspnea, and she was transferred to a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU). Arterial blood gas analysis in the PICU showed PaO2 of 60 mmHg, PaCO2 of 59 mmHg, and pH 7.27 under mechanical ventilation with FiO2 of 1.0, which resulted in a PaO2/FiO2 (P/F) ratio of 60 mmHg and an oxygenation index (OI) of 29 . A chest X-ray showed bilateral infiltration without findings of heart failure . Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell (WBC) count, 7000 cells/μl; red blood cell (RBC) count, 430 × 103 cells/μl; platelet (PLT) count, 223 × 103 cells/μl; aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 60 U/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 13 U/L; blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 18.0 mg/dL; creatinine (Cre), 32 μmol/L; c-reactive protein (CRP), 7.3 mg/dL; fibrinogen, 2.79 g/L; and prothrombin time (PT), 16.1 s . The results of a rapid influenza test were negative. Genomes of mycobacterium TB and cytomegalovirus (CMV) were detected in tracheal lavage fluid (TLF) by real-time polymerase chain reaction (rPCR) assay. Acid fast bacilli smear and culture were both positive. She was diagnosed as having severe ARDS that developed from TB pneumonia, and the standard anti-tuberculous drugs: rifampicin, 15 mg/kg/day; isoniazid, 10 mg/kg/day; pyrazinamide, 30 mg/kg/day; ethambutol, 20 mg/kg/day were administered. We also used colistin and levofloxacin for not only nosocomial infection, but also mycoplasma infection, which we could not rule out. However, her respiratory and circulatory conditions deteriorated despite high-frequency oscillating ventilation (HFO), vasopressor support (noradrenaline at 0.2 μg/kg/min), and administration of 1 g/kg of immunoglobulin. On the third day after admission, the patient’s International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis DIC score had increased to 5 (PLT, 153 × 103 cells/μl; fibrinogen, 2.11 g/L; D-dimer, 5659 ng/mL; and PT, 23.3 s). For the treatment of DIC, 380 U/kg of rTM was administered as an intravenous drip infusion for 6 consecutive days. After administration of rTM was completed, OI gradually decreased, and the mechanical ventilation mode was changed from HFO to synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation . DIC score also gradually decreased. We measured plasma levels of soluble receptor for advanced glycan end products (sRAGE) and high mobility group box 1 (HMGB-1) before and after rTM administration, because increased levels of sRAGE and HMGB-1 are associated with death in patients with ARDS . After administration of rTM, HMGB-1 and sRAGE decreased , and inflammatory biomarkers, including interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), also decreased . Throughout the administration of rTM, there was no bleeding-related and other adverse event. Although severe ARDS (P/F ratio ≦ 100 mmHg) was sustained for 19 days, the patient’s OI and P/F ratio improved gradually , and she was extubated on the 27th day after admission. Although there was still a diffuse pattern in the chest X-ray just after extubation , her fever went down and her respiratory condition was stable (P/F ratio: 325, OI: 3). Therefore, she was moved from the PICU to the infectious disease department. The severe ARDS with DIC was successfully treated, and she was discharged from hospital on the 33rd day after admission.