A 15-year-old Chinese female was referred to the Department of Nephrology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital because of proteinuria. She was noted to have proteinuria (protein excretion 2–3 g/24 h, maximum 3.1 g/24 h) at the age of 14 years. She had a history of hypertriglyceridaemia (triglyceride, 3.4 mmol/L) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (proven by liver biopsy, Grade 1–2, Stage 2 ) at the age of 12 years, and insulin-resistant diabetes at the age of 13 years (fasting insulin, 172.4 μU/mL; fasting c-peptide, 9.66 ng/mL; fasting glucose, 5.8 mmol/L; 2-h postprandial glucose, 15.5 mmol/L). Pelvic ultrasound revealed polycystic ovaries, and her serum testosterone concentration was 68 ng/dL. Menarche occurred at the age of 13 years and was regular thereafter. She was told to follow a low-carbohydrate, low-fat diet and was given metformin. With these treatments, her fasting and postprandial glucose level stayed normal, and glycated haemoglobin level was 5.5–5.8%. She had no history of hypertension, and she was a recreational jogger. Her mother, aunt and grandfather had middle-age-onset insulin-resistant diabetes.
On admission, her body mass index (BMI, the weight in kilograms divided by the square of the height in metres) was 22.9. Clinical examination revealed prominent muscular appearance of the calves . Lipoatrophy was not obvious. Acanthosis nigricans was present in the inguinal, nuchal and axillary regions . She had slightly excessive body hair on upper and lower limbs .
Laboratory evaluation revealed normal serum albumin (47 g/L), decreased creatinine (36 μmol/L), and elevated estimated glomerular filtration rate (154 mL/min/1.73 m2, Revised Schwartz Formula). Urine protein excretion was 1.72 g/24 h. Complement components C3 and C4 were 1.630 g/L (range 0.73–1.46 g/L) and 0.166 g/L (range 0.1–0.4 g/L), respectively. Complement factor H was normal, and C3 nephritic factor was not detected. Auto-antibodies and serum immunoglobulins were normal. Renal ultrasound showed both kidneys to be of normal size (length of right kidney was 11.5 cm, length of left kidney was 10.7 cm) and appearance. There was no evidence of diabetic retinopathy or other diabetes-related microvascular complications. Her body fat percentage was 24.7% (TBF-410 Total Body Composition Analyzer, Tanita, Japan). Whole body magnetic resonance diffusion-weighted imaging revealed mildly reduced subcutaneous fat mass, hepatic steatosis, and polycystic ovaries .
Considering the early onset of metabolic abnormalities, whole exome sequencing was performed to detect mutations in the blood samples of the patient and her parents. She and her mother were noted to have a heterozygous insertion of thymine in exon 8 (c.1201_1202insT) of the PLIN1 gene , which predicted a frameshift translation leading to the synthesis of 165 aberrant amino acids (p.Y401Lfs*165) and a mutated protein with an aberrant C-terminal. We detected no mutations in genes previously implicated in lipodystrophies (LMNA, PPARG, CIDEC, LIPE, ADRA2A, AKT2, PCYT1A, AGPAT2, BSCL2, CAV1, and PTRF).
The BMI of the patient’s mother was 22.1. She did not have acanthosis nigricans. She was noted to have gestational diabetes at the age of 32 years, and she still had diabetes mellitus after the birth of her daughter. While she was on insulin treatment, her fasting glucose was 5.6–7.2 mmol/L. She also had dyslipidaemia (LDL-cholesterol, 4.13 mmol/L; total cholesterol, 5.69 mmol/L; triglyceride, 0.78 mmol/L) treated with diet control and a statin. She had regular health check-ups in recent years. Her urine tests and renal function tests were normal. Ultrasound showed no sign of hepatic steatosis. Her father carried no mutation, and he was generally healthy. He did not have diabetes, dyslipidaemia, fatty liver, or proteinuria. The patient’s maternal grandfather had diabetes. One uncle and one cousin on the maternal side had hepatic steatosis (according to ultrasound results). In addition, one maternal aunt had diabetes, dyslipidaemia and hepatic steatosis .
Renal biopsy was performed on the patient. Immunofluorescence (IF) microscopy showed no immunoglobulin deposits. Light microscopy (LM) revealed that in the absence of significant background tubulointerstitial damage, 1 out of 17 glomeruli obtained was globally sclerosed, 2 glomeruli displayed segmental sclerosis (one segmental sclerosis adhered to Bowman’s capsule and involved the perihilar region, the other one was concomitant with exudative lesion ), and the remaining glomeruli displayed mild mesangial hypercellularity without matrix expansion . Glomerular enlargement was observed , with average glomerular diameter being 230 μm and maximum diameter being 251 μm. Transmission electron microscopy (EM) revealed focal thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and mild focal effacement of foot processes; mild expansion in mesangial matrix was also shown under EM ; no electron-dense deposits were present.
She was given benazepril (10 mg per day, gradually titrated to 20 mg twice a day) and metformin. Benazepril was well-tolerated, with no cough, hypotension or hyperkalaemia. After 1 month, her renal protein excretion was decreased to 0.81 g/24 h. Serum creatinine level was 40 μmol/L.